
Critical Thinking
MyLab Marketing: Improves Student 
Engagement Before, During, and After Class
Decision Making
BREAKTHROUGH
Prep and 
Engagement
BREAKTHROUGH
To better results
To better results
• NEW! VIDEO LIBRARY – Robust video library with over 100 new book-specific videos that include 
easy-to-assign assessments, the ability for instructors to add YouTube or other sources, the ability for 
students to upload video submissions, and the ability for polling and teamwork.
• Decision-making simulations – NEW and improved feedback for students. Place your students 
in the role of a key decision-maker! Simulations branch based on the decisions students make, providing  
a variation of scenario paths. Upon completion students receive a grade, as well as a detailed report of 
the choices and the associated consequences of those decisions.
• Video exercises – UPDATED with new exercises. Engaging videos that bring business concepts to 
life and explore business topics related to the theory students are learning in class. Quizzes then assess 
students’ comprehension of the concepts covered in each video.
• Learning Catalytics – A “bring your own device” 
student engagement, assessment, and classroom 
intelligence system helps instructors analyze 
students’ critical-thinking skills during lecture.
• Dynamic Study Modules (DSMs) – UPDATED 
with additional questions. Through adaptive 
learning, students get personalized guidance where 
and when they need it most, creating greater 
engagement, improving knowledge retention, and 
supporting subject-matter mastery.  Also available  
on mobile devices.
• Writing Space – UPDATED with new commenting tabs, new prompts, and a new tool for 
students called Pearson Writer. A single location to develop and assess concept mastery and critical 
thinking, the Writing Space offers automatic graded, assisted graded, and create your own writing 
assignments, allowing you to exchange personalized feedback with students quickly and easily.
Writing Space can also check students’ work for improper citation or plagiarism by comparing it against 
the world’s most accurate text comparison database available from Turnitin.
• Additional Features – Included with the MyLab are a powerful homework and test manager, robust 
gradebook tracking, Reporting Dashboard, comprehensive online course content, and easily scalable  
and shareable content.
http://www.pearsonmylabandmastering.com

This page intentionally left blank 

Consumer Behavior
Buying, Having, and Being
Twelfth Edition
Global Edition
Michael R. Solomon
Saint Joseph’s University 
 
Boston Columbus Indianapolis New York San Francisco Amsterdam  
Cape Town Dubai London Madrid Milan Munich Paris Montréal Toronto Delhi  
Mexico City São Paulo Sydney Hong Kong Seoul Singapore Taipei Tokyo

Vice President, Business Publishing: Donna Battista
Editor-in-Chief: Stephanie Wall
Acquisitions Editor: Mark Gaffney
Editorial Assistant: Eric Santucci
Vice President, Product Marketing: Maggie Moylan
Director of Marketing, Digital Services and Products:  
 Jeanette Koskinas
Senior Product Marketing Manager: Alison Haskins
Executive Field Marketing Manager: Adam Goldstein 
Field Marketing Manager: Lenny Ann Raper
Product Marketing Assistant: Jessica Quazza
Team Lead, Program Management: Ashley Santora
Program Manager: Jennifer M. Collins
Team Lead, Project Management: Jeff Holcomb
Project Manager: Becca Groves
Project Manager, Global Edition: Sudipto Roy
Associate Acquisitions Editor, Global Edition: Ishita Sinha
Senior Project Editor, Global Edition: Daniel Luiz
Manager, Media Production, Global Edition: M. Vikram Kumar
Senior Manufacturing Controller, Production, Global Edition:  
 Trudy Kimber
Operations Specialist: Carol Melville
Creative Director: Blair Brown
Art Director: Janet Slowik
Cover Image: © Lukasz Janyst/Shutterstock
Vice President, Director of Digital Strategy and Assessment:  
 Paul Gentile
Manager of Learning Applications: Paul DeLuca
Digital Editor: Brian Surette
Director, Digital Studio: Sacha Laustsen
Digital Studio Manager: Diane Lombardo
Digital Studio Project Manager: Monique Lawrence
Digital Studio Project Manager: Alana Coles
Digital Studio Project Manager: Robin Lazrus
Full-Service Project Management and Composition: Integra  
 Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at:
www.pearsonglobaleditions.com
© Pearson Education Limited 2018
The rights of Michael R. Solomon to be identified as the author of this work have been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs 
and Patents Act 1988.
Authorized adaptation from the United States edition, entitled Consumer Behavior: Buying, Having, and Being, 12th edition, ISBN 978-0-13-412993-8, 
by Michael R. Solomon, published by Pearson Education © 2017.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior written permission of the publisher or a license per-
mitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London 
EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this text does not vest in the author or 
publisher any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement 
of this book by such owners.
ISBN 10:           1-292-15310-5
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-15310-0
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
14 13 12 11 10
Typeset in 9.5/12 Utopia by Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Printed and bound by Vivar in Malaysia.

B r i e f  C o n t e n t s
Section 1 
● Foundations of Consumer Behavior 25
Chapter 1 
Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 26
Chapter 2 
Consumer and Social Well-Being 56
Section 2 
● Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior 95
Chapter 3 
Perception 96
Chapter 4 
Learning and Memory 130
Chapter 5 
Motivation and Affect 172
Chapter 6 
The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 200
Chapter 7 
Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 242
Section 3 
● Choosing and Using Products 283
Chapter 8 
Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 284
Chapter 9 
Decision Making 334
Chapter 10 
Buying, Using, and Disposing 380
Section 4 
● Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings 413
Chapter 11 
Groups and Social Media 414
Chapter 12 
Income and Social Class 446
Chapter 13 
Subcultures 478
Chapter 14 
Culture 514
 
  
 3 

This page intentionally left blank 

About the Author 11
New to this Edition! 13
Preface 15
Acknowledgments 21
Section 1 ● Foundations of 
 Consumer Behavior 25
Chapter 1 ● Buying, Having, and Being:  
An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 26
Consumer Behavior: People in the Marketplace 27
What Is Consumer Behavior? 28
Consumer Behavior Is a Process 29
Consumers’ Impact on Marketing Strategy 30
Consumers Are Different! How We Divide Them Up 30
Marketing’s Impact on Consumers 35
Popular Culture Is Marketing Is Popular Culture … 35
All the World’s a Stage 37
What Does It Mean to Consume? 39
What Do We Need—Really? 40
The Global “Always-On” Consumer 41
The Digital Native: Living a Social [Media] Life 41
Consumer Behavior as a Field of Study 44
Where Do We Find Consumer Researchers? 44
Interdisciplinary Influences on the Study of Consumer 
Behavior 45
Two Perspectives on Consumer Research 46
Should Consumer Research Have an Academic or an Applied 
Focus? 48
Taking It from Here: The Plan of the Book 50
Chapter Summary 51
Key Terms 51
Review 52
Consumer Behavior Challenge 52
Case Study 53
Notes 54
C o n t e n t s
Chapter 2 ● Consumer and Social 
Well-Being 56
Business Ethics and Consumer Rights 57
Needs and Wants: Do Marketers Manipulate Consumers? 58
Consumers’ Rights and Product Satisfaction 63
Market Regulation 66
Consumerism 66
Transformative Consumer Research 68
Social Marketing and Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) 68
Major Policy Issues Relevant to Consumer Behavior 70
Data Privacy and Identity Theft 70
Market Access 72
Sustainability and Environmental Stewardship 73
The Dark Side of Consumer Behavior 78
Consumer Terrorism 78
Addictive Consumption 79
Consumed Consumers 81
Illegal Acquisition and Product Use 82
Chapter Summary 83
Key Terms 84
Review 84
Consumer Behavior Challenge 84
Case Study 85
Notes 87
Section 1 Data Case 91
Section 2 ● Internal Influences on 
Consumer Behavior 95
Chapter 3 ● Perception 96
Sensation 96
Hedonic Consumption 98
Sensory Marketing 99
The Stages of Perception 108
Stage 1: Exposure 108
Stage 2: Attention 113
Stage 3: Interpretation 117
 
  
 5 

6 
Contents
Chapter Summary 194
Key Terms 194
Review 194
Consumer Behavior Challenge 195
Case Study 196
Notes 197
Chapter 6 ● The Self: Mind, Gender,  
and Body 200
The Self 200
Does the Self Exist? 201
Self-Concept 201
Are We What We Buy? 205
The Extended Self 208
Embodied Cognition 210
The Digital Self 211
Gender Identity 212
Sex Role Socialization 213
Gender Identity Versus Sexual Identity 214
Sex-Typed Products 215
The Body 221
Ideals of Beauty 222
Body Decoration and Mutilation 228
Chapter Summary 232
Key Terms 232
Review 233
Consumer Behavior Challenge 233
Case Study 235
Notes 236
Chapter 7 ● Personality, Lifestyles,  
and Values 242
Personality 243
Consumer Behavior on the Couch: Freudian Theory 243
Neo-Freudian Theories 246
Trait Theory 249
Brand Personality 253
Lifestyles and Consumer Identity 258
Product Complementarity and Co-Branding Strategies 261
Psychographics 262
Values 267
Core Values 268
How Do Values Link to Consumer Behavior? 271
Chapter Summary 124
Key Terms 125
Review 125
Consumer Behavior Challenge 125
Case Study 126
Notes 127
Chapter 4 ● Learning and Memory 130
How Do We Learn? 130
Behavioral Learning Theories 131
Marketing Applications of Classical Conditioning 
Principles 133
Marketing Applications of Instrumental Conditioning 
Principles 140
Gamification: The New Frontier for Learning Applications 140
Cognitive Learning Theory 142
How Do We Learn to Be Consumers? 144
Memory 150
How Our Brains Encode Information 151
Memory Systems 152
How Our Memories Store Information 152
How We Retrieve Memories When We Decide What to 
Buy 156
What Makes Us Forget? 157
How We Measure Consumers’ Recall of Marketing 
Messages 159
Bittersweet Memories: The Marketing Power of Nostalgia 161
Chapter Summary 163
Key Terms 164
Review 164
Consumer Behavior Challenge 165
Case Study 166
Notes 167
Chapter 5 ● Motivation and Affect 172
The Motivation Process: Why Ask Why? 172
Motivational Strength 173
Motivational Direction 174
How We Classify Consumer Needs 177
Affect 180
Types of Affective Responses 180
Positive Affect 181
Negative Affect 183
How Social Media Tap into Our Emotions 185
Consumer Involvement 185
Types of Involvement 187

 
Contents 
7 
Cognitive Decision Making 339
Steps in the Cognitive Decision-Making Process 339
Neuromarketing 343
Online Decision Making 346
How Do We Put Products into Categories? 347
Habitual Decision Making 352
Priming and Nudging 353
Heuristics: Mental Shortcuts 354
Collective Decision Making 356
B2B Decision Making 357
How Does B2B Decision Making Compare to Consumer 
Decision Making? 358
B2B E-Commerce 360
The Intimate Corporation: Family Decision Making 361
How Families Decide 362
The Wife 365
The Husband 366
Chapter Summary 368
Key Terms 369
Review 370
Consumer Behavior Challenge 370
Case Study 373
Notes 375
Chapter 10 ● Buying, Using, and 
Disposing 380
Situational Effects on Consumer Behavior 381
The Consumption Situation 381
Temporal Factors 382
The Shopping Experience 385
E-Commerce: Clicks Versus Bricks 388
Retailing as Theater 389
In-Store Decision Making 392
The Salesperson: A Lead Role in the Play 395
Ownership and the Sharing Economy 395
Postpurchase Satisfaction and Disposal 397
Postpurchase Satisfaction 397
Product Disposal 398
Chapter Summary 401
Key Terms 402
Review 402
Consumer Behavior Challenge 403
Case Study 404
Notes 405
Section 3 Data Case 409
Chapter Summary 274
Key Terms 274
Review 275
Consumer Behavior Challenge 275
Case Study 276
Notes 277
Section 2 Data Case 280
Section 3 ● Choosing and Using 
Products 283
Chapter 8 ● Attitudes and Persuasive 
Communications 284
The Power of Attitudes 285
The ABC Model of Attitudes 286
Hierarchies of Effects 286
How Do We Form Attitudes? 289
All Attitudes Are Not Created Equal 289
The Consistency Principle 290
Self-Perception Theory 291
Social Judgment Theory 292
Balance Theory 292
Attitude Models 296
Do Attitudes Predict Behavior? 298
Trying to Consume 302
Persuasion: How Do Marketers Change Attitudes? 302
Decisions, Decisions: Tactical Communications Options 303
The Elements of Communication 304
The Source 306
The Message 311
New Message Formats: The Social Media Revolution 315
Reality Engineering 317
Types of Message Appeals 319
The Source Versus the Message: Do We Sell the Steak  
or the Sizzle? 322
Chapter Summary 324
Key Terms 325
Review 326
Consumer Behavior Challenge 326
Case Study 328
Notes 329
Chapter 9 ● Decision Making 334
What’s Your Problem? 335
Hyperchoice 335
Self-Regulation 336

8 
Contents
Chapter Summary 472
Key Terms 472
Review 472
Consumer Behavior Challenge 473
Case Study 473
Notes 475
Chapter 13 ● Subcultures 478
Ethnic and Racial Subcultures 479
Subcultural Stereotypes 480
Ethnicity and Acculturation 480
The “Big Three” American Ethnic Subcultures 482
Religious Subcultures 486
Organized Religion and Consumption 489
Born Again Consumers 489
Islamic Marketing 490
The Family Unit and Age Subcultures 492
Family Structure 492
Age Cohorts 495
Children: Consumers-in-Training 495
Gen Y and Gen Z 496
Gen X 500
The Mature Market 500
Place-Based Subcultures 504
Chapter Summary 505
Key Terms 506
Review 506
Consumer Behavior Challenge 506
Case Study 508
Notes 510
Chapter 14 ● Culture 514
Cultural Systems 515
Cultural Systems 515
The Yin and Yang of Marketing and Culture 516
Cultural Movement 516
High and Low Culture 519
Cultural Formulae 520
Cultural Stories and Ceremonies 521
Myths 522
Rituals 523
Sacred and Profane Consumption 533
Sacralization 533
Domains of Sacred Consumption 534
From Sacred to Profane, and Back Again 536
The Diffusion of Innovations 537
How Do We Decide to Adopt an Innovation? 537
Section 4 ● Consumers in Their  
Social and Cultural Settings 413
Chapter 11 ● Groups and Social 
Media 414
Groups 415
Social Power 415
Reference Groups 416
Conformity 418
Brand Communities 420
Word-of-Mouth Communication 421
Buzz Building 424
Negative WOM 425
Opinion Leadership 426
How Influential Is an Opinion Leader? 427
Types of Opinion Leaders 427
How Do We Find Opinion Leaders? 428
The Social Media Revolution 430
Online Social Networks and Brand Communities 432
Social Games 433
Digital Word-of-Mouth 434
Digital Opinion Leaders 437
Chapter Summary 438
Key Terms 439
Review 439
Consumer Behavior Challenge 440
Case Study 441
Notes 442
Chapter 12 ● Income and Social 
Class 446
Income and Consumer Identity 447
To Spend or Not to Spend, That Is the Question 447
Income-Based Marketing 451
Social Class and Consumer Identity 454
Pick a Pecking Order 455
Income versus Social Class 457
How Do We Measure Social Class? 457
Social Class Around the World 459
Status Symbols and Social Capital 462
“What Do You Use That Fork For?” Taste Cultures, Codes, and 
Cultural Capital 462
Social and Cultural Capital 465
Online Social Capital 466
Status Symbols 467

 
Contents 
9 
Review 554
Consumer Behavior Challenge 555
Case Study 556
Notes 557
Section 4 Data Case 562
Appendix I: Sources of Secondary Data 566
Appendix II: Career in Consumer Research 569
Glossary 571
Index 587
Behavioral Demands of Innovations 539
What Determines If an Innovation Will Diffuse? 539
The Fashion System 540
Behavioral Science Perspectives on Fashion 541
Cycles of Fashion Adoption 544
Global Consumer Culture 546
It’s a BRAND-New World 547
Adopt a Standardized Strategy 549
Adopt a Localized Strategy 549
Does Global Marketing Work? 551
Chapter Summary 552
Key Terms 554

This page intentionally left blank 

 
 
 11 
Michael R. Solomon, Ph.D., is Professor of Marketing in the Haub School of Business 
at Saint Joseph’s University in Philadelphia. Before joining the Saint Joseph’s faculty 
in the fall of 2006, he was the Human Sciences Professor of Consumer Behavior at 
Auburn University. Before moving to Auburn in 1995, he was chair of the Department 
of Marketing in the School of Business at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New 
Jersey. Professor Solomon began his academic career in the Graduate School of Business 
Administration at New York University (NYU), where he also served as Associate Director 
of NYU’s Institute of Retail Management. He earned his B.A. degrees in psychology and 
sociology magna cum laude at Brandeis University and a Ph.D. in social psychology at the 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. In 1996 he was awarded the Fulbright/FLAD 
Chair in Market Globalization by the U.S. Fulbright Commission and the Government of 
Portugal, and he served as Distinguished Lecturer in Marketing at the Technical University 
of Lisbon. He held an appointment as Professor of Consumer Behaviour at the University 
of Manchester (United Kingdom) from 2007 to 2013.
Professor Solomon’s primary research interests include consumer behavior and 
lifestyle issues; branding strategy; the symbolic aspects of products; the psychology of 
fashion, decoration, and image; services marketing; marketing in virtual worlds; and the 
development of visually oriented online research methodologies. He has published numer-
ous articles on these and related topics in academic journals, and he has delivered invited 
lectures on these subjects in Europe, Australia, Asia, and Latin America. His research 
has been funded by the American Academy of Advertising, the American Marketing 
Association, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the International Council of Shopping 
Centers, and the U.S. Department of Commerce. He currently sits on the editorial or advi-
sory boards of The Journal of Consumer Behaviour, Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 
Critical Studies in Fashion and Beauty, and Journal for Advancement of Marketing Education, 
and he served an elected six-year term on the Board of Governors of the Academy of 
Marketing Science. Professor Solomon has been recognized as one of the 15 most widely 
cited scholars in the academic behavioral sciences/fashion literature, and as one of the 
10 most productive scholars in the field of advertising and marketing communications.
Professor Solomon is a frequent contributor to mass media. His feature articles have 
appeared in such magazines as Psychology Today, Gentleman’s Quarterly, and Savvy. He 
has been quoted in numerous national magazines and newspapers, including Advertising 
Age, Adweek, Allure, Elle, Glamour, Mademoiselle, Mirabella, Newsweek, the New York Times, 
Self, Time, USA Today, and the Wall Street Journal. He frequently appears on television and 
speaks on radio to comment on consumer behavior issues, including appearances on The 
Today Show, Good Morning America, Inside Edition, Newsweek on the Air, the Entrepreneur 
Sales and Marketing Show, CNBC, Channel One, the Wall Street Journal Radio Network, 
the WOR Radio Network, and National Public Radio. He acts as consultant to numerous 
companies on consumer behavior and marketing strategy issues and often speaks to busi-
ness groups throughout the United States and overseas. In addition to this text, Professor 
Solomon is coauthor of the widely used textbook Marketing: Real People, Real Choices. 
He has three children, Amanda, Zachary, and Alexandra; a son-in-law, Orly; and three 
granddaughters, Rose, Evey, and Arya. He lives in Philadelphia with his wife Gail and their 
“other child,” a pug named Kelbie Rae.
A B o u t  t h e  A u t h o r

This page intentionally left blank 

 
 
 13 
The twelfth edition of Consumer Behavior has been extensively revised and updated to 
reflect the major trends and changes in marketing that impact the study of consumer be-
havior. The most significant changes to the edition are:
• A totally reorganized Contents page that organizes material into four sections. The first 
section introduces the field of consumer behavior and then devotes an entire chapter 
to issues related to consumer well-being to reinforce to students the many commercial, 
environmental, ethical, and health issues our field touches. The second section dives 
deeper into micro influences such as perception and learning, and the third section 
examines how consumers make decisions and form attitudes toward products and ser-
vices. The final section shows how macro variables such as group dynamics, culture, 
and communications platforms such as social media influence these decisions.
• New data feature Data Powered by GfK. New end of part cases using real consumer data 
from GfK.
• Six new end-of-chapter cases and six updated end-of-chapter cases.
• All new “CB As I See It” boxes in every chapter that feature prominent consumer 
 behavior researchers who share their current work with students.
• A strong focus on social media and how digital technology influences consumer 
behavior.
• Significant coverage of major emerging topics including Big Data, the Digital Self, 
gamification, and contextual influences on decision making such as priming and 
nudging.
• New content added to every chapter, including the following key terms:
Ambicultural
Automated attention analysis
Bitcoin
Brand arrogance
Brand immigrants
Brand storytelling
Brand tourists
CEO pay ratio
Cognitive-affective model
Cohabitate
Collaborative consumption
College wage premium
Conditioned superstition
Consumer culture theory (CCT)
Consumer fairy tales
Consumer hyperchoice
Credit score
Crytocurrency
Dadvertising
Digital self
Disclaimers
Dispreferred marker effect
e-Sports
Embarrassment
Embodied cognition
Empty self
Enclothed cognition
Endcap displays
Endowed progress effect
Endowment effect
Envy
Evaluations
Executive control center
Fatshionistas
Feedback loop
Female-to-male earnings ratio
Glamping
Guilt
n e w  t o  t h i s  e d i t i o n !

Gyges effect
Happiness
Happiness economy
Haul videos
Homeostatis
Hook
Hybrid products
Identity
IKEA effect
Imbibing idiot bias
Implementation intentions
Incidental brand exposure
Income inequality
Independence hypothesis
Internet trolls
Intersex children
Linkbaiting
Locavore
Loss aversion
Marketplace sentiments
Martyrdom effect
Material accumulation
Material parenting
Media snacker
Medical tourism
Medication adherence
Meerkating
Megaphone effect
Microfame
Mood congruency
Moods
Morning morality effect
Nanofame
Native advertising
Negative state relief
Net neutrality
Neuroendocrinological science
Near-field communication (NFC)
Normcore
P2P commerce
Paradox of fashion
Phablets
Power posing
Product authenticity
Product personalization
Reader-response theory
Red sneakers effect
Retail therapy
Sadvertising
Search engine optimization (SEO)
Search engines
Selfie
Shared endorsements
Sharing economy
Simple additive rule
Slacktivism
Social default
Spectacles
Status anxiety
Street art
Swatting
Swishing
Technology acceptance model (TAM)
The Personal Data Notification & 
Protection Act
The Student Digital Privacy Act
Third-gender movement
Unboxing videos
Vanity sizing
Virtual makeover
Virtual reality
Wearable computing
Weighted additive rule
14 
New to this Edition!

I love to people-watch, don’t you? People shopping, people flirting, people consuming. 
Consumer behavior is the study of people and the products that help to shape their identi-
ties. Because I’m a consumer myself, I have a selfish interest in learning more about how 
this process works—and so do you.
In many courses, students are merely passive observers; they learn about topics that 
affect them indirectly, if at all. Not everyone is a plasma physicist, a medieval French 
scholar, or a marketing professional. But we are all consumers. Many of the topics in this 
book have both professional and personal relevance to the reader, regardless of whether 
he or she is a student, professor, or businessperson. Nearly everyone can relate to the tri-
als and tribulations of last-minute shopping; primping for a big night out; agonizing over 
an expensive purchase; fantasizing about a week in the Caribbean; celebrating a holiday 
or commemorating a landmark event, such as graduating or getting a driver’s license; or 
(dreaming about) winning the lottery.
In this edition, I have tried to introduce you to the latest and best thinking by some 
bright scientists who develop models and studies of consumer behavior. But that’s not 
enough. Consumer behavior is an applied science, so we must never lose sight of the role 
of “horse sense” when we apply our findings to life in the real world. That’s why you’ll find 
a lot of practical examples to back up these fancy theories.
What Makes This Book Different:  
Buying, Having, and Being
As this book’s subtitle suggests, my vision of consumer behavior goes well beyond study-
ing the act of buying—having and being are just as important, if not more so. Consumer 
behavior is more than buying things; it also embraces the study of how having (or not 
having) things affects our lives and how our possessions influence the way we 
feel about ourselves and about each other—our state of being. I devel-
oped the wheel of consumer behavior that appears at the beginning of 
text sections to underscore the complex—and often inseparable—- 
interrelationships between the individual consumer and his or 
her social realities.
In addition to understanding why people buy things, we 
also try to appreciate how products, services, and consump-
tion activities contribute to the broader social world we expe-
rience. Whether we shop, cook, clean, play basketball, hang 
out at the beach, or even look at ourselves in the mirror, the 
marketing system touches our lives. As if these experiences aren’t 
complex enough, the task of understanding the consumer increases 
when we take a multicultural perspective.
 
 
C
O
N
S
U
M
E
R  
B E
H
A
V
I
O
R
       
  and
 Usin
g Pr
odu
cts
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
o
c
i
a
l 
an
d 
Cu
ltu
ral 
Sett
ings 
 
4
: 
C
on
su
me
rs i
n Th
eir 
       
 3: C
hoos
ing
of C
ons
um
er 
Be
ha
vi
or
 
1: F
ou
nd
ati
on
s
o
n
 
C
o
n
s
u
m
er
 B
eh
avi
or
2
:
 
I
n
t
e
r
n
al
 I
nﬂ
ue
nce
s 
P r e f A C e
15

We’ll explore these ideas with intriguing and current examples as 
we show how the consumer behavior discipline relates to your daily life. 
Throughout the twelfth edition, you’ll find up-to-the-minute discussions 
of topics such as dadvertising, meerkating, the imbibing idiot basis, swat-
ting, and swishing. If you can’t identify all of these terms, I can suggest a 
textbook that you should read immediately!
Going Global
The U.S. experience is important, but it’s far from the whole story. This 
book also considers the many other consumers around the world whose 
diverse experiences with buying, having, and being we must understand. 
That’s why you’ll find numerous examples of marketing and consumer 
practices relating to consumers and companies outside the United States 
throughout the book. If we didn’t know it before the tragic events of 
September 11, 2001, we certainly know it now: Americans also are global 
citizens, and it’s vital that we all appreciate others’ perspectives.
Digital Consumer Behavior:  
A Virtual Community
As more of us go online every day, there’s no doubt the world is changing—and consumer 
behavior evolves faster than you can say “the Web.” The twelfth edition continues to high-
light and celebrate the brave new world of digital consumer behavior. Today, consumers 
and producers come together electronically in ways we have never known before. Rapid 
transmission of information alters the speed at which new trends develop and the direc-
tion in which they travel, especially because the virtual world lets consumers participate in 
the creation and dissemination of new products.
One of the most exciting aspects of the new digital world is that consumers can 
interact directly with other people who live around the block or around the world. As a 
result, we need to radically redefine the meaning of community. It’s no longer enough 
to acknowledge that consumers like to talk to each other about products. Now we share 
opinions and get the buzz about new movies, CDs, cars, clothes—you name it—in elec-
tronic communities that may include a housewife in Alabama, a disabled senior citizen in 
Alaska, or a teen loaded with body piercings in Amsterdam. And many of us meet up in 
computer-mediated environments (CMEs) such as Facebook, Twitter, and Foursquare. I’m 
totally fascinated by what goes on in virtual worlds, and you’ll see a lot of material in this 
edition that relates to these emerging consumer playgrounds.
We have just begun to explore the ramifications for consumer behavior when a Web 
surfer can project her own picture onto a Web site to get a virtual makeover or a corpo-
rate purchasing agent can solicit bids for a new piece of equipment from vendors around 
the world in minutes. These new ways of interacting in the marketplace create bountiful 
opportunities for businesspeople and consumers alike. You will find illustrations of the 
changing digital world sprinkled liberally throughout this edition. In addition, each chap-
ter features boxes that I call Net Profit, which point to specific examples of the Internet’s 
potential to improve the way we conduct business.
96 
SECTION 2   Internal Inﬂuences on Consumer Behavior
on the right of a frame appear heavier than products that appear on the left of a frame. 
This interpretation results from our intuition about levers: We know that the farther away 
an object is from a lever’s fulcrum, the more diﬃcult it is to raise the item. Because we 
read from left to right, the left naturally becomes the visual fulcrum and thus we perceive 
objects on the right as heavier. Manufacturers should bear these package schematics in 
mind because they may inﬂuence our feelings about the contents in a package for better 
or worse. Think, for example, about a diet food marketer who wants shoppers to regard the 
menu items as lighter.85
As we’ll see in Chapter 7, products often assume a “brand personality” because we 
tend to assign them common human traits such as sophistication or sexiness. In other 
words, we anthropomorphize objects when we think of them in human terms, and this 
thought process may encourage us to evaluate products using schemas we apply to clas-
sify other people. A recent study illustrates how this works: Subjects saw an advertisement 
with a picture of a car that had been modiﬁed to make it appear as though it was either 
“smiling” or “frowning.” In some cases, the text of the ad was written in the ﬁrst person, 
to activate a human schema, whereas others saw the same ad written in the third person. 
When the human schema was active, those who saw the “smiling” car rated it more favor-
ably than when they saw a “frowning” car.86
Stimulus Organization
One factor that determines how we will interpret a stimulus is the relationship we assume 
it has with other events, sensations, or images in memory. When RJR Nabisco introduced 
a version of Teddy Grahams (a children’s product) for adults, it used understated packag-
ing colors to reinforce the idea that the new product was for grown-ups. But sales were 
disappointing. Nabisco changed the box to bright yellow to convey the idea that this was a 
fun snack, and buyers’ more positive association between a bright primary color and taste 
prompted adults to start buying the cookies.87
The stimuli we perceive are often ambiguous. It’s up to us to determine the meaning 
based on our past experiences, expectations, and needs. A classic experiment demon-
strated the process of “seeing what you want to see”: Princeton and Dartmouth students 
separately viewed a movie of a particularly rough football game between the two rival 
schools. Although everyone was exposed to the same stimulus, the degree to which stu-
dents saw infractions and the blame they assigned for those they did see depended on 
which college they attended.88
As this experiment demonstrates, we tend to project our own desires or assumptions 
onto products and advertisements. This interpretation process can backﬁre for marketers. 
We recognize patterns of stimuli, such as 
 familiar words. In this Austrian ad consum-
ers will tend to see the word “kitchen” even 
though the letters are scrambled.
Source: Client: XXXLutz; Head of Marketing: Mag. 
Thomas Saliger; Agency: Demner, Merlicek & 
Bergmann; Account Supervisor: Andrea Kliment; 
Account Manager: Albin Lenzer; Creative Directors: 
Rosa Haider, Tolga Buyukdoganay; Art Directors: 
Tolga Buyukdoganay, Rene Pichler; Copywriter: 
Alistair Thompson.
Net Proﬁt
Do you remember all those 
crazy Mentos/Diet Coke 
videos? At least 800 of 
them ﬂooded YouTube af-
ter people discovered that 
when you drop the quarter-size candies into 
bottles of Diet Coke, you get a geyser that 
shoots 20 feet into the air. Needless to 
say, Mentos got a gusher of free public-
ity out of the deal, too.35 Probably the 
biggest marketing phenomenon of this de-
cade is user- generated content, whereby 
everyday people voice their opinions about 
products, brands, and companies on blogs, 
podcasts, and social networking sites such 
as Facebook and Twitter, and even ﬁlm their 
own commercials that thousands view on 
sites such as YouTube. This important trend 
helps to deﬁne the era of Web 2.0: the re-
birth of the Internet as a social, interactive 
medium from its original roots as a form 
of one-way transmission from producers to 
consumers.
16 
Preface

 
Preface 
17 
But is the digital world always a rosy place? Unfortunately, just as in the “real world,” 
the answer is no. The potential to exploit consumers, whether by invading their privacy, 
preying on the curiosity of children, or simply providing false product information, is 
 always there. That’s why you’ll also find boxes called The Tangled Web that point out some 
of the abuses of this fascinating new medium. Still, I can’t imagine a world without the 
Web, and I hope you’ll enjoy the ways it’s changing our field. When it comes to the new 
virtual world of consumer behavior, you’re either on the train or under it.
Consumer Research Is a Big Tent:  
The Importance of a Balanced Perspective
Like most of you who will read this book, the field of consumer behavior is young, dy-
namic, and in flux. It is constantly cross-fertilized by perspectives from many different 
disciplines: The field is a big tent that invites many diverse views to enter. I try to express 
the field’s staggering diversity in these pages. Consumer researchers represent virtually 
every social science discipline, plus a few from the physical sciences and the arts for good 
measure. From this blending of disciplines comes a dynamic and complex research per-
spective, including viewpoints regarding appropriate research methods, and even deeply 
held beliefs about what are and what are not appropriate issues for consumer researchers 
to study in the first place.
The book also emphasizes how strategically vital it is to understand consumers. Many 
(if not most) of the fundamental concepts in marketing emanate from a manager’s ability 
to know people. After all, if we don’t understand why people behave as they do, how can 
we identify their needs? If we can’t identify their needs, how can we satisfy their needs? If 
we can’t satisfy people’s needs, we don’t have a marketing concept, so we might as well fold 
up our big tent and go home!
To illustrate the potential of consumer research to inform marketing strategy, the text 
contains numerous examples of specific applications of consumer behavior concepts by 
marketing practitioners, as well as examples of windows of opportunity where we could 
use these concepts (perhaps by alert strategists after they take this course!). The Marketing 
Opportunity boxes you’ll find in each chapter highlight the fascinating ways in which mar-
keting practitioners translate the wisdom they glean from consumer research into actual 
business activities.
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly
A strategic focus is great, but this book doesn’t assume that everything marketers do is 
in the best interests of consumers or of their environment. Likewise, as consumers we 
do many things that are not so positive, either. We suffer from addictions, status envy, 
ethnocentrism, racism, sexism, and many other -isms. Regrettably, there are times when 
marketing activities—deliberately or not—encourage or exploit these human flaws. This 
book deals with the totality of consumer behavior, warts and all. We’ll highlight market-
ing mistakes or ethically suspect activities in boxes that I call Marketing Pitfall.
On a more cheerful note, marketers create wonderful (or at least unusual) things, 
such as holidays, comic books, Krispy Kreme donuts, nu-jazz music, Webkinz, and the 
many stylistic options that beckon to us in the domains of clothing, home design, the arts, 
and cuisine. I also take pains to acknowledge the sizable impact of marketing on popular 
culture. Indeed, the final section of this book captures recent work in the field that scruti-
nizes, criticizes, and sometimes celebrates consumers in their everyday worlds. I hope you 
will enjoy reading about such wonderful things as much as I enjoyed writing about them. 
Welcome to the fascinating world of consumer behavior!
From ihatestarbucks.com to 
boycottwalmart.meetup
.com, irritated customers 
have launched hundreds 
of gripe sites to air their 
grievances against companies. The practice 
is so widespread that some ﬁrms proactively 
buy unﬂattering domain names to keep other 
people from buying them. Xerox, for example, 
registered xeroxstinks.com, xeroxcorporation
sucks.com, and ihatexerox.net. About 20,000 
domain names end in “sucks.com.” About one-
third of these sites are registered to none other 
than the companies they slam; owners include 
Walmart Stores, Coca-Cola, Toys “R” Us, Target, 
and Whole Foods Market.32
  The Tangled Web
Successful 
companies 
understand that needs are 
a moving target. No orga-
nization—no matter how 
renowned for its marketing 
prowess—can afford to rest on its laurels. 
Everyone needs to keep innovating to stay 
ahead of changing customers and the mar-
ketplace. BMW is a great example. No one 
(not even rivals like Audi or Mercedes-Benz) 
would argue that the German automaker 
knows how to make a good car (though they 
may not agree with the company’s claim to 
be “the ultimate driving machine”). Still, 
BMW’s engineers and designers know they 
have to understand how drivers’ needs will 
change in the future—even those loyal own-
ers who love the cars they own today. The 
company is highly sensitive to such key 
trends as:
 
●A desire for environmentally friendly 
products
 
●Increasingly congested roadways and 
the movement by some cities such as 
London to impose fees on vehicles in 
central areas
 
●New business models that encourage 
consumers to rent products only while 
they need them rather than buying them 
outright
BMW’s response: The company committed 
more than $1 billion to develop electric 
BMWi models such as its new i3 commuter 
car and i8 sports car. These futuristic-looking 
vehicles are largely made from lightweight 
carbon ﬁber to maximize the distance they 
can go between battery charges, and 25 
percent of the interior plastic comes from 
recycled or renewable raw materials. In ad-
dition, BMW started a car-sharing service 
(now in several European cities as well as 
San Francisco) it calls DriveNow: Drivers use 
a computer chip in their licenses to hire a car 
and leave it wherever they are when they no 
longer need it. That’s forward thinking.4
Marketing Opportunity
Marketing Pitfall
When Hurricane Sandy 
devastated 
cities 
on 
the East Coast in 2012, 
some marketers rose to 
the occasion, whereas 
others stumbled in the wind. Gap, for exam-
ple, tweeted, “We’ll be doing lots of Gap.com 
shopping today. How about you?” American 
Apparel offered an incentive to shoppers: “In 
case you’re bored during the storm, just Enter 
SANDYSALE at Checkout.” Many of the storm 
victims were not amused. One tweeted, “Hey 
@americanapparel people have died and 
others are in need. Shut up about your 
#Sandy sale.”
In contrast, Allstate ran radio com-
mercials to let policyholders know how to 
ﬁle claims quickly. JetBlue Airways waived 
change and cancellation fees for people who 
had to rebook. How’s this for a relationship 
builder? Duracell batteries sent a truck to 
New York City that offered free batteries and 
access to charging lockers for mobile devices 
and computers to desperate people who had 
been without power (or even worse, access to 
social media).6

Consumer Behavior in the Trenches
I’m a huge believer in the value of up-to-date information. Our 
field changes so rapidly that often yesterday’s news is no news 
at all. True, there are “timeless” studies that demonstrate basic 
consumer behavior constructs as well today as they did 20 years 
ago or more (I may even have authored some of them!). Still, 
I feel a real obligation to present students and their professors 
with a current view of research, popular culture, and market-
ing  activities whenever I can. For this reason, each time I start 
to contemplate my next edition, I write to colleagues to ask for 
copies of papers they have in press that they believe will be im-
portant in the future. Their cooperation with my request allows 
me to include a lot of fresh research examples; in some cases, 
these articles will not yet have been published when this book 
comes out.
I’ve also taken this initiative to the next level with a feature I 
call CB As I See It. In every chapter you’ll find a “flesh-and-blood” 
consumer behavior professor who shares his or her perspective as 
a leading researcher in a particular area of specialization about 
an appropriate topic. I’ve let these esteemed colleagues largely speak for themselves, so 
now students can benefit from other voices who chime in on relevant research issues.
Data Powered by GfK
For this edition we’ve partnered with GfK, one of the largest market research organizations 
in the world, to provide students with actual consumer data to use in the end-of-part cases. 
This feature allows students to “get their hands dirty” with real issues and to develop their 
analytical skills. The data are real, and the problems are too. Each case presents the stu-
dent with a scenario that he or she would face when working in industry and asks them 
to use that information to make decisions and marketing recommendations. Additional 
chapter level exercises that also incorporate actual GfK data can be found in the Marketing 
Metrics questions in MyLab Marketing.
Critical Thinking in Consumer 
Behavior: Case Study
Learning by doing is an integral part of the classroom experi-
ence. You’ll find a case study at the end of each chapter, along 
with discussion questions to help you apply the case to the 
chapter’s contents. Also included in the twelfth edition are 
the following items that will enhance the student learning 
experience:
• Chapter Objectives at the beginning of each chapter provide an overview of key 
 issues to be covered in the chapter. Each chapter summary is then organized around the 
objectives to help you integrate the material you have read.
• Review at the end of each chapter helps you to study key issues.
• The Consumer Behavior Challenge at the end of each chapter is divided into two 
sections:
 Discuss poses thoughtful issues that encourage you to consider pragmatic and 
ethical implications of the material you have read.
18 
Preface
CB AS I SEE IT 
All the World’s a Stage
Stefano Putoni-Erasmus, University of Rotterdam
most other major cities. Second, 
globalization leads to a decrease in 
diversity between countries. Whereas 
few decades ago people in different 
countries lived very different lives, we 
can now observe a remarkable cultural 
convergence. For example, teenagers 
today listen to the same music, dress 
in the same way, and play the same 
games regardless of whether they live 
in Hong Kong or New York.
A paradox of globalization is thus 
that it both increases and decreases 
diversity. On the one hand, you can 
now eat sushi or Indian food in a 
sleepy Italian town. On the other 
hand, these restaurants look pretty 
much the same as those found 
in similarly sleepy towns in other 
countries or continents. These two 
trends raise important new questions 
for consumer researchers and I 
have tried to address some of them 
in my own work—focusing on both 
increasing diversity within countries 
and decreasing diversity between 
countries.
Here I would like to talk about one 
line of research, which I ﬁnd especially 
interesting. It concerns the decrease 
in diversity between countries. 
One of the most visible aspects of 
globalization is the spread of English 
as the new lingua franca. The recent 
growth of English as the global 
language has been extraordinary and 
the process is still gathering speed. 
With Bart de Langhe, Daniel Fenandes, 
and Stijn van Osselaer, I studied 
the impact of the rise of English as 
the global language for consumers’ 
response to both marketing 
communications and marketing 
research. The basic contention of our 
articles is simple, as well as intuitive 
to any introspective bilingual: one’s 
native language has special emotional 
qualities due to the connection of 
words with meaningful personal 
experiences. To make a concrete 
example, to a Dutch speaker, the word 
“oma” (“grandmother”) is inescapably 
associated to his or her grandmother, 
whereas the English word lacks this 
link to personal memories and it 
is thus more emotionally neutral. 
Messages have therefore more 
emotional impact when expressed in 
one’s native than second language.
Messages in English are common 
in many countries where English is 
not an ofﬁcial language. There are 
good reasons why companies decide 
to use English in their interactions 
with consumers who are not native 
speakers of English. However, our 
research highlights a potential 
drawback. For example, delivering 
emotional experiences is considered 
central in branding and it is harder to 
achieve this goal using a language that 
is not the consumer’s native language.
Globalization is the deﬁning 
social phenomenon of our times. 
Understanding its consequences 
for consumer behavior is crucial 
for marketers. A key way in which 
globalization inﬂuences consumer 
behavior is through the impact that 
globalization is having on the diversity 
of the societies in which we live. I 
think that many tensions associated 
with globalization stem from two 
opposing trends in how globalization 
inﬂuences diversity.
First, globalization leads to an 
increase in diversity within countries. 
Contemporary societies are vastly 
more diverse than they used to be, as 
can be easily noticed by taking a walk 
around Rotterdam—where I live—or 
HONDA’S ASIMO
Meet ASIMO! He is 4 feet tall, with a pleasant childish voice, 
and the ability to recognize and interact with people; however, 
ASIMO is no child. He is the humanoid robot “brainchild” of 
scientists at Honda. ASIMO’s technology includes two camera 
eyes to map its environment and recognize unique faces. Its 
body construction is so humanlike that it can run at 3.5 mph, 
toss a ball to play with a child, and use its opposable thumbs to 
open a bottle and serve you a cold drink. ASIMO is the perfect 
household companion.
Honda has not yet made ASIMO available to purchase 
for home use, but it is only a matter of time until families can 
have their own humanoid robot. But not everyone is interested. 
describe wanting to create a social robot with a whimsical 
appearance, intentionally not human or animal. They believe 
that “robots will be their own kind of creature and should be ac-
cepted, measured, and valued on those terms.”
If consumers are not ready for ASIMO, perhaps they are 
ready for some of its features. Facial recognition technology (FRT), 
the ability for a computer to “read” your face, is seeing strong 
development and application. According to some analysts, the 
FRT market is expected to grow from $1.92 billion to $6.5 bil-
lion within the next 5 years.
Advertisers and big brands are taking notice of FRT. 
Imagine a billboard in a mall that advertises Abercrombie to a 
teen girl and Target to a busy mom. Immersive Labs, recently 
acquired by Kairos, has developed digital billboards that mea-
Case Study

 Apply allows you to “get your hands dirty” as you conduct mini-experiments and 
collect data in the real world to better grasp the application of consumer behavior 
principles.
Instructor Resources
At the Instructor Resource Center, www.pearsonglobaleditions.com/solomon, instructors 
can easily register to gain access to a variety of instructor resources available with this text 
in downloadable format.
The following supplements are available with this text:
• Instructor’s Resource Manual
• Test Bank
• TestGen® Computerized Test Bank
• PowerPoint Presentations
 
Preface 
19 

This page intentionally left blank 

Sarah Roche, a doctoral student at the University of Texas at San Antonio (and now a 
faculty member at Texas Wesleyan University), did yeoman service as she helped me to 
review recently published academic articles.
I’m also grateful for the many helpful comments on how to improve the twelfth 
 edition that my peer reviewers provided. Special thanks go to the following individuals:
Karen L. Becker, The College of New Jersey
Carolyn Bonifield, University of Vermont
Dr. Jane Boyd Thomas, Winthrop University
Karthikeya Easwar, Georgetown University
Xiang Fang, Oklahoma State University
Andrew Forman, Hofstra University
Curtis P. Haugtvedt, Ohio State University
James Mason, Oklahoma State University
Carolyn F. Musgrove, Indiana University Southeast
Thomas A. Myers, Virginia Commonwealth University
Paul Jr., Indiana University
Glenna C. Pendleton, Northern Michigan University
Carol Salusso, Washington State University
Leah Schneider, University of Oregon
Gene Steidinger Jr., Loras College
Ebru Ulusoy, University of Maine
Mary G. Vermillion, DePaul University
Tommy E. Whittler, St. Vincent DePaul University
Yi-Chia Wu. University of Texas - Pan American
Weiling Zhuang, Eastern Kentucky University
These colleagues generously contributed their thoughts to my CB As I See It boxes:
Julie Baker, Texas A&M University
Stacey Menzel Baker, Creighton University
Jonah Berger, University of Pennsylvania
Malaika Brengman, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (Belgium)
Fredric Brunel, Boston University
Julien Cayla, Nanyang Business School (Singapore)
Pierre Chandon, INSEAD (France)
Jean-Charles Chebat, HEC-Montréal (Canada) and Technion (Israel)
Paul Connell, Stonybrook University
Giana Eckhardt, Royal Holloway, University of London (United Kingdom)
Amber Epp, University of Wisconsin–Madison
Jennifer Escalas, Vanderbilt University
Eileen Fischer, York University (Canada)
Ron Hill, Villanova
Paul Henry, University of Sydney (Australia)
Wendy Liu, University of California–San Diego
John Lynch, University of Colorado–Boulder
Nira Munichor, Hebrew University of Jerusalem (Israel)
Cele Otnes, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Michel Tuan Pham, Columbia University
Stefano Putoni, Erasmus University of Rotterdam (The Netherlands)
 
 
 21 
A C k n o w l e d g m e n t s

Derek Rucker, Northwestern University
Craig Thompson, University of Wisconsin–Madison
Debora Thompson, Georgetown University
Benjamin Voyer, ESCP Europe Business School (France) & London School of 
Economics (United Kingdom)
Michel Wedel, University of Maryland
Jerome Williams, Rutgers University
I thank David Nemi, Nassau Community College SUNY, for the creation of the 
Instructor’s Manual and Test Item Files and Darci Wagner, Ohio University, for her work 
with the PowerPoints.
I would also like to thank the good people at Pearson who, as always, have done great 
work on this edition. A special thanks to Mark Gaffney, Stephanie Wall, Jen Collins, and 
Lenny Raper for their support; Becca Groves did a great job keeping me on course, and 
Melissa Pellerano was her usual conscientious self.
Without the tolerance of my friends and colleagues, I would never have been able 
to sustain the illusion that I was still an active researcher while I worked on this edition. 
I am grateful to my department chair, Dave Allan, and to Dean Joe DiAngelo for support-
ing their high-maintenance faculty member. Also, I am grateful to my students, who have 
been a prime source of inspiration, examples, and feedback. The satisfaction I garnered 
from teaching them about consumer behavior motivated me to write a book I felt they 
would like to read.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family and friends for sticking by me 
during this revision. They know who they are; their names pop up in chapter vignettes 
throughout the book. My apologies for “distorting” their characters in the name of poetic 
license! My gratitude and love go out to my parents, Jackie and Henry, and my in-laws, 
Marilyn and Phil. Ditto to my super children, Amanda, Zachary, and Alexandra—and my 
high-tech son-in-law Orly—who always made the sun shine on gray days (not to mention 
my favorite pug, Kelbie Rae). My fabulous granddaughters Rose, Evey, and Arya added a 
special thrill. Finally, thanks above all to the love of my life: Gail, my wonderful wife, best 
friend, and the hottest grandmother on earth: I still do it all for you.
M.R.S.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
August 2015
Pearson would like to thank the following people for their contributions to the Global 
Edition:
Contributors:
Adele Berndt, Jönköping University (Sweden)
Nadia Rattoo, University of Central Lancashire (United Kingdom)
Muneeza Shoaib, Middlesex University Dubai (United Arab Emirates)
Diane Sutherland
Jon Sutherland
Reviewers:
Richard Glavee-Geo, Norges Teknisk-Naturvitenskapelige Universitet (Norway)
Jie Liu, Manchester Metropolitan University (United Kingdom)
Jimmy Wong Shiang Yang, SIM University (Singapore)
Frederick H.K. Yim, Hong Kong Baptist University (Hong Kong)
22 
Acknowledgments

Consumer Behavior


       
  and
 Usin
g Pr
odu
cts
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S
o
c
i
a
l 
an
d 
Cu
ltu
ral 
Sett
ings 
 
4
: 
C
on
su
me
rs i
n Th
eir 
       
 3: C
hoos
ing
 
C
O
N
S
U
M
E R
 B
E
H
A
V
I
O
R
 
of 
Con
su
me
r B
eh
av
io
r
1: F
ou
nd
ati
on
s
o
n
 
C
o
n
s
u
me
r B
eha
vior
2
:
 
 
I
n
t
e
r
n
al
 In
ﬂu
enc
es 
25
C h a p t e r s  a h e a d
Chapter 1 • Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction 
to Consumer Behavior
Chapter 2 • Consumer and Social Well-Being
This introductory section provides an overview of the field of consumer behavior (CB). In 
Chapter 1, we look at how consumers influence the field of marketing and at how market-
ers influence us. We describe the discipline of consumer behavior and some of the different 
approaches to understanding what makes consumers tick. In Chapter 2 we’ll look at the 
broad issue of well-being, at both the positive and negative ways the products we use affect 
us and we’ll also focus on the central role of ethics in marketing decisions.
Section 1 ● Foundations of Consumer  
Behavior

26
Source: Supri Suharjoto/Shutterstock.com.
G
ail has some time to kill before her Accounting class, so she pulls out her trusty 
iPhone to see what’s going on in her social networks. Between studying for her 
Accounting and Marketing exams, she hasn’t checked out anything interesting 
in days—even her Facebook friends around campus have been quiet. Enough of the serious 
stuff, she decides. It’s time for some really educational surfing.
So, where to go first? Gail goes straight to Pinterest to see if anyone has pinned 
any new styles on her Shoe-aholic Board. Yes, definitely some new stuff to post for her 
sorority sisters. She flicks over to HerCampus (“a collegiette’s guide to lifeSM”) to get the 
latest 411 on The Bachelor TV show. She’s just about to jump to Gen Y Girl when she 
gets a text from Jewelmint.com to notify her that the site has a new jewelry option for 
her that’s based on the profile she filled out when she registered. Sweet—it’s a bracelet 
the actress Allison Williams from Girls recommends. With her PayPal account, it doesn’t 
take Gail long to throw the bracelet in the digital cart and order it—and to share a photo 
of her haul on Facebook. Just on a whim, Gail opens the Tinder app on her phone; yes, 
as usual plenty of guys who want to meet up if she “swipes right.” Not happening with 
these dweebs—a flurry of left swipes and she’s done.1 As Gail glances at the clock, she 
realizes she’d better come back to the real world or she’ll miss her exam. OK, enough 
time for one quick post before she runs to catch the campus shuttle: Gail logs on to 
RateMyProfessors.com and writes a quick but glowing paragraph about how great her 
Consumer Behavior professor has been this semester … not to mention that awesome 
textbook they’re using.2
 1-1 Consumer behavior is a process.
 1-2 Marketers have to understand the wants and needs of 
different consumer segments.
 1-3 Our choices as consumers relate in powerful ways to the 
rest of our lives.
 1-4 Our motivations to consume are complex and varied.
 1-5 Technology and culture create a new “always-on” 
consumer.
 1-6 Many different types of specialists study consumer 
behavior.
 1-7 There are differing perspectives regarding how and what 
we should understand about consumer behavior.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
 Chapter 1 ● Buying, Having, and Being: 
An Introduction to Consumer 
Behavior

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
27 
Consumer Behavior: people in the 
Marketplace
This book is about people like Gail—and you. It concerns the 
products and services we buy and use and the ways these fit 
into our lives. This introductory chapter describes some important aspects of the field of 
consumer behavior and some reasons why it’s essential to understand how people interact 
with the marketing system. For now, though, let’s return to one “typical” consumer: Gail, 
the business major. The preceding vignette allows us to highlight some aspects of con-
sumer behavior that we will cover in the rest of the book.
Gail is a consumer; so let’s compare her to other consumers. For some purposes, 
marketers find it useful to categorize her in terms of her age, gender, income, or occupa-
tion. These are descriptive characteristics of a population, or demographics. In other 
cases, marketers would rather know something about Gail’s interests in clothing or music 
or the way she spends her leisure time. Knowledge of consumer characteristics plays an 
extremely important role in many marketing applications, such as when a manufacturer 
defines the market for a product or an advertising agency decides on the appropriate tech-
niques to employ when it targets a certain group of consumers.
Gail’s sorority sisters strongly influence her purchase decisions. The conversations 
we have with others transmit a lot of product information, as well as recommendations 
to use or avoid particular brands; this content often is more influential than what we see 
on television commercials, magazines, or billboards. The growth of the Web has created 
thousands of online consumption communities, where members share opinions and 
recommendations about anything from Barbie dolls to baseball fantasy league team line-
ups to iPhone apps. Gail forms bonds with fellow group members because they use the 
same products. There is also pressure on each group member to buy things that will meet 
with the group’s approval. A consumer may pay a steep price in the form of group rejec-
tion or embarrassment when he or she doesn’t conform to others’ conceptions of what is 
good or bad, “in” or “out.”
As members of a large society, such as in the United States, people share certain cul-
tural values, or strongly held beliefs about the way the world should function. Members of 
subcultures, or smaller groups within the culture, also share values; these groups include 
Hispanics, teens, Midwesterners, and even hipsters who listen to Arcade Fire, wear Band 
of Outsiders clothing, and eat vegan tacos.
Everyday Gail comes into contact with information about many competing brands. 
Some don’t capture her attention at all, whereas others are just a turnoff because they 
don’t relate to “looks,” people, or ideas with which she identifies. The use of market seg-
mentation strategies means an organization targets its product, service, or idea only to 
specific groups of consumers rather than to everybody—even if it means that other con-
sumers who don’t belong to this target market aren’t attracted to it. That’s why they make 
chocolate and vanilla ice cream (and even candied bacon flavor!).
Brands often have clearly defined images, or “personalities,” that advertising, 
packaging, branding, and other marketing elements help to shape. Even the choice 
of a favorite Web site is very much a lifestyle statement: It says a lot about a person’s 
interests, as well as something about the type of person he or she would like to be. 
People often purchase a product because they like its image or because they feel its 
“personality” somehow corresponds to their own. This is true even when they evaluate 
other people; after all, each of us is in a way a “brand” that others like or not—thus the 
popularity of dating apps such as Tinder that let people quickly choose among compet-
ing alternatives! Moreover, a consumer may believe that if he or she buys and uses the 
product or service, its desirable qualities will “magically” rub off on to him or her. When 
a product or service satisfies our specific needs or desires, we may reward it with many 
years of brand loyalty, which is a bond between product and consumer that is difficult for 
competitors to break.
OBjeCtIve 1-1
Consumer behavior is 
a process.

28 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
The appearance, taste, texture, or smell of the item influences our evaluations of 
products. A good Web site helps people to feel, taste, and smell with their eyes. We may 
be swayed by the shape and color of a package on the store shelf, as well as by more 
subtle factors, such as the symbolism in a brand name, in an advertisement, or even 
in the choice of a cover model for a magazine. These judgments are affected by—and 
often reflect—how a society feels people should define themselves at that point in time. 
Many product meanings lurk below the surface of packaging and advertising; we’ll dis-
cuss some of the methods marketers and social scientists use to discover or apply these 
meanings.
Like Gail, we shape our opinions and desires based on a mix of voices from around 
the world, which is becoming a much smaller place as a result of rapid advancements in 
communications and transportation systems. In today’s global culture, consumers often 
prize products and services that “transport” them to different places and allow them to 
experience the diversity of other cultures—even if only to watch others brush their teeth 
on YouTube.
What Is Consumer Behavior?
The field of consumer behavior covers a lot of ground: It is the study of  the processes 
involved when individuals or groups select, purchase, use, or dispose of  products, services, 
ideas, or experiences to satisfy needs and desires. Consumers take many forms, ranging 
from an 8-year-old child who begs her mother for a Frozen Elsa doll to an executive in 
a large corporation who helps to decide on a multimillion-dollar computer system. The 
items we consume include anything from canned peas to a massage, democracy, Juicy 
jeans, Reggaeton music, or a celebrity like Taylor Swift. The needs and desires we satisfy 
range from hunger and thirst to love, status, and even spiritual fulfillment. Also, as 
we’ll see throughout this book, people get passionate about a broad range of products. 
Whether it’s vintage Air Jordans, that perfect yoga mat, or the latest computer tablet, 
there’s no shortage of brand fans who will do whatever it takes to find and buy what 
they crave.
Consumers form strong loyalties with their 
favorite brands or stores. If necessary, many 
are willing to camp out for a new product 
introduction, much like they would for scarce 
tickets at a big concert.
Source: Jeffrey Blackler/Alamy.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
29 
Consumer Behavior Is a process
In its early stages of development, researchers referred to the field as buyer behavior; 
this reflected the emphasis at that time (1960s and 1970s) on the interaction between 
consumers and producers at the time of purchase. Most marketers now recognize 
that consumer behavior is in fact an ongoing process, not merely what happens at the 
moment a consumer hands over money or a credit card and in turn receives some good 
or service.
The exchange, a transaction in which two or more organizations or people give and 
receive something of value, is an integral part of marketing.3 Although exchange theory 
remains an important part of consumer behavior, the expanded view emphasizes the 
entire consumption process, which includes the issues that influence the consumer before, 
during, and after a purchase. Figure 1.1 illustrates some of the issues that we address dur-
ing each stage of the consumption process.
A consumer is a person who identifies a need or desire, makes a purchase, and then 
disposes of the product during the three stages of the consumption process. In many 
cases, however, different people play a role in this sequence of events. The purchaser and 
user of a product might not be the same person, as when a parent picks out clothes for 
a teenager (and makes selections that can result in “fashion suicide” in the view of the 
teen). In other cases, another person may act as an influencer when he or she recom-
mends certain products without actually buying or using them. A friend’s grimace when 
you try on that new pair of pants may be more influential than anything your mother 
might say.
Finally, consumers may take the form of organizations or groups. One or several 
persons may select products that many will use, as when a purchasing agent orders a 
company’s office supplies. In other organizational situations, a large group of people 
may make purchase decisions: for example, company accountants, designers, engineers, 
sales personnel, and others—all of whom will have a say in the various stages of the 
consumption process. As we’ll see in Chapter 11, one important type of organization is 
the family, in which different family members weigh in about products and services that 
all will use.
CONSUMER’S PERSPECTIVE
PREPURCHASE
ISSUES
POSTPURCHASE
ISSUES
PURCHASE
ISSUES
MARKETER’S PERSPECTIVE
How does a consumer decide that
he/she needs a product?
What are the best sources of information
to learn more about alternative choices?
What determines whether a consumer
will be satisfied with a product and
whether he/she will buy it again?
Does this person tell others about his/her
experiences with the product and influence
their purchase decisions?
How are consumer attitudes toward
products formed and/or changed?
What cues do consumers use to infer
which products are superior to others?
How do situational factors, such as time
pressure or store displays, affect the
consumer’s purchase decision?
Does the product provide pleasure or
perform its intended function?
How is the product eventually disposed
of, and what are the environmental
consequences of this act?
Is acquiring a product a stressful or
pleasant experience? What does the
purchase say about the consumer?
Figure 1.1 STAGES IN THE CONSuMPTION PROCESS

30 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
Consumers’ Impact on Marketing Strategy
Why should managers, advertisers, and other marketing professionals bother to learn 
about consumer behavior? Simply, it’s good business. The basic marketing concept that you 
(hopefully) remember from your basic Marketing class states that organizations exist to 
satisfy needs. Marketers can satisfy these needs only to the extent that they understand the 
people or organizations that will use the products and services they sell. Voila! That’s why 
we study consumer behavior.
Consumers Are Different! How We 
Divide them Up
Our society is evolving from a mass culture in which many con-
sumers share the same preferences to a diverse one in which 
we each have almost an infinite number of choices—just think 
about how many shades of lipstick or necktie patterns compete 
for your attention. This change makes it more important than ever to identify distinct mar-
ket segments and to develop specialized messages and products for those groups.
As we’ll see later, building loyalty to a brand is a smart marketing strategy, so some-
times companies define market segments when they identify their most faithful customers 
or heavy users. As a rule of thumb, marketers use the 80/20 rule: 20 percent of users 
account for 80 percent of sales. This guideline often holds up well, and in some cases even 
this lopsided split isn’t big enough: A study of 54 million shoppers reported that only 
2.5 percent of consumers account for 80 percent of sales for the average packaged-goods 
brand. The 1 percent of pet owners who buy 80 percent of Iams pet food spend $93 a 
year on the brand, and the 1.2 percent of beer drinkers who account for 80 percent of 
Budweiser sales spend $170 on Bud each year. Of the 1,364 brands the researchers stud-
ied, only 25 had a consumer base of more than 10 percent that accounted for 80 percent 
of volume.5 So, just think of the 80/20 rule as a guideline rather than set in stone.
Aside from heavy usage of a product, we use many other dimensions to divide up a 
larger market. As we’ve already seen, demographics are statistics that measure observable 
aspects of a population, such as birth rate, age distribution, and income. The U.S. Census 
Bureau is a major source of demographic data on U.S. families, but many private firms 
gather additional data on specific population groups as well. The changes and trends that 
demographic studies reveal are of great interest to marketers because they can use the 
data to locate and predict the size of markets for many products, ranging from home mort-
gages to brooms and can openers. Imagine trying to sell baby food to a single male or an 
around the world cruise to a couple making $15,000 a year!
Successful 
companies 
understand that needs are 
a moving target. No orga-
nization—no matter how 
renowned for its marketing 
prowess—can afford to rest on its laurels. 
Everyone needs to keep innovating to stay 
ahead of changing customers and the mar-
ketplace. BMW is a great example. No one 
(not even rivals like Audi or Mercedes-Benz) 
would argue that the German automaker 
knows how to make a good car (though they 
may not agree with the company’s claim to 
be “the ultimate driving machine”). Still, 
BMW’s engineers and designers know they 
have to understand how drivers’ needs will 
change in the future—even those loyal own-
ers who love the cars they own today. The 
company is highly sensitive to such key 
trends as:
●
●A desire for environmentally friendly 
products
●
●Increasingly congested roadways and 
the movement by some cities such as 
London to impose fees on vehicles in 
central areas
●
●New business models that encourage 
consumers to rent products only while 
they need them rather than buying them 
outright
BMW’s response: The company committed 
more than $1 billion to develop electric 
BMWi models such as its new i3 commuter 
car and i8 sports car. These futuristic-looking 
vehicles are largely made from lightweight 
carbon fiber to maximize the distance they 
can go between battery charges, and 25 
percent of the interior plastic comes from 
recycled or renewable raw materials. In ad-
dition, BMW started a car-sharing service 
(now in several European cities as well as 
San Francisco) it calls DriveNow: Drivers use 
a computer chip in their licenses to hire a car 
and leave it wherever they are when they no 
longer need it. That’s forward thinking.4
Marketing Opportunity
OBjeCtIve 1-2
Marketers have to 
understand the wants 
and needs of different 
consumer segments.
BMW anticipated changes in consumer 
behavior as it develops electric car models 
like the i8 that satisfy dual desires for style 
and environmental responsibility.
Source: BMW of North America, LLC.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
31 
In this book we explore many of the important demographic variables that make one 
consumer the same as or different from others. We also consider other important charac-
teristics that are a bit subtler, such as differences in consumers’ personalities and tastes 
that we can’t objectively measure, yet may hugely impact our product choices. For now, 
let’s summarize a few of the most important demographic dimensions, each of which 
we’ll describe in more detail in later chapters.
Age
Consumers of different age groups obviously have different needs and wants. Although 
people who belong to the same age group differ in many other ways, they do tend to share 
a set of values and common cultural experiences that they carry throughout life.7
In some cases, marketers initially develop a product to attract one age group and then 
try to broaden its appeal later on. That’s what the high-octane energy drink Red Bull does. 
The company aggressively introduced it in bars, nightclubs, and gyms to the product’s 
core audience of young people. Over time, it became popular in other contexts, and the 
company began to sponsor the PGA European Tour to broaden its reach to older golfers 
(who probably aren’t up partying all night). It also hands out free cans to commuters, cab 
drivers, and car rental agencies to promote the drink as a way to stay alert on the road.8
Gender
We start to make gender distinctions at an early age—even diapers come in pink versions 
for girls and blue for boys. Many products, from fragrances to footwear, target either men 
Marketing pitfall
When Hurricane Sandy 
devastated 
cities 
on 
the East Coast in 2012, 
some marketers rose to 
the occasion, whereas 
others stumbled in the wind. Gap, for exam-
ple, tweeted, “We’ll be doing lots of Gap.com 
shopping today. How about you?” American 
Apparel offered an incentive to shoppers: “In 
case you’re bored during the storm, just Enter 
SANDYSALE at Checkout.” Many of the storm 
victims were not amused. One tweeted, “Hey 
@americanapparel people have died and 
others are in need. Shut up about your 
#Sandy sale.”
In contrast, Allstate ran radio com-
mercials to let policyholders know how to 
file claims quickly. JetBlue Airways waived 
change and cancellation fees for people who 
had to rebook. How’s this for a relationship 
builder? Duracell batteries sent a truck to 
New York City that offered free batteries and 
access to charging lockers for mobile devices 
and computers to desperate people who had 
been without power (or even worse, access to 
social media).6
Red Bull targets different age groups with its 
promotions.
Source: picturesbyrob/Alamy.

32 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
or women. The popular sunglass and athletic apparel brand Oakley now makes a con-
certed effort to boost the paltry 10 percent of its’ revenue from women’s products. The 
new “Made for More” campaign offers a revitalized line of workout gear; it actually asks 
women to sign an agreement that they will wear the clothing specifically for exercising 
rather than just running errands after Oakley learned that a majority of women agree 
that exercise and fitness are important to them. 9
Family Structure
A person’s family and marital status is yet another important demographic variable 
because this has a huge effect on consumers’ spending priorities. Not surprisingly, young 
bachelors and newlyweds are the most likely to exercise; go to bars, concerts, and mov-
ies; and consume alcohol (enjoy it while you can!). Families with young children are big 
purchasers of health foods and fruit juices, whereas single-parent households and those 
with older children buy more junk food. Older couples and bachelors are most likely to use 
home maintenance services.10
Social Class and Income
People who belong to the same social class are approximately equal in terms of income and 
social standing in the community. They work in roughly similar occupations, and they 
tend to have similar tastes in music, clothing, leisure activities, and art. They also tend to 
The Redneck Bank takes a unique approach 
to social class segmentation (yes, this is a 
real bank).
Source: Courtesy of www.redneckbank.com.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
33 
socialize with one another, and they share many ideas and values regarding the way they 
should live.11 The distribution of wealth is of great interest to marketers because it deter-
mines which groups have the greatest buying power and market potential.
race and ethnicity
African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Asian Americans are the three fastest-
growing ethnic groups in the United States. As our society becomes increasingly multicul-
tural, new opportunities develop to deliver specialized products to racial and ethnic groups 
and to introduce other groups to these offerings. McDonald’s regards ethnic consumers 
as trendsetters. The restaurant chain often assesses their reactions to new menu items 
or advertisements before it rolls them out to the Caucasian market. For example, the fruit 
combinations in McDonald’s smoothies are based on preferences the company’s research-
ers discovered in ethnic communities.12
Geography
Many national marketers tailor their offerings to appeal to consumers who live in differ-
ent parts of the country. Some southerners are fond of a “good ol’ boy” image that leaves 
others scratching their heads. Although many northerners regard the name “Bubba” as 
a negative term, businesses in Dixie proudly flaunt the name. Bubba Co. is a Charleston-
based firm that licenses products such as Bubba-Q-Sauce. In Florida, restaurants, sports 
bars, nightclubs, and a limousine firm all proudly bear the name Bubba.13
Lifestyles
Consumers also have different lifestyles, even if they share other demographic characteris-
tics such as gender or age. The way we feel about ourselves, the things we value, the things 
we like to do in our spare time—all of these factors help to determine which products will 
push our buttons or even those that make us feel better. Procter & Gamble developed its 
heartburn medicine Prilosec OTC with an ideal customer in mind based on a lifestyle anal-
ysis. Her name is Joanne, and she’s a mother older than age 35 who’s more likely to get 
heartburn from a cup of coffee than from an overdose of pizza and beer. A P&G executive 
observed, “We know Joanne. We know what she feels. We know what she eats. We know 
what else she likes to buy in the store.”14
Segmenting by Behavior: relationships and “Big Data”
Marketers carefully define customer segments and listen to people in their markets as 
never before. Many of them now realize that a key to success is building relationships 
between brands and customers that will last a lifetime. Marketers who subscribe to this 
philosophy of relationship marketing interact with customers on a regular basis 
and give them solid reasons to maintain a bond with the company over time. A focus on 
relationships is even more vital, especially during the nasty economic conditions we’ve 
recently experienced; when times are tough, people tend to rely on their good friends for 
support!
Database marketing tracks specific consumers’ buying habits closely and crafts 
products and messages tailored precisely to people’s wants and needs based on this infor-
mation. Walmart stores massive amounts of information on the 100 million people who 
visit its stores each week, and the company uses these data to fine-tune its offerings. For 
example, when the company analyzed how shoppers’ buying patterns react when fore-
casters predict a major hurricane, it discovered that people do a lot more than simply stock 
up on flashlights. Sales of strawberry Pop-Tarts increase by about 700 percent, and the 
top-selling product of all is … beer. Based on these insights, Walmart loads its trucks with 
toaster pastries and six-packs to stock local stores when a big storm approaches.15
At this very moment (and every moment thereafter until we croak), we all generate 
massive amounts of information that holds tremendous value for marketers. You may 
not see it, but we are practically buried by data that comes from many sources—sensors 
that collect climate information, the comments you and your friends make to your favorite 
social media sites, the credit card transactions we authorize, and even the GPS signals in 

34 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
our smartphones that let organizations know where most of us are pretty much anytime 
day or night. This incredible amount of information has created a new field that causes 
tremendous excitement among marketing analysts (and other math geeks). The collec-
tion and analysis of extremely large datasets is called Big Data, and you’ll be hearing a lot 
more about it in the next few years. Hint: If you have aptitude or interest in quantitative 
topics, this will be a desirable career path for you.
In a single day, consumers create 2.5 quintillion bytes of data (or 2.5 exabytes). 
New data pops up so quickly that this number doubles about every 40 months—and 90 
percent of the data in the world today was created in the last 2 years alone. In addition to 
the huge volume of information marketers now have to play with, its velocity (speed) also 
enables companies to make decisions in real time that used to take months or years. For 
Forward-looking companies are 
beginning to mine the gold they find 
in “Big Data.”
Source: Copyright © 2012, SAS Institute 
Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduced with 
permission of SAS Institute Inc., Cary, 
NC, USA.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
35 
example, one group of researchers used the GPS phone signals that were coming from 
Macy’s parking lots on Black Friday to estimate whether the department store was going 
to meet or exceed its sales projections for the biggest shopping day of the year—before the 
stores even reported their sales. This kind of intelligence allows financial analysts and 
marketing managers to move quickly as they buy and sell stocks or make merchandising 
decisions.
It’s safe to say this data explosion will profoundly change the way we think about 
consumer behavior. Companies, nonprofits, political parties, and even governments now 
have the ability to sift through massive quantities of information that enables them to 
make precise predictions about what products we will buy, what charities we will donate 
to, what candidates we will vote for, and what levers they need to push to make this even 
more likely to happen. Walmart alone collects more than 2.5 petabytes of data every hour 
from its customer transactions (the equivalent of about 20 million filing cabinets’ worth 
of text). Here are a few varied examples that illustrate how Big Data influences what we 
know and do:16
●
●When they monitor blips in Google queries for words like flu and fever, epidemiologists 
at the Centers for Disease Control can identify specific areas of the United States that 
have been hit by flu outbreaks even before the local authorities notice a rise in hospital 
admissions.
●
●Analysts for city police departments use massive amounts of crime data to identify 
“hot zones,” where an abnormal amount of crimes occur. This intelligence enables 
them to assign and reassign law enforcement agents exactly where they need them.
●
●Although the Republicans outspent the Democrats during the 2012 presidential cam-
paign, many attribute President Barack Obama’s reelection to his campaign’s master-
ful use of Big Data. The Democratic campaign systematically used huge datasets to 
help it decide exactly which voters needed an extra “nudge” to go to the polls and pull 
the lever for Obama. In subsequent elections the Republicans figured out how impor-
tant it is to play catch-up and adopt their own Big Data strategies!
Marketing’s Impact on Consumers
Does marketing imitate life, or vice versa? After the movie 
Wedding Crashers became a big hit, hotels, wedding planners, and 
newlyweds reported an outbreak of uninvited guests who tried to 
gain access to parties across the United States.17 For better or for 
worse, we all live in a world that the actions of marketers signifi-
cantly influence.
popular Culture Is Marketing Is popular Culture …
Marketing stimuli surround us as advertisements, stores, and products compete for 
our attention and our dollars. Marketers filter much of what we learn about the world, 
whether through the affluence they depict in glamorous magazines, the roles actors play 
in commercials, or maybe the energy drink a rock star just “happens” to hold during a 
photo shoot. Ads show us how we should act with regard to recycling, alcohol consump-
tion, the types of houses and cars we might wish to own—and even how to evaluate 
 others based on the products they buy or don’t buy. In many ways we are also at the mercy 
of marketers, because we rely on them to sell us products that are safe and that perform as 
promised, to tell us the truth about what they sell, and to price and distribute these prod-
ucts fairly.
Popular culture—the music, movies, sports, books, celebrities, and other forms of 
entertainment that the mass market produces and consumes—is both a product of and an 
inspiration for marketers. It also affects our lives in more far-reaching ways, ranging from 
how we acknowledge cultural events such as marriage, death, or holidays to how we view 
OBjeCtIve 1-3
Our choices as 
consumers relate in 
powerful ways to the rest 
of our lives.

36 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
social issues such as climate change, gambling, and addictions. Whether it’s the Super 
Bowl, Christmas shopping, national health care, newspaper recycling, medical marijuana, 
body piercing, vaping, tweeting, or online video games, marketers play a significant role in 
our view of the world and how we live in it.
This cultural impact is hard to overlook, although many people do not seem to realize 
how much marketers influence their preferences for movie and musical heroes; the latest 
fashions in clothing, food, and decorating choices; and even the physical features that they 
find attractive or ugly in men and women. For example, consider the product icons that 
companies use to create an identity for their products. Many imaginary creatures and 
personalities, from the Pillsbury Doughboy to the Jolly Green Giant, at one time or another 
have been central figures in popular culture. In fact, it is likely that more consumers could 
recognize such characters than could identify past presidents, business leaders, or artists. 
We are surrounded by elements of popular 
culture—the good, the bad, and the ugly. This 
ad for the Museum of Bad Art reminds us 
of that.
Source: With permission of Museum of Bad Art.
Marketers exert a huge impact on the way 
we live, for better and worse. Many compa-
nies and entrepreneurs are jumping on the 
new vaping bandwagon although the jury is 
still out as to whether this substitute for cig-
arette smoking is a good thing for smokers 
or simply a way to entice more young people 
to take up the smoking habit.
Source: Alex_Mac/Fotolia.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
37 
Although these figures never really existed, many of us feel as if we “know” them, and 
they certainly are effective spokescharacters for the products they represent.
All the World’s a Stage
The sociological perspective of role theory takes the view that much of consumer behav-
ior resembles actions in a play.19 We as consumers seek the lines, props, and costumes 
necessary to put on a good performance. Because people act out many different roles, they 
sometimes alter their consumption decisions depending on the particular “play” they are 
in at the time. The criteria they use to evaluate products and services in one of their roles 
may be quite different from those they use in other roles. That’s why it’s important for 
marketers to provide each of us “actors” with the props we need to play all of our varied 
roles; these might include “up-and-coming executive,” “geek,” “hipster,” or “big man on 
campus.”
The interplay between mar-
keting and/media and “real  
life” is obvious when you 
consider the history of the  
cultural observance Ameri-
can u.S. college students know as “Spring 
Break.” Back in 1958 an English professor 
at Michigan State university heard some stu-
dents talking about their Easter trip to Fort 
Lauderdale, Florida. He decided to go along to 
observe (they probably loved that), and upon 
his return he wrote a novel he called Where the 
Boys Are. That turned into a hit movie and the 
title song by Connie Francis rocked the charts. 
The year after the movie debuted in 1960, 
the number of students who visited Florida on 
their spring vacation ballooned from 20,000 
to 50,000. MTV hosted a concert at Daytona 
Beach in 1986 that attracted major advertisers,  
and—thus began the commercialization of a 
rite that now attracts hundreds of thousands of 
devotees every year—maybe even you.18
Marketing Opportunity
Technologies like Bluetooth connectivity 
allow consumers to interact with products 
more intimately, which in turn strengthens 
their relationships.
Source: Courtesy of The Procter & Gamble 
Company.

38 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
As we have seen, one trademark of marketing strategies today is that many organiza-
tions try very hard to build relationships with customers. The nature of these relationships 
can vary, but these bonds help us to understand some of the possible meanings products 
have for us. Furthermore, researchers find that, like friendships and love affairs with other 
people, our relationships with brands evolve over time. Some resemble deep friendships, 
whereas others are more like exciting but short-lived flings.20
Here are some of the types of relationships a person might have with a product:
●
●Self-concept attachment—The product helps to establish the user’s identity.
●
●Nostalgic attachment—The product serves as a link with a past self.
●
●Interdependence—The product is a part of the user’s daily routine.
●
●Love—The product elicits emotional bonds of warmth, passion, or other strong 
emotion.21
CB AS I See It 
Stefano Putoni-Erasmus, University of Rotterdam
most other major cities. Second, 
globalization leads to a decrease in 
diversity between countries. Whereas 
few decades ago people in different 
countries lived very different lives, we 
can now observe a remarkable cultural 
convergence. For example, teenagers 
today listen to the same music, dress 
in the same way, and play the same 
games regardless of whether they live 
in Hong Kong or New York.
A paradox of globalization is thus 
that it both increases and decreases 
diversity. On the one hand, you can 
now eat sushi or Indian food in a 
sleepy Italian town. On the other 
hand, these restaurants look pretty 
much the same as those found 
in similarly sleepy towns in other 
countries or continents. These two 
trends raise important new questions 
for consumer researchers and I 
have tried to address some of them 
in my own work—focusing on both 
increasing diversity within countries 
and decreasing diversity between 
countries.
Here I would like to talk about one 
line of research, which I find especially 
interesting. It concerns the decrease 
in diversity between countries. 
One of the most visible aspects of 
globalization is the spread of English 
as the new lingua franca. The recent 
growth of English as the global 
language has been extraordinary and 
the process is still gathering speed. 
With Bart de Langhe, Daniel Fenandes, 
and Stijn van Osselaer, I studied 
the impact of the rise of English as 
the global language for consumers’ 
response to both marketing 
communications and marketing 
research. The basic contention of our 
articles is simple, as well as intuitive 
to any introspective bilingual: one’s 
native language has special emotional 
qualities due to the connection of 
words with meaningful personal 
experiences. To make a concrete 
example, to a Dutch speaker, the word 
“oma” (“grandmother”) is inescapably 
associated to his or her grandmother, 
whereas the English word lacks this 
link to personal memories and it 
is thus more emotionally neutral. 
Messages have therefore more 
emotional impact when expressed in 
one’s native than second language.
Messages in English are common 
in many countries where English is 
not an official language. There are 
good reasons why companies decide 
to use English in their interactions 
with consumers who are not native 
speakers of English. However, our 
research highlights a potential 
drawback. For example, delivering 
emotional experiences is considered 
central in branding and it is harder to 
achieve this goal using a language that 
is not the consumer’s native language.
Globalization is the defining 
social phenomenon of our times. 
Understanding its consequences 
for consumer behavior is crucial 
for marketers. A key way in which 
globalization influences consumer 
behavior is through the impact that 
globalization is having on the diversity 
of the societies in which we live. I 
think that many tensions associated 
with globalization stem from two 
opposing trends in how globalization 
influences diversity.
First, globalization leads to an 
increase in diversity within countries. 
Contemporary societies are vastly 
more diverse than they used to be, as 
can be easily noticed by taking a walk 
around Rotterdam—where I live—or 

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
39 
Even a very inexpensive product like Peeps 
can play an important role in a culture.
Source: garytog/Fotolia.
What Does It Mean to Consume?
What’s the poop on Peeps? Every year, people buy about 1.5 
billion of these mostly tasteless marshmallow chicks; about two-
thirds of them sell around Easter. The newer version called Peeps 
Minis encourages people to eat them at other times as well, 
including quirky and obscure “holidays” such as “Bubble Wrap Appreciation Day” and 
“Lost Sock Memorial Day.”22
Peeps have no nutritional value, but they do have a shelf life of two years. Maybe 
that’s why not all Peeps get eaten. Devotees use them in decorations, dioramas, online 
slide shows, and sculptures. Some fans feel challenged to test their physical properties: On 
more than 200 Peeps Web sites, you can see fetishists skewering, microwaving, hammer-
ing, decapitating, and otherwise abusing the spongy confections.23
This fascination with a creepy little candy chick illustrates one of the fundamental 
premises of the modern field of consumer behavior: People often buy products not for what 
OBjeCtIve 1-4
 Our motivations to 
consume are complex 
and varied.
Successful products satisfy needs and im-
prove our lives in ways large and small. This 
South African ad subtly reminds us that our 
plans might go astray if we don’t have a reli-
able form of transportation—and of course 
the quality auto parts that help to make that 
happen.
Source: Courtesy of Honda Motor Southern Africa.

40 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
they do, but for what they mean. This principle does not imply that a product’s basic function 
is unimportant, but rather that the roles products play in our lives extend well beyond the 
tasks they perform. The deeper meanings of a product may help it to stand out from other 
similar goods and services. All things being equal, we choose the brand that has an image 
(or even a personality!) consistent with our underlying needs.
For example, although most people probably couldn’t run faster or jump higher if 
they wear Nikes instead of Reeboks, many die-hard loyalists swear by their favorite brand. 
People choose between these archrivals (or other competitors) largely because of their 
brand images—meanings that have been carefully crafted with the help of legions of rock 
stars, athletes, slickly produced commercials, and many millions of dollars. So, when you 
buy a Nike “swoosh,” you are doing more than choosing shoes to wear to the mall; you 
also make a lifestyle statement about the type of person you are or wish you were. For a 
relatively simple item made of leather and laces, that’s quite a feat!
Our allegiances to sneakers, musicians, and even soft drinks help us define our place 
in modern society, and these choices also help each of us to form bonds with others who 
share similar preferences. This comment by a participant in a focus group captures the 
curious bonding that consumption choices can create: “I was at a Super Bowl party, and I 
picked up an obscure drink. Somebody else across the room went ‘yo!’ because he had the 
same thing. People feel a connection when you’re drinking the same thing.”24
As we’ll see in Chapter 5, our motivations to consume range from the practical to 
the fanciful (see the Peeps discussion). In some cases, we decide to try a product because 
we want to learn more about the experience and in some way grow personally. For 
example, in one study undergraduates who were asked to try a new (fictitious) brand of 
beer were more likely to do so when they believed their level of expertise with the product 
was relatively low (imagine that!), and thus there was an opportunity to enhance their 
knowledge about different attributes of beer.25 In other cases our choice of a product links 
more to our broader identity as a member of a larger entity such as an ethnic group or a 
country. In another study researchers found that emerging Chinese luxury brands such 
as Shanghai Tang and Shang Xia resonate with local consumers because they place a 
renewed value upon Chinese craftsmanship, values, and aesthetics.26
What Do We need—Really?
A recent large survey explored some profound questions: How can we predict if someone 
will be happy? How does that feeling relate to living a meaningful life? The researchers 
concluded that happiness is linked to satisfying wants and needs, whereas meaningfulness 
relates to activities that express oneself and impact others in a positive way. Not surpris-
ingly, people whose needs were satisfied were happier, but the findings went beyond that 
connection:
●
●Happiness was linked to being a taker rather than a giver, whereas meaningfulness 
went with being a giver rather than a taker. Happy people are more likely to think in 
the present rather than dwelling on the past or contemplating the future.
●
●Respondents who reported higher levels of worry, stress, and anxiety were less happy 
but had more meaningful lives. They spend a lot of time thinking about past struggles 
and imagining what will happen in the future. They are likely to agree that taking care 
of children and buying gifts for others are a reflection of who they are.
●
●The researchers concluded that “happiness without meaning characterizes a rela-
tively shallow, self-absorbed or even selfish life, in which things go well, needs and de-
sires are easily satisfied, and difficult or taxing entanglements are avoided.”27
The distinction between a “happy” and a “meaningful” life brings up an important 
question: What is the difference between needing something and wanting it? The answer 
to this deceptively simple question actually explains a lot of consumer behavior! A need 
is something a person must have to live or achieve a goal. A want is a specific manifesta-
tion of a need that personal and cultural factors determine. For example, hunger is a basic 

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
41 
need that all of us must satisfy; a lack of food creates a tension state that a person is moti-
vated to reduce. But, the way he or she chooses to do that can take a lot of forms: One per-
son’s “dream meal” might include a cheeseburger, fries, and double-fudge Oreo cookies, 
whereas another might go for sushi followed by vegan and gluten-free chocolate cake balls.
the Global “Always-On” Consumer
Today many of us take for granted things that our grandpar-
ents only dreamed about. We instantly access people, places, 
and products with the click of a link. Many consumers travel to 
remote countries in a day rather than the weeks or months our 
ancestors needed, if they ever left their places of birth at all.
The majority of us now live in urban centers that bustle with people from many 
countries and that offer exotic foods from around the world. The United Nations defines a 
megacity as a metropolitan area with a total population of more than 10 million people. 
By 2011, there were already 20 such areas in the world. Researchers estimate that by 
2030 three out of five people will live in cities, and more than 2 billion people will live in 
slums. Already, China boasts four shopping centers that are larger than the massive Mall 
of America in Minnesota, and soon it will be home to seven of the world’s largest malls.28
This concentration in urban centers, combined with population growth in develop-
ing countries and increasing demands for modernization by billions of people in boom-
ing economies such as China, India, and Brazil, is both a blessing and a curse. Quality 
of life for many everyday citizens is better than even the elite who lived several centuries 
ago (even kings only bathed once a month). On the other hand, millions live in squalor, 
children around the world go to bed hungry, and we all feel the effects unbridled growth 
contributes to pollution of our air, soil, and water. As we’ll see later in the book, all of these 
issues relate directly to our understanding of consumer behavior—and to the impact com-
panies and customers have on our future and the world that we will leave to our children.
the Digital native: Living a Social [Media] Life
It’s fair to say that 24/7 access to smartphones and other social media devices has kindled 
a fascination among many of us with documenting exactly what we’re doing and sharing 
the exciting news with others. A meal in a nice restaurant doesn’t get touched until the 
This ad from the united Arab Emirates
appeals to our basic drive to reduce hunger.
Source: Designed and released by Publinet
Advertising & Publicity LLC, Dubai, UAE.
OBjeCtIve 1-5
 Technology and culture 
create a new “always-on” 
consumer.

42 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
diner posts a photo of it on Instagram. We may not learn that the person we’re dating has 
broken up with us until we see they have changed their relationship status on Facebook. 
Today you can even wear a tiny camera called the Narrative Clip that automatically snaps 
a photo every 30 seconds for those who feel the need to post an ongoing documentary of 
their everyday movements for posterity.29
There’s little doubt that the digital revolution is one of the most significant influ-
ences on consumer behavior, and the impact of the Web will continue to expand as more 
and more people around the world log in. Many of us are avid Web surfers, and it’s hard 
to imagine a time when texting, tweeting, Facebooking, or pinning favorite items on 
Pinterest weren’t an accepted part of daily life—not to mention those who compulsively 
check in on Foursquare at their local Starbucks 10 times a day!
Electronic marketing makes our lives a lot easier. You can shop 24/7 without leaving 
home, you can read today’s newspaper without getting drenched picking up a newsprint 
copy in a rainstorm, and you don’t have to wait for the 6:00 pm news to find out what the 
weather will be like tomorrow—whether at home or around the globe. With the increas-
ing use of handheld devices and wireless communications, you can get that same informa-
tion—from stock quotes to the weather—even when you’re away from your computer.
Also, it’s not all about businesses selling to consumers (B2C e-commerce). 
The cyberspace explosion has created a revolution in consumer-to-consumer activ-
ity (C2C e-commerce): Welcome to the world of virtual brand communities. Just as 
e-consumers are not limited to local retail outlets in their shopping, they are not limited 
to their local communities when they look for friends or fellow fans of wine, hip-hop, or 
skateboarding.
Picture a small group of local collectors who meet once a month at a local diner to dis-
cuss their shared interests over coffee. Now multiply that group by thousands and include 
people from all over the world who are united by a shared passion for sports memorabilia, 
Barbie dolls, Harley-Davidson motorcycles, refrigerator magnets, or massive multiplayer 
New products like the Narrative Clip allow 
people who feel the need to document their 
activities to do so easily.
Source: Courtesy of Narrative.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
43 
online games (MMOGs) such as World of Warcraft. The Web also provides an easy way for 
consumers around the world to exchange information about their experiences with prod-
ucts, services, music, restaurants, and movies. The Hollywood Stock Exchange (hsx.com) 
offers a simulated entertainment stock market where traders predict the 4-week box 
office take for each film.30 Amazon.com encourages shoppers to write reviews of books, 
and (just as Gail did) you can even rate your professors at RateMyProfessors.com (don’t 
tell your prof about this one; it’ll be our secret).31 The popularity of chat rooms where 
consumers can go to discuss various topics with like-minded “Netizens” around the 
world grows every day, as do immersive virtual worlds such as Second Life, Habbo Hotel, 
and Kaneva. News reports tell us of the sometimes wonderful and sometimes horrific 
romances that have begun on the Internet as people check out potential mates on sites 
such as Match.com or OKCupid. In one month, the dating site Plenty of Fish alone had 
122  million visits.32 Or, chew on this: today in the United States, one-third of married 
couples met online!33
If you’re a typical student, you probably can’t recall a time when the Internet was just 
a static, one-way platform that transmitted text and a few sketchy images. And believe 
it or not, in the last century even that crude technique didn’t exist. You may have read 
about this in a history class: People actually hand-wrote letters to each other and waited 
for printed magazines to arrive in their mailboxes to learn about current events! The term 
digital native originated in a 2001 article to explain a new type of student who was 
starting to turn up on campus. These consumers grew up “wired” in a highly networked, 
always-on world where digital technology had always existed.34
Fast-forward a decade: Today the Internet is the backbone of our society. Widespread 
access to devices such as personal computers, digital video and audio recorders, web-
cams, and smartphones ensures that consumers of practically any age who live in 
virtually any part of the world can create and share content. But information doesn’t 
just flow from big companies or governments down to the people; today each of us 
can communicate with huge numbers of people by a click on a keypad, so information 
flows across people as well. Indeed, the recent decision by the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) to back the principle of net neutrality ensures that everyone— 
individual users and behemoth companies—is guaranteed equal access to the “pipes” 
we rely on to access cyberspace.
That’s what we mean by a horizontal revolution. This horizontal revolution is 
characterized in part by the prevalence of social media. Social media are the online 
means of communication, conveyance, collaboration, and cultivation among intercon-
nected and interdependent networks of people, communities, and organizations enhanced 
by technological capabilities and mobility.36
The Internet and its related technologies that gave birth to Web 2.0 make what we 
know today as social media possible and prevalent. Every day the influence of social media 
expands as more people join online communities. Facebook, a social utility that offers syn-
chronous interactions (those that occur in real time, like when you text back-and-forth 
with a friend) and asynchronous interactions (those that don’t require all participants 
to respond immediately, like when you text a friend and get an answer the next day), 
photo-sharing, games, applications, groups, e-retailing, and more, has more than one bil-
lion active users.37
People aren’t just joining social communities. They are contributing too! Users 
upload 72 hours of video to YouTube every minute. In just 30 days on YouTube, more 
video is broadcast than in the past 60 years on the CBS, NBC, and ABC broadcasting net-
works combined.38 Consider these mind-boggling social media stats:39
●
●If you were paid $1 for every time an article was posted on Wikipedia, you would earn 
$156.23 per hour.
●
●It took radio 38 years to reach 50 million listeners. TV took 13 years to reach 50 mil-
lion users. The Internet took 4 years to reach 50 million people. In less than 9 months, 
Facebook added 100 million users.
net profit
Do you remember all those 
crazy Mentos/Diet Coke 
videos? At least 800 of 
them flooded YouTube af-
ter people discovered that 
when you drop the quarter-size candies into 
bottles of Diet Coke, you get a geyser that 
shoots 20 feet into the air. Needless to 
say, Mentos got a gusher of free public-
ity out of the deal, too.35 Probably the 
biggest marketing phenomenon of this de-
cade is user- generated content, whereby 
everyday people voice their opinions about 
products, brands, and companies on blogs, 
podcasts, and social networking sites such 
as Facebook and Twitter, and even film their 
own commercials that thousands view on 
sites such as YouTube. This important trend 
helps to define the era of Web 2.0: the re-
birth of the Internet as a social, interactive 
medium from its original roots as a form 
of one-way transmission from producers to 
consumers.

44 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
●
●About 70 percent of Facebook users are outside the United States.
●
●Social networks have overtaken porn as the number-one online activity.
●
●Eighty percent of companies use LinkedIn as their primary recruiting tool.
●
●Twenty-five percent of search results for the world’s top 10 brands are to user-gener-
ated content.
●
●People share more than 1.5 billion pieces of content on Facebook—every day.
●
●Eighty percent of Twitter usage is from mobile devices, and 17 percent of users have 
tweeted while on the toilet.
This is all exciting stuff, especially because social media platforms enable a culture of 
participation; a belief in democracy; the ability to freely interact with other people, com-
panies, and organizations; open access to venues that allow users to share content from 
simple comments to reviews, ratings, photos, stories, and more; and the power to build on 
the content of others from your own unique point of view. Of course, just like democracy 
in the real world, we have to take the bitter with the sweet. There are plenty of unsavory 
things going on in cyberspace, and the hours people spend on Facebook, on online gam-
bling sites, or in virtual worlds like Second Life have led to divorce, bankruptcy, or jail in the 
real world.
Consumer Behavior as a Field 
of Study
By now it should be clear that the field of consumer behavior 
encompasses many things, from the simple purchase of a carton 
of milk to the selection of a complex networked computer system; from the decision to 
donate money to a charity to devious plans to rip off a company.
There’s an awful lot to understand, and many ways to go about it. Although people 
have certainly been consumers for a long time, it is only recently that consumption per 
se  has been the object of formal study. In fact, although many business schools now 
require that marketing majors take a consumer behavior course, most colleges did not 
even offer such a course until the 1970s.
Where Do We Find Consumer researchers?
Where do we find consumer researchers? Just about anywhere we find consumers. 
Consumer researchers work for manufacturers, retailers, marketing research firms, gov-
ernments and nonprofit organizations, and of course colleges and universities. You’ll find 
them in laboratories, running sophisticated experiments that involve advanced neural 
imaging machinery, or in malls interviewing shoppers. They may conduct focus groups 
or run large-scale polling operations. For example, when an advertising agency began 
to work on a new campaign for retailer JC Penney, it sent staffers to hang out with more 
than 50 women for several days. They wanted to really understand the respondents’ lives, 
so they helped them to clean their houses, carpool, cook dinner, and shop. As one of the 
account executives observed, “If you want to understand how a lion hunts, you don’t go to 
the zoo—you go to the jungle.”40
Researchers work on many types of topics, from everyday household products and 
high-tech installations to professional services, museum exhibits, and public policy issues 
such as the effect of advertising on children. Indeed, no consumer issue is too sacred for 
researchers: Some intrepid investigators bravely explore “delicate” categories such as 
incontinence products and birth control devices. The marketing director for Trojan con-
doms noted that, “Unlike laundry, where you can actually sit and watch people do their 
laundry, we can’t sit and watch them use our product.” For this reason, Trojan relies on 
clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, and cultural anthropologists to understand how men 
relate to condoms.41
OBjeCtIve 1-6
Many different types 
of specialists study 
consumer behavior.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
45 
Interdisciplinary Influences on the Study of Consumer 
Behavior
Many different perspectives shape the young field of consumer behavior. Indeed, it is hard 
to think of a field that is more interdisciplinary. You can find people with training in a 
wide range of disciplines—from psychophysiology to literature—doing consumer research. 
Universities, manufacturers, museums, advertising agencies, and governments employ 
consumer researchers. Several professional groups, such as the Association for Consumer 
Research and the Society for Consumer Psychology, have been formed since the mid-1970s.
To gain an idea of the diversity of interests of people who do consumer research, 
consider the list of professional associations that sponsor the field’s major journal, 
the Journal of Consumer Research: the American Association of Family and Consumer 
Sciences, the American Statistical Association, the Association for Consumer Research, 
the Society for Consumer Psychology, the International Communication Association, the 
American Sociological Association, the Institute of Management Sciences, the American 
Anthropological Association, the American Marketing Association, the Society for 
Personality and Social Psychology, the American Association for Public Opinion Research, 
and the American Economic Association. That’s a pretty mixed bag.
Clearly there are a lot of researchers from diverse backgrounds who are into the study 
of consumer behavior. So, which is the “correct” discipline to look into these issues? You 
might remember a children’s story about the blind men and the elephant. The gist of the 
story is that each man touched a different part of the animal and, as a result, the descrip-
tions each gave of the elephant were quite different. This analogy applies to consumer 
research as well. Depending on the training and interests of the researchers studying it, 
they will approach the same consumer phenomenon in different ways and at different 
levels. Table 1.1 illustrates how we can approach a “simple” topic such as magazine usage 
from a range of perspectives.
tABLe 1.1   Interdisciplinary Research Issues in Consumer Behavior
Disciplinary Focus
Magazine Usage Sample research Issues
Experimental Psychology: product role in perception, 
learning, and memory processes
How specific aspects of magazines, such as their design or layout, are recognized and 
interpreted; which parts of a magazine people are most likely to read.
Clinical Psychology: product role in psychological 
adjustment
How magazines affect readers’ body images (e.g., do thin models make the average woman 
feel overweight?)
Microeconomics/Human Ecology: product role in 
allocation of individual or family resources
Factors influencing the amount of money a household spends on magazines.
Social Psychology: product role in the behavior of 
individuals as members of social groups
Ways that ads in a magazine affect readers’ attitudes toward the products depicted; how 
peer pressure influences a person’s readership decisions
Sociology: product role in social institutions and 
group relationships
Pattern by which magazine preferences spread through a social group (e.g., a sorority)
Macroeconomics: product role in consumers’ 
relations with the marketplace
Effects of the price of fashion magazines and expense of items advertised during periods of 
high unemployment
Semiotics/Literary Criticism: product role in the 
verbal and visual communication of meaning
Ways in which underlying messages communicated by models and ads in a magazine are 
interpreted
Demography: product role in the measurable 
characteristics of a population
Effects of age, income, and marital status of a magazine’s readers
History: product role in societal changes over time
Ways in which our culture’s depictions of “femininity” in magazines have changed over time
Cultural Anthropology: product role in a society’s 
beliefs and practices
Ways in which fashions and models in a magazine affect readers’ definitions of masculine 
versus feminine behavior (e.g., the role of working women, sexual taboos)

46 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
Figure 1.2 provides a glimpse of some of the disciplines that work in the field and the 
level at which each tackles research issues. We can roughly characterize them in terms of 
their focus on micro- versus macro-consumer behavior topics. The fields closer to the top 
of the pyramid concentrate on the individual consumer (micro issues), and those toward 
the base are more interested in the collective activities that occur among larger groups of 
people, such as consumption patterns members of a culture or subculture share (macro 
issues). As we make our way through this book, we’ll focus on the issues at the top (micro) 
and then make our way to the bottom of the pyramid by the end of the course. Hang 
in there!
two perspectives on Consumer 
research
One general way in which we classify consumer research is in 
terms of the fundamental assumptions the researchers make 
about what they study and how to study it. We call a set of beliefs 
that guide our understanding of the world a paradigm. As in 
other fields of study, a paradigm dominates the discipline of con-
sumer behavior. However, some believe the discipline is in the middle of a paradigm shift, 
which occurs when a competing paradigm challenges the dominant set of assumptions.
The basic set of assumptions underlying the dominant paradigm at this point in time 
is positivism (sometimes called modernism). This perspective has significantly influenced 
Western art and science since the late 16th century. It emphasizes that human reason is 
supreme and that there is a single, objective truth that science can discover. Positivism 
encourages us to stress the function of objects, to celebrate technology, and to regard the 
world as a rational, ordered place with a clearly defined past, present, and future.
The newer paradigm of interpretivism (or postmodernism) questions these assump-
tions.42 Proponents of this perspective argue that our society emphasizes science and 
Experimental Psychology
Clinical Psychology
Developmental Psychology
Human Ecology
Microeconomics
Social Psychology
Sociology
Macroeconomics
Semiotics/Literary Criticism
Demography
History
Cultural Anthropology
MICRO CONSUMER BEHAVIOR
(INDIVIDUAL FOCUS)
MACRO CONSUMER BEHAVIOR
(SOCIAL FOCUS)
Figure 1.2 THE PYRAMID OF 
CONSuMER BEHAVIOR
OBjeCtIve 1-7
 There are differing 
perspectives regarding 
how and what we should 
understand about 
consumer behavior.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
47 
technology too much, and they feel that this ordered, rational view of behavior denies 
or ignores the complex social and cultural world in which we really live. Others feel that 
positivism puts too much emphasis on material well-being and that its logical outlook is 
directed by an ideology that stresses the homogenous views of a culture dominated by 
(dead) white males. And, as we’ll see in the next chapter, some adherents to this view also 
believe researchers should not just study consumer issues, but act on them as well.
Interpretivists instead stress the importance of symbolic, subjective experience, and 
the idea that meaning is in the mind of the person—that is, we each construct our own 
meanings based on our unique and shared cultural experiences, so there are no right 
or wrong answers. In this view, the world in which we live is a pastiche, or mixture of 
images and ideas.43 This perspective rejects the value we assign to products because they 
help us to create order; instead, it focuses on regarding consumption as offering a set of 
diverse experiences. Table 1.2 summarizes the major differences between these two per-
spectives on consumer research.
To appreciate how an interpretive framework helps us to understand marketing 
communications, let’s refer to an analysis of one of the best-known and longest-running 
(1959–1978) advertising campaigns of all time: the work the advertising agency Doyle 
Dane Bernbach (DDB) did for the Volkswagen Beetle. This campaign, widely noted for its 
self-mocking wit, found many ways to turn the Beetle’s homeliness, small size, and lack 
of power into positive attributes at a time when most car ads were emphasizing just the 
The expanded view of consumer behavior 
embraces much more than the study of what 
and why we buy; it also focuses on how 
marketers influence consumers and how 
consumers use the products and services 
marketers sell. In this case, a hotel in Dubai 
promotes responsible behavior.
Source: Courtesy of Marco Polo Hotel/Dubai;
Brandcom Agency.

48 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
opposite. In one famous advertising execution in this campaign, a black-and-white photo 
of a Beetle appeared above the tagline: “Lemon.” The copy beneath the word went on to 
explain that a company inspector rejected this particular vehicle because he found a blem-
ish on the glove box.
An interpretative analysis of these messages used concepts from literature, psychol-
ogy, and anthropology to ground the appeal of this approach within a broader cultural 
context. Analysts linked the image DDB created for the humble car to other examples of 
what scholars of comedy call the “Little Man” pattern. This is a type of comedic character 
who is related to a clown or a trickster, a social outcast who is able to poke holes in the 
stuffiness and rigidity of bureaucracy and conformity. Other examples of the “Little Man” 
character include Hawkeye in the classic TV sitcom M*A*S*H, the comedian Woody Allen, 
and actor Charlie Chaplin. When one looks at the cultural meaning of marketing mes-
sages this way, it is perhaps no coincidence that IBM chose the Charlie Chaplin character 
some years later to help it “soften” its stuffy, intimidating image as it tried to convince con-
sumers that its new personal computer products were user friendly.
In recent years the interpretivist focus has gained momentum and although it’s still 
not the dominant focus of consumer researchers, it’s quite commonplace to see research 
studies that adhere to this perspective, or its’ current incarnation many refer to as 
Consumer Culture Theory (CCT). This label refers generally to research that regards 
consumption from a social and cultural point of view rather than more narrowly as an 
economic exchange. CCT studies embrace a variety of topics that range from how the 
media shapes our conceptions of our bodies or how underprivileged people cope with pov-
erty to how Harley-Davidson riders participate in an active community of bike lovers.44
Should Consumer research Have an Academic or an 
Applied Focus?
Many researchers regard the field of consumer behavior as an applied social science. They 
argue that the value of the knowledge we generate should be judged in terms of its ability 
to improve the effectiveness of marketing practice. However, others argue that consumer 
behavior should not have a strategic focus at all; the field should not be a “handmaiden 
to business.” It should instead focus on the understanding of consumption for its own 
sake rather than marketers applying this knowledge to making a profit.45 Most consumer 
researchers do not hold this rather extreme view, but it has encouraged many to expand 
the scope of their work beyond the field’s traditional focus on the purchase of consumer 
goods such as food, appliances, and cars to embrace social problems such as homelessness 
or preserving the environment. Certainly, it has led to some fiery debates among people 
working in the field!
tABLe 1.2   Positivist versus Interpretivist Approaches to Consumer Behavior
Assumptions
positivist Approach
Interpretivist Approach
Nature of 
reality  
Goal
Objective, tangible 
Single Prediction
Socially constructed  
Multiple understanding
Knowledge 
generated
Time-free, context 
independent
Time-bound, context dependent
View of 
causality
Existence of real 
causes
Multiple, simultaneous  
shaping events
Research 
relationship
Separation between 
researcher and subject
Interactive, cooperative with researcher 
being part of phenomenon under study
Source: Laurel Anderson Hudson, Julie L. Ozanne. Alternative Ways of Seeking Knowledge in Consumer Research.  
Journal of Consumer Research, Mar 1988, Vol. 14(4), 508–521 by permission of Oxford University Press/on behalf  
of the sponsoring society if the journal is a society journal.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
49 
CB AS I See It
Craig Thompson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
present a desired self-image to 
others (i.e., the socially conscious 
shopper, the sophisticated culinary 
omnivore; the frugal, down-to-earth 
consumer). Research that I have 
conducted with various colleagues 
over the last 15 years suggests 
that neither of these dominant 
explanations tell the full story about 
the motivations and meanings 
that underlie practices of political 
consumerism.
My conceptualization of political 
consumerism builds upon the works 
of the historian and social theorist 
Michel de Certeau, who analyzed the 
micro-politics of everyday actions. 
That is, practices through which 
individuals attempt to change the 
social conditions that organize 
and constrain their everyday 
actions. To illustrate the concept 
of structural constraints, consider 
the vast number of Americans who 
embark on a daily commute from 
their suburban homes to their 
place of work; a commute which 
consumes time, money (fuel costs, 
automobile depreciation) and often 
that generates frustration as one 
negotiates traffic delays and the 
like. And many Americans would love 
to forego this costly and stressful 
routine but they have few practical 
alternatives owing to a lack of 
convenient public transportation or 
housing costs which make living in 
the distant suburbs more affordable 
than center city neighborhoods which 
would be closer to their workplaces. 
While consumers can choose 
alternative modes of transportation 
(such as biking to work), a network of 
structural relations push consumers 
to accept, as a default choice, the 
standard practice of commuting and 
to bear its associated costs.
Political consumerism refers 
to situations where consumers 
seek to consciously resist these 
structural constraints through 
alternative consumption practices 
and do so with a critical-reflexive 
knowledge of the specific conditions 
being challenged. My colleagues 
and I have consistently found that 
these resistant consumer choices 
and practices are collective rather 
individual in nature. In other words, 
consumers become socially linked to 
particular consumption communities 
that are mobilized by their opposition 
to some dominant structural 
influence and act upon a shared 
understanding (or ideology) of the 
ethical and cultural implications of 
their resistant consumer practices.
For example, Gokcen Coskuner-
Balli and I conducted a study of 
community-supported agriculture; an 
alternative market system whereby 
consumers buy a share in a local 
farm (which typically costs between 
$300 to $600) and in return, they 
receive a weekly box of produce that 
they acquire at a centralized drop 
off site or in some cases, the farm 
itself. In this exchange relationship, 
the CSA farmer’s planting decision 
and the success (or failure) of the 
crops determine what goes in the 
weekly basket as well as the volume 
of goods provided. Hence, consumers 
are foregoing their conventional ability 
to choose what they buy and CSA’s 
“buy a share” pricing model makes 
it difficult to accurately determine 
just what they are paying for any 
particular item in their basket. Why 
do consumers enter into such an 
unconventional market relationship? 
In many cases, CSA consumers first 
become sensitized to the often-
reported health risks associated with 
processed foods and the pesticides 
used in conventional agriculture. 
Thus, CSA offered these concerned 
consumers a means to incorporate 
fresh, organic produce into their 
diets. Importantly, many of these 
consumers were also responding to 
the evangelizing recommendations 
of friends and neighbors who were 
already members of a CSA. Once 
Would you rather spend your time 
sipping a latte in a small, dimly 
light bohemian coffee shop or a 
bright, shiny Starbucks? Would you 
rather drive a fuel-efficient Prius or a 
powerful, four-wheel drive gas guzzling 
SUV? Would you rather buy your 
groceries at a Walmart superstore 
stocked to the ceiling with nationally 
advertised brands, or at a Whole 
Foods with a meticulously arranged 
produce display and an enticing 
selection of niche-oriented organic 
brands, or at a farmers market or CSA 
(Community Supported Agriculture) 
program where you can form a direct 
face-to-face relationship with the 
person producing your food?
From a conventional consumer 
behavior perspective, these different 
scenarios are no different from the 
myriad other choices that consumers 
make on a daily basis. Accordingly, 
they can be explained as the outcome 
of a given consumer’s evaluation of 
the respective attributes offered by 
each alternative. Another prominent 
line of explanation would suggest that 
these choices are a form of identity 
signaling through which consumers 

50 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
taking It from Here: the plan of the Book
This book covers many facets of consumer behavior, and in the chapters to come we will 
highlight many of the research perspectives that we only briefly described in this one. 
The plan of the book is simple: It goes from micro to macro. Think of it as a sort of pho-
tograph album of consumer behavior: Each chapter provides a “snapshot” of consum-
ers, but the lens used to take each picture gets successively wider. First we’ll focus on the 
crucially important topic of consumer well-being in the next chapter of Section 1 as we 
consider some of the consequences of our decisions for our environment and ourselves. 
In Section 2 we’ll dive deeper into the facets of individual consumer behavior as we look 
at internal factors such as how we learn about products and services and then use this 
information to decide how we feel about them—and about ourselves as individuals. In 
Section 3 we zoom in on how exactly we choose products and services from a field of 
competitors and how we decide to purchase, use and even dispose of these products. 
Finally in Section 4 we expand the lens to consider external influences on these decisions 
such as the groups to which we belong and the opinions of others we access via both 
 traditional and new media.
consumers commit to a CSA program, 
they gradually become socialized into 
the shared ideological values, beliefs, 
and ideas of the CSA community 
through their interactions with farmers, 
other CSA consumers, participation in 
farm events (e.g., tours, watermelon 
tasting events, apple picking) and 
last but not least, the newsletters 
that many CSA farms include in their 
weekly baskets. Over time, these 
consumers come to understand their 
participation in a CSA as a means to 
gain some degree of autonomy from 
the structural influences exerted by 
large agri-business firms and the array 
of consumer packaged goods they 
promote.
A very different ideological 
expression of the politics of 
consumption is offered by an analysis 
of avid Hummer owners that I 
conducted with Marius Luedicke and 
Markus Giesler. Prior to our study, 
Hummer owners had largely been 
stereotyped as ardent status-seekers 
who were oblivious to the socially 
irresponsible nature of their oversized 
version of conspicuous consumption. 
In contrast, we discovered that devout 
Hummer owners had constructed a 
collective identity in which they were 
proponents and defenders of liberty. 
Upon further investigation, we found 
that their understanding of freedom 
and its symbolic linkage to a mass-
produced SUV was grounded in the 
ideology of American exceptionalism. 
This ideology portrays the United 
States as a proverbial City on the Hill 
that stands as beacon of freedom 
and liberty to the world. American 
exceptionalism further venerates the 
ideal of rugged individualism and 
promotes a belief that the United 
States, as a divinely blessed land, 
enjoys a boundless frontier of natural 
resources. For Hummer owners, their 
environmental critics were not only 
an affront to these hallowed values 
but were even akin to communists 
and socialists, in posing a threat to 
the sacrosanct American way of life. 
Paradoxically, the cultural backlash 
against the Hummer galvanized 
these owners’ belief that driving 
a Hummer was a principled act of 
resistance against un-American “tree 
huggers” who sought to impose 
tyrannical constraints on their rugged 
individualist lifestyles and their 
capacity to experience the American 
frontier through their off-roading 
endeavors. Although the Hummer’s 
cultural moment has passed, my 
colleagues and I believe that this 
underlying ideology of American 
exceptionalism can help to explain 
phenomena such as the high rate of 
climate change denial among political 
conservatives and even more extreme 
versions of politicized fossil fuel 
consumption, such as the automotive 
subculture known as “rolling coal.” 
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Rolling_coal]
For example, Chipotle’s award 
 winning animated short film—The 
 Scarecrow https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=lUtnas5ScSE—
incorporates critiques of corporate 
farming that have been central to 
the ideology of community supported 
agriculture and other variations of 
the local food movement. Similarly, 
Dove’s Campaign for Real Beauty 
reiterates feminist criticisms of 
the so-called beauty industry in 
the course of promoting its line of 
cosmetic and skin care products. One 
school of thought deems marketers’ 
appropriation of resistant consumer 
ideologies and marketing strategies 
to be an inherently hypocritical and 
exploitative action that misleads 
consumers, as in so-called 
greenwashing campaigns. Others 
counter that such campaigns can 
contribute to positive social change 
by building broader social awareness 
of the problems and concerns being 
represented.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
51 
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
ChaPTEr Summary
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. Consumer behavior is a process.
Consumer behavior is the study of the processes involved 
when individuals or groups select, purchase, use, or dispose 
of products, services, ideas, or experiences to satisfy needs 
and desires. A consumer may purchase, use, and dispose of 
a product, but different people may perform these functions. 
In addition, we can think of consumers as role players who 
need different products to help them play their various parts.
2. marketers have to understand the wants and needs of 
different consumer segments.
Market segmentation is an important aspect of consumer 
behavior. Consumers can be segmented according to many 
dimensions, including product usage, demographics (the 
objective aspects of a population, such as age and sex), 
and psychographics (psychological and lifestyle character-
istics). Emerging developments, such as the new emphasis 
on relationship marketing and the practice of database 
marketing, mean that marketers are much more attuned 
to the wants and needs of different consumer groups.
3. Our choices as consumers relate in powerful ways to 
the rest of our lives.
Marketing activities exert an enormous impact on individ-
uals. Consumer behavior is relevant to our understanding 
of both public policy issues (e.g., ethical marketing prac-
tices) and the dynamics of popular culture.
4. Our motivations to consume are complex and varied.
Marketers try to satisfy consumer needs, but the reasons 
people purchase any product can vary widely. The identifi-
cation of consumer motives is an important step to ensure 
that a product will satisfy appropriate needs. Traditional 
approaches to consumer behavior focus on the abilities of 
products to satisfy rational needs (utilitarian motives), but 
hedonic motives (e.g., the need for exploration or for fun) 
also play a key role in many purchase decisions.
5. Technology and culture create a new “always-on” 
consumer.
The Web and social media transform the way consumers 
interact with companies and with each other. Online com-
merce allows us to locate obscure products from around the 
world, and consumption communities provide forums for 
people to share opinions and product recommendations.
6. many different types of specialists study consumer 
behavior.
The field of consumer behavior is interdisciplinary; it is 
composed of researchers from many different fields who 
share an interest in how people interact with the market-
place. We can categorize these disciplines by the degree 
to which their focus is micro (the individual consumer) 
or macro (the consumer as a member of groups or of the 
larger society).
7. There are differing perspectives regarding how and 
what we should understand about consumer behavior.
Researchers who study consumer behavior do so both for 
academic purposes and to inform marketing organiza-
tions about practical decisions. We can roughly divide 
research orientations into two approaches: The positivist 
perspective emphasizes the objectivity of science and the 
consumer as a rational decision maker. The interpretivist 
(or CCT) perspective, in contrast, stresses the subjective 
meaning of the consumer’s individual experience and the 
idea that any behavior is subject to multiple interpreta-
tions rather than to one single explanation.
KEy TErmS
80/20 Rule, 30
Asynchronous interactions, 43
B2C e-commerce, 42
Big Data, 34
C2C e-commerce, 42
Consumer, 29
Consumer behavior, 28
Consumer Culture Theory (CCT), 48
Consumption communities, 27
Culture of participation, 44
Database marketing, 33
Demographics, 27

52 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
rEviEw
 
1-1 Provide a definition of consumer behavior.
 
1-2 What are demographics? Give three examples of demo-
graphic characteristics.
 
1-3 What are consumption communities? Give three exam-
ples of consumption communities.
 
1-4 What is role theory, and how does it help us to under-
stand consumer behavior?
 
1-5 How would you define a consumer?
 
1-6 Why do some marketers believe in the concept of 
 relationship marketing?
 
1-7 How practical and useful is database marketing for most 
businesses?
 
1-8 Identify the three stages of the consumption process.
 
1-9 Have traditional patterns of consumption been radi-
cally changed by globalization?
 1-10 How could interdisciplinary research in consumer behav-
ior explain the profile of a national newspaper or television 
news channel?
 1-11 Name two different disciplines that study consumer behav-
ior. How would their approaches to the same issue differ?
 1-12 This chapter states “people often buy products not for 
what they do but for what they mean.” Explain the 
meaning of this statement and provide an example.
 1-13 What are the major differences between the positivist 
and interpretivist paradigms in consumer research?
COnSumEr BEhaviOr ChallEngE
●
■DISCUSS
 1-14 Each country or region will have a core of products and 
services that are consumed. Collectively, the consump-
tion of these infers some kind of group bond. Identify 
examples of these specific products and services and 
comment on how they help to maintain group bonds.
 1-15 What aspects of consumer behavior would interest 
a financial planner? A university administrator? A 
graphic arts designer? A social worker in a government 
agency? A nursing instructor?
 1-16 Individuals can have different relationships with 
brands and products. It is suggested that an individ-
ual can have a self-concept attachment, a nostalgic 
attachment, interdependence, or love. Choose 8 to 
10 brands or products that you use and comment on 
whether you feel any of these attachments towards 
them. What do your findings tell you about the power 
of each brand?
 1-17 The chapter discussed a study that compared and con-
trasted people who lead “happy” lives versus those with 
“meaningful” lives. How does this distinction relate to 
the way you decide to spend your time and money? How 
does it relate to consumer behavior more generally? 46
 1-18 Businesses using social media to appear relevant and 
present in the lives of their consumers have seen some 
tremendous successes. Some, however, have exposed 
themselves to threats they could not have anticipated 
and have suffered huge losses in consumer perception. 
Yet, it seems that businesses cannot afford to ignore 
social media; they need to have a visible and vibrant 
presence on all platforms. The major problems are that 
the businesses become the subject of discussion. In these 
discussions, businesses have little control, and deleting 
comments is seen as exercising unreasonable censor-
ship. Do you agree or disagree with this assertion?
 1-19 PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) carried out an exten-
sive survey of 6 continents, 19 territories, and 19,000 
online shoppers for their Total Retail 2015 survey.47 
It revealed what many had predicted for some years, 
that the shift from high street retail to online retail 
was still gathering pace and showed few signs of slow-
ing down.
PwC’s model explains the continuing preference for 
online retail in terms of four retail disruptors. Their first 
disruptor considers the evolution of the conventional 
store. It is no longer the single point of sale for the busi-
ness. In some respects, it is a window into the business 
and a form of catalog or showroom. PwC suggests that 
this is a natural evolution of the business model. The 
second and third disruptors (mobile technology and 
social networks) are the technological changes that 
have had a massive impact on retailing. Mobile technol-
ogy means that purchases can be made anywhere, any-
time, by anyone. Social networks are instant, real-time 
points of contact with consumers and are increasingly 
important places for reviews and feedback. At the same 
time, the buzz and excitement that can be generated by 
Digital native, 43
Exchange, 29
Heavy users, 30
Horizontal revolution, 43
Interpretivism, 46
Market segmentation strategies, 27
Megacity, 41
Need, 40
Net neutrality, 43
Paradigm, 46
Pastiche, 47
Popular culture, 35
Positivism, 46
Relationship marketing, 33
Role theory, 37
Social media, 43
Synchronous interactions, 43
User-generated content, 43
Virtual worlds, 43
Want, 40
Web 2.0, 43

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
53 
social media can create instant and massive demand 
for a product or service. The final disruptor is related to 
changes in the demographic make-up of society.  The 
key 18–24 years’ age group has a much greater affinity 
with brands than previous generations do; 43 percent 
follow brands online, they research brands more, and 
they are more inclined to watch videos about brands. 
The PwC survey revealed that 36 percent of consum-
ers visit retail outlets at least once a week. It is still an 
important contact point. 
A decade ago, only 25.3 percent of consumers had 
ever made an online purchase.48 According to Dunn 
Humby, a global advertising company, multichannel 
purchasing is set to continue to change retail, with 
some brands seeing between 20 and 50 percent of sales 
through online shopping. 49
To what extent is apparent that the merger of technol-
ogy and culture driving this change from conventional 
retailing to online shopping?  Will it mean the death of 
traditional retailing?
●
■AppLy
 1-20 National marketers will often adapt the ways in which 
they market and promote products and services on a 
geographical basis. Is this the case in your country? Dis-
cuss with a company example.
 1-21 The specific way we choose to satisfy a need depends on 
our unique history, learning experiences, and cultural 
environment. For example, two classmates may feel their 
stomachs rumble during a lunchtime lecture. If neither 
person has eaten since the night before, the strength of 
their respective needs (hunger) would be about the same. 
However, the ways each person goes about satisfying 
this need might be quite different. Conduct this exercise 
with classmates: “As you probably know, a prisoner who 
is sentenced to die traditionally gets to choose his or her 
‘last meal.’ If you had to do this (let’s hope not), describe 
your last meal in detail.” Compare the responses you get, 
especially among people from different ethnic or cultural 
backgrounds. What similarities and differences emerge?
hOnda’S aSimO
Meet ASIMO! He is 4 feet tall, with a pleasant childish voice, 
and the ability to recognize and interact with people; however, 
ASIMO is no child. He is the humanoid robot “brainchild” of 
scientists at Honda. ASIMO’s technology includes two camera 
eyes to map its environment and recognize unique faces. Its 
body construction is so humanlike that it can run at 3.5 mph, 
toss a ball to play with a child, and use its opposable thumbs to 
open a bottle and serve you a cold drink. ASIMO is the perfect 
household companion.
Honda has not yet made ASIMO available to purchase 
for home use, but it is only a matter of time until families can 
have their own humanoid robot. But not everyone is interested. 
Although some consumers have interacted with robotic kiosks 
that can process food orders and provide rudimentary in-store 
customer service, many are a bit nervous about an actual robot 
serving them meals or sitting down and telling them the news 
of the day. Why? Perhaps it is Hollywood’s influence on our per-
ception of robots. It might not be the sweet WALL-E that comes 
to mind when we think about robots, but the Terminator or an-
other threatening machine.
Even robot developers have differing views on the roles 
robots could play or how they should look. Some see them 
as humanistic in appearance, serving as kind, compassionate 
companions for the aging or lonely. The movie Her explored the 
human-like connection that could exist with a computer-gen-
erated being. However, the developers of a robot called Leonardo 
describe wanting to create a social robot with a whimsical 
appearance, intentionally not human or animal. They believe 
that “robots will be their own kind of creature and should be ac-
cepted, measured, and valued on those terms.”
If consumers are not ready for ASIMO, perhaps they are 
ready for some of its features. Facial recognition technology (FRT), 
the ability for a computer to “read” your face, is seeing strong 
development and application. According to some analysts, the 
FRT market is expected to grow from $1.92 billion to $6.5 bil-
lion within the next 5 years.
Advertisers and big brands are taking notice of FRT. 
Imagine a billboard in a mall that advertises Abercrombie to a 
teen girl and Target to a busy mom. Immersive Labs, recently 
acquired by Kairos, has developed digital billboards that mea-
sure the age range, gender, and even attention level of a pass-
erby to deliver a tailored ad. With the addition of Immersive 
Labs, Kairos believes it has become the only facial biometrics 
company in the world that offers both facial recognition and 
emotion analysis tools.
According to researchers, FRT can do more than read your 
face and estimate general physical characteristics. It can map 
out a biometric profile that is as unique as your fingerprint. 
Red Pepper is a company that uses this advanced technology to 
develop Facedeals, a smartphone app that provides personalized 
offers to consumers. Here’s how it works. You download the app, 
walk into a store with a Facedeals camera and are recognized. 
Facedeals interfaces with your Facebook information, analyz-
ing your content for favorite brands, relationship status, places 
Case Study

54 
SeCtIOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior 
nOTES
visited, and other information. Then Facedeals presents you 
with a personalized offer.
Google is considering letting individuals use a body mo-
tion, perhaps a “wink” or “eyebrow movement,” as their FRT 
password. Forbes.com has unveiled an app where your webcam 
watches your facial responses when you view ads to learn what 
products and ads you like and dislike.
Although the marketing applications for FRT are numer-
ous, companies should be aware that a recent study found that  
75 percent of respondents were uncomfortable with in-store 
facial recognition technology that could identify them as a high 
value shopper and then alert a salesperson. That could change 
as technology continues to permeate our lives and as consum-
ers become convinced of the value of real-time personalized 
offers made possible only by having their unique facial features 
recognized.
diSCuSSiOn QuESTiOnS
 CS 1-1 What are the most likely consumer market segments 
for robots? Which consumer characteristics would be 
important to determine these market segments? What 
types of roles do you envision robots playing for these 
consumers?
 CS 1-2 Reflect on the value of FRT as a marketing tool. Give 
one example that illustrates how this technology can be 
most effectively used by marketers.
 CS 1-3 Discuss the “creepiness” concerns that some consum-
ers have about robots and FRT. How can marketers ad-
dress or even overcome these issues?
Sources: http://Asimo.honda.com, accessed July 30, 2013; Sara Gates, 
“Google Facial Recognition Patent: Users May Be Able to Make a Face Instead  
of Entering a Password,” http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/06/06/ 
google-facial-recognition-patent-password_n_3398360.html, accessed 
July 30, 2013; Companies and Markets.com, “Facial Recognition Market to Be 
Worth $6.5 Billion by 2018,” http://www.companiesandmarkets.com/News/ 
Security/Facial-recognition-market-to-be-worth-6-5-billion-by-2018/
NI7244, accessed July 30, 2013; Steve Parker, Jr., “Oh, It’s Happening!  
Facial Recognition & Data-Driven Marketing,” http://www.askingsmart 
erquestions.com/oh-it%E2%80%99s-happening-facial-recognition-data-
driven-marketing/, accessed July 30, 2013; Michael Walsh, “Facedeals:  
Facial Recognition Marketing Stirs Privacy Discussion Along with Excite ment,” 
http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/facedeals-facial-recognition- 
marketing-stirs-privacy-discussion-excitement-article-1.1137240# 
ixzz2aYzMgBZ2, accessed July 30, 2013; Gavin P. Sullivan, “Big Brother’s 
Tracking Shines Light on Emerging Facial Recognition Technology,” 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/mergermarket/2013/07/09/big-brothers- 
tracking-shines-light-on-emerging-facial-recognition-technology/,  
accessed July 30, 2013; Tarun Wadhwa, “What Do Jell-O, Kraft, and Adidas 
Have in Common? They All Want to Know Your Face,” http://www.forbes.
com/sites/singularity/2012/08/08/billboards-and-tvs-detect-your-face-  
and-juice-up-ads-tailored-just-for-you/, accessed July 30, 2013; “Three 
quarters of shoppers think facial recognition technology is “creepy,” http:// 
business-reporter.co.uk/2015/05/07/three-quarters-of-shoppers-think-
facial- recognition-technology-is-creepy/, accessed May 10, 2015; Brian 
Brackeen, “Kairos Acquires IMRSV,” https://www.kairos.com/blog/158-kairos- 
 acquires-imrsv, accessed May 8, 2015; Michael Roppolo, “Coming in 2015: 
World’s First Family Robot,” http://www.cbsnews.com/news/jibo-wants-  
to-be-your-familys-first-robot-next-year/, accessed May 1, 2015; Trends 
Magazine, January 2015, Vol. 12, Issue 1, pp. 1–7.
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 1.22 List the three stages in the consumption process. Describe the issues that you 
considered in each of these stages when you made a recent important purchase.
 1.23 This chapter states that people play different roles and that their consumption 
behaviors may differ depending on the particular role they are playing. State 
whether you agree or disagree with this statement, giving examples from your 
personal life. Try to construct a “stage set” for a role you play, specifying the 
props, costumes, and script that you use to play a role (e.g., job interviewee, 
conscientious student, party animal).
 
1. Molly Wood, “Led by Tinder, a Surge in Mobile Dating Apps,” February 
4, 2015, New York Times, http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2015/02/05/
technology/personaltech/led-by-tinder-the-mobile-dating-game-surges 
.html?ref=business, accessed February 28, 2015.
 
2. http://www.jewelmint.com, accessed July 18, 2013; http://www.oxygen.
com, accessed July 18, 2013; http://www.ivillage.com, accessed July 18, 
2013; http://www.hercampus.com, accessed July 18, 2013; http://www 
.RateMyProfessors.com, accessed July 18, 2013.
 
3. Michael R. Solomon, Greg W. Marshall, and Elnora W. Stuart, Marketing: 
Real People, Real Choices, 8th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Education, 2016).
 
4. http://www.bmw.com/com/en/insights/corporation/bmwi/vehicles 
.html, accessed February 27, 2015; https://us.drive-now.com/, accessed 
February 27, 2015; Joann Muller, “BMW’s Car of the Future: Glued, 
Screwed & Rented,” Forbes (November 3, 2011), http://www.forbes.com/
sites/joannmuller/2011/11/03/bmws-vision-for-the-future-of-automobiles/, 
accessed December 21, 2012.
 
5. Jack Neff, “Study: Package-Goods Brands’ Consumer Bases Very Small, Yet 
Diverse,” Advertising Age (December 8, 2008), http://www.adage.com, ac-
cessed December 8, 2008.
 
6. Stuart Elliott, “Capitalizing on Disaster, Sometimes With Results That 
Match,” New York Times (October 31, 2012), http://www.NewYorkTimes 
.com/2012/11/01/business/media/marketers-ride-the-coattails-of-a-
storm-not-all-successfully.html, accessed December 21, 2012.
 
7. Natalie Perkins, “Zeroing in on Consumer Values,” Advertising Age (March 
22, 1993): 23.

 
CHApter 1   Buying, Having, and Being: An Introduction to Consumer Behavior 
55 
 
8. Hannah Karp, “Red Bull Aims at an Older Crowd,” Wall Street Journal (June 
7, 2004): B3.
 
9. Mark J. Miller, “Oakley Looking to Get More In Tune with Female 
Customers,” June 4, 2013, Brandchannel, http://www.brandchannel 
.com/home/post/2013/06/04/Oakley-Women-060413.aspx, accessed  
Feb ruary 27, 2015.
 10. Charles M. Schaninger and William D. Danko, “A Conceptual and 
Empirical Comparison of Alternative Household Life Cycle Models,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 19 (March 1993): 580–594; Robert E. Wilkes, 
“Household Life-Cycle Stages, Transitions, and Product Expenditures,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 22 (June 1995): 27–42.
 11. Richard P. Coleman, “The Continuing Significance of Social Class to 
Marketing,” Journal of Consumer Research 10 (December 1983): 265–280.
 12. Burt Helm, “Ethnic Marketing: McDonald’s Is Lovin’ It,” Bloomberg Business-
week (July 8, 2010), http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/-content/10_ 
29/b4187022876832.htm, accessed December 21, 2012.
 13. Motoko Rich, “Region’s Marketers Hop on the Bubba Bandwagon,” Wall 
Street Journal Interactive Edition (May 19, 1999).
 14. Sarah Ellison, “Prilosec OTC Blitz by P&G Represents New Drug Foray,” 
Wall Street Journal (September 12, 2003), http://www.wsj.com, accessed 
September 12, 2003.
 15. Constance L. Hayes, “What Wal-Mart Knows About Customers’ Habits,” 
New York Times (November 14, 2004), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com, 
accessed November 14, 2004.
 16. Lisa Arthur, Big Data Marketing: Engage Your Customers More Effectively 
and Drive Value (New York: Wiley, 2013); Andrew McAfee and Erik 
Brynjolfsson, Big Data: The Management Revolution, Harvard Business 
Review (October 2012), http://hbr.org/2012/10/big-data-the-management-
re volu tion/ar/1, ac cessed December 21, 2012; “Bringing Big Data to  
the Enterprise,” IBM, http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/, 
 accessed December 21, 2012; Geoff Nunberg, “Forget YOLO: Why ‘Big 
Data’ Should Be the Word of the Year,” NPR (December 20, 2012), http://
www.npr.org/2012/12/20/167702665/geoff-nunbergs-word-of-the-
year-big-data, accessed December 21, 2012.
 17. Mylene Mangalindan, “Hollywood’s ‘Wedding Crashers’ Inspires the 
Invitationless,” Wall Street Journal (December 28, 2005): B1.
 18. Pagan Kennedy, “Who Made That? (Spring Break),” The New York Times 
Magazine (March 24, 2013).
 19. Erving Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday, 1959); George H. Mead, Mind, Self, and Society (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1934); Michael R. Solomon, “The Role of 
Products as Social Stimuli: A Symbolic Interactionism Perspective,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 10 (December 1983): 319–329.
 20. Jennifer Aaker, Susan Fournier, and S. Adam Brasel, “When Good Brands 
Do Bad,” Journal of Consumer Research 31 (2004): 1–16.
 21. Susan Fournier, “Consumers and Their Brands. Developing Relationship 
Theory in Consumer Research,” Journal of Consumer Research 24 (March 
1998): 343–373.
 22. Andrew Adam Newman, “Popular at Easter, Peeps Candy Extends to 
the Quirky Holidays,” June 18, 2014, New York Times, http://www 
.NewYorkTimes.com/2014/06/19/business/media/popular-at-easter-
peeps-candy-extends-to-the-quirky-holidays.html?ref=todayspaper&_
r=0, accessed February 22, 2015.
 23. http://www.marshmallowpeeps.com/products/valentines-day, accessed Decem-
ber 22, 2012; Thomas Vinciguerra, “Soft, Chewy and Taking Over the 
World,” New York Times (July 5, 2006): Sec. 4, p. 2.
 24. Quoted in “Bringing Meaning to Brands,” American Demographics  
(June 1997): 34.
 25. Joshua Clarkson, Chris Janiszewski, and Melissa D. Cinelli, “The Desire for 
Consumption Knowledge,” Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 6 (April 
2013): 1313–1329.
 26. Jonathan Schroeder, Janet Borgerson, and Zhiyan Wu, “A Brand Culture 
Approach to Brand Literacy: Consumer Co-creation and Emerging Chinese 
Luxury Brands,” Advances in Consumer Research (2014): 42.
 27. Roy F. Baumeister, Kathleen D. Vohs, Jennifer L. Aaker, and Emily N. 
Garbinsky, “Some Key Differences between a Happy Life and a Meaningful 
Life,” Journal of Positive Psychology (2013), 8: 505-516
 28. “Megacities,” http://webs.schule.at/website/megacities/megacities_index_ 
en.htm, accessed December 22, 2012; David Barbosa, “China, New Land 
of Shoppers, Builds Malls on Gigantic Scale,” New York Times (May 25, 
2005), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed May 25, 2005.
 29. Bianca Bosker, “Nice To Meet You. I’ve Already Taken Your Picture,” 
Huffington Post, February 10, 2014, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ 
2014/02/10/narrative-clip_n_4760580.html?&ncid=tweetlnkushpmg 
00000046, accessed February 22, 2015.
 30. http://www.hsx.com, accessed December 22, 2012.
 31. http://www.RateMyProfessors.com/, accessed February 28, 2015.
 32. http://www.pof.com/inbox.aspx, accessed December 16, 2012; Irina 
Slutsky, “Get Hooked up with the Big Business of Online Dating,” 
Advertising Age (February 14, 2011), http://adage.com/article/ad-age-
graphics/online-dating-a-a-1-3-billion-market/148845/, accessed May 7, 
2011.
 33. “One-Third of Married Couples in U.S. Meet Online: Study,” New York Daily 
News, June 4, 2013, http://www.nydailynews.com/life-style/one-third-u-
s-marriages-start-online-dating-study-article-1.1362743, accessed Feb-
ruary 28, 2015.
 34. Marc Prensky, “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants,” On the Horizon 9, no. 
5 (October 2001): 1–6.
 35. Keith Schneider, “Recipe for Success: Take Mentos, Diet Coke. Mix,” 
New York Times (February 20, 2007), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/ 
2007/02/20/business/smallbusiness/20eep.html, accessed Decem ber 22, 
2012; Steve Spangler, “Mentos Diet Coke Geyser,” SteveSpanglerScience 
.com, http://www.stevespanglerscience.com/experiment/original-mentos- 
diet-coke-geyser, accessed May 7, 2011; Suzanne Vranica and Chad 
Terhune, “Mixing Diet Coke and Mentos Makes a Gusher of Publicity,” 
Wall Street Journal (June 12, 2006): B1.
 36. Tracy Tuten and Michael R. Solomon, Social Media Marketing 2nd ed. 
(London: Sage, 2016).
 37. http://newsroom.fb.com/Key-Facts, accessed December 22, 2012.
 38. http://www.youtube.com/t/press_statistics, accessed December 22, 2012.
 39. Parts of this section are adapted from Tracy Tuten and Michael R. 
Solomon, Social Media Marketing 2nd ed. (London: Sage, 2016).
 40. Suzanne Vranica, “Ad Houses Will Need to Be More Nimble, Clients Are 
Demanding More and Better Use of Consumer Data, Web,” Wall Street 
Journal (January 2, 2008): B3.
 41. Jack Neff, “Mucus to Maxi Pads: Marketing’s Dirtiest Jobs, Frank Talk 
about Diapers and Condoms Lifts Taboos and Helps Make a Difference in 
Consumers’ Lives, Say Those in the Trenches,” Advertising Age (February 
17, 2009), http://www.adage.com, accessed February 17, 2009.
 42. For an overview, see Eric J. Arnould and Craig J. Thompson, “Consumer 
Culture Theory (CCT): Twenty Years of Research,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 31 (March 2005): 868–882.
 43. Alladi Venkatesh, “Postmodernism, Poststructuralism and Marketing,” 
paper presented at the American Marketing Association Winter Theory 
Conference, San Antonio, Texas, February 1992; see also Stella Proctor, 
Ioanna Papasolomou-Doukakis, and Tony Proctor, “What Are Television 
Advertisements Really Trying to Tell Us? A Postmodern Perspective,” Journal 
of Consumer Behavior 1 (February 2002): 246–255; A. Fuat Firat, “The 
Consumer in Postmodernity,” in NA: Advances in Consumer Research, eds. 
Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon (1991), Vol. 18, Provo, UT: 
Association for Consumer Research: 70-76.
 44. Eric J. Arnould and Craig J. Thompson, “Consumer Culture Theory (CCT): 
Twenty Years of Research.” Journal of Consumer Research 31, no. 4 (2005): 
868–882. doi:10.1086/426626; Russell W. Belk and John F. Sherry, eds., 
“Consumer Culture Theory,” Research in Consumer Behavior 11 (2007) and 
subsequent volumes.
 45. Morris B. Holbrook, “The Consumer Researcher Visits Radio City: Dancing 
in the Dark,” in Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Morris B. Holbrook, eds., 
Advances in Consumer Research 12 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1985): 28–31.
 46. Roy F. Baumeister, Kathleen D. Vohs, Jennifer L. Aaker, and Emily N. 
Garbinsky, “Some Key Differences between a Happy Life and a Meaningful 
Life,” Journal of Positive Psychology, (2013), 8: 505-516
 47. PwC, “Total Retail Survey 2015,” http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/
retail-consumer/global-multi-channel-consumer-survey.html.
 48. Enrique Bigne, Carla Ruiz, and Silvia Sanz, “The Impact of Internet 
User Shopping Patterns and Demographics on Consumer Mobile Buying 
Behaviour,” Journal of Electronic Commerce Research (2005), 6, no.3, http://
web.csulb.edu/journals/jecr/issues/20053/paper3.pdf.
 49. Julian Highley, “How Multichannel Grocery Shopping Is Changing the 
Way That Consumers Buy,” dunnhumby, https://www.dunnhumby.com/
how-multichannel-grocery-shopping-changing-way-consumers-buy.

56
 2-1 Ethical business is good business.
 2-2 Marketers have an obligation to provide safe and  
functional products as part of their business  
activities.
 2-3 Consumer behavior impacts directly on major public 
policy issues that confront our society.
 2-4 Consumer behavior can be harmful to individuals and to 
society.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
T
racy wheels her cart down the grocery aisles, absent-mindedly throwing in the 
usual fill-ins she always buys on her weekly trip. She reaches for a box of Tide 
laundry detergent and is about to toss it into the cart when she stops herself in 
midair: She just remembered her resolution to think a little more about the environmental 
impact of the cleaning products and other groceries she brings into the house. When her 
son Jon came home from school and asked her how she was helping to preserve the world 
for the next generation, she was embarrassed that she couldn’t answer him. From the 
mouths of babes! Time for this 33-year-old to learn a lesson.
Might as well start with detergents—Tracy thinks about that news report she saw last 
week about the excessive use of chemicals and other additives that are bad for the water 
supply, not to mention the huge amount of fresh water U.S. consumers waste just to wash 
their clothes.
Tracy has always bought Tide; it’s the same product her mother used for years. Now as 
she takes a closer look in the detergent section she notices a lot of other brands, including 
some “tree-hugger” ones she’s never seen before like Dropps, Ecos, Method, and Seventh 
Generation. When she looks at each box, Tracy notices that some carry different “ecola-
bels” including one issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency called DfE (Design 
for the Environment). Hmmm … Tide doesn’t have that on its box. On the other hand, the 
Tide package does recommend just using cold water instead of hot for the laundry, and 
Procter & Gamble (P&G) now sells a concentrated version that doesn’t require as much 
soap to do the wash. Tracy also notices that the “green” brands seem to cost a bit more. 
Today every penny counts—how much of her precious grocery budget is worth sacrificing 
for a slightly less sudsy wash? All of these choices are really confusing. Maybe she should 
stick with what she knows and let others worry about the environment. Then again, what 
will she tell Jon the next time he asks about how “green” she is?
Chapter 
Objectives
 Chapter 2 ● Consumer and Social 
Well-Being
Source: DmitriMaruta/Shutterstock.

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
57 
Business ethics and Consumer 
rights
Mainstream U.S. shoppers like Tracy increasingly choose “green” 
products that are better for the environment. On the other hand, 
there has been a lot of hype about “the green revolution”; since the recession, consum-
ers are a lot more cost-conscious. To add to the confusion, even well-intentioned shop-
pers have trouble figuring out which brands really are better. It’s practically a full-time 
job to sort out all the competing claims. One solution is for independent rating agencies 
to develop labeling systems that the shopper can use to decide among options—but 
even these systems can be overwhelming. There are more than 480 eco-label systems 
worldwide, and about a quarter of those are in North America.1 The U.S. government 
is trying to encourage businesses and consumers to select green cleaning products; 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) even signed a promotion agreement with 
NASCAR to raise awareness of the DfE label. In addition to DfE certification and other 
rating systems the cleaning industry sponsors, a few manufacturers and retailers even 
offer their own labels, such as SC Johnson’s Greenlist and Eco-Scale by the Whole Foods 
grocery chain. Other major brands, like P&G’s Tide, sell highly concentrated versions that 
are formulated to work with cold water. It’s tough to make apples-to-apples comparisons, 
and these competing systems threaten to “throw the baby out with the bath water” if con-
sumers like Tracy throw up their hands and just stick to what they know. Is it possible for 
marketers to “do good” and still “do well”; can they provide profits and still do what’s right 
for customers and the environment?
The answer is simple: Ethical business is good business. A global survey by Nielsen 
reported that 50 percent of consumers are willing to pay more for goods and services from 
companies that have implemented programs to give back to society.2 Consumers think 
 better of the products a firm sells when the organization behaves ethically.3
Business ethics are rules of conduct that guide actions in the marketplace; these 
are the standards against which most people in a culture judge what is right and what 
is wrong, good or bad. These universal values include honesty, trustworthiness, fairness, 
respect, justice, integrity, concern for others, accountability, and loyalty.
Of course, notions of right and wrong differ among people, organizations, and cul-
tures. Some businesses believe it is OK for salespeople to pull out all the stops to persuade 
customers to buy, even if this means they mislead them; other firms feel that anything less 
than total honesty with customers is terribly wrong. Because each culture has its own 
set of values, beliefs, and customs, companies around the world define ethical business 
 behaviors quite differently. For example, one study found that because of differences in 
values (as we will discuss in Chapter 3), Mexican firms are less likely to have formal codes 
of ethics and they are more likely to bribe public officials than are U.S. or Canadian compa-
nies. However, because of different attitudes about work and interpersonal relationships, 
these companies also are more likely to treat lower-level employees better than do their 
northern neighbors.4
These cultural differences certainly influence whether business practices such as 
bribery are acceptable. Since 1977 the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act makes it illegal 
for U.S. executives to bribe foreigners to gain business. The Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), to which most industrialized countries belong, 
also outlaws bribery. Still, these practices are common in many countries. In Japan, 
it’s called kuroi kiri (black mist); in Germany, it’s schmiergeld (grease money), whereas 
Mexicans refer to la mordida (the bite), the French say pot-de-vin (jug of wine), and 
Italians speak of the bustarella (little envelope). They’re all talking about baksheesh, the 
Middle Eastern term for a “tip” to grease the wheels of a transaction. Giving “gifts” 
in exchange for getting business from suppliers or customers is acceptable and even 
expected in many countries.
Regardless of whether they do it intentionally, some marketers do violate their bonds 
of trust with consumers. In some cases, these actions are actually illegal, as when a 
OBjeCtive 2-1
Ethical business is good 
business.

58 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
manufacturer deliberately mislabels the contents of a package. Or a retailer may adopt a 
“bait-and-switch” selling strategy that lures consumers into the store when it offers inex-
pensive products with the sole intent to get them to switch to higher-priced goods.
In other cases, marketing practices have detrimental effects on society even though 
they are not explicitly illegal. Some companies erect billboards for alcohol and tobacco 
products in low-income neighborhoods; others sponsor commercials that objectify women 
as they pander to male viewers.
needs and Wants: Do Marketers Manipulate 
Consumers?
One of the most common and stinging criticisms of marketing is that companies convince 
consumers they “need” many material things, and that they will be unhappy and inferior 
people if they do not have these “necessities.” The issue is a complex one and is certainly 
worth considering: Do marketers give people what they want, or do they tell people what 
they should want?
Who controls the market, companies or consumers? This question is even more 
complicated as new ways of buying, having, and being are invented every day. It seems 
that the “good old days” of marketerspace—a time when companies called the shots and 
decided what they wanted their customers to know and do—are dead and gone. Many 
people now feel empowered to choose how, when, or if they will interact with corpora-
tions as they construct their own consumerspace. In this new environment, individu-
als dictate to companies the types of products they want and how, when, and where (or 
even if) they want to learn about those products. In turn, companies need to develop 
and leverage brand equity in bold new ways to attract the loyalty of these consumer 
“nomads.” People still “need” companies—but in new ways and on their own terms. As 
we’ll see throughout this book, profound changes in consumer behavior are influencing 
how people search for product information and evaluate alternative brands. In the brave 
new world of consumerspace, we have much greater potential to shape our own market-
ing destinies.5
Do Marketers Create artificial needs?
The marketing system has come under fire from both ends of the political spectrum. On 
the one hand, some members of the Religious Right believe that marketers contribute 
to the moral breakdown of society when they present images of hedonistic pleasure and 
encourage the pursuit of secular humanism at the expense of spirituality and the envi-
ronment. A coalition of religious groups called the National Religious Partnership for the 
Environment claims that gas-guzzling cars and other factors that cause climate change are 
contrary to Christian moral teachings about protecting people and the Earth.6
On the other hand, some leftists argue that the same deceitful promises of material 
pleasure function to buy from people who would otherwise be revolutionaries working to 
change the system.7 According to this argument, the marketing system creates demand—
demand that only its products can satisfy.
a response. As we saw in Chapter 1, a need is a basic biological motive; a want represents 
one way that society has been taught to satisfy the need. For example, thirst is a biologically 
based need. Marketers teach us to want Coca-Cola to satisfy that thirst rather than, 
say, goat’s milk. Thus, the need is already there; marketers simply recommend ways to 
satisfy it. A basic objective of marketing is to create awareness that needs exist, not to 
create needs.
is Marketing necessary?
More than 50 years ago, the social critic Vance Packard wrote, “Large-scale efforts 
are being made, often with impressive success, to channel our unthinking habits, our 

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
59 
CB aS i See it
Ronald Hill, Villanova University
States, France, and Australia have 
similar dreams, aspirations, and 
consumption behaviors to more 
affluent citizens, or do they respond 
differently because of unique 
circumstances? How about billions 
of people in sub-Saharan Africa, 
South Asia, and parts of Latin and 
South America who lack access to 
even the most modest portfolio of 
items that we take for granted in 
the developed West? Do they use 
the same material “lenses” as their 
affluent counterparts in other parts of 
the planet?
Let’s look at three different 
studies that help inform this 
conversation. The first examined 
levels of materialism (or desire 
for goods and services) between 
impoverished versus affluent children 
in the United States. To have the 
starkest differences, poor youths 
came from neighborhoods where 
the average price of a home was 
$30,000; wealthier youths came 
from communities where the average 
home price was $1,000,000. Levels 
of material yearning were about 
the same at early ages (8–10) but 
increased significantly as they moved 
into middle and high school (11–17). 
What is most remarkable is that 
material longing declined for affluent 
children toward the end of this age 
range as their accomplishments 
inside and outside school supported 
self-esteem development. 
Unfortunately, such opportunities 
did not exist in the impoverished 
neighborhoods, leaving these youths 
with lower self-esteem and high 
materialism in a denuded living 
environment.
The second investigation 
considered thousands of consumers 
across 38 developed and developing 
nations. In both cases, persons 
who lived below the typical material 
abundance of their countries were 
less satisfied with their lives than 
individuals who lived above this level 
of material wealth. Thus, “haves” 
with positive social comparisons had 
greater life satisfaction than “have-
nots” who suffered from negative 
comparisons. Interestingly, people 
living in the most impoverished 
nations reveal even greater 
differences, with their haves and have-
nots experiencing even greater highs 
and lows.
The third study involved 
saving behaviors by citizens of 
impoverished versus affluent 
nations. Using the same 38 nations 
but more consumers, results 
demonstrate that poverty impacted 
relationships between saving 
behaviors and feelings of well-being 
in that persons living in poorer 
nations experienced an even greater 
boost in well-being from saving than 
their affluent nation complement. 
Although the reasons are somewhat 
complex, the simple answer is that 
failure to save in conditions of 
abject poverty can have catastrophic 
consequences including hunger, 
homelessness, and death.
The Judeo-Christian Bible, as 
well as most other religious and 
philosophical traditions, tell us  
that the “poor will always be with  
us.” As a child who grew up in the 
1950s and 1960s, I was often told 
to finish my meal, which inevitably 
included an unpleasant-tasting 
vegetable like Brussels sprouts, 
because “people are starving in 
India/Africa/Asia.” Of course, I 
remarked to my mother that I was 
happy to donate them!
But what is it really like to be 
“poor” in a material landscape that 
is dominated by the abundance 
of goods and services in western 
and developed economies. Do the 
very poor in nations like the United 
purchasing decisions, and our thought processes by the use of insights gleaned from 
psychiatry and the social sciences.”8 The economist John Kenneth Galbraith charged 
that radio and television are important tools to accomplish this manipulation of the 
masses. Because consumers don’t need to be literate to use these media, repetitive and 
compelling communications can reach almost everyone. This criticism may even be 
more relevant to online communications, where a simple click delivers a world of infor-
mation to us.
Some people charge that marketers arbitrarily link products to desirable social attri-
butes, so they foster a materialistic society where what we own defines our value as a 

60 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
person. One influential critic even argued that the problem is that we are not materialistic 
enough: We do not sufficiently value goods for the utilitarian functions they deliver but 
instead focus on the irrational value of goods for what they symbolize. According to this 
view, for example, “Beer would be enough for us, without the additional promise that 
in drinking it we show ourselves to be manly, young at heart, or neighborly. A washing 
machine would be a useful machine to wash clothes, rather than an indication that we are 
forward-looking or an object of envy to our neighbors.”9
a response. Products meet existing needs, and marketing activities only help to communicate their 
availability.10 The economics of information perspective regards advertising as an  important 
source of consumer information.11 This view emphasizes the economic cost of the time we 
This ad was created by the American 
 Association of Advertising Agencies to 
 counter charges that ads create artificial 
needs.
Source: Used with permission of American
Association of Advertising Agencies.

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
61 
spend to search for products. Accordingly, advertising is a service for which consumers are 
willing to pay because the information it provides reduces their search time.
Do Marketers promise Miracles?
Westin Hotels launched its Westin Well-Being Movement to hotel guests as well as employ-
ees worldwide. Programs all relate to what the hospitality company calls “six pillars”: “feel 
well,” “work well,” “move well,” “eat well,” “sleep well” and “play well.”12 Advertising 
leads us to believe that products have magical properties; the things we buy will trans-
form our lives. We will be beautiful, successful, perhaps even live forever. In this respect, 
advertising functions as mythology does in primitive societies: It provides simple, anxiety-
reducing answers to complex problems.
A poster for Westin Hotels’ Well-Being 
Movement
Source: Courtesy of Starwood Hotels & Resorts 
Worldwide, Inc.

62 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
a response. Marketers simply do not know enough about people to manipulate them. Consider 
that the failure rate for new products ranges from 40 percent to 80 percent. Although 
people think that advertisers have an endless source of magical tricks and scientific tech-
niques to manipulate them, in reality the industry is successful when it tries to sell good 
products and unsuccessful when it sells poor ones.13
Materialism: are You What You Own?
During World War II, members of “cargo cults” in the South Pacific literally worshiped 
cargo they salvaged from crashed aircraft or that washed ashore from ships. They believed 
that their ancestors piloted the ships and planes that passed near their islands, so they 
tried to attract them to their villages. They went so far as to construct fake planes from 
straw to lure the real ones overhead!14
We may not worship products to that extent, but many of us certainly work hard to 
attain our vision of the good life, which abounds in material comforts. Most young people 
can’t imagine a life without cell phones, MP3 players and other creature comforts. In fact, 
we can think of marketing as a system that provides certain standards of living to con-
sumers. To some extent, then, the standards of living we expect and desire influence our 
lifestyles, either by personal experience or as a result of the affluent characters we see on 
TV in “reality shows” such as Keeping Up With the Kardashians, in movies, and in the pages 
of Vogue or GQ.15 Exhibit A: The popular bumper sticker that reads “He Who Dies with the 
Most Toys Wins.”
Our possessions play a central role in our lives, and our desire to accumulate 
them shapes our value systems. Materialism refers to the importance people attach 
to worldly possessions.16 We sometimes take the bounty of products and services for 
granted, until we remember how recent this abundance is. For example, in 1950, two 
of five U.S. homes did not have a telephone, and in 1940 only half of all households had 
indoor plumbing.
Materialists are more likely to value possessions for their status and appearance-
related meanings, whereas those who do not emphasize this value tend to prize products 
that connect them to other people or that provide them with pleasure when they use 
them.17 As a result, high materialists prefer expensive products that they publicly con-
sume. A study comparing specific items that low versus high materialists value found 
that people who were non-materialists cherished items with personal significance, such 
as a mother’s wedding gown, picture albums, a rocking chair from childhood, or a gar-
den. In contrast, high materialists preferred prestige goods such as jewelry, china, or a 
vacation home.18
Materialistic people also appear to link more of their self-identity to products. One 
study found that when people who score high on this value fear the prospect of dying, they 
form even stronger connections to brands.19 Another study reported that consumers who 
are “love-smitten” with their possessions tend to use these relationships to compensate for 
loneliness and a lack of affiliation with social networks.20 Yet another found that mate-
rialists tend to value a product before they buy it because they believe it will make them 
happy, but their satisfaction with it diminishes after the purchase when they realize this 
didn’t happen.21
Nonetheless, consumers’ appetites for material goods continue to grow—especially in 
developing markets where luxury goods reign supreme. Analysts predict modest growth 
in sales of luxury products in Europe and the United States, but huge growth in China 
as well as solid gains in new markets such as Azerbaijan, Brazil, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, 
Malaysia, Mexico, South Africa, Turkey, and Vietnam. Asian consumers now account for 
more than 50 percent of global luxury sales.22 
Perhaps our expectations about accumulating material goods are evolving as U.S. 
consumers increasingly get access to more and more exotic products. Thus, material-
ists value (or perhaps even obsess about) the inherent qualities of  what they buy, 
whether their purchases are diamonds or organic yogurt. One important dimension 

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
63 
The Whole Foods grocery chain targets 
 shoppers who value health-oriented and 
locally-produced food products.
Source: Chris Howes/Wild Places Photography/
Alamy.
From ihatestarbucks.com to  
boycottwalmart.meetup 
.com, irritated customers 
have launched hundreds 
of gripe sites to air their 
grievances against companies. The practice 
is so widespread that some firms proactively 
buy unflattering domain names to keep other 
people from buying them. Xerox, for example, 
registered xeroxstinks.com, xeroxcorporation-
sucks.com, and ihatexerox.net. About 20,000 
domain names end in “sucks.com.” About one-
third of these sites are registered to none other 
than the companies they slam; owners include 
Walmart Stores, Coca-Cola, Toys “R” Us, Target,  
and Whole Foods Market.28
  the tangled Web
today is provenance: Shoppers are willing to pay more for an item when they know 
exactly where it comes from, and they are assured that “real people” have thought-
fully selected the things from which they choose. This process of  curation, which 
used to refer to an expert who carefully chooses pieces to include in a museum 
exhibit, now applies to a range of  consumer products such as food, clothing, and 
travel. Whole Foods personalizes its inventory as it features the names of  store 
employees on chalkboards throughout the store and often specifies the farms that 
grew the products.23 
Consumers’ rights and product 
Satisfaction
Fifty-four million dollars for a pair of missing pants? A judge in 
Washington, D.C., made headlines when he filed a $54 million 
lawsuit against his neighborhood dry cleaner because it lost a 
pair of his pinstriped suit pants. He claimed that a local con-
sumer protection law entitled him to thousands of dollars for 
each day over nearly four years in which signs at the shop promised “same day service” 
and “satisfaction guaranteed.” The suit dragged on for several months, but at the end of 
OBjeCtive 2-2
Marketers have an 
obligation to provide safe 
and functional products 
as part of their business 
activities.

64 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
Mass protests can sometimes cause change.
Source: Frances Roberts/Alamy.
the day the plaintiff went home with empty pockets.24 And some people claim we have 
too many lawsuits in this country!
If you’re not happy with a product or service, what can you do about it? You have 
three possible courses of action (though sometimes you can take more than one):25
1 Voice response—You can appeal directly to the retailer for redress (e.g., a refund).
2 Private response—You can express your dissatisfaction to friends and boycott the 
product or the store where you bought it.
3 Third-party response—Like the pantsless judge, you can take legal action against 
the merchant, register a complaint with the Better Business Bureau, or write a let-
ter to the newspaper. These comments can be effective, especially when others join 
in. Cover Girl ran an advertising campaign targeted to female football fans that 
depicted a model wearing a Baltimore Ravens jersey with the tagline, “Get Your 
Game Face On.” At about the same time, a prominent Ravens player made head-
lines in a series of allegations about NFL players who physically abused their wives 
and girlfriends. Protestors went online and altered the ad to make it look like the 
model had a black eye.26 When enough people band together to express negative 
marketplace sentiments through activist organizations such as Greenpeace or 
in social media mass protests such as the one Cover Girl ran into, dramatic changes 
can result.27
In one study, business majors wrote complaint letters to companies. When the firm 
sent a free sample in response, this action significantly improved how the students felt 

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
65 
about it. This didn’t happen, however, when they only received a letter of apology—but no 
swag. Even worse, students who got no response reported an even more negative image 
than before. This shows that any kind of response is better than none.29
A number of factors influence which route we choose. People are more likely to take 
action if they’re dissatisfied with expensive products such as household durables, cars, 
and clothing than for problems with inexpensive products.30 Ironically, consumers who 
are satisfied with a store in general are more likely to complain if they experience some-
thing bad; they take the time to complain because they feel connected to the store. And, 
if a company resolves the problem, customers feel even better about it than if they hadn’t 
complained in the first place!31 The moral: Although nobody likes criticism, organizations 
should encourage people to complain for these reasons:
1 They get the chance to correct the situation.
2 They will avoid an escalating problem that results when consumers take to social 
media to let others know they’ve been treated badly. People are more likely to spread 
the word about unresolved negative experiences to their friends than they are to boast 
about positive occurrences.
3 They collect valuable insights about customers’ experiences that will (hopefully) help 
them to improve for future customers.
4 If consumers do not believe that the store will respond to their complaint, they will be 
more likely to simply switch than fight as they just take their business elsewhere.
Companies that score high in customer satisfaction often benefit from a big com-
petitive advantage—especially when so many firms skimp on the attention they pay to 
customers. A five-year study of customer satisfaction in the Canadian banking industry 
provides typical results: Banks that provided better service commanded a larger “share of 
wallet” than did others (i.e., their customers entrusted them with a larger proportion of 
their money).32
Even so, more than half of the chief marketing officers (CMOs) who participated in 
a large survey reported that their companies do not reward their employees if customer 
satisfaction improves. More than one-third said they have no way to track word-of-mouth 
among customers, and less than 3 in 10 said their firms are good at resolving customers’ 
complaints.33 What is wrong with this picture?
Consumers get creative when they want to 
vent their feelings about companies they 
don’t like.
Source: Michael Matthews/Alamy.

66 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
When a product doesn’t work as we expect or turns out to be unsafe (like the 
recent spate of hazardous products from China, ranging from toothpaste to dog food), 
it’s the understatement of the year to say we’re not satisfied. In these situations, mar-
keters must immediately take steps to reassure us, or they risk losing a customer for 
life. If the company confronts the problem truthfully, we are often willing to forgive 
and forget. But if the firm seems to be dragging its heels or covering up, our resentment 
grows. This is what happened during the BP oil spill or when a disabled Carnival cruise 
ship sat at sea in 2013 while 4,200 passengers and crew suffered through five days 
with no plumbing or electricity, and little food, in the glare of an unrelenting media 
spotlight.34
Market regulation
The subprime mortgage meltdown that led to the collapse of major investment banking 
and insurance companies such as Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG, as well as 
triggered the Great Recession of 2008 (and beyond), illustrates why many people look to 
governments and industry watchdogs to provide oversight and regulation rather than 
relying strictly on businesses to police themselves. Concern for the welfare of consumers 
has been an issue since at least the beginning of the 20th century, and activists continue 
to voice concerns about a range of issues such as child labor, exploitative advertising, and 
genetically engineered food.35
Partly as a result of consumers’ efforts, the U.S. government established many 
federal agencies to oversee consumer-related activities. These include the Department 
of Agriculture, the Federal Trade Commission, the Food and Drug Administration, the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, and the EPA. After Upton Sinclair’s 1906 book The 
Jungle exposed the awful conditions in the Chicago meatpacking industry, Congress was 
prompted to pass important pieces of legislation—the Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906 
and the Federal Meat Inspection Act a year later—to protect consumers. A summary of 
some important consumer legislation enacted since that time appears in Table 2.1. You 
can find other information about consumer-related issues at consumerreports.org and 
cpsc.gov (the Consumer Product Safety Commission).
Table 2.2 lists major U.S. regulatory agencies and what they do. One of the most 
important ones for consumers is The Food and Drug Administration (FDA); it polices 
advertising claims as well as the contents of edible products and pharmaceuticals. For 
example, as part of an FDA crackdown on consumer drug advertising, Bayer HealthCare 
Pharmaceuticals launched a $20 million corrective advertising campaign for Yaz, 
the most popular birth control pill in the United States. This term means that the com-
pany must inform consumers that previous messages were wrong or misleading. The TV 
commercials, which ran during prime-time shows such as Grey’s Anatomy and on cable 
networks, warn that nobody should take Yaz hoping that it will also cure pimples or pre-
menstrual syndrome. Bayer was required to run these ads to correct previous messages 
after regulators decided the previous ads overstated the drug’s ability to improve women’s 
moods and clear up acne.36
Consumerism
“Absolut Impotence.” So reads a parody of a vodka ad created by Adbusters, a nonprofit 
organization that advocates for “the new social activist movement of the information 
age.” The editor of the group’s magazine argues that America is no longer a country, 
but rather a multitrillion-dollar brand subverted by corporate agendas. He claims that 
“America™” is no different from McDonald’s, Marlboro, or General Motors.38
Adbusters sponsors numerous initiatives, including Buy Nothing Day and TV 
Turnoff  Week, that try to discourage rampant commercialism. These efforts, along with 
biting ads and commercials that lampoon advertising messages, are examples of cul-
ture jamming, which is a strategy to disrupt efforts by the corporate world to dominate 
Marketing pitfall
Advertisers, 
retail-
ers, and manufacturers 
typically try to police 
themselves to ensure 
that their messages and 
products are not harmful or inaccurate. In 
addition to good intentions, they have a 
practical reason to do so: They don’t want 
governments to do it for them. Indeed, some-
times these efforts even seem to go a bit 
over the top. Consider, for example, a ruling 
by the National Advertising Division (NAD) 
of the Council of Better Business Bureaus, 
which is one of these industry watchdogs. 
Acting on a complaint by rival Kimberly-
Clark, P&G must add little flecks of cartoon 
toilet paper to the backsides of its Charmin 
cartoon bears in future ads for its toilet pa-
per. Although P&G supported its claim that 
Charmin leaves “fewer pieces behind” than 
the Cottonelle brand (and showed the results 
of its test on the brand’s Web site), the NAD 
decided that the test “did not accurately re-
flect the results consumers normally see and 
experience.”37

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
67 
Year
act
purpose
1953
Flammable Fabrics Act
Prohibits the transportation of flammable fabrics across state lines.
1958
National Traffic and Safety Act
Creates safety standards for cars and tires.
1958
Automobile Information Disclosure Act
Requires automobile manufacturers to post suggested retail prices on new cars.
1966
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act
Regulates packaging and labeling of consumer products. (Manufacturers must provide 
information about package contents and origin.)
1966
Child Protection Act
Prohibits sale of dangerous toys and other items.
1967
Federal Cigarette Labeling and  
Advertising Act
Requires cigarette packages to carry a warning label from the Surgeon General.
1968
Truth-in-Lending Act
Requires lenders to divulge the true costs of a credit transaction.
1969
National Environmental Policy Act
Established a national environmental policy and created the Council on Environmental Quality 
to monitor the effects of products on the environment.
1972
Consumer Products Safety Act
Established the Consumer Product Safety Commission to identify unsafe products, establish 
safety standards, recall defective products, and ban dangerous products.
1975
Consumer Goods Pricing Act
Bans the use of price maintenance agreements among manufacturers and resellers.
1975
Magnuson-Moss Warranty- 
Improvement Act
Creates disclosure standards for consumer product warranties and allows the Federal Trade 
Commission to set policy regarding unfair or deceptive practices.
1990
The Nutrition Labeling and  
Education Act
Reaffirms the legal basis for the Food and Drug Administration’s new rules on food labeling 
and establishes a timetable for the implementation of those rules. 
1998
Internet Tax Freedom Act
Established a moratorium on special taxation of the Internet, including taxation of access fees 
paid to America Online and other Internet Service Providers.
2010
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform  
and Consumer Protection Act
Prompted by the recession that began in 2008, intends to promote the financial stability of the 
United States by improving accountability and transparency in the financial system, to end “too 
big to fail,” to protect the American taxpayer by ending bailouts, and to protect consumers from 
abusive financial services practices.
taBle 2.1   Sample of Federal Legislation Intended to Enhance Consumers’ Welfare
our cultural landscape. The movement believes that “culture jamming” will change the 
way information flows; the way institutions wield power; the way TV stations are run; 
and the way the food, fashion, automobile, sports, music, and culture industries set their 
agendas.39
Although some in corporate America may dismiss these extreme sentiments as the 
ravings of a lunatic fringe, their proponents deserve to be taken seriously. The recent scan-
dals involving such corporate icons as BP, AIG, Enron, Martha Stewart, Arthur Andersen, 
Bear Stearns, and massive product recalls from companies such as General Motors and 
Blue Bell Creameries fueled a growing bonfire of mistrust and skepticism among the con-
suming public.
President John F. Kennedy ushered in the modern era of consumerism with his 
“Declaration of Consumer Rights” in 1962. These include the right to safety, the right to 
be informed, the right to redress, and the right to choice. The 1960s and 1970s were a 
time of consumer activism as consumers began to organize to demand better-quality prod-
ucts (and to boycott companies that did not provide them).
The publication of books such as Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring in 1962, which 
attacked the irresponsible use of pesticides, and Ralph Nader’s Unsafe at Any Speed in 

68 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
taBle 2.2   U.S. Regulatory Agencies and Responsibilities
regulatory agency
responsibilities
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
Protects the public from potentially hazardous products. Through regulation and testing 
programs, the CPSC helps firms make sure their products won’t harm customers.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Develops and enforces regulations aimed at protecting the environment. Such regulations have a 
major impact on the materials and processes that manufacturers use in their products and thus 
on the ability of companies to develop products.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
Regulates telephone, radio, and television. FCC regulations directly affect the marketing activities 
of companies in the communications industries, and they have an indirect effect on all firms that 
use broadcast media for marketing communications.
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
Enforces laws against deceptive advertising and product labeling regulations. Marketers must 
constantly keep abreast of changes in FTC regulations to avoid costly fines.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Enforces laws and regulations on foods, drugs, cosmetics, and veterinary products. Marketers 
of pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter medicines, and a variety of other products must get FDA 
approval before they can introduce products to the market.
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC)
Regulates interstate bus, truck, rail, and water operations. The ability of a firm to efficiently move 
products to its customers depends on ICC policies and regulation.
Marketing pitfall
When an organiza-
tion wants to encourage 
people to contribute to 
its cause in some way, it 
seems like a good idea 
to provide an initial token display of support 
such as wearing a tshirt, signing a petition, 
or asking them to join a Facebook group. 
Makes sense, right? Not necessarily. Some 
critics are worried about the phenomenon 
they term slacktivism; small and relatively 
meaningless expressions of support for im-
portant causes such as liking a charity on 
Facebook that substitute for donations or 
volunteering. One study found that if the 
initial display is visible to others, this public 
behavior can actually reduce the likelihood 
that the person will contribute beyond that. 
Under some circumstances the need to make 
a positive impression on others is satisfied 
by the public display, so the person exhibits 
slacktivism and doesn’t bother to do any-
thing else to support the cause.41
1965, which exposed safety defects in General Motors’ Corvair automobile, prompted 
these movements. Many people have a vigorous interest in consumer-related issues, 
ranging from environmental concerns such as global warming and climate change, 
toxic waste, and so on, to excessive violence and sex on television or in the lyrics of 
popular rock and rap songs like Robin Thicke’s controversial Blurred Lines music video 
that some people interpreted as encouraging rape. Indeed, after a public outcry Reebok 
had to drop the rapper Rick Ross from its endorsement roster after he released a song 
about spiking a woman’s drink with the drug MDMA, also referred to as ecstasy or 
molly: “Put molly all in her champagne/ She ain’t even know it/I took her home and I 
enjoyed that/she ain’t even know it.”40
transformative Consumer research
Indeed, some consumer researchers are themselves organizing, not only to study but also 
to rectify what they see as pressing social problems in the marketplace. This perspective is 
called participatory action research (PAR) or transformative consumer research (TCR). 
It promotes research projects that include the goal of helping people or bringing about 
social change. Scientists who subscribe to this perspective view consumers as collabora-
tors who work with them to realize this change rather than as a “phenomenon” on which 
to conduct research. Adherents of TCR work with at-risk populations, such as children, 
the disadvantaged, and the disabled, or on such topics as materialism, consumption of 
dangerous products, and compulsive consumption.42
Social Marketing and Corporate Social responsibility 
(CSr)
The evidence is mounting that a brand’s philanthropic activities can influence shopper 
behavior and ultimately purchase decisions. Consumers are especially interested in choos-
ing brands that support causes they find personally relevant. These causes include medical 
cures and disease prevention, social change, faith-based initiatives, and animal and child 
welfare.48

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
69 
CB aS i See it
Stacey Menzel Baker, Creighton University
We become aware of our own 
humanity, and we become aware of 
collective suffering. 43 44
My research focuses on how 
people make sense of losses of 
material possessions and marketplace 
interactions, as well as how they 
rebuild their lives in the face of 
adversity. 45 One way people make 
sense of their losses is through 
storytelling, and material possessions 
and marketplace interactions 
figure prominently in their stories. 
For instance, a person living in a 
community where a tornado left 25 
percent of the people homeless said:
Their [mobile home] trailers were totally 
wiped out, and their possessions were 
everywhere…. Your entire life was on 
display, on public display … like the 
pictures, these were private things…. 
People [were saying], “I had no idea how 
much a tornado exposed your entire life to 
the world.” There’s nobody that I know of 
that was able, unless they moved in after 
the tornado, there’s nobody that didn’t see 
something, there’s nobody that didn’t have 
pink insulation in their yard. Everyone had 
garbage that they had to clean up, and, 
you know, so we were all involved.
Notice that, though this person 
did not lose her home or many of 
her possessions, she felt the losses 
experienced by her neighbors. When 
we share in the vulnerability felt by 
others,46 we are more likely to do 
something to help them relieve their 
pain. For instance, we may volunteer 
our time, make donations of money, 
food, or material goods, or organize 
community action groups.
People who experience disasters 
seek to reclaim their lives from the 
traumatic event. Material possessions 
and marketplace interactions play a 
prominent role in the reconstruction  
of their lives. For instance, 95 percent  
of Greensburg, Kansas, was de-
stroyed by a tornado in 2007. The 
tornado wiped out businesses and 
most homes, and the community 
recovery became the focus of a 
documentary titled Greensburg: A 
Story of Community Rebuilding was 
produced by Leonardo DiCaprio and 
Craig Piligian and aired on Planet 
Green between 2008 and 2010.47 Two 
people from the community featured in 
the documentary said:
With the grand opening of this grocery 
store, it does feel like we are starting to 
get somewhere. Like our community is 
starting to come together. And the fact 
that we are doing such normal, everyday 
things now, that’s really a blessing.
It finally begins to set in. Today will 
be kind of moving day with everything 
coming in. It’s good, but it’s just a little 
overwhelming to see all of this coming 
in. It’s all new. It’s all different. But yet, 
it’s gonna be our home…. All of a sudden 
you realize how much you lost…. And 
until I see it coming back, I didn’t really 
realize the loss that we’d had. It was  
40 years of memories that are gone— 
40 years of some things we will never  
get back again. But yet, I still feel that 
we’re blessed to be in this place.
Notice how important the grocery 
store is in making people feel like 
their community is still intact. Their 
collective identity is coming back. 
In a similar sense, notice how the 
new home is both a reminder of all 
that has been lost and all that has 
been gained. My research program 
revolves around consumer well-being 
and focuses on attachments that 
are disrupted, the vulnerability that 
we experience, and the resiliency 
we develop in the face of adversity. 
One clear take away is that the same 
types of relationships with stores, 
marketplace experiences that bring 
us pain when they are gone, also 
bring us a sense of normalcy and  
an eventual return to our everyday 
lives when they return, albeit in a 
different form.
Consumer behavior researchers 
study the relationships among 
people possessions, places, brands, 
experiences, and other people. 
We know that consumers become 
attached to their cameras, cars, 
homes, coffee shops, communities, 
daily routines, favorite brands, 
commercial service providers, family, 
and friends. Such relationships are 
important in creating, maintaining, 
and, at times, reconstructing our 
identities. Thus, when one or more of 
these relationships is damaged, our 
identity may be altered.
Imagine a community devastated 
by a natural hazard event, such 
as a hurricane, tornado, or flood. 
Visual images of demolished homes, 
scattered personal possessions, 
uprooted trees, destroyed 
businesses, shell-shocked faces, 
and perhaps even caskets and 
flags may come to your mind. Such 
images make us acutely aware that 
essential relationships fundamentally 
important in the everyday lives of 
human beings have been damaged. 

70 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
As the emerging TCR perspective shows, the field of consumer behavior can help to 
improve our lives as consumers.49 Social marketing strategies use the techniques that 
marketers normally employ to sell beer or detergent to encourage positive behaviors such 
as increased literacy and to discourage negative activities such as drunk driving.50 Many 
researchers help to evaluate or create public policies to ensure that products are labeled 
accurately, to certify that people can comprehend important information in advertising 
messages, or to prevent children from being exploited by program-length toy commercials 
that masquerade as television shows.
Many firms today try to integrate corporate social responsibility (CSR) into their 
business models. CSR describes processes that encourage the organization to make a posi-
tive impact on the various stakeholders in its community including consumers, employ-
ees, and the environment. For example, the shoe company TOMS is well-known for its 
promise to give a needy child a pair of shoes for every pair it sells.
CSR is more than a nice idea; it’s also good business. Consumer research convincingly 
shows that, all things equal, people are likely to choose a brand that gives back to the com-
munity. Cause marketing is a popular strategy that aligns a company or brand with a 
cause to generate business and societal benefits. Indeed, one survey reported that three 
out of five consumers bought a product or service in the previous year because of its asso-
ciation with a cause. An executive observed, “As a whole, Americans do have a heightened 
sensitivity to how they can help make a difference.”51
Major policy issues relevant 
to Consumer Behavior
It’s hard to divorce consumer behavior from most of what goes 
on around us. The field intersects with many of the big issues we 
read about and debate every day. These range from human rights 
and humane working conditions to the safety of what we eat, the 
future of our environment, and our relationships with governments, corporations, and 
other organizations. In this section, we’ll introduce three major issues—without pretend-
ing to cover all of the important ones.
Data privacy and identity theft
A Carnegie Mellon professor demonstrated just how easy it is to find people online if you 
know what you’re doing. In one study he showed that it was possible to deduce portions of 
a person’s Social Security number from nothing but a photograph posted online.52 Data 
breaches at major companies such as Target, Sony, and Home Depot continue to worry 
many people. The federal government is actively engaged with this problem and a variety of 
legislative proposals are being considered including The Personal Data Notification & 
Protection Act of 2015 that would strengthen the obligations companies have to notify 
customers when their personal information has been exposed and The Student Digital 
Privacy and Parental Rights Act of 2015 that would prevent companies from selling 
K-12 students’ online data to third parties or otherwise sharing information unless it is for 
a school-related purpose.53
One of the biggest ethical issues many marketers face today relates to how much they 
can—or should—know about their customers. Virtually anyone who surfs the Web or 
who carries a cell phone (especially a smartphone with GPS capability) shares reams of 
personal information with all sorts of companies (whether they know it or not).
Clearly, we all benefit from technologies that allow companies to precisely tailor their 
messages to our needs based on the product information we look for. Indeed, industry 
researchers report that a lot of people actually don’t mind the ads if they are person-
ally relevant.55 But some consumer advocates argue that we pay a high cost for this 
OBjeCtive 2-3
Consumer behavior 
impacts directly on major 
public policy issues that 
confront our society.
Facebook recently intro-
duced a “Tag Suggestions” 
feature that uses fa cial rec-
ognition to iden tify a user’s 
friends in photos he or she 
uploads and automatically suggests nam-
etags for them. Other programs like Picasa 
also incorporate facial recognition technology. 
This handy little tool removes the need to keep 
typing the same friends’ names into photo al-
bums. But is there a dark side to this capabil-
ity? Because facial recognition analyzes and 
stores people’s unique facial measurements, 
it may come with some serious privacy risks. 
For example in the near future it will be pos-
sible for marketers to identify people as they 
walk down the street – and link their faces 
to relevant information such as credit scores 
or medical records. Some firms already offer 
smart billboards that detect the gender and 
age of a passerby and show that person rele-
vant ad messages. For now these boards don’t 
analyze emotions or other personal character-
istics, but what if they could detect a feeling 
like sadness and offer the person a message 
about antidepressants?54
  the tangled Web

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
71 
convenience. As the director of one consumer group phrased it in a complaint to the 
Federal Trade Commission, “Online consumers are being bought and sold like chattel.”56
Are we for sale? In some sense, yes. If you surf the Web (and who doesn’t today?), it’s 
likely that someone is carefully tracking your clicks—the search items you Google, the 
sites you visit, perhaps even the comments you post on Facebook. Your digital actions have 
actual financial value, because of the industry called real-time bidding; an electronic 
trading system that sells ad space on the Web pages people click on at the moment they 
visit them.
In the early days of the Internet, advertisers simply bought space on Web sites that 
generally matched the demographics of their target audience. Then they showed the 
same ad to everyone who came to the site—an inefficient approach people in the indus-
try call “spray and pray.” Today that picture has changed as companies develop complex 
algorithms that predict where consumers with specific profiles (e.g., “Asian Americans 
who make more than $100,000 a year, live in Los Angeles, and are in the market for a 
luxury car”) will visit and serve up precisely tailored messages to these customers. By the  
way, these are not “live auctions” like you might see on eBay; they are conducted auto-
matically on powerful computers that receive several million bids every second. Each auc-
tion typically takes less than 30 milliseconds. And because not all customers are as likely 
to buy or to spend as much as are others, these algorithms attach different values to them 
so higher value customers command higher auction prices. As the CEO of one of these 
 trading companies explained, “The first impression seen by a high-value person on the 
opening page of a major newspaper first thing in the morning has a different value than a 
user from China who is 12 and has been on the Web all day long playing games.” The real-
time bidding business is growing rapidly: Analysts estimate that by 2017, the U.S. market 
alone will reach $8.3 billion.57
Identity theft occurs when someone steals your personal information and uses it 
without your permission. They may charge items on a credit card or perhaps access medi-
cal services via your health benefits. Identity theft is the most common consumer com-
plaint, according to the Federal Trade Commission. It accounts for almost 20 percent of all 
problems consumers report.58 Experts estimate that approximately 15 million Americans 
fall victim to identity theft each year, with financial losses exceeding $50 billion. And, as 
any victim knows, the financial aspects are not the only pain points because cancelling 
credit cards or otherwise correcting the situation can result in huge hassles.
Identity thieves get more sophisticated every day. They used to be content with steal-
ing wallets and “dumpster diving” to obtain account numbers. Today, we increasingly 
fall prey to high-tech phishing scams in which people receive fraudulent emails that 
ask them to supply account information, as well as botnets (a set of computers that 
are penetrated by malicious software known as malware that allows an external agent to 
control their actions) that hijack millions of computers without any trace. Recently we’ve 
witnessed numerous hacks of corporate and government databases including Apple, Best 
Buy, The New York Times, Sony Pictures, and even NASA.
Locational privacy is a related issue. Every one of us who walks around with a phone 
transmits his or her approximate location, and those of us with GPS-enabled phones leave 
nothing to chance. In addition, many cars now have GPS devices that can share their loca-
tion with a centralized service. We can purchase GPS trackers to keep tabs on our kids, aged 
relatives, or wayward pets. Some insurance companies offer steep discounts to drivers who 
use GPS tracking technology. The companies provide a small tracker in the car that reports 
driving habits and in some cases even whether the driver is cruising through unsafe neigh-
borhoods. Other services allow anxious parents to track a teenager’s driving and provide 
a “report card” on use of the family car.59 A school district in Brazil goes a step farther: It 
requires 20,000 grade school students to wear uniforms embedded with GPS chips similar 
to those used in pet trackers. The chips automatically send parents a text message as soon as 
their children enter the school grounds, or if their children are more than 20 minutes late. 
A Texas school district implemented a similar plan though it later abandoned the idea and 
decided to install surveillance cameras on high school campuses instead.60

72 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
For all intents and purposes in today’s wired world, consumers can run, but we can’t 
hide: If someone wants to know where we are or where we’ve been, the data are there for 
the asking. As with Web tracking, there is value here: We can easily identify by looking at 
hundreds or even thousands of reviews the best sushi place within a block of our current 
location, or perhaps get a heads up on that policeman with the radar gun who is hiding 
behind that billboard up the highway. However, this is a mixed blessing if this information 
gets into the wrong hands. Consumers need to make tough tradeoffs between convenience 
and constant surveillance.
Market access
Many of us take for granted that we are free to shop anywhere we want or that we can eas-
ily learn about our purchase options—everything we need is just a click of a mouse away, 
right? In reality, however, large numbers of people can’t make this claim. For one reason or 
another their market access (i.e., their ability to find and purchase goods and services) is 
limited because of physical, mental, economic, or social barriers.
Disabilities
Disabled people are the largest minority market in the United States. One in 5 U.S. adults 
lives with a disability that interferes with daily life.61 The Census Bureau reports that 
there are 54 million adults with disabilities who spend almost $200 billion annually, yet 
companies pay remarkably little attention to the unique needs of this vast group. Fully 11 
million U.S. adults have a condition that makes it difficult for them to leave home to shop, 
so they rely almost exclusively on catalogs and the Internet to purchase products. Many 
people have limited mobility and are unable to gain easy access to stores, entertainment 
venues, educational institutions, and other locations. Bodily limitations or disfigurements 
may result in real or imagined stigmatization, so self-concept and interpersonal relation-
ships may be problematic.62 People who rely on wheelchairs for mobility often encounter 
barriers when they try to enter stores, move around the aisles, or enter dressing rooms 
that are too narrow to accommodate a chair. Others have mental illnesses, such as exces-
sive anxiety in public places. These issues touch many of us; for example, 15 percent of 
Vietnam and 1991 Gulf War Veterans have been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), and 20 percent of veterans who served in Afghanistan and Iraq received 
care at a Veterans’ Administration (VA) facility for the disorder since their return home. 
Large numbers of children also encounter difficulties with market access, whether offline 
or online.
The good news is that technology holds the potential to improve market access. Here 
are a few exciting new developments:
●
●The touch screen is a breakthrough for people who have problems with motor skills. 
They no longer need to manipulate a mouse, keyboard, or pen to use programs. A 
device like the iPad makes touch-to-speak technology affordable and easy to use. For 
example, a person who is unable to speak can communicate his or her preferences for 
meals, activities, and so on just by touching the screen. Other apps amplify sounds for 
the hard-of-hearing, or even encourage children with motor skills disabilities to en-
gage in physical therapy.63 The LookTel Money Reader app makes it possible for blind 
people to pay for products in cash; it can “read money” and tell the person the value of 
the bills he or she holds.64
●
●Dating websites for singles with health problems allow people with an array of dis-
abilities, including paralysis and multiple sclerosis, to find partners. Dating 4 Disabled 
caters to people with physical diseases, while NoLongerLonely focuses on those with 
mental illness. Sites like these and others allow users to be blunt and honest about 
their own issues and what they seek in a partner. One site was created by a man whose 
brother suffered from Crohn’s disease. He observed, “He was a good-looking boy, 
but when do you tell a girl that you have a colostomy bag? The first date? The third? 
There’s no good time.”65

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
73 
Food Deserts
The Department of Agriculture defines a food desert as a Census tract where 33 percent 
of the population or 500 people, whichever is less, live more than a mile from a grocery 
store in an urban area or more than 10 miles away in a rural area. Healthy food options in 
these communities are hard to find or are unaffordable. Researchers estimate that in the 
United States about 23.5 million people live in food deserts.
Limited access to healthy choices can lead to poor diets and higher levels of obesity 
and other diet-related diseases. More broadly, this food insecurity increases the number of 
low- and moderate-income families who struggle to purchase the diet they need to sustain 
a healthy and active life.66
literacy
Media literacy refers to a consumer’s ability to access, analyze, evaluate, and communi-
cate information in a variety of forms, including print and nonprint messages.67
Media literacy empowers people to be both critical thinkers and creative produc-
ers of an increasingly wide range of messages using image, language, and sound. This 
movement reminds us that we are bombarded with thousands of messages every day that 
espouse a particular point of view or try to persuade us to buy this or that. It’s our job to 
critically evaluate this information and not everyone has the skills to do that. This task is 
even more difficult in the age of Google, where many of us assume that whatever comes 
up in a Google search or on Wikipedia is completely true and accurate (Hint: not by a long 
shot). As the tried-but-true phrase says, “Caveat Emptor”—let the buyer beware!
Unfortunately, some of us have an even bigger problem than evaluating the source of a 
message: We can’t read it in the first place. The U.S. Department of Education estimates that 
about 1 in 7 U.S. adults are functionally illiterate.68 This term describes a person whose 
reading skills are not adequate to carry out everyday tasks, such as reading the newspaper or 
the instructions on a pill bottle. Almost half of U.S. Americans read below a sixth-grade level. 
This limitation impedes market access for a couple of reasons: First, the illiterate or 
“low-literate” consumer is at a disadvantage because he or she encounters difficulty in 
learning about the best purchase options. Second, this person may experience feelings of 
shame and embarrassment and avoid market situations where he or she will be forced to 
reveal the inability to read a label or other written material.69 Some of these people (whom 
researchers term social isolates) cope with the stigma of illiteracy by avoiding situations in 
which they will have to reveal this problem. They may choose not to eat at a restaurant 
with an unfamiliar menu, for example. 
Low-literate consumers rely heavily on visual cues, including brand logos and store lay-
outs, to navigate in retail settings, but they often make mistakes when they select similarly 
packaged products (for example, brand line extensions). They also encounter problems with 
innumeracy (understanding numbers); many low-literate people have difficulty knowing, for 
example, whether they have enough money to purchase the items in their cart and unethi-
cal merchants may cheat them out of the correct amount of change. Not surprisingly, these 
challenges create an emotional burden for low-literate consumers, who experience stress, 
anxiety, fear, shame, and other negative emotions before, during, and after they shop.70
Sustainability and environmental Stewardship
Almost everyone today is concerned about saving our planet. Worries about climate 
change, entire species going extinct, widespread exposure to carcinogens and harmful 
bacteria and many other issues are front and center. Some solutions are no-brainers: 
Unilever launched a campaign on Facebook and YouTube tied to its Axe brand to encour-
age reduced usage of hot water. The “Showerpooling” campaign asks fans to take a pledge 
to share a shower with a like-minded acquaintance or attractive stranger.71
Of course, that’s a trivial approach to a big problem but real solutions are a huge pri-
ority for many individuals and organizations. A sustainable business model is not just about 
“do-gooder” efforts that reduce a company’s carbon footprint or the amount of plastic that 
goes into landfills. Indeed, about 6 out of every 10 companies that convert to a sustainable 

74 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
business model report that they have profited financially as well.72 A triple bottom-line 
orientation refers to business strategies that strive to maximize return in three ways:
1. The financial bottom line: Provide profits to stakeholders.
2. The social bottom line: Return benefits to the communities where the organization 
operates.
3. The environmental bottom line: Minimize damage to the environment or even 
improve natural conditions.
The U.S. EPA defines the concept this way: “Sustainability is based on a simple prin-
ciple: Everything that we need for our survival and well-being depends, either directly or 
indirectly, on our natural environment. Sustainability creates and maintains the condi-
tions under which humans and nature can exist in productive harmony, that permit ful-
filling the social, economic and other requirements of present and future generations.”73 
Some people refer to this way of thinking as cradle to cradle; the target to aim for is a prod-
uct made from natural materials that is fully reusable or recyclable so that the company 
actually uses zero resources to make it.
That is a tough goal, but many organizations work hard to get as close to it as they 
can—and consumers increasingly take notice. Many of us are much more mindful of 
these issues when we shop and when we make decisions about the foods we eat, the clothes 
we wear, the buildings in which we live and work, and the cars we drive. The consumer’s 
focus on personal health is merging with a growing interest in global health. Some ana-
lysts call this new value conscientious consumerism.74
A Ford ad in Brazil promotes conservation.
Source: Courtesy of J. Walter Thompson 
 Publicidade LTDA.
A recent study of more 
than 2000 hotel guests 
suggests that simply allow-
ing consumers to pledge 
to 
practice 
sustainable 
behaviors increases the likelihood they will 
follow through. When guests made a spe-
cific commitment at check-in to hang their 
towels for reuse to reduce laundry waste 
(and received a lapel pin to symbolize their 
commitment), the number of towels actually 
hung increased by more than 40 percent. The 
researchers estimated the savings at this one 
hotel at over $50,000 and nearly 700,000 
gallons of water.75
Marketing Opportunity

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
75 
CNCD
11.11.11
Redevenons humains. Faites un don.
BE30-0000-0000-1111
Nous consommons, mais à quel prix?
“We consume, but at what price? Let’s be-
come human again. Please donate.” Ad for 
a Belgian NGO (non-governmental organiza-
tion) condemning food industry practices 
such as the feeding of Thai prawns with 
poison.
Source: Christophe Gilbert/Marine Vincent & Pierre 
Jadot
Green Marketing and Greenwashing
Because sustainability and related issues such as climate change, pollution, and toxic 
products are so pervasive, it is important to distinguish this term from another widely 
used buzzword: Green marketing describes a strategy that involves the development 
and promotion of environmentally friendly products and stressing this attribute when the 
manufacturer communicates with customers. Although some specialized companies such 
as Seventh Generation have successfully built a following around their green products, this 
strategy has not fared well in recent years. Nonetheless, there still is demand for environ-
mentally friendly products: U.S. consumers spend more than $40 billion a year on them. 

76 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
This estimate includes $29.2 billion for organic food; more than $10 billion for hybrid, 
electric, and clean-diesel vehicles; more than $2 billion on energy-efficient light bulbs; and 
$640 million on green cleaning products.76 However, sales are flat or lower than in prior 
years.
Why would this be? We know that consumers increasingly pay more attention to 
environmental issues, and many even say they will pay more for products that manu-
facturers produce under ethical conditions (e.g., in humane workplaces and without 
harmful chemicals). In one typical study, the researchers gave subjects a description of 
a coffee company that either used or did not use Fair Trade principles to buy its beans. 
They found that participants were willing to pay an additional $1.40 for a pound of 
the coffee if it was ethically sourced and were negative about the company if it did not 
adhere to these principles. The study obtained similar results for shirts that were made 
with organic cotton.77
Still—as we’ll see in more detail in Chapter 8—it is common to witness a disconnect 
between consumers’ attitudes and their actual behavior. As the old saying goes, “the road 
to hell is paved with good intentions.” Despite consumers’ best intentions to “buy green,” 
we can point to two major reasons for the gap between saying and doing:
First, green products are more expensive because the ingredients tend to cost more 
than their more conventional counterparts, and transportation costs are higher too 
because they are sold in smaller volumes than the big brands. Although many consumers 
profess a desire to buy environmentally friendly products, especially in tough economic 
times they have a tendency not to back these preferences with their cash. When the Great 
Recession hit in 2008, it took a lot of the steam out of the green movement. For example, 
in 2009, S.C. Johnson introduced a line of green products called Nature’s Source and the 
company spent more than $25 million to advertise them. By 2010 the company slashed 
the line’s advertising budget to zero.78
Unfortunately, the second reason for the lackluster showing of green products is 
largely self-inflicted. Greenwashing occurs when companies make false or exaggerated 
claims about how environmentally friendly their products are. Think about the old story 
of the “boy who cried wolf”: Consumers simply don’t believe most of the green claims 
companies make about their brands. Almost one-fourth of U.S. consumers say they have 
“no way of knowing” if a product is green or actually does what it claims. Their skepticism 
This ad from The Slovak Republic under-
scores the growing priority consumers place 
upon organic foods.
Source: JANDL marketing a reklama, S.R.O.

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
77 
is probably justified: According to one report, more than 95 percent of consumer compa-
nies that market as “green” make misleading or inaccurate claims. Another survey found 
that the number of products that claim to be green has increased by 73 percent since 
2009—but of the products investigated, almost one-third had fake labels, and 70 made 
green claims without offering any proof to back them up.79 One survey reported that  
71 percent of respondents say they will stop buying a product if they feel they’ve been mis-
led about its environmental impact, and 37 percent are so angry about greenwashing that 
they believe this justifies a complete boycott of everything the company makes.80
As we saw in Chapter 1, it is typical to find that a relatively small number of consum-
ers account for a large amount of the action with regard to a certain consumption activity 
or purchase. This certainly is true when we look at people who walk the walk, in addition 
to talking the talk, about modifying their behaviors to help the environment. Marketers 
point to a segment of consumers they call LOHAS—an acronym for “lifestyles of health 
and sustainability.” This label refers to people who worry about the environment, want 
products to be produced in a sustainable way, and spend money to advance what they see 
as their personal development and potential. These so-called “Lohasians” (others refer to 
this segment as cultural creatives) represent a great market for products such as organic 
foods, energy-efficient appliances, and hybrid cars, as well as alternative medicine, yoga 
tapes, and ecotourism. One organization that tracks this group estimates that they make 
up between 13 percent to 19 percent of the adults in the United States; it values the mar-
ket for socially conscious products at $290 billion.81 Table 4.4 shows that the LOHAS 
market divides into six different sectors.
taBle 2.4   LOHAS Market Sectors
personal health
Green Building
$117 billion
$100 billion
Natural, organic products
Home certification
Nutritional products
Energy Star appliances
Integrative health care
Sustainable flooring
Dietary supplements
Renewable energy systems
Mind body spirit products
Wood alternatives
Eco Tourism
Natural Lifestyles
$42 billion
$10 billion
Eco-tourism travel
Indoor & outdoor furnishings
Eco-adventure travel
Organic cleaning supplies
Compact fluorescent lights
Social change philanthropy
Apparel
Alternative Transportation
Alternative Energy
$20 billion
$1 billion
Hybrid vehicles
Renewable energy credits
Biodiesel fuel
Green pricing
Car sharing programs
Source: www.lohas.com/about.htm, accessed March 2, 2013.

78 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
the Dark Side of Consumer Behavior
A few years ago a crowd assembled for a big holiday sale at a 
Walmart store in New York. When the doors opened, the crowd 
trampled a temporary worker to death as people rushed to grab 
discounted merchandise off the store shelves. A lawsuit filed on 
behalf of the man’s survivors claimed that in addition to providing inadequate security, the 
retailer “engaged in specific marketing and advertising techniques to specifically attract 
a large crowd and create an environment of frenzy and mayhem.”82 In subsequent years 
there have been additional incidents of trampling and even gunfire as people frantically 
jockey for position to scoop up the big sales. Just how far will people go to secure a bargain?
Despite the best efforts of researchers, government regulators, and concerned indus-
try people, sometimes we are our own worst enemies. We think of individuals as rational 
decision makers, who calmly do their best to obtain products and services that will maxi-
mize the health and well-being of themselves, their families, and their society. In reality, 
however, consumers’ desires, choices, and actions often result in negative consequences to 
individuals and the society in which they live.
Some of these actions are relatively benign, but others have more onerous conse-
quences. Harmful consumer behaviors, such as excessive drinking or cigarette smoking, 
stem from social pressures. The cultural value many of us place on money encourages 
activities such as shoplifting and insurance fraud. Exposure to unattainable ideals of 
beauty and success creates dissatisfaction with our bodies or our achievements. We will 
touch on many of these issues later in this book, but for now, let’s review some dimensions 
of the “dark side” of consumer behavior.
Consumer terrorism
The terrorist attacks of 9/11 were a wake-up call to the free-enterprise system. They 
revealed the vulnerability of nonmilitary targets and reminded us that disruptions of our 
financial, electronic, and supply networks can potentially be more damaging to our way of 
life than the fallout from a conventional battlefield. Assessments by the Rand Corporation 
and other analysts point to the susceptibility of the nation’s food supply as a potential 
target of bioterrorism.83 More recently, many concerned policymakers, executives, and 
military commanders have added the prospect of cyberterrorism to the list of pressing 
concerns, especially in the light of high-profile attacks on the computer systems of large 
financial institutions such as American Express.84
Even before the anthrax scares of 2001, toxic substances placed in products threat-
ened to hold the marketplace hostage. This tactic first drew public attention in the United 
States in 1982, when seven people died after taking Tylenol pills that had been laced with 
cyanide. A decade later, Pepsi weathered its own crisis when more than 50 reports of 
syringes found in Diet Pepsi cans surfaced in 23 states. In that case, Pepsi pulled off a pub-
lic relations coup de grace by convincing the public that the syringes could not have been 
introduced during the manufacturing process. The company even showed an in-store 
surveillance video that caught a customer slipping a syringe into a Diet Pepsi can while 
the cashier’s head was turned.85 Pepsi’s aggressive actions underscore the importance of 
responding to such a crisis head-on and quickly.
More recently, a publicity campaign for a late-night cartoon show backfired when 
it aroused fears of a terrorist attack and temporarily shut down the city of Boston. The 
effort consisted of 1-foot-tall blinking electronic signs with hanging wires and batteries 
that marketers used to promote the Cartoon Network TV show Aqua Teen Hunger Force (a 
surreal series about a talking milkshake, a box of fries, and a meatball). The signs were 
placed on bridges and in other high-profile spots in several U.S. cities. Most depicted a 
boxy, cartoon character giving passersby the finger. The bomb squads and other police 
personnel required to investigate the mysterious boxes cost the city of Boston more than 
$500,000—and a lot of frayed nerves.86
OBjeCtive 2-4
Consumer behavior can 
be harmful to individuals 
and to society.

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
79 
addictive Consumption
A woman in New Zealand apparently died from drinking too much Coca-Cola. Her family 
said she drank about 2.2 gallons of the beverage every day for years. Prior to her death 
she had several rotten teeth removed, and she gave birth to a baby who was born without 
any tooth enamel. The 31-year-old mother of eight died following a cardiac arrhythmia 
after consuming more than two pounds of sugar and 970 mg of caffeine a day. Coca-Cola 
noted that the coroner’s report, while singling out its product as a probable cause of death, 
stated that the company “cannot be held responsible for the health of consumers who 
drink unhealthy quantities of the product.”87
Though we usually equate substance abuse with addiction to alcohol, drugs, or nico-
tine, it seems we can become dependent on almost anything—there is even a Chapstick 
Addicts support group with 250 active members!88 Consumer addiction is a physiologi-
cal or psychological dependency on products or services. Many companies profit from sell-
ing addictive products or from selling solutions for kicking a bad habit.
A Chinese man got so upset about the amount of time his adult son spent playing 
videogames that he took a novel approach: He hired “digital hit men” in the form of other 
gamers to kill off all of his son’s characters in the games.89 How is that for “tough love?” 
Psychologists compare social media addiction to chemical dependency, to the point 
of inducing symptoms of withdrawal when users are deprived of their fix. As one noted, 
“Everyone is a potential addict—they’re just waiting for their drug of choice to come 
along, whether heroin, running, junk food or social media.”90 Indeed, a survey reported 
1 in 3 smartphone owners would rather give up sex than their phones!91 And, as many of 
us realize this fixation grows by the “enablers” around us as they exhibit the same behav-
ior. Indeed one study documented that college students are much more likely to pull out 
their phones when someone with whom they were sitting had just done so.92
Internet addiction has been a big headache for several years already in South Korea, 
where 90 percent of homes connect to cheap, high-speed broadband. Many young 
Koreans’ social lives revolve around the “PC bang,” dimly lit Internet parlors that sit on 
practically every street corner. A government study estimates that up to 30 percent of 
South Koreans younger than 18 are at risk of Internet addiction. Many already exhibit 
signs of actual addiction, including an inability to stop themselves from using computers, 
rising levels of tolerance that drive them to seek ever-longer sessions online, and with-
drawal symptoms such as anger and craving when they can’t log on. Some users have 
literally dropped dead from exhaustion after playing online games for days on end.93
Other problems arise when people become overly involved in playing online games or 
posting on social network sites:
●
●In the United Kingdom, a 33-year-old widowed mother let her two dogs starve to death 
and neglected her three kids after becoming hooked on the online game Small World. A 
judge banned her from going on the Internet. The woman slept only two hours a night 
as she played the virtual reality game (in which dwarves and giants battle to conquer 
the world) almost nonstop for six months. Her children—aged 9, 10, and 13—had 
no hot food and “drank” cold baked beans from tins. When the family’s two dogs died 
from neglect, she left their bodies rotting in the dining room for two months.94
●
●A U.S. woman pled guilty to a charge of second-degree murder in the death of her 
three-month-old son. The 22-year-old mother lost her temper when her child be-
gan crying while she was playing FarmVille on Facebook; she shook the baby until 
it died.
●
●Cyberbullying refers to the “willful and repeated harm inflicted through the use of 
computer, cell phones, and other electronic devices.”95 One study reported that 1 in 
5 middle school students in the United States were subject to cyberbullying. As one 
seventh-grade girl observed, “It’s easier to fight online, because you feel more brave 
and in control. On Facebook, you can be as mean as you want.”96 The problem has got-
ten so bad that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services even has a website 
to combat it: Stopbullying.gov.97
Yik Yak is a hugely popu-
lar social app that has in-
vaded numerous college 
campuses. The down side 
is that the site fosters cy-
berbullying because it does not require users 
to post a profile so they remain anonymous. 
It sorts messages only by geographic location 
and only posts within a 1.5-mile radius ap-
pear so it’s ideal for a campus environment. 
Offensive “yaks” that derogate students by 
name or encourage violence and even gang 
rape appear more often than they should. It’s 
like a graffiti-defaced bathroom wall at the 
student union—but on digital steroids. 98
  the tangled Web

80 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
●
●Phantom Vibration Syndrome describes the tendency to habitually reach for your 
cell phone because you feel it vibrating, even if it is off or you are not even wearing it 
at the time. One researcher reports that 70 percent of people who report heavy us-
age of mobile devices say they experience this phenomenon. The name derives from 
phantom limb syndrome, a condition in which someone who has lost a limb experi-
ences sensory hallucinations that it is still attached to the body and functioning.99
Compulsive Consumption
Some consumers take the expression “born to shop” quite literally. They shop because they 
are compelled to do so rather than because shopping is a pleasurable or functional task. 
Compulsive consumption refers to repetitive and often excessive shopping performed 
as an antidote to tension, anxiety, depression, or boredom.100 “Shopaholics” turn to shop-
ping much the way addicted people turn to drugs or alcohol.101 One man diagnosed with 
compulsive shopping disorder (CSD) bought more than 2,000 wrenches and never used any 
of them. Therapists report that women clinically diagnosed with CSD outnumber men by 
four to one. They speculate that women are attracted to items such as clothes and cosmet-
ics to enhance their interpersonal relationships, whereas men tend to focus on gadgetry, 
tools, and guns to achieve a sense of power.
One out of 20 U.S. adults is unable to control the buying of goods that he or she does 
not really want or need. Some researchers say compulsive shopping may be related to 
low self-esteem. It affects an estimated 2 to 16 percent of the adult U.S. population.102 
In some cases, the consumer has little or no control over his or her consumption, much 
like a drug addict. Even the act of shopping itself is an addicting experience for some 
people. Three common elements characterize many negative or destructive consumer 
behaviors:103
1 The behavior is not done by choice.
2 The gratification derived from the behavior is short-lived.
3 The person experiences strong feelings of regret or guilt afterward.
Gambling is an example of a consumption addiction that touches every segment 
of consumer society. Whether it takes the form of casino gambling, playing the “slots,” 
betting on sports events with friends or through a bookie, or even buying lottery tickets, 
excessive gambling can be quite destructive. Taken to extremes, gambling can result in 
lowered self-esteem, debt, divorce, and neglected children. According to one psychologist, 
A government website focuses on the 
 problem of cyberbullying.
Source: StopBullying.gov, U.S. Department of 
Health & Human Service.

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
81 
A French organization combats the sexual 
abuse of children by online predators.
Source: Courtesy of Innocence en Danger
gamblers exhibit a classic addictive cycle: They experience a “high” while in action and 
depression when they stop gambling, which leads them back to the thrill of the action. 
Unlike drug addicts, however, money is the substance that hard-core gamblers abuse. 
We can probably expect the problem to grow as the movement to legalize online gam-
bling in some U.S. states picks up steam (it already is legal in Nevada, Delaware, and New 
Jersey).104 There is a built-in market for this new format: Analysts estimate more than 
170 million people play simulated casino games on social networks, more than triple the 
number of real money online gamblers.105
Consumed Consumers
Consumed consumers are people who are used or exploited, willingly or not, for com-
mercial gain in the marketplace. Here are some examples:
●
●Prostitutes—Expenditures on prostitution in the United States alone are estimated 
at $20 billion annually. These revenues are equivalent to those in the domestic shoe 
industry.106
●
●Organ, blood, and hair donors—There is a lively global red market for body parts. 
By one estimate, you could make about $46 million if you donated every reusable part 
of your body (do not try this at home).107 In the United States, millions of people sell 
their blood. A lively market also exists for organs (e.g., kidneys), and some women sell 
their hair to be made into wigs. Bidding for a human kidney on eBay went to more 
than $5.7 million before the company ended the auction (it’s illegal to sell human 
organs online … at least so far). The seller wrote, “You can choose either kidney…. Of 
course only one for sale, as I need the other one to live. Serious bids only.”108 Here is 
the retail price for some typical red market transactions in the United States (often 
much cheaper elsewhere):109
●
●
A pint of blood: $337
●
●
Hair (for extensions): $308
●
●
Cornea: $24,400
●
●
Heart: $997,700
●
●Babies for sale—Several thousand surrogate mothers have been paid to be medically 
impregnated and carry babies to term for infertile couples. A fertile woman between 

82 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
the ages of 18 and 25 can “donate” one egg every 3 months and rake in $7,000 each 
time. Over 8 years, that’s 32 eggs for a total of $224,000.110 In one case in Germany, 
police arrested a couple when they tried to auction their 8-month-old son on eBay. The 
parents claimed that the offer, which read “Baby—collection only. Offer my nearly new 
baby for sale because it cries too much. Male, 70 cm long” was just a joke.111
illegal acquisition and product Use
In addition to being self-destructive or socially damaging, many consumer behaviors 
are illegal as well. Analysts estimate the cost of crimes that consumers commit against 
business at more than $40 billion per year. A survey conducted by the McCann-Erickson 
advertising agency revealed the following tidbits:112
●
●Ninety-one percent of people say they lie regularly. One in 3 fibs about his or her 
weight, 1 in 4 about income, and 21 percent lie about their age. Nine percent even lie 
about their natural hair color.
●
●Four out of 10 Americans have tried to pad an insurance bill to cover the deductible.
●
●Nineteen percent say they’ve snuck into a theater to avoid paying admission.
●
●More than three out of five people say they’ve taken credit for making something from 
scratch when they have done no such thing. According to Pillsbury’s CEO, this “be-
havior is so prevalent that we’ve named a category after it—speed scratch.”
Consumer theft and Fraud
Who among us has never received an email offering us fabulous riches if we help to recover 
a lost fortune from a Nigerian bank account? Of course, the only money changing hands 
will be yours if you fall for the pitch from a so-called advance-fee fraud artist. These con men 
have successfully scammed many victims out of hundreds of millions of dollars. However, a 
small but intrepid group of “counterscammers” sometimes give these crooks a taste of their 
own medicine by pretending to fall for a scam and humiliating the perpetrator. One common 
strategy is to trick the con artist into posing for pictures while holding a self-mocking sign 
and then posting these photos on Internet sites. Both online and offline, fraud is rampant.
Stealing from stores is the most common scam. Someone commits a retail theft every 5 
seconds. Shrinkage is the industry term for inventory and cash losses from shoplifting and 
employee theft (it does not refer to the condition George experienced in a famous episode of 
the Seinfeld TV show). This is a massive problem for businesses that gets passed on to consum-
ers in the form of higher prices (about 40 percent of the losses can be attributed to employees 
rather than shoppers). Shopping malls spend $6 million annually on security, and a family 
of four spends about $300 extra per year because of markups to cover shrinkage.113
Indeed, shoplifting is fastest-growing crime in the United States. A comprehensive 
retail study found that shoplifting is a year-round problem that costs U.S. retailers $9 billion 
annually. The most frequently stolen products are tobacco products, athletic shoes, logo 
and brand-name apparel, designer jeans, and undergarments. The average theft amount 
per incident is $58.43, up from $20.36 in a 1995 survey.114 The problem is equally wor-
risome in Europe; retailers there catch well more than 1 million shoplifters every year. The 
United Kingdom has the highest rate of shrinkage (as a percent of annual sales), followed 
by Norway, Greece, and France. Switzerland and Austria have the lowest rates.115
The large majority of shoplifting is not done by professional thieves or by people 
who genuinely need the stolen items.116 About two million Americans are charged with 
shoplifting each year, but analysts estimate that for every arrest, 18 unreported incidents 
occur.117 About three-quarters of those shoplifters authorities catch are middle- or high-
income people who shoplift for the thrill of it or as a substitute for affection. Shoplifting 
is also common among adolescents. Research evidence indicates that teen shoplifting is 
influenced by factors such as having friends who also shoplift. It is also more likely to occur 
if the adolescent does not believe that this behavior is morally wrong.118
And what about shoppers who commit fraud when they abuse stores’ exchange 
and return policies? Some big companies, such as Guess, Staples, and Sports Authority, 
use new software that lets them track a shopper’s track record of bringing items back. 

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
83 
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
They are trying to crack down on serial wardrobers who buy an outfit, wear it once, 
and return it; customers who change price tags on items, then return one item for the 
higher amount; and shoppers who use fake or old receipts when they return a product. 
The retail industry loses approximately $16 billion a year to these and other forms of 
fraudulent behavior. Retail analysts estimate that about 9 percent of all returns are 
fraudulent.119
Counterfeiting, where companies or individuals sell fake versions of real products 
to customers (who may or may not be aware of the switch), accounts for more than $600 
billion in global losses annually. Many of us think of counterfeiters as guys who sell faux 
designer handbags or watches on the street, but in fact the problem is much more wide-
spread—and often deadly. About 200,000 people in China die per year because they ingest 
fake pharmaceuticals.120
anticonsumption
Some types of destructive consumer behavior are anticonsumption; events in which 
people deliberately deface or mutilate products and services. Anticonsumption ranges 
from relatively mild acts like spray-painting graffiti on buildings and subways to serious 
incidences of product tampering or even the release of computer viruses that can bring 
large corporations to their knees. It can also take the form of political protest in which 
activists alter or destroy billboards and other advertisements that promote what they feel 
to be unhealthy or unethical acts. For example, some members of the clergy in areas heav-
ily populated by minorities have organized rallies to protest the proliferation of cigarette 
and alcohol advertising in their neighborhoods; these protests sometimes include the 
defacement of billboards promoting alcohol or cigarettes.
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. Ethical business is good business.
Business ethics are rules of conduct that guide actions in 
the marketplace; these are the standards against which 
most people in a culture judge what is right and what is 
wrong, good or bad. Marketers must confront many ethi-
cal issues, especially ones that relate to how much they 
make consumers “want” things they don’t need or are not 
good for them. A related issue is materialism, which refers 
to the importance people attach to worldly possessions, 
and the role of business in encouraging this outlook.
2. Marketers have an obligation to provide safe and 
functional products as part of their business activities.
It is both ethically and financially smart to maximize 
customer satisfaction. In some cases, external bodies 
such as the government or industry associations regu-
late businesses to ensure that their products and adver-
tising are safe, clear, and accurate. Consumer behavior 
CHaptER SuMMaRy
researchers may play a role in this process and those 
who do transformative consumer research (TCR) may 
even work to bring about social change. Companies 
also play a significant role in addressing social condi-
tions through their corporate social responsibility (CSR) 
practices and social marketing campaigns that promote 
 positive behaviors.
3. Consumer behavior impacts directly on major public 
policy issues that confront our society.
Our relationships with companies and other organizations 
are complex and many issues that impact quality of life re-
late directly to marketing practices. These include the trade-
off between our privacy and the ability of companies to tailor 
their offerings to our individual needs. Other issues revolve 
around market access because many people are unable to 
navigate the marketplace as a result of disabilities, illiteracy, 
or other conditions. In addition, our fragile environment re-
quires a commitment to sustainable business practices that 
attempt to maximize the triple bottom-line that emphasizes 
financial, social, and environmental benefits.

84 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
REviEw
 
2-1 What are business ethics, and why is this an important 
topic?
 
2-2 The economics of information perspective argues that 
advertising is important. Why?
 
2-3 What are the main features of consumerspace? Does it 
actually work as a methodology?
 
2-4 Why should companies encourage consumers to com-
plain? How can this benefit the business?
 
2-5 What is greenwashing? Is it ethical? Are consumers 
likely to be convinced?
 
2-6 In what ways is corporate social responsibility different 
from social marketing?
 
2-7 Why is market access an important aspect of consumer 
well-being? What are some important reasons why con-
sumers can experience limited market access?
 
2-8 What is LOHAS, and how is it significant to marketers?
Anticonsumption, 83
Bioterrorism, 78
Botnets, 71
Business ethics, 57
Cause marketing, 70
Compulsive consumption, 80
Conscientious consumerism, 74
Consumed consumers, 81
Consumer addiction, 79
Consumerspace, 58
Corporate social responsibility (CSR), 70
Corrective advertising, 66
Counterfeiting, 83
Culture jamming, 67
Curation, 62
Cyberbullying, 79
Cyberterrorism, 78
Food desert, 73
Functionally illiterate, 73
Green marketing, 75
Greenwashing, 76
Gripe sites, 63
Identity theft, 71
Locational privacy, 71
LOHAS, 77
Market access, 72
Marketplace sentiments, 65
Materialism, 62
Media literacy, 73
Phantom vibration syndrome, 80
Phishing, 71
Provenance, 62
Real-time bidding, 71
Red market, 81
Serial wardrobers, 83
Shrinkage, 82
Slacktivism, 68
Social marketing, 70
Social media addiction, 79
Sustainability, 74
The Personal Data Notification & 
Protection Act, 70
The Student Digital Privacy and Parental 
Rights Act of 2015, 70
Transformative consumer research  
(TCR), 68
Transitional economies, 62
Triple bottom-line orientation, 74
KEy tERMS
4. Consumer behavior can be harmful to individuals and 
to society.
Although textbooks often paint a picture of the consumer 
as a rational, informed decision maker, in reality many 
consumer activities are harmful to individuals or to society. 
The “dark side” of consumer behavior includes terrorism, 
addiction, the use of people as products (consumed con-
sumers), and theft or vandalism (anticonsumption).
 
2-9 According to Viktoria de Chevron Villette, Co-Founder 
of the Millennial 20/20 Summit, which bills itself as the 
world’s first gathering of brands, businesses, and indus-
try leaders who target the Millennial generation, cause 
marketing offers enormous opportunities to corpora-
tions.121 How do you see cause marketing developing?
 2-10 Should scientists who study consumer behavior remain 
impartial, or is it appropriate for them to become involved 
in the topics they research like those who adhere to the 
transformative consumer research perspective?
 2-11 Because of higher competition and market saturation, 
marketers in industrialized countries try to develop third-
world markets. Asian consumers alone spend $90 billion 
a year on cigarettes, and U.S. tobacco manufacturers push 
relentlessly into these markets. We find cigarette advertis-
ing, which often depicts glamorous Western models and 
settings, just about everywhere—on billboards, buses, 
storefronts, and clothing—and tobacco companies spon-
sor many major sports and cultural events. Some com-
panies even hand out cigarettes and gifts in amusement 
areas, often to preteens. Should governments allow these 
practices, even if the products may be harmful to their 
citizens or divert money that poor people should spend on 
essentials? If you were a trade or health official in a third-
world country, what guidelines, if any, might you suggest 
to regulate the import of luxury goods from advanced 
economies?
 2-12 The chapter discusses the practice of serial wardrobing, 
where people return an outfit after they wear it for a spe-
cial occasion such as a formal. What do you think of this 
practice? Is it OK to use an expensive product once and 
then get your money back?
ConSuMER BEHavioR CHallEngE
●
■DiSCUSS

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
85 
 2-13 “College students’ concerns about the environment and 
vegetarianism are simply a passing fad; a way to look 
‘cool.’” Do you agree?
 2-14 Across Europe, lawyers estimate that around 10 million 
consumers are entitled to U.S. $5 billion in compensation 
from airline companies. The compensation claim is for 
when their flights have either been delayed or cancelled, 
unless this was due to extraordinary circumstances out 
of the airline’s control. The claims can date back as 
long as six years. In order to be eligible for a claim, the 
consumer had to have flown out of a European Union 
(EU) airport on an EU-registered airline. Despite the 
clear rulings on the compensation rights of consumers, 
thousands of claimants found their claims rejected by 
the airlines. The EU even clarified the ruling 2012 and 
streamlined the claim process. Does your justice system 
adequately meet the needs of both consumers and com-
panies in terms of how it awards damages?
 2-15 In the summer of 2013, Manchester United announced 
that it had agreed to an eight-year sponsorship con-
tract with AON worth $245 million to have its name 
on the club’s training ground at Carrington. The deal 
will see the facility renamed the AON Training Com-
plex. This was a part of a complicated deal in which 
Manchester United would appear in the Far East for 
matches wearing AON-sponsored shirts. The deal 
was worth double the amount that AON had paid in 
2009 for its four-year shirt sponsorship. However, the 
name Old Trafford, the club’s home, was not for sale at 
any price. Naming rights, claimed the executive vice-
chairman of the club, were not up for negotiation. 
Have sports clubs in your country or region sold their 
stadium names to sponsors? What was the reaction of 
fans to this move?
 2-16 The Creative Bloq Web site (www.creativebloq.com/) 
featured a collection of the most controversial ad 
campaigns of 2013. All of them attracted a lot of 
criticism. The 10 chosen advertisements appeared 
across the world and were designed by a number of 
different agencies. What is your take on them? Are 
they offensive or controversial? Why did the brands 
approve them?
up with the idea of matching every pair of shoes sold with a pair 
of new shoes for a child in need. Mycoskie set up TOMS shoes as a 
means of integrating responsible practice into business and gave a 
new meaning to corporate sustainability. His simple idea redefined 
twenty-first century social entrepreneurship and has developed into 
a meaningful business model that helps promote health, education, 
and economic opportunity for children and communities globally. 
The main idea behind TOMS’s One for One mission is to 
give the customers an opportunity to contribute positively to a 
onE foR onE: tHE aRt of giving at toMS
The first thing that comes to mind when people think about TOMS is 
their corporate social responsibility and the One for One philosophy 
that is the guiding force of the company’s philanthropic mission. 
The shoe company’s origins go back to 2006, during founder’s 
Blake Mycoskie’s travels in Argentina. There he saw the poor health 
and living conditions of the people as well as the difficulties that 
children faced growing up without shoes. It was thus that he came 
●■Case Study
would choose a more data-friendly business, but if they 
gained better deals, this figure rose to 83 percent.
Conduct a poll among 10 car owners of various ages, 
where you describe these programs, and ask respon-
dents if they would like to participate in order to receive 
a discount on their purchases. What are the pros and 
cons? Share your findings with the class.
 2-18 In 2015, the UK’s Medicines and Healthcare products 
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) seized $22 billion worth of 
counterfeit medicines and devices. Amongst the drugs 
were slimming pills and anaemia tablets. The seizure 
came at the end of a month-long international cam-
paign against the illegal internet trade involving 115 
countries and $72 billion worth of seizures. Suggest 
how you might design a marketing campaign to com-
bat this dangerous, life threatening fraud. Who would 
be your target audience?  
●
■applY
 2-17 According to a 2012 report by Enisa, the European 
Information Security Agency, 93 percent of consum-
ers were concerned as to whether businesses protected 
the information they hold about them. According to 
the report, 47 percent of service providers actively 
use personal data as a commercial asset. Around the 
same percentage share that data with third parties. 
If they were given the choice, consumers would be 
inclined to choose a business that required more per-
sonal data over one that did not in exchange for lower 
prices. The consumers also thought that giving more 
information would provide them with a more person-
alized service.
The Special Euro Barometer study in 2011 stated 
that 90 percent of customers revealed their names and 
addresses online to businesses. At the same time, the 
Enisa study suggested that 60 percent of consumers 

86 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
child’s life by giving them not only a pair of shoes, but also a safe 
means to walk to school and avoid diseases that a child could 
catch walking barefoot. For customers, this knowledge makes 
the act of buying shoes more than just a purchase. They are 
able to associate themselves with the company’s social mission. 
So far, TOMS has given 35 million pairs of shoes to children in 
more than 70 countries; it does so by donating shoes to chari-
table organizations that include the provision of shoes in their 
community development programs. The shoes are provided ac-
cording to the type of terrain and season for each community 
and region. Additionally, TOMS also creates local jobs by manu-
facturing shoes in countries where they are given.   
Corporate social responsibility at TOMS also focuses on the 
environmental impact of its products and operations. The shoes 
are made of sustainable vegan materials and their manufactur-
ing design includes natural hemp, organic cotton, or recycled 
polyester. Their shoes boxes are made from 80 percent recy-
cled material and are printed with soy ink. Expanding its social 
mission beyond providing shoes to children in need, TOMS has 
started other missions, including eye care, clean water, and safer 
birth. TOMS says that giving is in its DNA, and this is apparent 
from the fact that it even has a position called Chief Giving Officer. 
This person is responsible for ensuring that the various charitable 
missions that TOMS undertakes are carried out properly. 
In 2011, TOMS eyewear was launched, and it has helped re-
store sight to more than 275,00 people in need. Its eyewear mis-
sion operates in 13 countries and provides diagnostic services, 
medical treatment, vision correction procedures, and prescrip-
tion glasses with each sale of eyewear. The mission supports 
sustainable community-based eye care programs and helps in 
the creation of local professional job opportunities by providing 
basic eye care training to local health volunteers and teachers.
The company works on its clean water mission through 
its coffee roasting division.  In 2014, TOMS Roasting Co. was 
launched, and it has helped provide over 67,000 weeks of 
safe drinking water in six countries. With each sale of TOMS 
Roasting Co. Coffee, the company works with its “Giving 
Partners” to provide one week’s supply of safe water to one per-
son and also works to provide sustainable safe water systems for 
entire communities. In 2014, working on the same One for One 
philosophy, TOMS Bag Collection was launched in four coun-
tries. TOMS Bags works with its Giving Partners to provide train-
ing for skilled birth attendants, and with every bag sold, TOMS 
provides birth kits that help women deliver a baby safely. TOMS 
draws style and textile inspirations for its bag collection from the 
locations where it provides shoes, eye care, and water. The entire 
TOMS bag line communicates a global ethos that reinforces 
the company’s pledge to make a difference in people’s lives and 
works toward their well-being.
The manufacturing units for TOMS shoes are located in 
Argentina, Ethiopia, and China. The company is conscious of 
the challenges that come with a global supply network. Their 
global staff works closely with suppliers and vendors to ensure 
that TOMS ethical standards are maintained uniformly. Every 
year, the company ensures that its direct suppliers provide cer-
tification that the materials are sourced in conformity with the 
applicable local labor laws, including laws related to slavery and 
human trafficking. The company invests in its employees by 
providing training to them on various business and leadership 
issues, and it also provides training by third-party experts on 
labor laws to its supply chain employees.
Although widely recognized and appreciated, the TOMS 
One for One charity model has been questioned by some critics 
on broader and long-term social benefits.  The critics argue that 
there are unintended negative consequences of the One for One 
charity model that come at the expense of the local businesses 
in the communities where TOMS carries out its charities.  For 
example, they suggest, for example, that the local business of a 
small-scale cobbler who makes and sells shoes in a small town 
is greatly undermined when a truckload of free shoes arrives 
in their town. When a community gets free shoes, they will 
not buy shoes available at the local shop, and this will hurt the 
income of the local business. To make matters worse, if the free 
shoes are distributed at irregular time periods, the local shoe 
vendors are not able to plan the demand levels for their shoes.
Critics further argue that that giving free things fosters a 
poor self-image among the recipients. The critics do recognize 
that such a social mission has good intentions, but they contend 
that it only provides a small and temporary fix and does not ac-
tually alleviate poverty from the roots. As the proverb goes, it’s 
better to teach a hungry person to fish than to just give them a 
fish to eat. Furthermore, they say that in addition to hindering 
local businesses, such a model creates dependency and makes 
the affluent buyers of One for One products complacent about 
devising other ways to improve poverty and other social issues.
Similarly, many organizations that support social enter-
prises and entrepreneurial ventures suggest that the free giving 
model of charity does not address deeper causes of poverty, and 
in fact be inhibits long-term solutions. Such models approach 
poverty with the notion that people are poor because they lack 
things, and they ignore the reasons behind poverty, like the lack 
of infrastructure to earn more and make a better living. Social 
causes should not focus only on giving but should also focus 
on finding ways through which families can earn and support 
themselves. Although the TOMS model still predominately re-
volves around the free-good charity approach, it is worth noting 
that in some ways TOMS has responded to such criticisms by 
expanding the scope of its social missions. It diversified its chari-
table missions by including eye care, safe birth and clean water 
missions as a way to engage in socially responsible causes that 
go beyond the free good charities.
Overall, looking at the popularity of the TOMS model from 
the consumer point of view, it can be said to be a marketing suc-
cess. TOMS understands that more consumers want to buy from 
companies that incorporate sustainable and responsible busi-
ness practices that are key elements of its ethos. To communi-
cate its social message and raise awareness of global issues like 
poverty and blindness, the company holds events like One Day 
Without Shoes, Style Your Sole, and World Sight Day.
TOMS understands that consumers like tangibility in their 
charitable actions and good causes. They feel less passionate 
about a company that says it will spend 10 percent of its profits 

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
87 
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 2.19 A corporation that does something to ostensibly curb climate change is not only doing 
the right thing environmentally, but this is also a great marketing tool. In late 2015, 
many of the corporate sponsors of the Paris climate summit came under attack from 
a range of environmental groups for “greenwashing.” The corporations were being 
accused of cynically using the high profile event as a way of making themselves look 
environmentally friendly. The environmental groups claimed that the main sponsors, 
including a bank and two utility companies, were hypocrites, as their operations 
suggest that they are anything but environmentally friendly.123 Research seems to 
suggest that the majority of consumers agree and believe that many corporations 
exaggerate their green credentials. What are the likely consequences for a corporation 
that is exposed as having green-washed their activities?
 2.20 According to a recent survey by the US National Retail Federation, shoplifting 
is the biggest and most rapidly growing cause of inventory shrinkage.  Their 
survey suggested that 38 percent of loses can be attributed to shoplifting. This 
is closely followed by employee or internal theft at 34.5 per cent. Other causes 
included paperwork errors, vendor fraud and errors, and other unknown loses.124 
Inventory shrinkage does not just have implications for the retailer; it also means 
that retailers have to actively monitor their customers and be suspicious of their 
behavior. Shoplifting is a global problem, and few countries have answers to the 
problem. What are the implications of increased shoplifting? How does this affect 
retailers and customers?
notES
 
5. Michael R. Solomon, Conquering Consumerspace: Marketing Strategies for a 
Branded World (New York: AMACOM, 2003).
 
6. Jeffrey Ball, “Religious Leaders to Discuss SUVs with GM, Ford Officials,” 
Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition (November 19, 2002); Danny Hakim, 
“The S.U.V. Is a Beast, and It’s Hairy, Too,” New York Times (February 2, 
2005), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed February 2, 2005; www.nrpe 
.org/issues, accessed May 11, 2009.
 
7. William Leiss, Stephen Kline, and Sut Jhally, Social Communication in 
Advertising: Persons, Products, and Images of Well-Being (Toronto: Methuen, 
1986); Jerry Mander, Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television (New 
York: William Morrow, 1977).
 
8. Packard (1957), quoted in Leiss et al., Social Communication, 11.
 
1. http://www.ecolabelindex.com/, accessed March 4, 2015.
 
2. “Nielsen 50% of Global Consumers Surveyed Willing to Pay More For 
Goods, Services from Socially Responsible Companies, Up From 2011,”  
(August 6, 2013), http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/press-room/2013/niel 
sen-50-percent-of-global-consumers-surveyed-willing-to-pay-more-fo 
.html, accessed March 4, 2015.
 
3. Valerie S. Folkes and Michael A. Kamins, “Effects of Information about 
Firms’ Ethical and Unethical Actions on Consumers’ Attitudes,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 8 (1999): 243–259.
 
4. Jacqueline N. Hood and Jeanne M. Logsdon, “Business Ethics in the NAFTA 
Countries: A Cross-Cultural Comparison,” Journal of Business Research 55 
(2002): 883–890.
on research that will help the poor, but if a company says it will 
give shoes to or will put glasses on a poor child, the consumer 
will feel a direct connection. TOMS’s One for One model has also 
inspired many other companies to adopted such practices as 
part of their corporate social responsibility. Once such example 
is the Canadian company The Mealshare, which also works 
on the “buy one, give one” principle:  the non-profit company 
gives people the choice to feed someone in need every time they 
eat out. Another company that has meaningfully modified the 
TOMS charity model is TheNakedHippie, which works on the 
basis of “buy one, fund one.” This T-shirt brand invests 100% of 
its profits in micro loans that help people in developing countries 
start small business to support themselves and their families. 
DiSCuSSion QuEStionS
 CS 2-1 Discuss TOMS’s ethical foundation and its approach 
to social marketing and corporate social responsibility. 
Would TOMS have succeeded without its One for One 
business model?
 CS 2-2 Given the increasing trend toward ethical consumerism 
or conscientious consumption, discuss how consumers 
evaluate TOMS’s ethical supply chain and charitable 
causes as part of their decision making.
 CS 2-3 Considering the viewpoints of the critics regarding 
TOMS’s charity model, discuss its pros and cons. What 
type of sustainable charitable causes can TOMS pursue 
in the future that will attract more customers to its  
social marketing efforts?
Sources: Toms.com, “TOMS: One for One,” 2015, http://www.toms.com/
corporate-responsibility, accessed November 1, 2015; G. Cheeseman, “The 
Problem with the TOMS Shoes Charity Model,” Triple Pundit: People, Planet, 
Profit, 
2012, 
http://www.triplepundit.com/2012/04/problem-charity-
model-toms-shoes/; Knowledge@Wharton, “The One-for-one Business 
Model: Avoiding Unintended Consequences,” 2015, http://knowledge.
wharton.upenn.edu/article/one-one-business-model-social-impact-avoid-
ing-unintended-consequences/, accessed November 14, 2015; M. Ellen 
Biery, “Mixing Business Strategy, ‘Social Responsibility,’” Forbes.com, 2011, 
accessed November 2, 2015; A. Edwards, “TheNakedHippie—about,” 
Thenakedhippie.com, 2015, http://www.thenakedhippie.com/about.php, 
accessed November 20, 2015.

88 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: 
Association for Consumer Research, 1991): 225–231; Marsha L. Richins, 
“A Multivariate Analysis of Responses to -Dissatisfaction,” Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science 15 (Fall 1987): 24–31; John A. Schibrowsky 
and Richard S. Lapidus, “Gaining a Competitive Advantage by Analyzing 
Aggregate Complaints,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 11 (1994): 15–26; 
Clay M. Voorhees, Michael K. Brady, and David M. Horowitz, “A Voice 
from the Silent Masses: An Exploratory and Comparative Analysis of 
Noncomplainers,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 34 (Fall 
2006): 514–527.
 32. Bruce Cooil, Timothy L. Keiningham, Lerzan Aksoy, and Michael Hsu, 
“A Longitudinal Analysis of Customer Satisfaction and Share of Wallet: 
Investigating the Moderating Effect of Customer Characteristics,” Journal 
of Marketing 71 (January 2007): 67–83. For a study that looks at con-
sumer variables moderating this relationship, cf. Kathleen Seiders, Glenn 
B. Voss, Dhruv Grewal, and Andrea L. Godfrey, “Do Satisfied Customers 
Buy More? Examining Moderating Influences in a Retailing Context,” 
Journal of Marketing 69 (October 2005): 26–43.
 33. “Voice of the Consumer Not Leveraged,” Center for Media Research 
(February 3, 2009), www.mediapost.com, accessed February 3, 2009.
 34. Robbie Brown, Kim Severson, and Barry Meier, “Cruise Line’s Woes Are Far 
From Over as Ship Makes Port,” New York Times (February 14, 2013), http://
www.NewYorkTimes.com/2013/02/15/us/carnival-cruise-line-ship-triumph-
towed-into-port.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0, accessed February 20, 2013.
 35. Robert V. Kozinets and Jay M. Handelman, “Adversaries of Consumption: 
Consumer Movements, Activism, and Ideology,” Journal of Consumer Research 
31 (December 2004): 691–704; cf. also Paul C. Henry, “How Mainstream 
Consumers Think about Consumer Rights and Responsibilities,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 37, no. 4 (2010), 670–687.
 36. Natasha Singer, “A Birth Control Pill That Promised Too Much,” New York 
Times (February 10, 2009), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed February 
10, 2009.
 37. Jack Neff, “NAD to Charmin: No Bare Bear Bottoms: P&G Must Show 
Some Pieces of TP on Bruin’s Bums,” Advertising Age (August 12, 2010), 
http://adage.com/article/adages/advertising-p-g-show-pieces-charmin-
bears/145379/, accessed April 29, 2011.
 38. “Adbusters,” Adbusters Media Foundation, www.adbusters.org, accessed 
March 5, 2015.
 39. “Adbusters.”.
 40. Victoria Uwumarogie, “Robin Thicke Concert Met With Protesters Who 
Still Say ‘Blurred Lines’ Promotes Rape,” Madame Noire (March 5, 2014), 
http://madamenoire.com/406804/robin-thicke-concert/, accessed March 
4, 2015; James C. McKinley, Jr., “Reebok Drops Rick Ross After Protest 
Over Lyrics,” New York Times, (April 11, 2013), http://artsbeat.blogs 
. nytimes.com/2013/04/11/reebok-drops-rick-ross-after-protest-over- 
lyrics/? _r=0, accessed March 4, 2015.
 41. K. Kristofferson, Katherine White, and J. Peloza, (2014). “The nature of 
slacktivism: How the social observability of an initial act of token support 
affects subsequent prosocial action,” Journal of Consumer Research 40,  
no. 6: 1149–1166.
 42. Julie L. Ozanne and Bige Saatcioglu, “Participatory Action Research,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 35 (October 2008): 423–439.
 43. Baker, Stacey Menzel and Courtney Nations Baker (2015), “Keeping the 
Bounce in Our Steps: Community Narratives of Vulnerability and Resiliency 
and their Relationship to Shared Material Resources,” Working Paper.
 44. Baker, Stacey Menzel, and Ronald Paul Hill (2013), “A Community 
Psychology of Object Meanings: Identity Negotiation during Disaster 
Recovery,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 23 (3), 275c287.
 45. Baker, Stacey Menzel (2009), “Vulnerability and Resilience in Natural 
Disasters: A Marketing and Public Policy Perspective,” Journal of Public 
Policy & Marketing, 28 (Spring), 114–123. Baker, Stacey Menzel, Ronald 
Paul Hill, Courtney Nations Baker, and John D. Mittelstaedt, (2015), 
“Improvisational Provisioning in Disaster: The Mechanisms and Meanings 
of Ad Hoc Marketing Exchange Systems in Community,” Journal of 
Macromarketing, in press.
 46. Baker, Stacey Menzel, David M. Hunt, and Terri L. Rittenburg (2007), 
“Consumer Vulnerability as a Shared Experience: Tornado Recovery Process 
in Wright Wyoming,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 26 (Spring), 6–19.
 47. DiCaprio, Leonardo and Craig Piligian (2008), Greensburg: A Story of 
Community Rebuilding, [documentary series], United States: Discovery 
Communications, LLC.
 48. Shelia Shayon, “Cause Marketing Does Affect Brand Purchase,” Broad 
Channel, August 26, 2011, http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/ 
2011/08/26/Cause-Marketing-Does-Affect-Brand-Purchase.aspx, accessed  
February 3, 2015.
 49. For consumer research and discussions related to public policy issues, see 
Paul N. Bloom and Stephen A. Greyser, “The Maturing of Consumerism,” 
Harvard Business Review (November–December 1981): 130–139; George S. 
Day, “Assessing the Effect of Information Disclosure Requirements,” Journal 
of Marketing (April 1976): 42–52; Dennis E. Garrett, “The Effectiveness 
 
9. Raymond Williams, Problems in Materialism and Culture: Selected Essays 
(London: Verso, 1980).
 10. Leiss et al., Social Communication.
 11. George Stigler, “The Economics of Information,” Journal of Political- 
Economy (1961): 69.
 12. Jane L. Levere, “Westin Creates Six Pillars of Well-Being in a Program for 
Guests and Employees,” New York Times (March 19, 2014), http://www 
.NewYorkTimes.com/2014/03/20/business/media/westin-creates- 
six-pillars-of-well-being-in-a-program-for-guests-and-employees.html, ac-
cessed February 22, 2015.
 13. Leiss et al., Social Communication, 11.
 14. Russell W. Belk, “Possessions and the Extended Self,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 15 (September 1988): 139–168; Melanie Wallendorf and Eric 
J. Arnould, “‘My Favorite Things’: A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Object- 
Attachment, Possessiveness, and Social Linkage,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 14 (March 1988): 531–547.
 15. L. J. Shrum, Jaehoon Lee, James E. Burroughs, and Aric Rindfleisch, “On-
line Process Model of Second-Order Cultivation Effects: How Television 
Cultivates Materialism and Its Consequences of Life Satisfaction,” Human 
Communication Research 37 (January 2011): 34–57; L. J. Shrum, James 
E. Burroughs, and Aric Rindfleisch, “Television’s Cultivation of Material 
Values,” Journal of Consumer Research 32, no. 3 (2005): 473–479.
 16. Susan Schultz Kleine and Stacy Menzel Baker, “An Integrative Review of 
Material Possession Attachment,” Academy of Marketing Science Review,  
no. 1 (2004).
 17. Marsha L. Richins, “Special Possessions and the Expression of Material 
Values,” Journal of Consumer Research 21 (December 1994): 522–533.
 18. Richins, “Special Possessions.”
 19. Aric Rindfleisch, James E. Burroughs, and Nancy Wong, “The Safety 
of Objects: Materialism, Existential Insecurity, and Brand Connection,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 36 (June 2009): 1–16.
 20. John L. Lastovicka and Nancy J. Sirianni, “Truly, Madly, Deeply: Consumers 
in the Throes of Material Possession Love,” Journal of Consumer Research 
Vol. 38, No. 2 (August 2011): 323-342.
 21. Marsha L. Richins, “When Wanting Is Better than Having: Materialism, 
Transformation Expectations, and Product-Evoked Emotions in the Purchase 
Process,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (June 2013): 1–18.
 22. “Luxury Goods Market Predicted to Grow Six to Seven Percent in 2012, 
Defying Global Turmoil and Spreading to New Markets, According to 
Spring Update of Bain & Company’s Luxury Goods Worldwide Market 
Study,” Bain & Company, May 15, 2012, http://www.bain.com/about/
press/press-releases/luxury-goods-market-predicted-to-grow-six-to-seven-
percent-in-2012.aspx, accessed March 1, 2013.
 23. Quoted in Michael Pavone, “How Whole Foods Became the Luxury Brand  
of Millennials,” Fastcoexist.com, February 23, 2012, http://www. fastcoexist 
.com/1679351/how-whole-foods-became-the-luxury-brand-of–millennials,  
accessed March 1, 2013.
 24. Ariel Sabar, “In Case of Missing Trousers, Aggrieved Party Loses Again,” 
New York Times (June 26, 2007), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed June 
26, 2007.
 25. Mary C. Gilly and Betsy D. Gelb, “Post-Purchase Consumer Processes and the 
Complaining Consumer,” Journal of Consumer Research 9 (December 1982): 
323–328; Diane Halstead and Cornelia Droge, “Consumer Atti tudes Toward 
Complaining and the Prediction of Multiple Complaint Responses,” in Rebecca 
H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 18 
(Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1991): 210–216; Jagdip 
Singh, “Consumer Complaint Intentions and Behavior: Definitional and 
Taxonomical Issues,” Journal of Marketing 52 (January 1988): 93–107.
 26. Ryan Parker, “Covergirl Issues Statement After Protesters Alter NFL ‘Game 
Face’ Ads, LA Times (September 16, 2014), http://www.latimes.com/fashion/ 
alltherage/la-ar-cover-girl-nfl-ads-protest-the-league-20140915-htmlstory 
.html, accessed March 4, 2015.
 27. Ahir Gopaldas, “Marketplace Sentiments,” Journal of Consumer Research 
41, no. 4 (2014): 995–1014. doi: 10.1086/678034.
 28. Emily Steel, “How to Handle ‘IHateYourCompany.com’: Some Firms Buy Up  
Negative Domain Names to Avert ‘Gripe Sites,’” Wall Street Journal (September  
5, 2008), http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB122057760688302147, 
accessed November 22, 2013. http://webreprints.djreprints.com/25744 
30594663.html, accessed September 5, 2008.
 29. Gary L. Clark, Peter F. Kaminski, and David R. Rink, “Consumer 
Complaints: Advice on How Companies Should Respond Based on an 
Empirical Study,” Journal of Services Marketing 6 (Winter 1992): 41–50.
 30. Alan Andreasen and Arthur Best, “Consumers Complain—Does Business 
Respond?” Harvard Business Review 55 (July–August 1977): 93–101.
 31. Tibbett L. Speer, “They Complain Because They Care,” American Demo-
graphics (May 1996): 13–14; cf. also Yany Grégoire, Thomas M. Tripp, and 
Renaud Legoux, “When Customer Love Turns into Lasting Hate: The Effects 
of Relationship Strength and Time on Customer Revenge and Avoidance,” 
Journal of Marketing 73 (November 2009): 18–32; Ingrid Martin, “Expert-
Novice Differences in Complaint Scripts,” in Rebecca H.  Holman and 

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
89 
.com/2012/03/26/uniforms-with-microchip/?utm_medium=email&utm_
source=newsletter, accessed January 4, 2013; Will Oremus, “Texas School 
District Drops RFID Chips, Will Track Kids With Surveillance Cameras 
Instead,” Future & Tense (July 17, 2013), http://www.slate.com/blogs/
future_tense/2013/07/17/texas_northside_school_district_drops_rfid_
tracking_privacy_not_the_main.html, accessed March 5, 2015.
 61. “Nearly 1 in 5 People Have a Disability in the U.S., Census Bureau Reports,” 
U.S. Census Bureau (July 25, 2012), https://www.census.gov/newsroom/
releases/archives/miscellaneous/cb12-134.html, accessed March 5, 2015; 
Susannah Fox, “Americans Living with Disability and Their Technology 
Profile,” PewInternet (January 21, 2011), http://pewinternet.org/Reports/ 
2011/Disability.aspx, accessed January 2, 2013; Terry L. Childers and Carol 
Kaufman-Scarborough, “Expanding Opportunities for Online Shoppers with 
Disabilities,” Journal of Business Research 62 (2009), 572–578.
 62. Michael R. Solomon, Kel Smith, Nadine Vogel, and Natalie T. Wood, 
“Virtual Freedom for People with Disabilities,” Society for Disability Studies, 
Philadelphia (June 2010).
 63. Zoe Fox, “4 Ways iPads Are Changing the Lives of People with Disabilities,” 
Mashable (July 25, 2011), http://mashable.com/2011/07/25/ipads-dis 
abilities/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaig
n=Feed%3A+Mashable+%28Mashable%29, accessed January 2, 2013.
 64. http://www.looktel.com/moneyreader, accessed March 5, 2015; Nick 
Bilton,” An iPhone App Helps the Blind Identify Currency,” New York Times 
(March 9, 2011), http://bits.blogs.NewYorkTimes.com/2011/03/09/an- 
iphone-app-helps-the-blind-identify-currency/?scp=1&sq=app%20
helps%20the%20blind&st=cse, accessed January 2, 2013.
 65. Quoted in Karen Barrow, “Difference Is the Norm on These Dating Sites,” 
New York Times (December 27, 2010), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/ 
2010/12/28/health/28dating.html?emc=eta1, accessed January 2, 2013.; 
 http://www.dating4disabled.com/, accessed March 5, 2015; http://www 
.nolongerlonely.com/, accessed March 5, 2015.
 66. “Healthy Food Financing Initiative,” Office of Community Services, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services (January 18, 2011), http://
www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ocs/resource/healthy-food-financing– 
initiative-0, accessed January 4, 2013.
 67. National Association for Media Literacy Education, http://namle.net/ 
publications/media-literacy-definitions/, accessed March 1, 2013.
 68. Robert Roy Britt, “14 Percent of U.S. Adults Can’t Read,” Live Science  
(January 10, 2009),  http://www.livescience.com/3211-14-percent-adults- 
read.html, accessed March 1, 2013.
 69. Natalie Ross Adkins and Julie L. Ozanne, “The Low Literate Consumer,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 32, no. 1 (June 2005): 93–105.
 70. Natalie Ross Adkins and Julie L. Ozanne, “The Low Literate Consumer,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 32, no. 1 (2005): 93; Madhubalan Viswanathan, 
José Antonio Rosa, and James Edwin Harris, “Decision-Making and Coping 
of Functionally Illiterate Consumers and Some Implications for Marketing 
Management,” Journal of Marketing 69, no. 1 (2005): 15.
 71. Bruce Horovitz, “Axe Showerpool Promo Raises Eyebrows,” USA Today 
(September 17, 2012), http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/business/
story/2012/09/17/axe-showerpool-promo-raises–eyebrows/57797640/1, 
accessed March 1, 2013.
 72. “5 Lessons from the Companies Making Sustainability More Profitable Than 
Ever,” Fast Company Co.Exist (February 5, 2013), http://www.fastcoexist 
.com/1681339/5-lessons-from-the-companies-making-sustainability- 
more-profitable-than-ever, accessed March 1, 2013.
 73. Quoted in “What Is Sustainability?” United States Environmental 
Protection Agency,” http://www.epa.gov/sustainability/basicinfo.htm, ac-
cessed March 1, 2013.
 74. Emily Burg, “Whole Foods Is Consumers’ Favorite Green Brand,” Marketing 
Daily, www.mediapost.com, accessed May 10, 2007.
 75. K. Baca-Motes, A. Brown, A. Gneezy, E. A. Keenan, and L. D. Nelson, 
“Commitment and Behavior Change: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 39, no. 5: 1070–1084
 76. Jack Neff, “As More Marketers Go Green, Fewer Consumers Willing to Pay for 
It,” Advertising Age (September 24, 2012), http://adage.com/article/news/
marketers-green-fewer-consumers-pay/237377/, accessed January 4, 2013.
 77. Remi Trudel and June Cotte, “Does It Pay to Be Good?” MIT Sloan 
Management Review 61 (Winter 2009): 61–68.
 78. Stephanie Clifford and Andrew Martin, “As Consumers Cut Spending, ‘Green’  
Products Lose Allure,” New York Times (April 21, 2011), http://www 
.NewYorkTimes.com/2011/04/22/business/energy-environment/ 
22green.html?hp&_r=0, accessed March 1, 2013.
 79. Wendy Koch, “‘Green’ Product Claims Are Often Misleading,” USA Today  
(October 26, 2010),   http://content.usatoday.com/communities/greenhouse/ 
post/2010/10/green-product-claims/1?csp=34money&utm_source= 
feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+Usatoday-
comMoney-TopStories+%28Money+-+Top+Stories%29, accessed April 10,  
2011.
 80. Mark Dolliver, “Thumbs Down on Corporate Green Efforts,” Adweek (August  
31, 2010),   http://www.adweek.com/aw/content_display/news/client/e3i842 
of Marketing Policy Boycotts: Environmental Opposition to Marketing,” 
Journal of Marketing 51 (January 1987): 44–53; Michael Houston and 
Michael Rothschild, “Policy-Related Experiments on Information Provision: 
A Normative Model and Explication,” Journal of Marketing Research 17 
(November 1980): 432–449; Jacob Jacoby, Wayne D. Hoyer, and David A. 
Sheluga, Misperception of Televised Communications (New York: American 
Association of Advertising Agencies, 1980); Gene R. Laczniak and Patrick E. 
Murphy, Marketing Ethics: Guidelines for Managers (Lexington, MA: Lexington 
Books, 1985): 117–123; Lynn Phillips and Bobby Calder, “Evaluating 
Consumer Protection Laws: Promising Methods,” Journal of Consumer 
Affairs 14 (Summer 1980): 9–36; Donald P. Robin and Eric Reidenbach, 
“Social Responsibility, Ethics, and Marketing Strategy: Closing the Gap 
Between Concept and Application,” Journal of Marketing 51 (January 1987): 
44–58; Howard Schutz and Marianne Casey, “Consumer Perceptions of 
Advertising as Misleading,” Journal of Consumer Affairs 15 (Winter 1981): 
340–357; Darlene Brannigan Smith and Paul N. Bloom, “Is Consumerism 
Dead or Alive? Some New Evidence,” in Thomas C. Kinnear, ed., Advances in 
Consumer Research 11 (1984): 369–373.
 50. Cf. Philip Kotler and Alan R. Andreasen, Strategic Marketing for Nonprofit 
Organizations, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991); Jeff 
B. Murray and Julie L. Ozanne, “The Critical Imagination: Emancipatory 
Interests in Consumer Research,” Journal of Consumer Research 18 (September 
1991): 192–244; William D. Wells, “Discovery-Oriented Consumer Re-
search,” Journal of Consumer Research 19 (March 1993): 489–504.
 51. Quoted in Chuck Raasch, “‘Conscientious Consumption’ Survives Recession,” 
USA Today (November 29, 2012), http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/
nation/2012/11/28/giving-back-post-great-recession/1634703/, accessed  
January 2, 2013; http://www.causemarketingforum.com/site/c.bkLUKcOTL 
kK4E/b.6443937/k.41E3/Background_and_Basics.htm, accessed February 
16, 2013; Adam Kleinberg, “Brands from KFC to Gucci are Jumping on the 
Cause Marketing Bandwagon,” Advertising Age (June 6, 2014), http://adage 
.com/article/agency-viewpoint/marketing-hot-pay-good/293537/, accessed 
March 4, 2015.
 52. Chloe Albanesius, “Social Security Numbers Revealed … With Facial-
Recognition Software?” PC (August 1, 2011), http://www.pcmag.com/arti 
cle2/0,2817,2389540,00.asp, accessed March 5, 2015.
 53. FACT SHEET: Safeguarding American Consumers & Families, Office of 
the Press Secretary, The White House (January 12, 2015), http://www 
.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/12/fact-sheet-safeguarding-
american-consumers-families, accessed March 5, 2015; Natasha Singer, 
“Legislators Introduce Student Digital Privacy Bill,” New York Times, 
April 29, 2015, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/04/29/legislators- 
introduce-student-digital-privacy-bill/?_r=0, accessed July 13, 2015;
Somini Sengupta, “Letting Down Our Guard With Web Privacy,” New York 
Times, March 30, 2013, http://www.New York Times.com/2013/03/31/
technology/web-privacy-and-how-consumers-let-down-their-guard.
html?pagewanted=1&ref=us, accessed February 23, 2015.
 54. Natasha Singer, “Face Recognition Makes the Leap from Sci-Fi,” New 
York Times (November 12, 2011), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2011/ 
11/13/business/face-recognition-moves-from-sci-fi-to-social-media 
.html?_r=0, accessed February 20, 2015.
 55. Karl Greenberg, “Fewer People Find Social Ads Annoying,” Marketing 
Daily (December 10, 2012), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/ 
article/188850/fewer-people-find-social-ads-annoying.html?edition=543
51#axzz2Ekc0H7Ua, accessed January 4, 2013.
 56. Quoted in Natasha Singer, “YOU FOR SALE: Your Online Attention, 
Bought in an Instant,” New York Times (November 17, 2012), http://www 
.NewYorkTimes.com/2012/11/18/technology/your-online-attention-bought-
in-an-instant-by-advertisers.html?pagewanted=1, accessed January 4, 2013.
 57. Singer, “YOU FOR SALE: Your Online Attention, Bought in an Instant,” 
New York Times (November 17, 2012).
 58. “Identity Theft Action Plan, Pennsylvania Commission on Crime and 
Delinquency,” http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/community/ 
what_is_id_theft_/12993/identity_theft_statistics/587724, accessed Feb-
ruary 16, 2013; “Identity Theft,” Federal Trade Commission, http://www. 
consumer.ftc.gov/features/feature-0014-identity-theft, accessed February 
16, 2013; “Identity Theft Victim Statistics,” http://www.identitytheft.info/ 
victims.aspx, accessed February 16, 2013; “Hacker ‘Botnet’ Hijacked 
Online Searches,” Phys.org (February 7, 2013), http://phys.org/news/ 
2013-02-hacker-botnet-hijacked-online.html, accessed February 16, 
2013; Nicole Perlroth, “Hackers in China Attacked the Times for Last 4 
Months,” New York Times (January 30, 2013), http://www.NewYorkTimes 
.com/2013/01/31/technology/chinese-hackers-infiltrate-new-york-
times-computers.html?pagewanted=all, accessed February 16, 2013.
 59. “Save Money on Car Insurance Through GPS Tracking, LiveView GPS” 
(February 9, 2012), http://www.liveviewgps.com/blog/save-money-on-car- 
insurance-through-gps-tracking/, accessed February 16, 2013; http://www 
.motosafety.com/, accessed February 16, 2013.
 60. Mariella Moon, “Uniforms with Microchip Notify Parents If Their 
Children Skip School,” Mashable (March 26, 2012), http://mashable 

90 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
60d4301c885f91b2cd8a712f323cf, accessed April 10, 2011; Sarah Mah-
oney, “Americans Hate Faux Green Marketers,” Marketing Daily (March 25, 
2011), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa=Articles.showArticle 
&art_aid=147415&nid=125122, accessed April 10, 2011.
 81. www.lohas.com/about.htm, accessed March 2, 2013.
 82. Aditi Mathur, “Black Friday Turns Deadly; Hundreds Left Unconscious, Injured 
and Trampled,” International Business Times (November 29 2011), http://www 
.ibtimes.com/black-friday-turns-deadly-hundreds-left–unconscious-injured-
trampled-graphic-videos-375868, accessed March 2, 2013. http://www 
.ibtimes.com/black-friday-turns-deadly-hundreds-left-unconscious-injured-
trampled-graphic-videos-375868, accessed November 3, 2013; Jack Neff, 
“Lawsuit: Marketing Blamed in Wal-Mart Trampling Death,” Advertising Age 
(December 4, 2008), www.adage.com, accessed December 4, 2008; www 
.Freerepublic.Com/Focus/F-News/2142920/Posts, accessed December 4, 2008.
 83. Kenneth E. Nusbaum, James C. Wright, and Michael R. Solomon, “Attitudes 
of Food Animal Veterinarians to Continuing Education in Agriterrorism,” 
paper presented at the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Animal Disease Research 
Workers in Southern States, University of Florida (February 2001).
 84. Christopher Harress, “Obama Says Cyberterrorism Is Country’s Biggest 
Threat, U.S. Government Assembles ‘Cyber Warriors,’” International Business 
Times (February 18, 2014), http://www.ibtimes.com/obama-says-cyber 
terrorism-countrys-biggest-threat-us-government-assembles-cyber-war 
riors-1556337, accessed March 5, 2015; Sean Gallagher, “Security Pros 
Predict “Major” Cyber Terror Attack This Year,” Ars Technica (January 4, 
2013), http://arstechnica.com/-security/2013/01/security-pros-predict- 
major-cyberterror-attack-this-year/, accessed April 3, 2013.
 85. Betty Mohr, “The Pepsi Challenge: Managing a Crisis,” Prepared Foods 
(March 1994): 13.
 86. “Boston Officials Livid Over Ad Stunt,” New York Times (February 1, 2007), 
www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed February 1, 2007.
 87. http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/02/12/coca-cola-soda-
death/1912491/?morestories=obnetwork, accessed January 29, 2015.
 88. http://www.experienceproject.com/groups/Am-Addicted-To-
Chapstick/34083, accessed May 29, 2011.
 89. Sam Laird, “Dad Hires Hit Men to Kill Son—in Video Games,” Mashable, 
January 9, 2013, http://mashable.com/2013/01/09/dad-son-video-games/?  
WT.mc_id=en_my_stories&utm_campaign=My%2BStories&utm_med 
ium=email&utm_source=newsletter?WT.mc_id=en_my_stories&utm_ 
campaign=My%2BStories&utm_medium=email&utm_source=newsletter,  
accessed February 22, 2015.
 90. Erik Sass, “Woman Kills Baby for Interrupting FarmVille,” Social Media 
& Marketing Daily (October 28, 2010), http://www.mediapost.com/publi 
cations/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=138502&nid=120184, accessed  
April 30, 2011.
 91. Bob Al-Greene, “Late-Night Gadget Use Damages Your Sleep Cycle,” Mashable  
(November 19, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/11/19/-gadgets-sleep/,  
accessed January 4, 2013.
 92. Emily Price, “Cellphone Addiction May Be Contagious, Study Finds,” Mashable 
(October 3, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/12/03/cell-phone-addiction-
contgious/? utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign= 
Feed%3A+Mashable+%28Mashable%29, accessed February 18, 2015.
 93. Martin Fackler, “In Korea, A Boot Camp Cure for Web Obsession,” New York 
Times (November 18, 2007), www.NewYorkTimes.com/2007/11/18/
Technology/18rehab.html, accessed November 19, 2007.
 94. Chris Pollard, “A Cruel World,” The Sun (U.K.) (September 13, 2010),  
http://www.diigo.com/cached?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.thesun.co 
.uk%2Fsol%2Fhomepage%2Fnews%2F3135278%2FMum-addicted-to- 
Small-World-neglected-kids-and-let-dogs-starve-to-death.html, accessed Feb-
ruary 23, 2011.
 95. Quoted in http://cyberbullying.us/, accessed March 2, 2013.
 96. Quoted in Jan Hoffman, “Online Bullies Pull Schools Into the Fray,” 
New York Times (June 27, 2010), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2010/ 
06/28/style/28bully.html?pagewanted=1&_r=0&emc=eta1, accessed Jan-
uary 4, 2013.
 97. http://www.stopbullying.gov/cyberbullying/what-is-it/, accessed March 5, 
2015.
 98. Jonathan Mahler, “Who Spewed That Abuse? Anonymous Yik Yak App 
Isn’t Telling,” New York Times (March 8, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2015/03/09/technology/popular-yik-yak-app-confers-anonymity-and-
delivers-abuse.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-
iphone&_r=0, accessed March 10, 2015.
 99. Matt Petronzio, “Do You Suffer from These 4 Tech Afflictions?” Mashable 
(June 1, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/06/01/tech-addiction/?WT 
.mc_id=en_top_stories&utm_campaign=Top%2BStories&utm_
medium=email&utm_source=newsletter, accessed January 4, 2013.
 100. Derek N. Hassay and Malcolm C. Smith, “Compulsive Buying: An 
Examination of the Consumption Motive,” Psychology & Marketing 13 
(December 1996): 741–752.
 101. Nancy M. Ridgway, Monika Kukar-Kinney, and Kent B. Monroe, “An 
Expanded Conceptualization and a New Measure of Compulsive Buying,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 35, no. 4 (2008): 622–639; Thomas 
C. O’Guinn and Ronald J. Faber, “Compulsive Buying: A Phenomenological 
Explanation,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 (September 1989): 154.
 102. Curtis L. Taylor, “Guys Who Buy, Buy, Buy,” Newsday (October 6, 2006): Jim 
Thornton, “Buy Now, Pay Later,” Men’s Health (December, 2004): 109–112.
 103. Georgia Witkin, “The Shopping Fix,” Health (May 1988): 73; see also Arch 
G. Woodside and Randolph J. Trappey III, “Compulsive Consumption of 
a Consumer Service: An Exploratory Study of Chronic Horse Race Track 
Gambling Behavior,” working paper #90-MKTG-04, A. B. Freeman School 
of Business, Tulane University (1990); Rajan Nataraajan and Brent G. 
Goff, “Manifestations of Compulsiveness in the Consumer-Marketplace 
Domain,” Psychology & Marketing 9 (January 1992): 31–44; Joann Ellison 
Rodgers, “Addiction: A Whole New View,” Psychology Today (September–
October 1994): 32.
 104. Deena Beasley and Nichola Groom, “States Race to Legalize Online Gambling,” 
The Huffington Post (February 28, 2013), http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ 
2013/03/01/online-gaming-legalized-in-new-jersey_n_2784866.html, 
accessed March 5, 2015.
 105. Spencer E. Ante and Alexandra Berzon, “Gambling Industry Bets Virtual 
Money Turns Real,” Wall Street Journal (December 20, 2012), http://-
professional.wsj.com/article/SB100014241278873247313045781917
41064162164.html, accessed January 4, 2013.
 106. Helen Reynolds, The Economics of Prostitution (Springfield, IL: Thomas, 1986).
 107. Patrick Di Justo, “How to Sell Your Body for $46 Million,” Wired (August 
2003): 47.
 108. Amy Harmon, “Illegal Kidney Auction Pops Up on eBay’s Site,” New York 
Times (September 3, 1999), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed September 
3, 1999.
 109. Scott Carney, “Inside the Business of Selling Human Body Parts,” Wired 
(January 31, 2011), http://www.wired.com/magazine/2011/01/ff_-red 
markets/2, accessed March 1, 2013.
 110. Di Justo, “How to Sell Your Body for $46 Million.”
 111. Reuters, “German Parents Offer Baby on eBay,” New York Times (May 25, 
2008), www.NewYorkTimes.com/2008/05/25/world/europe/25ebayby 
.html?_r=1&scp=1&sq=baby …, accessed May 25, 2008.
 112. “Advertisers Face Up to the New Morality: Making the Pitch,” Bloomberg 
(July 8, 1997).
 113. “Shoplifting: Bess Myerson’s Arrest Highlights a Multibillion-Dollar Prob-
lem That Many Stores Won’t Talk About,” Life (August 1988): 32.
 114. “New Survey Shows Shoplifting Is a Year-Round Problem,” Business Wire 
(April 12, 1998).
 115. “Customer Not King, But Thief,” Marketing News (December 9, 2002): 4.
 116. Catherine A. Cole, “Deterrence and Consumer Fraud,” Journal of Retailing 
65 (Spring 1989): 107–120; Stephen J. Grove, Scott J. Vitell, and David 
Strutton, “Non-Normative Consumer Behavior and the Techniques of 
Neutralization,” in Terry Childers et al., eds., Marketing Theory and Practice, 
1989 AMA Winter Educators’ Conference (Chicago: American Marketing 
Association, 1989): 131–135.
 117. Mark Curnutte, “The Scope of the Shoplifting Problems,” Gannett News 
Service (November 29, 1997).
 118. Anthony D. Cox, Dena Cox, Ronald D. Anderson, and George P. Moschis, “Social 
Influences on Adolescent Shoplifting—Theory, Evidence, and Implications for 
the Retail Industry,” Journal of Retailing 69 (Summer 1993): 234–246.
 119. Stephanie Kang, “New Return Policy: Retailers Say ‘No’ to Serial Exchang-
ers,” Wall Street Journal (November 29, 2004): B1.
 120. Leo Burnett, “Behind New System to Blunt Counterfeiting in China ‘1-
Tag’ Lets Consumers Authenticate Products and Avoid Potentially 
Hazardous Ripoffs,” AdAge Global (January 31, 2011), http://adage.com/
article/global-news/leo-burnett-creates-system-stop-counterfeiting-
china/148571/, accessed January 2, 2013.
 121. Viktoria de Chevron Villette, “Cause Marketing: Socially Relevant 
and Untapped,” Digital Marketing Magazine, February 4, 2016, http://
digitalmarketingmagazine.co.uk/digital-marketing-features/cause- 
marketing-socially-relevant-and-untapped/3141.
 122. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, “UK leads the 
way with £15.8 million seizure in global operation targeting counter-
feit and unlicensed medicines and devices,” GOV.UK, https://www.gov 
.uk/government/news/uk-leads-the-way-with-158-million-seizure-in-
global-operation-targeting-counterfeit-and-unlicensed-medicines-and-
devices.
 123. COP21: corporate sponsors accused of ‘green-washing’(http://www.ft.com/ 
cms/s/0/43986518-9426-11e5-b190-291e94b77c8f.html#axzz3uxPqpViJ); 
http://www.greenwashingindex.com/about-greenwashing;  
http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/13/greenwashing- 
sticky-business-naomi-klein.
 124. Kathy Grannis Allen, “Retailers Estimate Shoplifting, Incidents of Fraud 
Cost $44 Billion in 2014,” National Retail Federation, June 23, 2015, https://
nrf.com/media/press-releases/retailers-estimate-shoplifting-incidents-of-
fraud-cost-44-billion-2014; Centre for Retail Research, “Retail Crime in 
the UK,” http://www.retailresearch.org/ukretailcrime.php; Centre for Retail 
Research, “Retail Crime in the UK,” http://www.designagainstcrime.com/
projects/anti-shoplifting/

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
91 
SECTION 1  ANALyzING THE ATHLETIC SHOE 
 
 MARKET FOR SHOE FIEND 
 
BaCKgRounD
You are the marketing analyst for SHOE FIEND, an online ath-
letic shoe store. To date, your company has done little formal 
marketing research about athletic shoe buyers in the United 
States. Using the 2014 Spring GfK MRI data, you recently ran 
a series of reports about the shoe-buying habits of several 
U.S. consumer segments. At this time, you have decided to 
focus on the five best-selling shoe brands on your Web site: 
Adidas, Asics, Nike, New Balance, and Reebok. After looking 
through the GfK MRI data report options, you decided that 
the most fitting question for your purposes was “Did you buy 
[SHOE BRAND] in the last 12 months?”
The report is designed to compare the shoe-buying 
habits of consumers across several different consumer 
characteristics: gender, age, and Internet use. In addition, 
you also created three subsegment schemes that combined 
two different segmentation variables: Gender and Age (men 
18–34 and women 18–34) and Internet Use and Age (heavy 
Internet users 18–34 years old).
youR goal
First, review the data from the GfK MRI. You will use this 
information to make some inferences about the brand pref-
erences of the different segments. You will combine the 
information in the GfK MRI with some financial assumptions 
provided by SHOE FIEND to make some recommendations 
for future marketing tactics.
tHE Data
The data in the report can be interpreted in the following 
manner:
●
●Market Segment Size (000s): The total number of U.S. 
adults that meet the criteria for the segment (regardless 
of whether they did or did not buy a particular shoe brand)
●
●Market Segment Size (%): The same as Market  
Segment Size (000s), but presented as a percentage  
of all U.S. Adults.
●
●Estimated Count (000s): The estimated number of U.S. 
adults within the segment who bought that particular 
pair of shoes at least once in the last 12 months.
●
●Percentage of Total: Among all U.S. adults who bought 
a particular brand of shoes in the last 12months, 
the percentage of them who belong to that particular 
segment.
●
●Percentage within market segment who bought in  
last year: The percentage of people within a particular 
 segment who bought the shoe brand within the last  
12 months
●
●Index: The likelihood of a member of the segment  
to have bought the particular shoe brand in the last  
12 months, indexed to the likelihood of an average U.S. 
adult (the U.S. average equals an index value of 100). 
Thus, an index value of 120 can be interpreted as mem-
bers of that segment being 20 percent more likely than 
the national average to have bought a particular brand  
of shoes in the last 12 months.
 
 
 
total
 
 
Men
 
 
Women
 
adults  
18–34
 
Men  
18–34
 
Women  
18–34
 
internet 1  
(heavy Users)
adults 18–34  
and heavy  
internet
Market Segment Size (000s)
237,115
114,159
122,916
71,961
35,867
36,037
47,361
21,985
Market Segment Size (%)
100
48.1
51.8
30.3
15.1
15.2
9.3
ADIDAS
Estimated Count (000s)
17,096
9,635
7,461
6,973
4,053
2,919
4,163
2,392
% of Total
100
56.36
43.64
23.71
17.08
24.35
13.99
% within Mkt. Seg. who bought last year
7.21
8.44
 6.07
9.69
11.3
8.1
8.79
10.88
Index
100
117
84
134
157
112
122
ASICS
Estimated Count (000s)
11,186
4,851
6,335
2,948
1,321
1,627
2,453
899
% of Total
100
43.37
56.63
26.36
11.81
14.55
21.93
8.04
% within Mkt. Seg. who bought last year
4.72
4.25
4.1
3.68
4.51
5.18
4.09
Index
100
90
109
87
78
96
110
87
(Continued )

92 
SeCtiOn 1   Foundations of Consumer Behavior
 
 
 
total
 
 
Men
 
 
Women
 
adults  
18–34
 
Men  
18–34
 
Women  
18–34
 
internet 1  
(heavy Users)
adults 18–34  
and heavy  
internet
NIKE
Estimated Count (000s)
49,453
24,685
24,768
20,808
9,966
12,233
6,818
% of Total
100
49.92
50.08
42.08
21.92
20.15
24.74
13.79
% within Mkt. Seg. who bought last year
20.87
21.63
20.16
28.93
30.23
27.64
25.82
31
Index
100
104
97
139
145
132
124
149
NEW BALANCE
Estimated Count (000s)
25,338
12,488
12,850
4,931
2,681
2,250
4,816
1,638
% of Total
100
49.29
50.71
19.46
10.58
8.88
19.01
6.46
% within Mkt. Seg. who bought last year
10.69
10.94
10.46
6.86
7.47
6.24
10.17
7.45
Index
100
102
98
64
70
58
95
70
REEBOK
Estimated Count (000s)
9,919
5,234
4,685
2,891
1,681
1,209
2,149
952
% of Total
100
52.77
47.23
29.14
16.95
12.19
21.66
9.6
% within Mkt. Seg. who bought last year
4.18
4.59
3.81
4.02
4.69
3.35
4.54
4.33
Index
100
110
91
96
112
80
108
103
Source: Spring 2014 GfK MRI
task 1: Correct the table:
Unfortunately, it appears that someone accidentally left some of the calculated values blank in the table. Luckily, you know 
you can use the other available information in the table to calculate the missing values.
●
●Q1: Calculate the market segment size (in percentage) for heavy Internet users
  
CALCULATION =
●
●Q2: Calculate the percentage of total market for adults 18–34 who bought Adidas in the last 12 months.
  
CALCULATION =  
●
●Q3: Calculate the index for adults 18–34 who are heavy Internet users who bought Adidas in the last 12 months.
  
CALCULATION =●100 +  
× 100
●
●Q4: For the Women column, calculate the percentage within market segment who bought Asics in the last 12 months.
  
CALCULATION = 
●
●Q5: For Men 18–34, calculate the Estimated Count (000s) who bought Nike shoes in the last 12 months.
  
CALCULATION = 
 
 
[Market Segment Size (000s) in the Internet 1 (Heavy Users) Column] 
 
 
[Market Segment Size (000s) in the Total Column]
 
 
 
([percentage within market segment who bought last year in adults 18–34  
heavy Internet] – [percentage within market segment who bought last year in total])
 
 
 
[percentage within market segment who bought last year in total]
  [Estimated Count (000s in Adults 18–34] 
     [Estimated Count (000s in Total)]
[Estimated Count (000s)]
[Market Segment Size (000s)]
[Market Segment Size (000s) for Men 18–34] × [Percentage within market segment who bought 
last year for Men 18–34]

 
Chapter 2   Consumer and Social Well-Being 
93 
task 2: Making inferences about athletic  
Shoe Buyers
1 Generally speaking, does it appear that heavy Internet 
users are more or less likely than the average U.S.  
adult to have bought these shoe brands in the last  
12 months?
2 If you were going to run a series of advertisements 
for SHOE FIEND targeting younger adult women, which 
brand would you recommend to feature on the advertise-
ment? Which shoe brand would you be disinclined  
to feature? Why?
3 Lately, management for SHOE FIEND has worried that its 
positioning has completely overlooked serving the wants 
of “older” consumers (older than 45 years old). If SHOE 
FIEND decides to market toward older U.S. adults, which 
of the brands should SHOE FIEND be more conscientious 
about featuring?
task 3: estimating the value of the Shoe 
Buying Segments
Using some assumptions provided by the CFO, you are 
tasked with estimating the annual sales (in dollars) for each 
shoe buying segment. To do so, you will need to make the 
following assumptions:
●
●Average number of pairs bought within 12 months
●
●Average price of shoe brand
These numbers are estimates that came from the internal 
efforts of your financial analyst team.
if someone buys at least one pair of a shoe 
brand in the last 12 months, how many total 
pairs of that brand do they buy, on average?
average 
price per 
shoe pair
Adidas
2.0
$70
Asics
2.0
$70
Nike
1.5
$75
New Balance
2.0
$70
Reebok
1.5
$65
1  What are the total estimated sales of these five shoe 
brands for heavy Internet users in the last 12 months?
2  For a random U.S. adult woman, how much would we es-
timate she spent on Asics shoes in the last 12 months?
DiSCuSSion anD DEBatE
 
1. Based solely on the information that you analyzed, 
do you think it makes more sense for SHOE FIEND 
to: treat the whole market as homogeneous (no 
segmentation), use a single variable segmentation 
scheme (just  gender, just age, just Internet usage), 
or a multivariate segmentation scheme? Regardless 
of your answer, identify the advantages and limita-
tions  associated with your argument.
 
2. You are about to ask a junior analyst at SHOE FIEND 
to run another GfK MRI report for you. Which ad-
ditional variables do you think would be best to add 
into the report for segmentation purposes? Why?
GfK US LLC, Mediamark Research & Intelligence division.


Socia
l and
 Cul
tura
l S
ett
in
gs
o
f
 
C
on
su
me
r B
eha
vior 
1
: 
Fo
un
dat
ion
s
4: Co
nsu
mers
 in 
The
ir
   
    
    
 2:
 In
ter
nal
 In
ﬂu
en
c
e
s
 
 
3
:
 
C
h
oo
si
ng
 
C
O
N
S
U
M
E R
 B
E
H
A
V
I
O
R
 
a
n
d
 
U
si
n
g 
Pr
od
uct
s
    
    
     
 on
 Co
nsu
me
r B
eh
av
io
r
95
Section 2 ● Internal Influences on Consumer 
Behavior
In this section, we focus on the internal dynamics of consumers. Although “no man is an 
island,” each of us are to some degree “self-contained” in terms of receiving information 
about the outside world. We are constantly confronted by advertising messages, products, 
and other people—not to mention our own thoughts about ourselves—that affect how we 
make sense of the world and of course what we choose to buy. Each chapter in this section 
looks at some aspect that may be “invisible” to others but is important to understand how 
consumers make choices.
Chapter 3 describes the process of perception; the way we absorb and interpret in-
formation about products and other people from the outside world. Chapter 4 focuses on 
how we store this information and how it adds to our existing knowledge about the world. 
Chapter 5 looks at motivation—why we do what we do—and how our emotional states 
influence us. Chapter 6 explores how our views about our-
selves—particularly our sexuality and our physical appear-
ance—affect what we do, want, and buy. Chapter 7 goes 
on to consider how our unique personalities, lifestyles and 
values also guide us as consumers.
C h a p t e r s  a h e a d
Chapter 3 • Perception
Chapter 4 • Learning and Memory
Chapter 5 • Motivation and Affect
Chapter 6 • The Self and Gender Identity
Chapter 7 • Personality, Lifestyles, and Values

96
Source: LensKiss/Shutterstock.
T
he European vacation has been wonderful, and this stop in Lisbon is no excep-
tion. Still, after two weeks of eating his way through some of the continent’s 
finest pastry shops and restaurants, Gary’s getting a bit of a craving for his 
family’s favorite snack—a good old American box of Oreos and an ice-cold carton of milk. 
Unbeknownst to his wife, Janeen, he had stashed away some cookies “just in case”; this 
was the time to break them out.
Now all he needs is the milk. On an impulse, Gary decides to surprise Janeen with 
a mid-afternoon treat. He sneaks out of the hotel room while she’s napping and finds 
the nearest grosa. When he heads to the store’s small refrigerated section, though, he’s 
puzzled—no milk here. Undaunted, Gary asks the clerk, “Leite, por favor?” The clerk quickly 
smiles and points to a rack in the middle of the store piled with little white square boxes. 
No, that can’t be right—Gary resolves to work on his Portuguese. He repeats the question, 
and again he gets the same answer.
Finally, he investigates, and sure enough, he sees that the labels say they contain 
something called ultra-heat-treated (UHT) milk. Nasty! Who in the world would drink milk 
out of a little box that’s been sitting on a warm shelf for who knows how long? Gary deject-
edly returns to the hotel, his snack-time fantasies crumbling like so many stale cookies.
Sensation
Although news to Gary, many people in the world do drink milk out of a box 
every day. UHT, pasteurized milk that has been heated until the bacteria that 
cause it to spoil are destroyed, can last for 5 to 6 months without refrigeration if 
unopened. The milk tastes slightly sweeter than fresh milk but otherwise it’s basi-
cally the same.
 3-1 The design of a product often is a key driver of its suc-
cess or failure.
 3-2 Products and commercial messages often appeal to our 
senses, but because of the profusion of these messages 
we don’t notice most of them.
 3-3 Perception is a three-stage process that translates raw 
stimuli into meaning.
 3-4 Subliminal advertising is a controversial—but largely inef-
fective—way to talk to consumers.
 3-5 We interpret the stimuli to which we do pay attention ac-
cording to learned patterns and expectations.
 3-6 The field of semiotics helps us to understand how mar-
keters use symbols to create meaning.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives 
 Chapter 3 ● Perception

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
97 
Shelf-stable milk is particularly popular in Europe, where there is less refrigerator 
space in homes and stores tend to carry less inventory than in the United States. Seven 
out of 10 Europeans drink it routinely. Manufacturers keep trying to crack the U.S. market 
as well, though analysts doubt their prospects. To begin with, milk consumption in the 
United States is declining steadily as teenagers choose soft drinks instead, even though the 
Milk Industry Foundation pumped $44 million into an advertising campaign to promote 
milk drinking (“Got Milk?”).
Beyond that, it’s hard to convince Americans to drink milk out of a box. In focus 
groups, U.S. consumers say they have trouble believing the milk is not spoiled or unsafe. 
In addition, they consider the square, quart-sized boxes more suitable for dry food. 
Nonetheless, many schools and fast-food chains do buy UHT milk because of its long shelf 
life.1 Although Americans may not think twice about drinking a McDonald’s McFlurry 
made with shelf-stable milk, it’s still going to be a long, uphill battle to change their minds 
about the proper partner for a bagful of Oreos.
Whether we experience the taste of Oreos, the sight of a Chloé perfume ad, or the 
sound of the band Imagine Dragons, we live in a world overflowing with sensations. 
Wherever we turn, a symphony of colors, sounds, and odors bombards us. Some of the 
“notes” in this symphony occur naturally, such as the loud barking of a dog, the shades of 
the evening sky, or the heady smell of a rose bush. Others come from people: The person 
who plops down next to you in class might wear swirling tattoos, bright pink pants, and 
enough nasty perfume to make your eyes water.
Marketers certainly contribute to this commotion. Consumers are never far from 
pop-up ads, product packages, radio and television commercials, and billboards—all clam-
oring for our attention. Even movie theaters are getting into the act; some are installing 
moving seats, scent machines, and compressed air blasts to simulate the feeling of bullets 
flying by.2
Sometimes we go out of our way to experience “unusual” sensations: feeling thrills 
from bungee jumping; playing virtual reality games; or going to theme parks such as 
Universal Studios, which offers “Fear Factor Live” attractions in which vacationers swal-
low gross things or perform stomach-churning stunts.3
However, only a select few try to cram down as many peanut butter and banana sand-
wiches, Moon Pies, or cheesesteaks as (in)humanly possible in events sponsored by Major 
League Eating/Federation of Competitive Eating (MLE/FCE). Other sensation-seekers hap-
pily blast teeth-rattling Lupe Fiasco cuts from their booming car speakers. Each of us 
copes with this sensory bombardment by paying attention to some stimuli and tuning out 
Contestants at an eating contest.
Source: David Mark Erickson/Corbis.

98 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
others. And, the messages to which we do pay attention often wind up affecting us differ-
ently from what the sponsors intended; we each put our personal “spin” on things as we 
assign meanings consistent with our own unique experiences, biases, and desires. This 
chapter focuses on the process of how we absorb sensations and then use these to interpret 
the surrounding world.
Sensation refers to the immediate response of our sensory receptors (eyes, ears, 
nose, mouth, fingers, skin) to basic stimuli such as light, color, sound, odor, and texture. 
Perception is the process by which people select, organize, and interpret these sensations. 
The study of perception, then, focuses on what we add to these raw sensations to give them 
meaning.
Our brains receive external stimuli, or sensory inputs, on a number of channels. We 
may see a billboard, hear a jingle, feel the softness of a cashmere sweater, taste a new 
flavor of ice cream, or smell a leather jacket. These inputs are the raw data that begin the 
perceptual process. Sensory data from the external environment (e.g., hearing a tune on 
the radio) can generate internal sensory experiences; a song might trigger a young man’s 
memory of his first dance and bring to mind the smell of his date’s perfume or the feel of 
her hair on his cheek.
Marketers’ messages are more effective when they appeal to several senses. For 
example, in a recent study one group read ad copy for potato chips that only mentioned 
the taste, whereas another group’s ad copy emphasized the product’s smell and texture, 
in addition to its taste. The participants in the second group came away thinking the chips 
would taste better than did those whose ad message only focused on taste.4
Each product’s unique sensory qualities help it to stand out from the competition, 
especially if the brand creates a unique association with the sensation. The Owens-
Corning Fiberglass Corporation was the first company to trademark a color when it used 
bright pink for its insulation material; it adopted the Pink Panther as its spokescharacter.5 
Harley-Davidson actually tried (unsuccessfully) to trademark the distinctive sound a 
“hog” makes when it revs up.
hedonic Consumption
These responses are an important part of hedonic consumption: multisensory, fantasy, 
and emotional aspects of consumers’ interactions with products.6 Remember that in ear-
lier chapters we talked about how physical cues “prime” us to react even when we’re not 
aware of this impact. The sensations we experience are context effects that subtly influ-
ence how we think about products we encounter. Here are some examples from consumer 
research:
●
●Respondents evaluated products more harshly when they stood on a tile floor rather 
than a carpeted floor.7
●
●Fans of romance movies rate them higher when they watch them in a cold room (the 
researchers explain this is because they compensate for the low physical temperature 
with psychological warmth the movie provides).8
●
●When a product is scented, consumers are more likely to remember other attributes 
about it after they encounter it.9
The sensory experiences we receive from products and ser-
vices play an increasingly key role when we choose among com-
peting options. As manufacturing costs go down and the amount 
of “stuff” that people accumulate goes up, consumers want to buy 
things that will provide hedonic value in addition to simply doing 
what they’re designed to do. A Dilbert comic strip poked fun at 
this trend when it featured a product designer who declared: “Quality is yesterday’s news. 
Today we focus on the emotional impact of the product.” Fun aside, the new focus on 
emotional experience is consistent with psychological research finding that people prefer 
additional experiences to additional possessions as their incomes rise.10
objeCTIVe 3-1
The design of a product 
often is a key driver of its 
success or failure.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
99 
In this environment, form is function. Two young entrepreneurs named Adam Lowry 
and Eric Ryan discovered that basic truth when they quit their day jobs to develop a line 
of house-cleaning products they called Method. Cleaning products—what a yawn, right?
Think again: For years, companies such as Procter & Gamble have plodded along, 
peddling boring boxes of soap powder to generations of housewives who suffered in 
silence, scrubbing and buffing, yearning for the daily respite of martini time. Lowry 
and Ryan gambled that they could offer an alternative: cleaners in exotic scents such as 
cucumber, lavender, and ylang-ylang that come in aesthetically pleasing bottles. The bet 
paid off. Within two years, the partners were cleaning up, taking in more than $2 million 
in revenue. Shortly thereafter, they hit it big when Target contracted to sell Method prod-
ucts in its stores.11
There’s a method to Target’s madness. Design is no longer the province of upper-
crust sophisticates who never got close enough to a cleaning product to be revolted by it. 
The store chain helped to make designers such as Karim Rashid, Michael Graves, Philippe 
Starck, Todd Oldham, and Isaac Mizrahi household names. In fact, recent research evi-
dence suggests that our brains are wired to appreciate good design: Respondents who were 
hooked up to a brain apparatus called a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
scanner showed faster reaction times when they saw aesthetically pleasing packages even 
compared to well-known brands such as Coca-Cola.12 Mass-market consumers thirst for 
great design, and they reward those companies that give it to them with their enthusiastic 
patronage and loyalty. From razor blades such as the Gillette Sensor to the Apple Watch 
and even to the lowly trashcan, design is substance. Form is function.
Sensory Marketing
When guests at Omni luxury hotels visit the hotel chain’s Web site to reserve a room, 
they hear the sound of soft chimes playing. The signature scent of lemongrass and green 
tea hits them as they enter the lobby. In their rooms, they find eucalyptus bath salts and 
Sensation Bars, minibars stocked with items such as mojito-flavored jellybeans, and min-
iature Zen gardens.
Welcome to the new era of sensory marketing, where companies think carefully 
about the impact of sensations on our product experiences. From hotels to carmakers to 
brewers, companies recognize that our senses help us decide which products appeal to 
Method used aesthetic innovations to shake 
up the stale household cleaners market.
Source: Courtesy of Method Products.
net Profit
Augmented reality (Ar) 
refers to media that super-
impose one or more digital 
layers of data, images, or 
video over a physical ob-
ject. If you’ve ever watched a three-dimen-
sional (3D) movie with those clunky glasses, 
you’ve experienced one form of AR. Or, if 
you’ve seen that yellow line in an NFL game 
that shows the first down marker, you’ve also 
encountered AR in a simple form.
More likely, though, in the next few years 
you’ll live in AR through your smartphone 
or tablet. New apps like Google Goggles 
(for Android phones) and Layar (for Android 
and Apple devices) impose a layer of words 
and pictures on whatever you see in your 
phone’s viewer. Microsoft’s HoloLens technol-
ogy blends holograms with what you see in 
your physical space so that you can actually 
manipulate digital images—for example, a 
user who wants to assemble a piece of fur-
niture or fix a broken sink can actually “see” 
where each part connects to the next through 
the goggles.13
AR apps open new worlds of information 
(and marketing communications). Do you 
want to know the bio of the singer you see on 
a CD cover? Who painted that cool mural in 
your local bar? How much did that house you 
were looking at eventually sell for? Just point 
your smartphone at each and the informa-
tion will be superimposed on your screen.14 
AR is about to be big business: Analysts 
project that revenue from AR apps will hit 
$5.2 billion by 2017.15
The imminent explosion of virtual reality 
(Vr) technology in the consumer market also 
is driving the integration between physical 
sensations and digital information. Unlike AR 
that delivers a combination of both sensory 
experiences, VR provides a totally immersive 
experience that transports the user into an 
entirely separate 3D environment. Facebook 
purchased the Oculus VR company in 2014, 
and this was just the first step in what prom-
ises to be an avalanche of commercially 
available VR technology from major compa-
nies including Samsung, Sony and Google.16

100 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
us—and which ones stand out from a host of similar offerings in the marketplace. In this 
section, we’ll take a closer look at how some smart marketers use our sensory systems to 
create a competitive advantage.
Vision
Sure, Apple’s products usually work pretty well—but that’s not why many people buy 
them. Sleek styling and simple, compact features telegraph an aura of modernity, sophis-
tication, and just plain “cool.” Marketers rely heavily on visual elements in advertising, 
A virtual reality headset.
Source: Rommel Canlas/123RF.
Paintlist, a smartphone app from the Dutch 
Boy paint brand, evaluates music provided 
by users to suggest colors that it says evoke 
similar moods.
Source: Courtesy of Marcus Thomas, LLC.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
101 
store design, and packaging. They communicate meanings on the visual channel through a 
product’s color, size, and styling.
Colors may even influence our emotions more directly. Evidence suggests that some 
colors (particularly red) create feelings of arousal and stimulate appetite, and others (such 
as blue) create more relaxing feelings. American Express launched its Blue card after its 
research found that people describe the color as “providing a sense of limitlessness and 
peace.”17 Advertisements of products presented against a backdrop of blue are better 
liked than the same ads shown against a red background, and cross-cultural research 
indicates a consistent preference for blue whether people live in Canada or Hong Kong.18 
People even link moral judgments to colors; in a study, respondents evaluated undesir-
able consumer behaviors less negatively when described on a red (compared with green) 
background while they evaluated desirable consumer behaviors more positively when 
described on a green (compared with red) background.19
Cb AS I See IT
Malaika Brengman Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
study showed that apparently store 
color does matter! More television 
sets were sold in the blue-colored 
store than in the red-colored one. 
And even more impressing: more 
expensive television sets were chosen 
in the blue store condition.
Of course I wanted to find out 
how this was possible and more in 
particular which colors generate what 
effects. But what is color actually? 
Color is essentially our perception of 
the reflection of light. Without light, 
we cannot perceive any colors. The 
shapes and colors of the objects 
we perceive around us help us 
make sense of it all. But, as these 
perceptions are formed not only 
through our eyes, but also for a large 
part in our brain, color does not only 
provide objective information about 
our environment, it also affects our 
thoughts and feelings… and ultimately 
even our consumption behavior.
Triggered by the question what exact 
colors retail managers should apply 
to lure in shoppers and to persuade 
them to buy, I devoted my doctoral 
dissertation to this topic. In spite of 
the fact that some earlier studies did 
find that color influences the behavior 
of retail shoppers, it was still not 
entirely clear what specific colors would 
be most beneficial. In fact, researchers 
have often drawn inferences regarding 
color effects testing only two or 
four particular tones. I intended 
to conduct a more rigorous study, 
examining the specific effects of the 
three dimensions of color (pigment, 
saturation and value), by testing a total 
of 32 store color variants. The findings 
of this investigation confirmed that 
the more the consumer appreciates 
the colors in a shop, the longer he will 
linger there and the more money he 
will be prepared to spend. A positive 
feeling of excitement, evoked by the 
interior color, also tends to lead to 
approach behavior, a willingness to 
stay longer and explore the store 
more. Arousal can however also 
revert into tension and stress, which 
is experienced as unpleasant and 
leads to avoidance. According to our 
findings, vivid or dark store interiors 
are not to be advised, but rather light 
interiors are recommended because 
they bring about a pleasant, relaxed 
feeling, which is conducive to purchase 
behavior. While blue, green, yellow or 
orange interiors are also recommended 
because they bring about positive 
feelings, certain hues such as yellow-
green and red can best be avoided 
because they arouse feelings of stress.
This study proves that decisions 
about the color of a store interior 
should not be taken lightly, since 
they really influence the emotions of 
the shoppers, and their subsequent 
purchase behavior. Shoppers may also 
need to realize that a pleasant store 
environment can induce them to spend 
more than intended, which may not be 
so good if you are on a budget.
As you go shopping the lighting of 
the interior and the colors on the 
walls are probably the last thing you 
pay attention to. Still, while hardly 
noticed, these ambient cues in our 
surroundings influence our behavior as 
consumers in an important way.
I became intrigued about this 
subject when a study we conducted 
revealed that recycle stores with the 
color yellow in their store interior 
appeared to perform better. Reading 
more on the issue, I discovered 
an interesting experiment where 
television sets were presented either 
in a blue-colored store environment or 
a red-colored one. Could that possibly 
impact sales? The findings of this 

102 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
People who complete tasks when the words or images appear on red backgrounds 
perform better when they have to remember details; however, they excel at tasks requiring 
an imaginative response when the words or images are displayed on blue backgrounds. 
Olympic athletes who wear red uniforms are more likely to defeat competitors in blue uni-
forms, and men rate women who wear red as more attractive than those who wear blue. 
In one study, interior designers created bars decorated primarily in red, yellow, or blue and 
invited people to choose one to hang out in. More people chose the yellow and red rooms, 
and these guests were more social and active—and ate more. In contrast, partygoers in the 
blue room stayed longer.20 Maybe the moral is: Get your prof to give you multiple-choice 
exams on red paper, essays on blue paper, and then celebrate afterward in a red room!
Some reactions to color come from learned associations (which we’ll tackle in 
the next chapter). In Western countries, black is the color of mourning, whereas in 
some Eastern countries, notably Japan, white plays this role. In addition, we associ-
ate the color black with power. Teams in both the National Football League and the 
National Hockey League who wear black uniforms are among the most aggressive; they 
consistently rank near the top of their leagues in penalties during the season.21 And, 
researchers have found evidence for racial differences in preferences for white- versus 
 black-colored products. 22
Not surprisingly, there are gender differences in color preferences. People associate 
darker colors with males and lighter colors with females.23 Women are drawn toward 
brighter tones and they are more sensitive to subtle shadings and patterns. Some scientists 
attribute this to biology; females see color better than males do, and men are 16 times 
more likely to be color-blind.
Age also influences our responsiveness to color. As we get older, our eyes mature and 
our vision takes on a yellow cast. Colors look duller to older people, so they prefer white 
and other bright tones. This helps to explain why mature consumers are much more likely 
to choose a white car; Lexus, which sells heavily in this market, makes 60 percent of its 
vehicles in white. The trend toward brighter and more complex colors also reflects the 
increasingly multicultural makeup of the United States. For example, Hispanics tend to 
prefer brighter colors as a reflection of the intense lighting conditions in Latin America; 
strong colors retain their character in strong sunlight.24 That’s why Procter & Gamble 
uses brighter colors in makeup it sells in Latin countries.
Teams that wear black uniforms tend to play 
more aggressively.
Source: Nicholas Piccillo/Fotolia.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
103 
Scientists and philosophers have talked about the meanings of colors since the time 
of Socrates in the 5th century BC, but it took Sir Isaac Newton in the early 17th century to 
shine light through a prism and reveal the color spectrum. Even then, Newton’s observa-
tions weren’t totally scientific; he identified seven major colors to be consistent with the 
number of planets known at that time, as well as the seven notes of the diatonic scale.
We now know that perceptions of a color depend on both its physical wavelength and 
how the mind responds to that stimulus. Yellow is in the middle of wavelengths the human 
eye can detect, so it is the brightest and attracts attention. The Yellow Pages originally were 
colored yellow to heighten the attention level of bored telephone operators.25 However, 
our culture and even our language affect the colors we see. For example, the Welsh lan-
guage has no words that correspond to green, blue, gray, or brown in English, but it uses 
other colors that English speakers don’t (including one that covers part of green, part of 
gray, and the whole of our blue). The Hungarian language has two words for what we call 
red; Navajo has a single word for blue and green, but two words for black.26
Because colors elicit such strong emotional reactions, the choice of a color palette is a 
key issue in package design. Companies used to arrive at these choices casually. For exam-
ple, Campbell’s Soup made its familiar can in red and white because a company executive 
liked the football uniforms at Cornell University! Today, however, color choices are a seri-
ous business. These decisions help to “color” our expectations of what’s inside the pack-
age. When it launched a white cheese as a “sister product” to an existing blue “Castello” 
cheese, a Danish company introduced it in a red package under the name of Castello 
Bianco. They chose this color to provide maximum visibility on store shelves. Although 
taste tests were positive, sales were disappointing. A subsequent analysis of consumer 
interpretations showed that the red packaging and the name gave the consumers wrong 
associations with the product type and its degree of sweetness. Danish consumers had 
trouble associating the color red with the white cheese. Also, the name Bianco connoted 
a sweetness that was incompatible with the actual taste of the product. The company 
relaunched it in a white package and named it “White Castello.” Almost immediately, sales 
more than doubled.27
Some color combinations come to be so strongly associated with a corporation that 
they become known as the company’s trade dress, and courts may even grant exclusive 
use of specific color combinations: Eastman Kodak’s trade dress protects its usage of its 
distinctive yellow, black, and red boxes. As a rule, however, judges grant trade dress pro-
tection only when consumers might be confused about what they buy because of similar 
coloration of a competitor’s packages.28
Of course, fashion trends strongly influence our color preferences, so it’s no surprise 
that we tend to encounter a “hot” color on clothing and in home designs in one season 
that something else replaces the next season (as when the fashionistas proclaim, “Brown is 
the new black!” or fans of the TV series counter with, “No, Orange is the New Black”). These 
styles do not happen by accident; most people don’t know (but now you do) that a handful 
of firms produce color forecasts that manufacturers and retailers buy so they can be sure 
they stock up on the next hot hue. For example, Pantone, Inc. (one of these color arbiters) 
identified “Marsala”—a naturally robust and earthy wine red—as the color of the year for 
2015.29 Table 3.1 summarizes how experts link specific colors to marketing contexts.
Dollars and Scents
Odors stir emotions or create a calming feeling. They invoke memories or relieve stress. 
Die-hard New York Yankees fans can buy fragrances to bring back that stadium feeling: 
“New York Yankees” (for him) and “New York Yankees For Her.”30 As scientists continue 
to discover the powerful effects of smell on behavior, marketers come up with ingenious 
ways to exploit these connections. This form of sensory marketing takes interesting turns 
as manufacturers find new ways to put scents into products, including men’s suits, linge-
rie, detergents, and aircraft cabins. And this just in: Burger King in Japan sells a “Flame 
Grilled” fragrance to customers who want to smell like a Whopper.31
One study found that consumers who viewed ads for either flowers or chocolate and 
who also were exposed to flowery or chocolaty odors spent more time processing the 

104 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
product information and were more likely to try different alternatives within each product 
category.32 Another reported that subjects showed higher recall of a test brand’s attributes 
if it was embedded with a scent—and this effect persisted as long as two weeks after the 
experiment.33 Retailers like Hugo Boss often pump a “signature” scent into their stores; 
one study reported that “warm scents” such as vanilla or cinnamon as opposed to “cool 
scents” such as peppermint enhance shoppers’ purchases of premium brands.34
Some of our responses to scents result from early associations that call up good or bad 
feelings, and that explains why businesses explore connections among smell, memory, and 
mood.35 Researchers for Folgers found that for many people the smell of coffee summons 
up childhood memories of their mothers cooking breakfast, so the aroma reminds them 
of home. The company turned this insight into a commercial in which a young man in an 
army uniform arrives home early one morning. He goes to the kitchen, opens a Folgers’ 
package, and the aroma wafts upstairs. His mother opens her eyes, smiles, and exclaims, 
“He’s home!”36
We process fragrance cues in the limbic system, the most primitive part of the brain 
and the place where we experience immediate emotions. One study even found that the 
scent of fresh cinnamon buns induced sexual arousal in a sample of male students!37 In 
another study, women sniffed T-shirts that men had worn for two days (wonder how much 
they paid them to do that?) and reported which they preferred. The women were most 
attracted to the odor of men who were genetically similar to them, though not too similar. 
The researchers claimed the findings were evidence that we are “wired” to select compat-
ible mates, but not those so similar as to cause inbreeding problems.38
Sound
BMW recently began to use an audio watermark at the end 
of TV and radio ads around the world. “The company wants to 
establish what the brand sounds like,” so all of its messages end 
with a melody “underscored by two distinctive bass tones that 
form the sound logo’s melodic and rhythmic basis.” BMW claims 
this sound signature represents “sheer driving pleasure.”39
Music and other sounds affect people’s feelings and behav-
iors. Some marketers who come up with brand names pay 
attention to sound symbolism; the process by which the way a 
word sounds influences our assumptions about what it describes and attributes, such as 
size. For example, consumers are more likely to recognize brand names that begin with a 
hard consonant like a K (Kellogg’s) or P (Pepsi). We also tend to associate certain vowel 
and consonant sounds (or phonemes) with perceptions of large and small size. Mental 
objeCTIVe 3-2
 Products and 
commercial messages 
often appeal to our 
senses, but because of 
the profusion of these 
messages we don’t 
notice most of them.
TAbLe 3. 1   Marketing Applications of Colors
Color
Associations
Marketing Applications
Yellow
Optimistic and youthful
Used to grab window shoppers’ attention
Red
Energy
Often seen in clearance sales
Blue
Trust and security
Banks
Green
Wealth
Used to create relaxation in stores
Orange
Aggressive
Call to action: subscribe, buy or sell
Black
Powerful and sleek
Luxury products
Purple
Soothing
Beauty or anti-aging products
Source: Adapted from Leo Widrich, “Why Is Facebook Blue? The Science Behind Colors in Marketing,” Fast Company  
(May 6, 2013), http://www.fastcompany.com/3009317/why-is-facebook-blue-the-science-behind-colors-in-
marketing?partner=newsletter, accessed February 23, 2015.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
105 
rehearsal of prices containing numbers with small phonemes results in overestimation of 
price discounts, whereas mental rehearsal of prices containing numbers with large pho-
nemes results in underestimation.40 One study even found that the sound symbolism in a 
stock’s ticker symbol helped to predict the company’s performance during its first year of 
trading. 41
Touch
Pretend for a moment that you are shopping for a sweater on the Internet. You navigate 
to http://www.landsend.com, scroll through the cardigans, and pause at one that appeals 
to you. You click on the sweater for more information. A larger photo appears, and the 
caption reads: “Imagine holding this sweater, feeling the soft, 100% cotton in your hands.” 
What if you did as instructed? Would your perception of the sweater be any different than 
if you had not imagined feeling it?
One study demonstrated the potential power of touch: Britain’s Asda grocery chain 
removed the wrapping from several brands of toilet tissue in its stores so that shoppers 
could feel and compare textures. The result, the retailer says, was soaring sales for its own 
in-store brand, resulting in a 50 percent increase in shelf space for the line.42
It seems that encouraging shoppers to touch a product encourages them to imagine 
they own it, and researchers know that people value things more highly if they own them: 
This is known as the endowment effect. One set of researchers reported that partici-
pants who simply touched an item (an inexpensive coffee mug) for 30 seconds or less cre-
ated a greater level of attachment to the product; this connection in turn boosted what 
they were willing to pay for it.43 Indeed, the power of touch even translates to online shop-
ping where touchscreens create a stronger feeling of psychological ownership compared 
to products consumers explore using a touchpad or a mouse.44
Sensations that reach the skin, whether from a luxurious massage or the bite of a 
winter wind, stimulate or relax us. Researchers even have shown that touch can influence 
sales interactions. In one study, diners whom waitstaff touched gave bigger tips, and the 
same researchers reported that food demonstrators in a supermarket who lightly touched 
customers had better luck in getting shoppers to try a new snack product and to redeem 
coupons for the brand.45 On the other hand, an accidental touch from a stranger (espe-
cially a male) leads to more negative evaluations of products a shopper encounters in a 
store.46
Some anthropologists view our experience of touch much like a primal language, one 
we learn well before writing and speech. Indeed, researchers are starting to identify the 
important role the haptic (touch) sense plays in consumer behavior. Haptic senses appear 
to moderate the relationship between product experience and judgment confidence. This 
confirms the commonsense notion that we’re more sure about what we perceive when we 
can touch it (a major problem for those who sell products online). Individuals who score 
high on a “Need for Touch” (NFT) scale are especially sensitive to the haptic dimension. 
These people respond positively to such statements as:
●
●When walking through stores, I can’t help touching all kinds of products.
●
●Touching products can be fun.
●
●I feel more comfortable purchasing a product after physically examining it.47
Some Japanese companies take this idea a step farther with their practice of Kansei 
engineering, a philosophy that translates customers’ feelings into design elements. The 
designers of the Mazda Miata focused on young drivers who saw the car as an extension 
of their body, a sensation they call “horse and rider as one.” After extensive research they 
discovered that making the stick shift exactly 9.5 centimeters long conveys the optimal 
feeling of sportiness and control.48
Taste
Our taste receptors obviously contribute to our experience of many products. So-called 
“flavor houses” develop new concoctions to please the changing palates of consumers. 
We have a tendency to 
want to touch objects, al-
though typing or using a 
mouse are skills we have 
to learn. The proliferation 
of touchscreens on computers, ATM ma-
chines, digital cameras, GPS devices, and 
e-readers is an outgrowth of the natural user 
interface philosophy of computer design. 
This approach incorporates habitual human 
movements that we don’t have to learn. 
Sony decided to offer touchscreens on its 
e-readers after its engineers repeatedly ob-
served people in focus groups automatically 
swipe the screen of its older, nontouch mod-
els. Touchscreens also appear on exercise 
machines, in hospitals, at airport check-in 
terminals, and on Virgin America airplanes.49
Marketing opportunity

106 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Scientists are right behind them as they build new devices to test these flavors. Alpha 
M.O.S. sells a sophisticated electronic tongue for tasting, and the company is working on 
what its executives call an electronic mouth, complete with artificial saliva, to chew food 
and to dissect its flavor. Coca-Cola and PepsiCo use the tongue to test the quality of corn 
Product designers continue to experiment  
with natural user interfaces such as 
touchscreens.
Source: grafvision/shutterstock.com.
The classic, contoured Coca-Cola bottle also 
attests to the power of touch. The bottle 
was designed approximately 90 years ago 
to satisfy the request of a U.S. bottler for 
a soft-drink container that people could 
identify even in the dark.
Source: © Rufus Stone/Alamy.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
107 
syrups, and Bristol-Myers Squibb and Roche use the device to formulate medicines that 
don’t taste bitter.50
Cultural factors also determine the tastes we find desirable. A food item’s image 
and the values we attach to it (such as how vegans regard beef menu items, which is not 
kindly) influence how we experience the actual taste.51 For example, consumers’ greater 
appreciation of different ethnic dishes contributes to increased desires for spicy foods, 
so the quest for the ultimate pepper sauce continues. More than 50 stores in the United 
States supply fiery concoctions with names such as Sting and Linger, Hell in a Jar, and 
Religious Experience (comes in Original, Hot, and Wrath).52
In India, salt combats the sensory assault  
of spicy food.
Source: Courtesy of Taproot India. Contributors: 
Santosh Padhi, Agnello Dias, Pranan Bhide, and 
Chintan Ruparel.

108 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
The Stages of Perception
Like computers, we undergo stages of information processing in 
which we input and store stimuli. Unlike computers, though, 
we do not passively process whatever information happens to be 
present. In the first place, we notice only a small number of the 
stimuli in our environment, simply because there are so many 
different ones out there vying for our attention. Of those we do notice, we attend to an 
even smaller number—and we might not process the stimuli that do enter consciousness 
objectively. Each individual interprets the meaning of a stimulus in a manner consistent 
with his or her own unique biases, needs, and experiences. As Figure 3.1 shows, these 
three stages of exposure, attention, and interpretation make up the process of perception.
Stage 1: exposure
Exposure occurs when a stimulus comes within the range of someone’s sensory recep-
tors. Consumers concentrate on some stimuli, are unaware of others, and even go out of 
their way to ignore some messages. We notice stimuli that come within range for even a 
short time—if we so choose. However, getting a message noticed in such a short time (or 
even in a longer one) is no mean feat.
Sensory Thresholds
Before we consider what else people may choose not to perceive, let’s consider what they 
are capable of perceiving. By this we mean that stimuli may be above or below a person’s 
sensory threshold which is the point at which it is strong enough to make a conscious 
impact in his or her awareness.
If you have ever blown a dog whistle and watched your pooch respond to a sound you 
cannot hear, you won’t be surprised to learn that there are some stimuli that people simply 
can’t perceive. Some of us pick up sensory information that others, whose sensory chan-
nels have diminished because of disability or age, cannot. The science of psychophysics 
focuses on how people integrate the physical environment into their personal, subjective 
worlds.
It sounds like a great name for a rock band, but the absolute threshold refers to 
the minimum amount of stimulation a person can detect on a given sensory channel. 
The sound a dog whistle emits is at too high a frequency for human ears to pick up, so 
this stimulus is beyond our auditory absolute threshold. The absolute threshold is an 
important consideration when we design marketing stimuli. A highway billboard might 
have the most entertaining copy ever written, but this genius is wasted if the print is too 
small for passing motorists to see it. In contrast, the differential threshold refers to 
the ability of a sensory system to detect changes in or differences between two stimuli. 
The minimum difference we can detect between two stimuli is the just noticeable 
 difference (j.n.d.).
Marketing Pitfall
As the cost of raw mate-
rials skyrockets as a re-
sult of shortages caused 
by natural disasters such 
as the Tokyo earthquake 
and manmade ones like the conflict in the 
Middle East, some companies try to cam-
ouflage price increases as they shrink the 
size of packages instead of charging more. 
Sometimes marketers use code words to 
announce a change: they may label the 
smaller packages as “green” because there 
is less plastic or cardboard in a smaller box, 
more “portable” when they squeeze products 
into little carry bags, or “healthier” because 
smaller amounts translate into fewer calo-
ries. For example, Kraft brought out “Fresh 
Stacks” packages for its Nabisco Premium 
saltines and Honey Maid graham crackers. 
Each holds about 15 percent fewer crackers 
than the standard boxes for the same price. 
But, Kraft notes that because the new pack-
ages include more sleeves of crackers, they 
are more portable—and the company notes 
that as an added benefit the smaller boxes 
supply crackers that will be fresher when you 
get around to eating them. A packaging ex-
pert noted that typically, when the economy 
recovers, companies respond with a new 
“jumbo-size” product that is usually even 
more expensive per ounce. Then the process 
begins again: “It’s a continuous cycle, where 
at some point the smallest package of-
fered becomes so small that perhaps they’re 
phased out and replaced by the medium-size 
package, which has been shrunk down.”53
objeCTIVe 3-3
 Perception is a three-
stage process that 
translates raw stimuli 
into meaning.
SENSORY STIMULI
Nose
Mouth
Skin
Ears
Eyes
Smells
Taste
Textures
Sounds
Sights
Attention
Exposure
Interpretation
SENSORY RECEPTORS
Figure 3.1 AN OVERVIEW OF THE PERCEPTUAL PROCESS

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
109 
The dual issues of if and when consumers will notice a difference between two stimuli 
is relevant to many marketing situations. Sometimes a marketer may want to ensure that 
consumers notice a change, such as when a retailer offers merchandise at a discount. In 
other situations, the marketer may want to downplay the fact that it has made a change, 
such as when a store raises a price or a manufacturer reduces the size of a package. When 
a brand tries to modernize its logo, it has to walk a fine line because consumers tend to get 
tired of old-fashioned designs but they still want to be able to identify the familiar product. 
Figure 3.2 shows the evolution of the Pepsi label over time.
A consumer’s ability to detect a difference between two stimuli is relative. A whispered 
conversation that might be unintelligible on a noisy street can suddenly become public 
and embarrassingly loud in a quiet library. It is the relative difference between the decibel 
level of the conversation and its surroundings, rather than the absolute loudness of the 
conversation itself, that determines whether the stimulus will register.
In the 19th century, a psychophysicist named Ernst Weber found that the amount of 
change required for the perceiver to notice a change systematically relates to the intensity 
of the original stimulus. The stronger the initial stimulus, the greater a change must be for 
us to notice it. This relationship is Weber’s Law.
Consider how Weber’s Law works for a product when it goes on sale. If a retailer 
believes that a markdown should be at least 20 percent for the reduction to make an 
impact on shoppers, it should cut the price on a pair of socks that retails for $10 to $8 (a 
$2 discount) for shoppers to realize a difference. However, a sports coat that sells for $100 
would not benefit from a $2 discount; the retailer would have to mark it down $20 to 
achieve the same impact.
Weber’s Law, ironically, is a challenge to green marketers who try to reduce the 
sizes of packages when they produce concentrated (and more earth-friendly) versions of 
PEPSI 1974:
PEPSI 1991:
PEPSI 1998:
PEPSI 2003:
PEPSI 2009:
PEPSI 2006:
PEPSI 1987:
Figure 3.2 THE PEPSI LOGO OVER TIME
Source: Pepsi is a registered trademark of PepsiCo, Inc. Used with permission.
PEPSI 1898:
PEPSI 1906:
PEPSI 1950:
PEPSI 1962:
PEPSI 1940:
PEPSI 1905:

110 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
their products. Makers of laundry detergent brands have to convince their customers to 
pay the same price for about half the detergent. Also, because of pressure from power-
ful retailers such as Walmart that want to fit more bottles on their shelves, the size of 
detergent bottles is shrinking significantly. Procter & Gamble, Unilever and Henkel all 
maintain that their new concentrated versions will allow people to wash the same num-
ber of loads with half the detergent. One perceptual trick they’re using to try to convince 
consumers of this is the redesign of the bottle cap: Both P&G and Church & Dwight use a 
cap with a broader base and shorter sides to persuade consum-
ers that they need a smaller amount.54
Subliminal Perception
A German ad agency and the broadcaster Sky Deutschland 
are teaming up on a new advertising platform that targets 
weary commuters who rest their heads against the  windows 
This Canadian beer ad pokes fun at  
subliminal advertising.
Source: © 2005. Molson USA, LLC.
objeCTIVe 3-4
Subliminal advertising 
is a controversial—but 
largely ineffective—way to 
talk to consumers.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
111 
of train cars. They call it the “talking window”; it uses “bond conduction technology” 
that emits vibrations the brain reads as sounds. As the commuter starts to nod off, he 
or she will suddenly hear a voice inside their head that pitches a product.55 That will 
get your attention!
Most marketers want to create messages above consumers’ thresholds so people will 
notice them. Ironically, a good number of consumers instead believe that marketers design 
many advertising messages so they will be perceived unconsciously, or below the threshold 
of recognition. Another word for threshold is limen, and we term stimuli that fall below 
the limen subliminal. Subliminal perception refers to a stimulus below the level of the 
consumer’s awareness.
This topic has captivated the public for more than 50 years, despite the fact that there 
is virtually no proof that this process has any effect on consumer behavior. A survey of U.S. 
consumers found that almost two-thirds believe in the existence of subliminal advertising, 

112 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
and more than one-half are convinced that this technique can get them to buy things 
they do not really want.56 ABC rejected a Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) commercial that 
invited viewers to slowly replay the ad to find a secret message, citing the network’s long-
standing policy against subliminal advertising. KFC argued that the ad wasn’t subliminal 
at all because the company told viewers about the message and how to find it. The network 
wasn’t convinced.57
Like this KFC ad, most examples of subliminal advertising that people “discover” 
are not subliminal at all—on the contrary, the images are quite apparent. Remember, if 
you can see it or hear it, it’s not subliminal; the stimulus is above the level of conscious 
awareness. Nonetheless, the continuing controversy about subliminal persuasion 
has been important in shaping the public’s beliefs about advertisers’ and market-
ers’ abilities to manipulate consumers against their will. A recent kerfuffle generated 
by a McDonald’s Happy Meal toy illustrates that we tend to see or hear what we are 
looking for: When the company released a toy Minion (from the popular Despicable 
Me movie series), some outraged parents stated it was sending a “subliminal mes-
sage” to their children. They claim that it speaks gibberish that sounds a lot like 
“what the” and a word that rhymes with duck. McDonald’s response: “Minions speak 
‘Minionese’ which is a random combination of many languages and nonsense words 
and sounds…. Any perceived similarities to words used within the English language is 
purely coincidental.”58
Marketers supposedly send subliminal messages on both visual and aural channels. 
Embeds are tiny figures they insert into magazine advertising via high-speed photogra-
phy or airbrushing. These hidden images, usually of a sexual nature, supposedly exert 
strong but unconscious influences on innocent readers. Some limited evidence hints at 
the possibility that embeds can alter the moods of men when they’re exposed to sexually 
suggestive subliminal images, but the effect (if any) is subtle—and may even work in the 
opposite direction if this creates negative feelings among viewers.59 To date, the only real 
impact of this interest in hidden messages is to sell more copies of “exposés” written by 
a few authors and to make some consumers (and students taking a consumer behavior 
class) look a bit more closely at print ads, perhaps seeing whatever their imaginations lead 
them to see.
Some research by clinical psychologists suggests that subliminal messages can influ-
ence people under specific conditions, though it is doubtful that these techniques would 
be of much use in most marketing contexts. For this kind of message to have a prayer of 
working, an advertiser has to tailor it specifically to an individual rather than the mass 
messages suitable for the general public.60 The stimulus should also be as close to the 
liminal threshold as possible. Here are other discouraging factors:
●
●There are wide individual differences in threshold levels. For a message to avoid con-
scious detection by consumers who have low thresholds, it would have to be so weak 
that it would not reach those who have high thresholds.
●
●Advertisers lack control over consumers’ distance and position from a screen. In a 
movie theater, for example, only a small portion of the audience would be in exactly 
the right seats to be exposed to a subliminal message.
●
●The viewer must pay absolute attention to the stimulus. People who watch a television 
program or a movie typically shift their attention periodically, and they might not even 
notice when the stimulus appears.
●
●Even if the advertiser induces the desired effect, it works only at a general level. For 
example, a message might increase a person’s thirst—but not necessarily for a specific 
drink. Because the stimulus just affects a basic drive, a marketer could find that after 
all the bother and expense of creating a subliminal message, demand for competitors’ 
products increases as well!
Clearly, there are better ways to get our attention—let’s see how.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
113 
Stage 2: Attention
As you sit in a lecture, you might find your mind wandering (yes, even you!). One minute 
you are concentrating on the professor’s words, and the next you catch yourself day-
dreaming about the upcoming weekend. Suddenly, you tune back in as you hear your 
name being spoken. Fortunately, it’s a false alarm—the professor has called on another 
“victim” who has the same first name. But she’s got your attention now.
Attention refers to the extent to which processing activity is devoted to a particular 
stimulus. As you know from sitting through both interesting and “less interesting” lec-
tures, this allocation can vary depending on both the characteristics of the stimulus (i.e., 
the lecture itself) and the recipient (i.e., your mental state at the time).
Although we live in an “information society,” we can have too much of a good thing. 
Consumers often live in a state of sensory overload; we are exposed to far more informa-
tion than we can process. In our society, much of this bombardment comes from commer-
cial sources, and the competition for our attention steadily increases. The average adult 
is exposed to about 3,500 pieces of advertising information every single day—up from 
about 560 per day 30 years ago.
Are you a media snacker? A recent study found that consumers in their 20s (“digi-
tal natives”) switch media venues about 27 times per nonworking hour—the equivalent 
of more than 13 times during a standard half-hour TV show. As a Unilever marketing 
executive put it, “If you have consumers who are snacking on short amounts of time with 
different types of media channels, we have to think about how to communicate in short, 
‘snack-like’ bits of messaging.”61 That means the fight for your attention—or what some 
marketers refer to as an eyeball economy—gets tougher every day.
Multitasking
Getting the attention of young people in particular is a challenge—as your professor prob-
ably knows! A large proportion of teens report that they engage in multitasking, where 
they process information from more than one medium at a time as they alternate among 
their cell phones, TVs, and laptops.63 One study observed 400 people for a day and found 
that 96 percent of them were multitasking about a third of the time they used media.64
What impact does all this multitasking have on consumers’ ability to absorb, retain, 
and understand information? One possible consequence: These bursts of stimulation pro-
voke the body to secrete the dopamine hormone, which is addicting. When we go without 
these squirts, we feel bored. Some scientists warn that our cravings for more stimulation 
distract us from more prolonged thought processes and reduce our ability to concentrate 
(don’t text and drive!). Researchers find that heavy multitaskers have more trouble focus-
ing, and they experience more stress. One study found that people who are interrupted by 
email report significantly more stress than those who were allowed to focus on a task.65
Before you panic, there is some good news: Evidence suggests that the brains of 
Internet users become more efficient at finding information, whereas some videogame 
players develop better eyesight. One team of researchers found that players of fast-paced 
video games could track the movement of a third more objects on a screen than non-play-
ers. They say the games can improve reaction and the ability to pick out details amid clut-
ter. For better or worse, technology seems to be rewiring our brains to try to pay attention 
to more stimuli. Today we consume three times as much information each day as people 
did in 1960. We constantly shift attention: Computer users at work change windows or 
check email or other programs nearly 37 times an hour. Computer users visit an average 
of 40 Web sites a day.66
Marketers constantly search for ways to break through the clutter and grab people’s 
attention. Some tactics are straightforward, such as when manufacturers try to get their 
brands shelved at eye level in a store and toward the center of a display because they 
know that is where shoppers are most likely to look.67 In the online world, advertisers 
keep innovating to get visitors to watch their messages. One of the most popular today 
Marketing Pitfall
If you watch TV with a 
digital video recorder 
(DVR), you’re 25 percent 
more likely to fast-for-
ward past ads that don’t 
interest you immediately. Another 25 percent 
of DVR users don’t watch an entire commer-
cial if it doesn’t draw them in right away—no 
matter how entertaining it gets by the end. 
Ads that start out with a captivating story are 
more likely to hold an audience compared 
to those that get to the point more slowly. 
This finding may cast doubt on traditional 
ratings of advertisements where viewers in 
laboratory settings are forced to watch an 
entire commercial—in real life they may just 
zap through it.62

114 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
is rich media; the use of animated.gif files or video clips to grab viewers’ attention. 
LowerMyBills.com is notorious for its endless loops of silhouetted dancers and surprised 
office workers, whereas other ads spring into action when you move the cursor over them. 
Other rich media are online versions of familiar TV commercials that sit frozen on the Web 
site until you click them. Teaser ads, much like those you see on TV that give you a taste of 
the story but make you return later for the rest, also turn up on Web sites.68
Because the brain’s capacity to process information is limited, consumers are selec-
tive about what they pay attention to. The process of perceptual selection means that 
people attend to only a small portion of the stimuli to which they are exposed. Consumers 
practice a form of “psychic economy” as they pick and choose among stimuli to avoid 
being overwhelmed. How do we choose? Both personal and stimulus factors help to decide.
Cb AS I See IT
Michel Wedel University of Maryland
Users will interact with these devices 
through gaze- and voice-control. Much 
of this is already possible.
Software that records where 
consumers look can support visual 
cues and automatic alerts to direct 
consumer search during day-to-day 
tasks. This may help to make daily life 
safer, simpler, and more enjoyable. 
On digital devices, consumers will be 
able use their gaze to manipulate 3D 
images of objects, people, and virtual 
displays of public places and stores. 
For entertainment and education, they 
will be able to interact with avatars 
by looking at them. The avatar smiles 
when the viewer smiles and follows 
the viewer’s gaze. Face and gaze 
recording can be used to improve 
focus and comprehension in real-
time. Explanations may appear when 
comprehension is slow and gaze-cues 
may direct viewers’ gaze to relevant 
materials and improve focus and 
comprehension. Recommendation 
engines will recommend news articles, 
blogs, books and reviews, based on 
what a user has looked at previously 
and what emotions were expressed. 
Face and gaze recording will also 
improve the targeting of marketing 
efforts. Gaze-based rendering and 3D 
vision will enhance online and virtual 
shopping experiences. Attentive and 
interactive TV sets, billboards, digital 
ads, and digital point of sale devices 
will adapt dynamically to the viewers’ 
gaze, facial expression, and head- and 
body-movements to deliver commercial 
messages and services on electronic 
devices that are tailored to their 
moment-to-moment interests and 
emotions.
This new field of automated attention 
analysis (AAA), the automated recording 
of how long people look at images, 
words, people, places and products, 
if their pupils dilate, how their heads 
and postures change, how fast they 
blink, and what emotions they show, 
will explode information about the 
visual behavior in consumers’ day-to-
day lives. The revolution in big gaze 
and face recording data will be similar 
to the revolution in Internet click-
stream data that we have seen in the 
past decades. That wealth of data will 
be of great value to market research 
companies, manufacturers, service 
providers and retailers, and enable 
them to better tailor products, services 
and marketing effort to individual 
consumers’ momentary interests 
and experiences. But, unleashing the 
promise of AAA will require academic 
developments in two interconnected 
areas: (1) computing procedures and 
statistical models to analyze gaze 
and face data based on (2) consumer 
behavior theory that explains visual 
attention and facial expressions in 
these new natural contexts. Then, 
unprecedented new insights into 
consumer information processing and 
decision making will become available 
that hold the promise of improving 
marketing effectiveness and consumer 
welfare.
Front-facing cameras are now 
integrated in almost all computers 
and mobile devices. Software that 
analyzes the images captured by these 
cameras enables consumers’ eye 
movements and facial expressions to 
be recorded. This has made remote 
eye tracking studies on large panels 
of respondents for commercial 
and academic marketing research 
possible. But moreover, in a few 
years from now, this new technology 
will have become an integrated part 
of consumers’ everyday lives. It will 
not only be implemented on laptop 
and desktop computers, but also 
on smartphones, tablets, digital 
billboards, kiosks, and smart TVs. 

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
115 
Personal Selection Factors
How do marketers seem to “know” when you’re hungry and choose those times to bom-
bard you with food ads? The answer is they don’t—at least not yet. Perceptual vigilance 
means we are more likely to be aware of stimuli that relate to our current needs.
The flip side of perceptual vigilance is perceptual defense. This means that we tend 
to see what we want to see—and we don’t see what we don’t want to see. If a stimulus 
threatens us in some way, we may not process it, or we may distort its meaning so that it’s 
more acceptable. For example, a heavy smoker may block out images of cancer-scarred 
lungs because these vivid reminders hit a bit too close to home.
Still another factor is adaptation, which is the degree to which consumers continue 
to notice a stimulus over time. The process of adaptation occurs when we no longer pay 
attention to a stimulus because it is so familiar. A consumer can “habituate” and require 
increasingly stronger “doses” of a stimulus to notice it. A commuter who is en route to 
work might read a billboard message when the board is first installed, but after a few days 
it simply becomes part of the passing scenery. Several factors can lead to adaptation:
●
●Intensity—Less-intense stimuli (e.g., soft sounds or dim colors) habituate because 
they have less sensory impact.
●
●Discrimination—Simple stimuli habituate because they do not require attention to 
detail.
●
●Exposure—Frequently encountered stimuli habituate as the rate of exposure 
increases.
●
●Relevance—Stimuli that are irrelevant or unimportant habituate because they fail to 
attract attention.
Stimulus Selection Factors
In addition to the receiver’s mind-set, characteristics of the stimulus itself play an impor-
tant role to determine what we notice and what we ignore. Marketers need to understand 
these factors so they can create messages and packages that will have a better chance to 
cut through the clutter. For example, when researchers used infrared eye-tracking equip-
ment to measure what ads consumers look at, they found that visually complex ads are 
more likely to capture attention.69
In general, we are more likely to notice stimuli that differ from others around them 
(remember Weber’s Law). A message creates contrast in several ways:
●
●Size—The size of the stimulus itself in contrast to the competition helps to determine 
if it will command attention. Readership of a magazine ad increases in proportion to 
the size of the ad.70
●
●Color—As we’ve seen, color is a powerful way to draw attention to a product or to 
give it a distinct identity. Black & Decker developed a line of tools it called DeWalt to 
target the residential construction industry. The company colored the new line yellow 
instead of black; this made the equipment stand out against other “dull” tools.71
●
●Position—Not surprisingly, we stand a better chance of noticing stimuli that are in 
places we’re more likely to look. That’s why the competition is so heated among suppliers 
to have their products displayed in stores at eye level. In magazines, ads that are placed to-
ward the front of the issue, preferably on the right-hand side, also win out in the race for 
readers’ attention. (Hint: The next time you read a magazine, notice which pages you’re 
more likely to spend time looking at.)72 A study that tracked consumers’ eye movements 
as they scanned telephone directories also illustrates the importance of message posi-
tion. Consumers scanned listings in alphabetical order, and they noticed 93 percent of 
quarter-page display ads but only 26 percent of plain listings. Their eyes were drawn 
to color ads first, and these were viewed longer than black-and-white ones. In addition, 
subjects spent 54 percent more time viewing ads for businesses they ended up choosing, 
which illustrates the influence of attention on subsequent product choice.73 Another 
study reported that advertisers can increase brand recall and choice if they change the 
location of brand logos and product depictions across ad exposures.74 And products that 
are located in the center of a person’s field of vision are more likely to receive attention.75

116 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Position also is important in online advertising. Sophisticated eye-tracking studies 
clearly show that most search engine users view only a limited number of search results. 
When the typical shopper looks at a search page, his or her eye travels across the top 
of the search result, returns to the left of the screen, and then travels down to the last 
item shown on the screen without scrolling. Search engine marketers call this space on 
the screen where we are virtually guaranteed to view listings the golden triangle (see 
Figure 3.3).76
●
●Novelty—Stimuli that appear in unexpected ways or places tend to grab our atten-
tion. Packages that “stand out” visually on store shelves have an advantage, especially 
when the consumer doesn’t have a strong preference for brands in the category and he 
or she needs to make rapid decisions.77 One solution is to put ads in unconventional 
places, where there will be less competition for attention. These places include the 
backs of shopping carts, walls of tunnels, floors of sports stadiums, and yes, even pub-
lic restrooms.78 An outdoor advertising agency in London constructs huge ads in des-
erts and farm fields adjacent to airports so that passengers who look out the window 
can’t help but pay attention. It prints the digital ads on pieces of PVC mesh that sit on 
frames a few inches above the ground.79
Figure 3.3 THE GOLDEN TRIANGLE
Eye-tracking studies reveal that people 
 typically spend most of their time on  
a website looking at the “golden triangle” 
outlined by yellow, orange and red.
Source: Enquiro Search Solutions, Inc. (Now 
Mediative Performance LP).

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
117 
Indeed, one study indicates that novelty in the form of interruptions actually intensifies 
our experiences; distraction increases our enjoyment of pleasant stimuli because it ampli-
fies our dislike of unpleasant stimuli. According to this research, people actually enjoy TV 
shows more when commercials interrupt them. A group of undergraduates watched an 
episode of an old sitcom (Taxi) with which they were unfamiliar. Half viewed the original 
broadcast, which included ads for a jeweler, a lawyer, and other businesses; the other half 
saw the show with all commercials deleted. Students who saw the original actually gave it 
higher evaluations. The researchers found a similar pattern when they interrupted people 
who were getting a massage. In contrast, subjects reported that the irritating sound of a 
vacuum cleaner was even worse when they got a break from listening to it and then had to 
hear it resume! The researchers interpret these results as the outcome of adaptation: We 
experience events more intensely at first but then get used to them. When we experience an 
interruption and then start over, we revert to the original intensity level.80
Stage 3: Interpretation
Interpretation refers to the meanings we assign to sensory stim-
uli. Just as people differ in terms of the stimuli that they perceive, 
the meanings we assign to these stimuli vary as well. Many of 
these meanings depend on our socialization within a society: Even 
sensory perception is culturally specific. A team of anthropolo-
gists created a “kit” of stimuli to compare what people around the 
world perceive; this included color chips, scratch-and-sniff cards, sounds recorded at differ-
ent frequencies, and so on. When they exposed the same stimuli to people in more than 20 
different cultures, the results were dramatic: For example, prior research on mostly English-
speaking people indicated that the typical person is not good at identifying the smell of 
everyday things like coffee, peanut butter, and chocolate; they usually identify about half of 
them correctly. However, people who live on the Malay Peninsula were more accurate.
Language differences drive some of these contrasts. The researchers found that English 
and Dutch speakers used different metaphors than Farsi and Turkish people to describe 
pitch; they think of sounds as thin or thick rather than high or low. When Dutch speakers 
heard a tone while they were shown a mismatched height bar (e.g., a high tone and a low 
bar) and were asked to sing the tone, they sang a lower tone – but this wasn’t the case when 
they saw a thin or thick bar. In contrast, when Farsi speakers heard a tone and were shown 
a bar of mismatched thickness, they misremembered the tone but not when they were 
shown a bar mismatched for height.81 As we’ll see in Chapter 14, culture matters—a lot.
Two people can see or hear the same event, but their interpretation of it can be as differ-
ent as night and day, depending on what they had expected the stimulus to be. In one study, 
kids ages 3 to 5 who ate McDonald’s French fries served in a McDonald’s bag overwhelm-
ingly thought they tasted better than those who ate the same fries out of a plain white bag. 
Even carrots tasted better when they came out of a McDonald’s bag—more than half the 
kids preferred them to the same carrots served in a plain package! Ronald would be proud.82
The meaning we assign to a stimulus depends on the schema, or set of beliefs, to which 
we assign it. This in turn leads us to compare the stimulus to other similar ones we encoun-
tered in the past. Identifying and evoking the correct schema is crucial to many marketing 
decisions because this determines what criteria consumers will use to evaluate the product, 
package, or message. Extra Strength Maalox Whip Antacid flopped even though a spray can 
is a pretty effective way to deliver the product. To consumers, aerosol whips mean dessert 
toppings, not medication.83 When a college cafeteria gave menu items descriptive labels (e.g., 
Red Beans with Rice versus Traditional Cajun Red Beans with Rice, Chocolate Pudding ver-
sus Satin Chocolate Pudding) so that diners had more information about each option so they 
could more easily categorize it, sales increased by more than 25 percent.84
The location of a product’s image on a package influences the way our brains make 
sense of it. For example, as a result of what we have learned about the law of gravity 
(heavy objects sink and light objects float), we assume that products that are lower down 
in a frame weigh more than products that appear higher in a frame. In addition, objects 
objeCTIVe 3-5
 We interpret the stimuli 
to which we do pay 
attention according to 
learned patterns and 
expectations.

118 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
on the right of a frame appear heavier than products that appear on the left of a frame. 
This interpretation results from our intuition about levers: We know that the farther away 
an object is from a lever’s fulcrum, the more difficult it is to raise the item. Because we 
read from left to right, the left naturally becomes the visual fulcrum and thus we perceive 
objects on the right as heavier. Manufacturers should bear these package schematics in 
mind because they may influence our feelings about the contents in a package for better 
or worse. Think, for example, about a diet food marketer who wants shoppers to regard the 
menu items as lighter.85
As we’ll see in Chapter 7, products often assume a “brand personality” because we 
tend to assign them common human traits such as sophistication or sexiness. In other 
words, we anthropomorphize objects when we think of them in human terms, and this 
thought process may encourage us to evaluate products using schemas we apply to clas-
sify other people. A recent study illustrates how this works: Subjects saw an advertisement 
with a picture of a car that had been modified to make it appear as though it was either 
“smiling” or “frowning.” In some cases, the text of the ad was written in the first person, 
to activate a human schema, whereas others saw the same ad written in the third person. 
When the human schema was active, those who saw the “smiling” car rated it more favor-
ably than when they saw a “frowning” car.86
Stimulus organization
One factor that determines how we will interpret a stimulus is the relationship we assume 
it has with other events, sensations, or images in memory. When RJR Nabisco introduced 
a version of Teddy Grahams (a children’s product) for adults, it used understated packag-
ing colors to reinforce the idea that the new product was for grown-ups. But sales were 
disappointing. Nabisco changed the box to bright yellow to convey the idea that this was a 
fun snack, and buyers’ more positive association between a bright primary color and taste 
prompted adults to start buying the cookies.87
The stimuli we perceive are often ambiguous. It’s up to us to determine the meaning 
based on our past experiences, expectations, and needs. A classic experiment demon-
strated the process of “seeing what you want to see”: Princeton and Dartmouth students 
separately viewed a movie of a particularly rough football game between the two rival 
schools. Although everyone was exposed to the same stimulus, the degree to which stu-
dents saw infractions and the blame they assigned for those they did see depended on 
which college they attended.88
As this experiment demonstrates, we tend to project our own desires or assumptions 
onto products and advertisements. This interpretation process can backfire for marketers. 
We recognize patterns of stimuli, such as 
 familiar words. In this Austrian ad consum-
ers will tend to see the word “kitchen” even 
though the letters are scrambled.
Source: Client: XXXLutz; Head of Marketing: Mag. 
Thomas Saliger; Agency: Demner, Merlicek & 
Bergmann; Account Supervisor: Andrea Kliment; 
Account Manager: Albin Lenzer; Creative Directors: 
Rosa Haider, Tolga Buyukdoganay; Art Directors: 
Tolga Buyukdoganay, Rene Pichler; Copywriter: 
Alistair Thompson.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
119 
Planters LifeSavers Company found this out when it introduced Planters Fresh Roast, a 
vacuum-packed peanuts package. The idea was to capitalize on consumers’ growing love 
affair with fresh-roast coffee by emphasizing the freshness of the nuts in the same way. A 
great idea—until irate supermarket managers began calling to ask who was going to pay 
to clean the peanut gook out of their stores’ coffee-grinding machines.89
Interpretational biases: The eye of the beholder
Our brains tend to relate incoming sensations to others already in memory, based on some 
fundamental organizational principles. These principles derive from Gestalt psychology, a 
school of thought based upon the notion that people interpret meaning from the totality 
of a set of stimuli rather than from any individual stimulus. The German word Gestalt 
roughly means whole, pattern, or configuration, and we summarize this term as “the whole 
is greater than the sum of its parts.” A piecemeal perspective that analyzes each compo-
nent of the stimulus separately can’t capture the total effect. The Gestalt perspective pro-
vides several principles that relate to the way our brains organize stimuli:
●
●The closure principle states that people tend to perceive an incomplete picture as 
complete. That is, we tend to fill in the blanks based on our prior experience. This prin-
ciple explains why most of us have no trouble reading a neon sign even if several of its 
letters are burned out. The principle of closure is also at work when we hear only part 
of a jingle or theme. Marketing strategies that use the closure principle encourage audi-
ence participation, which increases the chance that people will attend to the message.
●
●The similarity principle tells us that consumers tend to group together objects that 
share similar physical characteristics. Green Giant relied on this principle when the 
company redesigned the packaging for its line of frozen vegetables. It created a “sea of 
green” look to unify all of its different offerings.
●
●The figure-ground principle states that one part of a stimulus will dominate (the 
figure), and other parts recede into the background (the ground). This concept is easy 
to understand if one thinks literally of a photograph with a clear and sharply focused 
object (the figure) in the center. The figure is dominant, and the eye goes straight to 
it. The parts of the configuration a person will perceive as figure or ground can vary 
depending on the individual consumer, as well as other factors. Similarly, marketing 
messages that use the figure-ground principle can make a stimulus the focal point of 
the message or merely the context that surrounds the focus.
Semiotics: The Meaning of Meaning
As we’ve seen, when we try to “make sense” of a marketing 
stimulus we interpret it in light of our prior associations. An 
experiment demonstrated how our assumptions influence our 
experiences; in this case, the study altered beer drinkers’ taste 
preferences simply by telling them different stories about a spe-
cific brew’s ingredients. The researcher offered bar patrons free 
beer if they would participate in a taste test (guess what: few refused the offer). Participants 
tasted two beers each, one a regular draft of Budweiser or Samuel Adams and the other 
the same beer with a few drops of balsamic vinegar added. Although most beer aficionados 
would guess that vinegar makes the drink taste bad, in fact 60 percent of the respondents 
who did not know which beer contained the vinegar actually preferred the doctored version 
to the regular one! But when tasters knew in advance which beer had vinegar in it before 
they took a swig, only one-third preferred that version.90
Much of the meaning we take away influences what we make of the symbolism we 
perceive. After all, on the surface many marketing images have virtually no literal connec-
tion to actual products. What does a cowboy have to do with a bit of tobacco rolled into a 
paper tube? How can a celebrity such as the basketball player LeBron James or the singer 
Rihanna enhance the image of a soft drink or a fast-food restaurant?
To help them understand how consumers interpret the meanings of symbols, some 
marketers turn to semiotics, a discipline that studies the correspondence between signs and 
objeCTIVe 3-6
The field of semiotics 
helps us to understand 
how marketers use 
symbols to create 
meaning.

120 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
symbols and their roles in how we assign meanings.91 Semiotics is a key link to consumer 
behavior because consumers use products to express their social identities. Products carry 
learned meanings, and we rely on marketers to help us figure out what those meanings are. 
As one set of researchers put it, “Advertising serves as a kind of culture/consumption dic-
tionary; its entries are products, and their definitions are cultural meanings.”92
From a semiotic perspective, every marketing message has three basic components: 
an object, a sign (or symbol), and an interpretant. The object is the product that is the focus 
of the message (e.g., Marlboro cigarettes). The sign is the sensory image that represents 
the intended meanings of the object (e.g., the Marlboro cowboy). The interpretant is 
the meaning we derive from the sign (e.g., rugged, individualistic, American). Figure 3.4 
diagrams this relationship.
According to semiotician Charles Sanders Peirce, signs relate to objects in one of 
three ways: They can resemble objects, connect to them, or tie to them conventionally. An 
icon is a sign that resembles the product in some way (e.g., the Ford Mustang has a gallop-
ing horse on the hood). An index is a sign that connects to a product because they share 
This Indian ad for paper products relies on 
the principle of similarity to create an image 
of a man.
Source: Courtesy of Taproot India. Contributors: 
Santosh Padhi, Agnello Dias, Ananth Nanavre, Amol 
Jadhav, and Amol Kamble.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
121 
some property (e.g., the pine tree on some of Procter & Gamble’s Spic and Span cleanser 
products conveys the shared property of fresh scent). A symbol is a sign that relates to a 
product by either conventional or agreed-on associations (e.g., the lion in Dreyfus Fund 
ads provides the conventional association with fearlessness and strength that it carries [or 
hopes to carry] over to the company’s approach to investments).93
A lot of time, thought, and money go into creating brand names and logos that 
clearly communicate a product’s image (even when a name like Exxon is generated by a 
computer!). Starbucks removed the words Starbucks Coffee as it introduced a new logo that 
 features only the famous siren character. The CEO explained this change means the com-
pany is thinking “beyond coffee.”94
The choice of a logo is even more difficult when the brand has to travel across cul-
tures. For example, as Chinese business becomes more global, companies refashion 
ancient Chinese pictograms into new corporate logos that resonate with both the East 
and the West. Chinese pictograms really are icons because the ancient symbols were once 
graphic depictions of the words they signify. China Telecom’s logo features two interlock-
ing letter Cs that together form the Chinese character for China but also represent the con-
cept of “customer” and “competition.” In addition, though, the symbol also resembles the 
horns of an ox, a hard-working animal. When the software company Oracle redesigned its 
logo for the Chinese market, it added three Chinese characters that signify the literal trans-
lation of the word oracle: “writing on a tortoise shell.” The expression dates back to ancient 
China when mystics scrawled prophecies on bones. The California firm was enthusiastic 
about the translation because it conveyed Oracle’s core competency—data storage.95
hyperreality
Perhaps you recall a recent Budweiser Super Bowl commercial that was set in “Whatever, 
U.S.A.” The action took place in a small town with blue streets, light poles and fencing—
not to mention a hot tub, sand pit, and concert stage smack in the middle of the main 
street surrounded by hordes of young partiers. In reality, the company paid the ski town of 
Crested Butte, Colorado, a cool half-million dollars to let it redo the place for a weekend and 
fly in 1,000 revelers to film a Bud Light commercial. That amount was double the original 
offer—after many residents pushed back at Budweiser’s plan to rent out their town.96
Not ringing a bell? How about the town of Mount Airy in North Carolina near the 
Virginia border? It was the inspiration for the mythical town of Mayberry in “The Andy 
Griffith Show.” To attract tourists, the town has slowly transformed itself into the TV town: 
Marlboro
Cigarettes
OBJECT
(Product)
SIGN
(Image)
INTERPRETANT
(Meaning)
Cowboy
Rugged
American
Figure 3.4 Semiotic Relationships

122 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
If you visit the Mayberry Motor Inn, an Aunt Bee look-alike will show you around. You 
can tour around in a vintage police car like the one that Sheriff Andy Taylor drove (Andy 
Griffith was born in Mount Airy). If you’re lucky you’ll stumble on the actress who played 
Thelma Lou in the original show; she still signs autographs.97
One of the hallmarks of modern advertising is that it creates a condition of 
hyperreality. This refers to the process of making real what is initially simulation or 
“hype.” Advertisers create new relationships between objects and interpretants when 
they invent connections between products and benefits, such as when an ad equates 
Marlboro cigarettes with the American frontier spirit. In a hyperreal environment, over 
time it’s no longer possible to discern the true relationship between the symbol and real-
ity. The “artificial” associations between product symbols and the real world take on 
lives of their own.
We see this a lot lately when fans create products that correspond to “realities” that never 
actually existed. These include Pinterest Boards for food mentioned in the steamy novel Fifty 
Shades of Gray and The Unofficial Mad Men Cookbook, The Unofficial Harry Potter Cookbook, The 
Unofficial Narnia Cookbook, A Feast of Ice and Fire (Game of Thrones), and Abbey Cooks Entertain 
(Downton Abbey)98 Even the fictional GEICO gecko has published a book titled You’re Only 
Human: A Guide to Life, that covers a range of topics from tattooing to flossing.99
Last Exit to Nowhere sells T-shirts that bear 
the logos of companies featured in works  
of fiction.
Source: Images from LastExittoNowhere.com.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
123 
Perceptual Positioning
So, we know that we often interpret a product stimulus in light of what we’ve learned about a 
product category and the characteristics of existing brands. Our perception of a brand com-
prises both its functional attributes (e.g., its features, its price, and so on) and its symbolic attri-
butes (its image and what we think it says about us when we use it). We’ll look more closely at 
issues such as brand image in later chapters, but for now it’s important to keep in mind that 
(as we stated in Chapter 1) our evaluation of a product typically is the result of what it means 
rather than what it does. This meaning—as consumers perceive it—constitutes the product’s 
market position, and it may have more to do with our expectations of product performance as 
communicated by its color, packaging, or styling than with the product itself.
When a marketer understands how consumers think about a set of competing 
brands, it can use these insights to develop a positioning strategy, which is a fundamen-
tal component of a company’s marketing efforts as it uses elements of the marketing mix 
(i.e., product design, price, distribution, and marketing communications) to influence the 
consumer’s interpretation of its meaning in the marketplace relative to its competitors. 
For example, although consumers’ preferences for the taste of one product over another 
are important, this functional attribute is only one component of product evaluation.
Marketers can use many dimensions to carve out a brand’s position in the market-
place. These include:100
●
●Lifestyle. Grey Poupon mustard is a “higher-class” condiment.
●
●Price leadership. L’Oréal sells its Noisôme brand face cream in upscale beauty 
shops, whereas its Plenitude brand is available for one-sixth the price in discount 
stores—even though both are based on the same chemical formula.101
A book supposedly written by the fictional 
GEICO gecko illustrates hyperreality.
Source: All text and images are copy righted with 
permission from GEICO.

124 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
Chapter SuMMary
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. the design of a product often is a key driver of its 
success or failure.
In recent years, the sensory experiences we receive from 
products and services have become a high priority when 
we choose among competing options. Consumers increas-
ingly want to buy things that will give them hedonic value 
in addition to functional value. They often believe that 
most brands perform similarly, so they weigh a product’s 
aesthetic qualities heavily when they select a brand.
2. products and commercial messages often appeal to our 
senses, but because of the profusion of these messages 
we don’t notice most of them.
Marketing stimuli have important sensory qualities. We 
rely on colors, odors, sounds, tastes, and even the “feel” of 
products when we evaluate them. Not all sensations suc-
cessfully make their way through the perceptual  process. 
Many stimuli compete for our attention, and we don’t 
 notice or accurately interpret the majority of them.
3. perception is a three-stage process that translates raw 
stimuli into meaning.
Perception is the process by which physical sensations, 
such as sights, sounds, and smells, are selected, organized, 
and interpreted. The eventual interpretation of a stimu-
lus allows it to be assigned meaning. A perceptual map is 
a widely used marketing tool that evaluates the relative 
standing of competing brands along relevant dimensions.
4. Subliminal advertising is a controversial—but largely 
ineffective—way to talk to consumers.
So-called subliminal persuasion and related techniques that 
expose people to visual and aural messages below the  sensory 
threshold are controversial. Although evidence that sub-
liminal persuasion is effective is virtually nonexistent, many 
 consumers continue to believe that advertisers use this tech-
nique. Some of the factors that determine which stimuli (above 
the threshold level) do get perceived include the amount of 
exposure to the stimulus, how much attention it generates, 
and how it is interpreted. In an increasingly crowded stimu-
lus environment, advertising clutter occurs when too many 
marketing-related messages compete for attention.
5. We interpret the stimuli to which we do pay attention 
according to learned patterns and expectations.
We don’t attend to a stimulus in isolation. We classify and 
organize it according to principles of perceptual organiza-
tion. A Gestalt, or overall pattern, guides these principles. 
Specific grouping principles include closure, similarity, 
and figure-ground relationships. The final step in the pro-
cess of perception is interpretation. Symbols help us make 
sense of the world by providing us with an interpretation 
of a stimulus that others often share. The degree to which 
the symbolism is consistent with our previous experience 
affects the meaning we assign to related objects.
6. the field of semiotics helps us to understand how 
marketers use symbols to create meaning.
Marketers try to communicate with consumers by creat-
ing relationships between their products or services and 
desired attributes. A semiotic analysis involves the cor-
respondence between stimuli and the meaning of signs. 
The intended meaning may be literal (e.g., an icon such 
as a street sign with a picture of children playing). Or 
it may be indexical if it relies on shared characteristics 
(e.g., the red in a stop sign means danger). Meaning also 
can be conveyed by a symbol in which an image is given 
meaning by convention or by agreement of members of a 
society (e.g., stop signs are octagonal, whereas yield signs 
are triangular). Marketer-created associations often take 
on lives of their own as consumers begin to believe that 
hype is, in fact, real. We call this condition hyperreality.
●
●Attributes. Bounty paper towels are “the quicker picker-upper.”
●
●Product class. The Spyder Eclipse is a sporty convertible.
●
●Competitors. Northwestern Insurance is “the quiet company.”
●
●Occasions. Wrigley’s gum is an alternative at times when smoking is not permitted.
●
●Users. Levi’s Dockers target men in their 20s to 40s.
●
●Quality. At Ford, “Quality is job 1.”

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
125 
Key terMS
Absolute threshold, 108
Adaptation, 115
Attention, 111
Audio watermark, 104
Augmented reality (AR), 99
Automated Attention Analysis  
(AAA), 114
Closure principle, 119
Color forecasts, 103
Context effects, 98
Contrast, 115
Differential threshold, 108
Embeds, 110
Endowment effect, 105
Exposure, 108
Eyeball economy, 111
Figure-ground principle, 119
Gestalt, 119
Golden triangle, 116
Haptic, 105
Hedonic consumption, 98
Hyperreality, 122
Icon, 120
Index, 120
interpretant, 120
Interpretation, 117
Just noticeable difference (j.n.d), 108
Kansei engineering, 105
Media snacker, 111
Multitasking, 111
Natural user interface, 105
Object, 120
Perception, 98
Perceptual defense, 115
Perceptual selection, 114
Perceptual vigilance, 115
Positioning strategy, 123
Psychophysics, 108
Rich media, 113
Schema, 117
Semiotics, 119
Sensation, 98
Sensory marketing, 99
Sensory overload, 111
Sensory threshold, 108
Sign, 120
Similarity principle, 119
Sound symbolism, 104
Subliminal perception, 111
Symbol, 121
Trade dress, 103
Virtual reality (VR), 99
Weber’s Law, 109
revieW
 
3-1 Define hedonic consumption and provide an example.
 
3-2 How does the sense of touch influence consumers’ reac-
tions to products?
 
3-3 Identify and describe the three stages of perception.
 
3-4 Why is Weber’s Law a challenge for green marketers?
 
3-5 Does subliminal perception work? Why or why not?
 
3-6 Compare and contrast perceptual vigilance and percep-
tual defense.
 
3-7 “The whole is greater than the sum of its parts.” Explain 
this statement.
 
3-8 How do you identify a product’s object, sign (or symbol), 
and interpretant?
 
3-9 What do we mean by the concept of augmented real-
ity? Give an example that is not discussed in the chapter. 
How does this concept differ from virtual reality?
 3-10 How does semiotics help marketers understand con-
sumer behavior?
ConSuMer Behavior Challenge
●
■DISCuSS
 3-11 Subliminal advertising is not illegal in the United States, 
but it is in the United Kingdom and Australia. Should it 
be made illegal globally considering there is no proof it 
actually works?
 3-12 The slogan for the movie Godzilla was “Size does matter.” 
Should this be the slogan for the United States as well? 
Many marketers seem to believe so. The average serv-
ing size for a fountain drink has gone from 12 ounces 
to 20 ounces. An industry consultant explains that the 
32-ounce Big Gulp is so popular because “people like 
something large in their hands. The larger the better.” 
Some cities (most notably New York) have tried to ban 
sales of sugary drinks greater than 24 ounces but so far 
unsuccessfully.102 Hardee’s Monster Burger, complete 
with two beef patties and five pieces of bacon, weighs 
in at 63 grams of fat and more than 1,000 calories. 
The standard for TV sets used to be 19 inches; now it’s 
32 inches and growing. Hulking sport utility vehicles 
(SUVs) have replaced tiny sports cars as the status vehi-
cle of the new millennium. What’s up with our fascina-
tion with bigness? Is this a uniquely U.S. preference? Do 
you believe that “bigger is better”? Is this a sound mar-
keting strategy?
 3-13 Augmented reality applications may reach the level 
of sophistication where we observe almost everything 
through the screen of our smartphones to receive an 
“enhanced” experience. Do you view this as a positive 
development or a problem?
 3-14 Analysts believe that augmented reality (AR) apps 
will be worth $5.2 billion (approximately) by 2017. 
However, AR will not be available to everyone. Is your 
country’s infrastructure ready for this next leap in 
technology?
 3-15 Identify a locally produced brand that has retained  
its normal packaging size despite having less contents.  
Did the manufacturer make this change clear?

126 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
a luSh treat for the SenSeS
A visit to the Lush store is pure indulgence for the senses, and 
that’s exactly what the store and its planners want its custom-
ers to expect, feel, and remember—a rich experience that leaves 
the senses and the mind invigorated. Lush manufactures a 
range of cosmetics including soaps, bathing foams, bath oils, 
creams, moisturizers, massage bars, cleansers, makeup, per-
fumes, and deodorants. The company was established in 1994 
in Poole, in the United Kingdom, to provide cosmetics that 
are fresh, natural, and fun. Today, Lush has 130 shops in 50 
countries around the world and firmly adheres to its original 
philosophy. Lush was ranked as the fourth-best company in the 
United Kingdom for Customer Experience Excellence in 2014, 
while its closest competitor Body Shop was in 38th place.
Lush is passionate about being fresh and organic, and 
this passion drives the company. Their products are made of 
the freshest organic fruits and vegetables, the finest essential 
oils, and safe synthesis. Their goal is clear and simple: they 
want to offer the freshest products ever. This commitment 
attracts the natural customer community and plays a vital 
role in how the company is perceived by its target customers. 
The company’s appeal is further bolstered by a no-animal 
testing policy, environmentally friendly packaging and label-
ling, helpful and friendly staff, and a unique store design and 
ambiance.  
The Lush experience starts even before one enters the shop. 
The exotic, natural fragrances of Lush products can be taken in 
from a distance, and shoppers are naturally drawn to the store. 
Once inside, all senses come alive within a few seconds. The 
colorful, unwrapped products are displayed like food on market 
stalls. The soaps are sold as chunky blocks that look like cheese, 
the Bath bombs are piled up like fruit, the face masks are kept in 
cold pots in salad-bar type tables, and butter cream is arranged 
like cake. The unusual forms of the products and the creative 
stocking style grab the customer’s attention, and their enchant-
ing scents drives the consumer to look even further. The overall 
ambiance of the store is attractive and comfortable, with the 
walls and lighting creating a warm effect. The furniture is made 
of natural wood, and the flooring is done with natural stone that 
creates a very fitting environment for the fresh, natural products. 
The sounds in the store are a combination of background music 
and a market-type buzz created by the salespeople’s active inter-
action and engagement with customers. 
The location of Lush stores is mostly near high-end fashion 
stores, enabling them to target the latter’s high-end custom-
ers and communicate a premium image. Lush hires and trains 
energetic and happy people who interact with the customers as 
if they are taking to their friends, showing them the things they 
love and encouraging them to touch the unwrapped products 
and smell them. The salespersons offer free skin and hair consul-
tations and invite customers for a live demonstration or even a 
hand massage.
Lush carefully selects the words it uses on its labels, pack-
ages, store signage, Web sites, and advertising. The words “fresh,” 
“natural,” and “handmade” are used extensively. Labelling con-
tains names of natural ingredients like chocolate, olives, sugar, 
cinnamon, coconut oil, and honey. The choice of words in dif-
ferent communications is creative, and this adds to its fun and 
green image; examples include the “Go Naked” campaign and 
the “Have a Sniff” point-of-purchase sign.  The “Go Naked” cam-
paign encouraged consumers to buy unpackaged products to 
help save resources that are wasted by over-packing products. 
More than 45 percent of lush products are sold naked; that is, 
Case Study 
●
■APPLy
 3-16 Compile a list of ten or twelve products you enjoyed 
when you were a child. What are your recollections 
about their size and price? Find a stockist of the brands 
and compare your recollections with the current prod-
uct offerings. Do the products appear to be the same size 
and have the same value? How would you apply Weber’s 
Law to this comparison?
 3-17 Interview three to five male and female friends each 
about their perceptions of mobile phones and their func-
tionality. Construct a perceptual map for each model. 
Based on your map of mobile phones, do you see any 
areas that are not adequately served by current offer-
ings? What (if any) gender differences did you notice 
regarding both the relevant dimensions raters use and 
how they place specific models along these dimensions?  
 3-18 Choose one of your favorite products that you have been 
buying for some years. How has it changed over the 
years? Is it better, bigger, smaller, easier to use, better 
tasting?
 3-19 Colors and designs of products are chosen so that they 
appeal to particular target groups. Colors are used to 
attract male or female consumers. The design of logos 
and packaging are also created to be attractive and 
appealing. What is your view of the ideal color, design, 
and packaging that would attract male consumers  
compared to female ones?
 3-20 Finding new locations for advertisements is a constant 
quest. Consider your own country or region. Where are 
advertisements appearing today where there were no 
advertisements in the past?

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
127 
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 3.22 Many studies have shown that our sensory detection abilities decline as we grow 
older. Discuss the implications of the absolute threshold for marketers who want 
to appeal to the elderly.
 3.23 The chapter discussed the “talking window,” which a German ad agency is placing 
in subway cars. When the agency posted a YouTube video to promote the 
platform, one person commented, “At what point does it stop being advertising 
and start being harassment?” How would you answer this question?103
noteS
 
1. Lisa Leake, “Why Some Milk is Not Refrigerated (and an Explanation 
of UHT),” (July 31st, 2013), http://www.100daysofrealfood.com/2013/ 
07/31/uht-why-some-milk-is-not-refrigerated/, accessed March 5, 2015; 
http://www.milkunleashed.com/shelf-safe-milk/aseptic-packaging- 
uht-milk.html, accessed July 22, 2013; http://wiki.answers.com/Q/
What_is_the_difference_between_fresh_milk_and_uht_treated_milk_
and_any_advantages_and_disadvantages, accessed March 28, 2011; Craig 
Baumrucker, “Why Does Organic Milk Last So Much Longer Than Regular 
Milk?,” Scientific American (June 6, 2008), www.scientificamerican.com/
article.cfm?id=experts-organic-milk-lasts-longer, accessed June 30, 2009.
 
2. Brooks Barnes, “To Lure Young, Movie Theaters Shake, Smell and Spritz,” 
New York Times (November 29, 2014), http://www.NewYorkTimes 
.com/2014/11/30/business/media/to-lure-young-movie-theaters-shake-
smell-and-spritz.html?ref=technology, accessed February 23, 2015.
 
3. http://www.universalorlando.com/Theme_Parks/Universal_Studios_
Orlando/Attractions/fear_factor_live.aspx, accessed March 28, 2011; Nat 
Ives, “Putting Some Terror in Family Outings,” New York Times (January 
17, 2005), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed January 17, 2005.
 
4. Ryan S. Elder and Aradhna Krishna, “The Effects of Advertising Copy on 
Sensory Thoughts and Perceived Taste,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, 
no. 5 (2010): 748–756.
 
5. Glenn Collins, “Owens-Corning’s Blurred Identity,” New York Times (August 
19, 1994): D4.
 
6. Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Morris B. Holbrook, “Hedonic Consumption: 
Emerging Concepts, Methods, and Propositions,” Journal of Marketing 46 
(Summer 1982): 92–101.
 
7. Joan Myers-Levy, Rui (Juliet) Zhu, and Lan Jiang, “Context Effects From 
Bodily Sensations: Examining Bodily Sensations Induced by Flooring and 
the Moderating Role of Product Viewing Distance,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 37 (June 2010): 1–14.
 
8. Jiewen Hong and Yacheng Sun, “Warm It Up with Love: The Effect of 
Physical Coldness on Liking of Romance Movies,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 39, no. 2 (August 2012): 293–306.
 
9. Aradhna Krishna, May O. Lwin, and Maureen Morrin, “Product Scent and 
Memory,” Journal of Consumer Research 37 (June 2010): 57–67.
 10. Virginia Postrel, “The New Trend in Spending,” New York Times (September 
9, 2004), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed September 9, 2004.
 11. Emily Cadei, “Cleaning Up: S. F. Duo Putting a Shine on Its Product Line,” 
San Francisco Business Times Online Edition 17, no. 16 (December 6, 2002).
 12. Martin Reimann, Judith Zaichkowsky, Carolin Neuhaus, Thomas Bender, 
and Bernd Weber, “Aesthetic Package Design: A Behavioral, Neural, and 
Psychological Investigation,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 20 (2010): 
431–441.
 13. http://www.microsoft.com/microsoft-hololens/en-us, accessed March 9, 
2015.
 14. Gabriel Kahn, “Chinese Characters Are Gaining New Meaning as 
Corporate Logos,” Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition (July 18, 2002).
 15. Natalie Zmuda, “Why Tommy Hilfiger Boosted Ad Budget by 60%, Aired 
First Branded TV Spot Since 2005,” Ad Age CMO Strategy, http://adage 
.com/article/cmo-strategy/marketing-tommy-hilfiger-boosted-ad-budget- 
60/147258/, accessed April 28, 2011.
 16. Andrew Rosenblum, “2015: The Year Virtual Reality Finally Reaches 
Living Rooms,” Popular Science (January 12, 2015), http://www.popsci 
.com/virtual-reality-meets-its-public, accessed March 9, 2015.
 17. Adam Bryant, “Plastic Surgery at AmEx,” Newsweek (October 4, 1999): 
55.
 18. Amitava Chattopadhyay, Gerald J. Gorn, and Peter R. Darke, Roses Are 
Red and Violets Are Blue—Everywhere? Cultural Universals and Differences 
in Color Preference among Consumers and Marketing Managers (unpublished 
manuscript, University of British Columbia, Fall 1999); Joseph Bellizzi and 
Robert E. Hite, “Environmental Color, Consumer Feelings, and Purchase 
Likelihood,” Psychology & Marketing 9 (1992): 347–363; Ayn E. Crowley, 
“The Two-Dimensional Impact of Color on Shopping,” Marketing Letters 4 
(January 1993); Gerald J. Gorn, Amitava Chattopadhyay, and Tracey Yi, 
Effects of Color as an Executional Cue in an Ad: It’s in the Shade (unpublished 
manuscript, University of British Columbia, 1994).
without packaging. Similarly, the “Have a Sniff” sign next to 
the unwrapped products promotes the package-less style of Lush 
while also inviting customers to take in the scent of the products.
DiSCuSSion QueStionS
 CS 3-1 Based on your understanding of the perceptual pro-
cess, discuss how Lush uses sensory marketing for 
its products and encourages its customers to process 
information. 
 CS 3-2 Are the decisions of Lush’s consumers driven by a ra-
tional consumption appeal that uses the message of 
ethical, organic, fresh, and healthy products, or is it 
influenced by the hedonic consumption and the plea-
surable multi-sensory experience they encounter in the 
stores?  
Sources: KPMG Nunwood, “Lush vs. The Body Shop—Why Retail CEM 
Is Essential for CX,” 2014, http://www.nunwood.com/lush-vs-body-shop-
retail-customer-experience-management-essential-customer-experience-
excellence/, accessed November 7, 2015; N. Bruins, “Why It’s Lush to Focus 
on Consumer Experience,” k3reatil, 2014, http://k3retail.com/blog/why-
its-lush-to-focus-on-consumer-experience/, accessed November 3, 2015; 
Brandrepublic.com, “Case Study: Lush—The Scent of Success,” 2015, 
http://www.brandrepublic.com/article/996257/case-study-lush—scent-
success#HIJAoyEIpKzqjFob.99, accessed November 7, 2015; Lushusa.
com, “A Lush Life,” 2015, http://www.lushusa.com/A-Lush-Life/about-us, 
en_US, pg.html, accessed November 7, 2015.

128 
SeCTIon 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
 19. Tine DeBock, Mario Pandelaere, and Patrick Van Kenhove, “When Colors 
Backfire: The Impact of Color Cues on Moral Judgment,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 23, no. 3 (2013): 341–348.
 20. Pam Belluck, “Reinvent Wheel? Blue Room. Defusing a Bomb? Red Room,” 
New York Times (February 5, 2009), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed 
February 5, 2009.
 21. Mark G. Frank and Thomas Gilovich, “The Dark Side of Self and Social 
Perception: Black Uniforms and Aggression in Professional Sports,” Journal 
of Personality & Social Psychology 54 (1988): 74–85.
 22. Ioannis Kareklas, Frédéric F. Brunel, and Robin A. Coulter, “Judgment Is 
Not Color Blind: The Impact of Automatic Color Preference on Product 
and Advertising Preferences,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 24, no. 1 
(2014): 87–95.
 23. Gün R. Semin and Tomás A. Palma, “Why the Bride Wears White: 
Grounding Gender With Brightness,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 24, 
no. 2 (2014): 217–225.
 24. Pamela Paul, “Color by Numbers,” American Demographics (February 
2002): 31–36.
 25. Marc Gobé, Emotional Branding: The New Paradigm for Connecting Brands to 
People (New York: Allworth Press, 2001).
 26. Dirk Olin, “Color Cognition,” New York Times (November 30, 2003), www 
.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed November 30, 2003.
 27. “Ny Emballage og Ny Navn Fordoblede Salget,” Markedsforing 12 (1992): 
24. Adapted from Michael R. Solomon, Gary Bamossy, and Soren 
Askegaard, Consumer Behavior: A European Perspective, 2nd ed. (London: 
Pearson Education, 2001).
 28. Meg Rosen and Frank Alpert, “Protecting Your Business Image: The 
Supreme Court Rules on Trade Dress,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 11 
(1994): 50–55.
 29. http://www.pantone.com/pages/index.aspx?pg=21163&, accessed March 
6, 2015.
 30. Mark J. Miller, “Smell Ball! New York Yankees Scents a Branding 
Opportunity,” 
Brand 
Channel, 
February 
13, 
2012, 
http://www 
.brandchannel.com/home/post/2012/02/13/New-York-Yankees-
Fragrance-021312.aspx, accessed February 3, 2015.
 31. The Associated Press, “Burger King to Offer Fragrance, Eau De Whopper,” 
New York Times (March 20, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/21/ 
business/burger-king-to-offer-fragrance-eau-de-whopper.html?_r=0, accessed 
March 21, 2015.
 32. Deborah J. Mitchell, Barbara E. Kahn, and Susan C. Knasko, “There’s 
Something in the Air: Effects of Congruent or Incongruent Ambient 
Odor on Consumer Decision-Making,” Journal of Consumer Research 22 
(September 1995): 229–238; for a review of olfactory cues in store envi-
ronments, see also Eric R. Spangenberg, Ayn E. Crowley, and Pamela W. 
Henderson, “Improving the Store Environment: Do Olfactory Cues Affect 
Evaluations and Behaviors?” Journal of Marketing 60 (April 1996): 67–80.
 33. Krishna Aradhna, May O. Lwin, and Maureen Morrin, “Product Scent and 
Memory,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 1 (2010): 57–67.
 34. Adriana V. Madzharov, Lauren G. Block, and Maureen Morrin, “The Cool 
Scent of Power: Effects of Ambient Scent on Consumer Preferences and 
Choice Behavior,” Journal of Marketing January 79, no. 1 (2015): 83–96, 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1509/jm.13.0263.
 35. Pam Scholder Ellen and Paula Fitzgerald Bone, “Does It Matter if It Smells? 
Olfactory Stimuli as Advertising Executional Cues,” Journal of Advertising 
27 (Winter 1998): 29–40.
 36. Jack Hitt, “Does the Smell of Coffee Brewing Remind You of Your Mother?” 
New York Times Magazine (May 7, 2000): 73–77.
 37. Maxine Wilkie, “Scent of a Market,” American Demographics (August 
1995): 40–49.
 38. Nicholas Wade, “Scent of a Man Is Linked to a Woman’s Selection,” 
New York Times (January 22, 2002), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed 
January 22, 2002.
 39. Dale Buss, “Audio Branding: BMW Uses New Sound Signature to Help 
Redefine the Brand,” Brand Channel, March 20, 2013, http://www.brand 
channel.com/home/post/2013/03/20/BMW-Sound-Signature-032013 
.aspx, accessed February 23, 2015; Sheila Shayon, “World Cup Winner: 
Coca-Cola for Sonic Branding,” BrandChannel (July 12, 2010), http://www 
.brandchannel.com/home/post/2010/07/12/Coca-Cola-World-Cup-
Wavin-Flag.aspx, accessed March 6, 2015.
 40. Bruce G. Vanden Bergh, Janay Collins, Myrna Schultz, and Keith Adler, 
“Sound Advice on Brand Names,” Journalism Quarterly 61, no. 4 (1984): 
835–840; Eric Yorkston and Geeta Menon, “A Sound Idea: Phonetic Effects 
of Brand Names on Consumer Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Research 
31 (June 2004): 43–51; Keith S. Coulter and Robin A. Coulter, “Small 
Sounds, Big Deals: Phonetic Symbolism Effects in Pricing,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 37, no. 2 (2010): 315–328.
 41. L. J. Shrum, Sarah Roche, and Tina M. Lowrey, “What’s in a Name: 
Sound Symbolism of Stock Ticker Symbols Predict Stock Performance,” in 
June Cotte and Stacy Wood, eds., NA—Advances in Consumer Research 42 
(Duluth, MN: Association for Consumer Research, 2014): 654–655.
 42. Sarah Ellison and Erin White, “‘Sensory’ Marketers Say the Way to Reach 
Shoppers Is the Nose,” Advertising Age (November 24, 2000): 1–3.
 43. “You Can Look—But Don’t Touch,” Science Daily (January 20, 2009), 
www.sciencedaily.com, accessed January 30, 2009; Joann Peck and 
Suzanne B. Shu, “The Effect of Mere Touch on Perceived Ownership,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 3 (2009): 434–447.
 44. Joann Peck, Victor A. Barger, and Andrea Webb, “In Search of a Surrogate 
for Touch: The Effect of Haptic Imagery on Perceived Ownership,” Journal 
of Consumer Psychology 23, no. 2 (2013): 189–196; S. Adam Brasel and 
James Gips, “Tablets, Touchscreens, and Touchpads: How Varying Touch 
Interfaces Trigger Psychological Ownership and Endowment,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 24, no. 2 (2014): 226–233.
 45. Jacob Hornik, “Tactile Stimulation and Consumer Response,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 19 (December 1992): 449–458.
 46. Brett A. S. Martin, “A Stranger’s Touch: Effects of Accidental Interpersonal 
Touch on Consumer Evaluations and Shopping Time,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 39, no. 1 (June 2012): 174–184.
 47. J. Peck and T. L. Childers, “Individual Differences in Haptic Information 
Processing: The ‘Need for Touch’ Scale,” Journal of Consumer Research 30, 
no. 3 (2003): 430–442.
 48. Material adapted from a presentation by Glenn H. Mazur, QFD Institute, 
2002.
 49. John Tagliabue, “Sniffing and Tasting with Metal and Wire,” New York 
Times (February 17, 2002), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed February 
17, 2002.
 50. Claire Cain Miller, “To Win Over Users, Gadgets Have to be Touchable,”  
New York Times (September 1, 2010), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2010/ 
09/01/technology/01touch.html?_r=1&emc=tnt&tntemail0=y, accessed 
March 27, 2011.
 51. Michael W. Allen, Richa Gupta, and Arnaud Monnier, “The Interactive 
Effect of Cultural Symbols and Human Values on Taste Evaluation,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 35 (August 2008): 294–308.
 52. Becky Gaylord, “Bland Food Isn’t So Bad—It Hurts Just to Think about 
This Stuff,” Wall Street Journal (April 21, 1995): B1.
 53. Stephanie Clifford and Catherine Rampell, quoted in “Food Inflation 
Kept Hidden in Tinier Bags,” New York Times (March 28, 2011), 
http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2011/03/29/business/29shrink 
.html?pagewanted=all, accessed March 29, 2011.
 54. Ellen Byron, “Selling Detergent Bottles’ Big Shrink Suds Makers’ Challenge: 
Convince Consumers Less Isn’t Really Less,” Wall Street Journal (May 21, 
2007), www.wsj.com, accessed May 21, 2007.
 55. David Knowles, “German Company Tests ‘Talking Window’ that Pumps 
Ads Into Brains of Train Passengers,” New York Daily News (July 3, 2013), 
http://www.nydailynews.com/news/world/talking-window-advertising-
technique-tested-germany-article-1.1391390, accessed February 23, 2015.
 56. Michael Lev, “No Hidden Meaning Here: Survey Sees Subliminal Ads,” New 
York Times (May 3, 1991): D7.
 57. “ABC Rejects KFC Commercial, Citing Subliminal Advertising,” Wall Street 
Journal (March 2, 2006), www.wsj.com, accessed March 2, 2006.
 58. Quoted in Claire Groden, “Potty-Mouthed Minions Wreak Happy Meal 
Havoc,” Fortune (July 9, 2015), http://fortune.com/2015/07/09/minions-
mcdonalds-happy-meal/, accessed July 11, 2015.
 59. Andrew B. Aylesworth, Ronald C. Goodstein, and Ajay Kalra, “Effect of 
Archetypal Embeds on Feelings: An Indirect Route to Affecting Attitudes?” 
Journal of Advertising 28, no. 3 (Fall 1999): 73–81.
 60. Joel Saegert, “Why Marketing Should Quit Giving Subliminal Advertising 
the Benefit of the Doubt,” Psychology & Marketing 4 (Summer 1987):  
107–120; see also Dennis L. Rosen and Surendra N. Singh, “An 
Investigation of Subliminal Embed Effect on Multiple Measures of 
Advertising Effectiveness,” Psychology & Marketing 9 (March–April 1992): 
157–173; for a more recent review, see Kathryn T. Theus, “Subliminal 
Advertising and the Psychology of Processing Unconscious Stimuli: A 
Review of Research,” Psychology & Marketing (May–June 1994): 271–290.
 61. Quoted in Brian Steinberg, “Study: Young Consumers Switch Media 27 
Times an Hour: Survey of ‘Digital Natives’ Indicates Brands Must Step Up 
Creative Game to Hold Their Attention,” Advertising Age (April 9, 2012), 
http://adage.com/article/news/study-young-consumers-switch-media- 
27-times-hour/234008/?utm_source=digital_email&utm_medium 
=newsletter&utm_campaign=adage, accessed January 30, 2015.
 62. Brian Steinberg, “How to Keep Ad Skippers from Fast-Forwarding Your 
Ad,” Advertising Age (March 31, 2009), www.adage.com, accessed March 
31, 2009.

 
ChAPTer 3   Perception 
129 
 63. Joseph Burris, “Plugged-in Generation Multi-Tasking Big Time,” Baltimore 
Sun (February 17, 2010), http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2010-02-17/
features/bal-md.pa.kids17feb17_1_cell-phones-multi-tasking-parental-
controls, accessed May 5, 2011.
 64. Sharon Waxman, “At an Industry Media Lab, Close Views of Multitasking,” 
New York Times (May 15, 2006), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2006/ 
05/15/technology/15research.html, accessed August 22, 2011.
 65. Emma Innes, “Is Your Inbox Making You Ill? Reading Work Emails 
Causes Your Blood Pressure and Heart Rate to Soar,” Daily Mail (June 
4, 2013), http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2335699/Is-inbox-
making-ill-Reading-work-emails-causes-blood-pressure-heart-rate-soar 
.html#ixzz3Tii7BFks, accessed March 7, 2015.
 66. Stephanie Castillo, “Teens Told They Need to ‘Focus on the Task at Hand’ 
Make a Case for Multitasking,” (October10, 2014), Medical Daily, http://
www.medicaldaily.com/teens-told-they-need-focus-task-hand-make-case-
multitasking-306721, accessed March 5, 2015; Matt Richtel, “Attached 
to Technology and Paying a Price,” New York Times (June 6, 2010), 
http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2010/06/07/technology/07brain 
.html?pagewanted=1, accessed April 17, 2011.
 67. A. Selin Atalay, H. Onur Bodur, and Dina Rasolofoarison, “Shining in 
the Center: Central Gaze Cascade Effect on Product Choice,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 39, no. 4 (December 2012): 848–866.
 68. Lee Gomes, “As Web Ads Grow, Sites Get Trickier about Targeting You,” 
Wall Street Journal (May 9, 2007): B1.
 69. Rik Pieters, Michel Wedel, and Rajeev Batra, “The Stopping Power of 
Advertising: Measures and Effects of Visual Complexity,” Journal of 
Marketing 74 (September 2010): 48–60.
 70. Roger Barton, Advertising Media (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964).
 71. Suzanne Oliver, “New Personality,” Forbes (August 15, 1994): 114.
 72. Adam Finn, “Print Ad Recognition Readership Scores: An Information 
Processing Perspective,” Journal of Marketing Research 25 (May 1988): 
168–177.
 73. Gerald L. Lohse, “Consumer Eye Movement Patterns on Yellow Pages 
Advertising,” Journal of Advertising 26 (Spring 1997): 61–73.
 74. Stewart A. Shapiro and Jesper H. Nielsen, “What the Blind Eye Sees: 
Incidental Change Detection as a Source of Perceptual Fluency,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 39, no. 6 (2013):: 1202–1218
 75. A. Selin Atalay, H. Onur Bodur, and Dina Rasolofoarison, “Shining in 
the Center: Central Gaze Cascade Effect on Product Choice,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 39, no. 4 (2012): 848–866.
 76. Linda Stern, “Bigger Than at Times Square,” Newsweek (March 24, 2008), 
www.newsweek.com.
 77. Milica Milosavljevic, Vidhya Navalpakkam, Christof Koch, and Antonio 
Rangel, “Relative Visual Saliency Differences Induce Sizable Bias in 
Consumer Choice,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 22, no. 1 (2012): 67–74.
 78. Chris Sherman, “A New F-Word for Google Search Results,” Search Engine 
Watch (March 8, 2005), http://searchenginewatch.com/3488076, ac-
cessed June 29, 2010.
 79. Michael R. Solomon and Basil G. Englis, “Reality Engineering: Blurring the 
Boundaries Between Marketing and Popular Culture,” Journal of Current 
Issues & Research in Advertising 16, no. 2 (Fall 1994): 1–18; Michael 
McCarthy, “Ads Are Here, There, Everywhere: Agencies Seek Creative Ways 
to Expand Product Placement,” USA Today (June 19, 2001): 1B.
 80. Benedict Carey, “Liked the Show? Maybe It Was the Commercials,” New 
York Times (March 2, 2009), http://topics.NewYorkTimes.com/topics/ 
reference/timestopics/people/c/benedict_carey/index.html, accessed March 3, 
2009.
 81. T. M. Luhrmann, “Can’t Place That Smell? You Must Be American: 
How Culture Shapes Our Senses,” New York Times, September 5, 2014, 
http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2014/09/07/opinion/sunday/how-
culture-shapes-our-senses.html?ref=international, accessed February 
23, 2015.
 82. Nicholas Bakalar, “If It Says McDonald’s, Then It Must Be Good,” New York 
Times (August 14, 2007), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed August 14, 
2007.
 83. Robert M. McMath, “Image Counts,” American Demographics (May 1998): 64.
 84. Brian Wansink, James Painter, and Koert van Ittersum, “Descriptive Menu 
Labels’ Effect on Sales,” Cornell Hotel & Restaurant Administration Quarterly 
(December 2001): 68–72.
 85. Xiaoyan Deng and Barbara E. Kahn, “Is Your Product on the Right Side? The 
‘Location Effect’ on Perceived Product Heaviness and Package Evaluation,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 46, no. 6 (December 2009): 725–738.
 86. Pankaj Aggarwal and Ann L. McGill, “Is That Car Smiling at Me? Schema 
Congruity as a Basis for Evaluating Anthropomorphized Products,” Journal 
of Consumer Behavior 34 (December 2007): 468–479.
 87. Anthony Ramirez, “Lessons in the Cracker Market: Nabisco Saved New 
Graham Snack,” New York Times (July 5, 1990): D1.
 88. Albert H. Hastorf and Hadley Cantril, “They Saw a Game: A Case Study,” 
Journal of Abnormal & Social Psychology 49 (1954): 129–134; see also 
Roberto Friedmann and Mary R. Zimmer, “The Role of Psychological 
Meaning in Advertising,” Journal of Advertising (1988): 31–40.
 89. Robert M. McMath, “Chock Full of (Pea)nuts,” American Demographics 
(April 1997): 60.
 90. Benedict Carey, “Knowing the Ingredients Can Change the Taste,” New 
York Times (December 12, 2006), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed 
December 12, 2006.
 91. David Glen Mick, “Consumer Research and Semiotics: Exploring the 
Morphology of Signs, Symbols, and Significance,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 13 (September 1986): 196–213.
 92. Teresa J. Domzal and Jerome B. Kernan, “Reading Advertising: The What 
and How of Product Meaning,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 9 (Summer 
1992): 48–64.
 93. Arthur Asa Berger, Signs in Contemporary Culture: An Introduction to Semiotics 
(New York: Longman, 1984); David Glen Mick, “Consumer Research and 
Semiotics,” 196–213; Charles Sanders Peirce, in Charles Hartshorne, 
Paul Weiss, and Arthur W. Burks, eds., Collected Papers (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1931–1958); cf. also V. Larsen, D. Luna, and L. 
A. Peracchio, “Points of View and Pieces of Time: A Taxonomy of Image 
Attributes,” Journal of Consumer Research 31, no. 1 (2004): 102–111.
 94. Steven Heller, “A Makeover for the Starbucks Mermaid,” New York 
Times (January 8, 2011), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2011/01/09/
weekinreview/09heller.html?_r=1&scp=2&sq=starbucks&st=cse, accessed 
March 27, 2011.
 95. Dexter Dining Room and Kitchen, Metropolitan Home (March 2009), www 
.metropolitanhome.com, accessed January 27, 2009.
 96. Julie Turkewitz, “Town Becomes a Beer Ad, but Residents Don’t Feel Like a 
Party,” New York Times (September 4, 2014), http://www.NewYorkTimes 
.com/2014/09/05/us/colorado-town-prepares-to-become-beer-ad 
.html?ref=media, accessed February 23, 2015.
 97. Kim Severson, “Inspiring Mayberry, and Then Becoming It,” New York 
Times (June 21, 2013), http://www.New York Times.com/2013/06/22/
us/in-north-carolina-inspiring-mayberry-and-then-becoming-it.html?_
r=0, accessed February 23, 2015.
 98. Hellen Lundell, “Fictional Food: Consumers Taking the Lead on Food 
Fabrication,” Heartbeat (June 18, 2013), http://www.hartman-group.com/ 
hartbeat/fictional-foodconsumers-taking-the-lead-on-food fabrication?utm_ 
content=msolom01@sju.edu&tm_keyword=1fM92wXkAvpCt0zU6Ab& 
utm_source=tailoretmail&utm_term=Read+More%26nbsp%3b%C2%BB& 
utm_campaign=Fictional+food%2c+fad+or+fantasy%3f&tm_campaign
=FICTIONAL+FOOD+CONSUMERS+TAKING+THE+LEAD+ON+FOOD+ 
FABRICATION&, accessed February 23, 2015.
 99. Dale Buss, “The GEICO Gecko Finds his Voice—and Puts it Into Book About 
Being ‘Human’” Brand Channel (April 25, 2013), http://www.brandchannel 
.com/home/post/2013/04/25/Geico-Gecko-Book-042513.aspx, accessed 
February 23, 2015.
 100. Adapted from Michael R. Solomon, Greg W. Marshall, and Elnora W. 
Stuart, Marketing: Real People, Real Choices, 8th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson, 2016).
 101. William Echikson, “Aiming at High and Low Markets,” Fortune (March 22, 
1993): 89.
 102. Michael M. Grybaum, “Judge Blocks New York City’s Limits on Big Sugary 
Drinks,” New York Times (March 11, 2013), http://www.NewYorkTimes 
.com/2013/03/12/nyregion/judge-invalidates-bloombergs-soda-ban 
.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0, accessed April 3, 2013.
 103. David Knowles, “German Company Tests ‘Talking Window’ that Pumps Ads 
into Brains of Train Passengers,” New York Daily News (July 3, 2013), http://
www.nydailynews.com/news/world/talking-window-advertising-tech 
nique-tested-germany-article-1.1391390, accessed February 23, 2015.

130
A
h, Sunday morning! The sun is shining, the birds are singing, and Joe is feeling 
groovy! He puts on his vintage Levi’s 501 jeans (circa 1968) and his Woodstock 
T-shirt (the “real” Woodstock, not that fake abomination they put on more re-
cently, thank you) and saunters down to the kitchen. Joe smiles in anticipation of his morn-
ing plans. He’s just returned from his college reunion and now it’s time to “process” all the 
people he’s seen and the stories he heard about their old antics. Joe cranks up the Lava 
Lamp, throws a Grateful Dead record on the turntable (ah, the sublime joys of vinyl), and 
sits back on his Barcalounger as he clutches a huge bowl filled to the brim with his all-time 
favorite cereal, Cap’n Crunch. Let the memories begin!
How Do We Learn?
Joe journeys through time with the aid of many prod-
ucts that make him feel good because they remind him 
of earlier parts of his life. Products have capitalized on 
this  nostalgia, too. PepsiCo launched its “Throwback” 
campaign; now it sells Pepsi Throwback, Mountain 
Dew Throwback, and Doritos Taco-Flavored chips in authentic packages from 
the past. Hostess brought back its 1970s characters Twinkie the Kid, Captain 
CupCake, King Ding Dong, and Happy Ho Ho to adorn its snack cake packages. 
Disney revived its Tron franchise. As a PepsiCo marketing executive explained, 
“Retro is very cool with 20-somethings, because it ties in with their desire for 
simpler, cleaner, more authentic lives. Many of them are engaged in identity 
self-creation through their Facebook pages, Instagram, Twitter and other social 
media, and they see nostalgia as a way to differentiate themselves.”1
Learning is a relatively permanent change in behavior caused by experi-
ence. The learner need not have the experience directly, however; we can also 
 4-1 It is important to understand how consumers learn about 
products and services.
 4-2 Conditioning results in learning.
 4-3 Learned associations with brands generalize to other 
products.
 4-4 There is a difference between classical and instrumental 
conditioning, and both processes help consumers learn 
about products.
 4-5 We learn about products by observing others’ behavior.
 4-6 Our brains process information about brands to retain 
them in memory.
 4-7 The other products we associate with an individual 
 product influence how we will remember it.
 4-8 Products help us to retrieve memories from our past.
 4-9 Marketers measure our memories about products  
and ads.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
 Chapter 4  ● Learning and Memory
Objective 4-1
It is important to 
understand how 
consumers learn about 
products and services.
Source: Photos.com/Thinkstock.

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
131 
learn when we observe events that affect others.2 We learn even when we don’t try: We 
recognize many brand names and hum many product jingles, for example, even for prod-
ucts we don’t personally use. We call this casual, unintentional acquisition of knowledge 
incidental learning.
Learning is an ongoing process. Our knowledge about the world constantly updates as 
we are exposed to new stimuli and as we receive ongoing feedback that allows us to modify 
our behavior when we find ourselves in similar situations at a later time. The concept of 
learning covers a lot of ground, ranging from a consumer’s simple association between 
a stimulus such as a product logo (e.g., Coca-Cola) and a response (e.g., “refreshing soft 
drink”) to a complex series of cognitive activities (e.g., writing an essay on learning for a 
consumer behavior exam).
Psychologists who study learning advance several theories to explain the learning 
process. These theories range from those that focus on simple stimulus–response con-
nections (behavioral theories) to perspectives that regard consumers as solvers of com-
plex problems who learn abstract rules and concepts when they observe what others 
say and do (cognitive theories). It’s important for marketers to understand these theories 
as well, because basic learning principles are at the heart of many consumer purchase 
decisions.
behavioral Learning theories
Behavioral learning theories assume that learning takes place 
as the result of responses to external events. Psychologists who 
subscribe to this viewpoint do not focus on internal thought pro-
cesses. Instead, they approach the mind as a “black box” and emphasize the observable 
aspects of behavior. The observable aspects consist of things that go into the box (the 
stimuli or events perceived from the outside world) and things that come out of the box 
(the responses, or reactions to these stimuli).
Two major approaches to learning represent this view: classical conditioning and 
instrumental conditioning. According to the behavioral learning perspective, the feedback 
we receive as we go through life shapes our experiences. Similarly, we respond to brand 
names, scents, jingles, and other marketing stimuli because of the learned connections 
we form over time. People also learn that actions they take result in rewards and pun-
ishments; this feedback influences the way they will respond in similar situations in the 
future. Consumers who receive compliments on a product choice will be more likely to buy 
that brand again, whereas those who get food poisoning at a new restaurant are not likely 
to patronize that restaurant in the future.
classical conditioning
Classical conditioning occurs when a stimulus that elicits a response is paired with 
another stimulus that initially does not elicit a response on its own. Over time, this second 
stimulus causes a similar response because we associate it with the first stimulus. Ivan 
Pavlov, a Russian physiologist who conducted research on digestion in animals, first dem-
onstrated this phenomenon in dogs. Pavlov induced classically conditioned learning when 
he paired a neutral stimulus (a bell) with a stimulus known to cause a salivation response 
in dogs (he squirted dried meat powder into their mouths). The powder was an uncondi-
tioned stimulus (UCS) because it was naturally capable of causing the response. Over 
time, the bell became a conditioned stimulus (CS); it did not initially cause salivation, 
but the dogs learned to associate the bell with the meat powder and began to salivate at the 
sound of the bell only. The drooling of these canine consumers because of a sound, now 
linked to feeding time, was a conditioned response (CR).
This basic form of classical conditioning that Pavlov demonstrated primarily applies 
to responses controlled by the autonomic (e.g., salivation) and nervous (e.g., eye blink) 
systems. That is, it focuses on visual and olfactory cues that induce hunger, thirst, sex-
ual arousal, and other basic drives. When marketers consistently pair these cues with 
Events 
we 
experience 
when we are young often 
exert a lasting influence 
on our preferences as we 
get older. Consider for ex-
ample the lifelong impact on a fan when his 
team wins the World Series. A recent analysis 
used Facebook data on how many people 
“liked” and posted about a specific baseball 
team. It found that if a team wins the champi-
onship when a boy is 8 years old, this signifi-
cantly increases the probability he will sup-
port the team as an adult regardless of how 
well the team did every other year of his life 
(the data doesn’t hold up for females). The 
pattern persists until age 14 when it starts 
falling off; a World Series winner when a man 
is 20 years old is only one-eighth as likely to 
create an adult fan as when he was 8 years 
old. Thus, overall there are 1.65 Yankees 
fans for every Mets fan. However, the Mets’ 
popularity spikes among those who were born 
in the years 1961 and 1978. It turns out 
that both sets of these fans happened to be 
8 years old when the Mets won the World 
Series. Maybe winning is everything.3
Marketing Opportunity
Objective 4-2
Conditioning results in 
learning.

132 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Some advertising messages appeal to our 
motivation to avoid negative outcomes like 
bad breath. This Indian ad for a mint  
certainly does.
Source: McCann Erickson India.
conditioned stimuli, such as brand names, consumers may learn to feel hungry, thirsty, or 
aroused when they encounter these brand cues at a later point.
Classical conditioning can have similar effects for more complex reactions, too. Even 
a credit card becomes a conditioned cue that triggers greater spending, especially because 
as a stimulus it’s present only in situations where we spend money. People learn they can 
make larger purchases with credit cards, and they also leave larger tips than when they pay 
by cash.4 Small wonder that American Express reminds us, “Don’t leave home without it.”
Conditioning effects are more likely to occur after the conditioned (CS) and uncon-
ditioned (UCS) stimuli have been paired a number of times.5 Repeated exposures— 
repetition—increase the strength of stimulus–response associations and prevent the 
decay of these associations in memory. Some research indicates that the intervals between 
exposures may influence the effectiveness of this strategy as well as the type of medium 
the marketer uses; the most effective repetition strategy is a combination of spaced expo-
sures that alternate in terms of media that are more and less involving, such as television 
advertising complemented by print media.6
Many classic advertising campaigns consist of product slogans that companies repeat 
so often they are etched in consumers’ minds. Conditioning will not occur or will take 
long er if the CS is only occasionally paired with the UCS. One result of this lack of asso-
ciation is extinction, which happens when the effects of prior conditioning diminish and 
finally disappear. This can occur, for example, when a product is overexposed in the mar-
ketplace so that its original allure is lost. The Izod Lacoste polo shirt, with its distinctive 

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
133 
crocodile crest, is a good example of this effect. When the once-exclusive crocodile started 
to appear on baby clothes and many other items, it lost its cachet. Other contenders, such 
as the Ralph Lauren polo player, successfully challenged it as a symbol of casual elegance. 
Now that Izod is being more careful about where its logo appears, the brand is starting to 
regain its “cool” in some circles.
Stimulus Generalization
Stimulus generalization refers to the tendency of stimuli similar to a CS to evoke simi-
lar, conditioned responses. For example, Pavlov noticed in subsequent studies that his dogs 
would sometimes salivate when they heard noises that only vaguely resembled a bell, such 
as keys jangling.
People also react to other, similar stimuli in much the same way they responded to the 
original stimulus; we call this generalization a halo effect. A drugstore’s bottle of private-brand 
mouthwash that is deliberately packaged to resemble Listerine mouthwash may evoke a similar 
response among consumers, who assume that this “me-too” product shares other character-
istics of the original. Indeed, consumers in one study on shampoo brands tended to rate those 
with similar packages as similar in quality and performance as well.7 This “piggybacking” strat-
egy can cut both ways: When the quality of the me-too product turns out to be lower than that 
of the original brand, consumers may exhibit even more positive feelings toward the original. 
However, if they perceive the quality of the two competitors to be about equal, consumers may 
conclude that the price premium they pay for the original is not worth it.8
Stimulus Discrimination
Stimulus discrimination occurs when a UCS does not follow a stimulus similar to a 
CS. When this happens, reactions weaken and will soon disappear. Part of the learn-
ing process involves making a response to some stimuli but not to other, similar stimuli. 
Manufacturers of well-established brands commonly urge consumers not to buy “cheap 
imitations” because the results will not be what they expect.
Marketing applications of classical 
conditioning principles
Behavioral learning principles apply to many consumer phenomena, such as when a mar-
keter creates a distinctive brand image or links a product to an underlying need. The trans-
fer of meaning from an unconditioned stimulus to a conditioned stimulus explains why 
Procter & Gamble opened a new line of Tide 
Dry Cleaners, named after its bestselling 
laundry detergent. P&G will rely on the more 
than 800,000 Facebook fans of Tide (what 
else do these people “like” on Facebook?) 
and other loyal detergent users to trust their 
clothes to the franchise stores. P&G plans to 
infuse the stores and its dry cleaning fluids 
with the familiar Tide scent just to under-
score the connection.
Source: Courtesy of Boomburg via Getty Images.

134 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
“made-up” brand names, such as Marlboro, Coca-Cola, or Adidas, exert such powerful 
effects on consumers. The association between the Marlboro man and the cigarette is so 
strong that in some cases the company no longer even bothers to include the brand name 
in its ads that feature the cowboy riding off into the sunset. Indeed, recent research shows 
that these linkages cement early on; scans of children show how the pleasure and appetite 
centers of their brains light up when they view advertising images of fast-food companies 
such as the McDonald’s logo.9
When researchers pair nonsense syllables (meaningless sets of letters) with such evalu-
ative words as beauty or success, the meaning transfers to the fake words. This change in 
the symbolic significance of initially meaningless words shows that fairly simple asso-
ciations can condition even complex meanings, and the learning that results can last a 
long time.10 These associations are crucial to many marketing strategies that rely on the 
creation and perpetuation of brand equity, in which a brand has strong positive associa-
tions in a consumer’s memory and commands a lot of loyalty as a result.11
Marketing applications of repetition
One advertising researcher argued that any more than three expo-
sures to a marketing communication are wasted. The first expo-
sure creates awareness of the product, the second demonstrates 
its relevance to the consumer, and the third reminds him or her of 
the product’s benefits.12 However, even this bare-bones approach 
implies that we need repetition to ensure that the consumer is actually exposed to (and 
processes) the message at least three times. As we’ve seen, this exposure is by no means 
guaranteed, because people tend to tune out or distort many marketing communications. 
Marketers that attempt to condition an association must ensure that the consumers they 
target will be exposed to the stimulus a sufficient number of times to make it “stick.”
However, it is possible to have too much of a good thing. Consumers can become so 
used to hearing or seeing a marketing stimulus that they no longer pay attention to it. 
One solution is to create variations of the same basic message to alleviate this problem 
of advertising wear-out. Toyota ran a commercial featuring a reworked version of The 
Fixx’s song “Saved by Zero” to promote its no-interest payment options so many times that 
close to 10,000 fed-up viewers organized a Facebook group to petition the company for 
mercy. As one worn-out group member posted, “There have been worse commercials, and 
there have been commercials that were played this often; but never before has a commer-
cial this bad been aired so much.”13
How often should an advertiser repeat the ads it places on Web sites? Recent research 
indicates that the answer depends on whether the ad relates to the Web site’s content, and 
whether or not competing ads are also present on the site. The study found support for the 
general idea that repetitive ad messages resulted in higher recall and interest in learning 
more about the advertised product (in this case, a laptop). However, repeating the same 
ad was primarily effective when competitors also showed ads on the site. Otherwise, it was 
better to vary the ad messages for the laptop (presumably because people tuned out the ad 
if it appeared repeatedly). These ads were also more effective when they appeared on a site 
where the content related to the advertised product.14
Marketing applications of conditioned product associations
Advertisements often pair a product with a positive stimulus to create a desirable asso-
ciation. Various aspects of a marketing message, such as music, humor, or imagery, can 
affect conditioning. In one study, for example, subjects who viewed a slide of pens paired 
with either pleasant or unpleasant music were more likely later to select the pen that 
appeared with the pleasant music.15
Marketing applications of Stimulus Generalization
The iconic (and deceased) reggae singer Bob Marley’s name and image appears on a vast 
range of products, including caps, lanyards, T-shirts, rolling papers, handbags and purses, 
Objective 4-3
Learned associations 
with brands generalize to 
other products.
People get attached to 
favorite logos, and social 
media platforms allow 
them to learn about any 
unsavory changes almost 
instantaneously. Gap misjudged consumers’ 
attachment to its old logo when it introduced 
a new one without warning fans first. Within 
hours, consumers who were loyal to the old 
logo were burning up the blogosphere with 
indignant posts. Gap wrote on its Facebook 
page, “We know this logo created a lot of 
buzz and we’re thrilled to see passionate de-
bate unfolding!” As the criticism got more 
heated, the company did an about-face and 
finally surrendered on Facebook: “O.K. We’ve 
heard loud and clear that you don’t like the 
new logo . . . we’re bringing back the Blue Box 
tonight.”16
  the tangled Web
Luxury 
carmakers 
are 
jumping into the licens-
ing pool in droves. Bent-
ley lends its name to 
colognes, furniture, skis, 
handbags and even a hotel suite at the St. 
Regis hotel in New York that costs $10,500 
a night. The Ferrari prancing horse logo pops 
up on chess sets, Tod’s loafers and Oakley 
sunglasses. Lamborghini, Maserati and Tesla 
now sell leather goods. Porsche (which like 
Lamborghini and Bentley now is owned by 
Volkswagen) has gone a step farther; it oper-
ates Porsche Design retail stores around the 
world. A spokeswoman observed, “Luggage, 
bikes, desk pieces, couture clothing—it all 
provides a continuation of the Porsche driv-
ing experience.”22
Marketing Opportunity

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
135 
belts and buckles, beach towels, and knapsacks. His daughter Cedella launched High Tide 
swimwear to further extend the franchise, and his son Rohan created the Marley Coffee 
brand; each variety is named after a different Marley tune.17
The process of stimulus generalization often is central to branding and packag-
ing decisions that try to capitalize on consumers’ positive associations with an existing 
brand or company name. We clearly appreciate the value of this kind of linkage when 
we look at universities with winning sports teams: Loyal fans snap up merchandise, from 
clothing to bathroom accessories, emblazoned with the school’s name. This business did 
Universities create a revenue stream when 
they grant companies the rights to use their 
names and logos.
Source: RosaIreneBetancourt/Alamy.

136 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
not even exist 20 years ago when schools were reluctant to commercialize their images. 
Texas A&M was one of the first schools that even bothered to file for trademark protec-
tion, and that was only after someone put the Aggie logo on a line of handguns. Today it’s 
a different story. Many college administrators crave the revenue they receive from sweat-
shirts, drink coasters, and even toilet seats emblazoned with school logos. Washington 
State University sells branded Wagyu beef raised by its staff and animal science students. 
It joins other college-branded delicacies, including Cornell Dairy Ice Cream and Texas 
A&M Jerky.18
Strategies that marketers base on stimulus generalization include:
●
●Family branding—Many products capitalize on the reputation of a company name. 
Companies such as Campbell’s, Heinz, and General Electric rely on their positive cor-
porate images to sell different product lines.
●
●Product line extension—Marketers add related products to an established brand. 
Dole, which we associate with fruit, introduced refrigerated juices and juice bars, 
whereas Sun Maid went from raisins to raisin bread. The gun manufacturer Smith & 
Wesson launched its own line of furniture and other home items. Starbucks Corp. and 
Jim Beam Brands teamed up to make Starbucks Coffee Liqueur. Condé Nast is opening 
bars and clubs linked to its Vogue and GQ magazines around the world.19
●
●Licensing—Companies often “rent” well-known names, hoping that the learned as-
sociations they have forged will “rub off” onto other kinds of products. Jamba Juice 
launched a clothing line.20 Zippo Manufacturing Co., long known for its “windproof” 
cigarette lighters, markets a men’s fragrance—and no, it doesn’t smell like lighter 
fluid.21
●
●Look-alike packaging—Distinctive packaging designs create strong associations 
with a particular brand. Companies that make generic or private-label brands and 
want to communicate a quality image often exploit this linkage when they put their 
products in packages similar to those of popular brands.23 How does this strategy af-
fect consumers’ perceptions of the original brand? One study found that a negative 
experience with an imitator brand actually increased consumers’ evaluations of the 
original brand, whereas a positive experience with the imitator had the opposite effect 
of decreasing evaluations of the original brand.24 Another study found that consum-
ers tend to react positively to “copycat brands” as long as the imitator doesn’t make 
grandiose claims that it can’t fulfill.25
Of course, this strategy can make a lot of work for lawyers if the copycat brand gets 
too close to the original. Marketers of distinctive brands work hard to protect their designs 
Bentley is among many luxury carmakers 
that is aggressively licensing its name in 
other product categories.
Source: Courtesy of Bentley Motors Limited.

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
137 
and logos, and each year companies file numerous lawsuits in so-called Lanham Act cases 
that hinge on the issue of consumer confusion: How likely is it that one company’s logo, 
product design, or package is so similar to another that the typical shopper would mistake 
one for the other? Levi Strauss has sued almost 100 other apparel manufacturers that it 
claims have borrowed its trademark pocket design of a pentagon surrounding a drawing 
of a seagull in flight or its distinctive tab that it sews into its garments’ vertical seams.26
Companies with a well-established brand image try to encourage stimulus discrimina-
tion when they promote the unique attributes of their brand—hence the constant remind-
ers for American Express Travelers Cheques: “Ask for them by name.” However, a brand 
name that a firm uses so widely that it is no longer distinctive becomes part of the public 
domain and competitors are free to borrow it: think of well-worn names such as aspirin, 
cellophane, yo-yo, escalator, and even google (which started as a noun and is now also a 
verb). This high degree of acceptance can be a tough barrier to jump when you’re a com-
petitor: Microsoft hopes that over time we will choose to “bing” rather than “google” when 
we want information.
instrumental conditioning
Instrumental conditioning (or operant conditioning) occurs 
when we learn to perform behaviors that produce positive out-
comes and avoid those that yield negative outcomes. We most 
closely associate this learning process with the psychologist B. 
F. Skinner, who demonstrated the effects of instrumental con-
ditioning by teaching pigeons and other animals to dance, play 
Ping-Pong, and perform other activities when he systematically 
rewarded them for desired behaviors.27
Whereas responses in classical conditioning are involuntary 
and fairly simple, we make those in instrumental conditioning deliberately to obtain a 
goal, and these may be more complex. We may learn the desired behavior over a period of 
time as a shaping process rewards our intermediate actions. For example, the owner of a 
new store may award prizes to shoppers who simply drop in; she hopes that over time they 
will continue to drop in and eventually even buy something.
Also, whereas classical conditioning involves the close pairing of two stimuli, instru-
mental learning occurs when a learner receives a reward after he or she performs the 
desired behavior. In these cases, learning takes place over time, while the learner attempts 
and abandons other behaviors that don’t get reinforced. A good way to remember the 
difference is to keep in mind that in instrumental learning the person makes a response 
because it is instrumental to gain a reward or avoid a punishment. Over time, consumers 
come to associate with people who reward them and to choose products that make them 
feel good or satisfy some need.
Instrumental conditioning occurs in one of three ways:
1 When the environment provides positive reinforcement in the form of a reward, 
this strengthens the response and we learn the appropriate behavior. For example, a 
woman who gets compliments after wearing Obsession perfume learns that using this 
product has the desired effect, and she will be more likely to keep buying the product.
2 Negative reinforcement also strengthens responses so that we learn the appropri-
ate behavior. A perfume company might run an ad showing a woman sitting home 
alone on a Saturday night because she did not wear its fragrance. The message this 
conveys is that she could have avoided this negative outcome if only she had used the 
perfume.
3 In contrast to situations where we learn to do certain things to avoid unpleasantness, 
punishment occurs when unpleasant events follow a response (such as when our 
friends ridicule us if we wear a nasty-smelling fragrance). We learn the hard way not 
to repeat these behaviors.
4 To help you understand the differences among these mechanisms, keep in mind that 
reactions from a person’s environment to his or her behavior can be either positive or 
Objective 4-4
There is a difference 
between classical 
and instrumental 
conditioning, and 
both processes help 
consumers learn about 
products.

138 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Positive reinforcement occurs after  
consumers try a new product and like it.
Source: Provided courtesy of Frito-Lay North 
America, Inc.
negative, and that marketers can either apply or remove these outcomes (or antici-
pated outcomes). That is, under conditions of both positive reinforcement and pun-
ishment, the person receives a reaction when he or she does something. In contrast, 
negative reinforcement occurs when the person avoids a negative outcome—the 
removal of something negative is pleasurable and hence is rewarding.
Finally, when a person no longer receives a positive outcome, extinction is likely to 
occur, and the learned stimulus–response connection will not be maintained (as when 
a woman no longer receives compliments on her perfume). Thus, positive and negative 
reinforcement strengthen the future linkage between a response and an outcome because 
of the pleasant experience. This tie is weakened under conditions of both punishment and 
extinction because of the unpleasant experience. Figure 4.1 will help you to “reinforce” 
the relationships among these four conditions.

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
139 
EVENT
CONDITION APPLIED
Weaken
Connections
Strengthen
Connections
POSITIVE
BEHAVIOR
NEGATIVE
BEHAVIOR
PUNISHMENT
Effect: Negative event 
weakens responses that are 
followed by negative 
outcome.
Learning Process:
Consumer learns not to 
perform responses leading 
to punishment.
EXTINCTION
Effect: Removal of positive 
event weakens responses 
preceding occurrence.
Learning Process:
Consumer learns that 
responses no longer 
produce positive outcome.
POSITIVE
REINFORCEMENT
Effect: Positive event 
strengthens responses 
preceding occurrence.
Learning Process:
Consumer learns to perform 
responses that produce 
positive outcome.
NEGATIVE
REINFORCEMENT
Effect: Removal of negative 
event strengthens responses 
that allow avoidance of 
negative outcome.
Learning Process:
Consumer learns to perform
responses that allow him or 
her to avoid negative 
outcome.
BEHAVIOR
CONDITION REMOVED
Figure 4.1 TYPES OF REINFORCEMENT
It’s important for marketers to determine the most effective reinforcement schedule 
to use. This decision relates to the amount of effort and resources they must devote when 
they reward consumers who respond as they hope to their requests. Several schedules are 
possible:
●
●Fixed-interval reinforcement—After a specified time period has passed, the first 
response you make brings the reward. Under such conditions, people tend to respond 
slowly right after they get reinforced, but their responses get faster as the time for the 
next reinforcement approaches. For example, consumers may crowd into a store for 
the last day of its seasonal sale and not reappear until the next one.
●
●Variable-interval reinforcement—The time that must pass before you get rein-
forced varies based on some average. Because you don’t know exactly when to expect 
the reinforcement, you have to respond at a consistent rate. This is the logic behind 
retailers’ use of so-called secret shoppers: people who periodically test for service quality 
when they pose as customers at unannounced times. Because store employees never 
know exactly when to expect a visit, they must maintain high quality constantly “just 
in case.”
●
●Fixed-ratio reinforcement—Reinforcement occurs only after a fixed number of 
responses. This schedule motivates you to continue performing the same behavior over 
and over. For example, you might keep buying groceries at the same store to earn a 
prize when you collect 50 register receipts.
●
●Variable-ratio reinforcement—You get reinforced after a certain number of re-
sponses, but you don’t know how many responses are required. People in such situa-
tions tend to respond at high and steady rates, and this type of behavior is difficult to 
extinguish. This reinforcement schedule is responsible for consumers’ attractions to 
slot machines. They learn that if they keep throwing money into the machine, they 
will eventually win something (if they don’t go broke first).

140 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Casino operators program slot machines to 
deliver rewards on a variable-ratio reinforce-
ment schedule.
Source: Boggy/Fotolia.
Marketing applications of instrumental 
conditioning principles
Principles of instrumental conditioning are at work when a marketer rewards or punishes 
a consumer for a purchase decision. Businesspeople shape behavior when they gradually 
reinforce the appropriate actions consumers take. A car dealer might encourage a reluctant 
buyer to simply sit in a floor model, then suggest a test drive, and then try to close the deal.
Marketers have many ways to reinforce consumers’ behaviors, ranging from a 
simple “thank you” after a purchase to substantial rebates and follow-up phone calls. For 
example, a life insurance company obtained a much higher rate of policy renewal among 
a group of new customers who received a thank-you letter after each payment, compared 
to a control group that did not receive any reinforcement.28
Frequency marketing is a popular technique that rewards regular purchasers with 
prizes that get better as they spend more. The airline industry pioneered this instrumen-
tal learning strategy when it introduced “frequent flyer” programs in the early 1980s to 
reward loyal customers. The practice has spread to many other businesses as well, ranging 
from grocery stores to casinos.
Gamification: the new Frontier for Learning 
applications
Many of us grew up playing games, and some of us never stopped. In some sense, all of life 
is a game, insofar as there are winners and losers and challenges we must solve to reach 
various objectives. Many organizations are going to the next level; they’re borrowing from 
basic principles of gaming to motivate consumers and employees across a broad spectrum 
of activity.
The fast-growing strategy of gamification turns routine actions into experiences as 
it adds gaming elements to tasks that might otherwise be boring or routine. Young people 
have grown up playing games; these activities structure their learning styles and influ-
ence the platforms to which they will gravitate.29 Important elements of gaming include:
●
●A dynamic digital environment (whether in-store, on a laptop, or on a tablet or phone) 
that resembles a sophisticated videogame platform
●
●Multiple short- and long-term goals

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
141 
●
●Rapid and frequent feedback
●
●A reward for most or all efforts in the form of a badge or a virtual product
●
●Friendly competition in a low-risk environment
●
●A manageable degree of uncertainty
At its most basic, gamification is simply about providing rewards to customers to 
encourage them to buy even more. These mechanisms used to take the form of buy-10-
get-one-free punch cards, but today a host of sophisticated phone apps dispense rewards 
to eager shoppers—sometimes with a twist when marketers tinker with the reinforcement 
schedule. Indeed research shows that when a business “preloads” a frequent buyer card 
with a few punches this makes the reward look more attainable and motivates consum-
ers to complete the rest. In a study on what the researchers term the endowed prog-
ress effect, a carwash gave one set of customers a buy-eight-get-one-free card, while a 
second set of customers got a 10-wash card that had been punched twice. Researchers 
reported that almost twice as many people in the second condition redeemed their cards 
even though in both cases customers had to pay for eight carwashes to get a free one. The 
connection to basic learning processes is clear. As one marketing professor explained, “All 
organisms, in different ways, are drawn to goals. The closer we are to achieving our goals, 
the more motivated we are to keep doing something. As mice on a runway get closer to 
a food pellet, they run faster…. as people get closer to having a completed card, the time 
between visits gets smaller.” 30
A phone app “gamfies” working out so that 
people will be more likely to break a sweat.
Source: Courtesy of Fitocracy, Inc.

142 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Many domains of human activity (and business) share the common need to motivate 
and reward people to achieve ascending levels of mastery. These include:
●
●Store and brand loyalty. Foursquare gives people virtual badges when they check in 
at a local cafe or restaurant. Some of them check in as often as they can to compete for 
the honor of being named “mayor” of the location.
●
●Social marketing. More than 75 utilities use a service from a company called 
Opower that awards badges to customers when they reduce their energy consump-
tion. Customers can compare their progress with their neighbors’ and broadcast their 
achievements on Facebook.
●
●Employee performance. Some restaurants enlist a service called Objective Logistics 
to rank the performances of waiters on a leaderboard, rewarding the good ones with 
plum shifts and more lucrative tables.31
cognitive Learning theory
Unlike behavioral theories of learning, cognitive learning theory approaches stress the 
importance of internal mental processes. This perspective views people as problem-solvers 
who actively use information from the world around them to master their environments. 
Supporters of this view also stress the role of creativity and insight during the learning 
process.
An Ocean Spray commercial for diet cranberry juice illustrates how marketers can 
harness their knowledge of cognitive theories to tweak marketing messages. The spot fea-
tures two men, in the role of cranberry growers, who stand knee-deep in a bog. A group 
of women who are exercising joins them. Originally, the ad depicted the women having a 
party, but a cognitive scientist who worked on the campaign nixed that idea; she argued 
that the exercise class would send the diet message more quickly, whereas the party scene 
would confuse viewers who would spend too much time trying to figure out why the group 
was celebrating. This extra cognitive activity would distract from the ad’s message. And, 
contrary to standard practice in advertising that the actors name the product as early as 
possible, she decided that the main characters should wait a few seconds before they men-
tion the new diet product. She reasoned that viewers would need a second or so more time 
to process the images because of the additional action in the ad (the exercising). In a test 
of which ads got remembered best, this new version scored in the top 10 percent.32
is Learning conscious or not?
A lot of controversy surrounds the issue of whether or when people are aware of their 
learning processes.33 Whereas behavioral learning theorists emphasize the routine, auto-
matic nature of conditioning, proponents of cognitive learning argue that even these 
simple effects are based on cognitive factors: They create expectations that a response will 
follow a stimulus (the formation of expectations requires mental activity). According to 
this school of thought, conditioning occurs because subjects develop conscious hypoth-
eses and then act on them.
There is some evidence to support the existence of nonconscious procedural knowledge. 
People apparently do process at least some information in an automatic, passive way, 
a condition that researchers call “mindlessness” (we’ve all experienced that!).34 When 
we meet someone new or encounter a new product, for example, we have a tendency to 
respond to the stimulus in terms of existing categories we have learned, rather than tak-
ing the trouble to formulate new ones. In these cases a trigger feature—some stimulus that 
cues us toward a particular pattern—activates a reaction. For example, men in one study 
rated a car in an ad as superior on a variety of characteristics if a seductive woman (the 
trigger feature) was present, despite the fact that the men did not believe the woman’s pres-
ence actually had an influence on their evaluations.35 We’ll discuss these triggers in the 
context of priming in later chapters.
Nonetheless, many modern theorists regard some instances of automatic condition-
ing as cognitive processes, especially when people form expectations about the linkages 

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
143 
between stimuli and responses. Indeed, studies using masking effects, which make it dif-
ficult for subjects to learn CS and UCS associations, show substantial reductions in condi-
tioning.36 An adolescent girl may observe that women on television and in real life seem 
to be rewarded with compliments and attention when they smell nice and wear alluring 
clothing. She figures out that the probability of these rewards occurring is greater when 
she wears perfume, so she deliberately wears a popular scent to obtain the reward of social 
acceptance. For now, the jury is out regarding the true impact of nonconscious processing 
and priming because this question currently is one of the hottest debates in the field of 
psychology.37
Observational Learning
Observational learning occurs when we watch the actions of 
others and note the reinforcements they receive for their behav-
iors. In these situations, learning occurs as a result of vicarious 
rather than direct experience. This type of learning is a complex 
process; people store these observations in memory as they accu-
mulate knowledge and then they use this information at a later point to guide their own 
behavior. Particularly when we are preoccupied with other demands, we are likely to 
mimic others’ behaviors as a social default.38
Modeling (not the runway kind) is the process of imitating the behavior of others. 
For example, a woman who shops for a new kind of perfume may remember the reactions 
her friend received when she wore a certain brand several months before, and she will 
mimic her friend’s behavior in the hope that she will get the same feedback.
The modeling process is a powerful form of learning, and people’s tendencies to imitate 
others’ behaviors can have negative effects. Of particular concern is the potential of televi-
sion shows and movies to teach violence to children. Children may be exposed to new meth-
ods of aggression by models (e.g., cartoon heroes) in the shows they watch. At some later 
point, when the child becomes angry, he or she may imitate these behaviors. A classic study 
demonstrates the effect of modeling on children’s actions. Kids who watched an adult stomp 
on, knock down, and otherwise torture a large inflated “Bobo doll” repeated these behaviors 
when later left alone in a room with the doll; children who did not witness these acts did 
not.39 Unfortunately, the relevance of this study to violent TV shows seems quite clear.
Figure 4.2 shows that for observational learning in the form of modeling to occur, the 
marketer must meet four conditions:40
1 The consumer’s attention must be directed to the appropriate model, whom, for 
reasons of attractiveness, competence, status, or similarity, he or she must want to 
emulate.
2 The consumer must remember what the model says or does.
3 The consumer must convert this information into actions.
4 The consumer must be motivated to perform these actions.
Objective 4-5
We learn about products 
by observing others’ 
behavior.
ATTENTION
The consumer
focuses on a
model’s
behavior.
RETENTION
The consumer
retains this
behavior in
memory.
PRODUCTION
PROCESSES
The consumer
has the ability
to perform the
behavior.
OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING
The consumer acquires and
performs the behavior earlier
demonstrated by a model.
MOTIVATION
A situation arises
wherein the behavior
is useful to the
consumer.
Figure 4.2  THE OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING PROCESS

144 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Marketing applications of cognitive Learning principles
Our ability to learn vicariously when we observe the outcomes of what others do makes 
the lives of marketers much easier. They don’t necessarily have to directly reward or 
punish consumers when they make a purchase (think how expensive or even ethically 
questionable that might be!). Instead, they can show what happens to desirable mod-
els who use or do not use their products; they know that consumers often will imitate 
these actions at a later time. For example, a perfume commercial might depict a throng 
of admirers who compliment a glamorous woman when she wears a certain fragrance. 
Needless to say, this learning process is more practical than providing the same atten-
tion to each woman who actually buys the perfume (unless your brand’s market share is 
really, really small!).
Consumers’ evaluations of the people they model go beyond simple stimulus–response 
connections. For example, a celebrity’s image elicits more than a simple reflexive response 
of good or bad.41 It is a complex combination of many attributes. In general, the degree to 
which a person emulates someone else depends on that model’s level of social attractiveness. 
Attractiveness comes from several components, including physical appearance, expertise, 
or similarity to the evaluator (more on this in Chapter 8).
How Do We Learn to be consumers?
Ah, nothing like a luxurious spa day. But for a 4-year-old girl? Sensing big opportunities, 
many adult spas are adding separate services for young girls that go well beyond the old-
fashioned mommy/daughter manicure. The International Spa Association reports that  
25 percent of its members now offer services specifically for the younger-than-13 age 
group. Chains such as Sweet and Sassy pamper their “princesses” with custom-size robes 
and banana-scented facials.42
We don’t spring from the womb with consumer skills in place. Consumer 
 socialization is the process “by which young people acquire skills, knowledge, and atti-
tudes relevant to their functioning in the marketplace.”43 Research supports the proposi-
tion that the brand preferences and product knowledge that occur in childhood persist into 
the later stages of consumers’ lives. 44
From where does this knowledge come? Friends and teachers certainly participate in 
this process. For instance, children talk to one another about consumer products, and this 
tendency increases as the kids age.45 Especially for young children, though, the family and 
the media are two primary socialization sources.
parents’ influence
Parents influence consumer socialization both directly and indirectly. They deliberately 
try to instill their own values about consumption in their children (“You’re going to 
learn the value of a dollar!”). Parents also determine the degree to which their children 
come into contact with other information sources, such as television, salespeople, and 
peers.46 Cultural expectations regarding children’s involvement in purchase decisions 
influence when and how parents socialize their kids as consumers. For example, parents 
in traditional cultures such as Greece and India rely on later development timetables 
for consumer-related skills and understanding of advertising practices than do U.S. and 
Australian parents.47
Grown-ups also serve as significant models for observational learning. Children learn 
about consumption as they watch their parents’ behaviors and imitate them. Marketers 
encourage this process when they package adult products in child versions. This “passing 
down” of product preferences helps to create brand loyalty; researchers find evidence of 
intergenerational influence when they study the product choices of mothers and their 
daughters.48
The process of consumer socialization begins with infants; within the first two years, 
children request products they want. By about age 5, most kids make purchases with the 
The media play an espe-
cially large role in teaching 
us how to be girls and 
boys. TV programs, movies, 
and performers such as 
Miley Cyrus, Justin Bieber, and Iggy Azalea or 
“boy bands” like One Direction socialize us 
into gender roles. We’ll dive more deeply into 
the importance of sexual identity for con-
sumer behavior in Chapter 6, but for now it’s 
worth noting how media role models help 
kids to learn about appropriate behaviors, or 
at least what society considers appropriate 
at any point in time:
Although Cinderella, Ariel and other prin-
cesses still offer a tried-and-true formula 
for girls that involves being “rescued” by a 
man, other heroines for girls teach a different 
lesson. Katniss from The Hunger Games, the 
Black Widow of The Avengers, Anna and Elsa 
of Frozen, and Tris from Divergent compete 
for girls’ loyalty. The appeal of Katniss ex-
plains why Hasbro has done so well with the 
Nerf Rebelle Heartbreaker Exclusive Golden 
Edge Bow, a petunia-colored weapon with 
gold and white trim that shoots colorful 
foam darts. A similar product line, Zing’s Air 
Huntress bows and sling shots, carries the 
slogan: “Ready. Aim. Girl Power. ” There’s 
even a Barbie version of a Katniss doll com-
plete with bow and arrow.54
Marketing Opportunity

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
145 
The beauty industry is expanding to cater to 
the needs of young consumers.
Source: Alikssa/Fotolia.
help of parents and grandparents, and by age 8 most buy things on their own.49 Figure 4.3 
summarizes the sequence of stages as kids turn into consumers.
Parents exhibit different styles when they socialize their children:50
●
●Authoritarian parents are hostile, restrictive, and emotionally uninvolved. They do not 
have warm relationships with their children, they censor the types of media their chil-
dren see, and they tend to have negative views about advertising.
●
●Neglecting parents also are detached from their children, and the parents don’t exercise 
much control over what their children do.
●
●Indulgent parents communicate more with their children about consumption-related 
matters and are less restrictive. They believe that children should be allowed to learn 
about the marketplace without much interference.
television and the Web: electric babysitters
Advertising starts to influence us at an early age. Today most kids divide their time 
among the TV set, the computer, and their cell phones. In the United States, about 
80 percent of children age 5 and under use the Internet at least once a week. What’s 
more, like their older brothers and sisters, little kids are avid multitaskers: A Nielsen 

146 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
8
Stage 1: Observing
Stage 2: Making requests
Stage 3: Making selections
Stage 4: Making assisted purchases
Stage 5: Making independent purchases
0
EARLIEST AGE AT ONSET
MEDIAN AGE AT ONSET
1
2
Children start accompanying parents to the marketplace as early as one month old
and begin to make independent purchases as early as four years old.
A CONSUMER IS BORN
4
5
6
7
3
Figure 4.3  FIVE STAGES OF 
CONSUMER DEVELOPMENT BY 
EARLIEST AGE AT ONSET AND MEDIAN 
AGE AT ONSET
study reported that 36 percent of kids ages 2 to 11 watch online content and TV at the 
same time.51
As we’ve seen, many marketers push their products on kids to encourage them to 
build a lifelong habit. The National Institutes of Health projects that a ban on fast-food 
advertising to children would cut the national obesity rate by as much as 18 percent.52 
In two studies, British researchers compared the effects of television advertising on the 
eating habits of 152 kids between the ages of 5 and 11. The kids watched 10 ads followed 
by a cartoon. In one session, the kids saw ads for toys before they watched a video. In 
another session, the researchers replaced the toy ads with food ads that commonly run 
during children’s programs. After both viewings, held two weeks apart, the kids were 
allowed to snack as much as they wanted from a table of low-fat and high-fat snacks, 
including grapes, cheese-flavored rice cakes, chocolate buttons and potato chips. The 
5- to 7-year-old kids who saw the food ads ate 14 to 17 percent more calories than those 
who saw the toy ads. The results were even more dramatic among 9- to 11-year-olds. 
Those in the food ad condition ate from 84 to 134 percent more calories than did those in 
the toy ad condition.53
cognitive Development
A child’s ability to make mature, “adult” consumer decisions obviously increases with age 
(not that grown-ups always make mature decisions). Marketers segment kids in terms 
of their stage of cognitive development, or their ability to comprehend concepts of 
increasing complexity. Some evidence indicates that young children learn consumption-
related information surprisingly well.55
The Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget was the foremost proponent of the idea that chil-
dren pass through distinct stages of cognitive development. He believed that a certain 
cognitive structure characterizes each stage as the child learns to process information.56 
In one classic demonstration of cognitive development, Piaget poured the contents of 
a short, squat glass of lemonade into a taller, thinner glass that actually held the same 
amount of liquid. Five-year-olds, who still believed that the shape of the glass determined 
its contents, thought this glass held more liquid than the first glass. They are in what 
Piaget termed a preoperational stage of development. In contrast, 6-year-olds tended to be 
unsure, but 7-year-olds knew the amount of lemonade had not changed.

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
147 
Many developmental specialists no longer believe that children necessarily pass 
through these fixed stages at the same time. An alternative view proposes that they differ 
in information-processing capability or the ability to store and retrieve information from 
memory. Researchers who advocate this approach identify three developmental stages:57
1 Limited—Children who are younger than age 6 do not employ storage-and-retrieval 
strategies.
2 Cued—Children between the ages of 6 and 12 employ these strategies but only when 
prompted to do so.
3 Strategic—Children 12 and older spontaneously employ storage-and-retrieval 
strategies.
This sequence of development underscores the notion that children do not think 
in the same way adults do, and we can’t expect them to use information the same way 
either. It also reminds us that they do not necessarily form the same conclusions as do 
adults when they encounter product information. Kids are not as likely to realize that 
something they see on TV is not “real,” and as a result they are more vulnerable to per-
suasive messages. Younger kids aren’t able to distinguish media depictions from reality, 
so the more a child watches Phineas and Ferb or SpongeBob SquarePants, the more he or 
she will accept the images it depicts as real.58 Kids also see idealized images of what 
it is like to be an adult. Because children older than age 6 do about a quarter of their 
television viewing during prime time, adult programs and commercials have a big effect 
on them. For example, young girls who see adult lipstick commercials associate lipstick 
with beauty.59
Television advertising has a big impact on 
children’s preferences.
Source: Thomas Koehler/photothek images UG/
Alamy.

148 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
cb aS i See it
Paul Connell, Stony Brook University
“blank slate” as infants to having 
an increasingly sophisticated 
understanding of marketing 
techniques as they approach 
adulthood. However, we still know 
surprisingly little about how our 
experiences with the marketplace 
when we are children might affect 
us years or even decades later in 
adulthood. Most of what we know is 
based on research conducted within 
the last decade, and much remains 
to be learned.
In the research I have worked 
on with Merrie Brucks and Jesper 
Nielsen at the University of Arizona, 
we investigate whether exposure 
to advertising in childhood has 
effects that persist into adulthood. 
Previous research strongly supports 
the idea that children first begin to 
understand that ads are distinct 
from the content they are embedded 
within, then begin to understand 
that the purpose of advertising is 
to persuade, and finally effectively 
use the knowledge they have gained 
about marketing techniques to 
evaluate marketing activities more 
critically. However, what happens 
when we are exposed to ads before 
we have learned that the purpose of 
advertising is to persuade (versus to 
entertain or inform) or before we have 
learned how to use our marketplace 
knowledge effectively?
We find that exposure to 
advertising in childhood indeed has 
effects that last well beyond the time 
of initial exposure. That is, when we 
are exposed to ads before we have 
begun to process ads similar to the 
way adults do (in our early teens), we 
have a greater tendency to develop 
strong emotional connections to 
elements featured in the advertising, 
such as brand characters. This 
emotional connection then causes us 
to evaluate the products associated 
with the advertising less critically. 
For example, we might think that a 
sugary or fattening snack is healthier 
than we would otherwise judge it 
to be. These biases are also quite 
resilient. Even after using well-known 
techniques for getting people to 
recognize and correct for judgment 
biases, people who harbored strongly 
positive feelings toward advertising 
elements such as brand characters 
resisted changing their judgments of 
these products. We even found the 
biases can translate to new products 
that do not even exist yet when 
they feature the same advertising 
elements. For example, a well-known 
brand character for a breakfast cereal 
could be used to promote a different 
food product and biased product 
evaluations can transfer to the new 
product.
When we are children, we must 
learn many things, including how to 
become a consumer. A large and 
growing literature has found that 
children gradually learn many of the 
skills necessary to be a consumer 
as they age. These skills include 
learning how to identify which price 
promotions are the best deal (such 
as buy one get one free or 60% 
off), understanding how advertising 
works, and what brands symbolize 
in the culture in which they live. A 
large and growing body of research 
conducted in the fields of marketing, 
psychology, communication, nutrition, 
and public health have contributed 
greatly to our understanding of 
how children progress from a 
Research underscores the idea that children’s understanding of brand names evolves 
as they age. Kids learn to relate to brand names at an early age; they recognize brand 
names in stores, develop preferences for some brands over others, and request branded 
items by name. However, brand names function as simple perceptual cues for these chil-
dren that let them identify a familiar object with particular features. Conceptual brand 
meanings, which specify the nonobservable abstract features of the product, enter into the 
picture in middle childhood (about age 8); children incorporate them into their thinking 
and judgments a few years later. By the time a child reaches 12 years of age, he or she 
thinks about brands on a conceptual or symbolic level and he or she is likely to incorporate 
these meanings into brand-related judgments.60
Several business ventures illustrate that using sound principles of consumer psychol-
ogy can also make good financial sense. The trend started a long time ago with public 

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
149 
television’s Sesame Street, but today the for-profit networks are in the game as well. The 
first successful foray into the preschool market was Blue’s Clues in 1996, which turned 
into a huge hit as viewers abandoned the smarmy Barney & Friends.
Now, when millions of preschoolers tune in to Nickelodeon’s hit show Dora the 
Explorer, they don’t realize that they view content based on multiple-intelligence 
theory. This influential perspective argues for other types of intelligence, such as athletic 
prowess or musical ability, beyond the traditional math and verbal skills psychologists 
use to measure IQ. Thus, when Dora consults her map, she promotes “spatial” skills. And 
when she asks her young viewers to help her count planks to build a bridge, Dora builds 
“interpersonal intelligence.”61
Message comprehension
Because children differ in their abilities to process product-related information, advertis-
ers’ direct appeals to them raise many serious ethical issues.62 Children’s advocacy groups 
argue that kids younger than age 7 do not understand the persuasive intent of commer-
cials, and (as we’ve seen) younger children cannot readily distinguish between a commer-
cial and programming. Kids’ cognitive defenses are not yet sufficiently developed to filter 
out commercial appeals, so in a sense, altering their brand preferences may be likened to 
“shooting fish in a barrel,” as one critic put it.63 Figure 4.4 shows one attempt to assess 
whether kids can tell that a commercial is trying to persuade them.
Beginning in the 1970s, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) took action to protect 
children. The agency limited commercials during “children’s” programming (most often 
Saturday morning television) and required “separators” to help children discern when a 
program ended and a commercial began (e.g., “We’ll be right back after these commer-
cial messages”). The FTC reversed itself in the early 1980s during the deregulatory, pro-
business climate of Ronald Reagan’s administration. The 1990 Children’s Television Act 
restored some of these restrictions. Still, critics argue that rather than sheltering children 
from marketplace influences, the dominant way that marketers view them is as what one 
calls “kid customers.”64
On the bright side, however, it seems that food companies are finally taking action to 
combat the growing problem of childhood obesity that they helped to create. Numerous 
corporations, including Sara Lee, Burger King, Campbell Soup Company, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, 
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 4.4  ExAMPLES OF SKETCHES 
RESEARCHERS USE TO MEASURE 
CHILDREN’S PERCEPTIONS OF 
COMMERCIAL INTENT

150 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Dannon, General Mills, Hershey, Kellogg, Kraft Foods, Mars, McDonald’s, and Nestlé, have 
joined the Council of Better Business Bureau’s Children’s Food and Beverage Initiative. 
They have pledged to market to kids 11 and younger only products that meet government 
or American Heart Association standards for “healthy” foods. In addition, this agreement 
restricts the use of third-party licensed characters in ads targeted to child audiences and 
sharply limits the usage of product images in places like elementary schools and video 
games.65 In addition, the FTC recently strengthened privacy safeguards that cover mobile 
apps and Web sites targeted to children; now companies must obtain parental consent 
before they collect data from kids that could be used to identify, contact, or locate them.66
Memory
Memory is a process of acquiring information and storing it over 
time so that it will be available when we need it. Contemporary 
approaches to the study of memory employ an information-pro-
cessing approach. They assume that the mind is in some ways like 
a computer: Data are input, processed, and output for later use in 
revised form. Figure 4.5 summarizes the memory process:
1 In the encoding stage, information enters in a way the system will recognize.
2 In the storage stage, we integrate this knowledge with what is already in memory 
and “warehouse” it until it is needed.
3 During retrieval, we access the desired information.67
Many of our experiences are locked inside our heads, and they may surface years 
later if the right cues prompt them. Marketers rely on consumers to retain information 
they collect about products and services so they will apply it to future purchase decisions. 
We combine this internal memory with external memory when we decide what to buy. This 
includes all the product details on packages and other marketing stimuli that permit us to 
identify and evaluate brand alternatives in the marketplace.68
The grocery-shopping list is a good example of a powerful external memory aid. 
When consumers use shopping lists, they buy approximately 80 percent of the items on 
the list. The likelihood that a shopper will purchase a particular list item is higher if the 
person who wrote the list also participates in the shopping trip. This means that if market-
ers can induce consumers to plan to purchase an item before they go shopping, there is a 
high probability that they will buy it. One way to encourage this kind of advance planning 
Objective 4-6
Our brains process 
information about  
brands to retain them  
in memory.
ELABORATIVE REHEARSAL
Information subjected to 
elaborative rehearsal or deep 
processing (e.g., its meaning is 
considered) is transferred to long-
term memory.
ATTENTION
Information that passes through an 
attentional gate is transferred to 
short-term memory.
SENSORY MEMORY
Temporary storage of
sensory information
 Less than 1 second
High
(vision) or a few 
seconds (hearing)
Capacity:
Duration:
SHORT-TERM MEMORY
Brief storage of information
currently being used
 Limited
 Less than 20 seconds
Capacity:
Duration:
LONG-TERM MEMORY
Relatively permanent
storage of information
 Unlimited
 Long or permanent
Capacity:
Duration:
Figure 4.5  TYPES OF MEMORY

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
151 
is to provide peel-off stickers on packages so that, when consumers notice the supply 
is low, they can simply peel off the label and place it directly on a shopping list.69 Or, a 
retailer can support a phone app that generates a shopping list for the user (you already 
can choose from an abundance of apps that do this).70
How Our brains encode information
The way we encode, or mentally program, information helps to determine how our brains 
will store this information. In general, it’s more likely that we’ll retain incoming data when 
we associate it with other things already in memory. For example, we tend to remember 
brand names that we link to physical characteristics of a product category (e.g., Coffee-Mate 
creamer or Sani-Flush toilet bowl cleaner) or that we can easily visualize (e.g., Tide detergent 
or Ford Mustang cars) compared to more abstract brand names.71 Similarly, our brains auto-
matically react to images of familiar celebrities and use them to guide how we think about 
them to ascribe meaning to other images of people or products with which they appear.72
Sometimes we process a stimulus simply in terms of its sensory meaning, such as 
the literal color or shape of a package. We may experience a feeling of familiarity when, 
for example, we see an ad for a new snack food we have recently tasted. In many cases, 
though, we encode meanings at a more abstract level. Semantic meaning refers to sym-
bolic associations, such as the idea that rich people drink champagne or that fashion-
able women have navel piercings. Let’s take a closer look at how we encode these deeper 
meanings.
Episodic memories relate to events that are personally relevant.73 As a result, a 
person’s motivation to retain these memories will likely be strong. Couples often have 
“their song,” which reminds them of their first date or wedding. We call some especially 
vivid associations flashbulb memories (where were you when you first heard that Osama 
bin Laden was dead?). In addition, recall of the past may affect future behavior. A college 
fund-raising campaign can raise more money when it evokes pleasant college memories 
than when it reminds alumni of unpleasant ones.
A narrative, or a description of a product that is written as a story, is often an effec-
tive way to convey product information. Our memories store a lot of the social informa-
tion we acquire in story form; it’s a good idea to construct ads in the form of a narrative 
Certain events create flashbulb memories. 
Do you remember when you heard that 
Osama bin Laden was dead?
Source: Cal Vornberger/Alamy.

152 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
so they resonate with the audience. Narratives persuade people to construct mental 
representations of the information they see or hear. Pictures aid in this construction and 
allow us to develop more detailed mental representations.74 Research supports the idea 
that we are more likely to positively evaluate and purchase brands when they connect 
with us like this.75
Memory Systems
Researchers describe three distinct memory systems: sensory memory, short-term memory 
(STM), and long-term memory (LTM). Each plays a role in processing brand-related infor-
mation (see Figure 4.5).
Sensory Memory
Sensory memory stores the information we receive from our senses. This storage is tem-
porary; it lasts a couple of seconds at most. For example, a man who walks past a donut 
shop gets a quick, enticing whiff of something baking inside. Although this sensation 
lasts only a few seconds, it is sufficient to allow him to consider whether he should inves-
tigate further. If he retains this information for further processing, it transfers to short-
term memory.
Short-term Memory
Short-term memory (STM) also stores information for a limited period of time, and it 
has limited capacity. Similar to a computer, this system is working memory; it holds the 
information we are currently processing. Our memories can store verbal input acoustically 
(in terms of how it sounds) or semantically (in terms of what it means).
We store this information as we combine small pieces into larger ones in a process we 
call chunking. A chunk is a configuration that is familiar to the person and that he or she 
can think about as a unit. For example, a brand name like 7 For All Mankind is a chunk 
that represents a great deal of detailed information about the product.
Initially, researchers believed that our STM was capable of processing between 
five and nine chunks of information at a time; they described this basic property as 
“the magical number 7+/–2.” This is the reason our phone numbers today (at least in 
the United States) have seven digits.76 It now appears that three to four chunks is the 
optimal size for efficient retrieval (we remember seven-digit phone numbers because 
we chunk the individual digits, so we may remember a three-digit exchange as one 
piece of information).77 Phone calls aside, chunking is important to marketers because 
it helps determine how consumers keep prices in short-term memory when they 
comparison-shop.78
Long-term Memory
Long-term memory (LTM) is the system that allows us to retain information for a long 
period of time. A cognitive process of elaborative rehearsal allows information to move 
from STM into LTM. This involves thinking about the meaning of a stimulus and relat-
ing it to other information already in memory. Marketers assist in the process when they 
devise catchy slogans or jingles that consumers repeat on their own.
How Our Memories Store information
The relationship between STM and LTM is a source of some controversy. The traditional 
multiple-store perspective assumes that STM and LTM are separate systems. More recent 
research has moved away from the distinction between the two types of memory; it 
emphasizes the interdependence of the systems. According to activation models of 
memory, depending on the nature of the processing task different levels of processing 
occur that activate some aspects of memory rather than others.81 The more effort it takes 
to process information (so-called deep processing), the more likely it is that information will 
transfer into LTM.
It’s common for market-
ers to give a brand a vivid 
name that conjures up 
an image or story in our 
minds. Research suggests 
that this strategy results in higher consumer 
evaluations versus brand names composed 
of meaningless letters or numbers. One study 
reported that consumers rated cell phones 
from Samsung and LG more positively after 
they were the first in the industry to break 
the practice of naming the phones with 
combinations of letters and numbers—LG’s 
phones instead sport names like Chocolate, 
Shine, Vu, Voyager, Dare, and Decoy, whereas 
Samsung started things off with the Black-
Jack, UpStage, FlipShot, and Juke, and later 
added the Access, Instinct, and Glyde. During 
the same period these companies increased 
market share in this category. Compared to 
other phone brands, consumers rated these 
models as modern, creative, engaging, origi-
nal, cool and easy to remember.79
Marketing Opportunity

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
153 
associative networks
According to activation models of memory, an incoming piece of 
information gets stored in an associative network that contains 
many bits of related information. We each have organized sys-
tems of concepts that relate to brands, manufacturers, and stores 
stored in our memories; the contents, of course, depend on our 
own unique experiences.
Think of these storage units, or knowledge structures, as com-
plex spider webs filled with pieces of data. Incoming information gets put into nodes 
that connect to one another (if you haven’t guessed, this is also why we call cyberspace 
the World Wide Web). When we view separate pieces of information as similar for some 
reason, we chunk them together under some more abstract category. Then, we interpret 
new, incoming information to be consistent with the structure we have created.82 This 
Objective 4-7
The other products 
we associate with an 
individual product 
influence how we will 
remember it.
cb aS i See it
John Lynch, University of Colorado-Boulder
it is because the consumer failed 
to consider another alternative  
he or she would have liked better.
My colleagues and I believe 
that these principles explain how 
consumers respond to resource 
scarcity of money or time by retrieving 
from memory alternative ways to 
spend a resource. 80 In economics, 
a key idea is opportunity cost – any 
time you decide to spend a resource, 
you are supposed to ask whether 
that is the highest and best use of 
the resource. Should you spend $5 
at Starbucks or save it for clothing? 
But newer work shows that only 
sometimes do consumers only think 
about opportunity costs, consistent 
with point 2 above.
Suppose you have plenty of cash 
in your wallet, and you are standing 
in line at McDonalds and thinking 
about what to order for breakfast. 
Experiments show that it may not even 
occur to you that you could spend that 
cash on something else later in the 
day. But when you have just a little 
cash in your wallet, later-in-the-day 
opportunity costs now pop into your 
head and enter your consideration set 
for how you are going to spend that 
money.
My colleagues and I find that 
the resource uses that enter your 
consideration sets are of two types, 
which we call priority plans and 
efficiency plans. In priority planning, 
consumers realize opportunity costs 
because they don’t feel like they 
have enough of the resource to have 
everything in their consideration 
sets; they decide to sacrifice 
less important uses. In efficiency 
planning, consumers try to cope 
with a short age without giving up 
anything by using the resource more 
efficiently—e.g., clipping coupons to 
save money, or combining shopping 
trips to save time.
We find that when consumers 
perceive little constraint, neither 
efficiency plans nor priority plans 
enter their consideration sets. When 
consumers feel moderate constraint, 
plans of both types start popping 
into their heads. But the efficiency 
plans feel good and the priority plans 
feel bad, so only when consumers 
are seriously constrained do priority 
plans start to pop into their heads 
faster and more frequently. When we 
consumers prioritize too little and too 
late, that can get us in a lot of trouble. 
It’s all about how memory affects our 
consideration sets!
The most important idea in all 
of marketing is the consumer’s 
consideration set – the set of 
alternatives actively considered for 
choice.
1. Most of the time you as a mar-
keter fail to make a sale to a 
consumer, it is not because you 
were considered and found want-
ing: it is because you were never 
considered.
2. Most of the time if you as a mar-
keter do make a sale, it is not be-
cause you were the best possible 
option for that consumer if he or 
she had searched exhaustively:  

154 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
helps explain why we are better able to remember brands or stores that we believe “go 
together”; for example, when Titleist golf balls rather than Chanel fragrances sponsors a 
golf tournament.83
In the associative network, links form between nodes. For example, a consumer might 
have a network for “perfumes.” Each node represents a concept related to the category. 
This node can be an attribute, a specific brand, a celebrity the consumer identifies with a 
specific perfume brand, or even a related product. A network for perfumes might include 
concepts such as the brand names Viva La Juicy by Juicy Couture, Calvin Klein Eternity, 
and Elizabeth Arden Red Door, as well as attributes such as sexy and elegant.
When we ask the consumer to list perfumes, this consumer recalls only those brands 
that show up in the appropriate category. The task of a new entrant that wants to position 
itself as a category member (e.g., a new luxury perfume) is to provide cues that facilitate its 
placement in the appropriate category. Figure 4.6 shows a sample network for perfumes.
Spreading activation
A marketing message may activate our memory of a brand directly (for example, when it 
shows us a picture of the package), or it may do so indirectly when it links to something 
else that’s related to the brand in our knowledge structure. If it activates a node, it will also 
activate other linked nodes, much as tapping a spider’s web in one spot sends movement 
reverberating across the web. Meaning thus spreads across the network, and we recall 
concepts, such as competing brands and relevant attributes, that we use to form attitudes 
toward the brand.
This process of spreading activation allows us to shift back and forth among lev-
els of meaning. The way we store a piece of information in memory depends on the type 
of meaning we initially assign to it. This meaning type, in turn, will determine how and 
when something activates the meaning. Thus, we could store the memory trace for an Axe 
men’s fragrance ad in one or more of the following ways:
●
●Brand-specific—Memory is stored in terms of claims the brand makes (“it’s macho”).
●
●Ad-specific—Memory is stored in terms of the medium or content of the ad itself (a 
macho-looking guy uses the product).
¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚
¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚
¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚
˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚
˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚
¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥˚¥
PERFUMES
Colognes
Calvin Klein
Obsession
Poison
elegant
sexy
rich
Rolls
Royce
Victoria’s
Secret
Mercedes
young
Charlie
Chanel
Elizabeth Taylor
Angelina Jolie
White
Linen
Floral scents
Toilet water
Figure 4.6  AN ASSOCIATIVE 
NETWORK FOR PERFUMES
Social networks such 
as Facebook have revo-
lutionized how people 
store and share memo-
ries. However, at least 
some users are starting to feel that maybe 
these platforms do this a bit too well: They 
don’t necessarily want others (especially 
employers, parents, and other authority fig-
ures) to know about all of their “awesome” 
experiences. As a result a number of newer 
platforms including Wickr, Vidburn, and even 
Facebook’s own Poke allow photos or mes-
sages to be viewed for a few seconds before 
they vanish into cyberspace. The biggest hit 
is Snapchat, which posts and then destroys 
more than 60 million photos or messages 
every day—already a tenth of the activity that 
occurs on the much bigger Facebook plat-
form. One of Snapchat’s founders explained 
the thinking behind the app: “It became clear 
how awful social media is. “There is real value 
in sharing moments that don’t live forever.”84
the tangled Web

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
155 
●
●Brand identification—Memory is stored in terms of the brand name (e.g., “Axe”).
●
●Product category—Memory is stored in terms of how the product works or where it 
should be used (a bottle of Axe sits in a guy’s medicine cabinet).
●
●Evaluative reactions—Memory is stored as positive or negative emotions (“that 
looks cool”).85
Levels of Knowledge
Within a knowledge structure, we code elements at different levels of abstraction and com-
plexity. Meaning concepts (such as “macho”) get stored as individual nodes. We may com-
bine these concepts into a larger unit we call a proposition (or a belief). A proposition links 
two nodes together to form a more complex meaning, which can serve as a single chunk 
of information. For example, “Axe is cologne for macho men” is a proposition (though not 
necessarily a correct one!).
In turn, we integrate propositions to produce an even more complex unit called a 
schema. As we saw in Chapter 3, a schema is a cognitive framework we develop through 
experience. We encode information more readily when that information is consistent 
with an existing schema.86 The ability to move up and down among levels of abstraction 
greatly increases processing flexibility and efficiency. For this reason, young children who 
do not yet have well-developed schemas are not able to make as efficient use of purchase 
information as are older children.87
One type of schema especially relevant to consumer behavior is a script; a sequence 
of events an individual expects to occur. As consumers we learn service scripts that 
guide our behavior in commercial settings. We expect a certain sequence of events, and 
we may become uncomfortable if the service departs from our script. A service script for a 
visit to the dentist might include such events as (1) drive to the dentist, (2) read old maga-
zines in the waiting room, (3) hear name called and sit in dentist’s chair, (4) dentist injects 
something into gums, (5) dentist turns on high-pitched drill, and so on. This desire to fol-
low a script helps to explain why such service innovations as automatic bank machines, 
self-service gas stations, or “scan-your-own” grocery checkouts have met with resistance 
by some consumers who have trouble adapting to new sequences of events.88
There is a growing market for products 
that enable consumers to practice “mental 
gymnastics.”
Source: Boominbox Limited.
Individual 
cognitive 
or 
physiological factors are 
responsible for some of 
the differences in retrieval 
ability among people.89 
Older adults consistently display inferior 
recall ability for current items, such as pre-
scription drug instructions, although they may 
recall events that happened to them when 
they were younger with great clarity.90 The 
recent popularity of puzzles, such as Sudoku 
and Brain Box, and centers that offer “men-
tal gymnastics” attests to emerging evidence 
that we can keep our retrieval abilities sharp 
by exercising our minds, just as we keep our 
other muscles toned when we work out on a 
regular basis.
Marketing Opportunity

156 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
How We retrieve Memories When We Decide  
What to buy
It hasn’t been smooth sailing for the cruise industry lately, following several highly-
publicized incidents where things were not exactly ship-shape on board. One of the 
most embarrassing and high-profile accidents stranded several thousand guests on a 
Carnival ship in the Gulf of Mexico with no electricity or working toilets, but plenty of 
smartphones to record the dismal conditions. Carnival’s potential cruisers are skittish, 
so the cruise line launched a $25 million public relations offensive to lure people back 
on board. The campaign asks previous customers to use social media to post images and 
videos of happy experiences that will contribute to Carnival’s “Moments that Matter” 
commercial. The ad’s voiceover says, “We never forget the moments that matter. We 
hang them on our walls. We share them with everyone. And hold onto them forever. 
Since the day we first set sail, millions of lasting moments have been made with us. 
What will yours be?” Sure enough, the campaign received more than 30,000 submis-
sions, presumably from passengers who enjoyed both the midnight chocolate buffet and 
working plumbing.91
We’ve seen that retrieval is the process whereby we recover information from long-
term memory. As evidenced by the popularity of the board game Trivial Pursuit or the TV 
show Are You Smarter Than a Fifth Grader?, we have a vast quantity of information stored 
in our heads—a lot of which is not useful unless you play the game! Although most of the 
information that enters LTM does not go away, it may be difficult or impossible to retrieve 
unless the appropriate cues are present. What factors influence the likelihood that we will 
remember the marketing messages that organizations work so hard to create?
Situational factors also influence retrieval; these relate to the environment in which 
we encounter the message. Not surprisingly, recall is enhanced when we pay more atten-
tion to the message in the first place. Some evidence indicates that we can more easily 
retrieve information about a pioneering brand (the first brand to enter a market) from 
memory than we can for follower brands that ride their coattails because the first prod-
uct’s introduction is likely to be distinctive, and for the time being, no competitors divert 
our attention.92 In addition, we are more likely to recall descriptive brand names than 
those that do not provide adequate cues as to what the product is.93
Not surprisingly, the way a marketer presents the message influences the likelihood 
that we’ll be able to recall it later. The spacing effect describes the tendency for us 
to recall printed material more effectively when the advertiser repeats the target item 
periodically, rather than presenting it repeatedly in a short time period.94 The viewing 
environment of a marketing message also affects recall. For example, commercials we 
see during baseball games yield the lowest recall scores among sports programs because 
the activity is stop-and-go rather than continuous. Unlike football or basketball, the 
pacing of baseball gives many opportunities for attention to wander even during play. 
General Electric discovered that its commercials fared better in television shows with 
continuous activity, such as stories or dramas, compared to variety shows or talk shows 
that are punctuated by a series of acts.95 A large-scale analysis of TV commercials 
found that viewers recall commercials shown first in a series of ads better than those 
they see last.96
Finally, it goes without saying that the nature of the ad itself plays a big role in 
determining whether it’s memorable. One study on print advertising reported that we 
are far more likely to remember spectacular magazine ads, including multipage spreads, 
three-dimensional pop-ups, scented ads, and ads with audio components. For example, a 
Pepsi Jazz two-page spread, which incorporated a three-dimensional pop-up of the opened 
bottle, a small audio chip that played jazz music from the bottle’s opening, and a scratch-
and-sniff tab that let readers smell its black cherry vanilla flavor, scored an amazing 100 
percent in reader recall.97 Unfortunately, that kind of multimedia treatment is expensive; 
not every ad can mimic a Broadway production!

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
157 
What Makes Us Forget?
Marketers obviously hope that consumers will not forget about their products. However, in 
a poll of more than 13,000 adults, more than half were unable to remember any specific 
ad they had seen, heard, or read in the past 30 days. How many can you remember right 
now? Clearly, forgetting by consumers is a big headache for marketers (not to mention a 
problem for students when they study for exams!). In one major study, only 23 percent of 
the respondents could recall a new product introduced in the past year.98
Early memory theorists assumed that memories simply fade with the passage of time. 
In a process of decay, the structural changes that learning produces in the brain simply 
go away. Forgetting also occurs as a result of interference; as we learn additional infor-
mation, it displaces the previous information. Consumers may forget stimulus–response 
associations if they subsequently learn new responses to the same or similar stimuli; we 
call this process retroactive interference. Or prior learning can interfere with new learning, 
a process we term proactive interference. Because we store pieces of information in memory 
as nodes that link to one another, we are more likely to retrieve a meaning concept that is 
connected by a larger number of links. But as we learn new responses, a stimulus loses its 
effectiveness in retrieving the old response.99
These interference effects help to explain problems in remembering brand informa-
tion. Consumers tend to organize attribute information by brand.100 Additional attribute 
information regarding a brand or similar brands may limit the person’s ability to recall 
old brand information. Recall may also be inhibited if the brand name is composed of 
frequently used words. These words cue competing associations; as a result, we retain less 
brand information.101 In one study, brand evaluations deteriorated more rapidly when ads 
for the brand appeared with messages for 12 other brands in the same category than when 
researchers showed the ad along with ads for 12 dissimilar products.102 Thus, when we 
increase the uniqueness of one brand, it impairs the recall of other brands.103 However, 
when we call a competitor by name, this can result in poorer recall for our own brand.104
State-Dependent retrieval
Is it true that you’ll do better on an exam if you study for it in the classroom in which 
you’ll take the test? Perhaps. The phenomenon of state-dependent retrieval illustrates 
that we are better able to access information if our internal state is the same at the time 
of recall as when we learned the information. So, we are more likely to recall an ad if our 
mood or level of arousal at the time of exposure is similar to that in the purchase environ-
ment. When marketers re-create the cues that were present when they first presented the 
information, they can enhance recall. For example, on its box Life cereal uses a picture of 
“Mikey” from its long-running TV commercials, which facilitates recall of brand claims 
and favorable brand evaluations.105
Familiarity and recall
As a general rule, when we are already familiar with an item we’re more likely to recall 
messages about it. Indeed, this is one of the basic goals of marketers who try to create and 
maintain awareness of their products. The more experience a consumer has with a prod-
uct, the better use he or she makes of product information.106
However, there is a possible fly in the ointment: As we noted previously in this chapter, 
some evidence indicates that extreme familiarity can result in inferior learning and recall. 
When consumers are highly familiar with a brand or an advertisement, they may not pay 
much attention to a message for it because they do not believe that any additional effort 
will increase their knowledge.107 We call this process automaticity.108 For example, when 
researchers expose consumers to a radio ad that repeats the audio track from a television 
ad they’ve already seen, they do little critical, evaluative processing; they just mentally 
replay the video portion of the ad.109
We may also encounter a highlighting effect, which occurs when the order in which 
consumers learn about brands determines the strength of association between these brands 

158 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
and their attributes. Consumers more strongly associate common attributes with early-
learned brands and unique attributes with late-learned brands. More generally, we are more 
likely to recognize words, objects, and faces we learn early in life than similar items we learn 
later. This applies to brands as well; managers who introduce new entries into a market 
with well-established brand names need to work harder to create learning and memory 
linkages by exposing consumers to information about them more frequently.110
Salience and recall
The salience of a brand refers to its prominence or level of activation in memory. Stimuli 
that stand out in contrast to their environments are more likely to command attention, 
which, in turn, increases the likelihood that we will recall them. The von Restorff Effect 
is well-known to memory researchers; it shows that almost any technique that increases 
the novelty of a stimulus also improves recall. This explains why unusual advertising or 
distinctive packaging tends to facilitate brand recall.111
The tactic of introducing a surprise element in an ad can boost recall, even if the 
new information is not relevant to the remaining material.112 In addition, mystery ads, in 
which the ad doesn’t identify the brand until the end, are more effective if we want to build 
associations in memory between the product category and that brand—especially in the 
case of relatively unknown brands.113
Furthermore, the intensity and type of emotions we experience at the time also affect 
the way we recall the event later. We recall mixed emotions (e.g., those with positive and 
negative components) differently than unipolar emotions that are either wholly positive 
or wholly negative. The latter become even more polarized over time, so that we recall good 
things as even better than they really were and bad things as even worse (maybe the “good 
old days” weren’t really so good after all!).114
the viewing context
Regardless of how awesome a commercial is, the show in which it appears influences its 
impact. Nielsen (one company that measures who watches which media) reports that 
viewers who enjoy a program are more likely to respond positively to a commercial and 
to say they want to buy the advertised product. Nielsen studied the responses of 10,000 
people across 50 shows and 200 brands. Viewers are almost one-third more likely to 
remember brands whose products were placed in shows they enjoy. The impact of this 
factor varies across show format; it’s weaker in sitcoms but much stronger in “lifestyle pro-
grams” such as Extreme Makeover: Home Edition.115
It also helps when the marketer’s message is consistent with the theme or events in the 
program, and it’s even better when the advertised product actually makes a reference to 
the show. The Discovery Channel documented this effect during a broadcast of its program 
Mythbusters, which uses science to test the validity of urban legends. The network ran a 
brief ad for Guinness beer in which a character asked another whether it was a “myth that 
Guinness only has 125 calories.” Viewers who saw this ad remembered the name of the 
Guinness brand 41 percent more often than they did when they saw a traditional ad for 
the beer. Other similar hybrid ads that include a program tie-in deliver similar results.116
pictorial versus verbal cues
Is a picture worth a thousand words? There is some evidence for the superiority of visual mem-
ory over verbal memory, but this advantage is unclear because it is more difficult to measure 
recall of pictures.117 However, the available data indicate that we are more likely to recognize 
information we see in picture form at a later time.118 Certainly, visual aspects of an ad are more 
likely to grab a consumer’s attention. In fact, eye-movement studies indicate that about 90 
percent of viewers look at the dominant picture in an ad before they bother to view the copy.119
Although pictorial ads may enhance recall, they do not necessarily improve com-
prehension. One study found that television news items presented with illustrations (still 
pictures) as a backdrop result in improved recall for details of the news story, even though 
understanding of the story’s content does not improve.120 Another study confirmed that 
consumers typically recall ads with visual figures more often and they like them better.121

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
159 
How We Measure consumers’ recall  
of Marketing Messages
Because marketers pay so much money to place their messages in 
front of consumers, they hope that people will actually remember 
these ads later on. It seems that they have good reason to be concerned. In one study, fewer 
than 40 percent of television viewers made positive links between commercial messages 
and the corresponding products; only 65 percent noticed the brand name in a commer-
cial, and only 38 percent recognized a connection to an important point.122
Even more sadly, only 7 percent of television viewers can recall the product or com-
pany featured in the most recent television commercial they watched. This figure repre-
sents less than half the recall rate recorded in 1965. We can explain this drop-off in terms 
of such factors as the increase of 30- and 15-second commercials and the practice of air-
ing television commercials in clusters rather than in single-sponsor programs.123
The news is a bit brighter for online marketing messages, especially when they repeat 
commercials that first appeared on television. Research by Google shows that recall 
improves when spots reappear before YouTube videos.124 Apple reports similar results for 
“iAds,” mobile ads that pop up on iPhones and iPods.125
recognition versus recall
One indicator of good advertising is, of course, the impression it makes on us. But how 
can we define and measure this impact? Two basic measures of impact are  recognition 
and recall. In the typical recognition test, researchers show ads to subjects one at a time 
and ask if they have seen them before. In contrast, free recall tests ask consumers to 
Visual aspects of an ad grab a consumer’s 
attention, especially when they are novel. 
That is certainly the case for this “pile of 
trash” that is actually an outdoor ad on a 
Dutch street for the MINI Cooper.
Source: Courtesy of UbachsWisbrun/JWT.
Objective 4-9
Marketers measure 
our memories about 
products and ads.

160 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
independently think of what they have seen without being prompted for this information 
first; obviously, this task requires greater effort on their part.
Under some conditions, these two memory measures tend to yield the same results, 
especially when the researchers try to keep the viewers’ interest in the ads constant 
(though that may be an overly artificial way to study true memory for ads).126 Generally, 
though, recognition scores tend to be more reliable and do not decay over time the way 
recall scores do.127 Recognition scores are almost always better than recall scores because 
recognition is a simpler process and the consumer has more retrieval cues available.
Both types of retrieval play important roles in purchase decisions, however. Recall tends 
to be more important in situations in which consumers do not have product data at their 
disposal, so they must rely on memory to generate this information.128 However, recogni-
tion is more likely to be an important factor in a store, where retailers confront consumers 
with thousands of product options (i.e., external memory is abundantly available) and the 
task simply may be to recognize a familiar package. Unfortunately, package recognition and 
familiarity can have negative consequences; for example, consumers may ignore warning 
labels because they take those messages for granted and don’t really notice them.129
problems with Memory Measures
Although measuring an ad’s memorability is important, analysts have questioned 
whether existing measures accurately assess these dimensions, for several reasons. First, 
the results we obtain from a measuring instrument are not necessarily based on what we 
measure, but rather on something else about the instrument or the respondent. This form 
of contamination is a response bias. For example, people tend to give “yes” responses to 
questions, regardless of what the item asks. In addition, experimental subjects often are 
eager to be “good subjects”: They try to figure out what the experimenter is looking for and 
give the response they think they are supposed to give. This tendency is so strong that in 
some studies the rate at which subjects claim they recognize bogus ads (ads they have not 
seen before) is almost as high as their recognition rate for those they really have seen!130
Memory Lapses
People are also prone to forget information or retain inaccurate memories (yes, even younger 
people). Typical problems include omitting (leaving facts out), averaging (the tendency to 
“normalize” memories by not reporting extreme cases), and telescoping (inaccurate recall 
of time).131 These distortions are not just a problem in court cases that rely on eyewitness 
testimony; they also call into question the accuracy of product usage databases that rely 
Facebook’s Timeline feature helps 
 consumers to recall the brands they have 
“liked” over time.
Source: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images.

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
161 
on consumers to recall their purchase and consumption of food and household items. For 
example, one study asked people to describe what portion of various foods—small, medium, 
or large—they ate in a typical meal. However, the researchers used different definitions of 
“medium.” Regardless of the definition they gave, about the same number of people claimed 
they typically ate “medium” portions.132 In other situations, we may “fool ourselves” by dis-
torting past memories. For example, some people who work toward a goal like losing weight 
or saving money may exaggerate (to themselves) how much progress they’ve made to justify 
current indulgences. That tendency points to the importance of documenting your progress 
(your Fitbit monitoring device doesn’t lie) to keep yourself on track.133
bittersweet Memories: the 
Marketing power of nostalgia
The Disney theme parks ran a marketing campaign 
called “Let the Memories Begin.” It focused on vacation memories; TV commercials, online 
ads, and brochures featured photos and videos shot by park guests. Disney projected 
images of visitors on building facades each night.134 The company understands just how 
powerful memories can be.
The pictures we take of ourselves using products and services (like when we pose 
for selfies with Mickey at Disney World) can themselves serve as powerful retrieval cues. 
Indeed, the three types of possessions consumers most value are furniture, visual art, and 
photos. These objects are likely to jog memories of the past.135 Researchers find that val-
ued possessions can evoke thoughts about prior events on several dimensions, including 
sensory experiences, friends and loved ones, and breaking away from parents or former 
partners.136 That helps to explain the popularity of photo-sharing sites like Flickr and 
Instagram; Flickr alone hosts more than 5 billion pictures and offers “Share This” tools for 
use on Facebook and Twitter.137
Nostalgia describes the bittersweet emotion that arises when we view the past with 
both sadness and longing.138 References to “the good old days” are increasingly common, 
as advertisers call up memories of youth and hope that these feelings will translate to what 
they’re selling today. A retro brand is an updated version of a brand from a prior histori-
cal period. These products trigger nostalgia, and researchers find that they often inspire 
consumers to think back to an era when (at least in our memories) life was more stable, 
simple, or even utopian. Simply, they let us “look backward through rose-colored glasses. 
One study reported that people who were asked to think about the past were willing to pay 
more for products than those who were asked to think about new or future memories.139
Our prior experiences also help to determine what we like today. Consumer researchers 
created a nostalgia index that measures the critical ages during which our preferences are 
likely to form and endure over time. It turns out that a good predictor of whether people will 
like a specific song is how old they were when that song was popular. On average, we are most 
likely to favor songs that were popular when we were 23.5 years old (so pay attention to the 
hot songs if you haven’t turned 23 yet). Our preferences for fashion models peak at age 33, 
and we tend to like movie stars who were popular when we were 26 or 27 years old.140
Products are particularly important as memory markers when our sense of the past 
is threatened, as, for example, when an event such as divorce, relocation, or gradua-
tion challenges a consumer’s current identity.141 Our cherished possessions often have 
 mnemonic qualities that serve as a form of external memory when they prompt us to 
retrieve episodic memories. For example, family photography allows consumers to create 
their own retrieval cues; the 11 billion amateur photos we take annually form a kind of 
external memory bank for our culture. A stimulus is, at times, able to evoke a weakened 
response even years after we first perceived it. We call this effect spontaneous recovery, 
and this reestablished connection may explain consumers’ powerful emotional reactions 
to songs or pictures they have not been exposed to in quite a long time. Some recent nostal-
gia campaigns include:
Objective 4-9
Products help us to retrieve memories 
from our past.

162 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
●
●Freezy Freakies gloves that sprouted designs when exposed to cold temperatures were 
all the rage 20 years ago, when the manufacturer sold about 300,000 pairs per year. 
The gloves were made with thermochromic ink that turns to bright colors when the 
temperature plunges. This technology resurfaced more recently on Coors Light cans 
that shine blue when the beer is cold and fade to white when it becomes warm. Now 
two brothers have licensed the Freezy Freakies brand to make adult versions of the 
gloves that are sure to light up fond memories for many people.142
●
●Coca-Cola is reviving Surge, a citrus-flavor soda that it discontinued more than a 
decade ago. The brand is coming back after a Millennial fan base called “The Surge 
Movement” spent years lobbying for it to return. The Surge Movement’s Facebook page 
has more than 150,000 likes.
●
●Calvin Klein collaborated with luxury fashion store MyTheresa.com to reissue 1990’s–era 
clothing styles from the collection that launched Kate Moss’s modeling career.
●
●Microsoft promotes its Internet Explorer browser with a video it calls “Child of the 
’90s.” It begins, “You might not remember us, but we met in the ’90s,” and goes on to 
remind its Millennial target audience of childhood favorites like virtual pets (“the only 
thing buzzing in your pocket”) and the tabletop game Hungry Hungry Hippos.143
Marketers often resurrect popular characters and stories from days gone by; they 
hope that consumers’ fond memories will motivate them to revisit the past. We had a 
1950s’ revival in the 1970s, and consumers in the 1980s got a heavy dose of memories 
from the 1960s. Today, it seems that popular characters only need to be gone for a few 
years before someone tries to bring them back. Many companies have responded as they 
dig deep into their vaults to bring back old favorites. New commercials position Chevrolet 
Fossil’s product designs evoke memories  
of earlier, classic styles.
Source: Used with permission of Fossil Inc.  
Photography by Thom Jackson and Jon Kirk.

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
163 
as a classic U.S. brand. Planters Peanuts recruited the actor Robert Downey, Jr., as the 
new voice of Mr. Peanut. “Retired” brand names, including Meister Brau beer, the broker-
age firm Shearson, Handi-Wrap plastic wrap, and Wonder Bread were sold at auction to 
companies that want to bring them back to life.144 The biggest retro success story in recent 
years: the Old Spice Guy campaign that went viral and revived a men’s deodorant brand 
that is more than 70 years old.
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. It is important to understand how consumers learn 
about products and services.
Learning is a change in behavior caused by experience. 
Learning can occur through simple associations between 
a stimulus and a response or via a complex series of cogni-
tive activities.
2. Conditioning results in learning.
Behavioral learning theories assume that learning occurs 
as a result of responses to external events. Classical condi-
tioning occurs when a stimulus that naturally elicits a re-
sponse (an unconditioned stimulus) is paired with another 
stimulus that does not initially elicit this response. Over 
time, the second stimulus (the conditioned stimulus) elicits 
the response even in the absence of the first.
3. Learned associations with brands generalize to other 
products.
This response can also extend to other, similar stimuli in a 
process we call stimulus generalization. This process is the 
basis for such marketing strategies as licensing and family 
branding, where a consumer’s positive associations with a 
product transfer to other contexts.
4. There is a difference between classical and instru­
mental conditioning, and both processes help con­
sumers learn about products.
Operant, or instrumental, conditioning occurs as the per-
son learns to perform behaviors that produce positive out-
comes and avoid those that result in negative outcomes. 
Whereas classical conditioning involves the pairing of two 
ChaPTer Summary
stimuli, instrumental learning occurs when a response to a 
stimulus leads to reinforcement. Reinforcement is positive 
if a reward follows a response. It is negative if the person 
avoids a negative outcome by not performing a response. 
Punishment occurs when an unpleasant event follows a 
response. Extinction of the behavior will occur if reinforce-
ment no longer occurs.
5. We learn about products by observing others’ behavior.
Cognitive learning occurs as the result of mental pro-
cesses. For example, observational learning occurs when 
the consumer performs a behavior as a result of seeing 
someone else performing it and being rewarded for it.
6. Our brains process information about brands to retain 
them in memory.
Memory is the storage of learned information. The way we 
encode information when we perceive it determines how 
we will store it in memory. The memory systems we call 
sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory 
each play a role in retaining and processing information 
from the outside world.
7. The other products we associate with an individual 
product influence how we will remember it.
We don’t store information in isolation; we incorporate it 
into a knowledge structure where our brains associate it with 
other related data. The location of product information in 
 associative networks, and the level of abstraction at which 
it is coded, help to determine when and how we will activate 
this information at a later time. Some factors that influence 
the likelihood of retrieval include the level of familiarity with 
an item, its salience (or prominence) in memory, and whether 
the information was presented in pictorial or written form.

164 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
8. marketers measure our memories about products  
and ads.
We can use either recognition or recall techniques to mea-
sure memory for product information. Consumers are more 
likely to recognize an advertisement if it is presented to them 
than they are to recall one without being given any cues. 
However, neither recognition nor recall automatically or 
reliably translates into product preferences or purchases.
9. Products help us to retrieve memories from our past.
Products also play a role as memory markers; consum-
ers use them to retrieve memories about past experiences 
(autobiographical memories), and we often value them 
because they are able to do this. This function also encour-
ages the use of nostalgia in marketing strategies.
Activation models of memory, 152
Advertising wear-out, 134
Associative network, 153
Behavioral learning theories, 131
Brand equity, 134
Chunking, 152
Classical conditioning, 131
Cognitive learning theory, 142
Conditioned response (CR), 131
Conditioned stimulus (CS), 131
Consumer confusion, 137
Consumer socialization, 144
Decay, 157
Elaborative rehearsal, 152
Encoding, 150
Endowed progress effect, 141
Episodic memories, 151
Extinction, 132
Family branding, 136
Fixed-interval reinforcement, 139
Fixed-ratio reinforcement, 139
Follower brands, 156
Frequency marketing, 140
Gamification, 140
Halo effect, 133
Highlighting effect, 157
Hybrid ads, 158
Incidental learning, 131
Instrumental conditioning, 137
Interference, 157
Learning, 130
Licensing, 136
Long-term memory (LTM), 152
Look-alike packaging, 136
Memory, 150
Mixed emotions, 158
Modeling, 143
Multiple-intelligence theory, 149
Narrative, 151
Negative reinforcement, 137
Nostalgia, 161
Observational learning, 143
Pioneering brand, 156
Positive reinforcement, 137
Product line extension, 136
Punishment, 137
Recall, 159
Recognition, 159
Repetition, 132
Response bias, 160
Retrieval, 150
Retro brand, 161
Salience, 158
schema, 155
Script, 155
Sensory memory, 152
Service scripts, 155
Shaping, 137
Short-term memory (STM), 152
Social default, 143
Spacing effect, 156
Spontaneous recovery, 161
Spreading activation, 154
Stage of cognitive development, 146
State-dependent retrieval, 157
Stimulus discrimination, 133
Stimulus generalization, 133
Storage stage, 150
Unconditioned stimulus (UCS), 131
Unipolar emotions, 158
Variable-interval reinforcement, 139
Variable-ratio reinforcement, 139
von Restorff effect, 158
Key TermS
revIeW
 
4-1  What is the difference between an unconditioned stimu-
lus and a conditioned stimulus?
 
4-2  People react to other, similar stimuli in much the same 
way as they responded to an original stimulus. What is 
this phenomenon, and how does it work?
 
4-3  What are the dangers of advertising wear-out, and how 
might a marketer avoid it?
 
4-4  Advertisers like to use celebrities and well-known faces 
to help promote their products and services. Is this a 
good idea?
 
4-5  Why are brand marketers concerned with stimulus 
discrimination?
 
4-6  What is the major difference between behavioral and 
cognitive theories of learning?
 
4-7  Name the three stages of information processing as we 
commit information about products to memory.
 
4-8  What is external memory, and why is it important to 
marketers?
 
4-9  How can marketers use sensory memory?
 4-10  What advantages does narrative bring to advertising?
 4-11  List the three types of memory, and explain how they 
work together.
 4-12  How is associative memory like a spider web?
 4-13  How does the likelihood that a person wants to use an 
ATM machine relate to a schema?
 4-14  Why does a pioneering brand have a memory advan-
tage over follower brands?

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
165 
 4-15  If a consumer is familiar with a product, advertising  
for it can work by either enhancing or diminishing recall. 
Why?
 4-16  Why are retro brands so popular? What is the key ingre-
dient that makes them successful?
 4-17  What is a schema? Give an example.
 4-18  How would you explain the terms salience and recall?
 4-19  How do different types of reinforcement enhance learn-
ing? How does the strategy of frequency marketing 
relate to conditioning?
 4-20  How does learning new information make it more likely 
that we’ll forget things we’ve already learned?
 4-21  To hasten kids’ introduction to social media, a team of 
Finnish designers invented a block-sorting toy that also 
works like Twitter. It allows preverbal kids to grab col-
orful blocks with icons for sleeping, eating, or brushing 
their teeth; the kids then fit them into slots to indicate 
what they’re up to. The device then transmits the “sta-
tus update” to light up the corresponding block-shape 
on the same toy in another household.145 Should very 
young children be introduced to social media this way?
 4-22  According to Gianfranco Zaccai of Continuum, focus 
groups kill innovation. He claims that in the 40 years 
he has been involved in the marketing industry, working 
with some of the most brilliant minds, he has never seen 
an innovation developed as a result of a focus group. He 
maintains that this is because of what focus groups can 
and cannot do. Do you agree?
 4-23  Sales of retro trainer brands, food brands, board games, 
and even vehicles (such as the relaunch of Vespa in 
India) are all examples of the growth of nostalgia mar-
keting. Nostalgia marketing taps into the memories of 
the consumer and sells them an idealized version of 
their past. According to Jannine LaSaleta at the Greno-
ble Ecole de Management in France, nostalgia market-
ing aims to provide consumers with a feeling of social 
connectedness.146 It makes them value money less and 
leads them to spend more freely. Nostalgia marketing 
can be applied to any stage in the consumers’ life. It does 
not just mean that the marketing has to refer to prod-
ucts or services that the consumer associates with their 
childhood or adolescence. How do you think nostalgia 
marketing works? How might nostalgia marketing work 
for several markets at the same time?
 4-24  Using commercial music for advertising is nothing 
new, but advertisers need to be very careful with their 
choices, as sometimes things can go wrong unexpect-
edly. In 2013, General Motors was forced to pull an 
advertisement for one of its Chevrolet models in China 
amid accusations of racism. The company had chosen 
the 2012 song “Booty Swing” by Parov Stelar, which 
sampled heavily from “Oriental Swing” by Lil Hardin 
Armstrong and Her Swing Orchestra. In the lyrics, there 
were lines that suggested that the Chinese were “ching-
chong, chop-suey” and that the Japanese could not pro-
nounce the letter “r.”
Although many musicians embrace the opportunity 
to earn royalties from the use of their music in advertis-
ing, some are adamant that their music should never be 
used. One such example is Adam Yauch, aka MCA, an 
original member of the Beastie Boys who died in 2012. 
His will left his entire estate to his widow with the caveat 
that in no event could his music or any of his creations 
be used in advertising. It was clear he did not approve.
Some musicians are only too happy to accept an 
additional revenue stream from the use of their music 
in advertisements. Not only do they receive royalties for 
its use, but this might also stimulate sales. What is your 
view on the use of popular music in advertisements?
COnSumer BehavIOr ChaLLenge
●
■DiScUSS
●
■appLy
 4-25  Just how well do you recall jingles and tunes used by 
brands in commercials? As a group, compile a list and 
see how many of these all of you can remember. Is there 
something specific that triggers recall? Are they original 
jingles or tunes or are they “borrowed”?
 4-26  In 2012, 14 of Singapore’s biggest food-and-beverage 
businesses committed themselves to a radical rethink-
ing of the way in which they advertise to children. The 
pledge, called the “Responsible Advertising to Children 
Pledge” was part of a commitment made by the compa-
nies to assist Singaporeans to attain a healthy and active 
lifestyle. The signatories were all renowned brands –  
Coca-Cola, Ferraro, General Mills, Kellogg’s, Kerry, 
Mars, McCain, McDonald’s, Mondelēz, Nestlé, Pepsico, 
FrieslandCampina, Suntory, and Unilever. They all 
agreed to advertise their products incorporating nutri-
ent details that were based on independently verifiable 
scientific tests. Further, they undertook to apply these 
guidelines to any advertising aimed at under 12-year-
olds or not advertise at all.
 4-27  Choose a well-established product sold in your coun-
try. Identify its key attributes. How could the brand be 

166 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
leveraged? Can you suggest any brand extensions that 
could be developed? What about licensing? Just how far 
could you go with the development?
 4-28  As a group, identify at least 10 long-established local 
brands that are specific to your country or region. What 
is it about them that has ensured their longevity? Iden-
tify the features and attributes of each brand, from the 
packaging and design to the product itself.
an avatar-powered testimonial page where satisfied customers 
can “talk” to potential customers visiting the company’s site. 
Research suggests that avatars might increase users’ satisfac-
tion with the Web sites and affect purchases.
Apparel brands continue to experiment with the use of 
avatars to help customers have a better online experience in de-
termining the right fit for clothing. Start-up company Fitle has 
developed a three-dimensional system that will enable a con-
sumer to create an avatar with a virtual representation of their 
body that is close to 99 percent accurate. Their system is being 
designed to interface with the catalogs of 250 partner brands 
that would allow users to “try on” clothing and create virtual 
wardrobes. The impact on how consumers would learn about 
different brands of clothing and their fit seems like a potential 
game-changer for the apparel industry.
Organizations and educators are continuing to explore the 
impact of avatars and virtual worlds. Companies can host their 
business meetings online and encourage employees to develop 
their own avatars when they attend the meetings. Several uni-
versity presidents have even held online forums with students 
and create avatars to discuss current issues of concern with 
their students. The world of avatars and virtual worlds will con-
tinue to challenge marketers in the years to come.
DISCuSSIOn QueSTIOnS
 CS 4-1 How might classical conditioning operate for a con-
sumer who visits a new tutoring Web site and is greeted 
by the Web site’s avatar who resembles Albert Einstein?
 CS 4-2 How might instrumental conditioning influence a con-
sumer who purchases a new outfit for his avatar in a 
virtual world?
 CS 4-3 Do consumers build associative networks from their 
avatar’s experience? If so, would the associations from 
their avatar experience be any different from other 
DO avaTarS Dream aBOuT vIrTuaL 
SheeP?
When he ventures online, he’s a muscular, bronzed, 23-year-old  
surfer. But, after a few hours chilling in the virtual world of 
The Sims 4, it’s time for this shy, 110-pound student to get 
back to work. Sound weird? It’s not. He is one of the more 
than one billion people worldwide who inhabit a virtual world 
in digital form. Welcome to the world of avatars! In the years 
since virtual worlds came into being, marketers have been 
working to understand how the time people spend in vir-
tual worlds influences the way they learn about brands and 
whether it impacts their relationship with the brand in the 
real world.
In The Sims 4 and other sites, users create an avatar to 
represent themselves online. Some people create avatars that 
look a lot like them in the real world, but many residents choose 
avatars that represent the person they would like to be, fantasy 
creatures, or even individuals of the opposite gender. With these 
alternate personalities they go out and explore virtual worlds. 
So what does this mean to marketers? A lot more than some 
pixels on a computer screen. Avatars interact with real brands  
in these virtual worlds. They can purchase products such as 
jeans for their avatars, and they can attend events such as 
 concerts or lectures. Marketers can gain insights about how 
consumers learn about brands by analyzing the behavior of 
their avatars in virtual settings.
But it’s not just virtual worlds that want to understand how 
to make money from the legions of avatars out there. Web site 
designers and developers also realize the importance of avatars 
that interact with visitors on corporate Web sites. Several com-
panies such as Sitepal offer software applications that design 
avatars to greet and guide visitors. Some of these avatars take 
the form of famous people, including rock stars, actors, and 
historical figures. Sitepal can even help a company to set up 
●■Case Study 

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
167 
billion#awesm=~omeiEn2UL1brEV, accessed November 4, 2013; www.site 
pal.com, accessed November 4, 2013 and May 26, 2015; Natalie T. Wood 
and Michael R. Solomon, (2011), “Adonis or Atrocious: Spokesavatars and 
Source Effects in Immersive Digital Environments,” in Matthew S. Eastin, 
Terry Daugherty, and Neal M. Burns, eds., Handbook of Research on Digital 
Media and Advertising: User Generated Content Consumption (IGI Global), 521–
534; Stu Robarts, “Fitle Gives Users a 3-D Avatar of Themselves for Trying 
on Clothes,” (July 29, 2014), http://www.gizmag.com/fitle-3d-clothing- 
avatar/33167/, accessed May 30, 2015.
shopping experiences? How would these networks im-
pact the consumer’s ability to organize and retrieve 
information that they have learned?
Sources: Audrey Waters, “Number of Virtual World Users Breaks 1 Billion, 
Roughly Half Under Age 15,” readwrite.com (October 1, 2010), http://read-
write.com/2010/10/01/number_of_virtual_world_users_breaks_the_1_
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 4.29 New passive monitoring systems allow us to pay tolls automatically or simply 
show our phones equipped with systems like Apple Pay. Convenient, for sure. 
But these systems also eliminate the transparency of the connection between the 
stimulus and the response. As a result we don’t think as much about the costs 
when we use them. Is this a problem for consumers?
 4.30 The Snapchat app provides a way for social media users to share content with 
their friends that disappears after a brief time. In Europe, Google is fighting an 
intense legal battle over what some call the “right to be forgotten”; users want 
the option to dictate to Google whether it will be allowed to display results when 
people search about them. On the other hand, some people who believe that 
“information wants to be free” say that if a person posts online it should be with 
the expectation that the content will be permanent and that you forfeit control 
over others’ right to access it. Which argument is correct?
nOTeS
 
9.  Roger Dobson, “Logos ‘Brand’ Youthful Minds: Children’s Brains Are Found 
to Light Up at the Sight of Fast-Food Logos,” The Independent (September 23, 
2012), 
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/logos-brand-youth 
ful-minds-8165962.html, accessed January 21, 2013.
 10.  Randi Priluck Grossman and Brian D. Till, “The Persistence of Classically 
Conditioned Brand Attitudes,” Journal of Advertising 21, no. 1 (1998): 23–31; 
Chris T. Allen and Thomas J. Madden, “A Closer Look at Classical Conditioning,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 12 (December 1985): 301–315; Chester A. Insko 
and William F. Oakes, “Awareness and the Conditioning of Attitudes,” Journal 
of Personality & Social Psychology 4 (November 1966): 487–496; Carolyn K. 
Staats and Arthur W. Staats, “Meaning Established by Classical Conditioning,” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology 54 (July 1957): 74–80.
 11.  Kevin Lane Keller, “Conceptualizing, Measuring, and Managing Customer-
Based Brand Equity,” Journal of Marketing 57 (January 1993): 1–22.
 12.  Herbert Krugman, “Low Recall and High Recognition of Advertising,” 
Journal of Advertising Research (February–March 1986): 79–80.
 13.  Brian Steinberg, “Ad Nauseam: Repetition of TV Spots Risks Driving 
Consumers Away, Fragmenting Media, Smaller Budgets Make for More 
of the Same Ads,” Crain’s Detroit Business (December 1, 2008), www 
.Crainsdetroit.Com/Article/20081201/Email01/812010278/1092, accessed 
December 1, 2008.
 14.  Yaveroglu Donthu and Naveen Donthu, “Advertising Repetition and 
Placement Issues in On-Line Environments,” Journal of Advertising 37 
(Summer 2008): 31–43.
 15.  Gerald J. Gorn, “The Effects of Music in Advertising on Choice Behavior: A 
Classical Conditioning Approach,” Journal of Marketing 46 (Winter 1982): 
94–101.
 16.  Stuart Elliot, “Gap Inc. Puts ‘GAP’ Back in Logo,” New York Times (October 
12, 2010), http://mediadecoder.blogs.NewYorkTimes.com/2010/10/12/
gap-inc-puts-gap-back-in-logo/?scp_1&sq_gap%20logo&st_cse, accessed  
March 27, 2011.
 
1.  Jenna Goudreau, “These Old Brands Are Poised for a 2011 Comeback: 
Nostalgia Will Help Sell to Consumers Who Aren’t Happy with the 
Present,” Forbes (December 31, 2010), http://today.msnbc.msn.com/
id/40856091/ns/today-entertainment, accessed July 22, 2013.
 
2.  Robert A. Baron, Psychology: The Essential Science (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 
1989).
 
3.  Seth Stephens-Davidowitz, “They Hook You When You’re Young,” New York 
Times (April 19, 2014), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2014/04/20/
opinion/sunday/they-hook-you-when-youre-young.html?_r=0, accessed 
February 22, 2015.
 
4.  Richard A. Feinberg, “Credit Cards as Spending Facilitating Stimuli: A 
Conditioning Interpretation,” Journal of Consumer Research 13 (December 
1986): 348–356; Goudreau, “These Old Brands Are Poised for a 2011 
Comeback.”
 
5.  R. A. Rescorla, “Pavlovian Conditioning: It’s Not What You Think It Is,” 
American Psychologist 43 (1988): 151–160; Elnora W. Stuart, Terence 
A. Shimp, and Randall W. Engle, “Classical Conditioning of Consumer 
Attitudes: Four Experiments in an Advertising Context,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 14 (December 1987): 334–339.
 
6.  C. Janiszewski, H. Noel, and A. G. Sawyer, “A Meta-analysis of the Spacing 
Effect in Verbal Learning: Implications for Research on Advertising 
Repetition and Consumer Memory,” Journal of Consumer Research 30, no. 1 
(2003): 138–149.
 
7.  James Ward, Barbara Loken, Ivan Ross, and Tedi Hasapopoulous, “The 
Influence of Physical Similarity of Affect and Attribute Perceptions from 
National Brands to Private Label Brands,” in Terence A. Shimp et al., eds., 
American Marketing Educators’ Conference (Chicago: American Marketing 
Association, 1986): 51–56.
 
8.  Judith Lynne Zaichkowsky and Richard Neil Simpson, “The Effect of 
Experience with a Brand Imitator on the Original Brand,” Marketing Letters 
7, no. 1 (1996): 31–39.

168 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Conditioned Stimulus and Context,” Journal of Consumer Research 18 (June 
1991): 1–12.
 37.  Sally L. Satel, “Primed for Controversy,” New York Times (February 23, 
2013), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2013/02/24/opinion/sunday/
psychology-research-control.html, accessed March 4, 2013.
 38.  Young Eun Huh, Joachim Vosgerau, and Carey K. Morewedge, “Social 
Defaults: Observed Choices Become Choice Defaults,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 41, no. 3: 746–760
 39.  Terence A. Shimp, “Neo-Pavlovian Conditioning and Its Implications for 
Consumer Theory and Research,” in Thomas S. Robertson and Harold H. 
Kassarjian, eds., Handbook of Consumer Behavior (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1991): 162-187.
 40.  Albert Bandura, Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive 
View (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1986).
 41.  Bandura, Social Foundations.
 42.  Julie Turkewitz, “After a Spa Day, Looking Years Younger (O.K., They’re 
Only 7),” New York Times, January 2, 2015, http://www.NewYorkTimes 
.com/2015/01/03/us/after-a-spa-day-looking-years-younger-ok-theyre-
only-7.html, accessed February 3, 2015.
 43.  Scott Ward, “Consumer Socialization,” in Harold H. Kassarjian and 
Thomas S. Robertson, eds., Perspectives in Consumer Behavior (Glenview, 
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1980), 380; cf. also Patricia Robinson and Steven 
Maxwell Kates, “Children and Their Brand Relationships,” Advances in 
Consumer Research 32, no. 1 (2005); Terry O’Sullivan, “Advertising and 
Children: What Do the Kids Think?” Qualitative Market Research 8, no. 4 
(2005): 371.
 44.  Paul M. Connell, Merrie Brucks, and Jesper H. Nielsen, “How Childhood 
Advertising Exposure Can Create Biased Product Evaluations That Persist 
into Adulthood,” Journal of Consumer Research 41, no. 1 (June 2014): 
119–134.
 45.  Thomas Lipscomb, “Indicators of Materialism in Children’s Free Speech: 
Age and Gender Comparisons,” Journal of Consumer Marketing (Fall 1988): 
41–46.
 46.  George P. Moschis, “The Role of Family Communication in Consumer 
Socialization of Children and Adolescents,” Journal of Consumer Research 
11 (March 1985): 898–913.
 47.  Gregory M. Rose, Vassilis Dalakas, and Fredric Kropp, “A Five-Nation Study 
of Developmental Timetables, Reciprocal Communication and Consumer 
Socialization,” Journal of Business Research 55 (2002): 943–949.
 48.  Elizabeth S. Moore, William L. Wilkie, and Richard J. Lutz, “Passing the 
Torch: Intergenerational Influences as a Source of Brand Equity,” Journal 
of Marketing 66 (April 2002): 17–37.
 49.  James U. McNeal and Chyon-Hwa Yeh, “Born to Shop,” American 
Demographics (June 1993): 34–39.
 50.  Karl Greenberg, “Study: Kids Influence Family’s Use of Media,” Marketing  
Daily (June 10, 2010), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/ 
129877/study-kids-influence-familys-use-of-media.html, accessed April 19,  
2011; Les Carlson, Sanford Grossbart, and J. Kathleen Stuenkel, “The Role 
of Parental Socialization Types on Differential Family Communication 
Patterns Regarding Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 1, no. 1  
(1992): 31–52; cf. also Sonya A. Grier, Janell Mensinger, Shirley H. Huang, 
Shiriki K. Kumanyika, and Nicolas Stettler, “Fast-Food Marketing and 
Children’s Fast-Food Consumption: Exploring Parents’ Influences in an 
Ethnically Diverse Sample,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 26 (Fall 
2007): 221–235.
 51.  Erik Sass, “Four Out of Five Kids Ages Five and Under Are on the 
Web,” Marketing Daily (March 17, 2011), http://www.mediapost.com/
publications/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=146941&nid=124844, 
accessed April 19, 2011.
 52.  Emily Bryson York, “NIH: Banning Fast Food Ads Will Make Kids Less 
Fat,” Advertising Age (November 19, 2008), http://adage.com/results 
.php?endeca=1&return=endeca&search_offset=0&search_order_
by=score&search_advanced=1&searchprop=AdAgeAll&search_phrase=
banning+fast+food+ads+will+make+kids+less+fat&searchmode=match
all&sortby=date&range=adage&variable=90&date_range=specific&date_
begin=11%2F19%2F08&date_end=&x=42&y=20, accessed November 
24, 2008.
 53.  Andrew Martin, “Kellogg to Curb Marketing of Foods to Children,” New 
York Times (June 14, 2007), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed June 14, 
2007; Tara Parker-Pope, “Watching Food Ads on TV May Program Kids to 
Overeat,” Wall Street Journal (July 10, 2007): D1.
 54.  Hilary Stout and Elizabeth A. Harris, “Today’s Girls Love Pink Bows as 
Playthings, But These Shoot,” New York Times, March 22, 2014, http://www 
.newyorktimes.com/2014/03/23/business/todays-girls-love-pink-bows-
as-playthings-but-these-shoot.html?hp&_r=0, accessed February 21,  
2015.
 55.  Laura A. Peracchio, “How Do Young Children Learn to Be Consumers? 
A Script-Processing Approach,” Journal of Consumer Research 18 (March 
 17.  Mark J. Miller, “Bob Marley Brand Expands from Music to Coffee to 
Swimwear,” Brandchannel (February 21, 2012), http://www.brand 
channel.com/home/post/2012/02/21/Bob-Marley-Brand-Exten 
sions-022112.aspx, accessed January 7, 2013.
 18.  Kirk Johnson, “A University Steak to Go with That Sweatshirt?” New York 
Times (March 2, 2013), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2013/03/03/us/
how-about-a-university-steak-with-your-sweatshirt.html?ref=todayspaper, 
accessed March 4, 2013.
 19.  Dale Buss, “Condé Nast Extends Magazine Brands into Bar and Restaurant 
Scene,” Broad Channel (April 12, 2013), http://www.brandchannel.com/
home/post/2013/04/12/Conde-Nast-Brand-Extensions-041213.aspx, 
accessed February 3, 2015.
 20.  Dan Macsai, “Jamba Juice Launches Clothing Line,” Fast Company (July 1, 
2010), http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/147/unwanted-wear-your-
smoothie.html?partner=homepage_newsletter, accessed April 6, 2011.
 21.  http://www.zippofragrances.com/VediMacro.phtml?goTo=1&IDMacro=1
321&sLang=EN, accessed March 4, 2013; James R. Hagerty, “Zippo Preps 
for a Post-Smoker World,” Wall Street Journal (March 8, 2011), http://
online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405274870407680457618041117
3921454.html?mod=dist_smartbrief&mod=WALLSTREETJOURNAL_hp_
MIDDLENexttoWhatsNewsThird, accessed April 6, 2011.
 22.  Quoted in Rebecca R. Ruiz, “Luxury Cars Imprint Their Brands on Goods 
From Cologne to Clothing,” New York Times, February 2015, http://www 
.NewYorkTimes.com/2015/02/21/automobiles/luxury-cars-imprint-
their-brands-on-goods-from-cologne-to-clothing.html?smid=NewYork 
Timescore-iphone-share&smprod=newyorktimesscore-iphone&_r=0,  
accessed February 22, 2015.
 23.  “Look-Alikes Mimic Familiar Packages,” New York Times (August 9, 1986): 
D1.
 24.  Zaichkowsky and Simpson, “The Effect of Experience with a Brand 
Imitator on the Original Brand.”
 25.  Luk Warlop and Joseph W. Alba, “Sincere Flattery: Trade-Dress Imitation 
and Consumer Choice,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 14, nos. 1 & 2 
(2004): 21–27.
 26.  Michael Barbaro and Julie Creswell, “Levi’s Turns to Suing Its Rivals,” New 
York Times (January 29, 2007), www.NewYorkTimes.com/2007/01/29/
business/29jeans.html, accessed June 30, 2009.
 27.  For a comprehensive approach to consumer behavior-based operant condi-
tioning principles, see Gordon R. Foxall, “Behavior Analysis and Consumer 
Psychology,” Journal of Economic Psychology 15 (March 1994): 5–91.
 28.  J. Blaise Bergiel and Christine Trosclair, “Instrumental Learning: Its 
Application to Customer Satisfaction,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 2 
(Fall 1985): 23–28.
 29.  Several books have recently been published on this topic; for example, Gabe 
Zichermann and Christopher Cunningham (2011), Gamification by Design: 
Implementing Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps, New York, O’Reilly 
Media; Jane McGonigal (2011), Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us 
Better and How They Can Change the World, New York: Penguin Press; and 
Byron Reeves and J. Leighton, Read (2009), Total Engagement: Using Games 
and Virtual Worlds to Change the Way People Work and Businesses Compete. 
Boston, Harvard Business Review Press.
 30.  Quoted in John Grossmann, “Using Smartphones and Apps to Enhance 
Loyalty Programs,” New York Times, January 28, 2015, http://www.newy 
orktimes.com/2015/01/29/business/smallbusiness/using-smartphones-
and-apps-to-enhance-small-business-loyalty-programs.html?smid=New 
York Timescore-iphone-share&smprod=New York Timescore-iphone, ac-
cessed February 22, 2015; Joseph C. Nunes and Xavier Drèze, “The 
Endowed Progress Effect: How Artificial Advancement Increases Effort,” 
Journal of Consumer Research (March 2006) 32: 504–512.
 31.  Nick Wingfield, “All the World’s a Game, and Business Is a Player,” 
New York Times (December 23, 2012), http://www.New York Times 
.com/2012/12/24/technology/all-the-worlds-a-game-and-business-is-a-
player.html?emc=eta1, accessed January 7, 2013.
 32.  Suzanne Vranica, “Agencies Don Lab Coats to Reach Consumers, Firms 
Deploy Scientists Within Creative Groups to Make Messages Stick,” Wall 
Street Journal (June 4, 2007): B8.
 33.  Cf., for example, E. M. Eisenstein and J. W. Hutchinson, “Action-Based 
Learning: Goals and Attention in the Acquisition of Market Knowledge,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 43, no. 2 (2006): 244–258.
 34.  Ellen J. Langer, The Psychology of Control (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1983).
 35.  Robert B. Cialdini, Influence: Science and Practice, 2nd ed. (New York: 
William Morrow, 1984); Y. Rottenstreich, S. Sood, and L. Brenner, “Feeling 
and Thinking in Memory-Based versus Stimulus-Based Choices,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 33, no. 4 (2007): 461–469.
 36.  Chris T. Allen and Thomas J. Madden, “A Closer Look at Classical 
Conditioning,” Journal of Consumer Research 12 (December 1985): 301–315;  
see also Terence A. Shimp, Elnora W. Stuart, and Randall W. Engle, “A 
Program of Classical Conditioning Experiments Testing Variations in the 

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
169 
(1998): 207–246; cf. also R. F. Baumeister and L. S. Newman, “How Stories 
Make Sense of Personal Experiences: Motives that Shape Autobiographical 
Narratives,” Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin 20, no. 6 (1994): 
676–690; J. Bruner, Actual Minds, Possible Worlds (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1986).
 75.  Jennifer Edson Escalas, “Narrative Processing: Building Consumer 
Connections to Brands,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 14, nos. 1 & 2 
(2004): 168–180.
 76.  George A. Miller, “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some 
Limits on Our Capacity for Processing Information,” Psychological Review 
63 (1956): 81–97.
 77.  James N. MacGregor, “Short-Term Memory Capacity: Limitation or 
Optimization?” Psychological Review 94 (1987): 107–108.
 78.  M. Vanhuele, G. Laurent, and X. Drèze, “Consumers’ Immediate Memory 
for Prices,” Journal of Consumer Research 33, no. 2 (2006): 163–172.
 79.  Beth Snyder Bulik, “What’s in a (Good) Product Name? Sales Cellphone 
Study Finds ‘Cognitive’ Monikers Work; Numerics Flop,” February 2, 2009, 
www.namedevelopment.com/Articles/Good-Cellphone-Names.html,  
accessed February 27, 2009.
 80.  Stephen A. Spiller, (2011) “Opportunity Cost Consideration.” Journal of  
Consumer Research 38, no. 4 (2011): 595-610. Philip M. Fernbach, Chri-
stina Kan, and John G. Lynch (2015), “Squeezed: Coping with Constraint 
through Efficiency and Prioritization,” Journal of Consumer Research, 41 
(5), 1204-1227.
 81.  See Catherine A. Cole and Michael J. Houston, “Encoding and Media Effects 
on Consumer Learning Deficiencies in the Elderly,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 24 (February 1987): 55–64; A. M. Collins and E. F. Loftus, 
“A Spreading Activation Theory of Semantic Processing,” Psychological 
Review 82 (1975): 407–428; Fergus I. M. Craik and Robert S. Lockhart, 
“Levels of Processing: A Framework for Memory Research,” Journal of 
Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior 11 (1972): 671–684.
 82.  Walter A. Henry, “The Effect of Information-Processing Ability on 
Processing Accuracy,” Journal of Consumer Research 7 (June 1980): 42–48.
 83.  T. B. Cornwell, M. S. Humphreys, A. M. Maguire, C. S. Weeks, and C. L. 
Tellegen, “Sponsorship-Linked Marketing: The Role of Articulation in 
Memory,” Journal of Consumer Research 33, no. 3 (2006): 312–321.
 84.  Quoted in Jenna Wortham, “A Growing App Lets You See It, Then You 
Don’t,” New York Times, February 8, 2013, http://www.NewYorkTimes 
.com/2013/02/09/technology/snapchat-a-growing-app-lets-you-see-it-
then-you-dont.html?_r=0, accessed February 22, 2015.
 85.  Kevin Lane Keller, “Memory Factors in Advertising: The Effect of 
Advertising Retrieval Cues on Brand Evaluations,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 14 (December 1987): 316–333. For a discussion of processing op-
erations that occur during brand choice, see Gabriel Biehal and Dipankar 
Chakravarti, “Consumers’ Use of Memory and External Information in 
Choice: Macro and Micro Perspectives,” Journal of Consumer Research 12 
(March 1986): 382–405.
 86.  Susan T. Fiske and Shelley E. Taylor, Social Cognition (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1984).
 87.  Deborah Roedder John and John C. Whitney Jr., “The Development of 
Consumer Knowledge in Children: A Cognitive Structure Approach,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 12 (March 1986): 406–417.
 88.  Michael R. Solomon, Carol Surprenant, John A. Czepiel, and Evelyn G. 
Gutman, “A Role Theory Perspective on Dyadic Interactions: The Service 
Encounter,” Journal of Marketing 49 (Winter 1985): 99–111.
 89.  S. Danziger, S. Moran, and V. Rafaely, “The Influence of Ease of Retrieval 
on Judgment as a Function of Attention to Subjective Experience,” Journal 
of Consumer Psychology 16, no. 2 (2006): 191–195.
 90.  Roger W. Morrell, Denise C. Park, and Leonard W. Poon, “Quality of Instruc-
tions on Prescription Drug Labels: Effects on Memory and Comprehension 
in Young and Old Adults,” The Gerontologist 29 (1989): 345–354.
 91.  Mark J. Miller, “Carnival Hopes to Jog Passengers’ Positive Memories in 
New Cruise Campaign,” Brand Channel (September 19, 2013), http://
www.brandchannel.com/home/post/2013/09/19/Carnival-Comeback-
Campaign-091913.aspx, accessed February 22, 2015.
 92.  Frank R. Kardes, Gurumurthy Kalyanaram, Murali Chandrashekaran, 
and Ronald J. Dornoff, “Brand Retrieval, Consideration Set Composition, 
Consumer Choice, and the Pioneering Advantage” (unpublished manu-
script, The University of Cincinnati, Ohio, 1992).
 93.  Judith Lynne Zaichkowsky and Padma Vipat, “Inferences from Brand 
Names,” paper presented at the European meeting of the Association for 
Consumer Research, Amsterdam (June 1992).
 94.  H. Noel, “The Spacing Effect: Enhancing Memory for Repeated Marketing 
Stimuli,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 16, no. 3 (2006): 306–320; for 
an alternative explanation, see S. L. Appleton-Knapp, R. A. Bjork, and 
T. D. Wickens, “Examining the Spacing Effect in Advertising: Encoding 
Variability, Retrieval Processes, and Their Interaction,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 32, no. 2 (2005): 266–276.
1992): 425–440; Laura A. Peracchio, “Young Children’s Processing of a 
Televised Narrative: Is a Picture Really Worth a Thousand Words?” Journal 
of Consumer Research 20 (September 1993): 281–293; see also M. Carole 
Macklin, “The Effects of an Advertising Retrieval Cue on Young Children’s 
Memory and Brand Evaluations,” Psychology & Marketing 11 (May–June 
1994): 291–311.
 56.  Jean Piaget, “The Child and Modern Physics,” Scientific American 196, 
no. 3 (1957): 46–51; see also Kenneth D. Bahn, “How and When Do 
Brand Perceptions and Preferences First Form? A Cognitive Developmental 
Investigation,” Journal of Consumer Research 13 (December 1986): 382–393.
 57.  Deborah L. Roedder, “Age Differences in Children’s Responses to Television 
Advertising: An Information-Processing Approach,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 8 (September 1981): 144–153; see also Deborah Roedder John 
and Ramnath Lakshmi-Ratan, “Age Differences in Children’s Choice 
Behavior: The Impact of Available Alternatives,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 29 (May 1992): 216–226; Jennifer Gregan-Paxton and Deborah 
Roedder John, “Are Young Children Adaptive Decision Makers? A Study 
of Age Differences in Information Search Behavior,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 21, no. 4 (1995): 567–580.
 58.  For a study on the effects of commercial programming on creative 
play, cf. Patricia M. Greenfield, Emily Yut, Mabel Chung, Deborah 
Land, Holly Kreider, Maurice Pantoja, and Kris Horsley, “The Program-
Length Commercial: A Study of the Effects of Television/Toy Tie-Ins on 
Imaginative Play,” Psychology & Marketing 7 (Winter 1990): 237–256.
 59.  Gerald J. Gorn and Renee Florsheim, “The Effects of Commercials for Adult 
Products on Children,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (March 1985): 962–
967. For a study that assessed the impact of violent commercials on children, 
see V. Kanti Prasad and Lois J. Smith, “Television Commercials in Violent 
Programming: An Experimental Evaluation of Their Effects on Children,” 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 22, no. 4 (1994): 340–351.
 60.  Gwen Bachmannn Achenreiner and Deborah Roedder John, “The 
Meaning of Brand Names to Children: A Developmental Investigation,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 13, no. 3 (2003): 205–219.
 61.  Paula Lyon Andruss, “‘Dora’ Translates Well,” Marketing News (October 
13, 2003): 8.
 62.  Gary Armstrong and Merrie Brucks, “Dealing with Children’s Advertising: 
Public Policy Issues and Alternatives,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 
7 (1988): 98–113.
 63.  Bonnie Reece, “Children and Shopping: Some Public Policy Questions,” 
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing (1986): 185–194.
 64.  Daniel Cook, University of Illinois, personal communication, December 
2002; Daniel Cook, “Contradictions and Conundrums of the Child Con-
sumer: The Emergent Centrality of an Enigma in the 1990s,” paper pre-
sented at the Association for Consumer Research, October 2002.
 65.  http://www.bbb.org/us/children-food-beverage-advertising-initiative/, ac-
cessed June 14, 2011; John Eggerton, “Sara Lee Agrees to Limit Food 
Marketing to Kids,” Broadcasting & Cable (September 23, 2010), http://
www.broadcastingcable.com/article/457541-Sara_Lee_Agrees_to_
Limit_Food_Marketing_to_Kids.php, accessed April 19, 2011.
 66.  Natasha Singer, “New Online Privacy Rules for Children,” New York Times 
(December 19, 2012), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2012/12/20/tech 
nology/ftc-broadens-rules-for-online-privacy-of-children.html, accessed 
January 4, 2013.
 67.  R. C. Atkinson and I. M. Shiffrin, “Human Memory: A Proposed System 
and Its Control Processes,” in K. W. Spence and J. T. Spence, eds., The 
Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory, vol. 
2 (New York: Academic Press, 1968): 89–195.
 68.  James R. Bettman, “Memory Factors in Consumer Choice: A Review,” 
Journal of Marketing (Spring 1979): 37–53. For a study that explores 
the relative impact of internal versus external memory on brand choice, 
see Joseph W. Alba, Howard Marmorstein, and Amitava Chattopadhyay, 
“Transitions in Preference over Time: The Effects of Memory on Message 
Persuasiveness,” Journal of Marketing Research 29 (1992): 406–416.
 69.  Lauren G. Block and Vicki G. Morwitz, “Shopping Lists as an External 
Memory Aid for Grocery Shopping: Influences on List Writing and List 
Fulfillment,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 8, no. 4 (1999): 343–375.
 70.  Tanya Menoni, “7 Time-Saving Grocery List Apps for the iPhone,” About Tech, 
http://ipod.about.com/od/bestiphoneapps/tp/6-Time-Saving-Iphone- 
Grocery-List-Apps.htm, accessed March 16, 2015.
 71.  Kim Robertson, “Recall and Recognition Effects of Brand Name Imagery,” 
Psychology & Marketing 4 (Spring 1987): 3–15.
 72.  Robin J. Tanner and Ahreum Maeng, “A Tiger and a President: 
Imperceptible Celebrity Facial Cues Influence Trust and Preference,” 
(December 2012), Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 4: 769–783.
 73.  Endel Tulving, “Remembering and Knowing the Past,” American Scientist 
77 (July–August 1989): 361.
 74.  Rashmi Adaval and Robert S. Wyer, Jr., “The Role of Narratives in 
Consumer Information Processing,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 7, no. 3  

170 
SectiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
 115.  Alex Mindlin, “Commercials Bask in a Show’s Glow,” New York Times Online 
(December 17, 2007), www.NewYorkTimes.com, accessed December 17, 
2008.
 116.  Suzanne Vranica, “New Ads Take on Tivo, Tie-Ins to TV Shows Aim to 
Prevent Fast-Forwarding,” Wall Street Journal (October 5, 2007): B4.
 117.  Hirschman and Solomon, “Utilitarian, Aesthetic, and Familiarity 
Responses to Verbal versus Visual Advertisements.”
 118.  Terry Childers and Michael Houston, “Conditions for a Picture-Superiority 
Effect on Consumer Memory,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (September 
1984): 643–654; Terry Childers, Susan Heckler, and Michael Houston, 
“Memory for the Visual and Verbal Components of Print Advertisements,” 
Psychology & Marketing 3 (Fall 1986): 147–150.
 119.  Werner Krober-Riel, “Effects of Emotional Pictorial Elements in 
Ads Analyzed by Means of Eye Movement Monitoring,” in Thomas C. 
Kinnear, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 11 (Provo, UT: Association for 
Consumer Research, 1984): 591–596.
 120.  Hans-Bernd Brosius, “Influence of Presentation Features and News 
Context on Learning from Television News,” Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media 33 (Winter 1989): 1–14.
 121.  Edward F. McQuarrie and David Glen Mick, “Visual and Verbal Rhetorical 
Figures Under Directed Processing versus Incidental Exposure to 
Advertising,” Journal of Consumer Research 29 (March 2003): 579–587; 
cf. also Ann E. Schlosser, “Learning Through Virtual Product Experience: 
The Role of Imagery on True Versus False Memories,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 33, no. 3 (2006): 377–383.
 122.  “Only 38% of T.V. Audience Links Brands with Ads,” Marketing News 
(January 6, 1984): 10.
 123.  “Terminal Television,” American Demographics (January 1987): 15.
 124.  Susan Kuchinskas, “Home > Media > Video Brands Increase Recall with 
TV/Digital Mix, Google Says,” ClizkZ (December 6, 2011), http://www 
.clickz.com/clickz/news/2130484/brands-increase-recall-tv-digital-mix-
google, accessed January 7, 2013.
 125.  Kunur Patel, “Apple, Campbell’s Say iAds Twice as Effective as TV A Nielsen 
Study Shows iPhone Users Are Paying Attention, While TV Viewers Not 
So Much,” Ad Age/Digital (February 3, 2011), http://adage.com/article/
digital/apple-campbell-s-iads-effective-tv/148630/, accessed January 7, 
2013.
 126.  Richard P. Bagozzi and Alvin J. Silk, “Recall, Recognition, and the 
Measurement of Memory for Print Advertisements,” Marketing Science 2 
(1983): 95–134.
 127.  Adam Finn, “Print Ad Recognition Readership Scores: An Information 
Processing Perspective,” Journal of Marketing Research 25 (May 1988): 
168–177.
 128.  James R. Bettman, “Memory Factors in Consumer Choice: A Review,” 
Journal of Marketing (Spring 1979): 37–53.
 129.  Mark A. Deturck and Gerald M. Goldhaber, “Effectiveness of Product 
Warning Labels: Effects of Consumers’ Information Processing Objectives,” 
Journal of Consumer Affairs 23, no. 1 (1989): 111–125.
 130.  Surendra N. Singh and Gilbert A. Churchill, Jr., “Response-Bias-Free 
Recognition Tests to Measure Advertising Effects,” Journal of Advertising 
Research (June–July 1987): 23–36.
 131.  William A. Cook, “Telescoping and Memory’s Other Tricks,” Journal of 
Advertising Research 27 (February–March 1987): 5–8.
 132.  “On a Diet? Don’t Trust Your Memory,” Psychology Today (October 1989): 12.
 133.  F. May, and C. Irmak, C. “Licensing Indulgence in the Present by Distorting 
Memories of Past Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research 41, no. 3 
(2014): 624–641.
 134.  Hugo Martin, “Disney’s 2011 Marketing Campaign Centers on Family 
Memories,” Los Angeles Times (September 23, 2010), http://latimesblogs 
.latimes.com/money_co/201009/disney-to-market-on-memories.html, 
accessed April 4, 2011.
 135.  Russell W. Belk, “Possessions and the Extended Self,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 15 (September 1988): 139–168.
 136.  Morris B. Holbrook and Robert M. Schindler, “Nostalgic Bonding: 
Exploring the Role of Nostalgia in the Consumption Experience,” Journal of 
Consumer Behavior 3, no. 2 (December 2003): 107–127.
 137.  Alexia Tsotsis, “Flickr Dips Its Toes into Social with Twitter and Facebook 
‘Share This’ Features,” TechCrunch (March 30, 2011), http://techcrunch 
.com/2011/03/30/flickr-dips-its-toes-into-social-with-twitter-and-face 
book-share-this-features/, accessed April 6, 2011.
 138.  Susan L. Holak and William J. Havlena, “Feelings, Fantasies, and 
Memories: An Examination of the Emotional Components of Nostalgia,” 
Journal of Business Research 42 (1998): 217–226.
 139.  Jannine D. Lasaleta, Constantine Sedikides, and Kathleen D. Vohs, 
“Nostalgia Weakens the Desire for Money,” Journal of Consumer Research 
(October 2014): 713–729.
 140.  Robert M. Schindler and Morris B. Holbrook, “Nostalgia for Early 
Experience as a Determinant of Consumer Preferences,” Psychology & 
 95.  Herbert E. Krugman, “Low Recall and High Recognition of Advertising,” 
Journal of Advertising Research (February–March 1986): 79–86.
 96.  Rik G. M. Pieters and Tammo H. A. Bijmolt, “Consumer Memory for 
Television Advertising: A Field Study of Duration, Serial Position, and 
Competition Effects,” Journal of Consumer Research 23 (March 1997): 
362–372.
 97.  Erik Sass, “Study Finds Spectacular Print Ads Get Spectacular Recall,” 
Marketing Daily (February 23, 2007), www.mediapost.com, accessed 
February 23, 2007.
 98.  Aaron Baar, “New Product Messages Aren’t Making Intended Impres-
sions,” Marketing Daily (March 6, 2008), http://publications.mediapost 
.com/Index.Cfm?Fuseaction=Articles.Showarticle&Art_Aid=779, accessed  
March 6, 2008.
 99.  Raymond R. Burke and Thomas K. Srull, “Competitive Interference and 
Consumer Memory for Advertising,” Journal of Consumer Research 15 (June 
1988): 55–68.
 100.  Eric J. Johnson and J. Edward Russo, “Product Familiarity and Learning 
New Information,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (June 1984): 542–550.
 101.  Joan Meyers-Levy, “The Influence of Brand Name’s Association Set Size 
and Word Frequency on Brand Memory,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 
(September 1989): 197–208.
 102.  Michael H. Baumgardner, Michael R. Leippe, David L. Ronis, and 
Anthony G. Greenwald, “In Search of Reliable Persuasion Effects: II. 
Associative Interference and Persistence of Persuasion in a Message-Dense 
Environment,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 45 (September 
1983): 524–537.
 103.  Joseph W. Alba and Amitava Chattopadhyay, “Salience Effects in Brand 
Recall,” Journal of Marketing Research 23 (November 1986): 363–370.
 104.  Margaret Henderson Blair, Allan R. Kuse, David H. Furse, and David 
W. Stewart, “Advertising in a New and Competitive Environment: 
Persuading Consumers to Buy,” Business Horizons 30 (November–
December 1987): 20.
 105.  Kevin Lane Keller, “Memory Factors in Advertising: The Effect of 
Advertising Retrieval Cues on Brand Evaluations,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 14 (December 1987): 316–333.
 106.  Eric J. Johnson and J. Edward Russo, “Product Familiarity and Learning 
New Information,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (June 1984): 
542–550.
 107.  Eric J. Johnson and J. Edward Russo, “Product Familiarity and Learning 
New Information”; John G. Lynch and Thomas K. Srull, “Memory 
and Attentional Factors in Consumer Choice: Concepts and Research 
Methods,” Journal of Consumer Research 9 (June 1982): 18–37.
 108.  Joseph W. Alba and J. Wesley Hutchinson, “Dimensions of Consumer 
Expertise,” Journal of Consumer Research 13 (March 1988): 411–454; 
Julie A. Edell and Kevin Lane Keller, “The Information Processing of 
Coordinated Media Campaigns,” Journal of Marketing Research 26 (May 
1989): 149–164; cf. also Jeff Galak, Joseph P. Redden, and Justin Kruger, 
“Variety Amnesia: Recalling Past Variety Can Accelerate Recovery from 
Satiation,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 4 (2009): 575–584.
 109.  Marcus Cunha, Jr., and Juliano Laran, “Asymmetries in the Sequential 
Learning of Brand Associations: Implications for the Early Entrant 
Advantage,” Journal of Consumer Research 35, no. 5 (2009): 788–799; 
Julie A. Edell and Kevin Lane Keller, “The Information Processing of 
Coordinated Media Campaigns,” Journal of Marketing Research 26 (May 
1989): 149–164; cf. also Galak, Redden, and Kruger, “Variety Amnesia: 
Recalling Past Variety Can Accelerate Recovery from Satiation.”
 110.  Cunha, Jr., and Laran, “Asymmetries in the Sequential Learning of Brand 
Associations: Implications for the Early Entrant Advantage”; Andrew W. 
Ellis, Selina J. Holmes, and Richard L. Wright, “Age of Acquisition and the 
Recognition of Brand Names: On the Importance of Being Early,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 20, no. 1 (2010): 43–52.
 111.  John G. Lynch and Thomas K. Srull, “Memory and Attentional Factors 
in Consumer Choice: Concepts and Research Methods,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 9 (June 1982): 18–37; Joseph W. Alba and Amitava 
Chattopadhyay, “Salience Effects in Brand Recall,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 23 (November 1986): 363–370; Elizabeth C. Hirschman and 
Michael R. Solomon, “Utilitarian, Aesthetic, and Familiarity Responses to 
Verbal versus Visual Advertisements,” in Thomas C. Kinnear, ed., Advances 
in Consumer Research 11 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 
1984): 426–431.
 112.  Susan E. Heckler and Terry L. Childers, “The Role of Expectancy and 
Relevancy in Memory for Verbal and Visual Information: What Is 
Incongruency?” Journal of Consumer Research 18 (March 1992): 475–492.
 113.  Russell H. Fazio, Paul M. Herr, and Martha C. Powell, “On the Development 
and Strength of Category-Brand Associations in Memory: The Case of 
Mystery Ads,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 1, no. 1 (1992): 1–13.
 114.  Jennifer Aaker, Aimee Drolet, and Dale Griffin, “Recalling Mixed 
Emotions,” Journal of Consumer Research 35 (August 2008): 268–278.

 
cHapter 4   Learning and Memory 
171 
20130227_1_bread-brands-beefsteak-brand-hostess-brands, accessed March 4,  
2013; Stuart Elliot, “From Retired Brands, Dollars and Memories,” New  
York Times (December 8, 2010), http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/ 
2010/12/09/business/media/09adco.html?_r=1&adxnnl=1& 
ref=media&adxnnlx=1301951891-EMjJs87oEc62npAZxAn7Gw, accessed  
April 4, 2011; Goudreau, “These Old Brands Are Poised for a 2011 
Comeback.”
 145.  http://passiripatti.com/2010/11/social-media-for-toddlers/,accessed June 
14, 2011; “Sign of the Times: Toy Blocks That Teach Toddlers Social  
Networking,” Fast Company (November 30, 2010), http://www.fastco 
design.com/1662781/toy-blocks-become-twitter-for-toddlers?partner= 
homepage_newsletter, accessed April 19, 2011.
 146.  Kate Taylor, “3 Ways Brands Are Marketing Nostalgia in the Age of 
Throwback Thursday,” January 13, 2015, Entrepreneur, http://www 
.entrepreneur.com/article/241716.
 147.  Thomas F. Jones, “Our Musical Heritage Is Being Raided,” San Francisco 
Examiner (May 23, 1997).
 148.  Kevin Goldman, “A Few Rockers Refuse to Turn Tunes into Ads,” New York 
Times (August 25, 1995): B1.
 149.  Charles Duhigg, “Warning: Habits May Be Good for You,” New York Times 
Magazine (July 17, 2008), www.ntyimes.com/2008/07/13/Business/13habit 
.html, accessed July 17, 2008.
Marketing 20, no. 4 (April 2003): 275–302; Morris B. Holbrook and 
Robert M. Schindler, “Some Exploratory Findings on the Development of 
Musical Tastes,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 (June 1989): 119–124; 
Morris B. Holbrook and Robert M. Schindler, “Market Segmentation Based 
on Age and Attitude Toward the Past: Concepts, Methods, and Findings 
Concerning Nostalgic Influences on Consumer Tastes,” Journal of Business 
Research 37, no. 1 (September 1996): 27–40.
 141.  Russell W. Belk, “The Role of Possessions in Constructing and Maintaining 
a Sense of Past,” in Marvin E. Goldberg, Gerald Gorn, and Richard W. 
Pollay, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 16 (Provo, UT: Association for 
Consumer Research, 1989): 669–678.
 142.  Claire Martin, “Freezy Freakies, a Colorful Blast From Winters Past,” 
New York Times, February 14, 2015, http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/ 
2015/02/15/business/freezy-freakies-a-colorful-blast-from-winters-
past.html?smid=NewYorkTimescore-iphone-share&smprod=NewYork 
Timescore-iphone, accessed February 23, 2015.
 143.  Katherine Duncan, “Blast from the Past: Nostalgia Becomes a Marketing 
Strategy,” Entrepreneur (December 16, 2014), http://www.entrepreneur 
.com/article/239684, accessed February 23, 2015.
 144.  Martinne Geller, “Exclusive: Flowers Foods to Win Hostess’ Wonder 
Bread,” Chicago Tribune (February 27, 2013), http://articles.chicagotri - 
bune.com/2013-02-27/business/sns-rt-us-hostess-flowersbre91q0tf- 

172
Source: Phil Date/Shutterstock.
A
s Basil scans the menu at the trendy health-food 
restaurant Paula has dragged him to, he reflects on 
what a man will give up for love. Now that Paula has 
become a die-hard vegan, she’s slowly but surely working on him 
to forsake those juicy steaks and burgers for healthier fare. He 
can’t even hide from tofu and other delights at school; the din-
ing facility in his dorm just started to offer “veggie” alternatives 
to its usual assortment of greasy “mystery meats” and other 
delicacies he loves.
Paula is totally into it; she claims that eating this way not 
only cuts out unwanted fat but also is good for the environment. 
Just his luck to fall head-over-heels for a “tree-hugger.” As Basil 
gamely tries to decide between the stuffed artichokes with red 
pepper vinaigrette and the grilled marinated zucchini, fantasies 
of a sizzling 14-ounce T-bone dance before his eyes.
The Motivation Process:  
Why Ask Why?
Paula certainly is not alone in her belief that eating green is good 
for the body, the soul, and the planet. According to a 2014 Harris 
Interactive study, approximately 5 percent of U.S. Americans are 
vegetarian (close to 16 million people) and about half of these vegetarians are vegan. 
Indeed the number of vegans in the United States has doubled since 2009.
Vegetarianism refers only to a diet that excludes meat (some animal products that do not 
involve the death of an animal, such as milk, cheese, and butter, may be included). Veganism, 
in contrast, links to a set of ethical beliefs about use of and cruelty to animals. In addition 
 5-1 Products can satisfy a range of consumer needs.
 5-2 Consumers experience different kinds of motivational 
conflicts that can impact their purchase decisions.
 5-3 Consumers experience a range of affective responses to 
products and marketing messages.
 5-4 The way we evaluate and choose a product depends on 
our degree of involvement with the product, the marketing 
message, or the purchase situation.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
 Chapter 5 ● Motivation and Affect
ObjecTive 5-1
Products can satisfy a 
range of consumer needs.

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
173 
to objecting to hunting or fishing, adherents protest cruel animal training; object to the 
degrading use of animals in circuses, zoos, rodeos, and races; and also oppose the testing of 
drugs and cosmetics on animals.1
The forces that drive people to buy and use products are generally straightforward—
for example, when a person chooses what to have for lunch. As hard-core vegans dem-
onstrate, however, even the basic food products we consume also relate to wide-ranging 
beliefs regarding what we think is appropriate or desirable. In some cases, these emotional 
responses create a deep commitment to the product. Sometimes people are not even fully 
aware of the forces that drive them toward some products and away from others.
To understand motivation is to understand why consumers do what they do. Why do 
some people choose to bungee-jump off a bridge or compete on reality shows, whereas oth-
ers spend their leisure time playing chess or gardening? Whether it is to quench a thirst, 
kill boredom, or attain some deep spiritual experience, we do everything for a reason, even 
if we can’t articulate what that reason is. We teach marketing students from Day 1 that 
the goal of marketing is to satisfy consumers’ needs. However, this insight is useless unless 
we can discover what those needs are and why they exist. A beer commercial once asked, 
“Why ask why?” In this chapter, we’ll find out.
Motivation refers to the processes that lead people to behave as they do. It occurs 
when a need is aroused that the consumer wishes to satisfy. The need creates a state of 
tension that drives the consumer to attempt to reduce or eliminate it. This need may be 
utilitarian (i.e., a desire to achieve some functional or practical benefit, as when a person 
loads up on green vegetables for nutritional reasons) or it may be hedonic (i.e., an experien-
tial need, involving emotional responses or fantasies as when a person feels “righteous” by 
eating kale). The desired end state is the consumer’s goal. Marketers try to create products 
and services to provide the desired benefits and help the consumer to reduce this tension.
One question that keeps some consumer researchers up at night is whether a per-
son even needs to be aware of a motivation to achieve a goal. The evidence suggests 
that motives can lurk beneath the surface, and cues in the environment can activate a 
goal even when we don’t know it: Marketers are just beginning to explore the effects of 
incidental brand exposure:
●
●People who were exposed to a sign in a room of the brand name “Apple” provided 
responses on an unrelated task that were more unique compared to those who saw a 
sign with the IBM brand name.2
●
●College students who used a “cute” ice cream scoop to help themselves to ice cream 
took a larger amount than those who used a plain scoop; the researchers explained 
that the whimsical object drove them to be more self-indulgent even though they 
weren’t aware of this effect.3
●
●Some students scored higher on difficult Graduate Records Examination questions 
when they took the test using a Massachusetts Institute of Technology pen and deliv-
ered a better athletic performance when they drank water from a Gatorade cup during 
strenuous exercise.4
Motivational Strength
Whether the need is utilitarian or hedonic, the magnitude of the tension it creates deter-
mines the urgency the consumer feels to reduce it. We call this degree of arousal a drive.
Drive Theory
Drive theory focuses on biological needs that produce unpleasant states of arousal (e.g., 
your stomach grumbles during a morning class). The arousal this tension causes moti-
vates us to reduce it and return to a balanced state called homeostasis. Some research-
ers believe that this need to reduce arousal is a basic mechanism that governs much of 
our behavior. Indeed there is research evidence for the effectiveness of so-called retail 
therapy; apparently the act of shopping restores a sense of personal control over one’s 
environment and as a result can alleviate feelings of sadness.5 Go for it!

174 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
If a behavior reduces the drive, we naturally tend to repeat it. Your motivation to leave 
class early to grab a snack would be greater if you hadn’t eaten in 24 hours than if you 
had eaten only two hours earlier. If you did sneak out and got indigestion afterward, say, 
from wolfing down a package of Twinkies, you would be less likely to repeat this behavior 
the next time you want a snack. One’s degree of motivation, then, depends on the distance 
between one’s present state and the goal.
Drive theory runs into difficulties when it tries to explain some facets of human 
behavior that run counter to its predictions. People often do things that increase a drive 
state rather than decrease it. For example, we may delay gratification. If you know you are 
going out for a lavish dinner, you might decide to forego a snack earlier in the day even 
though you are hungry at that time.
expectancy Theory
Most current explanations of motivation focus on cognitive factors rather than biological 
ones to understand what motivates behavior. Expectancy theory suggests that expecta-
tions of achieving desirable outcomes—positive incentives—rather than being pushed 
from within motivate our behavior. We choose one product over another because we 
expect this choice to have more positive consequences for us. Thus, we use the term drive 
here loosely to refer to both physical and cognitive processes.
Motivational Direction
Motives have direction as well as strength. They are goal-oriented in that they drive us to 
satisfy a specific need. We can reach most goals by a number of routes, and the objective of 
a company is to convince consumers that the alternative it offers provides the best chance 
to attain the goal. For example, a consumer who decides that she needs a pair of jeans to 
help her reach her goal of being admired by others can choose among Levi’s, Wranglers, 
True Religion, Diesel, 7 for All Mankind, and many other alternatives, each of which 
promises to deliver certain benefits.
needs versus Wants
As we saw in Chapter 1, a need reflects a basic goal such as keeping yourself nourished 
or protected from the elements. In contrast a want is a specific pathway to achieving 
this objective that depends a lot on our unique personalities, cultural upbringing, and 
our observations about how others we know satisfy the same need. One person’s cool 
A want (like fast food) is a specific way to 
satisfy a need (like hunger).
Source: Dennis Tarnay, Jr./Alamy.

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
175 
downtown loft is another’s suburban McMansion. In some cases, we don’t even know we 
have a “want” until we can no longer have it: A lot of people didn’t know they wanted foie 
gras ice cream sandwiches until California made them illegal. California banned foie gras in 
2012, arguing that it was cruel to force-feed a duck to fatten its liver. Demand for delica-
cies made with the expensive and unobtainable dish spiked. A federal court overturned the 
ban in 2015, much to the relief of fatty liver connoisseurs.6
When we focus on a utilitarian need, we emphasize the objective, tangible attributes 
of products, such as miles per gallon in a car; the amount of fat, calories, and protein in 
a cheeseburger; or the durability of a pair of blue jeans. Hedonic needs are subjective and 
experiential; here we might look to a product to meet our needs for excitement, self-confi-
dence, or fantasy—perhaps to escape the mundane or routine aspects of life.7 Many items 
satisfy our hedonic needs (there’s even a popular resort called Hedonism). Luxury brands 
in particular thrive when they offer the promise of pleasure to the user—how badly do you 
“need” that Armani suit or Coach bag?8
Of course, we can also be motivated to purchase a product because it provides both 
types of benefits. For example, a woman (perhaps a politically incorrect one) might buy a 
mink coat because of the luxurious image it portrays and because it also happens to keep 
her warm through the long, cold winter. Indeed, recent research on novel consumption 
experiences indicates that even when we choose to do unusual things (like eating bacon 
ice cream or staying in a freezing ice hotel), we may do so because we have what the 
authors term a productivity orientation. This refers to a continual striving to use time 
constructively: Trying new things is a way to check them off our “bucket list” of experi-
ences we want to achieve before we move on to others.9
Motivational conflicts
A goal has valence, which means that it can be positive or nega-
tive. We direct our behavior toward goals we value positively; we 
are motivated to approach the goal and to seek out products that 
will help us to reach it. However, as we saw in Chapter 4’s discus-
sion of negative reinforcement, sometimes we’re also motivated to 
avoid a negative outcome rather than achieve a positive outcome. 
We structure purchases or consumption activities to reduce the 
chances that we will experience a nasty result. For example, many consumers work hard 
to avoid rejection by their peers (an avoidance goal). They stay away from products that 
For some, jumping out of an airplane is a 
valuable hedonic experience.
Source: Kovalenko Inna.
ObjecTive 5-2
Consumers experience 
different kinds of 
motivational conflicts 
that can impact their 
purchase decisions.

176 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
they associate with social disapproval. Products such as deodorants and mouthwash fre-
quently rely on consumers’ negative motivation when ads depict the onerous social conse-
quences of underarm odor or bad breath.
Because a purchase decision can involve more than one source of motivation, con-
sumers often find themselves in situations in which different motives, both positive and 
negative, conflict with one another.10 Marketers attempt to satisfy consumers’ needs by 
providing possible solutions to these dilemmas. As Figure 5.1 shows, there are three gen-
eral types of conflicts we should understand.
Approach–Approach conflict
A person has an approach–approach conflict when he or she must choose between two 
desirable alternatives. A student might be torn between going home for the holidays and 
going on a skiing trip with friends. Or, he or she might have to choose between two CDs to 
download (assuming that he or she is going to pay for one of them!). The theory of cog-
nitive dissonance is based on the premise that people have a need for order and consis-
tency in their lives and that a state of dissonance (tension) exists when beliefs or behaviors 
conflict with one another. We resolve the conflict that arises when we choose between two 
alternatives through a process of cognitive dissonance reduction, where we look for a way to 
reduce this inconsistency (or dissonance) and thus eliminate unpleasant tension.
Postdecision dissonance occurs when a consumer must choose between two products, 
both of which possess good and bad qualities. When he or she chooses one product and 
not the other, the person gets the bad qualities of the product he or she buys and loses out 
on the good qualities of the one he or she didn’t buy. This loss creates an unpleasant, dis-
sonant state that he wants to reduce. We tend to convince ourselves, after the fact, that the 
choice we made was the smart one as we find additional reasons to support the alterna-
tive we did choose—perhaps when we discover flaws with the option we did not choose 
(sometimes we call this rationalization). A marketer can bundle several benefits together to 
resolve an approach–approach conflict. For example, Miller Lite’s claim that it is “less fill-
ing” and “tastes great” allows the drinker to “have his beer and drink it too.”
Approach-Avoidance conflict
Many of the products and services we desire have negative consequences attached to them 
as well as positive ones. We may feel guilty or ostentatious when we buy a luxury product 
such as a fur coat or we might feel like gluttons when we crave a tempting package of 
Twinkies. An approach–avoidance conflict occurs when we desire a goal but wish to 
avoid it at the same time.
Some solutions to these conflicts include the proliferation of fake furs, which elimi-
nate guilt about harming animals to make a fashion statement, and the success of diet 
programs like Weight Watchers that promise good food without the calories.11 Many 
Figure 5.1 TyPes OF MOTivATiONAl 
CONFliCT

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
177 
marketers try to help consumers overcome guilt by convincing them that they deserve 
these luxuries. As the model for L’Oréal cosmetics exclaims, “Because I’m worth it!”
Avoidance-Avoidance conflict
Sometimes we find ourselves caught “between a rock and a hard place.” We may face a 
choice with two undesirable alternatives: for instance, the option of either spending more 
money on an old car or buying a new one. Don’t you hate when that happens? Marketers 
frequently address an avoidance–avoidance conflict with messages that stress the 
unforeseen benefits of choosing one option (e.g., when they emphasize special credit plans 
to ease the pain of car payments).
how We classify consumer needs
Numerous psychologists have tried to define a universal inventory of needs they could 
trace systematically to explain virtually all behavior.
Murray’s Psychogenic needs
One such inventory that the psychologist Henry Murray developed delineates a set of 20 
psychogenic needs that (sometimes in combination) result in specific behaviors. These needs 
include such dimensions as autonomy (being independent), defendance (defending the self 
against criticism), and even play (engaging in pleasurable activities).12
Murray’s framework is the basis for a number of personality tests that modern-day 
psychologists use, such as the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT). In the TAT, the analyst 
shows test subjects four to six ambiguous pictures and asks them to write answers to four 
direct questions about the pictures:
1 What is happening?
2 What led up to this situation?
3 What is being thought?
4 What will happen?
The theory behind the test is that people will freely project their own subconscious 
needs onto the neutral stimulus. By getting responses to the pictures, the analyst really 
gets at the person’s true needs for achievement or affiliation or whatever other need may 
be dominant. Murray believed that everyone has the same basic set of needs but that indi-
viduals differ in their priority rankings of these needs.13
Specific needs and buying behavior
Other motivational approaches have focused on specific needs and their ramifications for 
behavior. For example, individuals with a high need for achievement strongly value personal 
accomplishment.14 They place a premium on products and services that signify success 
because these consumption items provide feedback about the realization of their goals. 
These consumers are good prospects for products that provide evidence of their achieve-
ment. One study of working women found that those who were high in achievement moti-
vation were more likely to choose clothing they considered businesslike and less likely to 
be interested in apparel that accentuated their femininity.15 Some other important needs 
that are relevant to consumer behavior include:
●
●Need for affiliation (to be in the company of other people):16 The need for affiliation is 
relevant to products and services for people in groups, such as participating in team 
sports, frequenting bars, and hanging out at shopping malls.
●
●Need for power (to control one’s environment):17 Many products and services allow 
us to feel that we have mastery over our surroundings. These products range from 
“hopped-up” muscle cars and loud boom boxes (oversized portable radios that impose 
one’s musical tastes on others) to luxury resorts that promise to respond to every 
whim of their pampered guests.

178 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
●
●Need for uniqueness (to assert one’s individual identity):18 Products satisfy the need 
for uniqueness when they pledge to bring out our distinctive qualities. For example, 
Cachet perfume claims to be “as individual as you are.”
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs
The psychologist Abraham Maslow originally developed his influential Hierarchy of 
Needs to understand personal growth and how people attain spiritual “peak experiences.” 
Marketers later adapted his work to understand consumer motivations.19 Maslow’s hierarchi-
cal structure implies that the order of development is fixed—that is, we must attain a certain 
level before we activate a need for the next, higher one. Marketers embraced this perspective 
because it (indirectly) specifies certain types of product benefits people might look for, depend-
ing on their stage of mental or spiritual development or on their economic situation.20
Figure 5.2 presents this model. At each level, the person seeks different kinds of prod-
uct benefits. Ideally, an individual progresses up the hierarchy until his or her dominant 
motivation is a focus on “ultimate” goals, such as justice and beauty. Unfortunately, this 
state is difficult to achieve (at least on a regular basis); most of us have to be satisfied with 
occasional glimpses, or peak experiences. One study of men aged 49 to 60 found that these 
respondents engaged in three types of activities to attain self-fulfillment: (1) sport and 
physical activity, (2) community and charity, and (3) building and renovating. Regardless of 
whether these activities were related to their professional work, these so-called magnetic 
points gradually took the place of those that were not as fulfilling.21
Marketers’ applications of this hierarchy have been somewhat simplistic, especially 
because the same product or activity can gratify different needs. For example, one study 
found that gardening could satisfy needs at every level of the hierarchy:22
●
●Physiological—“I like to work in the soil.”
●
●Safety—“I feel safe in the garden.”
●
●Social—“I can share my produce with others.”
●
●Esteem—“I can create something of beauty.”
●
●Self-actualization—“My garden gives me a sense of peace.”
Another problem with taking Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs too literally is that it 
is culture-bound; its assumptions may apply only to Western culture. People in other 
safety is a lower-level need in Maslow’s  
Hierarchy of Needs
Source: Courtesy of Volvo do Brasil.

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
179 
SELF-
ACTUALIZATION
Self-Fulﬁllment,
Enriching Experiences
EGO NEEDS
Prestige, Status,
Accomplishment
BELONGINGNESS
Love, Friendship,
Acceptance by Others
SAFETY
Security, Shelter, Protection
PHYSIOLOGICAL
Water, Sleep, Food
UPPER-LEVEL NEEDS
LOWER-LEVEL NEEDS
Relevant Products
Hobbies, travel, education
Cars, furniture, credit cards,
stores, country clubs, liquors
Clothing, grooming products,
clubs, drinks
Insurance, alarm systems,
retirement, investments
Medicines, staple
items, generics
Example
U.S. Army—‘‘Be all you can be.’’
Royal Salute Scotch—‘‘What the
rich give the wealthy.’’
Pepsi—‘‘You’re in the
Pepsi generation.’’
Allstate Insurance—‘‘You’re
in good hands with Allstate.’’
Quaker Oat Bran—‘‘It’s
the right thing to do.’’
Figure 5.2 MAslOw’s HierArCHy OF Needs
cultures (or, for that matter, even some in Western cultures) may question the order of the 
levels it specifies. A religious person who has taken a vow of celibacy would not necessarily 
agree that physiological needs must be satisfied before self-fulfillment can occur.
Similarly, many Asian cultures value the welfare of the group (belongingness needs) 
more highly than needs of the individual (esteem needs). The point is that this hierarchy, 
although marketers widely apply it, is helpful primarily because it reminds us that con-
sumers may have different need priorities in different consumption situations and at dif-
ferent stages in their lives—not because it exactly specifies a consumer’s progression up the 
ladder of needs.
A basic activity like gardening can satisfy 
people at different levels depending upon 
their motivation to engage in it.
Source: Todd Arena/123RF.

180 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Affect
Zumba began in the 1990s as a Colombian dance fitness program, 
but today it’s an international sensation. Every week about 14 mil-
lion people in more than 150 countries take classes that combine 
elements of dance moves adapted from various sources such as 
hip-hop, salsa, merengue, mambo, belly dancing and Bollywood, 
with some squats and lunges thrown in for good measure. The Zumba company started as 
an infomercial producer, but the regimen was popularized when the CEO’s brother, an out-
of-work advertising executive, had a revelation and convinced him to change focus. The 
brother recalls that he saw a movie billboard with some exuberant dancers: “Immediately, 
I called my brother and said, ‘You’re selling the wrong thing. You’re selling fitness when 
you should be selling this emotion.’ I wanted to turn Zumba into a brand where people felt 
that kind of free and electrifying joy.” The two invented the tagline, “Ditch the workout; 
join the party!” The rest is history.23
We may not all be in good enough shape to endure a Zumba workout, but many of 
our decisions are driven by our emotional responses to products. Social scientists refer 
to these raw reactions as affect. That explains why so many marketing activities and 
messages focus on altering our moods or linking their products to an affective response, 
although different types of emotional arousal may be more effective in some contexts than 
others.24 These connections make sense to anyone who has ever teared up during a sappy 
TV commercial or written an angry letter after getting shabby treatment at a hotel.
Types of Affective responses
Affect describes the experience of emotionally laden states, but the nature of these expe-
riences ranges from evaluations, to moods, to full-blown emotions. Evaluations are 
valenced (i.e., positive or negative) reactions to events and objects that are not accompa-
nied by high levels of physiological arousal. For example, when a consumers evaluates 
a movie as being positive or negative, this usually involves some degree of affect accom-
panied by low levels of arousal (possible exceptions such as Fifty Shades of Gray notwith-
standing!). Moods involve temporary positive or negative affective states accompanied 
by moderate levels of arousal. Moods tends to be diffuse and not necessarily linked to a 
particular event (e.g. you might have just “woken up on the wrong side of the bed this 
morning”). Emotions such as happiness, anger, and fear tend to be more intense and 
often relate to a specific triggering event such as receiving an awesome gift.25
Marketers find many uses for affective states. They often try to link a product or ser-
vice with a positive mood or emotion (just think of a sappy Hallmark greeting card). Of 
Zumba exercise routines focus on providing 
an emotional experience.
Source: Photo by Danny Martindale/WireImage/
Getty Images.
ObjecTive 5-3
Consumers experience 
a range of affective 
responses to products 
and marketing messages.

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
181 
course a variety of products from alcohol to chocolate are consumed at least partly for 
their ability to enhance mood. Numerous companies evaluate the emotional impact of 
their ads; some such as Unilever and Coca-Cola use sophisticated technology that inter-
prets how viewers react to ads by their facial expressions.26
On other occasions marketing communications may deliberately evoke negative 
affect, such as regret if you forget to play the lottery. Perhaps a more productive way to 
harness the power of negative affect is to expose the consumer to a distressing image and 
then provide a way to improve it. For example, a nonprofit organization might run an ad 
showing a starving child when it solicits donations. Helping others as a way to resolve 
one’s own negative moods is known as negative state relief. Recently we’ve seen a trend 
in advertising toward inspirational stories that manipulate our emotions like a roller-
coaster: Think about the commercials Budweiser likes to run about a puppy who befriends 
a horse, gets lost, finds his way home, etc. This practice even has a name: sadvertising.27
A study shows that this emotional element is especially potent for decisions that 
involve outcomes the person will experience shortly as opposed to those that involve a 
longer time frame.28 Another study attests to the interplay between our emotions and 
how we access information in our minds that allows us to make smarter decisions. These 
researchers reported evidence for what they call an emotional oracle effect: People 
who trusted their feelings were able to predict future events better than those who did 
not; this occurred for a range of situations including the presidential election, the winner 
of American Idol, movie box office success, and the stock market. The likely reason is that 
those with more confidence were better able to access information they had learned that 
could help them make an informed forecast.29
Mood congruency
We’ve already seen that cognitive dissonance occurs when our various feelings, beliefs, or 
behaviors don’t line up, and we may be motivated to alter one or more of these to restore 
consistency. We’ll talk more about that in our discussion of attitudes in Chapter 8.
Mood congruency refers to the idea that our judgments tend to be shaped by our 
moods. For example, consumers judge the same products more positively when they are 
in a positive as opposed to a negative mood. This is why advertisers attempt to place their 
ads after humorous TV programming or create uplifting ad messages that put viewers in a 
good mood. Similarly, retailers work hard to make shoppers happy by playing “up” back-
ground music and encouraging staff to be friendly. Then of course there’s the traditional 
“three-martini” business lunch…
Positive Affect
As part of its global “Open Happiness” campaign, Coca-Cola set up a vending machine 
at the National University of Singapore that trades free coke beverages for hugs. The 
machine, which is outfitted in Coca-Cola’s signature colors and fonts, reads, “hug me” in 
large letters on the front.30
Our feelings also can serve as a source of information when we weigh the pros and 
cons of a decision. Put simply, the fact that the prospect of owning a specific brand will 
make a person feel good can give it a competitive advantage—even if the brand is similar 
on a functional level to other competing brands. That helps to explain why many of us will 
willingly pay a premium for a product that on the surface seems to do the same thing as a 
less expensive alternative—whether in the case of the hottest new Apple iPhone, a Justice 
shirt, or even a pricey university. A passionate commitment to one brand has famously 
been termed a lovemark by the head of the Saatchi & Saatchi advertising agency.
happiness
Happiness is a mental state of well-being characterized by positive emotions. What 
makes us happy? Although many of us believe owning more shiny material goods is the 
key to happiness, research says otherwise. Several studies have reported that a greater 
emphasis on acquiring things actually links to lower levels of happiness! Indeed some 

182 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
cb AS i See iT
Michel Tuan Pham, Columbia University
their willingness to trade-off brand 
reputation for lower prices). The 
metaphor typically advanced is that of 
a consumer using Consumer Reports® 
to make decisions.
Anyone who has observed 
consumers operate in the real world 
knows that the above-described 
model offers a poor description of 
many consumption decisions. In 
particular, this computer-like model 
doesn’t capture the important role 
that feelings and emotions play in 
consumers’ decisions and behavior. 
Think of the pride and contentment 
of a mother buying new shoes for 
her growing toddler, the joy of a 
young child learning that she is 
going to Disneyland, the excitement 
of a teenager planning his next 
birthday party, or the anger of a 
customer who feels cheated by a 
company. How does one capture 
that?
For the past 25 years, I have studied 
how feelings and emotions influence 
consumers’ decisions and behavior. 
My findings show that feelings and 
emotions indeed do matter. Part of the 
reason why they matter is that contrary 
to the assumed incompatibility between 
emotion and rationality, consumers 
typically consider their feelings and 
emotions to be informative. On this 
point, I think that they are generally 
right. If a product doesn’t “feel right,” 
one should probably stay away from it, 
even if it seems like a good deal; and 
if a product “feels right,” one is likely 
to be happy with it in the long run—
something that I have called emotional 
rationality.
Another reason why feelings 
and emotions matter is that a lot 
of the seemingly logical arguments 
that consumers use to explain 
their decisions are in fact post hoc 
rationalizations of their immediate 
feelings toward the products that they 
evaluate. Consumers may reason 
that they like a new BMW because it 
has good mileage or because their 
current car is getting old, whereas 
in fact these rationales only came 
to their minds because they were 
immediately attracted by the car’s 
pleasing aesthetic. First emotional 
impressions thus matter a lot in 
business.
My research further shows that 
feelings and emotions are not just 
good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant. 
Their specific content makes a big 
difference. Pride isn’t the same as 
excitement; anxiety isn’t the same 
as sadness; and joy isn’t the same 
as relaxation. Each of these distinct 
emotions moves consumers in 
different directions. A big challenge for 
marketers will be to understand how 
to induce the “right” emotions among 
consumers, which is something that 
I am currently working on in my latest 
research.
Theories of how consumers 
make choices and decisions have 
historically emphasized processes 
that are cognitive and seemingly 
“rational.” Consumers, we are told, 
function a bit like computers: They 
search and receive product-related 
information from the environment 
(e.g., the electrical consumption 
of a dishwasher), combine this 
information with other information 
stored in their memory (e.g., the 
reputation of a particular brand), and 
integrate the whole into an overall 
decision using rules that reflect 
what consumers care about (e.g., 
recent evidence suggests we are “wired” to engage in material accumulation, which 
is what researchers term the instinct to earn more than we can possibly consume, even 
when this imbalance makes us unhappy. In the first phase of a study to explore this idea, 
respondents were asked to listen to obnoxious white noise on a headset. They were told 
they could earn pieces of Dove chocolate when they listened to the white noise a certain 
number of times. They also were asked to estimate how may pieces of chocolate they 
could eat in a 5-minute period after this phase. Respondents on average endured enough 
white noise to earn far more chocolates then even they predicted they could eat. In other 
words, they endured negative experiences to earn more than they knew they could pos-
sibly consume.31

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
183 
Other work suggests that experiences beat out material acquisitions. In one study 
respondents were asked to think of either a material purchase (defined as a purchase made 
with the primary intention of acquiring a material possession) or an experiential purchase 
(defined as a purchase made with the primary intention of acquiring a life experience). 
Even though the two scenarios were matched for the price paid, respondents were happier 
when they thought of experiential purchases.32 In addition, the drivers of happiness also 
seem to vary throughout the life span. Younger people are more likely to associate happi-
ness with excitement, whereas older people are more likely to associate this state with feel-
ings of calm and peacefulness.33
negative Affect
Although we may assume that marketers want to make us happy all the time, that’s 
hardly the case. Marketing messages can make us sad, angry or even depressed—and 
sometimes that’s done on purpose!
Disgust
Many researchers believe that the primitive emotion of disgust evolved to protect us from 
contamination; we learned over the years to avoid putrid meat and other foul substances 
linked to pathogens. As a result, even the slight odor of something nasty elicits a univer-
sal reaction—the wrinkling of the nose, curling of the upper lips, and protrusion of the 
tongue. Wrinkling the nose has been shown to prevent pathogens from entering through 
the nasal cavity, and sticking out the tongue aids in the expulsion of tainted food and is a 
common precursor to vomiting.
OK, now that you’re sufficiently grossed out, what (you may ask in disgust) does this 
have to do with marketing and persuasion? Well, disgust also exerts a powerful effect on 
our judgments. People who experience this emotion become harsher in their judgments of 
moral offenses and offenders. In one experiment, people who sat in a foul-smelling room 
or at a desk cluttered with dirty food containers judged acts such as lying on a résumé or 
keeping a wallet found on the street as more immoral than individuals who were asked 
to make the same judgments in a clean environment. In another study, survey respon-
dents who were randomly asked to complete the items while they stood in front of a hand 
sanitizer gave more conservative responses than those who stood in another part of the 
hallway.35
Happiness is an extreme state of well-being 
accompanied by positive emotions.
Source: Phil Date/Shutterstock.
The next time you’re feel-
ing down and you think 
about cheering yourself 
by checking your Face-
book page, think again: 
researchers report that the longer people stay 
on Facebook, the worse they feel.  Apparently 
this activity makes you feel like you’re wast-
ing your life; people say that  compared to 
browsing the internet (or  perhaps, studying) 
Facebook checking is less meaningful or 
useful. This judgment in turns leads to bad 
feelings.34
  The Tangled Web

184 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Advertisers used to avoid using negative imagery so they wouldn’t turn people off, 
but many now realize that it actually can be productive to elicit extreme feelings such as 
disgust to get their message across:
●
●To discourage people from consuming sugary drinks, The New York Department of 
Health showed a man imbibing a soft drink—as he does the beverage turns into gobs 
of fat.
●
●Febreze ran a TV commercial where blindfolded people in a foul room believe it’s 
 actually a nice location because the air freshener covers up the stench.
●
●Lamisil is a medication for toenail fungus, so it’s not too hard to generate feelings of 
disgust.  The company created a creature it called “Digger” that excavates its way 
 under people nails—a safe bet it accomplished its objective.
envy
Envy is a negative emotion associated with the desire to reduce the gap between oneself and 
someone who is superior on some dimension. Researchers distinguish between two types of 
envy: Benign envy occurs when we believe the other person actually deserves a coveted brand 
(like an iPhone). Under these circumstances the person may be willing to pay more to obtain 
the same item. Malicious envy occurs when the consumer believes the other person does not 
deserve his or her superior position. In this case the consumer may not desire the product the 
other person owns, but he or she may be willing to pay more for a different brand in the same 
category (like a Samsung Galaxy) to set them apart from the other person.36
Guilt
Guilt is “an individual’s unpleasant emotional state associated with possible objections to 
his or her actions, inaction, circumstances, or intentions.”37 Marketers may try to invoke 
a feeling of guilt when they want consumers to engage in prosocial behaviors like giving 
to charities. These “guilt appeals” can be particularly effective when others are present 
because this approach activates a sense of social responsibility. However, extreme guilt 
appeals can backfire so often a more subtle approach is preferable.38
embarrassment
Embarrassment is an emotion driven by a concern for what others think about us. To 
be embarrassed, we must be aware of, and care about, the audience that evaluates us.39 
This reaction also pops up in the consumer environment when we purchase socially sensi-
tive products such as condoms, adult diapers, tampons, or hair-lice shampoo.40 In these 
Talk about a rude awakening—and the need 
to make a quick decision! This unforgiving 
clock brings new meaning to the phrase, 
“you snooze, you lose.” if you don’t get up  
to turn off the alarm when it sounds, it’s 
 going to cost you.
Source: wireframe.ru.

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
185 
situations consumers get creative as they try to reduce embarrassment; they might try to 
hide a sensitive product among others in a shopping basket or choose a cashier who looks 
“more friendly” when they check out.
how Social Media Tap into Our emotions
Since 1972, the tiny country of Bhutan has measured the Gross National Happiness of 
its citizens.41 Now the city of Somerville, MA, is testing an app called H(app)athon, which 
combines survey questions about well-being with data collected automatically by phone 
to monitor how happy residents are. New devices like Fitbits and services like the Nike + 
Training Club allow many of us to continuously monitor our well-being; at least in terms of 
steps walked or how well we slept.42 Proponents of a happiness economy claim that well-
being is the new wealth, and social media technology is what allows us to accumulate it.
A lot of our social media activity involves expressing affect, both positive and nega-
tive. We may share particularly good or bad feelings on Facebook or Twitter, or even resort 
to corny emoticons like :) in texts or emails, to convey how we feel. To push sales of its 
Jell-O brand, Kraft unveiled a “Mood Monitor” on Twitter, in which it will randomly send 
coupons to users it finds who type in a :( emoticon. Kraft will monitor the Twittersphere 
and the company will launch coupons whenever the national average of smiley faces dips 
below 51 percent.43 LOL!
In fact, it’s so common for people to express their moods and also their emotional 
reactions to products that these posts can be a treasure trove for marketers who want to 
learn more about how their offerings make people feel. A technique called sentiment 
analysis refers to a process (sometimes also called opinion mining) that scours the social 
media universe to collect and analyze the words people use when they describe a specific 
product or company. When people feel a particular way, they are likely to choose certain 
words that tend to relate to the emotion. From these words, the researcher creates a word-
phrase dictionary (sometimes called a library) to code the data. The program scans the 
text to identify whether the words in the dictionary appear.
Consider this example based on Canon’s PowerShot A540. A review on Epinions, a prod-
uct review site, included this statement: “The Canon PowerShot A540 had good aperture 
and excellent resolution.” A sentiment analysis would extract the entities of interest from 
the sentence, identifying the product as the Canon PowerShot A540 and the relevant dimen-
sions as aperture and resolution. The sentiment would then be extracted for each dimen-
sion: the sentiment for aperture is good, whereas that for resolution is excellent. Text-mining 
software would collect these reactions and combine them with others to paint a picture of 
how people are talking about the product. There are several sentiment analysis programs 
that do similar things; a new one called ToneCheck even reports on the emotions it detects in 
people’s emails.45
consumer involvement
Imagine this conversation between two shoppers at a car 
dealership:
Consumer #1: I want the one I read about in the latest issue of 
Car and Driver magazine: It has a six-cylinder turbo engine, a dou-
ble-clutch transmission, a 90 strokebore, and 10:1 compression 
ratio.
Consumer #2: I want a red one.
Involvement is “a person’s perceived relevance of the object based on their inherent 
needs, values, and interests.”46 Figure 5.3 shows that different factors may create involve-
ment. These factors can be something about the person, something about the object, or 
something about the situation.
Facebook routinely ad-
justs its users’ news 
feeds, 
without 
their 
knowledge, to see what 
happens when they see 
different ad formats or numbers of ads. The 
company got into hot water recently when it 
admitted that it had manipulated the news 
feeds of more than 600,000 randomly se-
lected users to change the number of positive 
and negative posts they saw. The goal was 
to determine if these posts then influenced 
what users posted. sure enough, moods are 
contagious: people who saw more positive 
posts responded by writing more positive 
posts. similarly, seeing more negative con-
tent prompted the viewers to be more nega-
tive in their own posts. Although Facebook 
argued that users give blanket consent to the 
company’s research as a condition of using 
the service, many critics suggested the com-
pany had crossed an ethical boundary.44
  The Tangled Web
ObjecTive 5-4
The way we evaluate 
and choose a product 
depends on our degree 
of involvement with the 
product, the marketing 
message, or the 
purchase situation.

186 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Our motivation to attain a goal increases our desire to acquire the products or ser-
vices that we believe will satisfy it. However, as we see in the case of Consumer #2 at 
the car dealership, not everyone is motivated to the same extent. Involvement reflects 
our level of motivation to process information about a product or service we believe 
will help us to solve a problem or reach a goal.47 Think of a person’s degree of involve-
ment as a continuum that ranges from absolute lack of interest in a marketing stimulus 
at one end to obsession at the other. Inertia describes consumption at the low end of 
involvement, where we make decisions out of habit because we lack the motivation to 
consider alternatives. Table 5.1 shows one of the most widely used scales to assess level 
of involvement.
Depending on whether the need we want to satisfy is utilitarian or hedonic (see 
Chapter 1), as our involvement increases we think more about the product (“I’ve spent 
the last three days researching mortgage interest rates”) or we experience a strong emo-
tional response (“I get goose bumps when I imagine what my daughter will look like in 
that bridal gown”).48 Not surprisingly, we tend to find higher levels of involvement in 
product categories that demand a big investment of money (like houses) or self-esteem 
(like clothing) and lower levels for mundane categories like household cleaners or hard-
ware.49 Still, bear in mind that virtually anything can qualify as highly involving to 
some people—just ask a “tool guy” to talk about his passion for hammers or plumbing 
supplies.
When Apple put its first iPhone on sale, thousands of adoring iCultists around the 
country (including the mayor of Philadelphia) waited in front of Apple stores for days 
to be one of the first to buy the device—even though they could order the phone online 
and have it delivered in 3 days. Somehow that was too long to wait for a cell phone with 
a touchscreen. As one loyal consumer admitted, “If Apple made sliced bread, yeah, I’d 
buy it.”50
Cult products such as Apple—or Hydrox, Harley-Davidson, Jones Soda, Chick-Fil-A, 
Manolo Blahnik designer shoes (think Carrie on Sex and the City), and the Boston Red 
Sox—command fierce consumer loyalty, devotion, and maybe even worship by consum-
ers.51 A large majority of consumers agree that they are willing to pay more for a brand 
when they feel a personal connection to the company.52
ANTECEDENTS OF INVOLVEMENT
needs
importance
interest
values
INVOLVEMENT
INVOLVEMENT = f (Person, Situation, Object)
The level of involvement may be influenced by one or more of these three factors. Interactions among
persons, situation, and object factors are likely to occur.
differentiation of
alternatives
source of
communication
content of
communication
purchase/use
occasion
elicitation of counter
arguments to ads
effectiveness of ad
to induce purchase
relative importance
of the product class
perceived differences
in product attributes
preference for a
particular brand
influence of price
on brand choice
amount of information
search
time spent deliberating
alternatives
type of decision rule
used in choice
POSSIBLE RESULTS OF
INVOLVEMENT
OBJECT OR STIMULUS
FACTORS
PERSON FACTORS
SITUATIONAL FACTORS
with purchase
decisions
with products
with advertisements
Figure 5.3 CONCePTuAliZiNg iNvOlveMeNT
As we saw in Chapter 4, 
gamification is a red-hot 
marketing strategy today; 
it refers to the application 
of gaming principles to 
non-gaming contexts. This approach offers 
a way to dramatically increase involvement, 
especially for activities that can benefit from 
a bit of motivation. when the Federal de-
posit insurance Corporation (FdiC) wanted 
to promote financial literacy, the government 
agency created its Money smart program. it’s 
designed to look like a board game similar to 
Monopoly and it challenges players to learn 
financial skills such as setting up a bank 
account, paying bills on time and avoiding 
identity theft. The game attracted more than 
40,000 users in a year.53 Closer to home, 
when the business school at syracuse univer-
sity wanted to ramp up undergraduates’ inter-
est in corporate finance, it did so by placing 
students into one of four “houses” for the year 
à la Harry Potter, each with its own name and 
shield. students can earn points for attending 
optional lectures and other finance-related 
activities. The winning team at the end of the 
year gets a party with the dean, but also a 
“house cup” just like in the movie.54
Marketing Opportunity

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
187 
Types of involvement
A freelance software programmer named Winter is on a mission to visit every Starbucks 
in the world. To date he’s been to more than 12,000 outlets in numerous countries. 
When he learned that a Starbucks store in British Columbia was scheduled to close the 
next day, he spent $1,400 to fly there immediately just to order a cup of coffee in the nick 
of time. He chronicles his odyssey on his Web site, starbuckseverywhere.net.55
OK, maybe Winter needs to get a life. Still, his passion demonstrates that involvement 
takes many forms. It can be cognitive, as when a “gearhead” is motivated to learn all he or 
she can about the latest specs of a new tablet, or emotional, as when the thought of a new 
Armani suit gives a clotheshorse the chills.56 What’s more, the act of buying the Armani 
may be highly involving for people who are passionately devoted to shopping.
To further complicate matters, advertisements such as those Nike or Adidas produce 
may themselves be involving for some reason (e.g., because they make us laugh or cry 
or inspire us to exercise harder). So, it seems that involvement is a fuzzy concept because 
it overlaps with other things and means different things to different people. Indeed, the 
The FdiC “gamified” the need to build 
 financial literacy.
Source: FDIC.
TAble 5.1   A scale to Measure involvement
To Me [Object to be judged] is
 1. important
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
unimportant*
 2. boring
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
interesting
 3. relevant
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
irrelevant*
 4. exciting
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
unexciting*
 5. means nothing
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
means a lot to me
 6. appealing
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
unappealing*
 7. fascinating
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
mundane*
 8. worthless
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
valuable
 9. involving
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
uninvolving*
 10. not needed
_:_:_:_:_:_:_
needed

188 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
This Brazilian ad for hair-loss product 
 appeals to men who take their impending 
baldness seriously.
Source: Art Director: Pedro Vargens, Creative 
Directors: Bruno Richter and Victor Vicente.
consensus is that there are actually several broad types of involvement we can relate to the 
product, the message, or the perceiver.57
Product involvement
Product involvement is a consumer’s level of interest in a particular product. The more 
closely marketers can tie a brand to an individual, the higher the involvement they will create.
As a rule, product decisions are likely to be highly involving if the consumer believes 
there is a lot of perceived risk. This means the person believes there may be negative 
consequences if he or she chooses the wrong option. Risk is greater when a product 
is expensive or complicated. In some cases perceived risk also is a factor when others 
can see what we choose, and we may be embarrassed if we make the wrong choice.58 
Remember that a product does not necessarily have to cost a fortune or be hard to use to 
be risky—for example, a college senior who is going to a job interview may obsess about 
sweating too much and give a lot of thought to the brand of deodorant he or she uses 
that morning.
when we have the op-
portunity to personalize a 
product, our involvement 
increases 
because 
the 
item reflects our unique 
preferences. But how about when we build 
the product ourselves? researchers term this 
the iKeA effect; self-made (or at least assem-
bled) products including furniture, legos, and 
even origami enhance the value we attach to 
them because our own labor is involved.61 Of 
course, there may also be that unsettling feel-
ing when you finish assembling a bookcase 
and there’s still one part left over….
Marketing Opportunity
we value things more when our own labor 
contributes to making or assembling them.
Source: Maridav/Fotolia.

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
189 
cb AS i See iT
Debora Thompson, Georgetown University
persuasiveness. Through several 
lab experiments in which consumers 
watched TV ads for several brands, 
my colleagues and I have found that 
informing consumers that an ad is 
consumer-generated triggers two 
conflicting responses: skepticism 
about the competence of the ad 
creator and identification with the 
ad creator. Skepticism emerges 
when the audience challenges 
the ability of regular consumers 
to design effective advertising, 
perhaps recognizing that effective 
advertising requires particular 
skill and expertise. Identification 
emerges when the audience 
perceives similarities between 
themselves and the consumer 
creating the ad. The effectiveness 
of disclosing advertising co-
creation, therefore, depends on 
factors that hinder skepticism 
and heighten identification with 
the ad creator. Interestingly, we 
found that attributing the ad to a 
consumer backfires when the ad 
creator is simply portrayed as an 
unspecified fellow consumer or 
when the audience consists of non-
loyal consumers who do not share 
with the ad creator a commitment 
towards the brand. However, this 
negative effect can be mitigated 
and even reversed under high 
distraction viewing conditions, when 
consumers’ ability to activate their 
critical thoughts is limited, and when 
the audience identifies with the 
consumer creating the ad, such as 
when the ad creator is depicted as 
sharing a background trait with the 
viewers or when the consumer is 
loyal to the brand.
Overall, my research shows that 
although marketers should continue 
to engage consumers and benefit 
from their creativity, they should be 
careful about how they publicize 
this fact to the population at large. 
To reap greater benefits from 
consumer-generated campaigns, it is 
important to develop a narrative not 
only about the initiative itself, but 
also about the consumer creating 
the ad. Marketers can prevent 
the heightened skepticism about 
the skills of ordinary consumers 
as content creators by increasing 
identification between the ad creator 
and the ad recipient. This can be 
done by disseminating information 
about the co-creation process via 
public relations efforts, TV ads, 
and online videos, or through social 
networking sites (e.g., developing 
“the making of the ad” videos). 
Finally, my research suggests 
that the disclosure of consumer-
generated ads should be driven by 
a careful assessment of the brand’s 
growth objectives. Consumer-
generated advertising campaigns are 
likely to be a more effective tactic 
to engage and retain a brand’s loyal 
customers, rather than to attract and 
grow the share of customers who 
are not presently loyal to the brand.
Companies increasingly involve 
consumers in the process of 
developing advertising and other 
marketing actions. Such co-creation 
of marketing with consumers is 
expected to significantly increase 
their engagement with the brand. 
However, not much is known about 
the response of consumers who 
have not been directly involved in 
the co-creation process, but are 
simply informed that the company 
undertook co-creation activity with 
some unspecified fellow consumers. 
My research has explored when 
and why informing the audience 
that an ad was created by another 
consumer will increase message 
Figure 5.4 lists five kinds of risk—including objective (e.g., physical danger) and subjec-
tive (e.g., social embarrassment) factors—as well as the products each type tends to affect. 
Perceived risk is less of a problem for consumers who have greater “risk capital,” because they 
have less to lose from a poor choice. For example, a highly self-confident person might worry 
less than a vulnerable, insecure person who chooses a brand that peers think isn’t cool.
Mass customization describes the personalization of products and services for 
individual customers at a mass-production price.59 This product involvement strategy 
applies to a wide range of products and services, from newspaper Web sites that allow 
readers to choose which sections of the paper they want to see, to Dell computers that you 
can configure, to Levi’s blue jeans that have a right leg one inch shorter than a left leg to 
fit an asymmetrical body (this is more common than you think).60 Mars Snackfood USA 

190 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Risk capital consists of money and 
property. Those with relatively little 
income and wealth are most 
vulnerable.
BUYERS MOST
SENSITIVE TO RISK
PSYCHO-
LOGICAL
RISK
SOCIAL
RISK
PHYSICAL
RISK
FUNCTIONAL
RISK
MONETARY
RISK
High-ticket items that require 
substantial expenditures are most 
subject to this form of risk.
Risk capital consists of
alternative means of performing the 
function or meeting the need. 
Practical consumers are most 
sensitive.
Products or services whose 
purchase and use requires the 
buyer’s exclusive commitment are 
most sensitive.
Risk capital consists of physical 
vigor, health, and vitality. Those 
who are elderly, frail, or in ill health 
are most vulnerable.
Mechanical or electrical goods (such 
as vehicles or flammables), drugs 
and medical treatment, and food and 
beverages are most sensitive.
Risk capital consists of self-esteem 
and self-confidence. Those who are 
insecure and uncertain are most 
sensitive.
Socially visible or symbolic goods, 
such as clothes, jewelry, cars, 
homes, or sports equipment are 
most subject to social risk.
Risk capital consists of affiliations 
and status. Those lacking
self-respect or attractiveness to 
peers are most sensitive.
Expensive personal luxuries that 
may engender guilt, durables, and 
services whose use demands
self-discipline or sacrifice are 
most sensitive.
PURCHASES MOST
SUBJECT TO RISK
Figure 5.4 Five TyPes OF PerCeived risk
introduced M&M’s Faces to encourage consumers to bond with its chocolates: At mymms 
.com, you can upload a photo and order a batch of M&Ms with a face and personal mes-
sage printed on the candy shell.
When a consumer is highly involved with a specific product, this is the Holy Grail for 
marketers because it means he or she exhibits brand loyalty: Repeat purchasing behavior 
that reflects a conscious decision to continue buying the same brand.62 Note that this defi-
nition states that the consumer not only buys the brand on a regular basis, but that he or 
she also has a strong positive attitude toward it rather than simply buying it out of habit. In 
fact, we often find that a brand-loyal consumer has more than simply a positive attitude; fre-
quently he or she is passionate about the product. “True-blue” users react more vehemently 
when a company alters, redesigns, or (God forbid) eliminates a favorite brand. One simple 
test to find out if you’re brand loyal: If the store is temporarily out of your favorite brand, 
will you buy a different product or hold off until you can get your first choice?
Although everyone wants to cultivate brand-loyal customers, there is a wrinkle that 
sometimes confounds even the most effective marketers. We often engage in brand switch-
ing, even if our current brand satisfies our needs. When researchers for British brewer 
Bass Export studied the U.S. beer market, they discovered that many drinkers have a reper-
toire of two to six favorite brands rather than one clear favorite.63

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
191 
Sometimes, it seems we simply like to try new things; we crave variety as a form of 
stimulation or to reduce boredom. Variety-seeking, the desire to choose new alterna-
tives over more familiar ones, even influences us to switch from our favorite products to 
ones we like less! This can occur even before we become satiated, or tired, of our favorite. 
Research supports the idea that we are willing to trade enjoyment for variety because the 
unpredictability itself is rewarding.64
We’re especially likely to look for variety when we are in a good mood, or when there 
isn’t a lot of other stuff going on.65 So, even though we have favorites, we still like to sam-
ple other possibilities. However, when the decision situation is ambiguous, or when there is 
little information about competing brands, we tend to opt for the safe choice.
Message involvement
It started with Jay Z’s celebrated campaign to promote his autobiographical Decoded book. 
The agency Droga5 created a national scavenger hunt when it hid all 320 pages of the 
book (mostly blown-up versions) in outdoor spots in 13 cities that somehow related to the 
text on each page (e.g. on cheeseburger wrappers in New York). Coldplay borrowed a page 
from this book more recently to promote its album Ghost Stories. The band hid lyric sheets 
inside ghost stories in libraries around the world and gave out clues on Twitter.66 This 
represents an emerging way to engage consumers: In alternate reality games (ARGs), 
thousands of people participate in a fictional story or competition to solve a mystery.
As these novel scavenger hunts illustrate, media vehicles possess different qualities 
that influence our motivation to pay attention to what they tell us, known as message 
involvement. Print is a high-involvement medium (whether it appears on a “dead tree” or 
in an e-book). The reader actively processes the information and (if desired) he or she is 
able to pause and reflect on it before turning the page.67 In contrast, television is a low-
involvement medium because it requires a passive viewer who exerts relatively little control 
(remote-control “zipping” notwithstanding) over content.
TV’s passive nature explains why advertisers try to place their ads in shows such as 
American Idol that engage viewers; they want to increase the likelihood their audience will 
pay attention when their messages come on the screen. Research evidence indicates that 
a viewer who is more involved with a television show will respond more positively to com-
mercials he or she sees during that show, and that these spots will have a greater chance 
to influence purchase intentions.69 In fact, some messages (including really well-made 
advertisements) are so involving that they trigger a stage of narrative transportation, 
where people become immersed in the storyline. One recent study showed that people who 
are feeling lucky engage in this process when they look at an advertisement for a lottery; 
once immersed, it is hard to distract them from the message.70 Not a great thing for com-
pulsive gamblers, but a powerful effect nonetheless.
Although consumers’ involvement levels with a product message vary, marketers do 
not have to simply sit back and hope for the best. If they are aware of some basic factors 
that increase or decrease attention, they can take steps to increase the likelihood that 
product information will get through. A marketer can boost a person’s motivation to pro-
cess relevant information via one or more of the following techniques:71
●
●Use novel stimuli, such as unusual cinematography, sudden silences, or 
 unexpected movements, in commercials. When a British firm called Egg Banking 
introduced a credit card to the French market, its ad agency created unusual com-
mercials to make people question their assumptions. One ad stated, “Cats always land 
on their paws,” and then two researchers in white lab coats dropped a kitten off a 
 rooftop—never to see it again (animal rights activists were not amused).72
●
●Use prominent stimuli, such as loud music and fast action, to capture attention.  
In print formats, larger ads increase attention. Also, viewers look longer at colored 
 pictures than at black-and-white ones.
●
●Include celebrity endorsers. As we’ll see in Chapter 8, people process more infor-
mation when it comes from someone they admire or at least know about, whether 
Michael Jordan, Bill Gates, or maybe even Kim Kardashian.
The Nielsen research com-
pany wanted to see if the 
social media activity people 
participated in while they 
watched a Tv show related 
to how involved they were with the action 
in the program. sure enough, when they 
hooked up 300 people to brain monitors as 
they watched prime-time Tv shows in a 2015 
study, they found a strong relationship with 
the number of messages on Twitter during 
the same segments on these shows when 
they aired on live Tv. Nielsen concludes that 
Twitter chatter is an accurate indicator of the 
overall audience’s interest in a show, right 
down to the specific scene. in a separate 
study Nielsen also found that the volume of 
tweets about new shows before they launch 
can predict which premieres will attract the 
largest audiences.68
net Profit

192 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
●
●Provide value that customers appreciate. Charmin bathroom tissue set up public 
toilets in Times Square that hordes of grateful visitors used. Thousands more people 
(evidently with time on their hands) visited the brand’s Web site to view the display.73
●
●Invent new media platforms to grab attention. Procter & Gamble printed trivia 
questions and answers on its Pringles snack chips with ink made of blue or red food 
coloring, and a company called Speaking Roses International patented a technology to 
laser-print words, images, or logos on flower petals.74 An Australian firm creates hand 
stamps that nightclubs use to identify paying customers; the stamps include logos or 
ad messages so partiers’ hands become an advertising platform.75
 
A novel or unexpected image can heighten 
involvement, especially for a less-than- 
thrilling business like an optician.
Source: luerzersarchive.net.
Product involvement often depends on the 
situation we’re in. The Charmin toilet tissue 
brand sponsors a web site, appropriately 
named sitOrsquat.com. The site helps 
travelers find the cleanest public restrooms 
wherever they happen to be. The brand 
manager explains, “Our goal is to connect 
Charmin with innovative conversations and 
solutions as a brand that understands the 
importance of bringing the best bathroom 
experience to consumers, even when they’re 
away from home.” According to Charmin,  
sitOrsquat lists over 52,000 toilets in  
10 countries.
Source: Courtesy of P&G/Charmin.

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
193 
●
●Encourage viewers to think about actually using the product. If a person can 
imagine this, he or she is more likely to want to obtain the real thing. Research shows that 
even subtle cues in an advertisement can encourage this mental rehearsal. One simple 
example is orienting an image of a cup with its handle to the right so that (for a right-
handed person) it matches the dominant hand and facilitates mental stimulation.76
●
●Create spectacles where the message is itself  a form of  entertainment. In 
the early days of radio and television, ads literally were performances; show hosts 
integrated marketing messages into the episodes. Today live advertising that features 
attention-grabbing events called spectacles is making a comeback as marketers try 
harder and harder to captivate jaded consumers:77 Axe body products sponsored a 
posh Hamptons (New York) nightclub for the whole season; it became The Axe Lounge, 
sporting branding on the DJ booth and menu and Axe products in the restrooms.
Situational involvement
Situational involvement describes engagement with a store, Web site, or a location 
where people consume a product or service. One way to increase this kind of involvement 
is to personalize the messages shoppers receive at the time of purchase. For example, a few 
marketers tailor the recommendations they give shoppers in a store based on what they 
picked up from a shelf. At some Dunkin’ Donuts locations, a person who orders a morning 
coffee sees an ad at the cash register that pushes hash browns or breakfast sandwiches. 
Many retailers and event planners today focus on enhancing customers’ experiences in 
stores, dealerships, and stadiums. Industry insiders refer to this as a “butts-in-seats” strat-
egy. That’s why some fans who attend Atlanta Falcons football games get visited by a cheer-
leader in the stands for a photo op, and also why Chrysler is ramping up its efforts to get 
people to test drive cars at dealerships and auto shows. As the head of the car company’s 
“experiential marketing unit” explained, “We know a physical experience with a vehicle is 
a great way to allow people to try it out and move up on their consideration list. 78
would you pay hard-earned 
money to watch other peo-
ple play videogames? if you 
answer yes, you’re part of 
the booming e-sports phe-
nomenon. These sports boast stars, uniforms, 
and rivalries, but the players are clicking their 
mouses rather than swinging their bats. in a 
world championship game in seoul, 40,000 
fans packed a stadium built for the soccer 
world Cup to cheer on their favorite league 
of legends team.79
net Profit
e-sports is a rapidly growing phenomenon 
around the world.
Source: Jean Chung/The New York Times/Redux.
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.

194 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
1. Products can satisfy a range of consumer needs.
Marketers try to satisfy consumers’ needs, but the rea-
son any product is purchased can vary widely. The iden-
tification of consumer motives is an important step to 
ensure that a product will meet the appropriate need(s). 
Traditional approaches to consumer behavior have fo-
cused on the abilities of products to satisfy rational needs 
(utilitarian motives), but hedonic motives (such as the 
need for exploration or fun) also guide many purchase 
decisions. Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs demonstrates that 
the same product can satisfy different needs.
2. Consumers experience different kinds of motivational 
conflicts that can impact their purchase decisions.
Motivation refers to the processes that lead people to be-
have as they do. It occurs when a need is aroused that 
the consumer wishes to satisfy. A goal has valence, which 
means that it can be positive or negative. We direct our be-
havior toward goals we value positively; we are motivated 
to approach the goal and to seek out products that will help 
us to reach it. However, we may also be motivated to avoid a 
negative outcome rather than achieve a positive outcome.
ChaPTer SuMMary
3. Consumers experience a range of affective responses 
to products and marketing messages.
Affective responses can be mild (evaluations), moderate 
(moods), or strong (emotions). Marketers often try to elicit 
a positive emotional response via advertising or other 
communication channels so that consumers form a bond 
(or lovemark) with their offering. A lot of the content 
on social media reflects affective responses that people 
post, so these platforms are a rich source of information 
for marketers to gauge how consumers feel about their 
brands.
4. The way we evaluate and choose a product depends 
on our degree of involvement with the product, the 
marketing message, or the purchase situation.
Product involvement can range from low where consum-
ers make purchase decisions based on inertia, to high 
where they form strong bonds with favorite brands (cult 
products). Marketing strategies also need to consider con-
sumers’ extent of engagement with the messages about 
their products and the environments in which consump-
tion of these products occur.
Affect, 180
Alternate reality games (ARGs), 191
Approach–approach conflict, 176
Approach–avoidance conflict,176
Avoidance–avoidance conflict, 177
Brand loyalty, 190
Co-creation, 189
Cult products, 186
Drive, 173
Drive theory, 173
Embarrassment, 184
Emotional oracle effect, 181
Emotions, 180
Envy, 184
Evaluations, 180
E-sports, 193
Expectancy theory, 174
Goal, 173
Guilt, 184
Happiness, 181
Happiness economy, 185
Hierarchy of Needs, 178
Homeostasis, 173
IKEA Effect, 188
Incidental brand exposure, 173
Inertia, 186
Involvement, 185
Lovemark, 181
Mass customization, 189
Material accumulation, 182
Message involvement, 191
Mood congruency, 181
Moods, 180
Motivation, 173
Narrative transportation, 191
Negative state relief, 181
Perceived risk, 188
Product involvement, 188
Productivity orientation, 175
Retail therapy, 173
Sadvertising, 181
Sentiment analysis, 185
Situational involvement, 193
Spectacles, 193
Theory of cognitive dissonance, 176
Variety-seeking, 191
Word-phrase dictionary, 185
Key TerMS
review
 
5-1 What is motivation and why is this idea so important to 
marketers?
 
5-2 Describe three types of motivational conflicts. Cite an 
example of each from a current marketing campaign.
 
5-3 Explain the difference between a need and a want.
 
5-4 What is cognitive dissonance?
 
5-5 What are some of the key problems with Maslow’s hier-
archy of needs?
 
5-6 List three types of perceived risk, and give an example of 
each.
 
5-7 What is the difference between a mood and an emotion?
 
5-8 What is mood congruency and how do advertisers use it?
 
5-9 What is it about a cult product that allows a higher price 
point?
 5-10 What are some strategies marketers can use to increase 
consumers’ involvement with their products?

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
195 
 5-11 Does money buy happiness? Why or why not?
 5-12 Many consumers today seem to be obsessed with moni-
toring their emotions. They post about their feelings, 
track their sleep patterns, and fret about how often 
they’re “liked” on social media. Should happiness be 
quantified?
 5-13 Crisis, fear, and guilt are very common themes in mar-
keting and advertising. Humanitarian disasters are 
the backdrops favored by charities to elicit donations. 
Fear of burglary or weather damage fuels home and 
contents insurance marketing. Gyms rely on our guilt 
about putting on a few pounds over the winter months. 
These are all dominant emotions—should marketers 
use these emotions as integral parts of their marketing 
campaigns?
 5-14 A group of psychologists argued that we need to revise 
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. They propose we should 
delete “self-actualization” from the pinnacle and 
replace it with “parenting.” Right below this peak, they 
added “mate retention” and “mate acquisition.” They 
claim that too many people see Maslow’s triangle as 
“aspirational”—a description of what fulfilled individu-
als “should” do—rather than as an explanation of how 
human motivation actually works. Their perspective is 
evolutionary; if the only purpose of art, music, and lit-
erature is self-fulfillment, how does that contribute to 
the survival of the species? One of the proponents of this 
view observes, “If you are a good poet or a good musician, 
there is a reproductive payoff: women are attracted to 
men with these abilities. What a man is saying when he 
is playing his guitar up there is ‘look at my good genes.’” 
What do you think—do our motivations to buy, have, and 
be ultimately come down to survival of our gene pool?80
 5-15 The chapter discusses a study that says our moods actu-
ally get worse when we spend a lot of time on Facebook 
because we feel like we’re wasting our time. Do you agree?
ConSuMer Behavior Challenge
●
■DiScuSS
●
■APPly
 5-16 Our online behaviors also can satisfy needs at different 
levels of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, especially when 
we participate in social networks such as Facebook. 
Web-based companies can build loyalty if they keep 
these needs in mind when they design their offerings:
• We satisfy physiological needs when we use the 
Web to research topics such as nutrition or medical 
questions.
• The Web enables users to pool information and 
satisfy safety needs when they call attention to 
bad practices, flawed products, or even dangerous 
predators.
• Profile pages on Facebook let users define them-
selves as individuals.
• Online communities, blogs, and social networks 
provide recognition and achievement to those who 
cultivate a reputation for being especially helpful or 
expert in some subject.
• Users can seek help from others and connect with 
people who have similar tastes and interests.
• Access to invitation-only communities provides status.
• Spiritually based online communities can provide 
guidance to troubled people.81
Interview people you know about their motivations to 
participate in social media. Ask them to provide a list 
of the platforms they access most, then for each probe 
about their reasons to visit these. What needs do these 
sites appear to satisfy? How might these insights help you 
to devise ideas for new social media products?
 5-17 Interview members of a celebrity fan club. Describe 
their level of involvement with the “product,” and 
devise some marketing strategies to reach this group.
 5-18 Crowdfunding is a relatively new frontier for marketing 
and consumer behavior. The main feature of this type of 
business arrangement and its related marketing revolves 
around attracting a sufficient number of interested back-
ers to fund the project. The reward for involvement is the 
eventual delivery of the product and any rewards or 
additional features that are either included as a reward 
tier for larger contributions or “unlocked” once the basic 
funding figure has been exceeded. However, the rela-
tionship between the developers of the product and the 
backers is no longer a simple case of gathering pre-sales 
funding to validate the demand for the product. Increas-
ingly, backers are involved in the actual development and 
direction that the product takes. The project developer 
responds to the requirements of the backers; after all, 
it is their funds that underpin the financial viability of 
the whole project. Crowdfunding certainly shortens the 
development cycle for new products, but it is developing 
far beyond the original idea of peer-to-peer lending or 
involvement.82
Research the development of crowdfunding across 
two or more crowdfunding platforms. How has the 
development and launch of products been influenced 
by the involvement of the customers or backers? How 
has the product been marketed? Has the product, once 
launched, featured the involvement of backers in 

196 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
the marketing messages? In your view, is this backer 
involvement and influence a feature that is likely to 
continue to develop? What challenges will marketers 
face in the future both during the project crowdfunding 
phase and the eventual launch of the product on the 
market? 
Creative Strategies analyst says, “the flexibility of “glanceable 
information” is more valuable than people realize today.” He 
also mentions that the new watches will offer options for non-
verbal communication, tapping a button to send a message, for 
instance. Apple CEO Tim Cook calls it “the most personal device 
we’ve ever created—it’s not just with you, it’s on you” and claims 
that it’s the most advanced timepiece ever created, period.
Analysts forecast that Apple will ship 7.5 million watches 
in the months following its introduction. But critics still wonder 
if consumers can be convinced that there’s a real need for the 
devices. On top of that, there’s a potentially saturated market to 
consider, with 10 million competing smartwatches shipped in 
the year before Apple’s entry into the product category. Another 
form of competition comes from the established luxury brand 
watches that may have already cornered the higher end of the 
market. Proponents of luxury watches believe that Apple can’t 
match their unique qualities—prestige, resale value, their abil-
ity to be passed down as an heirloom, exclusivity, and a less 
obtrusive look which may be safer for the wearer.
While blogger John Gruber commented on a recent podcast: 
“I still have no idea why I would want to wear it,” early adopters 
of the Apple Watches and others who believe in the power of 
Apple to succeed were not surprised by recent announcements 
from the company about an upgraded operating system and im-
provements that will make the watches’ apps work even better.
So, who knows how this story will turn out—will Apple be 
the game-changer that played a significant role in how we think 
about the evolution of the personal watch or will it be seen as 
having momentarily misstepped into an industry whose death 
was already a foregone conclusion?
DiSCuSSion QueSTionS
 CS 5.1 Discuss the possible reasons to buy a watch today. 
Connect each motivation you identify with an appropri-
ate motivational theory from the chapter.
 CS 5.2 What does Apple really believe will motivate consumers 
to purchase the Apple Watch? Are there different mo-
tivations at the low versus high (luxury version) price 
point?
 CS 5.3 How do marketers of watches use marketing and adver-
tising to motivate consumers to buy them? Give specific 
examples.
Sources: Kathleen Beckett, “Who Wears What, Why?” http://www.nytimes 
.com/2014/03/28/fashion/who-wears-what-why.html?emc=edit_tnt_20
haS The DeaTh of The waTCh Been 
greaTly exaggeraTeD? aPPle geTS  
inTo The gaMe
It used to be that putting on a watch was just a standard part 
of getting dressed in the morning. How could you hope to move 
successfully throughout your day, making it to appointments 
on time, if you weren’t wearing a watch on your wrist to let you 
know what time it is?
Today however, we’re surrounded by technology devices at 
work, home, and even away from home that readily display the 
time of day. The outcome? Many have come to view the personal 
watch as an unnecessary device. As a result, the watch industry 
has been struggling to find ways to remain relevant, searching for 
the key to how they can motivate consumers to purchase a time-
keeping device that many consider redundant with the desktops, 
laptops, tablets, and cellphones to which they are so connected.
As industry analysts have pointed out, watches may actually 
be “superfluous” and there are claims that “telling time is second-
ary today.” And even for those more diehard consumers who still 
wear a watch, according to Marshall Cohen, chief industry ana-
lyst in New York at the NPD Group, “there’s no practical need for 
any watch-wearing holdouts to pay a lot for a timepiece.”
Apple says, not true! It believes that the death of the watch 
has been greatly exaggerated and in response, the company re-
cently introduced the Apple Watch. These devices range in price 
from $350 to more than $10,000. The new watches, far from 
simply telling the time, are actually mini-computers that allow 
the wearer to check and send messages, surf the Internet, moni-
tor heart rate, and pay in a store.
The watches’ introduction has been both praised and criti-
cized. Some point to Apple’s ability to interest consumers in any 
number of technology devices and believe that the Apple Watch 
will be yet another success story for the company. An early 
reviewer, Wall Street Journal’s Geoffrey Fowler, believes that his 
dependence on other devices has decreased since putting on the 
Apple Watch and that it’s helped him to be more focused. But 
others cite consumers’ waning interest in watches in general, 
the difficulties in functioning with such a small screen, and 
they wonder who would really be motivated to make the invest-
ment in the entry level model, let alone the top of the line, Apple 
Watch Edition, with an attention-getting price tag of $17,000!
So what does Apple think will motivate consumers to buy 
one of these new gadgets? They talk about consumers’ need to 
quickly and subtly get access to information, which is not al-
ways possible with a clunkier tablet or cell phone. Tim Bajarin, 
●■Case Study 

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
197 
140327&nlid=33295816&tntemail0=y&_r=1, accessed May 15, 2015; 
Jessica Guynn, “Apple Prices Apple Watch,” http://www.usatoday.com/
story/tech/2015/03/09/apple-watch-event/24536117/, 
accessed 
May 
28, 2015; Micah Singleton, “Who Will Buy a $10,000 Apple Watch 
Edition?” 
http://www.theverge.com/2015/3/10/8164135/apple-watch-
price-target-market-who-will-buy, accessed June 2, 2015; Farhad Manjoo 
and Vanessa Friedman, “Affairs of the Wrist: The Apple Watch Comes 
Between Them,” June 11, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/11/
fashion/affairs-of-the-wrist-the-apple-watch-comes-between-them.html, 
accessed June 12, 2015; John Paul Titlow, “The Apple Watch Just Got A Lot 
More Useful,” http://www.fastcompany.com/3047207/fast-feed/the-apple-
watch-just-got-a-lot-more-useful, accessed June 9, 2015; Geoffrey Fowler, 
“Apple Watch Review: The Smartwatch Finally Makes Sense,” http://www 
.wsj.com/articles/apple-watch-review-the-smartwatch-finally-makes-
sense-1428494495, accessed June 10, 2015.
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 5.19 The basic lesson of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs is that we must first satisfy basic 
needs before we progress up the ladder (a starving man is not interested in status 
symbols, friendship, or self-fulfillment). This implies that consumers value different 
product attributes depending on what is currently available to them. In today’s 
economic environment, the hierarchy helps to explain why many consumers 
take a closer look at the price and reliability of a product rather than whether 
it will impress their friends. How do you believe the recession changed the way 
consumers evaluate products? Do you agree that the priorities many now place 
on “value-priced” brands is the “new normal,” or will our attitudes change as the 
economy improves?
 5.20 Our emotional reactions to marketing cues are so powerful that some high-
tech companies study mood in small doses (in 1/30 of a second increments) 
as they analyze people’s facial reactions when they see ads or new products. 
They measure happiness as they look for differences between, for example, 
a true smile (which includes a relaxation of the upper eyelid) and a social smile 
(which occurs only around the mouth). Whirlpool used this technique to test 
consumers’ emotional reactions to a yet-to-be-launched generation of its Duet 
washers and dryers. The company’s goal: To design an appliance that will actually 
make people happy. Researchers discovered that even though test subjects said 
they weren’t thrilled with some out-of-the-box design options, such as unusual 
color combinations, their facial expressions said otherwise.83 Does the ability to 
study our emotional reactions at such a specific level give marketers an unfair 
advantage?
noTeS
20/upshot/how-forbidding-foie-gras-increased-the-appetite-for-it.html? 
smid=nytcore-iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=1&abt= 
0002&abg=0, accessed January 30, 2015.
 
7. Russell W. Belk, Guliz Ger, and Søren Askegaard, “The Fire of Desire: A 
Multisited Inquiry into Consumer Passion,” Journal of Consumer Research 
30 (2003): 326–351; cf. also Yu Chen, “Possession and Access: Consumer 
Desires and Value Perceptions Regarding Contemporary Art Collection and 
Exhibit Visits,” Journal of Consumer Research 35 (April 2009): 925–940.
 
8. Henrik Hagtvedt and Vanessa M. Patrick, “The Broad Embrace of Luxury: 
Hedonic Potential as a Driver of Brand Extendibility,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology 19, no. 4 (2009): 608–618.
 
9. Anat Keinan and Ran Kivetz, “Productivity Orientation and the 
Consumption of Collectable Experiences,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, 
no. 6 (April 2011):935–935. DOI: 10.1086/657163.
 10. Thomas Kramer and Song-Oh Yoon, “Approach-Avoidance Motivation and 
the Use of Affect as Information,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 17, no. 2 
(2007): 128–138.
 11. www.weightwatchers.com/index.aspx, accessed June 30, 2009.
 12. See Paul T. Costa and Robert R. McCrae, “From Catalog to Classification: 
Murray’s Needs and the Five-Factor Model,” Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology 55 (1988): 258–265; Calvin S. Hall and Gardner Lindzey, 
 
1. “Is 2014 the Year of the Vegan,?” One Green Planet, http://www.one-
greenplanet.org/news/is-2014-the-year-of-the-vegan/, accessed March 
3, 2015; “Vegetarianism in America,” Vegetarian Times, http://www 
.vegetariantimes.com/features/archive_of_editorial/667, accessed May 9, 
2011.
 
2. Gráinne M. Fitzsimmons, Tanya L. Chartrand and Gavan J. Fitzsimons, 
“Automatic Effects of Brand Exposure on Motivated Behavior: How Apple 
Makes You ‘Think Different,’” Journal of Consumer Research 35 (2008): 
21–35.
 
3. Gergana Y. Nenkov and Maura L. Scott, “So Cute I Could Eat It Up”: 
Priming Effects of Cute Products on Indulgent Consumption,” Journal 
of Consumer Research August 2014, vol. 41, 2: 326-341; http://www 
.jcr-admin.org/files/pressPDFs/041814131740_676581.pdf.
 
4. Ji Kyung Park, and Deborah Roedder John, “I Think I Can, I Think I Can: 
Brand Use, Self-Efficacy, and Performance. Journal of Marketing Research 
51, no. 2 (2014): 233–247.
 
5. Scott I. Rick, Beatriz Pereira, and Katherine A. Burson, “The Benefits of 
Retail Therapy: Making Purchase Decisions Reduces Residual Sadness,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 24, no. 3 (2014): 373–380.
 
6. Josh Barro, “How Forbidding Foie Gras Increased the Appetite for It,” 
New York Times, (Janury 20, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/ 

198 
SecTiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
 30. Lauren Indvik, “Hug a Vending Machine, Get a Free Coke,” April 9, 2012, 
http://mashable.com/2012/04/09/coca-cola-hug-machine/?WT.mc_
id=en_business&utm_campaign=Business&utm_medium=email&utm_
source=newsletter, accessed January 11, 2013.
 31. Matt Richtel, “You Can’t Take It With You, But You Still Want More,” 
New York Times (January 4, 2014) http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/05/
business/you-cant-take-it-with-you-but-you-still-want-more.
html?ref=business, accessed February 22, 2015.
 32. Leaf Van Boven and Thomas Gilovich, “To Do or to Have? That Is the 
Question,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 85, no. 6: 1193–
1202. 2003,
 33. Elizabeth Dunn, Lara B. Aknin and Michael I Norton, “Spending Money 
on Others Promotes Happiness,” Science 319 (2008): 1687–1688; Cassie 
Mogilner, “The Pursuit of Happiness: Time, Money, and Social Connection,” 
Psychological Science 21, no. 9 (2011): 1348–1354; Cassie Mogilner, Sepandar 
D. Kamvar and Jennifer Aaker, “The Shifting Meaning of Happiness,” Social 
Psychological and Personality Science (July 2, 2011): 395–402.
 34. Rebecca Hiscott, “Why You Feel Terrible After Spending Too Much Time 
On Facebook,” The Huffington Post, July 17, 2014, http://www.huffing 
tonpost.com/2014/07/17/facebook-study_n_5595890.html, accessed Jan-
uary 29, 2015.
 35. Peter Lieberman and David Pizarro, “All Politics Is Olfactory,” New York  
Times (October 23, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/24/opinion/ 
24pizarro.html?_r=1&ref=todayspaper, accessed April 29, 2011.
 36. Niels Van de Ven, Marcel Zeeienberg, and Rik Pieters, “The Envy Premium in 
Product Evaluation,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 6 (2011): 984–998.
 37. Roy F. Baumeister, Arlene M. Stillwell, and Todd F. Heatherton, “Guilt: An 
Interpersonal Approach,” Psychological Bulletin 115 (1994): 243–267.
 38. Debra Z. Basil, Nancy M. Ridgway, and Michael D. Basil, “Guilt Appeals: 
The Mediating Effective of Responsibility,” Psychology & Marketing 23, no. 
12 (2006): 1035–1054.
 39. Loraine Lau-Gesk and Aimee Drolet, “The Publicly Self-Conscious 
Consumer: Prepare to Be Embarrassed,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 
18, no. 2 (2008):127–136.
 40. Aubrey Wilson and Christopher West, “The Marketing of Unmentionables,” 
Harvard Business Review (January–February 1981): 91–102.
 41. Gross National Happiness Commission, Government of Bhutan, http://
www.gnhc.gov.bt/, accessed March 2, 2015.
 42. Anya Kamenetz, “A City-Wide Quest For Happiness, Powered By Sensors 
and Data,” Fast Company (June 3, 2013), http://www.fastcompany 
.com/3011057/tech-forecast/a-city-wide-quest-for-happiness-powered-
by-sensors-and-data?partner=newsletter, accessed January 29, 2015; 
http://happathon.com/, accessed March 3, 2015.
 43. E. J. Schultz, “Turning the Frown Upside Down: Kraft’s Jell-O Plans Twitter 
Mood Monitor,” Advertising Age (May 8, 2011), http://adage.com/article/
news/kraft-s-jell-o-plans-twitter-mood-monitor/227439/, accessed May 
10, 2011.
 44. Vindu Goel, “Facebook Tinkers with Users’ Emotions in News Feed 
Experiment, Stirring Outcry, New York Times (June 29, 2014), http://www 
.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/technology/facebook-tinkers-with-users- 
emotions-in-news-feed-experiment-stirring-outcry.html, accessed January 29,  
2015.
 45. http://tonecheck.com, accessed March 3, 2015; Tracy Tuten and 
Michael R. Solomon, Social Media Marketing, 2nd ed. (London: SAGE, 
2016); Jennifer Van Grove, “How a Sentiment Analysis Startup Profits 
by Checking Emotion in E-mail,” Mashable (January 20, 2011), http://
mashable.com/2011/01/20/lymbix/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_
medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+Mashable+%28Masha
ble%29, accessed April 29, 2011.
 46. Judith Lynne Zaichkowsky, “Measuring the Involvement Construct in 
Marketing,” Journal of Consumer Research 12 (December 1985): 341–352.
 47. Andrew Mitchell, “Involvement: A Potentially Important Mediator of 
Consumer Behavior,” in William L. Wilkie, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 
6 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1979): 191–196.
 48. Richard L. Celsi and Jerry C. Olson, “The Role of Involvement in Attention 
and Comprehension Processes,” Journal of Consumer Research 15 (Septem-
ber 1988): 210–224.
 49. Barbara J. Phillips and Edward F. McQuarrie, (2010). “Narrative and 
Persuasion in Fashion Advertising,” Journal of Consumer Research 37 
(October 2010): 368–392; Ronald E. Goldsmith, Leisa R. Flynn, and 
Ronald A. Clark, “Materialistic, Brand Engaged, and Status Consuming 
Consumers and Clothing Behaviors,” Journal of Fashion Marketing and 
Management 16, no. 1 (2012): 102–120.
 50. Jeremy W. Peters, “Gave Up Sleep and Maybe a First-Born, But at Least I 
Have an iPhone,” New York Times Online (June 30, 2007), http://www.ny 
times.com/2007/06/30/technology/30phone.html?scp=1&sq=Gave%20
up%20Sleep%20and%20Maybe%20a%20First-Born,%20but%20at%20
Least%20I%20Have%20an%20iPhone&st=Search, accessed August 24, 2011.
Theories of Personality, 2nd ed. (New York: Wiley, 1970); James U. McNeal 
and Stephen W. McDaniel, “An Analysis of Need-Appeals in Television 
Advertising,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 12 (Spring 1984): 
176–190.
 13. Michael R. Solomon, Judith L. Zaichkowsky, and Rosemary Polegato, 
Consumer Behaviour: Buying, Having, and Being—Canadian Edition 
(Scarborough, Ontario: Prentice Hall Canada, 1999).
 14. See David C. McClelland, Studies in Motivation (New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1955).
 15. Mary Kay Ericksen and M. Joseph Sirgy, “Achievement Motivation and 
Clothing Preferences of White-Collar Working Women,” in Michael R. 
Solomon, ed., The Psychology of Fashion (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 
1985): 357–369.
 16. See Stanley Schachter, The Psychology of Affiliation (Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 1959).
 17. Eugene M. Fodor and Terry Smith, “The Power Motive as an Influence 
on Group Decision Making,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 42 
(1982): 178–185.
 18. C. R. Snyder and Howard L. Fromkin, Uniqueness: The Human Pursuit of 
Difference (New York: Plenum, 1980).
 19. Abraham H. Maslow, Motivation and Personality, 2nd ed. (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1970).
 20. An integrative view of consumer goal structures and goal-determination 
processes proposes six discrete levels of goals wherein higher-level (versus 
lower-level) goals are more abstract, more inclusive, and less mutable. 
In descending order of abstraction, these goal levels are life themes and 
values, life projects, current concerns, consumption intentions, benefits 
sought, and feature preferences. See Cynthia Huffman, S. Ratneshwar, 
and David Glen Mick, “Consumer Goal Structures and Goal-Determination 
Processes: An Integrative Framework,” in S. Ratneshwar, David Glen Mick, 
and Cynthia Huffman, eds., The Why of Consumption (London: Routledge, 
2000): 9–35.
 21. Paul Henry, “Magnetic Points for Lifestyle Shaping: The Contribution of 
Self-Fulfillment, Aspirations and Capabilities,” Qualitative Market Research 
9, no. 2 (2006): 170.
 22. Study conducted in the Horticulture Department at Kansas State 
University, cited in “Survey Tells Why Gardening’s Good,” Vancouver 
Sun (April 12, 1997): B12; see also Paul Hewer and Douglas Brownlie, 
“Constructing ‘Hortiporn’: On the Aesthetics of Stylized Exteriors,” 
Advances in Consumer Research 33, no. 1 (2006): 36-42.
 23. http://www.zumba.com/en-US, accessed March 3, 2015; Quoted in 
Alexandra Bruell, “How Zumba Built a Brand with a Cult Following in Just 
a Few Years,” Ad Age/CMO Strategy (August 20, 2012), http://adage.com/
article/cmo-interviews/zumba-built-a-cult-a-years/236737/, accessed Jan-
uary 11, 2013.
 24. Fabrizio Di Muro and Kyle B. Murray, “An Arousal Regulation 
Explanation of Mood Effects on Consumer Choice,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 39, no. 3 (October 2012): 574–584, http://www.jstor.org/-
stable/10.1086/664040; Cassie Mogilner, Jennifer Aaker, and Sepandar 
D. Kamvar, “How Happiness Affects Choice,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 39, no. 2 (August 2012): 429–443, http://www.jstor.org/
stable/10.1086/663774; For a study that looks at cross-cultural differ-
ences in expression of emotion, cf. Ana Valenzuela, Barbara Mellers, and 
Judi Strebel, “Pleasurable Surprises: A Cross-Cultural Study of Consumer 
Responses to Unexpected Incentives,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 
5 (2010): 792–805; cf. also Samuel K. Bonsu, Aron Darmody, and Marie-
Agnès Parmentier, “Arrested Emotions in Reality Television,” Consumption 
Markets & Culture 13, no. 1 (2010): 91–107. Parts of this section were 
adapted from Michael R. Solomon, Rebekah Russell-Bennett, and Josephine 
Previte, Consumer Behaviour: Buying, Having, Being, 3rd ed. (Frenchs Forest, 
NSW: Pearson Australia, 2012).
 25. Portions of this section are adapted from Michael R. Solomon, Katherine 
White and Darren W. Dahl, Consumer Behaviour: Buying, Having, Being,  
6th Canadian Edition, (Toronto: Pearson, 2014).
 26. Steve McClellan, “Unilever, Coca-Cola Utilize Facial Analysis To Enhance 
Ad Tests Mediapost (January 18, 2013), http://www.mediapost.com/ 
publications/article/191418/unilever-coca-cola-utilize-facial-analysis-
to-enh.html?edition=55665#axzz2IcmSJS00, accessed February 22, 
2015.
 27. Rae Ann Fera, “The Rise Of Sadvertising: Why Brands Are Determined To 
Make You Cry,” Fast Company, http://www.fastcocreate.com/3029767/
the-rise-of-sadvertising-why-brands-are-determined-to-make-you-
cry?partner=newsletter#!, accessed January 29, 2015.
 28. Hannah H. Chang and Michel Tuan Pham, “Affect as a Decision-Making 
System of the Present,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (2013): 42–63.
 29. Michel Tuan Pham, Leonard Lee, and Andrew T. Stephen, “Feeling the 
Future: The Emotional Oracle Effect,” Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 
3 (October 2012): 461–477.

 
chAPTer 5   Motivation and Affect 
199 
 68. Vindu Goel, “Study of TV Viewers Backs Twitter’s Claims to Be Barometer 
of Public Mood,” New York Times (March 8, 2015), http://bits.blogs 
.nytimes.com/2015/03/08/twitter-chatter-reveals-what-we-like-to-
watch/?smid=nytcore-iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-iphone, accessed 
March 10, 2015.
 69. Kevin J. Clancy, “CPMs Must Bow to ‘Involvement’ Measurement,” 
Advertising Age (January 20, 1992): 26.
 70. Brent McFerran, Darren W. Dahl, Gerald J. Gorn, and Heather Honea, 
“Motivational Determinants of Transportation into Marketing Narratives,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 20, no. 3 (2010): 306–316.
 71. David W. Stewart and David H. Furse, “Analysis of the Impact of 
Executional Factors in Advertising Performance,” Journal of Advertising 
Research 24 (1984): 23–26; Deborah J. MacInnis, Christine Moorman, and 
Bernard J. Jaworski, “Enhancing and Measuring Consumers’ Motivation, 
Opportunity, and Ability to Process Brand Information from Ads,” Journal 
of Marketing 55 (October 1991): 332–353.
 72. Elaine Sciolino, “Disproving Notions, Raising a Fury,” New York Times 
(January 21, 2003), www.nytimes.com, accessed January 21, 2003.
 73. Louise Story, “Times Sq. Ads Spread via Tourists’ Cameras,” New York Times 
(December 11, 2006), www.nytimes.com, accessed December 11, 2006.
 74. “Read My Chips? Pringles Has Plans to Print Jokes, Trivia on Its Potatoes,” 
Wall Street Journal (May 20, 2004): C13; David Serchuk, “A Rose with 
Another Name,” Forbes (December 27, 2004): 52.
 75. “Ads That Stay with You,” Newsweek (November 19, 2007), www.news 
week.com/Id/68904, accessed November 19, 2007.
 76. R. S. Elder and A. Krishna, “The ‘Visual Depiction Effect’ in Advertising: 
Facilitating Embodied Mental Simulation Through Product Orientation,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 6 (April 2012): 988–1003.
 77. Stephanie Clifford, “Axe Body Products Puts Its Brand on the Hamptons Club 
Scene,” New York Times (May 22, 2009): B6; Alana Semuels, “Honda Finds 
a Groovy New Way to Pitch Products: The Musical Road,” Los Angeles Times 
(October 13, 2008), www.latimes.com/Business/La-Fi-Roads13-2008 
oct13,0,4147014.Story, accessed October 13, 2008; Eric Pfanner, “A 
Live Promotion, At 14,000 Feet,” New York Times (June 6, 2008), www 
.nytimes.com, accessed June 6, 2008; Les Luchter, “Jameson Whiskey 
Texts Targets on N.Y. Streets,” Marketing Daily (August 8, 2008), www 
.mediapost.com, accessed August 8, 2008; Doreen Carvajal, “Dancers in 
the Crowd Bring Back ‘Thriller,’ ” New York Times (March 10, 2008), www 
.nytimes.com, accessed March 10, 2008; Eric Pfanner, “When Consumers 
Help, Ads Are Free,” New York Times (June 21, 2009), www.nytimes.com, 
accessed June 22, 2009.
 78. “This Is How the NFL Is Getting Butts Back in the Bleachers,” Adweek 
(August 26, 2014), http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/
how-nfl-getting-butts-back-bleachers-159687, accessed March 3, 2015; 
Quoted in Larry P. Vellequette, “Chrysler’s Butts-In-Seats Marketing Gets 
a Boost, Automotive News (December 2, 2013), http://www.autonews 
.com/article/20131202/RETAIL03/312029970/chryslers-butts-in-
seats-marketing-gets-a-boost, accessed March 18, 2015.
 79. David Segal, “Behind League of Legends, E-Sports’s Main Attraction,” New 
York Times (October 10, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/12/
technology/riot-games-league-of-legends-main-attraction-esports.
html?smid=nytcore-ipad-share&smprod=nytcore-ipad&_r=0, accessed Feb-
ruary 19, 2015.
 80. Lisa Belkin, “Living to Be a Parent,” New York Times (September 10, 2010), 
http://www.NewYorkTimes.com/2010/09/12/magazine/12fob-wwln-t 
.html?_r=1&ref=magazine, accessed April 10, 2011.
 81. Adapted in part from Jack Loechner, “Emotional Business Bonding on 
Social Networks,” Research Brief, Center for Media Research (December 
27, 2007), http://blogs.mediapost.com/research_brief/?p=1603, accessed 
December 27, 2007.
 82. Nadine Scholz, “The Relevance of Crowdfunding: The Impact on the 
Innovation Process of Small Entrepreneurial Firms,” Springer, 2015.
 83. Jeffrey Zaslow, “Happiness Inc.,” Wall Street Journal (March 18, 2006): P1.
 51. Ronald W. Pimentel and Kristy E. Reynolds, “A Model for Consumer 
Devotion: Affective Commitment with Proactive Sustaining Behaviors,” 
Academy of Marketing Science Review no. 5 (2004), www.amsreview.org/
articles/pimentel05-2004.pdf, accessed March 17, 2015.
 52. Tanya Irwin, “‘Breakout Brands’ Connect With Customers,” Marketing Daily 
(November 4, 2012), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/-article/ 
186468/breakout-brands-connect-with-customers.html?edition=53137
#ixzz2HcbTBfx7, accessed January 10, 2013.
 53. Ronald Smit, “Advance to Go: Winning with Gamification, Wired (June 19, 2013), 
http://www.wired.com/2013/06/advance-to-go-winning-with-gamifi 
cation/, accessed February 21, 2015.
 54. Natalie Kitroeff, “Syracuse University Turns to Harry Potter to Motivate 
Business Students,” Bloomburg Business (September 12, 2014) http://www 
.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2014-09-12/syracuse-university-uses-a-
harry-potter-game-to-motivate-b-schoolers, accessed February 21, 2015.
 55. www.starbuckseverywhere.net, accessed March 3, 2015; Julie Jargon, “A 
Fan Hits a Roadblock on Drive to See Every Starbucks,” Wall Street Journal 
(May 23, 2009), http://online.wsj.com/article/SB124301100481847767.
html, accessed May 25, 2009.
 56. Judith Lynne Zaichkowsky, “The Emotional Side of Product Involvement,” 
in Paul Anderson and Melanie Wallendorf, eds., Advances in Consumer 
Research 14 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research): 32–35.
 57. For a discussion of interrelationships between situational and enduring in-
volvement, see Marsha L. Richins, Peter H. Bloch, and Edward F. McQuarrie, 
“How Enduring and Situational Involvement Combine to Create Involvement 
Responses,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 1, no. 2 (1992): 143–153. 
For more information on the involvement construct, see “Special Issue on 
Involvement,” Psychology & Marketing 10, no. 4 (July–August 1993).
 58. Alba and Hutchinson, “Dimensions of Consumer Expertise”; Bettman and 
Park, “Effects of Prior Knowledge and Experience and Phase of the Choice 
Process on Consumer Decision Processes”; Merrie Brucks, “The Effects 
of Product Class Knowledge on Information Search Behavior,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 12 (June 1985): 1–16; Joel E. Urbany, Peter R. Dickson, 
and William L. Wilkie, “Buyer Uncertainty and Information Search,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 16 (September 1989): 208–215.
 59. Joseph B. Pine, II, and James H. Gilmore, Markets of One: Creating Customer-
Unique Value through Mass Customization (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 2000), www.managingchange.com/masscust/overview.htm, ac-
cessed May 30, 2005.
 60. Neeraj Arora, Xavier Drèze, Anindya Ghose, James D. Hess, Raghuram 
Iyengar, Bing Jing, Yogesh Joshi, V. Kumar, Nicholas Lurie, Scott Neslin, S. 
Sajeesh, Meng Su, Niladri Syam, Jacquelyn Thomas, and Z. John Zhang, 
“Putting One-to-One Marketing to Work: Personalization, Customization, 
and Choice,” Marketing Letters (2008): 305–321; Mike Beirne, “Mars Gives 
M&M’s a Face,” Brandweek (May 22, 2008), www.brandweek.com/bw/news/
recent_display.jsp?vnu_content_Id=1003807134, accessed May 22, 2008.
 61. Michael I. Norton, Daniel Mochon, and Dan Ariely, “The IKEA Effect: 
When Labor Leads to Love,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 22, no. 3 
(2012): 453–460.
 62. Jacob Jacoby and Robert Chestnut, Brand Loyalty: Measurement and 
Management (New York: Wiley, 1978).
 63. David F. Midgley, “Patterns of Interpersonal Information Seeking for 
the Purchase of a Symbolic Product,” Journal of Marketing Research 20 
(February 1983): 74–83.
 64. Cyndee Miller, “Scotland to U.S.: ‘This Tennent’s for You,’ ” Marketing News 
(August 29, 1994): 26.
 65. Rebecca K. Ratner, Barbara E. Kahn, and Daniel Kahneman, “Choosing 
Less-Preferred Experiences for the Sake of Variety,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 26 (June 1999): 1–15.
 66. Tim Nudd, “Coldplay Hides Lyrics From New Album Inside Libraries in 9 
Countries: Look for the Ghost Stories,” Adweek (May 1, 2014), http://www 
.adweek.com/adfreak/coldplay-hides-lyrics-new-album-inside-libraries-
9-countries-157410, accessed February 22, 2015.
 67. Herbert E. Krugman, “The Impact of Television Advertising: Learning 
Without Involvement,” Public Opinion Quarterly 29 (Fall 1965): 349–356.

200
L
isa is trying to concentrate on the report her client 
expects by five o’clock. She has worked hard to 
maintain this important account for the firm, but 
today she is distracted thinking about her date with Eric last 
night. Although things seemed to go OK, she couldn’t shake 
the feeling that Eric regards her more as a friend than as a 
potential romantic partner. As she leafs through Glamour and 
Cosmopolitan during her lunch hour, Lisa is struck by all the 
articles that offer tips on how to become more attractive by 
dieting, exercising, and wearing sexy clothes. She begins to 
feel depressed as she looks at the svelte models in the many 
advertisements for perfumes, apparel, and makeup. Each 
woman is more glamorous and beautiful than the last. Surely 
they’ve had “adjustments”; women simply don’t look that way 
in real life. Then again, it’s unlikely that Eric could ever be mis-
taken for Brad Pitt on the street. Still, in her down mood, Lisa 
actually thinks that maybe she should look into cosmetic surgery. Even though she’s never considered 
herself unattractive, maybe if she got a new nose or removed that mole on her cheek she’d feel better 
about herself. Who knows, she might look so good she’ll get up the nerve to submit a photo to that 
Web site Tinder that everyone’s talking about. But on second thought, is Eric even worth it?
The Self
Are you what you buy? Lisa isn’t the only person who feels that 
her physical appearance and possessions affect her “value” as a 
person. We choose many products, from cars to cologne, because 
 Chapter 6 ● The Self: Mind, Gender, 
and Body
 6-1 The self-concept strongly influences consumer behavior.
 6-2 Products often define a person’s self-concept.
 6-3 Gender identity is an important component of a con-
sumer’s self-concept.
 6-4 The way we think about our bodies (and the way our 
culture tells us we should think) is a key component of 
self-esteem.
 6-5 Every culture dictates certain types of body decoration or 
mutilation.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
ObjecTive 6-1 
The self-concept strongly 
influences consumer 
behavior.
Source: gpointstudio/Shutterstock.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
201 
we want to highlight or hide some aspect of the self. In this chapter, we’ll focus on how 
consumers’ feelings about themselves shape their consumption practices, particularly as 
they strive to fulfill their society’s expectations about how a male or female should look 
and act.
Does the Self exist?
Most of us can’t boast of coming close to Katy Perry’s 66 million followers on Twitter, but 
many of us do have hundreds of followers, in addition to legions of Facebook friends.1 
The explosion of these and other social networking services enables everyone to focus on 
himself or herself and share mundane or scintillating details about life with anyone who’s 
interested (why they are interested is another story!).
An emphasis on the unique nature of the self is much greater in Western societies.3 
Many Eastern cultures stress the importance of a collective self, where a person derives 
his or her identity in large measure from a social group. Both Eastern and Western cultures 
believe that the self divides into an inner, private self and an outer, public self. Where cul-
tures differ is in terms of which part they see as the “real you”; the West tends to subscribe 
to an independent understanding of the self, which emphasizes the inherent separateness 
of each individual.
Non-Western cultures, in contrast, tend to focus on an interdependent self where we 
define our identities largely by our relationships with others.4 For example, a Confucian 
perspective stresses the importance of “face”: others’ perceptions of the self and maintain-
ing one’s desired status in their eyes. One dimension of face is mien-tzu, the reputation 
one achieves through success and ostentation. Some Asian cultures developed explicit 
rules about the specific garments and even colors that certain social classes and occupa-
tions were allowed to display. These traditions live on today in Japanese style manuals that 
set out detailed instructions for dressing and how to address people of differing status.5 
That orientation is a bit at odds with such Western conventions as “casual Friday,” which 
encourages employees to express their unique selves through dress (at least short of mus-
cle shirts and flip-flops).
Self-concept
The self-concept summarizes the beliefs a person holds about his or her own attributes 
and how he or she evaluates the self on these qualities. Although your overall self-concept 
may be positive, there certainly are parts of it you evaluate more positively than others. 
For example, Lisa feels better about her professional identity than she does about her femi-
nine identity.
The self-concept is a complex structure. We describe attributes of self-concept along 
such dimensions as content (e.g., facial attractiveness versus mental aptitude), positivity 
(i.e., self-esteem), intensity and stability over time, and accuracy (i.e., the degree to which 
one’s self-assessment corresponds to reality).6 As we’ll see later in this chapter, consum-
ers’ self-assessments can be quite distorted, especially with regard to their physical appear-
ance. In addition, our own estimates of how much we change over time vary as well: A 
recent study that included both young and old people asked more than 19,000 respon-
dents about their preferences in the past (foods, vacations, hobbies, and bands) and also to 
predict how their tastes will change in the future. Regardless of age, people acknowledged 
that their prior choices had changed quite a bit over time, but they still tended to predict 
that they would not change as they got older.7
A person’s self-concept is a work in progress. Some parts are fairly stable, but each of 
us modifies some elements of it as we make our way through life—and particularly as we 
discover new ideas, social groups we admire, and yes, images we receive from the culture 
around us that endorse certain types of people over others. Each element that contributes 
to our self-concept is an identity. One way to define identity is “any category label with 
which a consumer self-associates that is amenable to a clear picture of what a person in 
that category looks like, thinks, feels and does.” Some of these identities are pretty stable 
Today it seems natural to 
think of ourselves as potential 
celebs waiting for our 15 min-
utes of fame (as the pop icon 
Andy Warhol once predicted). 
The Internet supplies microfame for many 
people like the blogger Perez Hilton and the 
buxom singer Tila Tequila. Indeed some ana-
lysts propose that microfame has morphed into 
nanofame as the glare of the internet spotlight 
shines brighter and increasingly faster—you 
may (or may not!) remember the temporarily 
famous “Alex from Target” (a cashier turned 
overnight heartthrob on Twitter) or “Left Shark” 
who was an awkward backup dancer during 
Katy Perry’s 2015 Super Bowl performance. 
One easy avenue to nanofame: The Vine plat-
form that lets users share 6-second videos. It 
boasts more than 200 people who have more 
than a million followers each.2
Net profit

202 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
(e.g., mother, African American), whereas other identities are more temporary and likely 
to change (e.g., Libertarian, college student, Prius driver).8
As we’ll see in Chapter 7, marketers try hard to understand which consumers adopt 
certain identities and then develop products and messages that meet the needs of people 
who link themselves to a given identity. So for example a person who sees herself as envi-
ronmentally responsible is more likely than someone who doesn’t think much about 
that to drive a Prius hybrid vehicle. “Green” products are more likely to get that person’s 
attention.
Self-esteem
Self-esteem refers to the positivity of a person’s self-concept. People with low self-esteem 
expect that they will not perform very well, and they will try to avoid embarrassment, 
failure, or rejection. When Sara Lee developed a new line of snack cakes, for exam-
ple, researchers found that consumers low in self-esteem preferred portion-controlled 
snack items because they felt they lacked self-control.9 In contrast, a more recent study 
found that individuals who are made to feel powerful spend more money on themselves 
(“because I’m worth it!”), whereas those who experience a feeling of powerlessness spend 
more on others than on themselves.10
How do marketers influence self-esteem? Exposure to ads such as the ones Lisa checked 
out can trigger a process of social comparison, in which the person tries to evaluate her 
appearance by comparing it to the people depicted in these artificial images.11 This is a 
basic human tendency, and many marketers tap into our need for benchmarks when they 
supply idealized images of happy, attractive people who just happen to use their products. 
An ad campaign for Clearasil is a good example. In one typical ad, two teenage boys enter 
a kitchen where a 40-ish mother is mixing something in a bowl. When her son leaves the 
room, his friend hits on Mom. The ad’s tagline: “Clearasil may cause confidence.”
In a study that illustrates the social comparison process, female college students who 
were exposed to beautiful women in advertisements afterward expressed lowered satisfac-
tion with their own appearance, as compared to other participants who did not view ads 
with attractive models.12 Another study reported that young women alter their percep-
tions of their own body shapes and sizes after they watch as little as 30 minutes of TV 
programming.13 Researchers report similar findings for men.14 This process even operates 
when we decide how much to eat: A study found that people who were served food by a 
server who was either fat or thin chose different portion sizes.15
real and ideal Selves
When a consumer compares some aspect of himself or herself to an ideal, this judgment 
influences self-esteem. He or she might ask, “Am I as good-looking as I would like to be?” 
or “Do I make as much money as I should?” The ideal self is a person’s conception of how 
he or she would like to be, whereas the actual self refers to our more realistic appraisal of 
the qualities we do and don’t have. We choose some products because we think they are 
consistent with our actual self, whereas we buy others to help us reach an ideal standard. 
We also often engage in a process of impression management in which we work hard 
to “manage” what others think of us; we strategically choose clothing and other products 
that will show us off to others in a good light.16
Impression management applies to all sorts of behaviors, from professional contexts 
and dating to markers of religious observance. For example, an increasing number of 
Islamic men in Egypt have a zebibah (Arabic for “raisin”)—a dark circle of callused skin 
or a bump—between the hairline and the eyebrows. It marks the spot where the worship-
per repeatedly presses his forehead into the ground during his daily prayers (observant 
Muslims pray five times a day). Some add prayers so that the bump will become even more 
pronounced; the owner of the mark thus broadcasts his degree of piousness on his head. 
As an Egyptian newspaper editor explains, “there is a kind of statement in it. Sometimes 
as a personal statement to announce that he is a conservative Muslim and sometimes as 
a way of outbidding others by showing them that he is more religious or to say that they 
should be like him.”17
Marketing pitfall
A word to the wise: Cor-
porate recruiters often 
complain about students 
who show up for job inter-
views in sloppy or reveal-
ing clothing; these applicants failed to “read 
the memo” about which role they’re expected 
to play in professional settings! Opportunities 
for impression management abound, and this 
includes how you act at business dinners or 
networking events. Indeed researchers found 
evidence of an imbibing idiot bias: Even 
when they are not actually impaired, people 
who simply hold an alcoholic beverage are 
perceived to be less intelligent than those 
who do not. Job candidates who ordered wine 
during an interview held over dinner were 
viewed as less intelligent and less hireable 
than candidates who ordered soda. Ironically, 
the job candidates themselves believed that 
ordering wine rather than soda helped them 
to appear more intelligent!18

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
203 
Fantasy: bridging the Gap between the Selves
Most people experience a discrepancy between their real and ideal selves, but for some con-
sumers this gap is especially large. These people are especially good targets for marketing 
communications that employ fantasy appeals.19 A fantasy or daydream is a self-induced 
shift in consciousness, which is sometimes a way to compensate for a lack of external 
stimulation or to escape from problems in the real world.20 Many products and services 
succeed because they appeal to our fantasies. An ad may transport us to an unfamiliar, 
exciting situation; things we purchase may permit us to “try on” interesting or provocative 
roles. And, with today’s technology, such as the virtual makeovers that several Web sites 
offer, consumers can experiment with different looks before they actually take the plunge 
in the real world. Vogue’s “Makeup Simulation” application (now available in Japan) 
allows women to see how brands such as Clinique would look on their (simulated) faces. 
Johnson & Johnson’s ROC Skincare offers its “Skin Correxion Tool” to simulate the effects 
of anti-aging products.21
Multiple Selves
In a way, each of us really is a number of different people—for example, your mother prob-
ably would not recognize the “you” that emerges at a party at 2:00 am! We have as many 
selves as we do different social roles. Depending on the situation, we act differently, use 
different products and services, and even vary in terms of how much we like the aspect of 
ourselves we put on display. A person may require a different set of products to play each 
of her roles: She may choose a sedate, understated perfume when she plays her profes-
sional self, but splash on something more provocative on Saturday night as she transitions 
to her femme fatale self.
The dramaturgical perspective on consumer behavior views people as actors who 
play different roles. We each play many roles, and each has its own script, props, and cos-
tumes.22 The self has different components, or role identities, and only some of these are 
active at any given time. Some identities (e.g., husband, boss, student) are more central 
to the self than others, but other identities (e.g., dancer, gearhead, or advocate for the 
homeless) may dominate in specific situations.23 Indeed, some roles may conflict with one 
another. For example, one study of Iranian young people who live in the United Kingdom 
described what the authors termed the torn self, where respondents struggle with retain-
ing an authentic culture while still enjoying Western freedom (and dealing with assump-
tions of others who believe they might be terrorists).24
A message about multiple selves from Chile.
Source: Courtesy of Prolam Young & Rubicam.

204 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Strategically, this means a marketer may want to ensure that the appropriate role 
identity is active before pitching products that customers need to play a particular role. 
One obvious way to do this is to place advertising messages in contexts in which people are 
likely to be well aware of that role identity; for example, when fortified drink and energy 
bar product companies hand out free product samples to runners at a marathon.
If each person potentially has many social selves, how does each develop? How do we 
decide which self to “activate” at any point in time? The sociological tradition of symbolic 
interactionism stresses that relationships with other people play a large part to form 
the self.26 According to this perspective, we exist in a symbolic environment. We assign 
meaning to any situation or object when we interpret the symbols in this environment. As 
members of society, individuals learn to agree on shared meanings. Thus, we “know” that 
a red light means stop, the “golden arches” mean fast food, and “blondes have more fun.” 
That knowledge is important to understand consumer behavior because it implies that our 
possessions play a key role as we evaluate ourselves and decide “who we are.”27
The Looking-Glass Self
Bloomingdales and some other clothing stores are testing interactive dressing rooms: 
When you choose a garment, the mirror superimposes it on your reflection so that you can 
see how it would look on your body without having to go to the trouble of trying it on.28 
Exciting stuff, but in a way this fancy technology simply simulates the “primping” process 
many shoppers undergo when they prance in front of a mirror and try to imagine how a 
garment will look on them—and whether others will approve or not.
Sociologists call the process of imagining others’ reactions “taking the role of the 
other,” or the looking-glass self.29 According to this view, our desire to define ourselves 
operates as a sort of psychological sonar: We take readings of our own identity when we 
“bounce” signals off others and try to project their impression of us. Like the distorted mir-
rors in a funhouse, our appraisal of who we are varies depending on whose perspective we 
consider and how accurately we predict their evaluations of us. In symbolic interactionist 
terms, we negotiate these meanings over time. Essentially we continually ask ourselves the 
question: “Who am I in this situation?” Those around us greatly influence how we answer 
this query because we also ask, “Who do other people think I am?” We tend to pattern our 
behavior on the perceived expectations of others, as a form of self-fulfilling prophecy. 
When we act the way we assume others expect us to act, we often confirm these perceptions.
A confident career woman may sit morosely at a nightclub, imagining that others 
see her as a dowdy, unattractive woman with little sex appeal (regardless of whether these 
perceptions are true). A self-fulfilling prophecy like the one we described comes into play 
here because these “signals” influence the woman’s actual behavior. If she doesn’t believe 
she’s attractive, she may choose frumpy, unflattering clothing that actually does make her 
less attractive. The next morning at work, however, her self-confidence at the office may 
cause her to assume that others hold her “executive self” in even higher regard than they 
actually do (we all know people like that)!
Self-consciousness
Have you ever walked into a class in the middle of a lecture? If you were convinced that all 
eyes were on you as you awkwardly searched for a seat, you can understand the feeling of 
self-consciousness. In contrast, sometimes we behave with shockingly little self-conscious-
ness. For example, we may do things in a stadium, at a riot, or at a fraternity party that 
we would never do if we were highly conscious of our behavior (and add insult to injury 
when we post these escapades to our Facebook page!).30 Of course, certain cues in the 
environment, such as walking in front of a mirror, are likely to promote self-conscious-
ness. That feeling in turn may influence behavior. For example, one pair of researchers 
is looking at whether grocery shoppers who push a cart with an attached mirror will buy 
more produce and healthy foods because their heightened self-consciousness makes them 
more weight conscious.31
Some people seem to be more sensitive in general to the image they communicate to 
others. However, we all know people who act as if they’re oblivious to the impression they 
Marketing pitfall
The automaker Renault 
avoided a big problem 
when a French judge 
ruled that the company 
could go forward with 
its plan to release a new electric car named 
Zoe—even though the two plaintiffs in the case 
already had the name Zoe Renault. The lawyer 
who brought the unsuccessful suit argued that 
the girls would endure a lifetime of grief, as 
would the other 35,000 people in France who 
are also named Zoe. He claimed, “Can you 
imagine what little Zoes would have to endure 
on the playground, and even worse, when they 
get a little bit older and someone comes up 
to them in a bar and says, ‘Can I see your air 
bags?’ or ‘Can I shine your bumper?’”25

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
205 
make. A heightened concern about the nature of one’s public “image” also results in more 
concern about the social appropriateness of products and consumption activities.
Consumers who score high on a scale of public self-consciousness express more 
interest in clothing and use more cosmetics than others who score lower.32 In one study, 
highly self-conscious subjects expressed greater willingness to buy personal products, 
such as a douche or a gas-prevention remedy, that are somewhat embarrassing to buy but 
may avoid awkward public incidents later.33
Similarly, high self-monitors are more attuned to how they present themselves in 
their social environments, and their estimates of how others will perceive their product 
choices influence what they choose to buy.34 A scale to measure self-monitoring asks con-
sumers how much they agree with statements such as “I guess I put on a show to impress 
or entertain others” or “I would probably make a good actor.” Perhaps not surprisingly, 
publicly visible types such as college football players and fashion models tend to score 
higher on these dimensions.35
Self-consciousness on steroids—perhaps that’s what we’re experiencing in what histo-
rians looking back might call “The Era of the Selfie.” A selfie, or a picture a smartphone 
user takes of himself or herself on a smartphone (whether or not it’s attached to a “selfie 
stick”) is a common form of communication, especially for Millennials. There are more 
than 35 million of them posted on Instagram alone. Then add in the growing practice 
of posting streaming video of yourself on platforms including Periscope, Camio, and 
Meerkat, and you’ve got a major cultural phenomenon. Indeed the term meerkating, 
which describes the act of someone shooting a live video stream, has become a verb as 
thousands of people create their own running self-documentaries.
What explains the infatuation many of us seem to have with photographing our-
selves? One simple reason: Because we can. Obviously the widespread adoption of smart-
phones makes it easy to do. But there may be other reasons as well. One explanation 
hinges on the concept of the empty self. This perspective points to the decline of shared 
points of reference over the last 50 years as we witnessed a decline in family, community, 
and traditions. As a result, people have shifted inward and a focus on the self is an uncon-
scious way to compensate for what we have lost. Indeed when we look at young people 
(more on this in Chapter 13), we do observe a decline in marriage rates and a low amount 
of trust people place in government, corporations, and organized religion. The increasing 
focus on self-reliance in turn creates a culture of narcissism, where we are obsessed with 
what we do and feel the need to constantly record it (updating our relationship status on 
Facebook, posting selfies and photos of our meals on Instagram, etc.).36
Perhaps that’s an overly bleak assessment, but it does help to explain why the average 
Millennial checks his or her smartphone 43 times per day, and why 83 percent of Millennials 
report that they sleep with their smartphones every night.37 Here’s the irony: Research shows 
that although people believe taking pictures during an event enhances their enjoyment, the 
opposite is true. There is a tendency to become preoccupied with documenting the moment—
the more pictures people take, the less they say they enjoy the actual experience.38
are We What We buy?
Way back in 1890, the famous psychologist William James wrote, “A man’s self is the sum 
total of all that he can call his.” And that was before iPhones, Diesel jeans, and Igloo dorm-
size refrigerators! Self-image congruence models suggest that we choose products 
when their attributes match some aspect of the self.42 And, when we choose a product 
that we think is aesthetically pleasing this choice makes us feel better about ourselves. 43 
Indeed recent research that included brain wave measures such as functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) showed that when a person has a close relationship with a 
brand this activates the insula, a brain area responsible for urging, addiction, loss aver-
sion, and interpersonal love.44
These emotional connections even make people defensive of their favorite brands if 
they see negative information about them. A comment by a respondent (a 32-year-old 
male) in one study nicely illustrates this bond: “My BMW is my wingman, my twin. I 
Job applicants who post 
outrageous selfies (that 
must have been a pretty 
wild party …) may come 
to regret their actions 
as potential employers start to check out 
their pages before they look at the would-be 
candidates’ résumés. Some even turn to ser-
vices such as Reputation.com that scour the 
Internet to remove embarrassing postings 
before the boss (or Mom) sees them.39 Cell 
phones have spawned yet another way for 
teens to share intimate details about them-
selves online. The phenomenon of sexting, in 
which kids post nude or seminude photos of 
themselves online, is growing. In one recent 
survey of a sample of college students, more 
than half of respondents admitted to sexting 
as minors, and most were unaware that these 
acts have potential legal consequences.40 
Your online photos may be a lot more public 
than you think, and marketers find ways to use 
them, too. Digital marketing companies scan 
photo-sharing sites such as Instagram, Flickr, 
and Pinterest when they work for major adver-
tisers. They use scanning software that identi-
fies whether a person is holding a brand with 
a logo (like a Coke can) and what the person 
is doing in the picture. This information is use-
ful to send targeted messages to consumers 
and to provide feedback to clients about how 
people use their brands. For example, Kraft 
Foods pays a company to find out what people 
drink when they eat macaroni and cheese.41
  The Tangled Web

206 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
would never diss it for another car because that would be like dissing my twin brother or 
worse, dissing myself.”45 This guy’s fondness for his vehicle is hardly unique; more than 
a third of Americans have nicknames for their cars. That bond explains the wording of a 
recent TV commercial for SafeAuto insurance as a Mom drives her kids around in a well-
used minivan: “For years you and this supercharged piece of eye candy have done much 
more than make car payments, buy gas and change the oil. You’ve lived, really lived, and 
you’re most certainly not done …”46
Congruence models assume a process of cognitive matching between product attri-
butes and the consumer’s self-image.47 Over time we tend to form relationships with prod-
ucts that resemble the bonds we create with other people: These include love, unrequited 
love (we yearn for it but can’t have it), respect, and perhaps even fear or hate (“why is my 
computer out to get me?”).48 Researchers even report that after a “breakup” with a brand, 
people tend to develop strong negative feelings and will go to great lengths to discredit it, 
including bad-mouthing and even vandalism.49
Research largely supports the idea of congruence between product usage and self-
image. One of the earliest studies to examine this process found that car owners’ ratings of 
themselves tended to match their perceptions of their cars: Pontiac drivers saw themselves 
as more active and flashy than did Volkswagen drivers.50 Indeed, a German study found 
that observers were able to match photos of male and female drivers to pictures of the cars 
they drove almost 70 percent of the time.51 Researchers also report congruity between 
consumers and their most preferred brands of beer, soap, toothpaste, and cigarettes relative 
to their least preferred brands, as well as between consumers’ self-images and their favorite 
stores.52 Some specific attributes useful to describe matches between consumers and prod-
ucts include rugged/delicate, excitable/calm, rational/emotional, and formal/informal.53
Although these findings make some intuitive sense, we cannot blithely assume that 
consumers will always buy products whose characteristics match their own. It is not clear 
that consumers really see aspects of themselves in down-to-earth, functional products 
that don’t have complex or humanlike images. It is one thing to consider a brand person-
ality for an expressive, image-oriented product, such as perfume, and quite another to 
impute human characteristics to a toaster.
Another problem is the old “chicken-and-egg” question: Do people buy products 
because they see these as similar to themselves, or do people assume that these products 
must be similar to themselves because they bought them? The similarity between a per-
son’s self-image and the images of products purchased does tend to increase over the time 
the product is owned, so we can’t rule out this explanation.
Remember that the reflected self helps shape self-concept, which implies that people 
see themselves as they imagine others see them. Because what others see includes a per-
son’s clothing, jewelry, furniture, car, and so on, it stands to reason that these products 
also help to create the perceived self. A consumer’s possessions place him or her into a 
social role, which helps to answer the question, “Who am I now?”
People use an individual’s consumption behaviors to identify that person’s social iden-
tity. In addition to checking out a person’s clothes and grooming habits, we make inferences 
about personality based on his or her choice of leisure activities (e.g., squash versus bowling), 
food preferences (e.g., tofu and beans versus steak and potatoes), cars, and home decorating 
choices. When researchers show people pictures of someone’s living room, for example, 
study participants make surprisingly accurate guesses about the occupant’s personality.54 
In the same way that a consumer’s use of products influences others’ perceptions, the same 
products can help to determine his or her own self-concept and social identity.55
We are attached to an object to the extent we rely on it to maintain our self-concept.59 
Objects act as a security blanket when they reinforce our identities, especially in unfamil-
iar situations. For example, students who decorate their dorm rooms with personal items 
are less likely to drop out of college. This coping process may protect the self from being 
diluted in a strange environment.60 When a pair of researchers asked children of various 
ages to create “who am I?” collages, for which they chose pictures that represented their 
selves, older kids between middle childhood and early adolescence inserted more photos of 
branded merchandise. Also, as they aged, their feelings about these objects evolved from 
identity marketing is a pro-
motional strategy whereby 
consumers 
alter 
some 
aspects of their selves to 
advertise for a branded 
product. Air New Zealand created “cranial 
billboards” in exchange for a round-trip ticket 
to New Zealand—30 Los Angeles participants 
shaved their heads and walked around with 
an ad for the airline on their skulls.56 Tempo-
rary tattoos of brand logos are common these 
days. Indeed this idea is hardly new; bubble 
gum companies in the 19th century distrib-
uted crudely made versions of the tattoos, 
and then in 1890, Cracker Jack used them as 
one of their “prize in every box” promotions.57 
More recently, Reebok set up a pop-up tattoo 
shop at an event in Sweden and gave away 
thousands of dollars in prizes to the fan who 
got the biggest version of the brands’ new tri-
angle logo (not a temporary one). The lucky 
winner’s right thigh is, shall we say, Reebok’s 
for life.58
Marketing Opportunity

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
207 
concrete relationships (e.g., “I own it”) to more sophisticated, abstract relationships (e.g., 
“It is like me”).61
Our use of consumption information to define the self is especially important when we 
have yet to completely form a social identity, such as when we have to play a new role in life. 
Think, for example, of the insecurity many of us felt when we first started college or reen-
tered the dating market after leaving a long-term relationship. Symbolic self-completion 
theory suggests that people who have an incomplete self-definition tend to complete this 
identity when they acquire and display symbols they associate with that role.62
Adolescent boys, for example, may use “macho” products such as cars and cigarettes 
to bolster developing masculinity; these items act as a “social crutch” during a period of 
uncertainty about their new identity as adult males. As we mature into a role, we actually 
to offset the psychological state of 
feeling powerless.
However, the fact consumers engage 
in compensatory consumption does 
not mean consumption is always an 
antidote for a psychological threat. 
In work with Monika Lisjak, Andrea 
Bonezzi, and Soo Kim, we demonstrated 
that compensatory consumption 
can worsen psychological threat. For 
example, in one experiment we first 
threatened participants’ perceptions 
of their intelligence and then we gave 
them the opportunity to either select a 
product that signaled intelligence or a 
product that signaled sociability. Finally, 
we measured participants’ tendency 
to ruminate on (i.e., repeatedly think 
about) the threatening experience. We 
found that participants who chose a 
product that signaled success in the 
domain of threat, which in theory can 
offset the threat, heightened rumination 
about the threat. Furthermore, 
additional experiments suggest that, 
as a consequence of rumination, 
participants perform poorer on tasks 
that involved subsequent attention, 
such as completing math problems.
My current work continues to try to 
understand how consumers protect 
their sense of self in the face of 
psychological threat. I hope to answer 
the question of when consumption is a 
sound salve for threat versus a hollow 
substitute as a means to understand 
the powerful and transformative 
effects of brands and products.
cb aS i See iT
Derek D. Rucker, Northwestern University
psychological threat—when one feels 
unsuccessful in an important domain 
of the self-concept— shapes the type 
of products one desires. Specifically, 
the notion that people might cope with 
threat through consumption is termed, 
compensatory consumption.
In my first foray into compensatory 
consumption, I demonstrated that 
psychological threats in the form 
of feeling powerless could affect 
consumption. Feeling powerless 
represents a psychological threat 
in that people often desire power 
(i.e., control over precious resources 
in relation to others). My colleague 
Adam Galinsky and I proposed that, 
as power is intimately associated 
with status, when consumers feel 
powerless they might exhibit a shift 
in preferences towards objects 
associated with status. To test this 
idea, we instructed undergraduate 
students to write about a time they felt 
powerless or powerful. Subsequently, 
participants indicated their reservation 
price for a framed portrait of their 
university that was either described 
as scarce (high-status) or as common 
(low-status). Participants who had 
written about a past experience of 
feeling powerless were willing to 
pay more for the framed portrait of 
their university, but only when that 
framed portrait was represented as 
scarce (i.e., high status). Essentially, 
consumers, seemingly unbeknownst 
to themselves, sought consumption 
What meaning do you attach to 
products and brands? If you are 
like many consumers, products and 
brands have psychological utility in 
addition, and perhaps in some cases 
exceeding, their functional value. 
A Louis Vuitton handbag is not just 
a container for holding personal 
objects; a Ferrari is not simply a 
vehicle to get a consumer from point 
A to point B; and a sweatshirt of 
one’s undergraduate alma mater is 
not merely a piece of clothing to stay 
warm. Rather, each of these objects 
has the potential to signal one’s 
identity to both the self and others. 
Of particular interest to me is how 

208 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
rely less on the products people associate with it: When kids start to skateboard, they often 
invest in pro skateboard “decks” with graphics and branding that cost between $40 and 
$70 even without the “trucks” (wheels and axles). But—to the chagrin of the skateboard 
industry—as they get more serious about boarding, many think it’s just fine to buy blank 
decks, the plain wood boards that cost only $15 to $30.63
The contribution of possessions to self-identity is perhaps most apparent when we 
lose these treasured objects. One of the first acts of institutions that want to repress indi-
viduality and encourage group identity, such as prisons or the military, is to confiscate 
personal possessions.64 Victims of burglaries and natural disasters commonly report feel-
ings of alienation, depression, or of being “violated.” One consumer’s comment after she 
was robbed is typical: “It’s the next worse thing to being bereaved; it’s like being raped.”65 
Burglary victims exhibit a diminished sense of community, lowered feelings of privacy, 
and less pride in their houses’ appearance than do their neighbors.66
A study of postdisaster conditions, where consumers may have lost literally every-
thing but the clothes on their backs following a fire, hurricane, flood, or earthquake, high-
lights the dramatic impact of product loss. Some people are reluctant to undergo the pro-
cess of re-creating their identities by acquiring new possessions. Interviews with disaster 
victims reveal that some hesitate to invest the self in new possessions and so become more 
detached about what they buy. This comment from a woman in her 50s is representative 
of this attitude: “I had so much love tied up in my things. I can’t go through that kind of 
loss again. What I’m buying now won’t be as important to me.”67
The extended Self
As we noted previously, many of the props and settings consum-
ers use to define their social roles become parts of their selves. 
Those external objects that we consider a part of us constitute 
the extended self. In some cultures, people literally incorporate 
objects into the self: they lick new possessions, take the names of conquered enemies (or in 
some cases eat them), or bury the dead with their possessions.68
Consumers continue to discover new ways to integrate man-made products into 
our physical bodies. The use of foreign materials to replace or supplement human body 
A spouse often becomes part of a person’s 
extended self—for better or worse.
Source: Courtesy of Clemenger BBDO.
ObjecTive 6-2 
Products often define a 
person’s self-concept.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
209 
parts is not necessarily new (remember George Washington’s infamous wooden teeth), 
but recent advances in technology continue to erode the barrier between self and not self. 
Here are some examples:69
●
●According to the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery, Americans get more 
than 9 million cosmetic surgical and nonsurgical procedures in a year. The most fre-
quently performed surgical procedure is breast augmentation, which typically involves 
the integration of man-made silicon implants with the patient’s organic material.
●
●More than 4 million Americans have an artificial knee.
●
●At least prior to his recent arrest for murder that made global headlines, the South 
African track star Oscar Pistorious competed against world-class runners with two 
artificial legs made of carbon. Nike teamed with orthopedics company Össur to intro-
duce its first sprinting prosthesis, called the Nike Sole, perhaps the first commercially 
scalable transformation of disabled athletes into “superabled” athletes.
●
●More than 200,000 people now have cochlear implants that deliver sound from a 
microphone directly to the auditory nerve. Other neural implants recognize when 
epileptic seizures are about to occur and stimulate the brain to stop them. A woman 
paralyzed from the waist down who wore a motorized exoskeleton walked the route of 
the London Marathon over a period of 17 days.
We don’t usually go that far, but some people do cherish possessions as if they were 
a part of them. In fact, some of us willingly (and perhaps eagerly) label ourselves as 
fanatics about a cherished product.71 Consider shoes, for example: You don’t have to be 
Carrie of Sex and the City fame to acknowledge that many people feel a strong bond to 
their footwear. The singer Mariah Carey recently posted a photo of her huge shoe closet 
on Instagram and labeled it, “Always my favorite room in the house… #shoes #shoes 
#moreshoes.”72
One study found that people commonly view their shoes as magical emblems of self, 
Cinderella-like vehicles for self-transformation. Based on data collected from consumers, 
the researcher concluded that (like their sister Carrie) women tend to be more attuned to 
the symbolic implications of shoes than men. A common theme that emerged was that 
a pair of shoes obtained when younger—whether a first pair of leather shoes, a first pair 
of high heels, or a first pair of cowboy boots—had a big impact even later in life. These 
experiences were similar to those that occur in such well-known fairy tales and stories 
as Dorothy’s red shoes in The Wizard of Oz, Karen’s magical red shoes in Hans Christian 
Anderson’s The Red Shoes, and Cinderella’s glass slippers.73
In addition to shoes, of course, many material objects—ranging from personal 
possessions and pets to national monuments or landmarks—help to form a consumer’s 
identity. Just about everyone can name a valued possession that has a lot of the self 
“wrapped up” in it, whether it is a beloved photograph, a trophy, an old shirt, a car, or a 
cat. Indeed, usually we can construct a pretty accurate “biography” of someone when 
we simply catalog the items he displays in his bedroom or office. A study illustrates that 
the product/self doesn’t even have to be that strong to influence a consumer’s self-con-
cept. In one experiment, researchers approached women in a shopping mall and gave 
them one of two shopping bags to walk around with for an hour. Women who received 
a bag from Victoria’s Secret later reported to the researchers that they felt more sensual 
and glamorous. In another experiment, MBA students were asked to take notes for 6 
weeks using a pen embossed with the MIT logo; they reported feeling smarter at the end 
of the term.74
As Figure 6.1 shows, we describe four levels of the extended self, ranging from per-
sonal objects to places and things that allow people to feel as though they are rooted in 
their larger social environments:75
1 Individual level—Consumers include many of their personal possessions in self-defi-
nition. These products can include jewelry, cars, clothing, and so on. The saying “You 
are what you wear” reflects the belief that one’s things are a part of one’s identity.
Many consumers try to bol-
ster their self-esteem as 
they accumulate evidence 
of their achievements. In a 
results-oriented and com-
petitive society, we continue to find ways 
to trumpet our successes. In Chapter 4 we 
discussed the growing trend of gamifica-
tion, which involves rewarding people for 
accomplishing tasks. We display evidence of 
these rewards, or badges, by way of car bum-
per stickers (“My son is an honor student”) 
or even grownup equivalents of the merit 
badges that the Boy Scouts award. Adults 
can buy their own Nerd Merit Badges recog-
nizing geeky achievements, including “Open 
Source” (contribution to an open-source proj-
ect), “Family Tech Support,” or “I Have an Ac-
tual Human Skeleton in My Office.” When they 
go online to geospatial platforms that use 
their smartphones to identify their physical 
locations, consumers earn pins on Gowalla 
to certify that they’ve eaten in certain restau-
rants, or badges on Foursquare that testify 
to personal qualities such as “Photogenic,” 
“Gossip Girl,” or even “Crunked” (for hitting 
more than four bars in a single night).70
Net profit

210 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
2 Family level—This part of the extended self includes a consumer’s residence and the 
furnishings in it. We can think of the house as a symbolic body for the family, and the 
place where we live often is a central aspect of who we are.
3 Community level—It is common for consumers to describe themselves in terms 
of the neighborhood or town from which they come. For farm families or other 
residents with close ties to a community, this sense of belonging is particularly 
important.
4 Group level—We regard our attachments to certain social groups as a part of the 
self; we’ll consider some of these consumer subcultures in later chapters. A con-
sumer also may feel that landmarks, monuments, or sports teams are a part of the 
extended self.
embodied cognition
To what extent do the products we buy influence how we define ourselves? Social scien-
tists who study relationships between thoughts and behaviors increasingly talk about the 
theory of embodied cognition. A simple way to explain this perspective is that “states of 
the body modify states of the mind.”76 In other words, our behaviors and observations of 
what we do and buy shape our thoughts rather than vice versa. One of the most powerful 
examples is the idea that our body language actually changes how we see ourselves; in 
the most widely viewed TED talk ever, a social psychologist discusses how power posing 
(standing in a confident way even if you don’t feel confident) affects brain activity, Again, 
the self-fulfilling prophecy at work.77
The embodied cognition approach is consistent with consumer behavior research 
that demonstrates how changes in self-concept can arise from usage of brands that convey 
different meanings. Indeed one pair of researchers used the term enclothed cognition 
in their work that showed how the symbolic meaning of clothing changes how people 
behave. In one study they asked respondents to wear a lab coat, which people associate 
with attentiveness and precise work. Indeed they found that subjects who wore the lab 
coat displayed enhanced performance on tasks that required them to pay close attention. 
But they also introduced a twist: When respondents were told the garment was in fact a 
painter’s coat rather than a doctor’s lab coat, the effects went away. In other words, the 
respondents interpreted the symbolic meaning of the clothing and then altered their 
behavior accordingly.78
Individual
Family
Community
Group
Figure 6.1 LEVELS OF THE ExTENDED 
SELF

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
211 
It’s tempting to point out that a study your humble author conducted more than 30 
years ago on the “dress for success” phenomenon found similar results for students in 
job interview settings. In perhaps the best Ph.D. dissertation ever written (at least in your 
author’s opinion), male candidates who wore professional attire acted more assertively 
and confidently during the interviews, and on average even asked for higher starting 
salaries!79
The Digital Self
We’ve already talked about impression management, but our wired world takes this 
process to a new level.80 Today we have access to “post-production” tools to engineer 
our identities. These free or inexpensive applications allow virtually anyone to dramati-
cally modify his or her digital self at will as we strategically “modify” the profile photos 
Residents of the Blue Mars virtual world use 
their iPhones to vote on the most attractive 
avatars.
Source: Image courtesy of Avatar Reality.

212 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
we post on Facebook or the descriptions we share on online dating sites. In addition, 
many of us create additional identities in the form of avatars in virtual worlds like 
Second Life and massive multiplayer online games (MMOGs) such as World of  Warcraft. 
U.S. Americans alone spend about $1.6 billion per year to buy virtual goods just for their 
avatars. Our physical bodies continue to merge with our digital environments; we’re 
moving from “you are what you wear” to “you are what you post.” We also take pieces 
of these digital identities back with us to the physical world. Respondents in one study 
placed more value on digital items that reflect their physical identities, such as digital 
photos and written communications.81
Wearable computing
Get ready for the invasion of wearable computing. Whether devices we wear on our 
wrist like the Apple Watch, on our face like Google Glass, or woven into our clothing, 
increasingly our digital interactions will become attached to our bodies—and perhaps 
even inserted into our bodies as companies offer ways to implant computer chips into 
our wrists. There are obvious privacy concerns as these products pick up steam, but 
advocates argue they offer numerous benefits as well. These attachable computers will 
be cheaper, provide greater accuracy because sensors are closer to our bodies, and be 
more convenient because we won’t have to carry around additional hardware.82 Already 
numerous wearables with big health implications are available or under development:83
●
●Sensing for sleep disorders by tracking breath, heart rate, and motion
●
●Detecting possible onset of Alzheimer’s by monitoring a person’s gait via a GPS embed-
ded in his or her shoes
●
●Tracking ingestion of medication via sensors that are activated by stomach fluid
●
●Measuring blood sugar via a contact lens with a chip that can track activity in a pa-
tient’s tears
●
●Assessing the impact of blows to a football player’s head via sensors inserted in his 
helmet.
virtual Makeovers
New virtual makeover technologies make it even easier for each of us to involve the 
digital self as we choose products to adorn our physical selves. These platforms allow the 
shopper to superimpose images on their faces or bodies so that they can quickly and eas-
ily see how products would alter appearance, without taking the risk of actually buying 
the item first. L’Oréal offers a Makeup Genius app that turns the front-facing iPhone and 
iPad camera into a makeup mirror so that the customer can virtually try on hundreds 
of cosmetics products. The shopper can change facial expressions and lighting condi-
tions; the virtual makeup stays on her face. The online glasses merchant Warby Parker 
allows consumers to upload a picture of themselves and try on frames virtually. Other 
apps such as Perfect 365 and Face Tune let you touch up your photo so you can remove a 
pimple, a wrinkle, or even a few pounds before you post it on Instagram or Facebook for 
others to admire.84
Gender identity
The Indian government banned a TV spot for Axe men’s deodor-
ant: The spot shows a man who turns into a walking chocolate 
figurine after he sprays himself with the brand’s Dark Temptation 
deodorant. As he walks through the city, women throw them-
selves at him as they lick him and bite off various parts of his 
body. Although the same ad played in Argentina and Europe without any problem, tra-
ditional Indian culture doesn’t approve of such blatant imagery. The government yanked 
another ad for Amul Macho underwear, in which a young woman comes to a river to do 
ObjecTive 6-3 
Gender identity is an 
important component 
of a consumer’s 
self-concept.
“I can leave Facebook 
whenever I want!” Actually, 
for many people it’s not so 
easy. Researchers looked 
at Facebook posts, blogs, discussion groups, 
and online magazines to find “breakup sto-
ries” that would help them to understand what 
people go through when they decide to end 
their relationship with this social network. Many 
people talked about the things they’re missing: 
friends’ birthdays, the ability to play online 
games, and the ability to use various online ser-
vices. Their descriptions were laced with strong 
emotions that ranged from sadness to the kind 
of relief an addict might feel if he or she suc-
ceeds in breaking out of a bad habit.
  The Tangled Web

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
213 
her husband’s laundry, pulls out a pair of boxer shorts, and begins to wash them by hand 
as she gives sultry looks to the camera and throws her head back in a suggestive manner, 
as a voiceover says, “Amul Macho. Crafted for fantasies.” Members of a Hindu organiza-
tion called The Army of Ram (a Hindu god) attacked a group of female college students 
in a bar because they were drinking and dancing with men.85 Clearly, expectations for 
the appropriate behavior of men and women are not set in stone around the world.
Gender identity is an important component of a consumer’s self-concept. People 
often conform to their culture’s expectations about how those of their gender should act, 
dress, or speak; we refer to these sets of expectations as sex roles. Of course, these guide-
lines change over time, and they differ radically across societies. In India and elsewhere, 
for example, a society communicates its assumptions about the proper roles of men and 
women as it defines ideal behaviors for each gender.
It’s not clear to what extent gender differences are innate rather than culturally 
shaped, but they’re certainly evident in many consumption situations. Consider the gen-
der differences market researchers observe when they compare the food preferences of 
men to those of women. Women eat more fruit; men are more likely to eat meat. As one 
food writer put it, “Boy food doesn’t grow. It is hunted or killed.”86 Indeed, consumers do 
tend to view meat as a masculine product. In one case a company that sells soy patties 
found that men viewed the food as feminine, so its solution was to add artificial grill marks 
on the patties to make them look like cuts of meat.87
The sexes also differ sharply in the quantities of food they eat: When researchers at 
Hershey discovered that women eat smaller amounts of candy, they created a white choco-
late confection called Hugs, one of the most successful food introductions of all time. In con-
trast, a man in a Burger King Whopper ad ditches his date at a fancy restaurant, complain-
ing that he is “too hungry to settle for chick food.” Pumped up on Whoppers, a swelling mob 
of men shake their fists, punch one another, toss a van off a bridge, and sing, “I will eat this 
meat until my innie turns into an outie,” and “I am hungry. I am incorrigible. I am man.”88
Sex role Socialization
When students write reviews of faculty members on the popular website Rate My 
Professors, they use different words depending on whether the professor is male or female. 
Women professors usually come out on the losing end of these reviews. In a study that 
Scientists continue to develop new ways for 
people to easily wear computer chips.
Source: Courtesy of John A. Rogers, The University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

214 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
examined 14 million reviews on the site, positive words such as smart and genius are more 
much more likely to describe males than females across 25 different disciplines. Other 
terms that fit female stereotypes pop up in reviews of female professors, including bossy, 
strict, and demanding (as well as nurturing). Women are also much more likely to be called 
out by the fashion police with terms such as frumpy.89
Children pick up on the concept of gender identity at an earlier age than research-
ers previously believed—by as young as age 1 in some cases. By the age of 3, most 
U.S. children categorize driving a truck as masculine and cooking and cleaning as 
feminine.90 Even characters that cartoons portray as helpless are more likely to wear 
frilly or ruffled dresses.91 Many commercial sources, in addition to parents and friends, 
provide lessons in gender socialization for both girls and boys. An advertisement 
for Sony’s Bravia televisions is typical: The spot shows a man and a woman gazing 
through a storefront window at a Bravia LCD. Unaware of each other, the two simul-
taneously whisper: “Nice picture.” Suddenly, two buttons appear on the screen that 
read: “Ending for Men” and “Ending for Women.” The male ending is either a funny 
clip from a sports show or a cartoon spoof of a martial-arts movie. Women see either a 
1950s-era musical centered on shoes or a tearjerker about a female doctor who saves 
the life of an orphan.92
Marketers tend to reinforce cultural expectations regarding the “correct” way for boys 
and girls, men and women, to look and act. Many societies expect males to pursue agen-
tic goals, which stress self-assertion and mastery. However, they teach females to value 
communal goals, such as affiliation and building harmonious relations.93 A recent com-
prehensive review of the research literature reported five basic conclusions about gender 
differences:94
1 Males are more self-oriented, whereas females are more other-oriented
2 Females are more cautious responders
3 Females are more responsive to negative data
4 Males process data more selectively and females more comprehensively; and
5 Females are more sensitive to differentiating conditions and factors.
Gender identity versus Sexual identity
Gender-role identity is a state of mind as well as body. A person’s biological gender (i.e., 
male or female) does not totally determine whether he or she will exhibit sex-typed 
traits—characteristics we stereotypically associate with one gender or the other. A con-
sumer’s subjective feelings about his or her sexuality are crucial as well.95
At the same time, new evidence is emerging about the effects of biology on consumer 
behavior. Neuroendocrinological science focuses on the potential role of hormonal 
influences on preferences for different kinds of products or people.96 Much of this work is 
based on evolutionary logic that underscores how people are “wired” from birth to seek 
out mates who can produce optimal offspring that will be more likely to survive in a com-
petitive environment. For example, evidence suggests that women who are at peak fertil-
ity (near ovulation in their monthly menstrual cycle) are attracted to men who display 
evidence of higher levels of testosterone (male hormone), and these women are also more 
interested in attending social gatherings (presumably to increase their chances of locating 
a suitable mate). One set of experiments showed that at peak fertility women (noncon-
sciously) chose products that enhanced their appearance by wearing sexy rather than 
conservative clothing. The researchers claim this is because of a desire to attract men’s 
attention away from attractive rivals. Another set of studies found that ovulating women 
are more likely to prefer variety in product choice; the authors report that this variety 
seeking relates to a desire to be exposed to new men during this time.97
Unlike maleness and femaleness, masculinity and femininity are not biological char-
acteristics. A behavior that one culture considers to be masculine might get a different 
response in another. For example, the norm in the United States is that male friends avoid 
touching each other (except in “safe” situations such as on the football field). In some 

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
215 
Latin and European cultures, however, it is common for men to hug and kiss one another 
as a form of greeting. Note that even this norm continues to evolve, as U.S. teenagers 
of both sexes adopt the new fad of hugging as a standard form of greeting (sometimes 
accompanied by the high-five or the fist-bump) and male friends (encouraged by the MTV 
show of the same name) feel free to talk about having a bromance (affection between 
straight male friends).98
Sex-Typed products
Obviously many products are intimately associated with one gender or the other, espe-
cially if they link to a culture’s definition of what is sexually appealing. Thus, the results 
of a recent French study shouldn’t be too surprising: In a series of field experiments, men 
were more likely to complete a survey or pick up a dropped glove if a female confederate 
wore high heels rather than flats. The higher the heel, the greater the likelihood of coop-
eration. As you might guess, the relationship did not hold for females.99 Note: Gender-
specific linkages like this may indeed have a biological basis. Some (though hardly all) 
social scientists speculate that high heels change a woman’s posture in a way that men 
are “wired” to notice. As one account puts it, “The waist looks slimmer, the backside pro-
trudes, the chest thrusts out, and a pedestrian gait becomes what anthropologists call ‘the 
courtship strut.’”100
A popular book once proclaimed, Real Men Don’t Eat Quiche. In addition to quiche, 
marketers promote many sex-typed products. They reflect stereotypical masculine or 
feminine attributes, and consumers associate them with one gender or another.102 For 
example, ePad Femme is the “world’s first tablet made exclusively for women.” It comes 
preloaded with a pink background and a number of apps related to yoga, grocery shop-
ping, weight loss, and cooking.103
Female Sex roles
In the 1949 movie Adam’s Rib, Katharine Hepburn played a stylish and competent lawyer. 
This film was one of the first to show that a woman can have a successful career and still 
be happily married. Today, the evolution of a new managerial class of women has forced 
marketers to change their traditional assumptions about women as they target this grow-
ing market. For example, Suzuki appeals to the growing number of women in India who 
achieve financial independence and buy their own cars. Its Zen Estilo (estilo means “style” 
in Spanish) model comes in eight colors, including “purple fusion,” “virgin blue,” and 
“sparkling olive.”104
Still, it’s premature to proclaim the death of traditional sex-role stereotypes. This is 
certainly true in Islamic countries that require women to be completely covered in public 
Many products acquire a gender identity.
Source: Courtesy of Greatest Common Factory and 
SafeAuto Bill Sallans.
Marketing pitfall
Restaurant chains that 
attract diners with buxom 
servers in short shorts 
have become so popular 
the industry has a name 
for this category: breastaurants. The largest 
eatery of this kind is Hooters, which boasts 
more than $1 billion in sales annually. Other 
category members include Twin Peaks, Mugs 
N Jugs, and Tilted Kilt. A Texas company called 
Bikinis Sports Bar and Grill, that offers girls in 
bikinis who jump on trampolines when they’re 
not serving food, recently trademarked the 
term breastaurant.101

216 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
and that prohibit them from working as salespeople in stores open to the public (even if the 
store sells female intimate apparel).105
To further complicate matters, sex roles constantly evolve. In a complex society like 
ours, we often encounter contradictory messages about “appropriate” behavior, and we 
may find ourselves putting on a different face as we jump from situation to situation. An 
exploration of what the authors labeled contemporary young mainstream female 
achievers (CYMFA) identified different roles these women play in different contexts. 
For example, as a mother or partner they enact a highly feminine role; as a tough, piti-
less businessperson, they play a masculine role; and with a friend they might evoke both 
roles at once.106
Male Sex roles
A European ad for designer Dolce & Gabbana depicts a group of sweaty men in tight jeans 
who surround a woman wearing spike heels who is pinned to the ground. Other ads fea-
turing long-time household products spokescharacter Mr. Clean claim that only a strong 
man is powerful enough to tackle dirt.107 To promote the Dr. Pepper Ten drink, the com-
pany sent a mobile “Man Cave” to U.S. cities. The trailer parked in “testosterone zones” 
such as ball fields or car shows, where it gave men a place to watch TV and play video 
games. The accompanying advertising campaign featured a muscled commando type who 
totes a space-age weapon. “Hey ladies, enjoying the film?” he asks. “‘Course not. Because 
this is our movie, and Dr. Pepper Ten is our soda.”108
Our culture’s stereotype of the ideal male is a tough, aggressive, muscular man 
who enjoys “manly” sports. When global entrepreneur and CEO of Virgin Airlines 
This ad for Bijan illustrates how sex role 
identities are culturally bound by contrasting 
the expectations of how women should  
appear in two different countries.
Source: Courtesy of Bijan Fragrances c/o Fashion 
World.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
217 
Richard Branson lost a racing bet to the owner of Air Asia, his “sentence” was to dress 
as a female flight attendant for the winner’s airline. The winner gloated, “I’m looking 
forward to him sucking up to me as a stewardess!”109 A study that tracked advertising 
in eight male magazines with primarily male readerships (ranging from Maxim to Golf 
Digest) reported that most contain many ads that can contribute to “hyper-masculinity” 
because of heavy emphasis on violence, dangerousness, and callous attitudes toward 
women and sex.110
Just as for women, however, the true story is more complicated than being “a 
man’s man.” Indeed, scholars of masculinism study the male image and the complex 
cultural meanings of masculinity.111 Like women, men receive mixed messages about 
how they are supposed to behave and feel. Chevrolet’s “Guy’s Night Out” commercial 
depicts a new dad’s night out with friends where they wind up watching his toddler’s 
sing-a-long CD.
One study examined how U.S. men pursue masculine identities through their every-
day consumption. The researchers suggest that men try to make sense out of three dif-
ferent models of masculinity that they call breadwinner, rebel, and man-of-action hero. On 
the one hand, the breadwinner model draws from the U.S. myth of success and celebrates 
respectability, civic virtues, pursuit of material success, and organized achievement. The 
rebel model, on the other hand, emphasizes rebellion, independence, adventure, and 
potency. The man-of-action hero is a synthesis that draws from the best of the other two 
models.112
androgyny
The British department store chain Selfridges is known for unusual promotions and events 
(this is the store where actress Lindsay Lohan ripped off her clothes and ran through the 
aisles, much to the delight of the London tabloids).113 The store even went brand-free for 
2 years to give customers a break. Now the merchant is going gender-free in its 2-month 
Gun Goddess sells feminine accessories to 
women who own or use firearms.
Source: GunGoddess.com.

218 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Agender Project. It will feature unisex fashion lines and put mannequins in storage to 
“show the collections in a non-gender-specific way.” One possible motivation for the exper-
iment: The store finds that more female shoppers are buying menswear for themselves and 
now it wants to encourage men to be adventurous about crossing to the other side of the 
aisle as well.114 Come on, guys, rock those skirts….
Androgyny refers to the possession of both masculine and feminine traits.115 
Researchers make a distinction between sex-typed people, who are stereotypically mas-
culine or feminine, and androgynous people, whose orientation isn’t as clearly defined. 
Clearly, the “normality” of sex-typed behaviors varies across cultures. For example, 
although acceptance of homosexuality varies in Asian cultures, it doesn’t occur to most 
Asians to assume that a man with some feminine qualities is gay. A survey of Korean con-
sumers found that more than 66 percent of men and 57 percent of women younger than 
age 40 live self-described “androgynous” lifestyles—with men having more tradition-
ally female traits and women having more traditionally male ones than they might have 
years ago. But the respondents didn’t link that with sexual orientation. Although Koreans 
nickname males with feminine interests “flower men,” they don’t consider this to be a 
derogatory term.116 In Japan, men that people call gyaru-o (“male gals”) are common on 
city streets. Tanned and meticulously dressed (and usually heterosexual), these fops cruise 
Tokyo’s stylish boutiques.117
Some research indicates that sex-typed people are more sensitive to the sex role depic-
tions of characters in advertising. In one study, subjects read two versions of a beer adver-
tisement couched in either masculine or feminine terms. The masculine version contained 
phrases such as “X beer has the strong aggressive flavor that really asserts itself with good 
A male sex-typed product.
Source: IWC Schaffhausen.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
219 
food and good company,” and the feminine version made claims such as “Brewed with 
tender care, X beer is a full-bodied beer that goes down smooth and gentle.” People who 
rated themselves as highly masculine or highly feminine preferred the version that was 
described in (respectively) very masculine or very feminine terms.118
Researchers developed a scale to identify “nontraditional males” (NTMs) who exhibit 
stereotypically female tendencies. The scale included statements such as these:
●
●I enjoy looking through fashion magazines.
●
●In our family, I take care of the checkbook and pay the bills.
●
●I am concerned about getting enough calcium in my diet.
●
●I am good at fixing mechanical things.
●
●I would do better than average in a fistfight.
Not too surprisingly, strong differences emerged between men who rated the state-
ments along traditional sex-role lines and those who had nontraditional orientations 
When asked how they would like others to see them, NTMs were more likely than tradi-
tional males (TMs) to say that they would like to be considered stylish, sophisticated, up to 
Androgyny refers to the possession of 
both masculine and feminine traits. 
Source: kitty/Shutterstock.

220 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
date, and trendsetting. They were also more likely to say that they would like to be seen as 
sensitive, spiritual, affectionate, organized, and thrifty, but less likely to say they would like 
to be seen as “outdoorsy.”
Androgyny can open new markets if marketers can expand the reach of their target 
audience. Some companies that sell exclusively to one gender may therefore decide to test 
the waters with the other sex when they promote gender-bending products, which are 
traditionally sex-typed items adapted to the opposite gender, such as the recent profusion 
of merchants that sell pink guns for women. Here are some other gender benders:119
●
●Rubbermaid introduced a line of grooming tools specifically for men, including twee-
zers and clippers. As a manager explained, “Most men don’t want to go to what we call 
the ‘pink aisle’ of the store to get tweezers and clippers that are made for women. They 
want products that look masculine and are made for their specific grooming needs.”
●
●Old Spice has long been known as the brand Dad keeps in his medicine cabinet, but 
young women who like the scent and the relatively low price are tuning into the de-
odorant as well. This resurgence is a bit ironic because the first product the company 
introduced in 1937 was a women’s fragrance.
●
●Febreze is an odor-neutralizing line of products that Procter & Gamble (P&G) markets 
to women for housecleaning. However, P&G finds that a lot of men spray it on their 
clothes to delay doing laundry. And in Vietnam, where the product is called Ambi Pur, 
men who ride motor scooters use it as a deodorizing spray for their helmets.120
Gay, Lesbian, bisexual, and Transgender (GLbT) consumers
The proportion of the population that is gay or lesbian is difficult to determine, and 
efforts to measure this group have been controversial.121 A 2015 Gallup report based on 
responses from more than 300,000 adult Americans found that on average 3.6 percent 
of respondents who live in the 50 largest metropolitan areas (that researchers refer to as 
Metropolitan Statistical Areas or MSAs) self-identified as GLBT.122
To put things in perspective, the GLBT market is about as large as the Asian American 
population (currently at about 12 million people). These consumers spend in the range of 
$250 billion to $350 billion a year. A Simmons study of readers of gay publications found 
that these readers are almost 12 times more likely to hold professional jobs, twice as likely 
Axe’s Anarchy brand is a gender-bender.
Source: Courtesy of Unilever.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
221 
to own a vacation home, and eight times more likely to own a notebook computer com-
pared to heterosexuals.123
Gay relationships are increasingly mainstream in most parts of the United States. 
A Gallup survey in 2014 found that 55 percent of Americans favor same-sex marriage, 
whereas nearly 8 of 10 young adults support it.124 Therefore, it’s not surprising to see 
more and more marketing communications that routinely include gay couples. A recent 
Banana Republic campaign features pairs of models who also are couples in real life. One 
of these is two men, both interior designers. The chief creative officer of the agency that 
created the campaign observed, the goal is “to reflect our world and how we live in a true, 
genuine way.”125 Even the Oreo cookie brand took a public stand when in support of Gay 
Pride Month the company posted a photo on its Facebook page of an Oreo with six differ-
ent colors of cream—one for each color of the rainbow, a symbol gay rights supporters use 
to show diversity. The post drew many thousands of comments. Some called for a product 
boycott, but most like this one were more supportive: “Thank you Oreo and Nabisco for 
your Pride. Not only did you make an awesome statement about love and acceptance, but 
that cookie looked freaking delicious!!”126
Of late the cultural spotlight has turned on transgender people, helped along by the 
media attention paid to a character in the popular TV show Orange is the New Black and 
the debut of former athlete and current reality TV star Bruce Jenner in her new identity 
as Caitlin Jenner on the cover of Vogue. Our definitions of gender continue to evolve 
as a global third gender movement picks up steam: Australia’s High Court recently 
ruled that a person there was allowed to register gender as “nonspecific” on official 
documents. Nepal issues citizenship papers with a “third gender” category and Germany 
allows parents of intersex children—those born with both genitals, or ambiguous sex 
characteristics—to mark their birth certificates with an X.127 United Colors of Benetton 
caused a stir when its product campaign included Lea T, a trans-sexual Brazilian 
model.128
The body
For many women, trying on jeans is a painful exercise. Levi 
Strauss launched an online fitting service called the Curve ID 
System to make the process a little more comfortable. The digital 
offering is available in 20 languages and 50 countries; it is based 
on 60,000 women’s figures worldwide and its goal is to provide a 
more customized experience to ease the frustration many women 
feel as they search for the perfect pair of jeans.130 Still, you may 
want to consider some Spanx shapewear for some “tummy-taming,” “butt boosting,” or 
“thigh trimming” before you wear your new pants in public.131
A person’s physical appearance is a large part of his or her self-concept. Body 
image refers to a consumer’s subjective evaluation of his or her physical self. Our 
evaluations don’t necessarily correspond to what those around us see. A man may 
We can expect to see gender-neutral icons 
like this one popping up on public restrooms 
and other locations as the third-gender 
movement picks up steam.
Source: Gender Neutral icon.
ObjecTive 6-4 
The way we think about 
our bodies (and the 
way our culture tells 
us we should think) is 
a key component of 
self-esteem.
Now that the U.S. Supreme 
Court has ruled in favor of 
same-sex marriage, busi-
nesses are searching for 
ways to meet the needs of 
this lucrative market. Americans already spend 
more than $50 billion per year on  weddings 
and the explosion of gay weddings is pro-
jected to add at least another $2 billion to this 
 figure. The online magazine EquallyWed off ers 
tips on  wedding planning and OutVite.com 
sells “custom printed gay and lesbian sta-
tionery.” After it received pressure from gay 
rights groups, the Today show on NBC invited 
same-sex couples to compete in its annual 
wedding contest. Brides’ magazine ran its first 
feature about a wedding between one of the 
magazine’s photo editors and her longtime 
girlfriend. A year previously, Martha Stewart 
Weddings published a pictorial of two gay 
grooms stomping on a glass and sharing a 
kiss.129
Marketing Opportunity

222 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
think of himself as being more muscular than he really is, or a woman may feel she 
appears fatter than is actually the case. Whether these perceptions are accurate is 
almost a moot point because our body insecurities weigh us down whether they’re 
justified or not.132
Some marketers exploit consumers’ tendencies to distort their body images when they 
prey on our insecurities about appearance. They try to create a gap between the real and 
the ideal physical selves and consequently motivate a person to purchase products and 
services he or she thinks will narrow that gap. Even social media apparently impacts how 
we feel about our bodies. A recent study of Facebook users reported that one-half of them 
felt more self-conscious about their body images after they looked at photos of themselves 
and others on the site.134
ideals of beauty
BeautifulPeople.com is an online dating site that allows only attractive people to join 
(you have to have your photo approved by members). Now it’s expanding its service to 
employers who want to hire “good-looking staff.” One of the site’s managers explains, 
“Attractive people tend to make a better first impression on clients, win more business and 
earn more.”135 He might be right: One study reported that on average a U.S. worker who 
was among the bottom one-seventh in looks, as assessed by randomly chosen observers, 
earned 10 to 15 percent less per year than a similar worker whose looks were assessed in 
the top one-third—a lifetime difference, in a typical case, of about $230,000.136 Who 
says “beauty is only skin deep?”
Our satisfaction with the physical image we present to others depends on how 
closely we think the image corresponds to the ideal our culture values. An ideal of 
beauty is a particular model, or exemplar, of appearance. Ideals of beauty for both men 
and women may include physical features (e.g., a well-rounded derriere for women or 
a well-defined six-pack for men) as well as clothing styles, cosmetics, hairstyles, skin 
tone (pale versus tan), and body type (petite, athletic, voluptuous, etc.). Our desires to 
match up to these ideals—for better or worse—drive a lot of our purchase decisions. 
What’s more, the pressure to exhibit these traits starts earlier and earlier: The retailer 
Abercrombie & Fitch first came under fire a few years ago for selling thongs to preteens. 
In a series of Dove ads in China, pregnant 
bellies are painted with questions from 
unborn girls. “If you knew I would grow to 
be a flat-nosed girl, will you still welcome 
me?” asks one. “If you knew I’d grow up to 
weigh 140 jin [154 lbs], would I still be your 
baby?” asks another. The third: “I’ll soon 
come to the world, but if I grow to only have 
an A bra cup, will you tease me?” Many 
Chinese women worry about being labelled 
a “leftover woman” or a “spinster,” terms for 
women who reach the age of 26 and are still 
single.133
Source: Phil Date/Shutterstock.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
223 
More recently, critics blasted the chain because it offers padded bikini tops to the same 
age group.137
is beauty Universal?
As we noted, the evidence continues to mount that at least some of our tastes for physical 
features are “wired in” genetically. What cues lead us to view some faces as beautiful or 
handsome as opposed to others? Specifically, people appear to favor features we associate 
with good health and youth because these signal reproductive ability and strength. These 
characteristics include large eyes, high cheekbones, and a narrow jaw. Believe it or not, 
another cue that people across ethnic and racial groups use to signal sexual desirability 
is whether the person’s facial features are balanced (i.e., if the two sides of the face are in 
proportion to one another). This is a signal of good health. Sure enough, people with sym-
metrical features on average start having sex 3 to 4 years earlier than those with unbal-
anced features.138
Men also use a woman’s body shape as a sexual cue; an evolutionary explanation 
is that feminine curves provide evidence of reproductive potential. During puberty, a 
typical female gains almost 35 pounds of “reproductive fat” around the hips and thighs 
that supply the approximately 80,000 extra calories she will need to support a preg-
nancy. Most fertile women have waist-to-hip ratios of 0.6 to 0.8, an hourglass shape 
that also happens to be the one men rank highest. Even though preferences for overall 
weight change over time, waist-to-hip ratios tend to stay in this range. Even the super 
thin model Twiggy (who pioneered the “waif look” decades before Kate Moss) had a 
ratio of 0.73.139
How do women infer that a potential male mate has desirable characteristics of 
strength and health? They tend to favor men with heavy lower faces (an indication of 
a high concentration of androgens that impart strength), those who are slightly above 
average in height, and those with prominent brows. In one study, women viewed a series 
of male headshots that had been digitally altered to exaggerate or minimize masculine 
traits. They saw men with square jaws and well-defined brow ridges as good short-term 
partners, whereas they preferred those with feminine traits, such as rounder faces and 
fuller lips, for long-term mates. Overwhelmingly, participants said those with more mas-
culine features were likely to be risky and competitive and also more apt to fight, challenge 
bosses, cheat on spouses, and put less effort into parenting. They assumed that men with 
more feminine faces would be good parents and husbands, hard workers, and emotionally 
supportive mates.140
These findings also relate to the emerging—and controversial—work in neuroen-
docrinological science we discussed earlier in the chapter. In another study, researchers 
showed women in Japan and Scotland a series of computer-generated photos of male faces 
that were systematically altered in terms of such dimensions as the size of the jaw and the 
prominence of the eyebrow ridge.141 Women in the study preferred the heavier masculine 
features when they were ovulating, but these choices shifted during other parts of their 
monthly cycles.
Jaw size aside, the way we “package” our bodies still varies enormously, and that’s 
where marketers come in: Advertising and other forms of mass media play a significant 
role in determining which forms of beauty we consider desirable at any point in time. An 
ideal of beauty functions as a sort of cultural yardstick. Consumers compare themselves 
to some standard (often one the fashion media advocate at that time), and they are dis-
satisfied with their appearance to the extent that they don’t match up to it. This may 
lower their own self-esteem or, in some cases, possibly diminish the effectiveness of an ad 
because of negative feelings a highly attractive model arouses.142
Our language provides phrases to sum up these cultural ideals. We may talk about 
a “bimbo,” a “girl-next-door,” or an “ice queen,” or we may refer to specific women who 
have come to embody an ideal, such as J-Lo, Gwyneth Paltrow, the late Princess Diana, 

224 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
and before her the late Princess Grace.144 Similar descriptions for men include “jock,” 
“pretty boy,” and “bookworm,” or a “Brad Pitt type,” a “Wesley Snipes type,” and so on.
ideals of Female beauty evolve Over Time
Although beauty may “only be skin deep,” throughout history women have worked hard 
to attain it. They starved themselves; painfully bound their feet; inserted plates into their 
lips; spent countless hours under hair dryers, in front of mirrors, and beneath tanning 
lights; and opted for breast reduction or enlargement operations.
We characterize periods of history by a specific “look,” or ideal of beauty. Often these 
relate to broader cultural happenings, such as today’s emphasis on fitness and toned 
bodies. A look at U.S. history reveals a succession of dominant ideals. For example, in 
sharp contrast to today’s emphasis on health and vigor, in the early 1800s it was fashion-
able to appear delicate to the point of looking ill. The poet John Keats described the ideal 
woman of that time as “a milk white lamb that bleats for man’s protection.” Other past 
looks include the voluptuous, lusty woman that Lillian Russell made popular; the athletic 
Gibson Girl of the 1890s; and the small, boyish flapper of the 1920s exemplified by the 
silent movie actress Clara Bow.145 Marilyn Monroe died in 1962, but she represents a 
While Americans spend billions of dollars 
per year to fix less-than-perfect teeth, a 
new craze among Japanese women is to 
pay to have straight teeth made crooked. 
People in the U.S. refer negatively to this 
look as “snaggleteeth,” or “fangs,” but many 
Japanese men find what they call yaeba 
(double tooth) attractive. Blogs celebrate 
the yaeba look and woman pay dentists to 
attach pieces of plastic to their real teeth to 
achieve it.143
Source: © Philip Bigg/Alamy.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
225 
cultural ideal of beauty that persists to this day. M.A.C. introduced a line of cosmetics 
named after her and Macy’s launched a Marilyn clothing line.146
In much of the 19th century, the desirable waistline for U.S. women was 18 inches, a 
circumference that required the use of corsets pulled so tight that they routinely caused 
headaches, fainting spells, and possibly even the uterine and spinal disorders common 
among women of the time. Although modern women are not quite as “straight-laced,” 
many still endure such indignities as high heels, body waxing, eyelifts, and liposuction. In 
addition to the millions women spend on cosmetics, clothing, health clubs, and fashion 
magazines, these practices remind us that—rightly or wrongly—the desire to conform to 
current standards of beauty is alive and well.
Our culture communicates these standards—subtly and not so subtly—virtually every-
where we turn: on magazine covers, in department store windows, on TV shows. Feminists 
argue that fashion dolls, such as the ubiquitous Barbie, reinforce an unnatural ideal of thin-
ness. When we extrapolate the dimensions of these dolls to average female body sizes, indeed 
they are unnaturally long and thin.147 If the traditional Barbie doll were a real woman, her 
dimensions would be 38–18–34! Mattel conducted “plastic surgery” on Barbie to give her a 
less pronounced bust and slimmer hips, but she is still not exactly dumpy.148 The company 
now sells an even more realistic Barbie featuring wider hips and a smaller bust.149
As we’ve seen, the ideal body type of Western women changes over time—check out por-
traits of models from several hundred years ago by Botticelli and others to appreciate by just 
how much. These changes periodically cause us to redefine sexual dimorphic markers, which are 
those aspects of the body that distinguish between the sexes. The first part of the 1990s saw 
the emergence of the controversial “waif” look in which successful models (most notably Kate 
Moss) had bodies that resembled those of young boys. Using heights and weights from winners 
of the Miss America pageant, nutrition experts concluded that many beauty queens were in 
the undernourished range. In the 1920s, contestants had a body mass index in the range now 
considered normal (20 to 25). Since then, an increasing number of winners have had indexes 
under 18.5, which is the World Health Organization’s standard for undernutrition.150
Similarly, a study of almost 50 years of Playboy centerfolds shows that the women have 
become less shapely since Marilyn Monroe graced the first edition with a voluptuous hour-
glass figure of 37–23–36. However, a magazine spokesman comments, “As time has gone 
on and women have become more athletic, more in the business world and more inclined 
to put themselves through fitness regimes, their bodies have changed, and we reflect that 
as well….”151 Fair enough. Indeed, a recent reexamination of centerfold data shows that 
the trend toward increasing thinness seems to have stabilized and may actually have begun 
to reverse. Still, although the women shown in the magazine became somewhat heavier 
over the 21-year period the researchers reviewed, the Playmates remain markedly below 
weights medical experts consider normal for their age group.152 Ironically, when research-
ers ask women to predict how men will rate women of different body shapes, women choose 
thinner figures than do men. In other words, they think men prefer skinny fashion model 
types, when in fact the shapes men choose come closer to the “real” women.153
The Western ideal of Female beauty
The French Parliament is talking about legislation that would regulate the minimum weight 
for fashion models. It wants to combat widespread problems among women who starve 
themselves to stay thin enough to succeed in this competitive business. If this law passes, 
a 5’7” model would need to weigh at least 120 pounds for a modeling agency to avoid 
criminal penalties. The “you can never be too thin or too rich” debate goes on in other coun-
tries as well, especially after the well-publicized deaths of several malnourished models— 
including a French woman who at one point before she died weighed only 55 pounds.
Some people exaggerate the connection between self-esteem and appearance to such 
an extent that they sacrifice their health to attain what they consider to be a desirable body 
image. Women in particular tend to pick up messages from the media that the quality of 
their bodies reflects their self-worth, so it is not surprising that most (though certainly not all) 
major body image distortions occur among females. These psychological disorders cause 
the patient to believe that his or her body literally is bigger or smaller than others see it.

226 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Researchers link a distorted body image to eating disorders, which are particularly 
prevalent among young women. People with anorexia perceive themselves as too fat, and 
they virtually starve themselves in the quest for thinness. This condition often results in 
bulimia, which involves two stages. First, binge eating occurs (usually in private), in which 
a person may consume more than 5,000 calories at one time. The binge is followed by 
induced vomiting, abuse of laxatives, fasting, or overly strenuous exercise—a “purging” 
process that reasserts the woman’s sense of control.
Most eating disorders occur among white, upper-middle-class teens and college-age 
women. Victims often have brothers or fathers who are hypercritical of their weight; these 
disorders are also associated with a history of sexual abuse.154 In addition, one’s peers can 
encourage binge eating; groups such as athletic teams, cheerleading squads, and sorori-
ties may reinforce this practice. In one study of a college sorority, members’ popularity 
within the group increased the more they binged.155
What is Today’s ideal of Female beauty?
Of course the pendulum is always moving because cultural changes modify the ideals of 
beauty that are dominant at one point in time. In late 2014 Kim Kardashian supposedly 
“broke the Internet” when many thousands of people clicked on a link to see a revealing 
photo of her large (and allegedly PhotoShop enhanced) backside on the cover of Paper 
magazine.156 A hit music video by Jennifer Lopez and Iggy Azalea called “Booty” helped to 
drive the trend toward, shall we say, a more pronounced female silhouette.
It’s not surprising that standards are changing because the typical woman’s body 
is no longer as “petite” as it used to be. The most commonly purchased dress today is a 
size 14; it was a size 8 in 1985! The size and shape of the “average” U.S. consumer is dra-
matically different from what it was 60 years ago; essentially the fashion industry is sell-
ing clothing to super thin women who don’t exist (at least not many of them do). The U.S. 
government estimates that two-thirds of U.S. adults are overweight or obese. Nevertheless, 
apparel companies still develop clothing lines based on a 1941 military study that set 
sizing standards based on a small sample of mostly white, young (and presumably physi-
cally fit) female soldiers. Indeed, even the sizes we wear send messages about body ideals. 
Clothing manufacturers often offer vanity sizing, where they deliberately assign smaller 
sizes to garments. Women prefer to buy the smaller size, even if the label is inaccurate. 
Those who have low self-esteem related to appearance think of themselves more positively 
and believe they are thinner when they wear vanity sizes.157
In addition, standards based on this outdated snapshot of U.S. women need to recog-
nize the diversity of today’s ethnic population: According to current criteria, 78 percent of 
African American women and 72 percent of Hispanic women are overweight, compared with 
58 percent of white women. Non-Caucasian body shapes differ as well; for example, Hispanic 
Americans and Asian Americans tend to be shorter than their Caucasian counterparts.
For several years Dove’s Campaign for Real Beauty has drawn attention to unrealistic 
beauty ideals as it features women with imperfect bodies in advertising. One ad read, “Let’s 
face it, firming the thighs of a size 8 supermodel wouldn’t have been much of a challenge.” 
Unilever initiated the campaign after its research showed that many women didn’t believe its 
products worked because the women who used them in its ads didn’t look realistic.158 When 
the company asked 3,200 women around the world to describe their looks, most summed 
themselves up as “average” or “natural.” Only 2 percent called themselves “beautiful.”
The growing popularity of “full-figured” women, such as Oprah, Queen Latifah, and 
Rosie O’Donnell, and plus-size spokesmodels, such as Emme, also has helped to improve 
the self-esteem of larger women. In reality, plus-size clothes have been available for almost 
a century, ever since a Lithuanian immigrant, Lena Bryant (her name was later misspelled 
as “Lane” on a business form), transformed a maternity-wear business into a line for stout 
women in the 1920s. Today, mass-market stores like Forever 21 and Target and upscale 
designers like Elie Tahari have turned their attention to the larger woman.
Nonetheless, fattism is deeply ingrained in our culture: As early as nursery school 
age, children prefer drawings of peers in wheelchairs, on crutches, or with facial dis-
figurements to those of fat children. One survey of girls aged 12 to 19 reported that 55 
percent said they see ads “all the time” that make them want to go on a diet.159 A recent 

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
227 
advertising controversy testifies to our thinness mania: It was bad enough when Pepsi 
unveiled its new “skinny” diet soda can. When the company paired the launch with 
Fashion Week—the huge promotion for an industry that celebrates skinny models (some 
of whom have died from anorexia)—the National Eating Disorders Association protested 
and Pepsi had to apologize. The organization also persuaded Apple to shut down an ad 
campaign because it was built around the message, “You can never be too thin or too 
powerful.”160
However larger consumers are fighting back against these stereotypes. As the name of 
a Dutch magazine proclaims, Big is Beautiful.161 A recent study focused on fatshionistas, 
plus-sized consumers who want more options from mainstream fashion marketers. A blog 
post the researchers found sums up the alienation many of these women feel:
For many of us who were fat as children and teens, clothes shopping was nothing short of tortuous. 
Even if our parents were supportive, the selection of “husky” or “half-sizes” for kids was the abso-
lute pits. When that sort of experience is reinforced as a child, we often take it into adulthood…. We 
simply have been socialized not to expect better than to be treated as fashion afterthoughts.
The researchers investigated the triggers that mobilize these women to try to change 
the market to make it friendlier to shoppers who don’t conform to a pencil-thin ideal 
of beauty. They found that indeed these consumers can agitate for change, especially 
when they create a common community of like-minded people (the “Fat Acceptance 
Movement”) who can rally behind others who have successfully challenged the status quo.
One “heroine” of this movement is the indie-rock singer Beth Ditto, who at slightly 
more than 5 feet tall weighs more than 200 pounds. She has successfully defied the “fat” 
stereotype and even launched her own fashion line. Ditto also was the opening model at 
a Jean Paul Gaultier runway show during Paris Fashion Week.162 And recently Target 
launched a plus-size product line after a popular blogger with almost 70,000 Instagram 
followers started a boycott against the stores because of its lack of plus-size inventory. In 
an open letter to the company, she wrote: “All I want is the clothing you offer all your other 
regular sized customers, but you always leave me out…. You have once again made me 
feel like a second-class customer and because of that I’m going to have to discontinue my 
relationship with you altogether.” Guess what? Target made her a brand ambassador for its 
new line, AVA & VIV.163 There really is something to this social media stuff.
ideals of Male beauty
It’s hard not to notice that many business leaders and celebrities recently have sprouted a 
lot of facial hair. Beards were a no-no for over a century; in the early to mid-1800s people 
commonly associated them with socialists and others on the margins of society. Friedrich 
Engels (who co-authored The Communist Manifesto with Karl Marx) once sponsored a 
“moustache evening” to taunt the clean-shaven members of the bourgeois class.
Then in the latter part of the century the “beard movement” came into fashion as the 
Gold Rush and the Civil War made shaving optional; and some rebelled against a world of 
“woman-faced men.” As Robber Barons like full-bearded Jay Gould and Andrew Carnegie 
flouted their millions, beards now became linked to capitalists. The pendulum swung yet 
again, however, as workers’ rebellions evoked images of bearded men committing violent 
acts against their bosses. King C. Gillette invented the safety razor in 1901, and the clean-
shaven look was back. Now, the pendulum has moved again: Google’s co-founder Sergey 
Brin, Goldman Sachs’s chief executive, Lloyd C. Blankfein, and Marc Benioff, the billion-
aire founder and chief executive of Salesforce, all sport prominent facial hair.164
As this brief history of facial hair illustrates, a society’s ideals of beauty for men change 
as well. Who could confuse Justin Bieber with Johnny Depp? Male ideals involve length of 
hair, the presence and type of facial hair (or not), musculature, and of course clothing styles 
and accessories (anyone for a “murse” aka “man bag?”). We also distinguish among ideals of 
beauty for men in terms of facial features, musculature, and facial hair. In fact, one national 
survey that asked both men and women to comment on male aspects of appearance found 
that the dominant standard of beauty for men is a strongly masculine, muscled body, though 
women tend to prefer men with less muscle mass than men themselves strive to attain.165
At least 400 Web sites 
attract young people with 
“ana” and “mia,” nick-
names for anorexia and 
bulimia. These “communi-
ties” offer tips on crash dieting, bingeing, vom-
iting, and hiding weight loss from concerned 
parents. Group dieting is a growing problem 
as consumers patronize blog rings devoted to 
excessive weight loss—especially when they 
challenge female college students to lose as 
much weight as possible before events such as 
spring break. In one typical post, a woman con-
fessed to eating “one cracker, one strawberry 
and a little bit of soup” in a 24-hour period, 
whereas another recounted a lunch of a slice 
of mango and a stick of gum. These sites, often 
adorned with photos of ultrathin celebrities 
and slogans such as “Diet Coke Is Life,” ap-
peal to followers of an underground movement 
called pro-ana (pro-anorexia) who sometimes 
identify themselves in public when they wear 
red bracelets. 
The Tangled Web

228 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Advertisers appear to have the males’ ideal in mind; a study of men who appear in 
advertisements found that most sport the strong and muscular physique of the male ste-
reotype.166 More than 40 percent of boys in middle school and high school say they exer-
cise regularly to increase muscle mass. Perhaps more troubling, 38 percent say they use 
protein supplements, and nearly 6 percent admit they have experimented with steroids.167
body Decoration and Mutilation
People in every culture adorn or alter their bodies in some way. 
Decorating the physical self serves a number of purposes:168
●
●To separate group members from nonmembers—One Native American tribe, the 
Chinook, pressed the head of a newborn between two boards for a year, which perma-
nently altered its shape. In our society, teens go out of their way to adopt distinctive 
hair and clothing styles that will separate them from adults.
●
●To place the individual in the social organization—Many cultures engage in 
puberty rites during which a boy symbolically becomes a man. Some young men in 
part of Ghana paint their bodies with white stripes to resemble skeletons to symbolize 
the death of their child status. In Western cultures, this rite may involve some form of 
mild self-mutilation or engaging in dangerous activities.
●
●To place the person in a gender category—The Tchikrin, American Indians of 
South America, insert a string of beads in a boy’s lip to enlarge it. Western women 
wear lipstick to enhance femininity. At the turn of the 20th century, small lips were 
fashionable because they represented women’s submissive role at that time.169 Today, 
big, red lips are provocative and indicate an aggressive sexuality.
●
●To enhance sex-role identification—We can compare the modern use of high 
heels, which podiatrists agree are a prime cause of knee and hip problems, backaches, 
and fatigue, with the traditional Asian practice of foot binding to enhance feminin-
ity. As one doctor observed, “When [women] get home, they can’t get their high-
heeled shoes off fast enough. But every doctor in the world could yell from now until 
Doomsday, and women would still wear them.”170
●
●To indicate desired social conduct—The Suya of South America wear ear orna-
ments to emphasize the importance placed on listening and obedience in their culture. 
In Western society, some gay men may wear an earring in the left or right ear to signal 
what role (submissive or dominant) they prefer in a relationship.
The e-commerce site Rent the Runway 
replaces models with regular women and 
allows visitors to search for women of a 
certain age, height, weight, and even bust 
size to see how that dress looks on someone 
similar. Shoppers can review dresses they 
have rented and have the option to list their 
height, weight, and chest size alongside their 
reviews. That feature allows other women 
to search for customers who have similar 
dimensions and ask them questions. The 
strategy seems to be working: The company 
found that the conversion rate for shoppers 
who clicked on real photos was double 
that of shoppers who clicked on models’ 
photos.171
Source: Rent the Runway.
ObjecTive 6-5 
Every culture dictates 
certain types of body 
decoration or mutilation.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
229 
●
●To indicate high status or rank—The Hidates, American Indians of North 
America, wear feather ornaments that indicate how many people they have killed. In 
our society, some people wear glasses with clear lenses, even though they do not have 
eye problems, to enhance their perceived status.
●
●To provide a sense of  security—Consumers often wear lucky charms, amulets, and 
rabbits’ feet to protect them from the “evil eye.” Some modern women wear a “mugger 
whistle” around their necks for a similar reason.
body anxiety
A billboard that shows a woman wearing a tank top and raising her arm to show off her 
underarm proclaims, “Dear New Jersey: When people call you ‘the Armpit of America,’ 
take it as a compliment. Sincerely, Dove.” It’s part of a campaign for Dove Advanced Care, 
a new deodorant product with moisturizers for underarms.”172 It looks like women have 
another body part to worry about.
Because many consumers experience a gap between their real and ideal physical 
selves, they often go to great lengths to change aspects of their appearance. From girdles 
to bras, cosmetics to plastic surgery, tanning salons to diet drinks, a multitude of prod-
ucts and services promise to alter aspects of the physical self. It is difficult to overstate 
the importance of the physical self-concept (and consumers’ desires to improve their 
appearances) to many marketing activities. To rub salt into the wound, there is evidence 
that exposure to these messages increases the desire to conform to a cultural ideal (such 
as thinness for women) but also decreases a person’s belief that they can attain this ideal. 
One recent study reported that when women in a weight loss program were repeatedly 
exposed to images of a thin model, they saw their dieting goals as less attainable and actu-
ally consumed more unhealthy snacks.173
cosmetic Surgery
Consumers increasingly choose to have cosmetic surgery to change a poor body image or 
simply to enhance appearance.174 In Venezuela, billboards advertise bank loans to obtain 
breast augmentations; a political candidate even tried to finance his campaign by raffling 
off a breast lift.175 Cosmetic procedures are so fashionable that a woman with implants is 
often casually referred to as “an operated woman.” South Korea, which boasts the highest 
rate of cosmetic surgery of any country, is attracting hordes of Chinese consumers who 
flock there for double eyelid surgery or more radical facial restructuring that often involves 
painful procedures to alter their faces into a V-shape that results in delicate features their 
culture values.. The Korean government even provides funding to promote the country’s 
A Russian artist takes body decoration to 
a new extreme: He describes himself as a 
platypus – and indeed his lips extend more 
than two inches from his face.
Source: News Dog Media.
Marketing pitfall
In 
a 
previous 
era, 
wealthy women avoided 
the sun at all costs lest 
people get the impres-
sion that they had to 
work for a living outdoors. The bias toward 
pale skin extends to other cultures as well. 
An ad on Malaysian television showed an 
attractive college student who can’t get a 
second glance from a boy at the next desk. 
“She’s pretty,” he says to himself, “but ….” 
Then she applies Pond’s Skin Lightening 
Moisturizer by Unilever PLC, and she reap-
pears looking several shades paler. Now 
the boy wonders, “Why didn’t I notice her 
before?” In many Asian cultures, people also 
historically equate light skin with wealth and 
status, and they associate dark skin with the 
laboring class that toils in the fields. This 
stereotype persists today: In a survey, 74 
percent of men in Malaysia, 68 percent in 
Hong Kong, and 55 percent in Taiwan said 
they are more attracted to women with fair 
complexions. About a third of the female 
respondents in each country said they use 
skin-whitening products. Olay has a product 
it calls White Radiance, and L’Oréal sells a 
White Perfect line.176
In contrast, Caucasians in the U.S. today 
equate a tanned complexion with health, 
physical activity and an abundance of leisure 
time… Indoor tanning at salons with names 
such as Eternal Summer and Tan City is 
popular among many U.S. young people, de-
spite evidence that links this practice to skin 
cancer. A recent analysis found that tanning 
beds account for as many as 400,000 cases 
of skin cancer in the United States each year, 
including 6,000 cases of melanoma, which 
is the deadliest form of the disease. The rate 
of melanoma among women younger than 40 
has risen significantly in recent years. Public 
health officials report that one-third of Cau-
casian teenage girls say they have engaged 
in indoor tanning. And, about half of the top-
rated colleges in the United States offer tan-
ning beds either on campus or in off-campus 
housing.177 Is skin cancer too high a price to 
pay to attain an ideal of beauty?

230 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
medical tourism business. This term describes a rapidly growing sector of the global 
economy that encourages consumers to travel to other countries for surgical procedures 
that might be unavailable, more dangerous, or more expensive where they live.178
According to the American Academy of Cosmetic Surgery, doctors in the United 
States perform nearly 860,000 cosmetic-surgery procedures each year—and men make 
up more than 150,000 of the patients. As cosmetic surgery becomes increasingly accept-
able (even expected in some circles), consumers and the medical profession expand the 
scope of body parts they want to alter. Perhaps spurred by fashions such as low-rise jeans 
and spandex workout gear that call attention to the derrière, for example, buttock aug-
mentation surgery is gaining in popularity. The operation typically costs about $20,000, 
so clearly it’s not intended for the bottom of the market.179
The craze for “modifications” even extends to younger consumers who (one would 
think) don’t need it—at least not yet. The American Society of Plastic Surgeons reports that 
doctors give about 12,000 Botox injections to U.S. teens aged 13 to 19 annually. Although 
there are some sound medical reasons for this, such as abnormal twitching of the eyelid or 
involuntary contractions of neck muscles, apparently most young patients elect to have 
the treatment to address perceived imperfections such as a too-gummy smile and a too-
square jaw. Some teenagers mistakenly think that Botox can prevent wrinkles.180
Tattoos
Tattoos—both temporary and permanent—today are a popular form of body adorn-
ment.181 Mattel Inc. even released Totally Stylin’ Tattoos Barbie, which comes with tiny 
tattoos her young owners can put on her body. The doll also comes with wash-off tats kids 
can use to ink themselves.182
Although consumers young and old (okay, mostly young) sport body art to make 
statements about the self, these skin designs actually serve some of the same functions 
that other kinds of body painting do in primitive cultures. Tattoos (from the Tahitian ta-tu) 
have deep roots in folk art. Until recently, the images were crude and were primarily death 
symbols (e.g., a skull), animals (especially panthers, eagles, and snakes), pinup women, or 
military designs. More current influences include science fiction themes, Japanese sym-
bolism, and tribal designs.
Historically, people associated tattoos with social outcasts. For example, authori-
ties in 6th-century Japan tattooed the faces and arms of criminals to identify them, and 
these markings served the same purpose in 19th-century prisons and 20th-century 
In Venezuela, women are confronted with a 
culture of increasingly enhanced physiques 
fueled by beauty pageants and plastic 
surgery.
Source: Meridith Kohut/The New York Times.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
231 
concentration camps. Marginal groups, such as bikers or Japanese yakuza (gang mem-
bers), often use these emblems to express group identity and solidarity.
Today, a tattoo is a fairly risk-free way to express an adventurous side of the self. 
About 1 in 5 Americans have at least one, and women are twice as likely to sport a tattoo 
compared to men. The most popular ink site for women: the ankle.183
As more people jump on the tattoo bandwagon it’s inevitable that some of them will 
regret this decision later (perhaps when they wake up in the morning?). Tattoo removal cen-
ters with names such as Dr. Tattoff, Tat2BeGone, and Tattoo MD meet the need to deal with 
so-called “tattoo regret.” Industry data indicate that at least 45,000 Americans undergo 
tattoo removal each year. Unfortunately—at least for now—it’s a lot more complicated to 
remove a tattoo than to put one on. A design that cost several hundred dollars could require 
several thousand dollars and many laser sessions to remove.184 The moral: Before you get a 
significant other’s name etched onto your body, be pretty sure you plan to stay together.
body piercing
Like tattoos, body piercing evolved from a practice associated with fringe groups to a 
popular fashion statement. Historians credit the initial impetus for the mainstreaming 
of what had been an underground West Coast fad to Aerosmith’s 1993 video for the 
An interesting tattoo in an Australian  
liquor ad.
Source: Sean Izzard/Advertising Agency: JayGrey/
Pool Productions.

232 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
song “Cryin’,” in which actress Alicia Silverstone gets both a navel ring and a tattoo.185 
Piercings can range from a hoop protruding from a navel to scalp implants, where metal 
posts are inserted in the skull (do not try this at home!). Publications such as Piercing Fans 
International Quarterly see their circulations soar, and Web sites attract numerous follow-
ers. According to one recent estimate, about 14 percent of Americans have at least one 
body piercing other than in an earlobe. About three-fourths of these people are female; the 
most popular site is the navel.186
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
1. The self-concept strongly influences consumer behavior.
Consumers’ self-concepts are reflections of their attitudes 
toward themselves. Whether these attitudes are positive or 
negative, they will help to guide many purchase decisions; 
we can use products to bolster self-esteem or to “reward” 
the self.
2. Products often define a person’s self-concept.
We choose many products because we think that they are 
similar to our personalities. The symbolic interactionist 
perspective of the self implies that each of us actually has 
many selves, and we require a different set of products as 
props to play each role. We view many things other than 
the body as part of who we are. People use valued objects, 
cars, homes, and even attachments to sports teams or 
national monuments to define the self, when they incorpo-
rate these into the extended self.
3. Gender identity is an important component of a consumer’s 
self-concept.
Sex roles, or a society’s conceptions about masculinity and 
femininity, exert a powerful influence on our expectations 
about the brands we should consume. Advertising plays an 
ChaPTeR SummaRy
important role because it portrays idealized expectations 
about gender identity.
4. The way we think about our bodies (and the way our 
culture tells us we should think) is a key component of 
self-esteem.
A person’s conception of his or her body also provides feed-
back to self-image. A culture communicates specific ideals 
of beauty, and consumers go to great lengths to attain these. 
Many consumer activities involve manipulating the body, 
whether through dieting, cosmetic surgery, piercing, or tat-
tooing. Sometimes these activities are carried to an extreme 
because people try too hard to live up to cultural ideals. 
One common manifestation is eating disorders, diseases in 
which women in particular become obsessed with thinness.
5. every culture dictates certain types of body decoration 
or mutilation.
Body decoration or mutilation may serve such functions 
as separating group members from nonmembers, marking 
the individual’s status or rank within a social organization 
or within a gender category (e.g., homosexual), or even 
providing a sense of security or good luck.
Actual self, 202
Agentic goals, 214
Androgyny, 218
Badges, 209
Body image, 221
Body image distortions, 225
Bromance, 215
Collective self, 201
Communal goals, 214
Compensatory consumption,207
Contemporary young mainstream 
female achievers (CYMFA), 216
Digital self, 211
Dramaturgical perspective, 203
Embodied cognition, 210
Empty self, 205
Enclothed cognition, 210
Extended self, 208
Fantasy, 203
Fatshionistas, 227
Fattism, 226
Gender identity, 213
Gender socialization, 214
Gender-bending products, 220
Geospatial platforms, 209
Group dieting, 227
Ideal of beauty, 222
Key TeRmS

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
233 
Ideal self, 202
Identity, 201
Identity marketing, 206
Imbibing idiot bias, 202
Impression management, 202
Intersex children, 221
Looking-glass self, 204
Masculinism, 217
Medical tourism, 230
Meerkating, 205
Microfame, 201
Nanofame, 201
Neuroendocrinological science, 214
Power posing, 210
Public self-consciousness, 205
Self-concept, 201
Self-esteem, 202
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 204
Self-monitors, 205
Selfie, 205
Self-image congruence models, 205
Sex roles, 213
Sexting, 205
Sex-typed products, 215
Sex-typed traits, 214
Social comparison, 202
Symbolic interactionism, 204
Symbolic self-completion theory, 207
Third gender movement, 221
Torn self, 203
Vanity sizing, 226
Virtual makeover, 212
Wearable computing, 212
 
6-4 Have ideals of beauty in the United States changed dur-
ing the past 50 years? If so, how?
 
6-5 What is vanity sizing?
 
6-6 What does “the looking-glass self” mean? How do feel-
ings about the self influence what we buy?
 
6-7 How do Eastern and Western cultures differ in terms of 
how people think about the self?
 
6-8 How are subjective views of body image exploited by 
marketers?
Review
 
6-1 What is the Big Five?
 
6-2 Compare and contrast the real versus the ideal self. List 
three products for which a person is likely to use each 
type of self as a reference point when he or she considers 
a purchase.
 
6-3 How might the “digital self” differ from a consumer’s 
self-concept in the real world, and why is this difference 
potentially important to marketers?
some cosmetics products, like foundation and eyeliner, 
are catching on in some segments, though men aren’t 
comfortable owning up to using them. In fact, a British 
makeup product looks like a ballpoint pen so men can 
apply it secretly at the office.187 Over the past decade, 
the media paid a lot of attention to so-called “metro-
sexuals”: straight males who are interested in fashion, 
home design, gourmet cooking, and personal care 
products. How widespread is this phenomenon? Do you 
see men in your age group focusing on these interests? 
Should marketers change how they think of male sex 
roles today?
 6-14 Some activists object to Axe’s male-focused marketing 
because they claim it demeans women. In contrast, 
Dove’s “Natural Beauty” campaign gets kudos because 
it promotes more realistic expectations for girls. Guess 
what? The same company—Unilever—owns both Axe 
and Dove. Is it hypocritical for a big company to sponsor 
positive messages about women in one of its divisions 
while it sends a different message in another?
 6-15 Jenny Darroch of the Drucker School of Management 
focuses much of her research on how to market to 
women. She believes that around 85 percent of all fam-
ily household purchases occur as a result of a decision 
made by a woman. The other major consideration is the 
 
6-9 To what extent do your purchasing habits reflect your 
own personality?
 6-10 Are you what you post online?
 6-11 According to the Web site Voucher Codes, “pester 
power” costs U.K. parents $750 per year. The children 
were clearly influenced by advertising, and parents 
often used diversionary tactics to put them off the 
scent. One parent in 10, according to the study, gave in 
and made the purchase whether the child needed the 
item or not. What is pester power, and is it a problem in 
your country?   
 6-12 How might a marketer frame a marketing campaign 
aimed at contemporary young mainstream female 
achievers (CYMFA)? Are there any key differences or sim-
ilarities to the broader female market that can be used?
 6-13 One consequence of the continual evolution of sex 
roles is that men are concerned as never before with 
their appearance. Men spend $7.7 billion on grooming 
products globally each year. A wave of male cleansers, 
moisturizers, sunscreens, depilatories, and body sprays 
washes up on U.S. shores, largely from European mar-
keters. L’Oréal Paris reports that men’s skincare prod-
ucts are now its fastest-growing sector. In Europe, 24 
percent of men younger than age 30 use skincare prod-
ucts—and 80 percent of young Korean men do. Even 
ConSumeR BehavioR ChallenGe
■ DiScUSS

234 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
growth of demographic data and how it is being used 
to target women as decision makers. Darroch is firmly 
of the opinion that marketers need to consider whether 
gender plays a role in a purchasing decision.188 The 
motivation behind a potential purchase may be entirely 
gender-driven. A potential automobile purchase might 
mean that a man is more interested in style and perfor-
mance while a woman is more concerned with practical-
ities such as space, affordability, and fuel consumption. 
What marketing advice would you suggest when target-
ing female customers? 
 6-16 The clothing chain H&M features computer-generated 
models on its Web site. The company drew criticism 
for presenting only picture-perfect people; for example, 
the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation accused 
the chain of “creating unrealistic physical ideals.” A 
company spokesman defended the move by explain-
ing that these unreal bodies would ensure that the 
garments remain the focus of online shoppers’ atten-
tion. In contrast, the teen-oriented magazine Seven-
teen pledged to always feature “real girls” in its pages. 
This change was in response to an online petition that 
gathered nearly 85,000 signatures in just 4 days. The 
14-year-old reader who posted the petition stated, “For 
the sake of all the struggling girls all over America, who 
read Seventeen and think these fake images are what 
they should be, I’m stepping up. I know how hurtful 
these photoshopped images can be.”189 What do you 
think of this argument—does the use of only “perfect” 
bodies create a problem for real shoppers?
●
■appLy
 6-17 If our possessions do indeed come to be a part of us, how 
do we bring ourselves to part with these precious items? 
Researchers find that people often take steps to distance 
themselves from a favored object before they get rid of 
it. Strategies they identified include taking pictures and 
videos of the objects; moving them into an out-of-the 
way location such as a garage or an attic; or washing, 
ironing, and wrapping the item. Interview people you 
know who have disposed of a product that was impor-
tant to them—for example, a well-used car or a favor-
ite sweatshirt that finally had too many holes to keep. 
What steps did they take to “divest” themselves of this 
attachment (such as removing personal items from a 
car before selling it, etc.).190
 6-18 Construct a “consumption biography” of a friend or 
family member. Make a list of or photograph his or 
her favorite possessions, and see if you or others can 
describe this person’s personality just from the informa-
tion provided by this catalog.
 6-19 Interview victims of burglaries, or people who have lost 
personal property in floods, hurricanes, or other natu-
ral disasters. How do they go about reconstructing their 
possessions, and what effect did the loss appear to have 
on them? Similarly, poll your class: If their house or 
apartment was on fire and they could only take one pos-
session with them as they evacuate, what would it be?
 6-20 Some people sacrifice their health to attain what they 
consider to be a desirable body image. Is this a problem 
in your country?
 6-21 Clearly some products and services are necessarily 
gender orientated, but many products are needlessly 
gender-specific. Many women would also point out that 
female versions of a product are often more expensive too. 
Identify some products that are needlessly gender-specific.
 6-22 How do people you know feel about their cars? Interview 
some of them about the “relationships” they have. Do 
they decorate their cars? Do they have nicknames for 
them? And, check out a video on YouTube called “I Love 
My Car” to really see how deep these relationships can go.
 6-23 Many advertisers routinely purchase stock photogra-
phy when they need an image of a certain kind of per-
son to insert in an ad. Many photos of women reflect 
common stereotypes, ranging from the crisp busi-
nesswoman who wears a suit and glasses and holds a 
briefcase to the smiling mother who pours milk into 
cereal bowls for her kids at breakfast. Sheryl Sandberg, 
the Facebook executive who is an advocate for women 
in business, started an organization called Lean In to 
promote leadership. Lean In has now partnered with 
Getty Images, one of the biggest stock photography 
companies, to offer an image collection that represents 
women differently. The new collection depicts women 
as surgeons, painters, bakers, soldiers and hunters. 
There are girls riding skateboards and women lifting 
weights.191 Look through a sample of current maga-
zines and collect images of women. To what extent do 
they represent a range of roles? Categorize these images 
according to the type of product advertised and the 
situation the photo depicts (e.g., multitasking woman 
holding a  tablet and a baby, happy homemaker, etc.). 
Based on what you find, what messages do our media 
give us about gender roles today?

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
235 
itself as a brand that is still relevant to women’s self-concept and 
self-importance in the twenty-first century. With the Age Perfect 
range, L’Oréal overtly endorses that the idea that beauty and the 
use of cosmetics are not limited to younger women, and it encour-
ages older women to indulge themselves and enjoy and take pride 
in growing older. It reinforces this message in several slogans: 
“The older we get, the more fabulous we become,” “Now is our 
time. Now is our Perfect Age,” “It’s taken over 60 years to look this 
good. We are so worth it!”
Through many online tips and tutorials, L’Oréal also shows 
how many Age Perfect products can be used. These tips include 
advice for haircuts, hair color, hair volume, foundation, lip color, 
eyeshades and mascara, eyebrows, makeup remover, cleansers, 
and moisturizers. The focus is on helping women understand how 
products from the Age Perfect line can be used according to their 
age and image. 
L’Oréal’s Age Perfect has been well received for its inclusivity, 
but the Age Perfect line has also allowed the company to effec-
tively segment the female cosmetics market. In practice, the ap-
proach combines experimentation and redefining one’s looks with 
the help of age-appropriate products that will address the specific 
beauty needs of older women—all while encouraging women to 
develop a bold attitude as an expression of their beauty.
DiSCuSSion QueSTionS
CS  6-1 Discuss the success of L’Oréal’s slogan “Because I am 
worth it” over time, and how it has managed to con-
nect with women. What is role of cosmetics in the way 
women of different ages look at themselves and define 
their self-concept and self-esteem? 
CS 6-2 Comment on the role of female celebrities in delivering 
L’Oréal’s brand message. How do you think the message 
of self-worth would be received by women if L’Oréal did 
not use celebrities in its marketing?  
CS  6-3 Discuss the appeal of the Age Perfect advertising cam-
paign for the older women. Actress Helen Mirren in-
sisted that her facial features, including wrinkles and 
age spots, were not to be air brushed or retouched. Do 
you think this strategy will work better than glossy and 
airbrushed campaigns?  
Sources: L’Oréal Paris, “Age Perfect for Helen Mirren’s Golden Age,” 2015, http://
www.loreal-paris.co.uk/perfectage, accessed November 26, 2015; E. McLonan, 
“My Beauty Secrets—by Dame Helen: At 69, She Still Looks Stunning,” Mail 
Online, 
2015, 
 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2926043/My-
beauty-secrets-Dame-Helen-69-looks-stunning-reveals-new-ad-campaign-
Helen-Mirren-tells-exclusively-does-it.html, accessed November 26, 2015; 
YouTube, “The History of ‘Because You’re Worth It,’” 2015, https://www 
.youtube.com/watch?v=j6DHRFuCEwA, accessed November, 26 2015; 
YouTube, “Helen Mirren Stars in the NEW Age Perfect TV Advert from L’Oréal 
Paris,” 2015, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ZPIqfpM3-s, accessed 
November 26, 2015.
l’oRéal aGe PeRfeCT—BeCauSe They’Re 
woRTh iT 
L’Oréal Paris’s signature slogan “Because I’m worth it” is one of 
the most recognizable of all time. It was first introduced in 1973 by 
L’Oreal Paris when it was launching its hair color products in the 
United States; since then, the company has grown into a  cosmetics 
giant that markets a range of beauty and makeup products in 
more than 130 countries, and the slogan still resonates with wom-
en’s conceptions of beauty and self-esteem around the world. 
L’Oréal Paris adopted a very modern approach to its com-
munication strategy when it ran the “Because I’m worth it” 
advertising campaign. Before the campaign, advertising mostly 
involved male voiceovers talking about women’s products. L’Oréal 
initiated the trend of women speaking for themselves, highlight-
ing their self-confidence, independence, and self-fulfillment. A 
23-year-old female copy writer from McKann Erickson created 
the slogan at the height of the feminist movement in the 1970s. 
The slogan struck the right chord, communicating independence, 
 respect, and recognition for women. This led to the development 
of a long line of successful celebrity endorsements by more than  
35 diverse international female ambassadors, including Jane 
Fonda, Eva Longoria, Jennifer Lopez, Beyoncé, and Aishwarya 
Rai. The slogan has changed little over the years, the only varia-
tions being “Because you’re worth it” and “Because we’re worth 
it” to adapt to the changing times and circumstances. 
Over the years, L’Oréal has continued to partner with fe-
male brand ambassadors belonging to different age groups from 
across the globe. Many of L’Oréal’s brand ambassadors have 
been relatively younger female celebrities, a global trend in the 
cosmetic industry. But L’Oréal has shown a higher degree of in-
clusivity by offering specific beauty products for older women like 
the L’Oréal Age Perfect Range. L’Oréal recognized that women’s 
concepts of beauty are evolving, and older women increasingly 
prefer age-appropriate beauty products that address their specific 
needs. L’Oréal’s Age Perfect range offers many products that ca-
ter to such needs, including Excellence Hair Color, Cell Renewal 
Day Cream, Glow Renewal Day/Night Cream, and Eye Renewal 
Eye Cream.
For its Age Perfect Range, L’Oréal partnered with the ac-
claimed actress Dame Helen Mirren in 2015. L’Oréal’s decision 
to have Dame Mirren as a spokesperson for the Age Perfect brand 
has been welcomed in the beauty world for its celebration of older 
women. The ads for the Age Perfect Range present Dame Mirren 
as very candid, un-retouched; she promotes the idea of aging with 
a confident attitude, saying “Grow another year bolder.” In one of 
the ads for Age Perfect, Helen makes a bold statement by wearing a 
black leather jacket, a sleek fitting skirt, and bright red lipstick. She 
gives a twist to the brand’s famous tagline by asking, “So are we 
worth it?” and answers with a mischievous grin, “More than ever.”
By endorsing its Age Perfect line through bold celebrity am-
bassadors, L’Oréal reinforces its brand personality, promoting 
●■Case Study 

236 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
6-24 The chapter discusses the “empty self” explanation for the popularity of selfies 
among young people. Do you agree?
6-25 Societies and cultures view body decoration and mutilation in different ways. But 
people in nearly every society adorn or alter their bodies in some way. What 
are the main reasons for decorating the physical self in this way? How do these 
decorations inform us about these individuals?
noTeS
Häfner and Debra Trampe, “When Thinking Is Beneficial and When 
It Is Not: The Effects of Thin and Round Advertising Models,” Journal 
of Consumer Psychology 19, no. 4 (2009): 619–628; Brent McFerran, 
Darren W. Dahl, Gavan J. Fitzsimons, and Andrea C. Morales, “I’ll Have 
What She’s Having: Effects of Social Influence and Body Type on the Food 
Choices of Others,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 6 (April 2010): 
173–180.
 16. For the seminal treatment of this process, cf. Erving Goffman, The 
Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (New York: Doubleday, 1959).
 17. Quoted in Michael Slackman, “Fashion and Faith Meet, on Foreheads of 
the Pious,” New York Times (December 18, 2007), www.nytimes.com, 
 accessed March 25, 2015.
 18. Scott I. Rick and Maurice E. Schweitzer, “The Imbibing Idiot Bias: Con-
suming Alcohol Can be Hazardous to Your (Perceived) Intelligence,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 23, no. 2 (2013): 212–219.
 19. Harrison G. Gough, Mario Fioravanti, and Renato Lazzari, “Some Impli-
cations of Self Versus Ideal-Self Congruence on the Revised Adjective 
Check List,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 44, no. 6 (1983): 
1214–1220.
 20. Steven Jay Lynn and Judith W. Rhue, “Daydream Believers,” Psychology 
Today (September 1985): 14.
 21. Parham Aarabi, “How Brands are Using Facial Recognition to Trans-
form Marketing,” VB News (April 13, 2013), http://venturebeat.com/ 
2013/04/13/marketing-facial-recognition/, accessed February 20, 2015.
 22. Erving Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1959); Michael R. Solomon, “The Role of Products as Social 
Stimuli: A Symbolic Interactionism Perspective,” Journal of Consumer Research 
10 (December 1983): 319–329.
 23. Americus Reed II, “Activating the Self-Importance of Consumer Selves: 
Exploring Identity Salience Effects on Judgments,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 31, no. 2 (2004): 286–295.
 24. Aliakbar Jafari and Christina Goulding, “‘We Are Not Terrorists!’ UK-Based 
Iranians, Consumption Practices and the ‘Torn Self,’” Consumption Markets 
& Culture 11 (June 2008): 73–91.
 25. Quoted in Fred Meier, “Girls Named Zoe Lose Suit Against Renault for 
Naming Electric Car Zoe,” DriveOn (November 10, 2010), http://content 
.usatoday.com/communities/driveon/post/2010/11/girls-lose-renault-
zoe-electric-car-lawsuit-over-name/1, accessed April 10, 2011.
 26. George H. Mead, Mind, Self and Society (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1934).
 27. Debra A. Laverie, Robert E. Kleine, and Susan Schultz Kleine, “Reexamination 
and Extension of Kleine, Kleine, and Kernan’s Social Identity Model of 
Mundane Consumption: The Mediating Role of the Appraisal Process,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 28 (March 2002): 659–669.
 28. Jennifer Elias, “Can This Company Finally Get The Retail Fashion World 
Online?” Fast Company (June 24, 2014), http://www.fastcolabs.com/ 
3026831/can-this-company-finally-get-the-retail-fashion-world-online, 
accessed March 19, 2015.
 29. Charles H. Cooley, Human Nature and the Social Order (New York: Scribner’s, 
1902).
 30. Jay G. Hull and Alan S. Levy, “The Organizational Functions of the Self: An 
Alternative to the Duval and Wicklund Model of Self-Awareness,” Journal 
of Personality & Social Psychology 37 (1979): 756–768; Jay G. Hull, Ronald 
R. Van Treuren, Susan J. Ashford, Pamela Propsom, and Bruce W. Andrus, 
“Self-Consciousness and the Processing of Self-Relevant Information,” 
Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 54, no. 3 (1988): 452–465.
 
1. http://www.statista.com/statistics/273172/twitter-accounts-with-the-
most-followers-worldwide/accessed March 18, 2015.
 
2. Alex Williams, “15 Minutes of Fame? More Like 15 Seconds of Nanofame,”  
New York Times (February 6, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/08/
style/15-minutes-of-fame-more-like-15-seconds-of-nanofame.html?smid 
=nytcore-ipad-share&smprod=nytcore-ipad&_r=0, accessed February 16, 
2015.
 
3. Harry C. Triandis, “The Self and Social Behavior in Differing Cultural 
Contexts,” Psychological Review 96, no. 3 (1989): 506–520; H. Markus and 
S. Kitayama, “Culture and the Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion, 
and Motivation,” Psychological Review 98 (1991): 224–253.
 
4. Markus and Kitayama, “Culture and the Self.”
 
5. Nancy Wong and Aaron Ahuvia, “A Cross-Cultural Approach to 
Materialism and the Self,” in Dominique Bouchet, ed., Cultural Dimensions 
of International Marketing (Denmark: Odense University, 1995): 68–89.
 
6. Morris Rosenberg, Conceiving the Self (New York: Basic Books, 1979); M. 
Joseph Sirgy, “Self-Concept in Consumer Behavior: A Critical Review,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 9 (December 1982): 287–300; www.mediapost.com, 
accessed February 15, 2007; Roy F. Baumeister, Dianne M. Tice, and Debra 
G. Hutton, “Self-Presentational Motivations and Personality Differences in 
Self-Esteem,” Journal of Personality 57 (September 1989): 547–575; Ronald 
J. Faber, “Are Self-Esteem Appeals Appealing?” in Leonard N. Reid, ed., 
Proceedings of the 1992 Conference of the American Academy of Advertising 
(1992): 230–235.
 
7. John Tierney, “Why You Won’t Be the Person You Expect to Be?” New York  
Times (January 3, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/04/ scence/
study-in-science-shows-end-of-history-illusion.html?_r=0, accessed January 
23, 2013.
 
8. Americus Reed, Mark R. Forehand, Stefano Puntoni, and Luk Warlop, 
“Identity-based Consumer Behavior,” International Journal of Research in 
Marketing 29, no. 4 (2012): 310–321.
 
9. Emily Yoffe, “You Are What You Buy,” Newsweek (June 4, 1990): 59.
 10. Derek D. Rucker, David Dubois, and Adam D. Galinsky, “Generous Paupers 
and Stingy Princes: Power Drives Consumer Spending on Self Versus 
Others,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 6 (April 2011): 1015–1029.
 11. Michael Häfner, “How Dissimilar Others May Still Resemble the Self: 
Assimilation and Contrast After Social Comparison,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology 14, nos. 1 & 2 (2004): 187–196.
 12. Marsha L. Richins, “Social Comparison and the Idealized Images of 
Advertising,” Journal of Consumer Research 18 (June 1991): 71–83; Mary 
C. Martin and Patricia F. Kennedy, “Advertising and Social Comparison: 
Consequences for Female Preadolescents and Adolescents,” Psychology 
& Marketing 10 (November–December 1993): 513–530; cf. also Claudia 
Townsend and Sanjay Sood, “Self-Affirmation Through the Choice of Highly 
Aesthetic Products,” Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 2 (2012): 415–428.
 13. Philip N. Myers, Jr., and Frank A. Biocca, “The Elastic Body Image: 
The Effect of Television Advertising and Programming on Body Image 
Distortions in Young Women,” Journal of Communication 42 (Summer 
1992): 108–133.
 14. Charles S. Gulas and Kim McKeage, “Extending Social Comparison: An 
Examination of the Unintended Consequences of Idealized Advertising 
Imagery,” Journal of Advertising 29 (Summer 2000): 17–28.
 15. Brent McFerran, Darren W. Dahl, Gavan J. Fitzsimons, and Andrea C. 
Morales, “Might an Overweight Waitress Make You Eat More? How the 
Body Type of Others Is Sufficient to Alter Our Food Consumption,” Journal 
of Consumer Psychology 20, no. 2 (2010): 146–151; cf. also Michael 

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
237 
 49. Allison R. Johnson, Maggie Matear, and Matthew Thomson, “A Coal in the 
Heart: Self-Relevance as a Post-Exit Predictor of Consumer Anti-Brand 
Actions,” Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 1 (June 2011): 108–125.
 50. A. L. E. Birdwell, “A Study of Influence of Image Congruence on Consumer 
Choice,” Journal of Business 41 (January 1964): 76–88; Edward L. Grubb 
and Gregg Hupp, “Perception of Self, Generalized Stereotypes, and Brand 
Selection,” Journal of Marketing Research 5 (February 1986): 58–63.
 51. Benedict Carey, “With That Saucy Swagger, She Must Drive a Porsche,” 
New York Times (June 13, 2006), www.nytimes.com, accessed March 25, 
2015.
 52. Ira J. Dolich, “Congruence Relationship Between Self-Image and Product 
Brands,” Journal of Marketing Research 6 (February 1969): 80–84; Danny 
N. Bellenger, Earle Steinberg, and Wilbur W. Stanton, “The Congruence 
of Store Image and Self Image as It Relates to Store Loyalty,” Journal 
of Retailing 52, no. 1 (1976): 17–32; Ronald J. Dornoff and Ronald L. 
Tatham, “Congruence Between Personal Image and Store Image,” Journal 
of the Market Research Society 14, no. 1 (1972): 45–52.
 53. Naresh K. Malhotra, “A Scale to Measure Self-Concepts, Person Concepts, 
and Product Concepts,” Journal of Marketing Research 18 (November 1981): 
456–464.
 54. Jack L. Nasar, “Symbolic Meanings of House Styles,” Environment & 
Behavior 21 (May 1989): 235–257; E. K. Sadalla, B. Verschure, and J. 
Burroughs, “Identity Symbolism in Housing,” Environment & Behavior 19 
(1987): 579–587.
 55. Solomon, “The Role of Products as Social Stimuli”; Robert E. Kleine III, 
Susan Schultz-Kleine, and Jerome B. Kernan, “Mundane Consumption and 
the Self: A Social-Identity Perspective,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 2, 
no. 3 (1993): 209–235; Newell D. Wright, C. B. Claiborne, and M. Joseph 
Sirgy, “The Effects of Product Symbolism on Consumer Self-Concept,” in 
John F. Sherry Jr. and Brian Sternthal, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 
19 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1992): 311–318; Susan 
Fournier, “A Person-Based Relationship Framework for Strategic Brand 
Management” (doctoral dissertation, University of Florida, 1994); Liad 
Weiss and Gita V. Johar, “Egocentric Categorization and Product Judgment: 
Seeing Your Traits in What You Own (And Their Opposite in What You 
Don’t),” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (2013): 185–201.
 56. www.airnewzealand.com/aboutus/mediacentre/cranial-billboards-cam 
paign.htm, accessed March 5, 2013.
 57. “The History of Temporary Tattoos,” TemporaryTattoos.com (May 25, 2013), 
http://temporarytattoos.com/the-history-of-temporary-tattoos/, accessed  
March 20, 2015.
 58. Gabriel Beltrone, “Woman Gets a Giant Reebok Tattoo, and Her Very Own 
Ad to Go with It,” Adweek (September 17, 2014), http://www.adweek 
.com/adfreak/woman-gets-giant-reebok-tattoo-and-her-very-own-ad-
well-160192, accessed March 20, 2015.
 59. A. Dwayne Ball and Lori H. Tasaki, “The Role and Measurement of 
Attachment in Consumer Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 1, no. 2  
(1992): 155–172.
 60. William B. Hansen and Irwin Altman, “Decorating Personal Places: 
A Descriptive Analysis,” Environment & Behavior 8 (December 1976): 
491–504.
 61. Lan Nguyen Chaplin and Deborah Roedder John, “The Development of 
Self-Brand Connections in Children and Adolescents,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 32 (June 2005): 119–129.
 62. Robert A. Wicklund and Peter M. Gollwitzer, Symbolic Self-Completion 
(Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1982).
 63. Paul Glader, “Avid Boarders Bypass Branded Gear,” Wall Street Journal (July 27, 
2007), http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB118549628157679731, accessed 
March 24, 2015.
 64. Erving Goffman, Asylums (New York: Doubleday, 1961).
 65. Floyd Rudmin, “Property Crime Victimization Impact on Self, on Attach-
ment, and on Territorial Dominance,” CPA Highlights, Victims of Crime Sup-
plement 9, no. 2 (1987): 4–7.
 66. Barbara B. Brown, “House and Block as Territory,” paper presented at the 
Conference of the Association for Consumer Research, San Francisco, 
1982.
 67. Shay Sayre and David Horne, “I Shop, Therefore I Am: The Role of 
Possessions for Self-Definition,” in Shay Sayre and David Horne, eds., Earth, 
Wind, and Fire and Water: Perspectives on Natural Disaster (Pasadena, CA: 
Open Door Publishers, 1996): 353–370; cf. also Jill G. Klein and Laura 
Huang, “After All Is Lost: Meeting the Material Needs of Adolescent Disaster 
Survivors,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 26, no. 1 (Spring 2007): 
1–12.
 68. Ernest Beaglehole, Property: A Study in Social Psychology (New York: Mac-
millan, 1932).
 69. Adapted from Jagdish N. Sheth and Michael R. Solomon, “Extending the 
Extended Self in a Digital World,” Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice 
22, no. 2 (2014): 123–132.
 31. Michael Moss, “Nudged to the Produce Aisle by a Look in the Mirror,” New 
York Times (August 27, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/28/
dining/wooing-us-down-the-produce-aisle.html?_r=0, accessed February 
23, 2015.
 32. Arnold W. Buss, Self-Consciousness and Social Anxiety (San Francisco: 
Freeman, 1980); Lynn Carol Miller and Cathryn Leigh Cox, “Public Self-
Consciousness and Makeup Use,” Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin 
8, no. 4 (1982): 748–751; Michael R. Solomon and John Schopler, “Self-
Consciousness and Clothing,” Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin 8, 
no. 3 (1982): 508–514.
 33. Loraine Lau-Gesk and Aimee Drolet, “The Publicly Self-Conscious 
Consumer: Prepare to Be Embarrassed,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 18 
(April 2008): 127–136.
 34. Morris B. Holbrook, Michael R. Solomon, and Stephen Bell, “A Re-
Examination of Self-Monitoring and Judgments of Furniture Designs,” 
Home Economics Research Journal 19 (September 1990): 6–16; Mark 
Snyder, “Self-Monitoring Processes,” in Leonard Berkowitz, ed., Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology (New York: Academic Press, 1979): 85–128.
 35. Mark Snyder and Steve Gangestad, “On the Nature of Self-Monitoring: 
Matters of Assessment, Matters of Validity,” Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology 51 (1986): 125–139; Timothy R. Graeff, “Image Congruence 
Effects on Product Evaluations: The Role of Self-Monitoring and Public/
Private Consumption,” Psychology & Marketing 13 (August 1996): 481–499; 
Richard G. Netemeyer, Scot Burton, and Donald R. Lichtenstein, “Trait 
Aspects of Vanity: Measurement and Relevance to Consumer Behavior,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 21 (March 1995): 612–626.
 36. Philip Cushman, “Why the Self Is Empty: Toward a Historically Situated 
Psychology,” American Psychologist 45 (1990): 599–611.
 37. Peter Noel-Murray, “Are Selfies and Smartphones the New Comfort Food? 
How Millennials Satisfy the ‘Empty Self,’” Psychology Today (October 2, 
2014), https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/inside-the-consumer-
mind/201410/are-selfies-and-smartphones-the-new-comfort-food, ac-
cessed March 19, 2015.
 38. Gia Nardini, Robyn A. LeBoeuf, and Richard J. Lutz, (2013). “When a 
Picture Is Worth Less Than a Thousand Words” Association for Consumer 
Research 2013 North American Conference, Chicago (USA), (October 4, 
2013.)
 39. http://www.reputation.com/, accessed March 25, 2015.
 40. Heidi Strohmaier, Megan Murphy, and David DeMatteo, “Youth Sexting: 
Prevalence Rates, Driving Motivations, and the Deterrent Effect of Legal 
Consequences,” Sexuality Research and Social Policy 11, no. 3 (September 
2014): 245–255, http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13178-014-
0162-9, accessed March 19, 2015.
 41. Douglas Macmillan and Elizabeth Dwoskin, “Smile! Marketing Firms 
Are Mining Your Selfies,” Wall Street Journal (October 9, 2014), http://
www.wsj.com/articles/smile-marketing-firms-are-mining-your-selfies-
1412882222?KEYWORDS=selfies, accessed February 22, 2015.
 42. Jennifer L. Aaker, “The Malleable Self: The Role of Self-Expression in 
Persuasion,” Journal of Marketing Research 36 (February 1999): 45–57; 
Sak Onkvisit and John Shaw, “Self-Concept and Image Congruence: Some 
Research and Managerial Implications,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 4 
(Winter 1987): 13–24.
 43. Claudia Townsend and Sanjay Sood, “Self-Affirmation Through the Choice 
of Highly Aesthetic Products,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (2013): 
256–269.
 44. Martin Reimann, Raquel Castaño, Judith Zaichkowsky, and Antoine 
Bechara, “How We Relate to Brands: Psychological and Neurophysiological 
Insights Into Consumer–Brand Relationships,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology 22, no 1 (2012): 128–142.
 45. Quoted in Shirley Y. Y. Cheng, Tiffany Barnett White, and Lan Nguyen 
Chaplin, “The Effects of Self-brand Connections on Responses to Brand 
Failure: A New Look at the Consumer–Brand Relationship,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 22, no. 2 (2012): 280–288.
 46. Andrew Adam Newman, “Playing on America’s Love for Its 2-Ton 
Darlings,” New York Times (December 26, 2013), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2013/12/27/business/media/playing-on-americas-love-for-its-2-ton-
darlings.html, accessed February 24, 2015.
 47. C. B. Claiborne and M. Joseph Sirgy, “Self-Image Congruence as a Model 
of Consumer Attitude Formation and Behavior: A Conceptual Review 
and Guide for Further Research,” paper presented at the Academy of 
Marketing Science Conference, New Orleans, 1990.
 48. Susan Fournier and Julie L. Yao, “Reviving Brand Loyalty: A 
Reconceptualization 
within 
the 
Framework 
of 
Consumer-Brand 
Relationships,” International Journal of Research in Marketing 14, no. 5 
(December 1997): 451–472; Caryl E. Rusbult, “A Longitudinal Test of the 
Investment Model: The Development (and Deterioration) of Satisfaction 
and Commitment in Heterosexual Involvements,” Journal of Personality & 
Social Psychology 45, no. 1 (1983): 101–117.

238 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
 92. Suzanne Vranica, “Sony Tries to Lure DVR Ad-Skippers,” Wall Street 
Journal (September 20, 2006): A20.
 93. Joan Meyers-Levy, “The Influence of Sex Roles on Judgment,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 14 (March 1988): 522–530.
 94. Joan Meyers-Levy and Barbara Loken, “Revisiting Gender Differences: 
What We Know and What Lies Ahead,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 25, 
no. 1 (2015): 129–149.
 95. Meyers-Levy and Loken, “Revisiting Gender Differences.”; Eileen Fischer 
and Stephen J. Arnold, “Sex, Gender Identity, Gender Role Attitudes, and 
Consumer Behavior,” Psychology & Marketing 11 (March–April 1994): 
163–182.
 96. Julie King, “What Biology Can Tell Us About Consumers,” Canada One (March 
1, 2011), http://www.canadaone.com/ezine/mar11/biology_ consumers. 
html, accessed March 25, 2015.
 97. Kristina M. Durante, Vladas Griskevicius, Sarah E. Hill, Carin Perilloux, 
and Norman P. Li, “Ovulation, Female Competition, and Product Choice: 
Hormonal Influences on Consumer Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research 
37, no. 6 (April 2011): 921–934.; Kristina M. Durante and Ashley Rae 
Arsena, “Playing the Field: The Effect of Fertility on Women’s Desire for 
Variety,” Journal of Consumer Research 41 no. 6 (2015): 1372–1391.
 98. Sarah Kershaw, “For Teenagers, Hello Means ‘How About a Hug?’”  
New York Times (May 27, 2009), www.nytimes.com, accessed May 28, 
2009.
 99. Nicolas Guéguen, “High Heels Increase Women’s Attractiveness,” Archives 
of Sexual Behavior (2014), http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs 
10508-014-0422-z#page-1, DOI 10.1007/s10508-014-0422-z, accessed  
March 25, 2015.
 100. Quoted in Kathleen Kelleher, “For Many Women, High Heels Are a Way 
to Elevate the Spirit,” LA Times (March 27, 2000), http://articles.latimes 
.com/2000/mar/27/news/cl-13018, accessed March 23, 2015.
 101. Mark J. Miller, “It’s Official: ‘Breastaurant Trademarked by Texas Sports 
Bar,” Brandchannel (April 12, 2013), http://www.brandchannel.com/home/ 
post/2013/04/12/Breastaurant-Trademark-041213.aspx, accessed Feb-
ruary 25, 2015.
 102. Clifford Nass, Youngme Moon, and Nancy Green, “Are Machines Gender 
Neutral? Gender-Stereotypic Responses to Computers with Voices,” Journal 
of Applied Social Psychology 27, no. 10 (1997): 864–876; Kathleen Debevec 
and Easwar Iyer, “Sex Roles and Consumer Perceptions of Promotions, 
Products, and Self: What Do We Know and Where Should We Be Headed,” 
in Richard J. Lutz, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 13 (Provo, UT: 
Association for Consumer Research, 1986): 210–214; Joseph A. Bellizzi 
and Laura Milner, “Gender Positioning of a Traditionally Male-Dominant 
Product,” Journal of Advertising Research (June–July 1991): 72–79.
 103. Michelle Jaworski, “The ‘First Tablet for Women’ Is as Awful as It Sounds,” 
The Daily Dot (March 13, 2013), http://www.dailydot.com/society/epad-
femme-tablet-for-women/, accessed March 23, 2015.
 104. Eric Bellman, “Suzuki’s Stylish Compacts Captivate India’s Women,” Wall 
Street Journal (May 11, 2007): B1.
 105. Craig S. Smith, “Underneath, Saudi Women Keep Their Secrets,” New 
York Times (December 3, 2002), www.nytimes.com, accessed December 3, 
2002.
 106. Marylouise Caldwell, Ingeborg Astrid Kelppe, and Paul Henry, “Prosuming 
Multiple Gender Role Identities: A Multi-Country Written and Audio-
Visual Exploration of Contemporary Young Mainstream Female 
Achievers,” Consumption, Markets & Culture 10 (June 2007): 95–115.
 107. Doreen Carvajal, “Europe Takes Aim at Sexual Stereotyping in Ads,” New 
York Times (September 9, 2008), http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/10/
business/media/10adco.html?_r=0 accessed September 10, 2008.
 108. Quoted in Natalie Zmuda, “Can Dr Pepper’s Mid-Cal Soda Score a 10 with 
Men?” Advertising Age (February 21, 2011), http://adage.com/article/news/ 
dr-pepper-10-avoid-marketing-missteps-pepsi-coke/148983/, accessed 
April 10, 2011.
 109. Quoted in Barry Silverstein, “Ever the Publicity Hound, Branson Readies to 
Be an Airline Hostess,” BrandChannel (November 18, 2010), http://www 
.brandchannel.com/home/post/2010/11/18/Richard-Branson-Loses-Bet 
.aspx, accessed April 10, 2011.
 110. Sarah Mahoney, “Study: Men’s Mags May Be Bad For Men,” Marketing 
Daily (March 2, 2013), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/ 
194617/study-mens-mags-may-be-bad-for-men.html?edition=57304#a
xzz2MuwUQkdG, accessed February 25, 2015.
 111. Barbara B. Stern, “Masculinism(s) and the Male Image: What Does It 
Mean to Be a Man?” in Tom Reichert and Jacqueline Lambiase, eds., Sex 
in Advertising: Multi-Disciplinary Perspectives on the Erotic Appeal (Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum, 2003): 215–228.
 112. Douglas B. Holt and Craig J. Thompson, “Man-of-Action Heroes: The 
Pursuit of Heroic Masculinity in Everyday Consumption,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 31 (September): 425–440.
 70. https://foursquare.com/user/2509238/badges/foursquare, accessed March 25, 
2015; Rob Walker, “Lifelong Earning,” New York Times (June 11, 2010), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/13/magazine/13fob-consumed- 
t.html?emc=eta1, accessed April 10, 2011.
 71. Scott Smith, Dan Fisher, and S. Jason Cole, “The Lived Meanings of 
Fanaticism: Understanding the Complex Role of Labels and Categories in 
Defining the Self in Consumer Culture,” Consumption, Markets & Culture 
10 (June 2007): 77–94.
 72. Quoted in Cavan Sieczkowski, “Mariah Carey’s Shoe Closet Is Probably 
Bigger Than Your Apartment,” Huffington Post (July 20, 2015), http://www 
.huffingtonpost.com/entry/mariah-careys-shoe-closet-is-probably-bigger-
than-your-apartment_55acf41de4b0caf721b322ca, accessed July 21, 2015.
 73. Russell W. Belk, “Shoes and Self,” Advances in Consumer Research (2003): 
27–33.
 74. Park Ji Kyung and Deborah Roedder John, “Got to Get You into My Life: Do 
Brand Personalities Rub Off on Consumers?” Journal of Consumer Research 
37, no. 4 (2010): 655–669.
 75. Russell W. Belk, “Possessions and the Extended Self,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 15 (September 1988): 139–168.
 76. Andrew D. Wilson and Sabrina Golonka, “Embodied Cognition Is Not 
What You Think it Is,” Frontiers in Psychology (February 12, 2013), http://
journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00058/full, accessed 
March 19, 2015, doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00058
 77. Amy Cuddy, “Your Body Language Shapes Who You Are,” TED talk filmed 
June 2012, http://www.ted.com/talks/amy_cuddy_your_body_language_
shapes_who_you_are?language=en, accessed March 21, 2015.
 78. Adam Hajo and Adam D. Galinsky, “Enclothed Cognition,” Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology 48, no. 4 (July 2012): 918–925.
 79. Michael R. Solomon (1981), “Dress for Success: Clothing Appropriateness 
and the Efficacy of Role Behavior,” Dissertation Abstracts International, 42 
(6), Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Psychology, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill.
 80. Adapted from Jagdish N. Sheth, and Michael R. Solomon, “Extending 
the Extended Self in a Digital World,” Journal of  Marketing Theory and 
Practice 22, no. 2 (2014): 123–132; cf. also Russell W. Belk, “Extended 
Self in a Digital World,” Journal of  Consumer Research 40, no. 3 (2013): 
477–500.
 81. Nick Yee, Jeremy N. Bailenson, Mark Urbanek, Francis Chang, and Dan 
Merget, “The Unbearable Likeness of Being Digital: The Persistence of 
Nonverbal Social Norms in Online Virtual Environments,”Cyberpsychology 
& Behavior 10, no. 1 (2007): 116–121.
 82. Nick Bilton, “Wearable Technology That Feels Like Skin,” New York Times 
(October 8, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/09/fashion/wearable- 
technology-that-feels-like-skin.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-share& 
smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=0, accessed February 26, 2015.
 83. Adapted from a presentation by Prof. Thanigavelan Jambulingam, 
Saint Joseph’s University, January 22, 2015; mc10.com, http://www. 
mc10inc.com/consumer-products/sports/checklight/, accessed March 
25, 2015.
 84. Hilary Stout, “Mirror, Mirror in the App: What’s the Fairest Shade and 
Shadow of Them All?” New York Times (May 14, 2014), http://www.nytimes. 
com/2014/05/15/business/mirror-mirror-in-the-app-whats-the-fairest-
shade-of-all.html?_r=0, accessed March 25, 2015.
 85. Somini Sengupta, “Attack on Women at an Indian Bar Intensifies a Clash of 
Cultures,” New York Times (February 8, 2009), www.nytimes.com, accessed 
February 8, 2009; Niraj Sheth and Tariq Engineer, “As the Selling Gets 
Hot, India Tries to Keep Cool, New-Age Dilemma: Too Sexy? Just Fun? The 
Chocolate Man,” Wall Street Journal (September 9, 2008), www.wsj.com, 
accessed September 9, 2008.
 86. Diane Goldner, “What Men and Women Really Want … to Eat,” New York 
Times (March 2, 1994): C1(2).
 87. Paul Rozin, Julia M. Hormes. Myles S. Faith, and Brian Wansink, “Is 
Meat  Male?: A Quantitative Multimethod Framework to Establish 
Metaphoric Relationships,” Journal of  Consumer Research 39, no. 3 (2012):  
629–643.
 88. Nina M. Lentini, “McDonald’s Tests ‘Angus Third Pounder’ in California,” 
Marketing Daily (March 27, 2007), www.mediapost.com, accessed March 27, 
2007.
 89. Scott Jaschik, “Rate My Word Choice,” Inside Higher Ed (February 9, 2015), 
https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2015/02/09/new-analysis-rate-my-
professors-finds-patterns-words-used-describe-men-and-women, accessed  
February 25, 2015.
 90. Glenn Collins, “New Studies on ‘Girl Toys’ and ‘Boy Toys,’” New York Times 
(February 13, 1984): D1.
 91. Susan B. Kaiser, “Clothing and the Social Organization of Gender 
Perception: A Developmental Approach,” Clothing & Textiles Research 
Journal 7 (Winter 1989): 46–56.

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
239 
a Bride, Businesses Respond,” New York Times (July 15, 2010), http://www 
.nytimes.com/2010/07/16/us/16marriage.html?emc=eta1, accessed 
March 22, 2015; http://equallywed.com/, accessed March 22, 2015; http://
www.outvite.com/?Cobrand=OutVite&Site=OutVite&vk=1777211146,  
accessed March 22, 2015.
 130. Sheila Shayon, “Levi’s for Women: Shape, Not Size, Matters,” BrandChannel 
(September 17, 2010), http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/2010/09/ 
17/Levis-Women-Curve-ID-Digital.aspx, accessed April 10, 2011; http://
us.levi.com/shop/index.jsp?categoryId=3146849&AB=CMS_Home_
CurveID_081010, accessed May 28, 2011.
 131. http://www.spanx.com/category/index.jsp?categoryId=2992553&clickid
=topnav_shapers_txt, accessed March 24, 2015.
 132. Abe Sauer, “How Unilever is Translating the Dove Real Beauty Campaign 
for China,” Brandchannel (July 15, 2013), http://www.brandchannel.com/
home/post/2013/07/15/Dove-Real-Beauty-China-Campaign-071513 
.aspx, accessed January 30, 2015.
 133. Ibid.
 134. Samantha Murphy, “No, You’re Not Fat—Facebook Just Makes You Think 
You Are,” Mashable (March 30, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/03/30/ 
facebook-makes-you-feel-fat/?WT.mc_id=en_social-media&utm_campaign= 
Social%2BMedia&utm_medium=email&utm_source=newsletter, accessed  
January 11, 2013.
 135. Samantha Murphy Kelly, “Job Site Wants Only Beautiful Candidates,” 
Mashable (June 2, 2013), http://mashable.com/2013/06/02/beautiful- 
people-job-site/?WT.mc_id=en_my_stories&utm_campaign=My% 
2BStories&utm_medium=email&utm_source=newsletter, accessed January 
30, 2015.
 136. Daniel S. Hamermesh, “Ugly? You May Have a Case,” New York Times 
Magazine (August 27, 2011), http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/28/
opinion/sunday/ugly-you-may-have-a-case.html?ref=opinion, accessed 
March 22, 2015.
 137. Nina Mandell, “Padded Swimsuits for All? Abercrombie and Fitch Marketing 
Padded Tops to Young Girls,” New York Daily News (March 27, 2011), http://
www.nydailynews.com/lifestyle/fashion/2011/03/27/2011-03-27_pad 
ded_swimsuits_for_all_abercrombie_and_fitch_marketing_padded_tops_
to_young_gi.html, accessed April 10, 2011.
 138. Emily Flynn, “Beauty: Babes Spot Babes,” Newsweek (September 20, 2004): 
10.
 139. For some results that provide exceptions to this overall phenomenon, 
cf. Elizabeth Cashdan, “Waist-to-Hip Ratio Across Cultures: Trade-Offs 
Between Androgen- and Estrogen-Dependent Traits,” Current Anthropology 
49, no. 6 (2008): 1099–1107.
 140. Abigail W. Leonard, “How Women Pick Mates vs. Flings,” LiveScience 
(January 2, 2007), www.livescience.com/health/070102_facial_features.
html, accessed January 3, 2007.
 141. Corky Siemaszko, “Depends on the Day: Women’s Sex Drive a Very Cyclical 
Thing,” New York Daily News (June 24, 1999): 3.
 142. Amanda B. Bower, “Highly Attractive Models in Advertising and the Women 
Who Loathe Them: The Implications of Negative Affect for Spokesperson 
Effectiveness,” Journal of Advertising 30 (Fall 2001): 51–63.
 143. Austin Considine, “A Little Imperfection for That Smile?” New York Times 
(October 21, 2011), http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/23/fashion/in- 
japan-a-trend-to-make-straight-teeth-crooked-noticed.html, 
accessed 
December 2, 2013.
 144. Basil G. Englis, Michael R. Solomon, and Richard D. Ashmore, “Beauty 
Before the Eyes of Beholders: The Cultural Encoding of Beauty Types in 
Magazine Advertising and Music Television,” Journal of Advertising 23 
(June 1994): 49–64; Michael R. Solomon, Richard Ashmore, and Laura 
Longo, “The Beauty Match-Up Hypothesis: Congruence Between Types 
of Beauty and Product Images in Advertising,” Journal of Advertising 21 
(December 1992): 23–34.
 145. Lois W. Banner, American Beauty (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1980); for a philosophical perspective, see Barry Vacker and Wayne 
R. Key, “Beauty and the Beholder: The Pursuit of Beauty Through 
Commodities,” Psychology & Marketing 10 (November–December 1993): 
471–494.
 146. Mark J. Miller, “Macy’s Introduces Marilyn Monroe Collection to a Racier 
Generation,” Brandchannel (March 6, 2013), http://www.brandchannel 
.com/home/post/2013/03/06/Macys-Marilyn-Monroe-030613.aspx, 
 accessed March 23, 2015.
 147. Elaine L. Pedersen and Nancy L. Markee, “Fashion Dolls: Communicators 
of Ideals of Beauty and Fashion,” paper presented at the International 
Conference on Marketing Meaning, Indianapolis, IN, 1989; Dalma Heyn, 
“Body Hate,” Ms. (August 1989): 34; Mary C. Martin and James W. 
Gentry, “Assessing the Internalization of Physical Attractiveness Norms,” 
Proceedings of the American Marketing Association Summer Educators’ 
Conference (Summer 1994): 59–65.
 113. Lucy Vine, “Lindsay Lohan Gets Naked and Streaks in London’s Selfridges 
Laughing Hysterically,” Mirror (June 23, 2014), http://www.mirror.co.uk/ 
3am/celebrity-news/lindsay-lohan-gets-naked-streaks-3746464, accessed  
March 22, 2015.
 114. Quoted in Mark J. Miller, “Selfridges Will Go Gender-Free in Latest 
Retail Experiment,” Brandchannel (January 29, 2015), http://www 
.brandchannel.com/home/post/2015/01/29/150129-Selfridges-
Gender-Free.aspx?utm_campaign=150129-Selfridges-Agender&utm_
source=newsletter&utm_medium=email, accessed February 25, 2015.
 115. Sandra L. Bem, “The Measurement of Psychological Androgyny,” Journal 
of Consulting & Clinical Psychology 42 (1974): 155–162; Deborah E. S. 
Frable, “Sex Typing and Gender Ideology: Two Facets of the Individual’s 
Gender Psychology That Go Together,” Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology 56, no. 1 (1989): 95–108.
 116. Geoffrey A. Fowler, “Asia’s Lipstick Lads,” Wall Street Journal (May 27, 
2005), www.wsj.com, accessed May 27, 2005.
 117. Matt Alt and Hiroko Yoda, “Big Primpin’ in Tokyo,” Wired (May 2007): 46.
 118. Leila T. Worth, Jeanne Smith, and Diane M. Mackie, “Gender Schematicity 
and Preference for Gender-Typed Products,” Psychology & Marketing 9 
(January 1992): 17–30.
 119. Rupal Parekh, “Gender-Bending Brands an Easy Way to Increase Product 
Reach,” Advertising Age (March 2, 2009), www.adage.com, accessed March  
24, 2015; Sarah Mahoney, “Best Buy Opens Store Designed for Women,”  
Retail Customer Experience (October 6, 2008), http://www.retailcustomer 
experience.com/news/best-buy-opens-store-designed-for-women/, accessed  
March 24, 2015; Kevin Helliker, “The Solution to Hunting’s Woes? Setting 
Sights on Women,” Wall Street Journal (October 1, 2008), http://online.wsj.com/
Article/Sb122281550760292225,  accessed October 2, 2008; Stephanie  
Clifford, “Frito Lay Tries to Enter the Minds (and Lunch Bags) of Women,”  
New York Times (February 24, 2009), http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/25/ 
business/media/25adco.html?, accessed March 24, 2015; Karl Greenberg, 
“Harley Says Guys Ride Back Seat in May,” Marketing Daily (February 3, 2009), 
www.mediapost.com, accessed February 3, 2009.
 120. Lauren Coleman-Lochner, “Old Spice Attracting Women in Gender-
Bending Hit for P&G,” Bloomburg Business (March 12, 2015), http://www 
.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-03-12/old-spice-attracting-women-
in-gender-bending-hit-for-p-g, accessed March 20, 2015.
 121. Projections of the incidence of homosexuality in the general population 
often are influenced by assumptions of the researchers, as well as the 
methodology they employ (e.g., self-report, behavioral measures, fantasy 
measures). For a discussion of these factors, see Edward O. Laumann, 
John H. Gagnon, Robert T. Michael, and Stuart Michaels, The Social 
Organization of  Homosexuality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1994).
 122. Frank Newport and Gary J. Gates, “San Francisco Metro Area Ranks 
Highest in LGBT Percentage,” Gallup (March 20, 2015), http://www.gallup 
.com/poll/182051/san-francisco-metro-area-ranks-highest-lgbt-percent 
age.aspx?utm_source=Social%20Issues&utm_medium=newsfeed&utm_
campaign=tiles, accessed March 20, 2015.
 123. For an academic study of this subculture, cf. Steven M. Kates, “The Dynamics 
of Brand Legitimacy: An Interpretive Study in the Gay Men’s Community,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 31 (September 2004): 455–464.
 124. Justin McCarthy, “Same-Sex Marriage Support Reaches New High at 55%,” 
Gallup, http://www.gallup.com/poll/169640/sex-marriage-support-reaches- 
new-high.aspx, accessed March 22, 2015.
 125. Stuart Elliott, “Banana Republic Ads With Real-Life Unions Include 
a Gay Couple,” New York Times (February 20, 2014), http://www.ny 
times.com/2014/02/21/business/media/banana-republic-ads-with-
real-life-unions-includes-a-gay-couple.html?_r=1, accessed February 21,  
2015.
 126. Quoted in Meghan Neal, “Oreo Sees Support, But Also Backlash and 
Boycott, for Gay Pride Rainbow Cookie, “New York Daily News, July 27, 2012, 
http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/oreo-sees-support-back 
lash-boycott-gay-pride-rainbow-cookie-article-1.1103369, accessed Feb-
ruary 21, 2015.
 127. Julia Baird, “Neither Female Nor Male,” New York Times (April 6, 2014), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/opinion/neither-female-nor-male 
.html?ref=opinion, accessed February 21, 2015.
 128. Matthew Chapman, “Benetton to Feature Trans-Sexual Brazilian Model in 
Spring/Summer Campaign,” marketingmagazine.co.uk (January 23, 2013), 
http://www.brandrepublic.com/news/1168021/Benetton-feature-trans-
sexual-Brazilian-model-Spring-Summer-campaign/, accessed February 21, 
2015.
 129. Sreekar Jasthi, “The Economic Impact of Gay Marriage: A $2.5 Billion 
Question,” Nerd Wallet (November 12, 2014), http://www.nerdwallet 
.com/blog/cities/economics/economic-impact-gay-marriage-2-5-billion-
question/, accessed March 22, 2015; Kevin Sack, “When the Bride Takes 

240 
SecTiON 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
business/media/dove-tells-women-to-love-their-armpits.html, accessed 
February 24, 2015.
 173. Anne-Kathrin Klesse, Caroline Goukens, Kelly Geyskens, and Ko de 
Ruyter, “Repeated Exposure to the Thin Ideal and Implications for the Self: 
Two Weight Loss Program Studies,” International Journal of Research in 
Marketing 29, no. 4 (2013): 355–362.
 174. Andrew Adam Newman, “Celebrating Black Beauty and Advocating 
Diversity,” New York Times (April 18, 2013), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2013/04/19/business/media/celebrating-black-beauty-and-advo 
cating-diversity.html, accessed February 2, 2015; Thomas Fuller, “A 
Vision of Pale Beauty Carries Risks for Asia’s Women,” International Herald 
Tribune Online (May 14, 2006), accessed May 16, 2006.
 175. Sherry L. Pagoto, Stephenie C. Lemon, Jessica L. Oleski, Jonathan M. 
Scully, Gin-Fei Olendzki, Martinus M. Evans, Wenjun Li, L. Carter Florence, 
Brittany Kirkland, and Joel J. Hillhouse, “Availability of Tanning Beds on 
US College Campuses,” JAMA Dermatology 151, no. 1 (2015): 59–63, 
http://archderm.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1919438, ac-
cessed March 24, 2015,doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.3590; Sabrina 
Tavernise, “Warning: That Tan Could Be Hazardous: Indoor Tanning Poses 
Cancer Risks, Teenagers Learn,” New York Times (January 10, 2015), http://
www.nytimes.com/2015/01/11/health/indoor-tanning-poses-cancer-
risks-teenagers-learn.html?_r=1, accessed February 3, 2015.
 176. John W. Schouten, “Selves in Transition: Symbolic Consumption in Personal 
Rites of Passage and Identity Reconstruction,” Journal of Consumer Research 
17 (March 1991): 412–425; Janet Whitman, “Extreme Makeovers Blur 
Line Between Medicine and Cosmetics,” Wall Street Journal (January 7, 
2004), www.wsj.com, accessed January 7, 2004.
 177. William Neuman, “Mannequins Give Shape to a Venezuelan Fantasy,” New York 
Times (November 6, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/07/world/ 
americas/mannequins-give-shape-to-venezuelan-fantasy.html?hp, accessed  
February 3, 2015; Simon Romero, “Chávez Tries to Rally Venezuela 
against a New Enemy: Breast Lifts,” New York Times (March 14, 2011), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/15/world/americas/15venezuela.
html?scp=1&sq=breast&st=cse, accessed April 10, 2011.
 178. Alexandra Stevenson, “Plastic Surgery Tourism Brings Chinese to South 
Korea,” New York Times (December 23, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2014/12/24/business/international/plastic-surgery-tourism-brings- 
chinese-to-south-korea.html?ref=international&_r=0, accessed January 30,  
2015.
 179. Natasha Singer, “How to Stuff a Wild Bikini Bottom,” New York Times 
(March 2, 2006), www.nytimes.com, accessed March 2, 2006.
 180. Catherine Saint Louis, “This Teenage Girl Uses Botox. No, She’s Not 
Alone,” New York Times (August 11, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2010/08/12/fashion/12SKIN.html?_r=1&scp=2&sq=botox&st=cse, 
 accessed April 10, 2011.
 181. Dannie Kjeldgaard and Anders Bengtsson, “Consuming the Fashion 
Tattoo,” in Geeta Menon and Akshay R. Rao, eds., Advances in Consumer 
Research 32 (Duluth, MN: Association for Consumer Research, 2005): 
172–177.
 182. Tiffany Hsu and Don Lee, “At 50 Years Old, Barbie Gets Tattoos—And a 
Megastore in China,” Los Angeles Times (March 6, 2009), http://articles 
.latimes.com/2009/mar/06/business/fi-tattoobarbie6, accessed March 6,  
2009.
 183. Dana Blanton, “Fox News Poll: Tattoos aren’t just for rebels anymore,” 
Fox News (March 14, 2014), http://www.foxnews.com/us/2014/03/14/
fox-news-poll-tattoos-arent-just-for-rebels-anymore/, accessed March 24, 
2015.
 184. Mona Chalabi, “Dear Mona, How Many People Regret Their Tattoos?” 
FiveThirtyEight 
(November 
6, 
2014), 
http://fivethirtyeight.com/ 
datalab/how-many-people-regret-their-tattoos/, accessed March 24, 
2015; Natasha Singer, “Erasing Tattoos, Out of Regret or for a New 
Canvas,” New York Times (June 17, 2007), www.nytimes.com, accessed 
June 17, 2007.
 185. www.pathfinder.com:80/altculture/aentries/p/piercing.html, accessed 
August 22, 1997.
 186. “Body Piercing Statistics,” Statistic Brain (March 17, 2015), http://www 
.statisticbrain.com/body-piercing-statistics/, accessed March 24, 2015.
 187. Vivian Manning-Schaffel, “Metrosexuals: A Well-Groomed Market?” Brand 
Channel (May 22, 2006), www.brandchannel.com, accessed May 22, 2006; 
Jack Neff, “A Lipstick Index for Men? Philips’ Norelco Posits That Guys Are 
Growing Beards to Protest Recession,” Advertising Age (April 2, 2009), 
www.adage.com, accessed April 2, 2009; Aaron Baar, “Move Over, Ladies; 
Men Are Walking Down Beauty Aisles,” Marketing Daily (December 22, 
2008), www.mediapost.com, accessed December 22, 2008.
 188. Jenny Darroch, “Marketing to Women: What to Do/What Not to Do ... Without 
Appearing Too Contradictory,” The Huffington Post, October 27, 2014, 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/jenny-darroch/marketing-to-women- 
what-t_b_6050500.html.
 148. Lisa Bannon, “Barbie Is Getting Body Work, and Mattel Says She’ll Be 
‘Rad,’” Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition (November 17, 1997).
 149. Lisa Bannon, “Will New Clothes, Bellybutton Create ‘Turn Around’ 
Barbie,” Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition (February 17, 2000).
 150. “Report Delivers Skinny on Miss America,” Montgomery Advertiser (March 22,  
2000): 5A.
 151. “Study: Playboy Models Losing Hourglass Figures,” CNN.com (December 20, 
2002), www.CNN.com.
 152. Anthony H. Ahrensa, Sarah F. Etua, James J. Graya, James E. Mosimanna, 
Mia Foley Sypecka, and Claire V. Wiseman, “Cultural Representations of 
Thinness in Women, Redux: Playboy Magazine’s Depiction of Beauty from 
1979 to 1999,” Body Image (September 2006): 229–235.
 153. Quoted in Will Lassek, Steve Gaulin, and Hara Estroff Marano, “Eternal 
Curves,” Psychology Today (July 03, 2012), http://www.psychologytoday 
.com/articles/201206/eternal-curves, accessed January 11, 2013.
 154. Jane E. Brody, “Personal Health,” New York Times (February 22, 1990): B9.
 155. Christian S. Crandall, “Social Contagion of Binge Eating,” Journal of 
Personality & Social Psychology 55 (1988): 588–598.
 156. Charlotte Alter, “What Does It Mean to ‘Break the Internet’?” Time 
(November 12, 2014), http://time.com/3580977/kim-kardashian-break-
the-internet-butt/, accessed March 23, 2015.
 157. Nilüfer Z. Aydinoğlu and Aradhna Krishna, “Imagining Thin: Why Vanity 
Sizing Works,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 22, no. 4 (2012): 
565–572.
 158. Erin White, “Dove ‘Firms’ with Zaftig Models: Unilever Brand Launches 
European Ads Employing Non-Supermodel Bodies,” Wall Street Journal (April 
21, 2004): B3.
 159. David Goetzl, “Teen Girls Pan Ad Images of Women,” Advertising Age 
(September 13, 1999): 32; Carey Goldberg, “Citing Intolerance, Obese 
People Take Steps to Press Cause,” New York Times (November 5, 2000), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2000/11/05/us/fat-people-say-an-intoler-
ant-world-condemns-them-on-first-sight.html, accessed September 1, 
2011.
 160. Shirley S. Wang, “Diet Pepsi’s ‘Skinny Can’ Campaign Riles Eating 
Disorders Group,” Wall Street Journal (February 15, 2011), http://blogs 
.WallStreetJournal.com/health/2011/02/15/diet-pepsis-skinny-can- 
campaign-riles-eating-disorders-group/, accessed April 10, 2011.
 161. http://www.bigisbeautiful.nl/, accessed March 22, 2015.
 162. Quoted in Daiane Scaraboto and Eileen Fischer, “Frustrated Fatshionistas: 
An Institutional Theory Perspective on Consumer Quests for Greater 
Choice in Mainstream Markets,” Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 6 
(2013): 1234–1257.
 163. Sheila Shayon, “Target Launches First Plus-Size Collection Following Blogger 
Boycott,” Brandchannel (January 21, 2015), http://www.brandchannel 
.com/home/post/2015/01/21/150121-Target-Plus-Size.aspx?utm_
campaign=150121-Target-Plus-Size&utm_source=newsletter&utm_
medium=email, accessed February 3, 2015.
 164. Stephanie Clifford, “High Fashion, No Airbrushing,” New York Times 
(October 19, 2012), http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/20/business/rent- 
the-runway-uses-real-women-to-market-high-fashion.html?ref= 
todayspaper&_r=0,  accessed January 11, 2013.
 165. Stephen Mihm, “Why C.E.O.s Are Growing Beards,” New York Times (Novem-
ber 28, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/30/opinion/sunday/why- 
ceos-are-growing-beards.html?module=Search&mabReward=relbias%3Ar
%2C%7B%221%22%3A%22RI%3A9%22%7D&_r=0, accessed January 30,  
2015.
 166. Jill Neimark, “The Beefcaking of America,” Psychology Today (November–
December 1994): 32.
 167. Richard H. Kolbe and Paul J. Albanese, “Man to Man: A Content Analysis 
of Sole-Male Images in Male-Audience Magazines,” Journal of Advertising 
25 (Winter 1996): 1–20.
 168. Douglas Quenqua, “Muscular Body Image Lures Boys into Gym, and 
Obsession,” New York Times (November 19, 2012), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2012/11/19/health/teenage-boys-worried-about-body-image-take-
risks.html?hp, accessed January 11, 2013.
 169. Ruth P. Rubinstein, “Color, Circumcision, Tattoos, and Scars,” in Michael 
R. Solomon, ed., The Psychology of Fashion (Lexington, MA: Lexington 
Books, 1985): 243–254; Peter H. Bloch and Marsha L. Richins, “You Look 
‘Mahvelous’: The Pursuit of Beauty and Marketing Concept,” Psychology & 
Marketing 9 (January 1992): 3–16.
 170. Sondra Farganis, “Lip Service: The Evolution of Pouting, Pursing, and 
Painting Lips Red,” Health (November 1988): 48–51.
 171. Michelle Hancock, “High Heels: The Agony and the Ecstacy,” The Telegraph 
(April 1, 1986), http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=2209&dat=19
860401&id=xp4rAAAAIBAJ&sjid=NfwFAAAAIBAJ&pg=6255,163038, 
accessed September 19, 2013.
 172. Andrew Adam Newman, “Dove Tells Women to Love Their Armpits,” New 
York Times (February 27, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/28/

 
chapTer 6   The Self: Mind, Gender, and Body 
241 
 191. Claire Cain Miller, “LeanIn.org and Getty Aim to Change Women’s 
Portrayal in Stock Photos,” New York Times (February 9, 2014), http://
www.nytimes.com/2014/02/10/business/leaninorg-and-getty-aim-to-
change-womens-portrayal-in-stock-photos.html?_r=1, accessed February 
25, 2015.
 189. Quoted in Lauren Indvik, Mashable (July 3, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/ 
07/03/seventeen-real-girls-petition/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_
medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+Mashable+%28Mashable%29, 
accessed January 11, 2013.
 190. Jesse Chandler and Norbert Schwarz, “Use Does Not Wear Ragged the 
Fabric of Friendship: Thinking of Objects as Alive Makes People Less 
Willing to Replace Them,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 20, no. 2 (2010):  
138–145.

242
J
ackie and Hank, executives in a high-powered Los 
Angeles advertising agency, are exchanging ideas 
about how they are going to spend the big bonus 
everyone in the firm is getting for landing a new account. 
They can’t help but snicker at their friend Rose in account-
ing, who avidly surfs the Internet for information about a 
state-of-the-art home theater system she plans to install 
in her condo. What a couch potato! Hank, who fancies 
himself a bit of a daredevil, plans to blow his bonus on 
a thrill-seeking trip to Colorado, where a week of outra-
geous bungee jumping awaits him (assuming he lives to 
tell about it, but that uncertainty is half the fun). Jackie 
replies, “Been there, done that…. Believe it or not, I’m 
staying put right here—heading over to Santa Monica to 
catch some waves.” Seems that the surfing bug has bitten 
her since she stumbled onto Jetty Girl, an online resource 
for women who surf.1
Jackie and Hank marvel at how different they are from Rose, who’s content to spend her down-
time watching sappy old movies or actually reading books. All three make about the same salary, 
and Jackie and Rose were sorority sisters at USC. How can their tastes be so different? Oh well, they 
figure, that’s why they make chocolate and vanilla.
 Chapter 7 ● Personality, Lifestyles, 
and Values
 7-1 A consumer’s personality influences the way he or she 
responds to marketing stimuli, but efforts to use this in-
formation in marketing contexts meet with mixed results.
 7-2 Brands have personalities.
 7-3 A lifestyle defines a pattern of consumption that reflects a 
person’s choices of how to spend his or her time and money, 
and these choices are essential to define consumer identity.
 7-4 It can be more useful to identify patterns of consumption 
than knowing about individual purchases when organiza-
tions craft a lifestyle marketing strategy.
 7-5 Psychographics go beyond simple demographics to help 
marketers understand and reach different consumer 
segments.
 7-6 Underlying values often drive consumer motivations.
When you have finished reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
Source: Alfgar/Shutterstock

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
243 
personality
Jackie and Hank are typical of many people who search for new 
(and even risky) ways to spend their leisure time. This desire 
translates into big business for the “adventure travel” industry, 
which provides white-knuckle experiences.2 In the old days, the 
California beach culture relegated women to the status of land-
locked “Gidgets” who sat on shore while their boyfriends rode the 
surf. Now (inspired by the female surfers in the movie Blue Crush 
and then by Bethany Hamilton, the woman documented in the 
movie Soul Surfer who lost her left arm to a shark and returned 
to the sport), women fuel the sport’s resurgence in popularity. Roxy rides the wave with 
its collections of women’s surf apparel; it even includes a feature on its Web site that lets 
users design their own bikinis.3
Just what does make Jackie and Hank so different from their more sedate friend Rose? 
One answer may lie in the concept of personality, which refers to a person’s unique psy-
chological makeup and how it consistently influences the way a person responds to his or 
her environment. Do all people have personalities? Certainly we can wonder about some 
we meet! Actually, even though the answer seems like a no-brainer, some psychologists 
argue that the concept of personality may not be valid. Many studies find that people do 
not seem to exhibit stable personalities. Because people don’t necessarily behave the same 
way in all situations, they argue that this is merely a convenient way to categorize people.
Intuitively, this argument is a bit hard to accept, because we tend to see others in a limited 
range of situations, and so they do appear to act consistently. However, we each know that 
we ourselves are not all that consistent; we may be wild and crazy at times and serious and 
responsible at others. Although certainly not all psychologists have abandoned the idea of 
personality, many now recognize that a person’s underlying characteristics are but one part of 
the puzzle, and situational factors often play a large role in determining behavior.4 Although 
we may undergo dramatic changes as we grow up, in adulthood measures of  personality stay 
relatively stable. Studies of thousands of people’s scores on the widely used measurement 
instrument the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) confirm that our 
personalities tend to stabilize by the age of 30. For example, most of us become less interested 
in thrill seeking as we focus more on self-discipline. Enjoy it while you can!5
Consumer Behavior on the Couch: Freudian theory
The famous psychologist Sigmund Freud proposed that much of one’s adult personality 
stems from a fundamental conflict between a person’s desire to gratify his or her physical 
needs and the necessity to function as a responsible member of society. This struggle plays 
out in the mind among three systems. (Note: These systems do not refer to physical parts of 
the brain.) Let’s quickly review each.
Freudian Systems
The id is about immediate gratification; it is the “party animal” of the mind. It operates 
according to the pleasure principle; that is, our basic desire to maximize pleasure and 
avoid pain guides our behavior. The id is selfish and illogical. It directs a person’s psychic 
energy toward pleasurable acts without any regard for consequences.
The superego is the counterweight to the id. This system is essentially the person’s 
conscience. It internalizes society’s rules (especially as parents teach them to us) and 
tries to prevent the id from seeking selfish gratification. Finally, the ego is the system that 
mediates between the id and the superego. It’s basically a referee in the fight between 
temptation and virtue. The ego tries to balance these opposing forces according to the 
reality principle, which means it finds ways to gratify the id that the outside world will 
find acceptable. (Hint: This is where Freudian theory applies to marketing.) These conflicts 
OBjeCtive 7-1 
A consumer’s personality 
influences the way 
he or she responds 
to marketing stimuli, 
but efforts to use this 
information in marketing 
contexts meet with mixed 
results.

244 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
occur on an unconscious level, so the person is not necessarily aware of the underlying 
reasons for his or her behavior.
How is Freud’s work relevant to consumer behavior? In particular, it highlights the 
potential importance of unconscious motives that guide our purchases. The implication is 
that consumers cannot necessarily tell us their true motivation when they choose products, 
even if we can devise a sensitive way to ask them directly. The Freudian perspective also 
raises the possibility that the ego relies on the symbolism in products to compromise between 
the demands of the id and the prohibitions of the superego. People channel their unaccept-
able desire into acceptable outlets when they use products that signify these underlying 
desires. This is the connection between product symbolism and motivation: The product 
stands for, or represents, a consumer’s true goal, which is socially unacceptable or unattain-
able. By acquiring the product, the person vicariously experiences the forbidden fruit.
“Sometimes a Cigar is just a Cigar”: products as Sexual Symbols
Most Freudian applications in marketing relate to a product’s supposed sexual symbolism. 
For example, some analysts speculate that owning a sports car is a substitute for sexual grat-
ification (especially for men going through a “midlife crisis”). Indeed, some people do seem 
inordinately attached to their cars, and they may spend many hours lovingly washing and 
polishing them. An Infiniti ad reinforces the belief that cars symbolically satisfy consum-
ers’ sexual needs in addition to their functional ones when it describes one model as “what 
happens when you cross sheet metal and desire.” Other approaches focus on male-oriented 
symbolism—so-called phallic symbols—that appeals to women. Although Freud joked that, 
“sometimes a cigar is just a cigar,” many popular applications of Freud’s ideas revolve 
around the use of objects that resemble sex organs (e.g., cigars, trees, or swords for male sex 
organs; tunnels for female sex organs). This focus stems from Freud’s analysis of dreams, 
which he believed communicate repressed desires in the form of symbolically rich stories.
Motivational research
In the 1950s, motivational research borrowed Freudian ideas to understand the 
deeper meanings of products and advertisements. This approach adapted psychoanalyti-
cal (Freudian) interpretations with a heavy emphasis on unconscious motives. It basically 
assumed that we channel socially unacceptable needs into acceptable outlets—including 
product substitutes.
This perspective relies on depth interviews with individual consumers. Instead of ask-
ing many consumers a few general questions about product usage and combining these 
responses with those of many other consumers in a representative statistical sample, a 
motivational researcher talks to only a few people but probes deeply into each respon-
dent’s purchase motivations. A depth interview might take several hours, and it’s based 
on the assumption that the respondent cannot immediately articulate his or her latent or 
underlying motives. A carefully trained interviewer can derive these only after extensive 
questioning and interpretation.
Ernest Dichter, a psychoanalyst who trained with Freud’s disciples in Vienna in the 
early part of the 20th century, pioneered this work. Dichter conducted in-depth inter-
view studies on more than 230 different products, and actual marketing campaigns 
incorporated many of his findings.6 For example, Esso (now Exxon in the United States) 
for many years reminded consumers to “Put a Tiger in Your Tank” after Dichter found 
that people responded well to this powerful animal symbolism containing vaguely 
sexual undertones. Table 7.1 provides a summary of major consumption motivations 
he identified.
Some critics reacted to the motivational studies that ad agencies conducted in much 
the same way they did to subliminal perception studies (see Chapter 3). They charged that 
this approach gave advertisers the power to manipulate consumers.7 However, many con-
sumer researchers felt the research lacked sufficient rigor and validity because the interpre-
tations are so subjective.8 Because the analyst based his conclusions on his own judgment 
after he interviewed a small number of people, critics were dubious about whether the 
findings would generalize to a larger market. In addition, because the original motivational 

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
245 
researchers were heavily influenced by orthodox Freudian theory, their interpretations 
usually involved sexual themes. This emphasis tends to overlook other plausible causes 
for behavior. Still, motivational research had great appeal to at least some marketers for 
several reasons:
●
●Motivational research is less expensive to conduct than large-scale, quantitative 
survey data collection because interviewing and data-processing costs are relatively 
minimal.
●
●The knowledge a company derives from motivational research may help it develop 
marketing communications that appeal to deep-seated needs and thus provide a 
more powerful hook to reel in consumers. Even if they are not necessarily valid for all 
consumers in a target market, these insights can still be valuable to an advertiser who 
wants to create copy that will resonate with customers.
●
●Some of the findings seem intuitively plausible after the fact. For example, motiva-
tional studies concluded that we associate coffee with companionship, that we avoid 
prunes because they remind us of old age, and that men fondly equate the first car 
they owned as an adolescent with the onset of their sexual freedom.
Other interpretations were hard for some researchers to swallow, such as the observation 
that women equate the act of baking a cake with birth, or that men are reluctant to give blood 
because they feel it drains their vital fluids. However, we do sometimes say a pregnant woman 
has “a bun in the oven,” and Pillsbury claims that “nothing says lovin’ like something from 
taBle 7.1   A Motivational Researcher Identifies Consumption Motives
Source: Adapted from Jeffrey F. Durgee, “Interpreting Dichter’s Interpretations: An Analysis of Consumption Symbolism,” in The Handbook of Consumer Motivation, Marketing and 
Semiotics: Selected Papers from the Copenhagen Symposium, eds. Hanne Hartvig-Larsen, David Glen Mick, and Christian Alstead (Copenhagen, 1991).
Motive
associated products
Power-masculinity-virility
Power: Sugary products and large breakfasts (to charge oneself up), bowling, electric trains, hot rods, power tools
Masculinity-virility: Coffee, red meat, heavy shoes, toy guns, buying fur coats for women, shaving with a razor
Security
Ice cream (to feel like a loved child again), full drawer of neatly ironed shirts, real plaster walls (to feel sheltered), 
home baking, hospital care
Eroticism
Sweets (to lick), gloves (to be removed by woman as a form of undressing), a man lighting a woman’s cigarette (to 
create a tension-filled moment culminating in pressure, then relaxation)
Moral purity-cleanliness
White bread, cotton fabrics (to connote chastity), harsh household cleaning chemicals (to make housewives 
feel moral after using), bathing (to be equated with Pontius Pilate, who washed blood from his hands), oatmeal 
(sacrifice, virtue)
Social acceptance
Companionship: Ice cream (to share fun), coffee, Love and affection: Toys (to express love for children), sugar and 
honey (to express terms of affection) Acceptance: Soap, beauty products
Individuality
Gourmet foods, foreign cars, cigarette holders, vodka, perfume, fountain pens
Status
Scotch: ulcers, heart attacks, indigestion (to show one has a high-stress, important job!), carpets (to show one 
does not live on bare earth like peasants)
Femininity
Cakes and cookies, dolls, silk, tea, household curios
Reward
Cigarettes, candy, alcohol, ice cream, cookies
Mastery over environment
Kitchen appliances, boats, sporting goods, cigarette lighters
Disalienation (a desire to feel  
connectedness to things)
Home decorating, skiing, morning radio broadcasts (to feel “in touch” with the world)
Magic-mystery
Soups (having healing powers), paints (change the mood of a room), carbonated drinks (magical effervescent 
property), vodka (romantic history), unwrapping of gifts

246 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
the oven.” When the Red Cross hired motivational researcher Dichter to boost blood donation 
rates, he reported that men (but not women) tended to drastically overestimate the amount 
of blood they gave. As a result, the Red Cross counteracted men’s fear of losing their virility 
when the organization symbolically equated the act of giving blood with fertilizing a female 
egg: “Give the gift of life.” Despite its drawbacks, some ad agencies today still use some forms 
of motivational research. The approach is most useful, however, when we use it as an explor-
atory technique to provide insights that inform more rigorous research approaches.
neo-Freudian theories
Freud’s work had a huge influence on subsequent theories of personality. Although he 
opened the door to the realization that explanations for behavior may lurk beneath the 
surface, many of his colleagues and students felt that an individual’s personality is more 
influenced by how he or she handles relationships with others than by how he or she 
resolves sexual conflicts. We call these theorists Neo-Freudian (meaning following from or 
being influenced by Freud).
Karen horney
One of the most prominent neo-Freudians was Karen Horney. This pioneering psychother-
apist described people as moving toward others (compliant), away from others (detached), 
or against others (aggressive).9 Indeed, one early study found that compliant people are 
more likely to gravitate toward name-brand products, detached types are more likely to 
be tea drinkers, and males the researchers classified as aggressive preferred brands with a 
strong masculine orientation (e.g., Old Spice deodorant).10 Other well-known neo-Freud-
ians include Alfred Adler, who proposed that a prime motivation is to overcome feelings of 
inferiority relative to others; and Harry Stack Sullivan, who focused on how personality 
evolves to reduce anxiety in social relationships.11
Carl jung
Carl Jung was also one of Freud’s disciples. However, Jung didn’t accept Freud’s emphasis 
on sexual aspects of personality. He went on to develop his own method of psychotherapy 
that he called analytical psychology. Jung believed that the cumulative experiences of past 
generations shape who we are today. He proposed that we each share a collective uncon-
scious, a storehouse of memories we inherit from our ancestors. For example, Jung would 
argue that many people are afraid of the dark because their distant ancestors had good 
reason to fear it. These shared memories create archetypes, or universally recognized 
ideas and behavior patterns. Archetypes involve themes, such as birth, death, or the devil, 
that appear frequently in myths, stories, and dreams.
Jung’s ideas may seem a bit far-fetched, but advertising messages do in fact often 
include archetypes. For example, some of the archetypes Jung and his followers identified 
include the “old wise man” and the “earth mother.”12 These images appear frequently in 
marketing messages that feature characters such as wizards, revered teachers, or even 
Mother Nature. Our culture’s current infatuation with stories such as Harry Potter and The 
Lord of the Rings speaks to the power of these images—to say nothing of the “wizard” who 
helps you repair your laptop.
Young & Rubicam (Y&R), a major advertising agency, uses the archetype approach in 
its BrandAsset® Archetypes model, as depicted in Figure 7.1. The model proposes healthy 
relationships among archetypes as well as unhealthy ones. A healthy personality is one in 
which the Archetypes overwhelm their corresponding Shadows; a sick personality results 
when one or more Shadows prevail. When a brand’s Shadows dominate, this cues the 
agency to take action to guide the brand to a healthier personality, much as one would try 
to counsel a psychologically ill person.13
A second, similar approach popularized by authors Mark and Pearson uses a typology 
of 12 brand archetypes. These include categories such as “Hero,” “Magician,” “Lover,” and 
“Jester.” This perspective draws on theories of human motivation to create two sets of contrasts: 
belonging/people versus independence/self-actualization, and risk/mastery versus stability/
control.14 Table 7.2 (on page 248) summarizes some of these archetype/brand relationships.
The technique that eLoyalty 
uses exemplifies the appli-
cation of trait theory to mar-
keting. This company, which 
builds tools and services for 
call centers, compiles personality profiles of 
each individual caller and matches them with a 
customer service representative who works best 
with that personality type. The system is based 
on a methodology called the Process Commu-
nication Model, which NASA used to weed out 
astronaut candidates and former President 
Bill Clinton used to tailor his speeches. The 
system’s creator divided people into six main 
personality types, each of which has a differ-
ent communication style and each of which 
has different stress triggers. It’s based on 
the idea that if you know the personality type 
of the person you’re speaking with, you can 
modify your own communication style to work 
more effectively with that person. One such 
type is the “Workaholic,” a personality type 
who is task-oriented. If a customer service rep 
starts chit-chatting to establish rapport with 
a Workaholic, this approach will backfire. In 
contrast, a type called the “Reactor” is rela-
tionship-oriented, so a rep who does not ac-
knowledge the caller’s feelings before getting 
down to business is doomed to failure. The 
automated system analyzes callers’ language 
patterns to identify their personality type so 
that each time the customer calls back, he or 
she is directed to a rep who is a good match 
for that caller’s type.15
Marketing Opportunity

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
247 
Sage - peace
wise, visionary, mentoring
Magician - thought
logical, analytical, insightful
Matriarch - order
organized, systematic, controlled
Patriarch - belief
digniﬁed, authoritative, inspirational
Mother Earth - body
stable, genuine, nurturing
Angel - dreams
optimistic, innocent, pure
Queen - being
relaxed, comforting, sociable
Enchantress - soul
mysterious, sensual, tempting
Warrior - ego
conﬁdent, powerful, heroic
Actress - feelings
glamorous, dramatic, involved
Troubadour - joy
joyous, free-spirited, agile
Sorcerer
Jester - spirit
witty, resilient, daring
Shadow Characteristics
Characteristics
Dictator
hollow, dark, cowardly
repressive, close-minded, unforgiving
Hermit
isolated, lonely, irrelevant
Hag
stingy, messy, crotchety
Shadow Mother
bloated, immobile, self-absorbed
Orphan
abandoned, vulnerable, 
frightened
Shadow Witch
cold, vain, selﬁsh
Addict
wounded, jealous, tragic
Slave
oppressed, tormented, despondent
Destroyer
Trickster
Idiot
angry, aggressive, destructive
silly, dimwitted, goofy
tricky, phony, scheming
Figure 7.1 BRANDASSET VALUATOR® ARCHETyPES
Source: BrandAsset® Consulting: A Young & Rubican Brands Company.

taBle 7.2   Selected Mark and Pearson Brand Archetypes
archetype
Description
example brands
as consumers
leaving a thumbprint on the World
“hero”
Core desire:
To prove worth through  
courageous action
Goal:
Exert mastery in a way that 
improves the world
Fear:
Weakness, vulnerability, and 
wimping out
Strategy:
Become strong and competent
Everything seems lost … but 
then the Hero rides over the hill 
and saves the day. The Hero 
triumphs over evil, adversity, 
and challenges; in doing so, the 
Hero inspires others. Heroes 
are ambitious and seek out 
challenges. The Hero generally 
wants to make the world a better 
place. Their motto is: “Where 
there is a will, there’s a way.”
Hero brands include: the Ma-
rines, the Olympics, the NASA 
space program, Nike, Red Cross, 
and Under Armour.
Hero movies include: Star Wars 
and Saving Private Ryan.
Famous Heroes include: Martin 
Luther King, Jr., Nelson Mandela, 
John F. Kennedy, and Superman.
Hero consumers expect 
companies, and indeed 
brands, to articulate their 
values, mission, and vision 
in a clear way. Increasingly, 
Hero consumers expect those 
corporate visions to reflect some 
sense of social responsibility. 
Heroes evaluate brands and 
companies not just on the 
quality of the product or service 
but also the strengths and ethics 
of the firm’s convictions.
“Magician”
Core desire:
Knowledge of fundamental laws 
and how the world works
Goal:
Make dreams come true
Fear:
Unanticipated negative 
 consequences
Strategy:
Develop vision and live it
Most basic to the Magician is the 
desire to search out the funda-
mental laws of how things work 
and to apply these principles to 
getting things done. The most 
typical applications of magical 
lore are to heal the mind, heart, 
and body; to find the fountain of 
youth and the secret of longevity. 
Or to invent products to make 
things happen. The Magician’s 
motto is: “It can happen.”
Magician brands include all 
those that foster “magical 
moments”: Sony, Google, Moët 
and Chandon, Verve Clicquot, 
MasterCard, and Disney.
Television shows characterized 
by the Magician include: City of 
Angels, Touched by an Angel, 
and Seventh Heaven.
As customers, Magicians believe 
that who you are is as important 
as the quality of your products or 
services. you are always, there-
fore, selling yourself, your values, 
and your own consciousness 
when marketing to Magicians.
Magicians are motivated by per-
sonal transformation; therefore, 
firms offering transformative 
experiences will appeal most to 
Magicians.
no Man is an island
“lover”
Core desire:
Attain intimacy and experience 
sensual pleasure
Goal:
Being in a relationship with people
Fear:
Being alone, a wall-flower 
unwanted and unloved
Strategy:
Become more and more attractive 
physically, emotionally, and in 
every other way
The Lover archetype governs all 
sorts of love, from parental love, 
to friendship, to spiritual love, 
but most important is romantic 
love. The Lover is always active in 
intense and personal friendships. 
Lovers think of themselves as 
being wonderfully appreciative of 
others. They also typically dislike 
competition. This can often lead 
to jealousy and mean-spirited 
behavior. The Lover’s motto is:  
“I only have eyes for you.”
Lover brands include: Coco 
Chanel, Christian Dior, The Body 
Shop, Revlon, Godiva, Victoria’s 
Secret, Hallmark, and Häagen 
Dazs.
Lover archetypes in movies 
include: Titanic, Pretty Woman, 
and Casablanca.
Famous Lover people include: 
Sofia Vergara, Sophia Loren, 
Elizabeth Taylor, and George 
Clooney.
The Lover wants a deeper kind 
of connection—one that is 
intimate, genuine, and personal 
(sometimes also sensual). 
Lovers often identify products 
with certain relationships. Lovers 
develop deep relationships 
with products and companies, 
especially those that help them 
feel special and loved. These 
types of consumers also like 
being singled out for attention; 
for example: “mailing to special 
customers only.”
“jester”
Core desire:
To live in the moment with full 
enjoyment
Goal:
To have a great time and lighten 
up the world
Fear:
Boredom and being boring
Strategy:
Play, make jokes, and be funny
The Jester archetype includes: the 
clown, the trickster, and anyone 
at all who loves to play or act up. 
While it is possible to have fun on 
our own, the Jester calls us out to 
come and play with one another. 
Jester figures enjoy life and inter-
action for their own sake. They also 
love being the life of the party!
The Jester’s motto is: “If I can’t 
dance, I don’t want to be a part 
of your revolution.”
Jester brands include: M&Ms, 
Snickers, Skittles, Pringles, Coke, 
Pepsi, and Bud Light.
Famous Jester people include: 
Robin Williams, Johnny Carson, 
Chris Rock, and Will Smith.
The Jester in every one of us 
loves humor. Jesters like funny 
commercials because they 
entertain them and make them 
feel good, creating a halo effect 
around the product. Jester ads 
and packaging highlight bright 
colors and lots of action—the 
more outrageous, the better. 
Overall, the Jester loves the fun of 
marketing. They are not frightened 
by knowing we are in a new time.
Source: Adapted from Michael R. Solomon, Rebekah Russell-Bennett, and Josephine Previte, Consumer Behaviour: Buying, Having, Being, 3rd ed., Frenchs Forest, NSW: Pearson 
Australia, 2012.

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
249 
trait theory
Popular online matchmaking services such as match.com and eharmony.com offer to create 
your “personality profile” and then hook you up with other members whose profiles are simi-
lar. This approach to personality focuses on the quantitative measurement of personality 
traits, which we define as the identifiable characteristics that define a person.
What are some crucial personality traits? Consumer researchers have looked at many 
to establish linkages to product choice, such as “need for uniqueness,” “introversion/
extroversion” (whether people are shy or outgoing), and “attention to social comparison 
information.” Some research evidence suggests that ad messages that match how a person 
thinks about himself or herself are more persuasive.16
Another trait relevant to consumer behavior is frugality. Frugal people deny short-
term purchasing whims; they choose instead to resourcefully use what they already own. 
For example, this personality type tends to favor cost-saving measures such as timing 
showers and bringing leftovers from home to have for lunch at work.18 Obviously, dur-
ing tough economic times many people reveal their “inner frugalista” as they search for 
ways to save money. Indeed, as the Great Recession invaded, Google searches for the term 
frugality increased by roughly 2,500 percent. Whereas many of us splurged on expensive 
cars or Jimmy Choo shoes (or both) in the past, many analysts predict that more of us will 
Products like these from a German  
company appeal to people who like to  
be well-organized.
Source: Photo courtesy of The Container Store.
Certainly messages and prod-
ucts that promote uniqueness 
so that a consumer can make 
a statement via individualized 
choices are bound to appeal 
to some more than others. Technological devel-
opments encourage product personalization 
strategies that enable each buyer to customize 
an item and in some cases to design it online. 
Continuum, a new clothing company, allows 
women to create their own bikini design. After 
she uploads her measurements, the company 
uses three-dimensional printing to generate 
the product in nylon.17
  net profit

250 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
be frugal down the road, even when the economy improves. They expect to see us buy 
smaller houses and (gasp!) live within our means as we forsake heavy credit card debt. 
How accurate is this prediction? Maybe the answer depends on how many of us truly have 
frugal personality traits versus those who are merely “taking a break” until the economy 
improves. Recent surveys of U.S. college students indicate that frugal consumers are less 
materialistic and not as involved as brands compared to others; they’re also less likely to be 
concerned about others’ opinions regarding what they buy.19
According to the research firm Mindset Media, personality traits are better predic-
tors of the type of media consumers choose than are demographic variables such as 
age, gender, and income. The company also claims that the TV shows you watch offer 
marketers insights into your personality and the types of brands you’re likely to prefer, 
based on your dominant personality traits and the (perceived) matchup with a brand’s 
image. To find out which personalities are attracted to which TV shows it recently 
analyzed self-reported data from about 25,000 TV viewers across more than 70 TV 
shows. These are some of the media/trait/brand linkages the company generated in its 
analysis:20
●
●Viewers of Mad Men are emotionally sensitive and intellectually curious types who 
often tend to be dreamers rather than realists. Good brand matches are Apple and the 
Audi A6.
●
●Viewers of Family Guy are rebels who don’t like authority, rules, or structure they 
deem unfair, and usually won’t hesitate to make their feelings known with anger or 
sarcasm. Good brand matches are DiGiorno and the Ford F150.
●
●Viewers of Dancing with the Stars are traditionalists who prefer stability and the tried-
and-true. They respect authority and generally have their feet firmly grounded. Good 
brand matches are Kraft and the Chrysler Town and Country car.
●
●Viewers of The Office consider themselves superior to others and like to brag about their 
accomplishments. They also like to be in charge. Good brand matches are Starbucks 
and the BMW Series 3.
the Big Five personality traits
The most widely recognized approach to measuring personality traits is the so-called Big 
Five (also known as the Neo-Personality Inventory). This is a set of five dimensions that 
form the basis of personality: openness to experience, conscientiousness, extroversion, 
agreeableness, and neuroticism. Table 7.3 describes these dimensions.
taBle 7.3   Description of Big Five Personality Dimensions
 
Description
example of Measurement  
items (agree/disagree)
Openness to experience
The degree to which a person is 
open to new ways of doing things
Love to think up new ways  
of doing things
Conscientiousness
The level of organization and 
structure a person needs
Am always prepared
extroversion
How well a person tolerates 
stimulation from people
Talk to a lot of different 
people at parties
agreeableness
The degree to which we defer to 
other people
Take time out for others
neuroticism (emotional 
instability)
How well a person copes with 
stress
Get upset easily
Source: Michael R. Solomon, Rebekah Russell-Bennett, and Josephine Previte, Consumer Behaviour: Buying, Having, 
Being, 3rd ed., Frenchs Forest, NSW: Pearson Australia, 2012.

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
251 
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator®, which is based on Jung’s work, is another 
widely used personality test. When you apply for a job it is quite possible your potential 
employer will ask you to take this test. Depending on a respondent’s preferences within 
each of four dimensions as Table 7.4 shows, he or she is assigned to one of 16 four-letter 
types.21 Jung believed each of us has “inborn predispositions” along these dimensions that 
then interact with the environment to shape personality.
The publishers of the Myers-Briggs test also relate these dimensions to social media 
usage. For example, they report that people who use platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, 
and LinkedIn are more likely to be Extroverts, use Intuition, and arrive at decisions by 
Thinking.22
problems with trait theory in Consumer research
Because consumer researchers categorize large numbers of consumers according to 
whether they exhibit various traits, we can apply this approach to segment markets. If a 
car manufacturer, for example, determines that drivers who fit a given trait profile prefer a 
car with certain features, it can use this information to great advantage. The notion that 
consumers buy products that are extensions of their personalities makes intuitive sense. 
As we’ll see shortly, many marketing managers endorse this idea as they try to create 
brand personalities to appeal to different types of consumers.
Unfortunately, the use of standard personality trait measurements to predict product 
choices has met with mixed success at best. In general, marketing researchers simply have 
not been able to predict consumers’ behaviors on the basis of measured personality traits. 
These are some logical explanations for these less-than-stellar results:23
●
●Many of the scales are not sufficiently valid or reliable; they do not adequately mea-
sure what they are supposed to measure, and their results may not be stable over time.
●
●Psychologists typically develop personality tests for specific populations (e.g., people 
who are mentally ill); marketers then “borrow” them to apply to a more general popu-
lation where they have questionable relevance.
●
●Often marketers don’t administer the tests under the appropriate conditions; people 
who are not properly trained may give them in a classroom or at a kitchen table.
●
●The researchers often make changes in the instruments to adapt them to their own sit-
uations and needs; in the process, they may add or delete items and rename variables. 
These ad hoc changes dilute the validity of the measures and also reduce researchers’ 
ability to compare results across consumer samples.
●
●Many trait scales measure gross, overall tendencies (e.g., emotional stability or  
introversion); marketers then use these results to make predictions about purchases of 
specific brands.
taBle 7.4   The Four Dimensions of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator®
Focus of attention
Extroversion (E)
External world
Introversion (I)
Internal world
Take in information
Sensing (S)
Sequential, step-by-step
Intuition (N)
Big picture
Make decisions
Thinking (T)
Step back from the situation, 
take an objective view
Feeling (F)
Step into the situation, take 
a subjective view
Deal with the outer world
Judging (J)
A planned approach to 
meeting the deadline in a 
scheduled way
Perceiving (P)
A spontaneous approach to 
meeting the deadline with a 
rush of activity
Source: Adapted from Meyers-Briggs Type Indicator® (MBTI®),https://www.cpp.com (products page/mbti/index.aspx), 
accessed March 29, 2015.

252 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
●
●In many cases, marketers ask consumers to respond to a large number of scales with 
no advance thought about how they will relate these measures to consumer behavior. 
The researchers then use a “shotgun approach” because they follow up on anything 
that happens to look interesting. As any statistician will tell you, this approach capi-
talizes on chance and can produce distorted results that may not be reproducible (or 
surface at all) in other studies.
Although marketing researchers largely abandoned the use of personality measures 
after many studies failed to yield meaningful results, some researchers have not given up 
on the early promise of this line of work. More recent efforts (mainly in Europe) try to learn 
from past mistakes. Researchers use more specific measures of personality traits that they 
have reason to believe are relevant to economic behavior. They try to increase the validity 
of these measures, primarily by including multiple measures of behavior rather than just 
a single personality scale. In addition, these researchers tone down their expectations of 
what personality traits can tell them about consumers. They now recognize that traits 
are only part of the solution; they have to incorporate personality data with information 
about people’s social and economic conditions for it to be useful.24 As a result, some more 
recent research has had better success at relating personality traits to such consumer 
behaviors as alcohol consumption among young men or shoppers’ willingness to try new, 
healthier food products.25 Table 7.5 provides some examples of consumer research studies 
that tie personality traits to product purchase and use.
taBle 7.5   The Influence of Personality Traits on Consumer Behavior
personality trait
influence on Consumer Behavior
Superstition
Sports fan behavior such as “lucky socks,” the direction of one’s cap on the head, purchase of good luck charms, 
refusal to purchase particular items because of bad luck (i.e., opals, peacock feathers, apricots)
Pro-environment
Individual recycling efforts, decreased car usage, increased use of public transport
Romanticism
Movie genre choice, more likely to take risks, prefer warm countries to visit, prefer luxury travel
Willingness to spend money
Spendthrifts save less money and carry more debt than tightwads, so they are higher users of credit cards; more 
likely to buy hedonic items than tightwads
Enjoyment of shopping
People who enjoy shopping are more likely to spend time searching for products, resulting in increased product 
knowledge
Need for cognition (enjoyment 
of thinking)
People who enjoy thinking respond better to words than pictures and are more motivated to spend time 
processing the words and reading the “fine print.”
Need for affect (enjoyment of 
processing feelings)
People who enjoy feelings respond better to pictures than words; more likely to engage in compulsive behavior; 
pictures may encourage impulse buying
Impulsiveness
More likely to experience pleasure than guilt when overeating
Need for uniqueness
People who want to “stand out from the crowd” tend to be opinion leaders; they are more likely to be sources of 
information about brands and products for other people
Susceptibility to interpersonal 
influence (how influenced a 
person is by another)
A person who is easily influenced by others is more likely to prefer wines that offer social benefits such as 
prestige
Self-consciousness
People who are concerned with the way they appear to others are less likely to complain directly to a business or 
in front of others
Extroversion
Extroverts experience more positive emotions when consuming
Neuroticism
Neurotic people are less likely to repurchase or complain (they just leave), regardless of their level of satisfaction
Source: Michael R. Solomon, Rebekah Russell-Bennett, and Josephine Previte, Consumer Behaviour: Buying, Having, Being, 3rd ed., Frenchs Forest, NSW: Pearson Australia, 2012.26

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
253 
Brand personality
Are Apple users better than the rest of us? Many of us know 
an “Apple-holic” who likes to turn up his or her nose at the 
uneducated masses that have to get by with their primitive PCs or 
Android phones. In fact, a survey of 20,000 people claims that iPad users are unkind and 
have little empathy; it labels them a “selfish elite.” It also described them as “six times more 
likely to be wealthy, well-educated, power-hungry, over-achieving, sophisticated, unkind 
and non-altruistic 30- to 50-year-olds. They are self-centered workaholics with an over-
whelming interest in business and finance who cherish ‘power and achievement’ and will 
not cross the street to help others.”27 Ouch! That’s a pretty harsh way to describe people 
who happen to gravitate toward a successful brand. Do products as well as their owners 
actually have personalities? Let’s step back to explore this intriguing question.
In 1886, a momentous event occurred in marketing history: The Quaker Oats man 
first appeared on boxes of hot cereal. Quakers had a reputation in 19th-century America 
for being shrewd but fair, and peddlers sometimes dressed as members of this religious 
group to cash in on their credibility. When the cereal company decided to “borrow” this 
imagery for its packages, it hoped customers might make the same association.28
Today, thousands of brands also borrow personality traits of individuals or groups to con-
vey an image they want customers to form of them. A brand personality is the set of traits 
people attribute to a product as if it were a person.29 An advertising agency wrote the following 
memo to help it figure out how to portray one of its clients. Based on this description of the “cli-
ent,” can you guess who he is? “He is creative … unpredictable … an imp…. He not only walks 
and talks, but has the ability to sing, blush, wink, and work with little devices like pointers…. 
He can also play musical instruments…. His walking motion is characterized as a ‘swagger.’ … 
He is made of dough and has mass.”30 Of course, we all know today that packaging and other 
physical cues create a “personality” for a product (in this case, the Pillsbury Doughboy).
It’s increasingly common for marketers to think carefully about brand personality as 
they embrace the communications approach known as brand storytelling. This perspec-
tive emphasizes the importance of giving a product a rich background to involve custom-
ers in its history or experience. Brand storytelling is based on the tradition of reader-
response theory, which is a widely accepted perspective in literature that focuses on the 
role of the reader in interpreting a story rather than just relying upon the author’s version. 
This approach recognizes that the consumer does not just want to listen to a manufactured 
set of details, but he or she wants to participate in the story by “filling in the blanks.”31
One popular genre of brand storytelling is what a set of researchers described as 
an underdog brand biography. This includes details about a brand’s humble origins 
and how it defied the odds to succeed. Such a story resonates with consumers because 
they can identify with these struggles. Thus, Google, HP, and Apple like to talk about the 
garages in which they started. The label on a Nantucket Nectars bottle describes how the 
company started “with only a blender and a dream.”32
Anthropomorphism refers to the tendency to attribute human characteristics to 
objects or animals. We may think about a cartoon character or mythical creation as if it 
were a person and even assume that it has human feelings. Again, consider familiar spoke-
scharacters such as Chester Cheetah from Pringles, the Keebler Elves, or the Michelin 
Man—or the frustration some people feel when they come to believe their computer is 
smarter than they are or even that it’s “conspiring” to make them crazy! As we saw in our 
discussion of sex-typed products in Chapter 6, there is a common tendency in particular 
to ascribe a gender to a product. We tend to gravitate toward products that are the same 
as our own gender. In one study, a promotional message that depicted a fragrance, digital 
camera, and car as either male or female resulted in more positive evaluations when the 
item’s (presumed) gender was the same as the respondent’s.34
In a sense, a brand personality is a statement about the brand’s market position. 
Understanding this is crucial to marketing strategy, especially if consumers don’t see the 
brand the way its makers intend them to and they must attempt to reposition the product 
OBjeCtive 7-2 
Brands have 
personalities.
Marketing pitfall
Even colleges have brand 
personalities—though, 
as with other products, 
these images aren’t al-
ways an accurate (or de-
sirable) reflection of the place. ESPN had to 
pull the plug on an advertising campaign for 
its collegiate basketball coverage after man-
agers learned that Anomaly, the advertising 
agency ESPN had retained for the campaign, 
intended to recruit actors who would play the 
stereotypical students at numerous schools. 
The idea was to have the students stationed 
at a call center; they would phone consumers 
to convince them to watch their school play 
on TV. Here are just a few of the “brand per-
sonalities” a leaked memo described:
●
●Tennessee: “a slutty girl who would hang 
out at the cowgirl hall of fame.”
●
●Duke: “a smart, with it, young white 
male. He’s handsome. He’s from money. 
He is, in short, the kind of guy everyone 
can’t stand. He is the kind of guy every-
one wants to be.”
●
●Oklahoma: “is awesome and he thinks 
everything is awesome. He’s very enthu-
siastic about all things call center and 
all things life and he wants to share this 
contagious enthusiasm with everyone he 
meets. Wide-eyed, as naive as they come.”
●
●Purdue: “child prodigy. 14-year-old. Or 
open to an 18-year-old who looks 14. 
Aeronautical engineering. Wiz kid. Think 
McLovin from Superbad.”
●
●Kansas: “straight off the farm. However, 
he takes great pains to point out that 
Kansas is very cosmopolitan, as wit-
nessed by their record, their burgeoning 
tech industry, and their hybrid corns (bo-
nus: modified by fish genes!).”
●
●Villanova: “the poor man’s Duke—he’s not 
quite as handsome, he’s not quite as rich, 
he’s not quite as dapper. After 2 or 3 beers 
though, who cares? … he’s friendly enough.”
●
●Pittsburgh: “a tomboy. She obviously 
grew up in the neighborhood and isn’t 
going to take any guff from anyone and 
she’ll wallop you in the eye with a crow-
bar if you suggest different. So don’t. 
Think Tina Fey type.”
●
●Georgetown: “a 4.36 GPA who’s lived in 9 
world-class cities, but all the time in her 
sister’s shadow (her GPA is 4.37). She’s 
sort of the female Duke, except most peo-
ple like her. Think Reese Witherspoon.”33

254 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Quaker Oats was one of the first companies 
to create a distinct personality for its brand.
Source: FoodPhotography/Alamy.
(i.e., give it a personality makeover). That’s the problem Volvo now faces: Its cars are 
renowned for safety, but drivers don’t exactly see them as exciting or sexy. A safe and solid 
brand personality makes it hard to sell a racy convertible like the C70 model, so a British 
ad tried to change that perception with the tagline, “Lust, envy, jealousy. The dangers 
of a Volvo.” Just as with people, however, you can only go so far to convince others that 
your personality has changed. Volvo has been trying to jazz up its image for years, but for 
the most part consumers don’t buy it. In a previous attempt in the United Kingdom, the 
company paired action images like a Volvo pulling a helicopter off a cliff with the headline 
“Safe Sex”—but market research showed that people didn’t believe the new image. As one 

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
255 
CB aS i See it
Nira Munichor, Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and that informs you that “You’re not 
worthy.” Which attributes do you think 
such a brand has? Do you think the 
brand is high-quality? And would you 
buy a product of such a brand?
My colleague, Professor 
Yael Steinhart, and I have been 
investigating brand arrogance and 
the effects it has on consumers’ 
decisions, behaviors, and even well-
being. Arrogance is an interesting 
trait in that it comprises both positive 
and negative aspects. On one hand, 
consumers think of arrogant brands 
(like arrogant people) as being high 
in status and quality, which suggests 
that consumers should find these 
brands appealing. On the other hand, 
arrogance makes consumers feel 
uncomfortable and inferior, and they 
might therefore be put off by arrogant 
brands (just as they might be put off by 
arrogant people).
How does the complex array of 
positive and negative associations 
that arrogant brands evoke influence 
consumers’ purchase decisions? All 
told, does arrogance make a brand 
more or less attractive for consumers? 
We have discovered that the answers 
to these questions depend on who the 
consumer is, and, in particular, how 
positive or negative the consumer’s 
self-evaluation is. When people feel 
good about themselves, namely, 
when they have high self-esteem 
and high self-confidence, they tend 
to be less sensitive to criticism. 
Similarly, consumers with positive 
self-perceptions are less sensitive to 
the sense of inferiority that arrogant 
brands induce. Consequently, 
these consumers focus on the 
positive connotations inherent in 
brand arrogance, and are inclined 
to prefer an arrogant brand over a 
comparable non-arrogant alternative. 
In contrast, consumers with negative 
self-perceptions, those who feel 
unconfident and have low self-
esteem, find it difficult to tolerate 
any additional harm to their self-
view. These consumers are therefore 
motivated to resist arrogant brands 
that might cause them to feel inferior, 
and to prefer alternatives.
Interestingly, arrogant brand 
resistance, which at first glance 
might seem to be a defensive act of 
withdrawal, appears to be beneficial 
for consumers, and may help them 
improve their self-perceptions. We 
have found that consumers with 
negative self-evaluations feel better 
about themselves after they resist an 
arrogant brand.
Think of an arrogant person you 
know. What is your evaluation of this 
person? How successful do you think 
he or she is? How does this person 
make you feel? How uncomfortable 
are you in his or her presence? Now, 
picture an arrogant brand, a brand that 
conveys superiority in addition to a 
certain level of disrespect for others. 
For example, a brand that states that 
it is “Hated by many. Loved by few,” 
brand consultant observed, “You get the sort of feeling you get when you see your grand-
parents trying to dance the latest dance. Slightly amused and embarrassed.”35
Many of the most recognizable figures in popular culture are spokescharacters for 
long-standing brands, such as the Jolly Green Giant, the Keebler Elves, Mr. Peanut, or 
Charlie the Tuna.36 These personalities periodically get a makeover to keep their mean-
ings current. For example, Bayer recast Speedy Alka-Seltzer: In the 1950s and later, he 
was an all-around good guy who was ready to help with any sort of indigestion. Today, he 
appears as a “wingman” for men in their 20s and 30s who tend to “overindulge” on food 
and drink. (Do you know anyone who fits this description?) The creative director on the 
campaign explained that the goal is to introduce Speedy as “the good-times enabler who 
shows up whenever guys are being guys.”37
Forging a successful brand personality often is key to building brand loyalty, but it’s 
not as easy to accomplish as it might appear. One reason is that many consumers (par-
ticularly younger ones) have a sensitive “BS detector” that alerts them when a brand 
doesn’t live up to its claims or is somehow inauthentic. When this happens, the strategy 
may backfire as consumers rebel. They may create Web sites to attack the brand or post 

256 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Personality Traits
Low
High
Sincerity
Down-to-earth
Honest
Wholesome
Cheerful
Excitement
Daring
Spirited
Imaginative
Up-to-date
Competence
Reliable
Intelligent
Successful
Sophistication
Upper class
Charming
Ruggedness
Outdoorsy
Tough
A study found that consumers infer strong 
differences in a wine’s “personality” based 
on the bottle’s label design. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Journal  
of Marketing, published by the American Marketing 
Association, Ulrich R. Orth & Keven Malkewitz,  
May 2008, Vol. 72, p. 73.
parodies that make fun of it on YouTube. One set of researchers terms this phenomenon 
a Doppelgänger brand image (one that looks like the original but is in fact a critique 
of it). For example, many consumers were immensely loyal to the Snapple brand until 
Quaker purchased it. These loyalists felt that Quaker had stripped the brand of its offbeat, 
grassroots sensibility; one shock jock renamed it “Crapple” on his radio show.38

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
257 
Many of the most recognizable figures in 
popular culture are spokescharacters for 
long-standing brands.
Source: Franck Fotos/Alamy.
So, how do people think about brands? We use some personality dimensions to com-
pare and contrast the perceived characteristics of brands in various product categories, 
including these:39
●
●Old-fashioned, wholesome, traditional
●
●Surprising, lively, “with it”
●
●Serious, intelligent, efficient
●
●Glamorous, romantic, sexy
●
●Rugged, outdoorsy, tough, athletic

258 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Indeed, consumers appear to have little trouble assigning personality qualities to all 
sorts of inanimate products, from personal care products to more mundane, functional 
ones—even kitchen appliances. Whirlpool’s research showed that people saw its prod-
ucts as more feminine than they saw competing brands. When respondents were asked 
to imagine the appliance as a person, many of them pictured a modern, family-oriented 
woman living in the suburbs—attractive but not flashy. In contrast, they envisioned the 
company’s Kitchen Aid brand as a modern professional woman who was glamorous, 
wealthy, and enjoyed classical music and the theater.40
A product that creates and communicates a distinctive brand personality stands out 
from its competition and inspires years of loyalty. However, personality analysis helps 
marketers identify a brand’s weaknesses that have little to do with its functional qualities: 
Adidas asked kids in focus groups to imagine that the brand came to life and was at a party 
and to tell what they would expect the brand to be doing there. The kids responded that 
Adidas would be hanging around the keg with its pals, talking about girls. Unfortunately, 
they also said Nike would be with the girls!41 The results reminded Adidas’ brand manag-
ers that they had some work to do.42
Just as we rely on all sorts of cues to infer a human being’s personality including facial 
features, body type, clothing, home decoration, and so on the same is true when we try to figure 
out brand personality. A product’s design is an obvious cue (Apple is “sleek,” IKEA is “practi-
cal”). Packaging is another, as we saw in Chapter 3, that shapes and colors link to meanings.
Another important cue is a brand name: Although Shakespeare wrote “a rose by any 
other name would smell as sweet,” in reality a name does make a difference. That’s why 
you order mahi-mahi instead of dolphin, Chilean sea bass instead of Patagonian toothfish, 
and you buy dried plums rather than prunes. Companies typically pay professional “nam-
ers” up to $75,000 to come up with a good one that makes a memorable statement about 
brand personality, and of course millions more to put the marketing muscle behind it that 
makes the name a household word.
Although Steve Jobs came up with Apple (and stuck with it despite a lawsuit from The 
Beatles) and Sir Richard Branson thought of Virgin, in many cases the naming decision is 
carefully made by a team of branding experts and sometimes carefully scrutinized as well. 
This is especially true for pharmaceutical products because the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) makes sure that the name doesn’t make claims it can’t support: Rogaine, the hair-
restoring medication, was originally named Regain but the FDA didn’t approve. In addition, 
it’s important that a drug name can’t be mistaken for another medication. A heartburn treat-
ment named Losec became Prilosec so that people wouldn’t confuse it with the diuretic Lasix 
(that would not be a happy day for the patient). The FDA goes so far as to conduct handwriting 
tests on proposed names to be sure pharmacists won’t fill a prescription with a similar drug.43
In other categories, the goal is more straightforward: Break through the clutter and 
get noticed. Today that sometimes means a name that borders on the vulgar, but it gets 
our attention. Hapi Food cereal (that offers laxative properties) switched its name to Holy 
Crap cereal after a customer used that term to describe the product’s benefits. You can buy 
a Kickass Cupcake, and wash it down with wines called Sassy Bitch or Fat Bastard. The 
HVLS Fan Company (short for high volume, low speed) was moving sluggishly until the 
owner changed the name to Big Ass Fans.44
lifestyles and Consumer identity
Are you an e-sports fan, or is the idea of getting your kicks by 
watching other people play video games a bit strange? Maybe 
Amazon knows something you don’t; the company paid almost $1 
billion to acquire the Twitch Web site where many of these contests 
occur.45 Although still under the radar for many of us, competitive 
video gaming has become a major “athletic” activity. Millions of 
people watch e-sports on television. Today some video game play-
ers are celebrities with their own fan base and merchandise. The 
Marketing pitfall
When a regional carrier 
called USAir was pur-
chased in the late 1990s, 
the buyer decided that the  
name sounded too re-
gional. He hired a branding firm to find a new 
one. The rebranding process took 9 months and 
was reported to cost almost $40 million. The new 
name: US Airways.
OBjeCtive 7-3 
A lifestyle defines a 
pattern of consumption 
that reflects a person’s 
choices of how to 
spend his or her time 
and money, and these 
choices are essential to 
define consumer identity.

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
259 
sport is especially hot in South Korea, where a couple is as likely to go on a date to a game 
club as to the movies. One live tournament there drew 100,000 spectators. 46 Take that, 
Super Bowl.
Consumers who choose to spend hours watching their heroes play videogames make 
choices: how to spend their time and how to spend their money. Each of us makes similar 
choices everyday and often two quite similar people in terms of basic categories such as 
gender, age, income, and place of residence still prefer to spend their time and money in 
markedly different ways. We often see this strong variation among students at the same 
university, even though many of them come from similar backgrounds. A “typical” col-
lege student (if there is such a thing) may dress much like his or her friends, hang out in 
the same places, and like the same foods, yet still indulge a passion for marathon running, 
stamp collecting, or acid jazz. According to The Urban Dictionary, some of the undergradu-
ates at your school may fall into one of these categories:48
●
●Metro: You just can’t walk past a Banana Republic store without making a purchase. 
You own 20 pairs of shoes, half a dozen pairs of sunglasses, just as many watches, 
and you carry a man-purse. You see a stylist instead of a barber because barbers don’t 
do highlights. You can make lamb shanks and risotto for dinner and Eggs Benedict for 
breakfast … all from scratch. You shave more than just your face. You also exfoliate 
and moisturize.
●
●Hesher: A Reebok-wearing, mulleted person in acid-washed jeans and a Judas Priest 
T-shirt who still lives in his or her parents’ basement, swears that he or she can really 
rock out on his or her Ibanez Stratocaster copy guitar, and probably owns a Nova that 
hasn’t run in five years.
●
●Emo: Someone into soft-core punk music that integrates high-pitched, overwrought 
lyrics and inaudible guitar riffs. He or she wears tight wool sweaters, tighter jeans, 
itchy scarves (even in the summer), ripped chucks with their favorite band’s signature, 
black square-rimmed glasses, and ebony greasy unwashed hair that is required to 
cover at least three-fifths of the face at an angle.
In traditional societies, class, caste, village, or family largely dictate a person’s con-
sumption options. In a modern consumer society, however, each of us is free (at least 
within our budgets) to select the set of products, services, and activities that define our 
self and, in turn, create a social identity we communicate to others. Lifestyle defines a 
E-sports attracts millions of fans around  
the world.
Source: Imaginechina/Corbis.
The explosive popularity 
of e-sports has created a  
downside for some celeb-
rity gamers. In the last 
few years, a popular—and 
costly—prank that initially targeted movie and 
music stars has made its way into the e-sports 
world. It’s called swatting, and it involves 
phone calls and texts to police departments 
that falsely report wrongdoing at a celebrity’s 
home (such as the rapper Lil Wayne). These 
alarms prompt a visit from a SWAT team that 
descends on the house. The competitive na-
ture of e-sports creates rivalries and grudges 
and some players decide this is a fun and pub-
lic way to get back at another player.47
  the tangled Web

260 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
pattern of consumption that reflects a person’s choices of how to spend his or her time and 
money. These choices play a key role in defining consumer identity.49 Whether Tuners, 
Dead Heads, or skinheads, each lifestyle subculture exhibits its own unique set of norms, 
vocabulary, and product insignias. These subcultures often form around fictional char-
acters and events, and they help to define the extended self (see Chapter 6). Numerous 
lifestyles thrive on their collective worship of mythical and not-so-mythical worlds and 
characters that range from the music group Phish to Hello Kitty.
Marketers also think about lifestyle in terms of how much time we have available to 
do what we’d like and what we choose to do with that leisure time. In 2014, Americans 
between the ages of 25 and 54 who are employed on average spent 8.7 hours working, 2.5 
hours on leisure activities, and 1 hour eating and drinking in a typical day. 51 In contrast, 
although full-time college students on average also devote an hour per day to eating and 
drinking, they spent 3.3 hours on educational activities, 2.2 hours working, 1.4 hours 
traveling, 4 hours on leisure—and 0.8 hour on grooming.52 Figure 7.2 shows how U.S. 
consumers more generally allocate their time.
A lifestyle marketing perspective recognizes that people sort themselves into 
groups on the basis of the things they like to do, how they like to spend their leisure 
time, and how they choose to spend their disposable income.53 The growing number of 
niche magazines and Web sites that cater to specialized interests reflects the spectrum of 
choices available to us in today’s society. The downside of this is obvious to the newspaper 
industry; several major papers have already had to shut down their print editions because 
people consume most of their information online.
A lifestyle is much more than how we allocate our discretionary income. It is a state-
ment about who one is in society and who one is not. Group identities, whether of hobby-
ists, athletes, or drug users, gel around distinctive consumption choices. Social scientists 
use a number of terms to describe such self-definitions in addition to lifestyle, including 
taste public, consumer group, symbolic community, and status culture.54
A goal of lifestyle marketing is to allow consumers to pursue their chosen ways to 
enjoy their lives and express their social identities. For this reason, a key aspect of this 
strategy is to focus on people who use products in desirable social settings. The desire to 
associate a product with a social situation is a long-standing one for advertisers, whether 
they include the product in a round of golf, a family barbecue, or a night at a glamorous 
club surrounded by the hip-hop elite.55 Thus, people, products, and settings combine to 
express a consumption style, as Figure 7.3 diagrams.
Trend trackers find some 
of the most interesting— 
and rapidly changing—mi-
crocultures in Japan, where 
young women start many 
trends that eventually make their way around 
the world. One is Onna Otaku (she-nerds): 
girls who get their geek on as they stock up on 
femme-friendly comics, gadgets, and action fig-
ures instead of makeup and clothes. Another is 
the growing cosplay movement, a form of per-
formance art in which participants wear elabo-
rate costumes that represent a virtual world 
avatar or other fictional character. These out-
fits often depict figures from manga, anime, or 
other forms of graphic novels, but they can also 
take the form of costumes from movies such 
as The Matrix, Star Wars, Harry Potter, or even 
Ace Ventura: Pet Detective (cosplay cafés in 
Tokyo feature waitresses who dress as maids). 
This role-playing subculture appears in various 
forms in Western culture as well, as anyone 
who attended one of the many Comic Con con-
ventions held in U.S. cities can attest.50
Marketing Opportunity
Thousands of people who are into cosplay 
strut their stuff at Comic Con conventions.
Source: Jamie Pham Photography/Alamy.

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
261 
product Complementarity  
and Co-Branding Strategies
The designer Ralph Lauren has crafted a classic lifestyle brand 
that people around the world associate with U.S. taste. He built his 
Polo empire on an image that evokes country homes and sheep-
dogs. At the company’s elegant flagship store in Manhattan that 
is a refurbished mansion, one business journalist wrote, “While 
men who look like lawyers search for your size shirt and ladies 
who belong at deb parties suggest complementary bags and shoes, 
you experience the ultimate in lifestyle advertising.” Not bad for a guy born in the Bronx 
to a Jewish housepainter; his original name was Ralph Lifshitz. Now the Lauren empire 
is expanding beyond clothing, fragrances, and home accessories to restaurants in Paris, 
Chicago, and New York. You can eat the American Dream while you wear it.56
Figure 7.2 HOW U.S. CONSUMERS  
ALLOCATE THEIR TIME
Courtesy of The Hartman Group, Inc.
2'4510
241&7%6
5'66+0)
.+('56;.'
Figure 7.3 CONSUMPTION STyLE
OBjeCtive 7-4 
It can be more useful 
to identify patterns 
of consumption than 
knowing about individual 
purchases when organi-
zations craft a lifestyle 
marketing strategy.

262 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
We get a clearer picture of how people use products to define lifestyles when we see 
how they make choices in a variety of product categories. A lifestyle marketing perspec-
tive implies that we must look at patterns of behavior to understand consumers. As one 
study noted, “All goods carry meaning, but none by itself…. The meaning is in the relations 
between all the goods, just as music is in the relations marked out by the sounds and not in 
any one note.”57
Indeed, many products and services do seem to “go together,” usually because the same 
types of people tend to select them. In many cases, products do not seem to “make sense” if 
companion products don’t accompany them (e.g., fast food and paper plates, or a suit and tie) 
or are incongruous in the presence of other products that have a different personality (e.g., a 
Chippendale chair in a high-tech office or discount cigarettes paired with a solid gold lighter).
Therefore, an important part of lifestyle marketing is to identify the set of products 
and services that consumers associate with a specific lifestyle. In fact, research evidence 
suggests that even a relatively unattractive product becomes more appealing when 
consumers link it with other products that they do like.58 Furthermore, when people 
consume multiple products that are labeled with the same brand they actually like them 
more: They believe that these items were deliberately developed to go together.59
The meshing of objects from many different categories to express a single lifestyle idea is 
at the heart of many consumption decisions, including coordinating an outfit for a big date 
(shoes, garments, fragrance, etc.), decorating a room (tables, carpet, wallpaper, etc.), and 
designing a restaurant (menu, ambience, waitperson uniforms, etc.). Many people today 
evaluate products not just in terms of function but also in terms of how well their design 
coordinates with other objects and furnishings. Marketers who understand these cross-
category relationships may pursue co-branding strategies where they team up with other 
companies to promote two or more items. Some marketers even match up their spokes-
characters in ads; the Pillsbury Doughboy appeared in a commercial with the Sprint Guy to 
pitch cell phones, the lonely Maytag repairman was in an ad for the Chevrolet Impala, and 
the Taco Bell Chihuahua (now retired) showed up in a commercial for GEICO insurance.60
Product complementarity occurs when the symbolic meanings of different prod-
ucts relate to one another.61 Consumers use these sets of products we call a consump-
tion constellation to define, communicate, and perform social roles.62 For example, 
we identified the U.S. “yuppie” of the 1980s by such products as a Rolex watch, a BMW 
automobile, a Gucci briefcase, a squash racket, fresh pesto, white wine, and brie cheese. 
Researchers find that even children are adept at creating consumption constellations, and 
as they get older they tend to include more brands in these cognitive structures.63
psychographics
When Cadillac introduced its Escalade SUV, critics scoffed at 
the bizarre pairing of this old-line luxury brand with a truck. 
However, consumers quickly associated the vehicle with the hip-
hop lifestyle. Artists such as Jennifer Lopez, Outkast, and Jay Z 
referred to it in songs, and Jermaine Dupri proclaimed, “Gotta 
have me an Escalade.” Three years later, Cadillac rolled out its 
18-foot Escalade EXT pickup with a sticker price of $50,000.
The Escalade brand manager describes the target customer for luxury pickups as a 
slightly earthier version of the SUV buyer. She says that although the two drivers may 
own $2 million homes next door to each other, the typical luxury SUV driver is about 
50, has an MBA from Harvard, belongs to a golf club, maintains connections with his 
college friends, and works hard at keeping up with the Joneses. In contrast, the luxury 
pickup driver is roughly 5 years younger. He might have inherited his father’s construc-
tion business, and he’s been working since he was 18 years old. He may or may not have 
attended college, and unlike the SUV driver, he is absolutely still connected to his high 
school friends.64
As this example shows, marketers often find it useful to develop products that appeal 
to different lifestyle subcultures. When marketers combine personality variables with 
OBjeCtive 7-5 
Psychographics 
go beyond simple 
demographics to help 
marketers understand 
and reach different 
consumer segments.

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
263 
Cadillac developed a luxury SUV and then  
a luxury pickup to appeal to two distinct  
psychographic segments.
Source: Evox Productions/Drive Images/Alamy.
knowledge of lifestyle preferences, they have a powerful lens they can focus on consumer 
segments. It’s common to create a fictional profile of a “core customer” who inspires prod-
uct design and communications decisions. For example, Chip Wilson, who founded the 
popular clothing company Lululemon, relied on a “muse” he made up: A 32-year-old pro-
fessional single woman named Ocean who makes $100,000 a year. He described Ocean as 
“engaged, has her own condo, is traveling, fashionable, has an hour and a half to work out 
a day.” This ideal user, according to Wilson, appeals to all women: “If you’re 20 years old 
or you’re graduating from university, you can’t wait to be that woman. If you’re 42 years 
old with a couple children, you wish you had that time back.” Lululemon added a male 
“muse” when the company moved into menswear: Duke is 35 and an “athletic opportun-
ist” who surfs in the summer and snowboards in the winter. When he got involved in a 
new company, Kit and Ace, sure enough Wilson helped to come up with two new muses: 
“Kit, a 29-year-old single woman who ‘is looking to buy her first apartment, but is still 

264 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
renting. She works in the creative area, like in graphic design or fashion, and loves to bike 
on weekends,’ and Ace, a 32-year-old similarly groovy guy, who drinks strong coffee, ‘likes 
to go to breweries and hangs out with his friends. He does CrossFit once a week and spins 
three times a week, loves brunch on the weekends.’”65 Sound like anyone you know (hint: 
definitely not your humble author!)?
Psychographics involves the “use of psychological, sociological, and anthropologi-
cal factors … to determine how the market is segmented by the propensity of groups within 
the market—and their reasons—to make a particular decision about a product, person, 
ideology, or otherwise hold an attitude or use a medium.”66 Marketers use many psycho-
graphic variables to segment consumers, but all of these dimensions go beyond surface 
characteristics to investigate consumers’ motivations for purchasing and using products. 
Demographics allow us to describe who buys, but psychographics tells us why they do. A 
classic example involves a popular Canadian advertising campaign for Molson Export beer 
that included insights from psychographic findings. The company’s research showed that 
Molson’s target customers tend to be like boys who never grew up, who were uncertain 
about the future, and who were intimidated by women’s newfound freedoms. Accordingly, 
the ads featured a group of men, “Fred and the boys,” whose get-togethers emphasized 
male companionship, protection against change, and the reassuring message that the beer 
“keeps on tasting great.”67
how Do We perform a psychographic analysis?
Psychographic studies take several different forms:
●
●A lifestyle profile looks for items that differentiate between users and nonusers of a 
product.
●
●A product-specific profile identifies a target group and then profiles these consumers on 
product-relevant dimensions.
●
●A general lifestyle segmentation study places a large sample of respondents into homog-
enous groups based on similarities of their overall preferences.
●
●A product-specific segmentation study tailors questions to a product category. For exam-
ple, if a researcher wants to conduct research for a stomach medicine, she might re-
phrase the item, “I worry too much” as, “I get stomach problems if I worry too much.” 
This allows her to more finely discriminate among users of competing brands.68
aiOs
Most contemporary psychographic research attempts to group consumers according 
to some combination of three categories of variables: activities, interests, and opinions, 
which we call AIOs for short. Using data from large samples, marketers create profiles of 
customers who resemble each other in terms of their activities and patterns of product 
usage.69 Table 7.6 lists commonly used AIO dimensions.
To group consumers into AIO categories, researchers give respondents a long list of 
statements and ask them to indicate how much they agree with each one. Thus, we can 
“boil down” a person’s lifestyle by discovering how he or she spends time, what he or she 
finds interesting and important, and how he or she views himself or herself and the world 
around him or her.
Typically, the first step in conducting a psychographic analysis is to determine which 
lifestyle segments yield the bulk of customers for a particular product. This strategy 
reflects the 80/20 rule we first discussed in Chapter 1. This rule reminds us that, in many 
cases, only one or a few lifestyle segments account for the majority of sales.70
Psychographic techniques help marketers to identify their heavy users. Then they can 
better understand how they relate to the brand and the benefits they derive from it. For 
instance, marketers at the beginning of the walking-shoe craze assumed that all purchasers 
were basically burned-out joggers. Subsequent psychographic research showed that there 
were actually several different groups of “walkers,” ranging from those who walk to get to 
work to those who walk for fun. This realization resulted in shoes that manufacturers aimed 
at different segments, from Footjoy Joy-Walkers to Nike Healthwalkers.

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
265 
Marketers use the results of these studies to:
●
●Define the target market This information allows the marketer to go beyond simple 
demographic or product usage descriptions (e.g., middle-aged men or frequent users).
●
●Create a new view of  the market Sometimes marketers create their strategies with a 
“typical” customer in mind. This stereotype may not be correct because the actual cus-
tomer may not match these assumptions. For example, marketers of a face cream for 
women were surprised to find that older, widowed women were their heavy users rather 
than the younger, sociable women to whom they were pitching their appeals.
The makers of the popular Sigg water bottle, 
which is available in many different designs, 
actually choose from about 3,000 different 
concepts each year with specific custom-
ers in mind. These include the Whole Foods 
Woman, who lives in a city, practices yoga, 
and buys organic produce; and the Geek 
Chic Guy, who listens to Radiohead and 
wears vintage Converse sneakers.
Source: Winston Wong/Alamy.
taBle 7.6   AIO Dimensions
activities
interests
Opinions
Demographics
Work
Family
Themselves
Age
Hobbies
Home
Social issues
Education
Social events
Job
Politics
Income
Vacation
Community
Business
Occupation
Entertainment
Recreation
Economics
Family size
Club membership
Fashion
Education
Dwelling
Community
Food
Products
Geography
Shopping
Media
Future
City size
Sports
Achievements
Culture
Stage in life cycle
Source: William D. Wells and Douglas J. Tigert, “Activities, Interests, and Opinions,” Journal of Advertising Research  
11 (August 1971): 27–35. © 1971 by The Advertising Research Foundation. Used with permission.

266 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
●
●Position the product Psychographic information can allow the marketer to empha-
size features of the product that fit in with a person’s lifestyle.
●
●Better communicate product attributes The artist or copywriter obtains a much 
richer mental image of the target consumer than he or she can simply by looking at 
dry statistics. For example, research that the Schlitz beer brand conducted found that 
heavy beer drinkers tended to feel that life’s pleasures were few and far between. In re-
sponse, the brewer developed commercials with the tagline, “You only go around once, 
so reach for all the gusto you can.”71
●
●Develop product strategy Understanding how a product fits, or does not fit, into 
consumers’ lifestyles allows the marketer to identify new product opportunities, chart 
media strategies, and create environments most consistent and harmonious with 
these consumption patterns.
●
●Market social and political issues A psychographic study of men aged 18 to 24 who 
drink and drive highlights the potential for this perspective to help in the eradication of 
harmful behaviors. Researchers divided this segment into four groups: “good timers,” “well 
adjusted,” “nerds,” and “problem kids.” They found that one group in particular—“good 
timers”—was more likely to believe that it is fun to be drunk, that the chances of having an 
accident while driving drunk are low, and that drinking increases one’s appeal to the op-
posite sex. Because the study showed that this group is also the most likely to drink at rock 
concerts and parties, is most likely to watch MTV, and tends to listen to album-oriented 
rock radio stations, reaching “good timers” with a prevention campaign became easier.72
Marketers constantly search for new insights so they can identify and reach groups 
of consumers united by common lifestyles. To meet this need, many research compa-
nies and advertising agencies develop their own lifestyle segmentation typologies. 
Respondents answer a battery of questions that allow the researchers to cluster them 
into a set of distinct lifestyle groups. The questions usually include a mixture of AIOs 
plus other items relating to feelings about specific brands, favorite celebrities, and media 
preferences. Companies that want to learn more about their customers and potential 
customers then buy one or more of these systems for their own use.
International VALS is a segmentation methodology that can be used to gain deeper 
consumer insights in different countries and can be useful for country-specific strategic 
marketing planning and communication strategies. International VALS presents country-
specific frameworks based on cultural differences between attitudes and behaviors as they 
exist in different countries, including VALS for China, the Dominican Republic, Japan, 
Nigeria, the United Kingdom, and Venezuela.
Japan VALS and UK VALS will be discussed in this section to highlight how consumers 
from different countries can be segmented based on their society’s attitudes and behaviors.
Japan-VALS™ divides Japanese society into different segments based on two key con-
sumer attributes: primary motivation (tradition, achievement, and self-expression) and atti-
tudes about social change (innovation and self-expression). Primary motivation describes what 
a person is most interested in: life, occupational duties, and recreational interests.
●
●Integrators rank the highest on the Japan-VALS measure of innovation. They are ac-
tive, trend-setting, informed, affluent, well-traveled, and use a variety of media. 
●
●Self-Innovators and Self-Adapters score high on self-expression. They are fashion-
able, socially active, and seek adventure.  
●
●Ryoshiki Innovators and Ryoshiki Adapters are driven by occupations with a 
personal focus on education, career achievement, and professional knowledge.  Home, 
family, and social status are their guiding concerns.
●
●Traditional Innovators and Traditional Adapters are primarily focused on mat-
ters of tradition, like religions and customs, and are conservative in their opinions. 
They have a preference for traditional home styling and fashion. 

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
267 
●
●High Pragmatics and Low Pragmatics are less active, less informed, and have no 
obvious interests and lifestyle choices. They do not score high on any life-orientation 
dimension. 
●
●Sustainers score lowest on the innovation and self-expression dimensions and prefer 
to sustain the past. They lack money, youth, and high education.
United Kingdom VALS (UK VALS™) categorizes consumers into one of six core 
groups. Segments are defined based on primary motivation (tradition, achievement, and 
self-expression), resources (high or low), and innovation. 
●
●Activators are most open to change, new ideas, and products. They are forerun-
ners of innovation and have a wide range of interests. This group is further di-
vided by motivation: tradition activators, achievement activators, and self-expression 
activators.
●
●Traditionalists are primarily conservative and prefer to manage social change by 
reassessing new ideas based on tried and tested ones with established standards and 
ethical codes.
●
●Achievers base their accomplishments on hard work and professional pursuits. They  
are success-oriented and tend to focus on family, knowledge, influence, and qualifications.
●
●Seekers prefer individuality, self-discovery, and action. They actively seek self- 
gratification, excitement, and sociability.
●
●Pragmatics prefer to play safe and do not want to steer away from their peer group. 
They have a relatively low attachment to any particular lifestyle. Pragmatics can be 
differentiated on the basis on motivation: Pragmatic Involvers are motivated by tradi-
tion, Pragmatic Rationals are motivated by achievement, and Pragmatic Aspirationals 
are motivated by self-expression.
●
●Constraineds tend to stick to familiar things and the past. They are family-focused 
and have a few friends who share their opinions and ideas.
Achievers focus on hard work, professional 
pursuits, family, knowledge, influence, and 
qualifications.
OBjeCtive 7-6 
Underlying values 
often drive consumer 
motivations.
values
A religious official in Saudi Arabia decreed that children there 
should not be allowed to watch Mickey Mouse because the cartoon 
character is a “soldier of Satan.”73 This observation may surprise 
most of us, but then again we don’t live in this deeply conservative 
Islamic culture. A value is a belief that some condition is preferable to its opposite. For exam-
ple, it’s safe to assume that most people prefer freedom to slavery. Others avidly pursue prod-
ucts and services that will make them look younger rather than older. A person’s set of values 
plays an important role in consumption activities. Consumers purchase many products and 
services because they believe these products will help to attain a value-related goal.

268 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Two people can believe in and exhibit the same behaviors (e.g., vegetarianism), 
but their underlying belief system may be quite different (e.g., animal activism ver-
sus health concerns). The extent to which people share a belief system is a function 
of individual, social, and cultural forces. Advocates of a belief system often seek out 
others with similar beliefs so that social networks overlap; as a result, believers tend to 
be exposed to information that supports their beliefs (e.g., tree-huggers rarely hang out 
with loggers).74
Core values
The actress Kim Kardashian wasn’t pleased when her picture ran on the cover of 
Cosmopolitan Turkey, especially when it was released on the same date that some coun-
tries commemorate the alleged Armenian genocide in the last days of the Ottoman 
Empire. Because Cosmopolitan publishes in 64 different countries, it is difficult to be 
sure readers everywhere experience the content the same way. In addition to politi-
cal differences, marketers have to be sensitive to cultural values: In some countries, 
because of local norms about modesty, some female readers have to hide the magazine 
from their husbands! Different cultures emphasize varying belief systems that define 
what it means to be female, feminine, or appealing—and what people consider appro-
priate to see in print on these matters. Publishers of the Chinese version aren’t even 
permitted to mention sex at all, so they replace articles about uplifting cleavage with 
uplifting stories about youthful dedication. Ironically, there isn’t much down-and-dirty 
material in the Swedish edition either—but for the opposite reason: The culture is so 
open about this topic that it doesn’t grab readers’ attention the way it would in the 
United States.75
In many cases, of course, values are universal. Who does not desire health, wisdom, 
or world peace? What sets cultures apart is the relative importance, or ranking, of these uni-
versal values. This set of rankings constitutes a culture’s value system.76 For example, 
one study found that North Americans have more favorable attitudes toward advertising 
messages that focus on self-reliance, self-improvement, and the achievement of personal 
goals as opposed to themes stressing family integrity, collective goals, and the feeling of 
harmony with others. Korean consumers exhibited the reverse pattern.77
We characterize every culture in terms of its members’ endorsement of a value sys-
tem. Not every individual will endorse these values equally; in some cases, values may 
even seem to contradict one another (e.g., U.S. Americans appear to value both conformity 
and individuality and try to find some accommodation between the two). Nonetheless, it is 
usually possible to identify a general set of core values that uniquely define a culture. For 
example, core values such as freedom, youthfulness, achievement, materialism, and activ-
ity characterize U.S. culture.
Of course, these values certainly evolve over time. Some analysts argue that our 
focus on acquiring physical objects is shifting a bit toward the consumption of experi-
ences instead. This movement is consistent with research that shows experiential pur-
chases provide greater happiness and satisfaction because they allow us to connect with 
others and form a bigger part of our social identities. Indeed, one study demonstrated 
that highly materialistic consumers actually experience pleasure before a purchase 
because they believe it will transform their lives, but they then experience negative emo-
tions after they buy the item when they realize this is not the case.78 And, as we saw in 
Chapter 2 increasingly in the United States we find that many consumers value sustain-
ability and reward companies that are environmentally friendly. That helps to explain 
why among young consumers the Chipotle restaurant chain is so popular. The company 
promotes sustainable agriculture practices and the humane treatment of animals it uses 
for meat.79
How do we determine what a culture values? We term the process of learning the 
beliefs and behaviors endorsed by one’s own culture enculturation. In contrast, we 
call the process of learning the value system and behaviors of another culture (often a 
priority for those who wish to understand consumers and markets in foreign countries) 
Everyone wants to be clean, 
but some societies are more 
fastidious than others and 
won’t accept products and 
services that they think cut corners. Italian 
women on average spend 21 hours a week  
on household chores other than cooking— 
compared with only 4 hours for Americans, at 
least according to Procter & Gamble’s (P&G) 
research. The Italian women wash kitchen and 
bathroom floors at least four times a week, 
Americans only once. Italian women typically 
iron nearly all their wash, even socks and 
sheets, and they buy more cleaning supplies 
than women elsewhere do.
Because of these traits, they should be 
ideal customers for cleaning products, right? 
That’s what Unilever thought when it launched 
its all-purpose Cif spray cleaner there, but it 
flopped. Similarly, P&G’s best-selling Swiffer 
wet mop bombed big time. Both companies 
underestimated this market’s desire for prod-
ucts that are tough cleaners, not timesavers. 
Only about 30 percent of Italian households 
have dishwashers because many women don’t 
trust machines to get dishes as clean as they 
can get them by hand, manufacturers say. 
Many of those who do use machines tend to 
thoroughly rinse the dishes before they load 
them into the dishwasher. The explanation for 
this value: After World War II, Italy remained 
a poor country until well into the 1960s, so 
labor-saving devices, such as washing ma-
chines, which had become popular in wealthy 
countries, arrived late. Italian women joined 
the workforce later than many other European 
women and in smaller numbers. young Italian 
women increasingly work outside the home, 
but they still spend nearly as much time as 
their mothers did on housework.
When Unilever did research to determine 
why Italians didn’t take to Cif, they found that 
these women weren’t convinced that a mere 
spray would do the job on tough kitchen grease 
or that one product would adequately clean 
different surfaces (it turns out that 72 percent 
of Italians own more than eight different clean-
ing products). The company reformulated the 
product and then reintroduced it with differ-
ent varieties instead of as an all-in-one. It also 
made the bottles 50 percent bigger because 
Italians clean so frequently, and changed its 
advertising to emphasize the products’ clean-
ing strength rather than convenience. P&G 
also reintroduced its Swiffer, this time adding 
beeswax and a Swiffer duster that is now a 
bestseller. It sold 5 million boxes in the first  
8 months, twice the company’s forecasts.83
Marketing Opportunity

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
269 
acculturation. Socialization agents, including parents, friends, and teachers, impart these 
beliefs to us. In one study, for example, the researchers explored the domain of hunting. 
They described the process by which family members and friends mentor young men as 
they learn how to hunt. These socialization agents used stories and traditions to guide the 
men as they moved through the stages of pre-hunter, neophyte, and apprentice, until they 
finally become competent hunters.80
The media are another important socialization agent; we learn a lot about a culture’s 
priorities when we look at the values that advertising communicates. For example, sales 
strategies differ significantly between the United States and China. U.S. commercials are 
more likely to present facts about products and suggestions from credible authorities, 
whereas Chinese advertisers tend to focus more on emotional appeals without bothering 
too much about substantiating their claims. U.S. ads tend to be youth-oriented, whereas 
Chinese ads are more likely to stress the wisdom of older people.81
As we’ve seen, values are general ideas about good and bad goals. From these flow norms, 
or rules that dictate what is right or wrong, acceptable, or unacceptable. We explicitly decide 
on enacted norms, such as the rule that a green traffic light means “go” and a red one means 
“stop.” Many norms, however, are much more subtle. We discover these crescive norms as 
we interact with others. The following are all types of crescive norms:82
●
●A custom is a norm that controls basic behaviors, such as division of labor in a house-
hold or how we practice particular ceremonies.
●
●A more (“mor-ay”) is a custom with a strong moral overtone. It often involves a taboo, 
or forbidden behavior, such as incest or cannibalism. Violation of a more often meets 
with strong sanctions. In Islamic countries such as Saudi Arabia, people consider it 
sacrilege to display underwear on store mannequins or to feature a woman’s body 
in advertising, so retailers have to tread lightly; one lingerie store designed special 
headless and legless mannequins with only the slightest hint of curves to display its 
products.84
●
●A convention is a norm that regulates how we conduct our everyday lives. These rules 
often deal with the subtleties of consumer behavior, including the “correct” way to fur-
nish one’s house, wear one’s clothes, or host a dinner party. The Chinese government 
tried to change citizens’ conventions when the country geared up for the Olympics in 
Beijing: Local habits were at odds with what planners knew foreign visitors expected to 
encounter. For one, it’s common to spit on the sidewalk; the sinus-clearing, phlegmy 
The Chipotle chain is popular among young 
consumers, partly because of its sustainable 
business practices.
Source: Helen Sessions/Alamy.

270 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
CB aS i See it
Giana Eckhardt, Royal Holloway University of London
they do not have the obligations and 
burdens of ownership, such as finding 
a space to park their car or having to 
deal with the upkeep of their bicycle, 
when a bike sharing service is more 
convenient. But what is sharing? 
Sharing is a form of social exchange 
that takes place among people known 
to each other, without any profit. 
Sharing is an established practice, 
and dominates particular aspects of 
our life, such as within the family. By 
sharing and collectively consuming 
the household space of the home, 
family members establish a communal 
identity, for example.
My colleague Fleura Bardhi and  
I are interested in whether the form of 
exchange happening in the “sharing 
economy” is really sharing. We have 
found that when sharing is market-
mediated—when a company is an 
intermediary between consumers who 
don’t know each other—it is no longer 
sharing at all. Rather, consumers are 
paying to access someone else’s goods 
or services for a particular period of 
time. It is an economic exchange, and 
we have labeled this access-based 
consumption.
Our research on Zipcar, the world’s 
leading car-sharing company, illustrates 
some of the characteristics of access-
based consumption. Consumers 
don’t feel any psychological sense of 
ownership over the cars, nor do they 
feel a sense of reciprocal obligations 
that arise when sharing with one 
another. They experience Zipcar in the 
anonymous way one experiences a 
hotel; they know others have used the 
cars, but have no desire to interact 
with them. They don’t view other 
Zipsters as co-sharers of the cars, but 
rather are mistrustful of them, and rely 
on the company to police the sharing 
system so it’s equitable for everyone. 
Finally, consumers do not want to be 
a part of a community, with either 
other Zipsters or with the company 
itself. Thus, our research challenges 
the romanticized view of the sharing 
economy as being collaborative and 
altruistically motivated.
It is important to highlight the 
benefits that access provides in 
contrast to the disadvantages of 
ownership and sharing. These consist 
of convenient and cost-effective access 
to valued resources, flexibility, and 
freedom from the financial, social, and 
emotional obligations embedded in 
ownership and sharing. There is still a 
lot to learn about sharing, access, and 
ownership, though, and we are currently 
researching how these concepts 
may vary across generations, across 
cultures, and across social classes.
Did you use Airbnb rather than a 
hotel the last time you traveled? Or 
use Uber to get home rather than 
take a taxi? Or decided to rely on 
Zipcar instead of bringing your car 
to campus? If yes, you are a part 
of the Sharing Economy, heralded 
by sources ranging from Fortune 
magazine to President Obama as 
a major growth sector. The sharing 
economy represents a major shift in 
lifestyle for consumers: consumers 
no longer want to own, but prefer to 
access goods and services. That way, 
prespit hawking sound is so common that one foreigner dubbed it “the national 
 anthem of China.” In addition to the extensive cleanup the government conducted  
(it even restricted city traffic to reduce smog levels), it imposed a hefty fine for public 
spitting to get people accustomed to holding in their saliva before hordes of fans de-
scended on the city.85
All three types of crescive norms may jointly define a culturally appropriate behavior. 
For example, a more may tell us what kind of food it’s okay to eat. These norms vary across 
cultures, so a meal of dog is taboo in the United States, Hindus shun steak, and Muslims 
avoid pork products. A custom dictates the appropriate hour at which we should serve the 
meal. Conventions tell us how to eat the meal, including such details as the utensils we 
use, table etiquette, and even the appropriate apparel to wear at dinnertime. We often take 
these conventions for granted. We just assume that they are the “right” things to do (again, 
until we travel to a foreign country!). Much of what we know about these norms we learn 

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
271 
An etiquette class is one form of socialization  
agent that teaches people about their  
culture’s values and how to act 
“ appropriately” in different settings.
Source: John Robertson/Alamy.
vicariously as we observe the behaviors of actors in television commercials, sitcoms, print 
ads, and other media. That reminds us why the marketing system is such an important ele-
ment of culture.
how Do values link to Consumer Behavior?
Despite their importance, values haven’t helped us to understand consumer behavior 
as much as we might expect. One reason is that broad-based concepts such as freedom, 
security, or inner harmony are more likely to affect general purchasing patterns than 
to differentiate between brands within a product category. This is why some researchers 
distinguish among broad-based cultural values such as security or happiness, consumption-
specific values such as convenient shopping or prompt service, and product-specific values 
such as ease of use or durability, which affect the relative importance people in different 
cultures place on possessions.86
A study of product-specific values looked in depth at Australians who engage in 
extreme sports such as surfing, snowboarding, and skateboarding. The researchers identi-
fied four dominant values that drove brand choice: freedom, belongingness, excellence, and  
connection. For example, one female surfer they studied embraced the value of belonging-
ness. She expressed this value when she wore popular brands of surfing apparel even when 
these major brands had lost their local roots by going mainstream. In contrast, another 
surfer in the study valued connection: he expressed this as he selected only locally made 
brands and supported local surfing events.87

272 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Some aspects of brand image, such as sophistication, tend to be common across 
cultures, but others are more likely to be relevant in specific places. The Japanese tend 
to value peacefulness, whereas Spaniards emphasize passion, and the value of rug-
gedness appeals to Americans.88 Because values drive much of consumer behavior 
(at least in a general sense), we might say that virtually all consumer research ulti-
mately relates to identifying and measuring values. Let’s briefly describe some specific 
attempts by researchers to  measure cultural values and apply this knowledge to mar-
keting strategy.
the rokeach value Survey
The psychologist Milton Rokeach identified a set of terminal values, or desired end 
states, that apply to many different cultures. The Rokeach Value Survey also includes a set 
of instrumental values; actions we need to take to achieve these terminal values.89 
Table 7.7 lists these two sets of values.
Some evidence indicates that differences in these global values do translate into 
product-specific preferences and differences in media usage. Nonetheless, marketing 
researchers have not widely used the Rokeach Value Survey.90 One reason is that our 
society is evolving into smaller and smaller sets of consumption microcultures within a 
larger culture, each with its own set of core values (more on this in Chapter 13). For 
example, in the United States, a sizable number of people are strong believers in natural 
health practices and alternative medicine. This focus on wellness instead of mainstream 
medical approaches to sickness influences many of their behaviors, from food choices 
to the use of alternative medical practitioners, as well as their opinions on political and 
social issues.91
the list of values (lOv)
The List of Values (LOV) scale isolates values with more direct marketing applications. 
This instrument identifies nine consumer segments based on the values members endorse 
and relates each value to differences in consumption behaviors. These segments include 
consumers who place priorities on such values as a sense of belonging, excitement, warm 
relationships with others, and security. For example, people who endorse the sense-of-
belonging value are older, are more likely to read Reader’s Digest and TV Guide, drink and 
entertain more, and prefer group activities more than people who do not endorse this value 
as highly. In contrast, those who endorse the value of excitement are younger and prefer 
Rolling Stone magazine.92
the Means–end Chain Model
The means–end chain model assumes that people link specific product attributes (indi-
rectly) to terminal values: We choose among alternative means to attain some end state 
that we value (such as freedom or safety). Thus, we value products to the extent that they 
provide the means to some end we desire. A technique researchers call laddering uncovers 
consumers’ associations between specific attributes and these general consequences. Using 
this approach, they help consumers climb up the “ladder” of abstraction that connects 
functional product attributes with desired end states.93 Based on consumer feedback, they 
then create hierarchical value maps that show how specific product attributes get linked to 
end states.
Syndicated Surveys
A number of companies track changes in values through large-scale surveys. They sell 
the results of these studies to marketers, who receive regular updates on changes and 
trends. This approach originated in the mid-1960s, when Playtex was concerned about 
sagging girdle sales (pun intended). The company commissioned the market research 
firm of Yankelovich, Skelly & White to see why sales had dropped. Their research linked 
the decline to a shift in values regarding appearance and naturalness. Playtex went on to 
design lighter, less restrictive garments, while Yankelovich went on to track the impact of 

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
273 
taBle 7.7   Terminal and Instrumental Values
instrumental values
terminal values
Ambitious
A comfortable life
Broad-minded
An exciting life
Capable
A sense of accomplishment
Cheerful
A world of peace
Clean
A world of beauty
Courageous
Equality
Forgiving
Family security
Helpful
Freedom
Honest
Happiness
Imaginative
Inner harmony
Independent
Mature love
Intellectual
National security
Logical
Pleasure
Loving
Salvation
Obedient
Self-respect
Polite
Social recognition
Responsible
True friendship
Self-controlled
Wisdom
Source: Copyright 1983 From Measuring the Cultural Values Manifest in Advertising,” Current Issues and Research  
in Advertising (1983): 71–92 by Richard Pollay. Reproduced by permission of the American Academy of Advertising 
(http://www.aaoa.wildapricot.org)
these types of changes in a range of industries. Gradually, the firm developed the idea of 
one big study to track U.S. attitudes. In 1970, it introduced the Yankelovich Monitor™, 
which is based on 2-hour interviews with 4,000 respondents.94
Today, many other syndicated surveys also track changes in values. Advertising agen-
cies perform some of these so that they can stay on top of important cultural trends and 
help shape the messages they craft for clients. These services include the International 
VALS™ survey we discussed, GlobalScan (operated by the advertising agency Backer 
Spielvogel Bates), New Wave (the Ogilvy & Mather advertising agency), and the Lifestyles 
Study conducted by the DDB World Communications Group.
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.

274 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. A consumer’s personality influences the way he or she 
responds to marketing stimuli, but efforts to use this 
information in marketing contexts meet with mixed results.
The concept of personality refers to a person’s unique psy-
chological makeup and how it consistently influences 
the way a person responds to his or her environment. 
Marketing strategies based on personality differences have 
met with mixed success, partly because of the way re-
searchers have measured and applied these differences in 
personality traits to consumption contexts. Some analysts 
try to understand underlying differences in small samples 
of consumers by employing techniques based on Freudian 
psychology and variations of this perspective, whereas oth-
ers have tried to assess these dimensions more objectively in 
large samples using sophisticated, quantitative techniques
2. Brands have personalities.
A brand personality is the set of traits people attribute to a 
product as if it were a person. Consumers assign personal-
ity qualities to all sorts of inanimate products. Like our 
relationships with other people, these designations can 
change over time; therefore, marketers need to be vigilant 
about maintaining the brand personality they want con-
sumers to perceive. Forging a desirable brand personality 
often is key to building brand loyalty.
3. A lifestyle defines a pattern of consumption that 
reflects a person’s choices of how to spend his or her 
time and money, and these choices are essential to 
define consumer identity.
A consumer’s lifestyle refers to the ways he or she chooses 
to spend time and money and how his or her consumption 
choices reflect these values and tastes. Lifestyle research is 
CHAptER SUMMARy
useful for tracking societal consumption preferences and 
also for positioning specific products and services to differ-
ent segments. Marketers segment based on lifestyle differ-
ences; they often group consumers in terms of their AIOs 
(activities, interests, and opinions).
4. It can be more useful to identify patterns of consumption 
than knowing about individual purchases when 
organizations craft a lifestyle marketing strategy.
We associate interrelated sets of products and activities 
with social roles to form consumption constellations. People 
often purchase a product or service because they associate 
it with a constellation that, in turn, they link to a lifestyle 
they find desirable. Geodemography involves a set of tech-
niques that use geographical and demographic data to 
identify clusters of consumers with similar psychographic 
characteristics.
5. psychographics go beyond simple demographics to help 
marketers understand and reach different consumer 
segments.
Psychographic techniques classify consumers in terms 
of  psychological, subjective variables in addition to 
observable characteristics (demographics). Marketers 
have developed systems to identify consumer “types” 
and to differentiate them in terms of  their brand or 
product preferences, media usage, leisure time activi-
ties, and attitudes toward broad issues such as politics 
and religion.
6. Underlying values often drive consumer motivations.
Products take on meaning because a person thinks the 
products will help him or her to achieve some goal that 
is linked to a value, such as individuality or freedom. A 
set of  core values characterizes each culture, to which 
most of  its members adhere.
Acculturation, 268
AIOs, 264
Anthropomorphism, 253
Archetypes, 246
Belief system, 268
Big Five, 250
Brand arrogance,255
Brand personality, 253
Brand storytelling, 253
Co-branding strategies, 262
Consumption constellation, 262
Convention, 269
Core values, 268
Cosplay, 260
Crescive norms, 269
Custom, 269
Doppelgänger brand image, 256
Ego, 243
Enculturation, 268
E-sports, 258
Frugality, 249
KEy tERMS

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
275 
Id, 243
International VALS, 266
Instrumental values, 272
Laddering, 272
Lifestyle, 259
Lifestyle marketing perspective, 260
Lifestyle segmentation typologies, 266
List of Values (LOV) scale, 272
Means–end chain model, 272
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory (MMPI), 243
More, 269
Motivational research, 244
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator®, 251
Personality, 243
Personality traits, 249
Pleasure principle, 243
Product complementarity, 262
Product personalization, 249
Psychographics, 264
Reader-response theory, 253
Reality principle, 243
Superego, 243
Swatting, 259
Terminal values, 272
Underdog brand biography, 253
Value, 267
Value system, 268
●
■apply
 
7-9 Products and services exist in a carefully created ecosys-
tem of complementary products and services. Each one 
influences the demand, sales, and price of the others. 
What are a gym’s complementary products and services?
 7-10 Starbucks is solidly established as a go-to location for 
coffee, tea, and pastries but to grow the company needs 
to expand its offerings so that customers spend more of 
their time (and money) there. The chain is experiment-
ing with a new concept, Starbuck Evenings, where after 
4:00 each afternoon the store flips to a different menu 
that includes wine, beer, small plates like truffle mac 
and cheese, sandwiches, and salads.96 Is Starbucks too 
entrenched in our “coffeehouse lifestyle” or does the 
chain have room to expand? What recommendations 
would you make to Starbucks to help the company 
expand its lifestyle marketing strategy?
 7-11 Using media that target college students, construct a 
consumption constellation for this social role. What 
set of products, activities, and interests tend to appear 
in advertisements depicting “typical” college students? 
How realistic is this constellation?
 7-12 Extreme sports. YouTube. Pinterest. Veganism. Can you 
predict what will be “hot” in the near future? Identify 
a lifestyle trend that is just surfacing in your universe. 
Describe this trend in detail, and justify your predic-
tion. What specific styles or products relate to this 
trend?
REvIEw
 
7-1 How does Freud’s work on the unconscious mind relate 
to marketing practice?
 
7-2 Enculturation helps us learn the beliefs and behaviors of 
our own society. Could an external marketer learn the 
same things through acculturation?
 
7-3 What is the basic philosophy behind a lifestyle market-
ing strategy?
 
7-4 How can marketers stay on top of changes in lifestyle 
trends?
 
7-5 The state church in Iceland is the Evangelical Lutheran 
Church. Just over 92 percent of the population class 
themselves as being Lutherans, but not all are practic-
ing members of the church.95 Another 3 percent belong 
to other Lutheran groups. Less than 1 percent of the 
population are Catholic. Some still follow the ancient 
gods from the Norse sagas. What coercive norms would 
you expect in Iceland as a marketer?
 
7-6 Is there such a thing as personality? If so, how might 
you integrate knowledge about consumers’ personality 
traits into a marketing strategy?
 
7-7 The Great Recession is over, so things are looking up for 
many consumers. Still, is frugality the “new normal” or 
will many of us revert to the free-spending days before 
the bubble burst in 2008?
 
7-8 Taking your own country as an example, how would 
you link values to consumer behavior?
CoNSUMER BEHAvIoR CHALLENGE
●
■DiSCuSS

276 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
online, and feature films. Some of the productions of Red Bull 
Media House include the film The Art of Flight, the brand’s maga-
zine Red Bulletin, and the TV show Red Bull Signature Series, in 
partnership with NBC. With the establishment of the media 
house, the Red Bull brand has actually transcended the origi-
nal product and become a full-fledged creator of its own brand  
experience. Red Bull continues to hold autographed events 
across the globe and produce its own content, incorporating 
storytelling material that attracts readers, viewers, and listeners 
to the brand. 
Red Bull is not merely satisfying a functional need; it is 
offering its consumers a vision and promising values through 
which they can define themselves. Through this approach, the 
drink that vitalizes the body and mind becomes a consumer life-
style choice of extreme experience. In addition, through the Red 
Bull Media House, the company is set to take content marketing 
to the extreme as well. Many in the marketing and advertising 
world are ready to hail Red Bull as a publishing empire that also 
just happens to sell a drink. 
DISCUSSIoN QUEStIoNS
CS 7-1 Based on your understanding of the personality at-
tributes influencing consumer behavior, describe how 
consumers identify themselves with the brand person-
ality of Red Bull. What goal and values are the consum-
ers of Red Bull trying to achieve?
CS 7-2 Discuss how Red Bull can be considered a lifestyle 
brand. Looking at the diverse activities that Red Bull 
associates itself with, is there a single way to define the 
Red Bull lifestyle?
CS 7-3 Discuss the product complementarity of Red Bull’s en-
ergy drink and media house. Do you think that Red 
Bull as a lifestyle brand is strong enough to venture into 
publishing extreme content? What does this mean for 
its original product and the rising competition it is fac-
ing in different global markets?
Sources: Red Bull company Web site, http://energydrink.redbull.com/company,  
accessed October 20, 2015; Kim Bhasin, “Red Bull Is Absolutely Obsessed 
with Its ‘Gives You Wings’ Slogan,” Business Insider (October 15, 2012); Kim 
Bhasin, “Felix Baumgartner’s Jump Was the Biggest Risk Red Bull Has Ever 
Taken,” Business Insider (October 15, 2012); Catherine Smith, “Red Bull 
Stratos YouTube Live Stream Attracts Record Number of Viewers (UPDATE),” 
The Huffington Post, October 14, 2012; Rob Howard, “Cult Brand Secrets: 
Red Bull,” Cult, March 14, 2014, http://www.cult.ca/blog/cult-brand- 
secrets-red-bull#sthash.dAHOWxeK.dpuf, accessed October 20 2015; 
Henry Faustine, “Red Bull: The Brand That Gives Content Wings,” Digital 
for  Life, November 6,  2012, http://www.digitalforreallife.com/2012/11/
red-bull-the-brand-that-gives-content-wings/,  accessed October 18, 2015; 
James O’ Brien, “How Red Bull Takes Content Marketing to the Extreme,” 
Mashable, December 19, 2012, http://mashable.com/2012/12/19/red-bull-
content-marketing/#J_9pBDtlN5qy, accessed October 18, 2015.
RED BULL: GIvING wINGS to A wAy of LIfE
When Red Bull was launched in 1987 by the Austrian entrepre-
neur Dietrich Mateschitz, it created a new beverage category: 
energy drinks. Since then, the energy drink segment has grown 
substantially, with Red Bull establishing itself as the undisputed 
market leader worldwide—it is available in 167 countries and 
has sold around 50 billion cans to date. Red Bull has not only 
created a new product category but has also cultivated a way 
of life that is widely admired by athletes, musicians, artists, and 
students around the world. 
The brand’s logo of two red muscular bulls and its iconic 
slogan promising to give the consumer “wings” are a statement 
for the thrill-seeking consumer. Red Bull fans are attracted to 
the brand’s proposition of fun, adventure, creativity, and chal-
lenge. It resonates well with the 18–35 age group by embracing 
the culture of extreme sports, music, and art.   
Over time, the Red Bull brand has become bigger than the 
product itself. Red Bull does not intend to bring the product to 
the people, but to bring people to the product. Red Bull’s strat-
egy is to associate itself with experiences and events that are 
popular with its target customers and thereby create a unique 
brand identity. The company delivers such experiences by heav-
ily sponsoring extreme sports events like motor racing, snow-
boarding, kite surfing, soapbox races, and Formula One races. 
Red Bull also creates its own events, like Red Bull X Fighters, Red 
Bull Air Race, and Red Bull Paper Wings, all of which attract 
huge audiences.  
The Red Bull Flugtag is one of their popular annual events, 
and the participants live the brand’s slogan: they construct 
their own homemade flying machines and jump into water. 
Another event that showcased the brand’s spirit of adventure 
was Red Bull Stratos, which was the company’s breakthrough 
space-diving mission. The event was streamed live on October 
14, 2012, showing Austrian sky diver Felix Baumgatner in a 
Red Bull labelled costume take a free fall from the edge of space, 
breaking the speed of sound and landing on the ground in a Red 
Bull parachute. The company had heavily publicized the event 
and it was followed by avid Red Bull fans right from the planning 
stages. The live streaming of the event had 8 million views on 
YouTube, a new record in itself. 
Red Bull activities involve a mix of sports, games, athlete 
and team sponsorships, music events, and other sports culture 
events like Red Bull BC One (breakdancing), and Red Bull Art 
of Motion (free-running). The Red Bull Web site features more 
than 134 events and activities to engage its users. No matter 
what activity its users choose, one thing is shared among all—
the Red Bull state of mind.  
Red Bull started its own Media House in 2007 to offer its 
followers more options to know and experience the Red Bull life-
style. It produces content across multiple media: print, television, 
●■Case Study 

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
277 
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
7-13 Collect a sample of ads that appeal to consumers’ values. What value is being 
communicated in each ad, and how is this done? Is this an effective approach to 
designing a marketing communication?
7-14 Identify three distinct “taste cultures” within your school. Can you generate a 
“consumption constellation” for each (clothing, music, leisure activities, etc.)?
NotES
Situational and Dispositional Determinants of Message Elaboration,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 31 (March, 2005): 787–797.
 17. http://continuumfashion.com/N12.php, accessed March 29, 2015; “3D 
Printing Hits The Fashion World,” Forbes (August 7, 2013), http://www 
.forbes.com/sites/rachelhennessey/2013/08/07/3-d-printed-clothes-
could-be-the-next-big-thing-to-hit-fashion/, accessed February 16, 2015.
 18. John L. Lastovicka, Lance A. Bettencourt, Renee Shaw Hughner, and Ronald 
J. Kuntze, “Lifestyle of the Tight and Frugal: Theory and Measurement,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 26 (June 1999): 85–98; The Hartman Group, 
“The Continuing Economic Maelstrom & the US Consumer: Implications 
for CPG, Restaurant and Retail January 2009,” http://www.hartman-group 
.com/publications/white-papers/the-continuing-economic-maelstrom-the-
us-consumer, accessed September 3, 2011; Joseph Lazzaro, “US Savings 
Rate Soars to 14-Year High,” Daily Finance (June 1, 2009), www.dailyfi 
nance.com/2009/06/01/us-savings-rate-soars-to-14-year-high, accessed 
June 1, 2009; Andrea K. Walker, “Economy Breeds a Frugal Consumer,” 
Baltimore Sun (April 20, 2009), www.baltimoresun.com/business/bal-te 
.bz.shoppinghabits19apr20,0, 1577826.story, accessed June 1, 2009.
 19. Ronald E. Goldsmith, Leisa Reinecke Flynn, and Ronald A. Clark, “The 
Etiology of the Frugal Consumer,” Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 
21, no. 2 (2014): 175–184. doi: 10.1016/j.jretconser.2013.11.005.
 20. Adapted from information presented in Beth Snyder Bulik, “You Are 
What You Watch: Market Data Suggest Research Links Personality Traits 
to Consumers’ Viewing Habits, Helps Marketers Match Brands with 
Audiences,” Advertising Age (November 1, 2010), http://adage.com/article/ 
news/research-links-personality-traits-tv-viewing-habits/146779/, accessed  
April 13, 2011.
 21. Adapted from https://www.cpp.com/products/mbti/index.aspx, accessed 
March 6, 2013.
 22. Stephanie Buck, “What Type of Social Media Personality Are You?”  
Mashable.com (August 13, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/08/13/what- 
type-of-social-media-personality-are-you-infographic/?utm_medium= 
email&utm_source=newsletter, accessed March 6, 2013.
 23. Jacob Jacoby, “Personality and Consumer Behavior: How Not to Find 
Relationships,” in Purdue Papers in Consumer Psychology, no. 102 (Lafayette, 
IN: Purdue University, 1969); Harold H. Kassarjian and Mary Jane Sheffet, 
“Personality and Consumer Behavior: An Update,” in Harold H. Kassarjian 
and Thomas S. Robertson, eds., Perspectives in Consumer Behavior, 4th ed. 
(Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman, 1991): 291–353; John Lastovicka and 
Erich Joachimsthaler, “Improving the Detection of Personality Behavior 
Relationships in Consumer Research,” Journal of Consumer Research 14 
(March 1988): 583–587. For an approach that ties the notion of personal-
ity more directly to marketing issues, see Jennifer L. Aaker, “Dimensions 
of Brand Personality,” Journal of Marketing Research 34 (August 1997): 
347–357.
 24. Girish N. Punj and David W. Stewart, “An Interaction Framework of 
Consumer Decision-Making,” Journal of Consumer Research 10 (September 
1983): 181–196.
 25. J. F. Allsopp, “The Distribution of On-Licence Beer and Cider Consumption 
and Its Personality Determinants Among Young Men,” European Journal 
of Marketing 20, no. 3 (1986): 44–62; Gordon R. Foxall and Ronald E. 
Goldsmith, “Personality and Consumer Research: Another Look,” Journal 
of the Market Research Society 30, no. 2 (April 1988): 111–125; J. Z. Sojka 
and J. L. Giese, “Using Individual Differences to Detect Consumer Shopping 
Behavior,” International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research 
13, no. 4 (2003): 337–353; P. Albanese, “Personality and Consumer 
Behaviour: An Operational Approach,” European Journal of Marketing 27, 
no. 8 (1993): 28–37; M. B. Holbrook and T. J. Olney, “Romanticism 
 
1. http://www.jettygirl.com/blog/, accessed March 29, 2015.
 
2. For an interesting ethnographic account of skydiving as a voluntary 
high-risk consumption activity, see Richard L. Celsi, Randall L. Rose, and 
Thomas W. Leigh, “An Exploration of High-Risk Leisure Consumption 
Through Skydiving,” Journal of Consumer Research 20 (June 1993): 1–23.
 
3. http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1596346/, accessed March 29, 2015; http:// 
www.roxy.com/surf/, accessed March 29, 2015.
 
4. See J. Aronoff and J. P. Wilson, Personality in the Social Process (Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum, 1985); Walter Mischel, Personality and Assessment (New York: 
Wiley, 1968).
 
5. Robert R McCraie and Paul T. Costa, “The Stability of Personality: Obser-
vations and Evaluations,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 
(1994): 173–175.
 
6. Ernest Dichter, A Strategy of Desire (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1960); 
Ernest Dichter, The Handbook of Consumer Motivations (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1964); Jeffrey F. Durgee, “Interpreting Dichter’s Interpretations: 
An Analysis of Consumption Symbolism,” in The Handbook of Consumer 
Motivations (unpublished manuscript, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 
Troy, New York, 1989); Pierre Martineau, Motivation in Advertising (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1957).
 
7. Vance Packard, The Hidden Persuaders (New York: D. McKay, 1957).
 
8. Harold Kassarjian, “Personality and Consumer Behavior: A Review,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 8 (November 1971): 409–418.
 
9. Karen Horney, Neurosis and Human Growth (New York: Norton, 1950).
 10. Joel B. Cohen, “An Interpersonal Orientation to the Study of Consumer 
Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research 6 (August 1967): 270–278; 
Pradeep K. Tyagi, “Validation of the CAD Instrument: A Replication,” 
in Richard P. Bagozzi and Alice M. Tybout, eds., Advances in Consumer 
Research 10 (Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research, 1983): 
112–114.
 11. For a comprehensive review of classic perspectives on personality theory, 
see Calvin S. Hall and Gardner Lindzey, Theories of Personality, 2nd ed. 
(New York: Wiley, 1970).
 12. See Carl G. Jung, “The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious,” in 
H. Read, M. Fordham, and G. Adler, eds., Collected Works, vol. 9, part 1 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1959).
 13. This material was contributed by Rebecca H. Holman, senior vice president 
and director, Consumer Knowledge Structures, The Knowledge Group, 
Young & Rubicam Brands, July 2005.
 14. Margaret Mark and Carol S. Pearson, The Hero and the Outlaw: Building 
Extraordinary Brands Through the Power of Archetypes (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2001). This section borrows from a discussion in Michael R. Solomon, Rebekah 
Russell-Bennett, and Josephine Previte, Consumer Behaviour: Buying, Having, 
Being, 3rd ed. (Frenchs Forest, NSW: Pearson Australia, 2012).
 15. E. B. Boyd, “How a Personality Test Designed to Pick Astronauts Is Taking 
the Pain Out of Customer Support,” Fast Company (December 1, 2010), 
http://www.fastcompany.com/1706766/how-a-system-designed-to-
weed-out-nasa-astronauts-is-taking-the-pain-out-of-customer-support-
call?partner=homepage_newsletter, accessed April 13, 2011.
 16. Caglar Irmak, Beth Vallen, and Sankar Sen, “You Like What I Like, but I 
Don’t Like What You Like: Uniqueness Motivations in Product Preferences,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 3 (October 2010): 443–455; E. A. 
Kim, S. Ratneshwar, E. Roesler, and T. G. Chowdhury, “Attention to Social 
Comparison Information and Brand Avoidance Behaviors, Marketing 
Letters (2014): 1–13; Adam Duhachek and Dawn Iacobucci, “Consumer 
Personality and Coping: Testing Rival Theories of Process,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 15, no. 1 (2005): 52–63; S. Christian Wheeler, Richard 
E. Petty, and George Y. Bizer, “Self-Schema Matching and Attitude Change: 

278 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
and Wanderlust: An Effect of Personality on Consumer Preferences,” 
Psychology and Marketing 12, no. 3 (1995): 207–222; Hans Baumgartner, 
“Towards a Personology of the Consumer,” Journal of Consumer Research 
29 (September 2002): 286–292.
 26. J. C. Mowen and B. Carlson, “Exploring the Antecedents and Consumer 
Behavior Consequences of the Trait of Superstition,” Psychology and 
Marketing 20, no. 12 (2003): 1045–65; M. Cleveland, M. Kalamas, and 
M. Laroche, “Shades of Green, Linking Environmental Locus of Control 
and Pro-environmental Behaviors,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 22, 
no. 4/5 (2005): 198–212; J. C. Mowen, The 3M Model of Motivation and 
Personality: Theory and Empirical Applications to Consumer Behavior 
(Massachusetts: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000); M. B. Holbrook 
and T. J. Olney, “Romanticism and Wanderlust: An Effect of Personality 
on Consumer Preferences,” Psychology and Marketing 12, no. 3 (1995): 
207–22; S. I. Rick, C. E. Cryder, and G. Loewenstein, “Tightwads and 
Spendthrifts,” Journal of Consumer Research 34 (April 2008): 767–
81; J. Z. Sojka and J. L. Giese, “The Influence of Personality Traits on 
the Processing of Visual and Verbal Information,” Marketing Letters 
12, no. 1 (2001): 91–106; R. A. Clark and R. E. Goldsmith, “Market 
Mavens: Psychological Influences,” Psychology and Marketing 22 (April 
2005): 289–312; U. R. Orth, “Consumer Personality and Other Factors 
in Situational Brand Choice Variation,” Journal of Brand Management 13, 
no. 2 (2005): 115–33; M. Marquis and P. Filiatrault, “Understanding 
Complaining 
Responses 
Through 
Consumers’ 
Self-Consciousness 
Disposition,” Psychology and Marketing 19, no. 3 (2002): 267–91; T. A. 
Mooradian and J. M. Olver, ‘“I Can’t Get No Satisfaction”: The Impact 
of Personality and Emotion on Postpurchase Processes,” Psychology and 
Marketing 14, no. 4 (1997): 379–92.
 27. Quoted in Stuart O’Brien, “iPad Owners Are ‘Self-Centered Workaholics,’” 
Mobile Entertainment (July 30, 2010), http://www.mobile-ent.biz/news/
read/ipad-owners-are-self-centered-workaholics, accessed April 13, 2011.
 28. Thomas Hine, “Why We Buy: The Silent Persuasion of Boxes, Bottles, 
Cans, and Tubes,” Worth (May 1995): 78–83.
 29. Jennifer Aaker, Kathleen D. Vohs, and Cassie Mogilner, “Nonprofits Are 
Seen as Warm and For-Profits as Competent: Firm Stereotypes Matter,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 2 (August 2010): 224–237.
 30. Bradley Johnson, “They All Have Half-Baked Ideas,” Advertising Age (May 12, 
1997): 8.
 31. Jon Hamm, “Why Agencies and Brands Need to Embrace True Story 
telling,” Adweek (September 23, 2013), http://www.adweek.com/news/ 
advertising-branding/why-agencies-and-brands-need-embrace-true-sto 
rytelling-152534, accessed March 29, 2015.
 32. Neeru Paharia, Anat Keinan, Jill Avery, and Juliet B. Schor, “The Underdog 
Effect: The Marketing of Disadvantage and Determination through Brand 
Biography,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 5 (February 2011): 
775–790.
 33. Michael Hiestand, “ESPN Drops Ad Campaign That Was to Portray 
College Stereotypes,” USA Today (November 14, 2008), www.usatoday 
.com/money/advertising/2008-11-13-espn-ad-campaign-killed_N.html, 
 accessed November 14, 2008.
 34. Ellis A. Hende and Ruth Mugge, “Investigating Gender-Schema Congruity 
Effects on Consumers’ Evaluation of Anthropomorphized Products,” Psy-
chology & Marketing 31, no.2 (2014): 264–277.
 35. Quoted in Erin White, “Volvo Sheds Safe Image for New, Dangerous Ads,” 
Wall Street Journal (June 14, 2002), www.wsj.com, accessed June 14, 
2002; Viknesh Vijayenthiran, “Volvo’s Upmarket Plans Hindered by Brand 
Image, Poor CO2 Emissions,” Motor Authority (November 24, 2008), www 
.motorauthority.com/volvo-continuing-with-plans-to-move-upmarket.
html, accessed June 1, 2009.
 36. Yongjun Sung and Spencer F. Tinkham, “Brand Personality Structures 
in the United States and Korea: Common and Culture-Specific Factors,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 15, no. 4 (2005): 334–350; Beverly T. 
Venable, Gregory M. Rose, Victoria D. Bush, and Faye W. Gilbert, “The Role 
of Brand Personality in Charitable Giving: An Assessment and Validation,” 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 33 (July 2005): 295–312.
 37. Quoted in Stuart Elliott, “A 1950s Brand Mascot Fights 21st-Century 
Indigestion,” New York Times (March 5, 2008), www.nytimes.com, ac-
cessed March 5, 2008.
 38. Craig J. Thompson, Aric Rindfleisch, and Zeynep Arsel, “Emotional 
Branding and the Strategic Value of the Doppelganger Brand Image,” 
Journal of Marketing 70, no. 1 (2006): 50.
 39. Jennifer L. Aaker, “Dimensions of Brand Personality,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 34 (August 1997): 347–357.
 40. Tim Triplett, “Brand Personality Must Be Managed or It Will Assume a Life 
of Its Own,” Marketing News (May 9, 1994): 9.
 41. Seth Stevenson, “How to Beat Nike,” New York Times (January 5, 2003), 
www.nytimes.com, accessed January 5, 2003.
 42. Susan Fournier, “Consumers and Their Brands: Developing Relationship 
Theory in Consumer Research,” Journal of Consumer Research 24, no. 4 
(March 1998): 343–373.
 43. Neal Gabler, “The Weird Science of Naming New Products,” New York Times 
Magazine (January 15, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/18/magazine/ 
the-weird-science-of-naming-new-products.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-
share&smprod=nytcore-iphone, accessed February 3, 2015.
 44. John Grossman, “Risqué Names Reap Rewards for Some Companies,” 
New York Times (April 23, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/24/
business/smallbusiness/risque-names-reap-rewards-for-some-companies.
html, accessed February 3, 2015.
 45. Karyne Levy, “Here’s Why Amazon Just Paid Nearly $1 Billion for a Site 
Where You Watch People Play Video Games,” Business Insider (August 25, 
2014), http://www.businessinsider.com/heres-why-amazon-paid-almost-
1-billion-for-twitch-2014-8#ixzz3VnhCim1P, accessed March 29, 2015.
 46. Paul Mozur, “For South Korea, E-Sports is National Pastime,” New York 
Times (October 19, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/20/tech 
nology/league-of-legends-south-korea-epicenter-esports.html, accessed 
February 16, 2015.
 47. Chris Pereira, “Three Swatting Incidents Attributed to Teenage Minecraft 
Player,” Gamespot, (March 28, 2015), http://www.gamespot.com/articles/
three-swatting-incidents-attributed-to-teenage-min/1100-6426236/, 
accessed March 29, 2015; Richard Lewis, “On Twitch, SWAT Teams are 
Becoming Dangerous Props for Trolls,” The Daily Dot (August 22, 2014), 
http://www.dailydot.com/esports/swatting-twitch-trend-prank/, accessed 
March 29, 2015.
 48. These definitions are adapted from entries in The Urban Dictionary, www 
.urbandictionary.com, accessed March 16, 2013.
 49. Benjamin D. Zablocki and Rosabeth Moss Kanter, “The Differentiation 
of Life-Styles,” Annual Review of Sociology (1976): 269–297; Mary Twe 
Douglas and Baron C. Isherwood, The World of Goods (New York: Basic 
Books, 1979).
 50. http://www.comic-con.org/about, accessed March 29, 2015; “Cosplay,” 
www.cosplay.com, accessed March 29, 2015; Lisa Katayama, “Anatomy 
of a Nerd; Japanese Schoolgirl Watch,” Wired (March 2006), www.wired 
.com/wired/archive/14.03/play.html?pg=3, accessed March 29, 2015.
 51. “American Time Use Survey,” Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://www.bls 
.gov/tus/charts/, accessed March 29, 2015.
 52. “American Time Use Survey,” Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://www.bls 
.gov/tus/charts/students.htm, accessed March 29, 2015.
 53. Zablocki and Kanter, “The Differentiation of Life-Styles.”
 54. Richard A. Peterson, “Revitalizing the Culture Concept,” Annual Review of 
Sociology 5 (1979): 137–166.
 55. William Leiss, Stephen Kline, and Sut Jhally, Social Communication in 
Advertising (Toronto: Methuen, 1986).
 56. Quoted in “Polo/Ralph Lauren Corporation History,” Funding Universe, http://
www.fundinguniverse.com/company-histories/polo-ralph-lauren-corporation-
history/, accessed March 29, 2015; Mark J. Miller, “Ralph Lauren Ready to 
Open First Restaurant in New York City,” Brandchannel (December 12, 2014), 
http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/2014/12/12/141212-Ralph-
Lauren-New-York-Restaurant-Polo-Bar.aspx?utm_campaign=141212-Ralph-
Lauren-New-York-Restaurant-Polo-Bar&utm_source=newsletter&utm_
medium=email, accessed February 22, 2015.
 57. Douglas and Isherwood, The World of Goods, quoted on pp. 72–73.
 58. Christopher K. Hsee and France Leclerc, “Will Products Look More 
Attractive When Presented Separately or Together?” Journal of Consumer 
Research 25 (September 1998): 175–186.
 59. R. Rahinel and J. P. Redden, “Brands as Product Coordinators: Matching 
Brands Make Joint Consumption Experiences More Enjoyable,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 39, no. 6 (2013): 1290–1299.
 60. Brian Steinberg, “Whose Ad Is This Anyway? Agencies Use Brand Icons 
to Promote Other Products; Cheaper Than Zeta-Jones,” Wall Street Journal 
(December 4, 2003), www.wsj.com, accessed December 4, 2003.
 61. Michael R. Solomon, “The Role of Products as Social Stimuli: A Symbolic 
Interactionism Perspective,” Journal of Consumer Research 10 (December 
1983): 319–329.
 62. Michael R. Solomon and Henry Assael, “The Forest or the Trees? A 
Gestalt Approach to Symbolic Consumption,” in Jean Umiker-Sebeok, ed., 
Marketing and Semiotics: New Directions in the Study of Signs for Sale (Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter, 1988), 189–218; Michael R. Solomon, “Mapping 
Product Constellations: A Social Categorization Approach to Symbolic 
Consumption,” Psychology & Marketing 5, no. 3 (1988): 233–258; see 
also Stephen C. Cosmas, “Life Styles and Consumption Patterns,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 8, no. 4 (March 1982): 453–455; Russell W. Belk, 
“Yuppies as Arbiters of the Emerging Consumption Style,” in Richard J. 
Lutz, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 13 (Provo, UT: Association for 
Consumer Research, 1986): 514–519.

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
279 
 63. Lan Nguyen Chaplin and Tina M. Lowrey, “The Development of Consumer-
Based Consumption Constellations in Children,” Journal of Consumer 
Research, 36, no. 5 (2010): 757–777.
 64. Danny Hakim, “Cadillac, Too, Shifting Focus to Trucks,” New York Times 
(December 21, 2001), http://www.nytimes.com/2001/12/21/business/
cadillac-too-shifting-focus-to-trucks.html, accessed September 3, 2011.
 65. Quoted in Amy Wallace, “Chip Wilson, Lululemon Guru, Is Moving 
On,” New York Times Magazine (February 2, 2015), http://www.ny 
times.com/2015/02/08/magazine/lululemons-guru-is-moving-on 
.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=0,  accessed 
February 3, 2015.
 66. See Lewis Alpert and Ronald Gatty, “Product Positioning by Behavioral Life 
Styles,” Journal of Marketing 33 (April 1969): 65–69; Emanuel H. Demby, 
“Psychographics Revisited: The Birth of a Technique,” Marketing News 
(January 2, 1989): 21; William D. Wells, “Backward Segmentation,” in 
Johan Arndt, ed., Insights into Consumer Behavior (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 
1968): 85–100.
 67. Ian Pearson, “Social Studies: Psychographics in Advertising,” Canadian 
Business (December 1985): 67.
 68. Rebecca Piirto Heath, “Psychographics: Qu’est-Ce Que C’est?,” Marketing 
Tools (November–December 1995).
 69. Alfred S. Boote, “Psychographics: Mind Over Matter,” American 
Demographics (April 1980): 26–29; William D. Wells, “Psychographics: A 
Critical Review,” Journal of Marketing Research 12 (May 1975): 196–213.
 70. Joseph T. Plummer, “The Concept and Application of Life Style 
Segmentation,” Journal of Marketing 38 (January 1974): 33–37.
 71. Berkeley Rice, “The Selling of Lifestyles,” Psychology Today (March 1988): 
46.
 72. John L. Lastovicka, John P. Murry, Erich A. Joachimsthaler, Gurav Bhalla, 
and Jim Scheurich, “A Lifestyle Typology to Model Young Male Drinking and 
Driving,” Journal of Consumer Research 14 (September 1987): 257–263.
 73. Robert F. Worth, “Arab TV Tests Societies’ Limits with Depictions of Sex 
and Equality,” New York Times (September 26, 2008), www.nytimes 
.com/2008/09/27/World/Middleeast/27beirut.Html?_R=1&Scp=1&Sq=N...,  
accessed September 26, 2008.
 74. Ajay K. Sirsi, James C. Ward, and Peter H. Reingen, “Microcultural 
Analysis of Variation in Sharing of Causal Reasoning about Behavior,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 22 (March 1996): 345–372.
 75. Vercihan Zifliog˘lu, “TV Celebrity Kardashian Lashes Out at Turkish Cosmo 
Cover,” Hürriyet Daily News (April 12, 2011), http://www.hurriyetdailynews 
.com/n.php?n=american-tv-personality-angry-for-her-photos-on-turkish-
magazine-2011-04-12, accessed May 10, 2011; David Carr, “Romance in 
Cosmo’s World Is Translated in Many Ways,” New York Times (May 26, 2002), 
www.nytimes.com, accessed May 26, 2002.
 76. Milton Rokeach, The Nature of Human Values (New York: Free Press, 1973).
 77. Sang-Pil Han and Sharon Shavitt, “Persuasion and Culture: Advertising 
Appeals in Individualistic and Collectivistic Societies,” Journal of Exper-
imental Social Psychology 30 (1994): 326–350.
 78. Thomas Gilovich, Amit Kumar, and Lily Jampol, “A Wonderful Life: 
Experiential Consumption and the Pursuit of Happiness,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 25, no. 1 (2015): 152–165; Marsha L. Richins, 
“When Wanting Is Better than Having: Materialism, Transformation 
Expectations, and Product-Evoked Emotions in the Purchase Process,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (2013): 1–18.
 79. Noam Cohen, “Chipotle Blurs Lines With a Satirical Series About Industrial 
Farming,” New York Times (January 27, 2014), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2014/01/27/business/media/chipotle-blurs-lines-with-a-satirical-
series-about-industrial-farming.html?_r=1, accessed February 23, 2015.
 80. Jon Littlefield and Julie L. Ozanne, “Socialization into Consumer Culture: 
Hunters Learning to Be Men,” Consumption Markets & Culture 14, no. 4 
(2011): 333–360.
 81. Carolyn A. Lin, “Cultural Values Reflected in Chinese and American Tele-
vision Advertising,” Journal of Advertising 30 (Winter 2001): 83–94.
 82. George J. McCall and J. L. Simmons, Social Psychology: A Sociological Ap-
proach (New York: Free Press, 1982).
 83. Deborah Ball, “Women in Italy Like to Clean but Shun the Quick and Easy: 
Convenience Doesn’t Sell When Bathrooms Average Four Scrubbings a 
Week,” Wall Street Journal (April 25, 2006): A1.
 84. Arundhati Parmar, “Out from Under,” Marketing News (July 21, 2003): 
9–10.
 85. Jim Yardley, “No Spitting on the Road to Olympic Glory, Beijing Says,” New 
York Times (April 17, 2007), www.nytimes.com, accessed April 17, 2007.
 86. Donald E. Vinson, Jerome E. Scott, and Lawrence R. Lamont, “The Role 
of Personal Values in Marketing and Consumer Behavior,” Journal of 
Marketing 41 (April 1977): 44–50; John Watson, Steven Lysonski, Tamara 
Gillan, and Leslie Raymore, “Cultural Values and Important Possessions: A 
Cross-Cultural Analysis,” Journal of Business Research 55 (2002): 923–931.
 87. Pascale Quester, Michael Beverland, and Francis Farrelly, “Brand–Personal 
Values Fit and Brand Meanings: Exploring the Role Individual Values Play 
in Ongoing Brand Loyalty in Extreme Sports Subcultures,” Advances in 
Consumer Research 33, no. 1 (2006): 21–28.
 88. Jennifer Aaker, Veronica Benet-Martinez, and Jordi Garolera, “Con-
sumption Symbols as Carriers of Culture: A Study of Japanese and Spanish 
Brand Personality Constructs,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 
81, no. 3 (2001): 492–508.
 89. Milton Rokeach, Understanding Human Values (New York: Free Press, 1979); 
see also J. Michael Munson and Edward McQuarrie, “Shortening the 
Rokeach Value Survey for Use in Consumer Research,” in Michael J. 
Houston, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 15 (Provo, UT: Association for 
Consumer Research, 1988), 381–386.
 90. B. W. Becker and P. E. Conner, “Personal Values of the Heavy User of Mass 
Media,” Journal of Advertising Research 21 (1981): 37–43; Vinson, Scott, 
and Lamont, “The Role of Personal Values in Marketing and Consumer 
Behavior.”
 91. Craig J. Thompson and Maura Troester, “Consumer Value Systems in 
the Age of Postmodern Fragmentation: The Case of the Natural Health 
Microculture,” Journal of Consumer Research 28 (March 2002): 550–571.
 92. Sharon E. Beatty, Lynn R. Kahle, Pamela Homer, and Shekhar Misra, 
“Alternative Measurement Approaches to Consumer Values: The List of 
Values and the Rokeach Value Survey,” Psychology & Marketing 2 (1985): 
181–200; Lynn R. Kahle and Patricia Kennedy, “Using the List of Values 
(LOV) to Understand Consumers,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 2 (Fall 
1988): 49–56; Lynn Kahle, Basil Poulos, and Ajay Sukhdial, “Changes 
in Social Values in the United States During the Past Decade,” Journal of 
Advertising Research 28 (February–March 1988): 35–41; see also Wagner 
A. Kamakura and Jose Alfonso Mazzon, “Value Segmentation: A Model 
for the Measurement of Values and Value Systems,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 18 (September 1991): 28; Jagdish N. Sheth, Bruce I. Newman, 
and Barbara L. Gross, Consumption Values and Market Choices: Theory and 
Applications (Cincinnati, OH: South-Western, 1991).
 93. Thomas J. Reynolds and Jonathan Gutman, “Laddering Theory, Method, 
Analysis, and Interpretation,” Journal of Advertising Research (February–
March 1988): 11–34; Beth Walker, Richard Celsi, and Jerry Olson, 
“Exploring the Structural Characteristics of Consumers’ Knowledge,” 
in Melanie Wallendorf and Paul Anderson, eds., Advances in Consumer 
Research 14 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1986), 17–21; 
Tania Modesto Veludo-de-Oliveira, Ana Akemi Ikeda, and Marcos Cortez 
Campomar, “Laddering in the Practice of Marketing Research: Barriers 
and Solutions,” Qualitative Market Research: An International Journal 9, no. 3 
(2006): 297–306. For a critique of this technique, cf. Elin Brandi Sørenson 
and Søren Askegaard, “Laddering: How (Not) to Do Things with Words,” 
Qualitative Market Research: An International Journal 10, no. 1 (2007): 63–77.
 94. “25 Years of Attitude,” Marketing Tools (November–December 1995): 
38–39.
 95. World Council of Churches, “Evangelical Lutheran Church of Iceland,” 
https://www.oikoumene.org/en/member-churches/evangelical-lutheran- 
church-of-iceland.
 96. Dale Buss, “Night and Day, Starbucks Grows Up as a Global Lifestyle Brand,” 
Brandchannel (December 20, 2012), http://www.brandchannel.com/home/
post/2012/12/20/Starbucks-Night-and-Day-122012.aspx, accessed Feb-
ruary 22, 2015.

280 
SeCtiOn 2   Internal Influences on Consumer Behavior
SECTION 2  EVOLVING TRENDS IN FITNESS 
 
 AND FRENCH FRIES 
 
BACKGRoUND AND GoAL
Your close friend has finally saved up enough money to 
open up his dream business—a fitness gym! He hopes to 
one day turn his gym into a national chain, but for now he 
plans on opening just two locations in the large U.S. city 
where he lives. He recently read a news article about how 
fitness trends in his city are consistent with overall trends 
in the United States, so he asked you to do a little research 
about fitness membership trends in the nation. In addi-
tion, he asked you to look up membership trends for three 
likely competitors: Planet Fitness, LA Fitness, and 24 Hour 
Fitness. In addition, your friend has noted that some recent 
trends for gyms have included some rather curious prac-
tices, like giving away free pizza and candy to its members! 
He is wondering if you may be able to provide some insight, 
even if indirect, about such trends and how they may apply 
to his new gym.
You used GfK MRI’s data to find information about 
U.S. adult gym membership trends in 2012 and 2014. Your 
plan is to use the two different time points to make some 
inferences about where the future of fitness gym marketing 
may be heading. In addition, you also found historical trends 
about U.S. adult spending at fast-food restaurants. Although 
not exactly the same as free pizza at gyms, you decided 
to look at the data to consider whether you can glean any 
insights. You also found some information about the types 
of cable channels, Websites, and apps different fitness 
consumers use; you plan on using this  information to give 
some advice to your friend about how to advertise for his 
new gym.
tHE DAtA
The data in the report are all reported in the millions 
(000,000s) and interpreted in a similar way:
●
●“Bought Fast Food” and “Spent More than $100 on 
FF”: Both questions deal with someone’s fast-food con-
sumption in the past 6 months from either Spring 2014 
or Spring 2012. The first question is a simple count 
of whether someone spent any money on fast food, 
whereas the second question estimates the number of 
people who spent more than $100 on fast food in the 
past 6 months.
●
●“Member of Gym”: This question is an estimate of U.S. 
adults who have had a membership in any sort of fitness 
gym in the last 12 months from either Spring 2014 or 
Spring 2012. This number includes any gym, not just  
24 Hour Fitness, Planet Fitness, and LA Fitness.
●
●“LA Fitness”, “24 Hour Fitness”, and “Planet Fitness”: 
These questions are the estimated count of U.S. adults 
who had a membership to the gym within the last  
12 months from either Spring 2014 or Spring 2012.
 
Bought Fast Food
Spent More  
than $100 on FF
 
Member of Gym
 
la Fitness
 
24 hour Fitness
 
planet Fitness
Year
2012
2014
2012
2014
2012
2014
2012
2014
2012
2014
2012
2014
Total
169.0
168.5
55.3
56.5
43.2
52.1
2.9
4.2
4.5
3.6
2.6
4.9
HH < $40,000
49.9
50.3
12.3
12.5
7.5
10.9
0.5
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.6
1.3
HH $40,000–$74,999
48.5
45.8
15.5
15.2
10.5
12.2
0.7
1.2
0.8
0.9
0.6
1.3
HH $75,000+
70.6
72.4
27.5
28.8
25.2
28.9
1.7
2.0
2.9
2.0
1.3
2.3
Men
81.4
80.8
29.4
30.0
20.4
24.3
1.3
1.9
2.5
1.9
1.3
2.3
Women
87.7
87.8
25.9
26.5
22.8
27.7
1.6
2.3
2.0
1.6
1.2
2.5
All numbers reported in millions (000,000s)
Source: Spring 2012 and Spring 2014 GfK MRI

 
Chapter 7   Personality, Lifestyles, and Values 
281 
●
●Which of the three income groups had the largest in-
crease in gym membership from 2012 to 2014? If this 
was expressed in terms of percentage increase, which 
income group experienced the largest increase from 
2012 to 2014?
●
●Which of the three gyms had the largest market share  
in 2012? In 2014?
●
●From 2012 to 2014, does it appear that LA Fitness,  
24 Hour Fitness, and Planet Fitness comprise a  
greater or lesser share of the total gym membership 
market? Why?
DISCUSSIoN
 
1. Compare the membership trends between LA 
Fitness, 24 Hour Fitness, and Planet Fitness. Are 
membership trends similar or different across gen-
ders and income groups? Consider the different 
marketing mixes of the three gyms; what do you 
think may account for the differences in membership 
trends? (Tip: You can use a tool like Google News to 
search for news articles about each gym in 2012 or 
2014.)
 
2. Your friend told you that he envisions his gym being a 
place where people who are “intimidated” about go-
ing to the gym will feel safe and empowered to work 
out. Assuming this aspect of your friend’s gym is go-
ing to be part of his positioning, which of the three 
competing gyms would you consider to be his most 
serious competitor? Why?
 
3. Which income group has experienced the greatest 
increase in fast food spending from 2012 to 2014? 
Do you think this information is relevant for your friend 
when thinking about the marketing mix of his gym? 
Why or why not?
GfK US LLC, Mediamark Research & Intelligence division.


    
     
  a
nd 
Usi
ng 
Pro
du
ct
s
    
    
    
3: 
Ch
oo
sin
g 
C
O
N
S
U
M
E R
 B
E H
A
V
I
O
R
2
:
 
I
n
t
e
rn
al 
In
ﬂue
nce
s 
o
n
 
C
o
n
s
u
me
r B
eha
vior
1: Fo
unda
tion
s
of Co
nsum
er B
eha
vior
 
S
o
c
i
a
l
 
a
n
d
 C
ul
tu
ral
 Se
ttin
gs
4
:
 
C
o
n
s
u
m
er
s i
n T
heir
283
Section 3  ● Choosing and Using Products
In Section 3 we look at how consumers think about products, the steps they use to choose 
one, and what happens after we buy something. Chapter 8 focuses on how we form feelings 
and thoughts about products and how marketers influence us. In Chapter 9 we look at the 
steps we use to identify the best solution to a consumption problem. Chapter 10 highlights 
how factors at the time of purchase influence our choices and then what happens after  
we buy.
C h a p t e r s  a h e a d
Chapter 8 • Attitudes and Persuasive Communications
Chapter 9 • Decision Making
Chapter 10 • Buying, Using, and Disposing

284
S
aundra is hanging out at the mall, idly texting 
some friends about some stuff she saw in a few 
stores. When she checks her Facebook page, she 
sees several of them are chatting about their college ap-
plication plans. She groans to herself; it’s starting already! 
She’s just starting her senior year of high school, and already 
everybody’s thinking about what happens next year. Saundra 
realizes it’s time to bite the bullet and really start to look into 
this; her Mom will certainly be happy. But it’s all so confus-
ing. She’s been getting bombarded with enticing ads and 
brochures from so many different schools. They’re hard to 
escape; some arrive by snail mail and others keep hitting her 
with emails and texts. A few have invited her to take virtual 
campus tours on their Web sites, and one even wants her 
to enter a virtual world version of the campus as an avatar 
to walk around and “talk” to current students. It’s amazing 
to see how different their pitches are, too. Sure, some universities tout their academic excellence, 
but others play up their international programs, job placement programs, and even amenities (rock 
climbing walls!). Of course, she’s familiar with some of the schools that are starting to court her, and 
she already has a pretty good idea in her mind of what they’re about. But others feel like a blank 
 Chapter 8 ● Attitudes and Persuasive 
Communications
 8-1 It is important for consumer researchers to understand 
the nature and power of attitudes.
 8-2 Attitudes are more complex than they first appear.
 8-3 We form attitudes in several ways.
 8-4 A need to maintain consistency among all of our attitudinal 
components often motivates us to alter one or more of them.
 8-5 Attitude models identify specific components and com-
bine them to predict a consumer’s overall attitude toward 
a product or brand.
 8-6 The communications model identifies several important 
components for marketers when they try to change con-
sumers’ attitudes toward products and services.
 8-7 The consumer who processes a message is not the pas-
sive receiver of information marketers once believed him 
or her to be.
 8-8 Several factors influence the effectiveness of a message 
source.
 8-9 The way a marketer structures his or her message deter-
mines how persuasive it will be.
 8-10 Many modern marketers are reality engineers.
 8-11 Audience characteristics help to determine whether the 
nature of the source or the message itself will be rela-
tively more effective.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
Source: Blend Images/Corbis

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
285 
slate; so far at least, she has absolutely no idea about what it would be like to be a student at these 
schools. As Saundra starts to post some Facebook queries about where people are looking, she real-
izes it’s going to be an intense year.
the Power of Attitudes
People use the term attitude in many contexts. A friend might ask 
you, “What is your attitude toward abortion?” A parent might 
scold, “Young man, I don’t like your attitude.” Some bars even 
euphemistically refer to happy hour as “an attitude adjustment 
period.” For our purposes, though, an attitude is a lasting, gen-
eral evaluation of people (including oneself), objects, advertisements, or issues.1 We call 
anything toward which one has an attitude an attitude object (Ao). As Saundra will 
learn (and no doubt you did too) during her college search process, we assimilate informa-
tion from a variety of sources and often put a lot of effort into forming an attitude toward 
many things, including a complex attitude object like a university.
An attitude is lasting because it tends to endure over time. It is general because 
it applies to more than a momentary event, such as hearing a loud noise, though you 
might, over time, develop a negative attitude toward all loud noises. Consumers have 
attitudes toward a wide range of attitude objects, from product-specific behaviors (e.g., 
you use Crest toothpaste rather than Colgate) to more general, consumption-related 
behaviors (e.g., how often you should brush your teeth). Attitudes help to determine 
whom you choose to date, what music you listen to, whether you will recycle alumi-
num cans, or whether you choose to become a consumer researcher for a living. In 
this chapter we’ll consider the contents of an attitude, how we form attitudes, and 
how we measure them. We will also review some of the surprisingly complex relation-
ships between attitudes and behavior and then take a closer look at how marketers can 
change these attitudes.
Psychologist Daniel Katz developed the functional theory of attitudes to explain 
how attitudes facilitate social behavior.2 According to this pragmatic approach, attitudes 
exist because they serve some function for the person. Consumers who expect that they will 
need to deal with similar situations at a future time will be more likely to start to form an 
attitude in anticipation.3 Two people can each have an attitude toward some object for dif-
ferent reasons. As a result, it’s helpful for a marketer to know why an attitude is held before 
he or she tries to change it. These are different attitude functions:
●
●Utilitarian function—The utilitarian function relates to the basic principles of 
reward and punishment we learned about in Chapter 4. We develop some attitudes to-
ward products simply because they provide pleasure or pain. If a person likes the taste 
of a cheeseburger, that person will develop a positive attitude toward cheeseburgers. 
Ads that stress straightforward product benefits (e.g., you should drink Diet Coke “just 
for the taste of it”) appeal to the utilitarian function.
●
●Value-expressive function—Attitudes that perform a value-expressive function 
relate to the consumer’s self-concept (Chapter 6) or central values (Chapter 7). A per-
son forms a product attitude in this case because of what the product says about him 
or her as a person. Value-expressive attitudes also are highly relevant to the psycho-
graphic analyses we discussed in Chapter 7, which consider how consumers cultivate 
a cluster of activities, interests, and opinions to express a particular social identity.
●
●Ego-defensive function—Attitudes we form to protect ourselves either from external 
threats or internal feelings perform an ego-defensive function. An early marketing 
study showed that housewives resisted the use of instant coffee because it threatened 
their conception of themselves as capable homemakers (this doesn’t seem to be a big 
issue for most anymore!).4 Products that promise to help a man project a “macho” im-
age (e.g., Marlboro cigarettes) appeal to his insecurities about his masculinity. Another 
OBjeCtive 8-1 
It is important for 
consumer researchers to 
understand the nature 
and power of attitudes.

286 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
example is deodorant ads that stress the dire, embarrassing consequences when you’re 
caught with underarm odor in public.
●
●Knowledge function—We form some attitudes because we need order, structure, 
or meaning. A knowledge function applies when a person is in an ambiguous situ-
ation (“it’s OK to wear casual pants to work, but only on Friday”) or when he or she 
confronts a new product (e.g., “Bayer wants you to know about pain relievers”).
the ABC Model of Attitudes
When Subaru of America began work on a new marketing strat-
egy, the automaker discovered that even though most auto buyers 
had heard of the brand, few had strong emotional connections to 
it. However, current Subaru owners expressed strong passion and 
even love for the brand. To ramp up this emotional connection for non-owners as well, 
the new campaign targets people who are in three different stages of buying a car—what 
Subaru calls the heart, the head, and the wallet. The heart stage focuses on the love that 
owners show for their cars; commercials share personal stories of their attachment. The 
head stage ads, in contrast, present the rational side of specific models as they emphasize 
how the cars benefit their owners in terms of reliability, economy, and so on. Then, the 
wallet ads deal with the financial details of actually buying a Subaru; these include special 
offers from local dealers.5
Like the Subaru campaign, an attitude has three components: affect, behavior, and 
cognition. As we saw in Chapter 5, affect describes how a consumer feels about an atti-
tude object. Behavior refers to the actions he or she takes toward the object or in some 
cases at least his or her intentions to take action about it (but, as we will discuss at a later 
point, an intention does not always result in an actual behavior). Cognition is what he 
or she believes to be true about the attitude object. You can remember these three compo-
nents of an attitude as the ABC model of attitudes.
The ABC model emphasizes the interrelationships among knowing, feeling, and 
doing. We can’t determine consumers’ attitudes toward a product if we just identify their 
cognitions (beliefs) about it. For example, a researcher may find that shoppers “know” 
a particular camcorder has a power zoom lens, auto focus, and a flying erase head, but 
simply knowing this doesn’t indicate whether they feel these attributes are good, bad, or 
irrelevant, or whether they would actually buy the camcorder.
hierarchies of effects
Which comes first: knowing, feeling, or doing? It turns out that each element may lead 
things off, depending on the situation. Attitude researchers developed the concept of a 
hierarchy of effects to explain the relative impact of the three components. Each hier-
archy specifies that a fixed sequence of steps occur en route to an attitude. Figure 8.1 sum-
marizes these three different hierarchies.
the high-involvement hierarchy: think u Feel u Do
The high-involvement hierarchy assumes that a person approaches a product deci-
sion as a problem-solving process. First, he or she forms beliefs about a product as she 
accumulates knowledge (beliefs) regarding relevant attributes. Next, he or she evaluates 
these beliefs and forms a feeling about the product (affect).6 Then he or she engages in a 
relevant behavior, such as when he or she buys a product that offers the attributes he or 
she feels good about. This hierarchy assumes that a consumer is highly involved when he 
or she makes a purchase decision (see Chapter 5).7 He or she is motivated to seek out a lot 
of information, carefully weigh alternatives, and come to a thoughtful decision.
the Low-involvement hierarchy: think u Do u Feel
The low-involvement hierarchy of effects assumes that the consumer initially doesn’t 
have a strong preference for one brand over another; instead, he or she acts on the basis of 
OBjeCtive 8-2 
Attitudes are more 
complex than they first 
appear.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
287 
limited knowledge and forms an evaluation only after he or she has bought the product.8 
The attitude is likely to come about through behavioral learning, as good or bad experi-
ences reinforce his or her initial choice.
The possibility that consumers simply don’t care enough about many decisions 
to carefully assemble a set of product beliefs and then evaluate them is important. 
This implies that all of our well-intentioned efforts to influence beliefs and carefully 
communicate information about product attributes may fall on deaf ears. Consumers 
aren’t necessarily going to pay attention anyway; they are more likely to respond to 
simple stimulus–response connections when they make purchase decisions. For exam-
ple, a consumer who chooses among paper towels might remember that “Bounty is the 
quicker picker-upper” rather than systematically comparing all the brands on the shelf. 
Get a life!
The notion of consumers’ low involvement is a bitter pill for some marketers to swal-
low. Who wants to admit that what they market is not important to the people who buy 
it? A brand manager for, say, a brand of bubble gum or cat food may find it hard to believe 
that consumers don’t put that much thought into purchasing the product because he or 
she spends many waking (and perhaps sleeping) hours thinking about it.
For marketers, the ironic silver lining to this low-involvement cloud is that under 
these conditions, consumers are not motivated to process a lot of complex, brand-related 
information. Instead, they will be swayed by principles of behavioral learning, such as the 
simple responses that conditioned brand names or point-of-purchase displays elicit (as we 
discussed in Chapter 4).
the experiential hierarchy: Feel u Do u think
According to the experiential hierarchy of effects, we act on the basis of our emotional 
reactions. The experiential perspective highlights the idea that intangible product attri-
butes, such as package design, advertising, brand names, and the nature of the setting in 
which the experience occurs, can help shape our attitudes toward a brand. We may base 
these reactions on hedonic motivations, such as whether using the product is exciting like 
the Nintendo Wii or aesthetically pleasing like the Apple iPhone.
Even the emotions the communicator expresses have an impact. A smile is infec-
tious; in a process we term emotional contagion, messages that happy people deliver 
enhance our attitude toward the product.9 Numerous studies demonstrate that the 
mood a person is in when he or she sees or hears a marketing message influences how he 
or she will process the ad, the likelihood that he or she will remember the information he 
Figure 8.1 Three hIerArChIeS OF eFFeCTS
ATTITUDE
Based on
cognitive
information
processing
ATTITUDE
Based on
hedonic
consumption
ATTITUDE
Based on
behavioral
learning
processes
Cognition
Cognition
Behavior
Affect
Affect
Behavior
Cognition
Affect
Behavior
LOW INVOLVEMENT
HIGH INVOLVEMENT
EXPERIENTIAL

288 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
This ad for New York’s famous Smith & 
 Wollensky restaurant emphasizes that 
 marketers and others associated with a 
product or service are often more involved 
with it than are their customers.
Source: Courtesy of Smith & Wollensky Steak 
House.
Product design and other aesthetic  
attributes helps to influence attitudes when 
consumers choose on the basis of their 
emotional reactions.
Source: Rob Cousins/Alamy.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
289 
or she sees, and how he or she will feel about the advertised item and related products in 
the future.
Researchers continue to debate whether cognition and affect are independent or 
linked when we form attitudes based on hedonic consumption. The cognitive-affective 
model proposes that an emotional reaction is just the last step in a series of cognitive 
processes that follows sensory recognition of a stimulus and retrieval of information from 
memory that helps to categorize it. In contrast the independence hypothesis argues 
that affect and cognition are separate systems so that it’s not always necessary to have a 
cognition to elicit an emotional response. This perspective focuses more on the impact of 
aesthetic experiences as opposed to the consumption of products that provide primarily 
functional benefits. 10
how Do We Form Attitudes?
We all have lots of attitudes, and we don’t usually question how 
we got them. Certainly, you’re not born with the heartfelt convic-
tion that, say, Pepsi is better than Coke, or that emo music liberates 
the soul. From where do these attitudes come?
We form an attitude in several different ways, depending on the particular hierarchy 
of effects that operates. As we saw in Chapter 4, we simply may form an attitude toward a 
brand as a result of classical conditioning: A marketer repeatedly pairs an attitude object 
such as the Pepsi name with a catchy jingle (“You’re in the Pepsi Generation”). Or we can 
form an attitude because of instrumental conditioning: The marketer reinforces us when 
we consume the attitude object (e.g., you take a swig of Pepsi and it quenches your thirst). 
Finally, this learning can result from a complex cognitive process. For example, teenagers 
may model the behavior of friends and media endorsers, such as Beyoncé, who drink Pepsi 
because they believe that this will allow them to fit in with the desirable lifestyle that Pepsi 
commercials portray.
All Attitudes Are not Created equal
It’s important to distinguish among types of attitudes because not all form in the same 
way.11 One consumer may be highly brand-loyal; she has an enduring, deeply held positive 
attitude toward an attitude object, and it would be difficult to weaken this involvement. 
However, another woman may be a more fickle consumer: She may have a mildly positive 
attitude toward a product but be quite willing to abandon it when something better comes 
along. In this section, we’ll consider the differences between strongly and weakly held 
attitudes and briefly review some of the major theoretical perspectives researchers use to 
explain how attitudes form and relate to our other attitudes.
Consumers vary in their commitment to an attitude; the degree of commitment relates 
to their level of involvement with the attitude object (see Chapter 5).12 Let’s look at three 
(increasing) levels of commitment:
1 Compliance—At the lowest level of involvement, compliance, we form an attitude 
because it helps us to gain rewards or avoid punishment. This attitude is superficial; it 
is likely to change when others no longer monitor our behavior or when another op-
tion becomes available. You may drink Pepsi because the cafeteria sells it, and it is too 
much trouble to go elsewhere for a Coca-Cola.
2 Identification—Identification occurs when we form an attitude to conform to 
another person’s or group’s expectations. Advertising that depicts the dire social 
consequences when we choose some products over others relies on the tendency of 
consumers to imitate the behavior of desirable models (more on this in Chapter 11).
3 Internalization—At a high level of involvement we call internalization, deep-seated 
attitudes become part of our value system. These attitudes are difficult to change 
because they are so important to us. The infamous Coke debacle of the 1980s (still a 
OBjeCtive 8-3 
We form attitudes in 
several ways.

290 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
standard in marketing textbooks today) illustrates what can happen when a marketer 
messes with strongly held attitudes. In this case, Coca-Cola decided to change its flavor 
formula to meet the needs of younger consumers who often preferred a sweeter taste 
(more characteristic of Pepsi). The company conducted rigorous blind taste tests that 
showed people who didn’t know what brands they were drinking preferred the flavor 
of the new formula. Much to its surprise, when New Coke hit the shelves, the company 
faced a consumer revolt as die-hard Coke fans protested. This allegiance to Coke was ob-
viously more than a minor taste preference for these people; the brand was intertwined 
with their social identities and took on intense patriotic and nostalgic properties.
the Consistency Principle
Have you ever heard someone say, “Pepsi is my favorite soft drink. It 
tastes terrible,” or “I love my boyfriend. He’s the biggest idiot I’ve ever 
met”? Probably not (at least until the couple gets married!), because 
these beliefs or evaluations don’t go together. According to the 
principle of cognitive consistency, we value harmony among 
our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and a need to maintain uni-
formity among these elements motivates us. This desire means that, 
if necessary, we change our thoughts, feelings, or behaviors to make them consistent with 
other experiences. That boyfriend may slip up and act like a moron occasionally, but his girl-
friend (eventually) will find a way to forgive him—or dump him. The consistency principle is 
an important reminder that we don’t form our attitudes in a vacuum: A big factor is how well 
they fit with other, related attitudes we already hold.
We’ve already reviewed this phenomenon in Chapter 5, when we learned about the 
theory of cognitive dissonance. We saw there that when a person is confronted with incon-
sistencies among attitudes or behaviors, he or she will take some action to resolve this 
“dissonance”; perhaps he will change his or her attitude or modify his or her behavior to 
restore consistency. The theory has important ramifications for consumer behavior. We 
often confront situations in which there is some conflict between our attitudes toward a 
product or service and what we actually do or buy.13
According to the theory, our motivation to reduce the negative feelings of disso-
nance makes us find a way for our beliefs and feelings to fit together. The theory focuses 
on situations in which two cognitive elements clash. A cognitive element is something a 
person believes about himself or herself, a behavior he or she performs, or an observation 
about his or her surroundings. For example, the two cognitive elements “I know smoking 
cigarettes causes cancer” and “I smoke cigarettes” are dissonant with one another. This 
psychological inconsistency creates a feeling of discomfort that the smoker tries to reduce. 
The magnitude of dissonance depends on both the importance and number of dissonant 
elements.14 In other words, we’re more likely to observe dissonance in high-involvement 
situations where there is more pressure to reduce inconsistencies.
We reduce dissonance when we eliminate, add, or change elements. A person can 
stop smoking (eliminating), or remember Great-Aunt Sophie who smoked until the day 
she died at age 95 (adding). Alternatively, he or she might question the research that links 
cancer and smoking (changing), perhaps by believing industry-sponsored studies that try 
to refute this connection.
Dissonance theory can help to explain why evaluations of a product tend to increase after 
we buy the product. The cognitive element, “I made a stupid decision,” is dissonant with the 
element, “I am not a stupid person,” so we tend to find even more reasons to like something 
after it becomes ours. A classic study at a horse race demonstrated this postpurchase disso-
nance. Bettors evaluated their chosen horse more highly and were more confident of its suc-
cess after they placed a bet than before. Because the bettor financially commits to the choice, 
he or she reduces dissonance by elevating the attractiveness of the chosen alternative relative 
to the nonchosen ones.15 One implication of this phenomenon is that consumers actively 
seek support for their decisions so they can justify them; therefore, marketers should supply 
their customers with additional reinforcement after they purchase to bolster these decisions.
OBjeCtive 8-4 
A need to maintain 
consistency among 
all of our attitudinal 
components often 
motivates us to alter one 
or more of them.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
291 
Self-Perception theory
Do we always change our attitudes to be in line with our behavior because we’re motivated 
to reduce cognitive dissonance? Self-perception theory provides an alternative explana-
tion of dissonance effects.16 It assumes that we observe our own behavior to determine 
just what our attitudes are, much as we assume that we know what another person’s 
attitude is when we watch what he does. The theory states that we maintain consistency 
as we infer that we must have a positive attitude toward an object if we have bought or 
consumed it (assuming that we freely made this choice). Thus, you might say to yourself, 
“I guess I must be into Facebook pretty big time. I seem to spend half my life on it.”
As it gets increasingly difficult for cigarette 
smokers to indulge their habit in public 
places like offices, they have to work harder 
to reduce cognitive dissonance in order to 
justify the effort to continue this practice.
Source: Scott Griessel/Fotolia.

292 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Self-perception theory helps to explain the effectiveness of a strategy salespeople call 
the foot-in-the-door technique: They know that consumers are more likely to com-
ply with a big request if they agree to a smaller one first.17 The name for this technique 
comes from the old practice of door-to-door selling; salespeople learn to plant their foot 
in a door so the prospect doesn’t slam it on them. A good salesperson knows that he or 
she is more likely to get an order if he or she can persuade the customer to open the door 
and talk. By agreeing to do so, the customer signals that he or she is willing to listen to 
the salesperson’s pitch. Placing an order is consistent with the self-perception that “I’m 
the kind of person who is willing to buy something from a salesperson who knocks on my 
door.”18 Recent research also points to the possibility that when salespeople ask consum-
ers to make a series of choices, these decisions are cognitively demanding and deplete the 
resources the person has available to monitor his or her behavior. As a result, the target 
will opt for easier decisions down the road; in some cases, it may be easier just to comply 
with the request than to search for reasons why you shouldn’t.19
Social judgment theory
Social judgment theory also assumes that people assimilate new information about 
attitude objects in light of what they already know or feel.20 The initial attitude acts as a 
frame of reference, and we categorize new information in terms of this existing standard. 
Just as our decision that a box is heavy depends in part on the weight of other boxes we lift, 
we develop a subjective standard when we judge attitude objects.
One important aspect of the theory is that people differ in terms of the information 
they will find acceptable or unacceptable. They form latitudes of acceptance and 
rejection around an attitude standard. They will consider and evaluate ideas falling 
within the latitude favorably, but they are more likely to reject out of hand those that fall 
outside of this zone. People tend to perceive messages within their latitude of acceptance 
as more consistent with their position than those messages actually are. We call this exag-
geration an assimilation effect.
However, we tend to see messages that fall in our latitude of rejection as even more 
unacceptable than they actually are; this results in an exaggeration we call a contrast 
effect.21 As a person becomes more involved with an attitude object, his or her latitude of 
acceptance gets smaller. In other words, consumers accept fewer ideas farther from their 
own position and they tend to oppose even mildly divergent positions. Discriminating buy-
ers have smaller latitude of acceptance (e.g., “choosy mothers choose Jif peanut butter”). 
However, relatively uninvolved consumers consider a wider range of alternatives. They 
are less likely to be brand loyal and are more likely to switch brands.
Balance theory
Have you ever heard the expression, “Any friend of Joe’s is a friend of mine?” How 
about “My enemy’s enemy is my friend?” Balance theory considers how people per-
ceive relations among different attitude objects, and how they alter their attitudes so 
that these remain consistent (or “balanced”).22 One study even found that when a 
person observes two other individuals who are eating similar food, they assume they 
must be friends! 23
A balance theory perspective involves relations (always from the perceiver’s subjective 
point of view) among three elements, so we call the resulting attitude structures triads. 
Each triad contains (1) a person and his or her perceptions of (2) an attitude object and (3) 
some other person or object. The theory specifies that we want relations among elements 
in a triad to be harmonious. If they are unbalanced, this creates tension that we are moti-
vated to reduce by changing our perceptions to restore balance.
We link elements together in one of two ways: They can have either a unit relation, 
where we think that a person is somehow connected to an attitude object (something like 
a belief), or they can have a sentiment relation, where a person expresses liking or disliking 
for an attitude object. You might perceive that a dating couple has a positive sentiment 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
293 
A woman who dislikes men in earrings has 
to resolve a state of imbalance if she wants 
to date a guy who wears one.
Source: youngnova/123RF.
relation. On getting married, they will have a positive unit relation. If they get divorced, 
they sever the unit relation.
To see how balance theory might work, consider the following scenario:
●
●Kristin would like to date Dan, who is in her consumer behavior class. In balance 
theory terms, Kristin has a positive sentiment relation with Dan.
●
●One day, Dan shows up in class wearing an earring. Dan has a positive unit relation 
with the earring.
●
●Men who wear earrings are a turnoff to Kristin. She has a negative sentiment relation 
with men’s earrings.

294 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
According to balance theory, Kristin faces an unbalanced triad. As Figure 8.2 shows, 
she will experience pressure to restore balance by altering some aspect of the triad. How 
can she do this? She could decide that she does not like Dan after all. Or her liking for Dan 
could prompt her to decide that earrings on men are really pretty cool. She might even try 
to negate the unit relation between Dan and the earring by deciding that he must wear it 
as part of a fraternity initiation (this reduces the free-choice element). Finally, she could 
choose to “leave the field” by accepting a date with Dan’s roommate Doug who doesn’t 
wear an earring (but who has an awesome tattoo). Note that although the theory does not 
specify which of these routes Kristin will choose, it does predict that she will change one 
or more of her perceptions to achieve balance. Although this example is an oversimpli-
fied representation of most attitude processes, it helps to explain a number of consumer 
behavior phenomena.
Balance theory reminds us that when we have balanced perceptions, our attitudes 
also are likely to be stable. However, when we experience inconsistencies, we also are more 
likely to change our attitudes. Balance theory helps explain why consumers like to be 
linked to positively valued objects. When you form a unit relation with a popular product 
(e.g., you wear a popular designer’s clothing, drive a hot car, or follow a popular singer), 
this may improve the chances that other people will include you as a positive sentiment 
relation in their triads.
At the college level, many schools in addition to ASU reap huge revenues when they 
license their school’s name and logo. Universities with strong athletic programs, such as 
Michigan State, Miami, and Auburn, clean up when they sell millions of dollars worth 
of merchandise (everything from T-shirts to toilet seats). Yale was a relative latecomer to 
this game, but the director of licensing explained the decision to profit from the use of the 
school’s name and the likeness of bulldog mascot Handsome Dan: “We recognize that our 
name means a lot—even to people who didn’t go here. Plus, this way we can crack down 
on the Naked Coed Lacrosse shirts out there with Yale on them.”25
Figure 8.2 BAlANCe TheOrY
Kristin
   Dan 
 
Earring
Kristin
   Dan 
 
Earring
Kristin
UNBALANCED TRIAD
   Dan                       Earring
Kristin
   Dan 
 
Earring
Consumers often like to 
publicize their connections 
with successful people or 
organizations (no matter 
how shaky the connection) 
to enhance their own standing. researchers 
call this tactic basking in reflected glory. A 
series of studies at Arizona State University 
(ASU) showed how students’ desires to iden-
tify with a winning image—in this case, ASU’s 
football team—influenced their consumption 
behaviors. After the team played a game each 
weekend, observers recorded the incidence 
of school-related items, such as ASU T-shirts 
and caps that students walking around cam-
pus wore. The researchers correlated the 
frequency of these behaviors to the team’s 
performance. If the team won on Saturday, 
students were more likely to show off their 
school affiliation (basking in reflected glory) 
the following Monday than if the team lost. 
And the bigger the point spread, the more 
likely they were to observe students who wore 
clothes with the ASU logo.24
  Marketing Opportunity

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
295 
When a school’s team wins a game, students 
(and fans) are more likely to wear merchan-
dise that link them to the institution as they 
“bask in reflected glory.”
Source: Rose-Marie Murray/Alamy.
My research with Jim Bettman 
explores how celebrity endorsement 
works, focusing on the symbolic 
meanings associated with celebrities, 
and how that meaning can be linked to 
brands. We believe that people engage 
in consumption (at least in part) to 
create themselves and communicate 
aspects about themselves to others. 
For example, consumers may 
communicate who they are by the 
car they drive. You probably think 
that someone who drives a Prius is 
different from a person who drives a 
Mercedes. Why is that? It’s because 
there are different symbolic meanings 
associated with the two brands. Prius 
is a hybrid, so the driver is likely 
concerned about the environment. 
Mercedes are expensive, so the driver 
is likely to be wealthy.
Marketers spend a lot of time (and 
money!) developing unique images for 
their brands. Celebrity endorsement 
is one way for marketers to connect 
symbolic meanings to the image of 
their brand. Celebrities often personify 
various characteristics that may 
be useful to consumers when they 
construct and communicate their 
self-concepts, such as being stylish, 
rugged, smart, sexy, successful, or 
even rebellious.
Consumers do not look 
to all celebrities for meaning 
indiscriminately. They are more likely 
to accept meanings from brands 
associated with a celebrity who 
represents either who they are or 
who they would like to be, and to 
reject meanings associated with a 
celebrity who represents either who 
they are not or who they would not 
like to become. Furthermore, for a 
celebrity endorsement to work well, 
there should be a match between the 
celebrity image and the brand image. 
It doesn’t make sense for former 
President George W. Bush to endorse 
Urban Outfitters.
Our studies show that when self-
concept construction is especially 
important, celebrity endorsements 
have a stronger effect. We look at 
settings where consumers’ identities 
are compromised by such factors 
as low self-esteem, loneliness, 
or stress, which create a liminal 
state where self-identity needs 
to be reconstructed. We find that 
consumers with low self-esteem 
respond favorably to advertisements 
that feature aspirational celebrities 
that the consumer wishes to be more 
like. We believe these consumers 
use the celebrity’s image, which is 
associated with the brand, to build 
their own self-esteem. We also find 
that lonely consumers and consumers 
experiencing high levels of stress 
respond more favorably to brands 
advertised with a celebrity endorser 
who they like. Thus, we find that 
celebrity endorsement can serve a 
therapeutic function for consumers 
with compromised identities by 
providing useful symbolic meanings for 
self-identity construction.
CB AS i See it
Jennifer Escalas, Vanderbilt University
Do you have a favorite celebrity? 
One whom you follow on Twitter or 
Instagram? If that celebrity uses a 
particular brand, would you buy it? Kim 
Kardashian receives ten thousand 
dollars to tweet about a product. 
Abercrombie and Fitch paid Jersey Shore 
stars not to wear their products on the 
reality television show. Companies like 
Adly.com offer thousands of celebrities 
endorsement deals on social media; 
they utilize stars like Katy Perry, Justin 
Bieber, and Taylor Swift, who combined 
have nearly 200 million Twitter 
followers.

296 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
This “balancing act” is at the heart of celebrity endorsements, in which marketers 
hope that the star’s popularity will transfer to the product or when a nonprofit organiza-
tion recruits a celebrity to discourage harmful behaviors.26 We will consider this strategy 
at length later in this chapter. For now, it pays to remember that creating a unit relation 
between a product and a star can backfire if the public’s opinion of the celebrity endorser 
shifts from positive to negative. For example, Pepsi pulled an ad that featured Madonna after 
she released a controversial music video involving religion and sex; it also happened when 
celebrity bad girl Paris Hilton got busted. The strategy can also cause trouble if people ques-
tion the star–product unit relation: This occurred when the late singer Michael Jackson, who 
also did promotions for Pepsi, subsequently confessed that he didn’t even drink soda.
Attitude Models
When market researchers want to assess consumers’ attitudes 
toward beer brands, they might simply go to a bar and ask a 
bunch of guys, “How do you feel about Budweiser?” However, 
as we saw previously, attitudes can be a lot more complex than 
that. One problem is that many attributes or qualities may 
link to a product or service; depending on the individual, some 
of these will be more or less important (“Less filling!” “Tastes 
great!”). Another problem is that when a person decides to 
take action toward an attitude object, other factors influence his or her behavior, such as 
whether he or she feels that his family or friends would approve. Attitude models specify 
the different elements that might work together to influence people’s evaluations of atti-
tude objects.
Multiattribute Attitude Models
A simple response does not always tell us everything we need to know, either about why 
the consumer feels a certain way toward a product or about what marketers can do to 
change her attitude. Our beliefs (accurate or not) about a product often are key to how 
we evaluate it. Warner-Lambert discovered this when it conducted research for its Fresh 
Burst Listerine mouthwash. A research firm paid families so it could set up cameras in 
their bathrooms and watch their daily routines (maybe they should have just checked 
out YouTube). Participants who bought both Fresh Burst and rival Scope said they used 
mouthwash to make their breath smell good. But Scope users swished around the liquid 
and then spit it out, whereas Listerine users kept the product in their mouths for a long 
time (one respondent held the stuff in until he got in the car and finally spit it out in a 
sewer a block away!). These findings told Listerine that the brand still hadn’t shaken its 
medicine-like image.27
Because attitudes are so complex, marketing researchers may use multiattribute 
attitude models to understand them. This type of model assumes that consumers’ atti-
tude toward an attitude object (Ao) depends on the beliefs they have about several of its 
attributes. When we use a multiattribute model, we assume that we can identify these spe-
cific beliefs and combine them to derive a measure of the consumer’s overall attitude. We’ll 
describe how these models work with the example of a consumer who evaluates a complex 
attitude object that should be familiar to you: a college.
Basic multiattribute models contain three specific elements:28
●
●Attributes are characteristics of the Ao. A researcher tries to identify the attributes that 
most consumers use when they evaluate the Ao. For example, one of a college’s attri-
butes is its scholarly reputation.
●
●Beliefs are cognitions about the specific Ao (usually relative to others like it). A belief 
measure assesses the extent to which the consumer perceives that a brand possesses a 
particular attribute. For example, a student might believe that the University of North 
Carolina is strong academically (or maybe this is consistency theory at work because 
your humble author went to graduate school there!).
OBjeCtive 8-5 
Attitude models identify 
specific components and 
combine them to predict 
a consumer’s overall 
attitude toward a product 
or brand.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
297 
●
●Importance weights reflect the relative priority of an attribute to the consumer. 
Although people might consider an Ao on a number of attributes, some attributes are 
likely to be more important than others (i.e., consumers will give them greater weight). 
Furthermore, these weights are likely to differ across consumers. In the case of col-
leges and universities, for example, one student might stress research opportunities, 
whereas another might assign greater weight to athletic programs.
The most influential multiattribute model is called the Fishbein Model, named after 
its primary developer.29 The model measures three components of attitude:
●
●Salient beliefs people have about an Ao (i.e., those beliefs about the object a person con-
siders during evaluation).
●
●Object-attribute linkages, or the probability that a particular object has an important 
attribute.
●
●Evaluation of each of the important attributes.
When we combine these three elements, we compute a consumer’s overall attitude 
toward an object (we’ll see later how researchers modify this equation to increase its accu-
racy). The basic formula is:
Ajk = ΣbijkIik
where
i = attribute
j = brand
k = consumer
I = the importance weight given attribute i by consumer k
b = consumer k’s belief regarding the extent to which brand j possesses attribute i
A = a particular consumer’s (k’s) attitude score for brand j
We obtain the overall attitude score (A) when we multiply consumers’ rating of each attri-
bute for all the brands they considered by the importance rating for that attribute.
To see how this basic multiattribute model works, let’s suppose we want to predict 
which college our friend Saundra from the beginning of the chapter is likely to attend. 
After months of waiting anxiously, Saundra gets accepted to four schools. Because she 
must now decide among these, we would first like to know which attributes Saundra will 
consider when she forms an attitude toward each school. We can then ask Saundra to 
assign a rating regarding how well each school performs on each attribute and also deter-
mine the relative importance of the attributes to her.
By summing scores on each attribute (after we weight each by its relative impor-
tance), we compute an overall attitude score for each school. Table 8.1 shows these 
hypothetical ratings. Based on this analysis, it seems that Saundra has the most favor-
able attitude toward Smith. She is clearly someone who would like to attend a college for 
women with a solid academic reputation rather than a school that offers a strong athletic 
program or a party atmosphere.
Marketing Applications of the Multiattribute Model
Suppose you were the director of marketing for Northland College, another school 
Saundra considered. How might you use the data from this analysis to improve your 
image?
Capitalize on relative Advantage. If prospective students view one brand as superior 
on a particular attribute, a marketer needs to convince consumers like Saundra that this 
particular attribute is important. For example, although Saundra rates Northland’s social 
atmosphere highly, she does not believe this attribute is a valued aspect for a college. As 
Northland’s marketing director, you might emphasize the importance of an active social 

298 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
life, varied experiences, or even the development of future business contacts that a student 
forges when he or she makes strong college friendships.
Strengthen Perceived Product/Attribute Linkages. A marketer may discover that con-
sumers do not equate his brand with a certain attribute. Advertising campaigns often 
address this problem when they stress a specific quality to consumers (e.g., “new and 
improved”). Saundra apparently does not think much of Northland’s academic quality, 
athletic programs, or library facilities. You might develop an informational campaign to 
improve these perceptions (e.g., “little-known facts about Northland”).
Add a new Attribute. Product marketers frequently try to distinguish themselves from 
their competitors when they add a product feature. Northland College might try to empha-
size some unique aspect, such as a hands-on internship program for business majors that 
takes advantage of ties to the local community.
influence Competitors’ ratings. Finally, you can decrease your competitors’ higher rat-
ings with a comparative advertising strategy. In this case, you might publish an ad that lists 
the tuition rates of a number of area schools with which Northland compares favorably 
and emphasize the value for the money its students get.
Do Attitudes Predict Behavior?
Consumer researchers have used multiattribute models for many years, but a major problem 
plagues them: In many cases, a person’s attitude doesn’t predict behavior. In a classic demon-
stration of “do as I say, not as I do,” many studies report a low correlation between a person’s 
reported attitude toward something and actual behavior toward it. Some researchers are so 
discouraged that they question whether attitudes are of any use at all when we try to under-
stand behavior. Hence the popular expression, “the road to hell is paved with good intentions.”
In response, researchers tinkered with the Fishbein Model to improve its predictive abil-
ity. They call the newer version the theory of reasoned action.32 This model contains sev-
eral important additions to the original, and although the model is still not perfect, it does a 
better job of prediction.33 Let’s look at some of the modifications to this model.
intentions versus Behavior
Attitudes possess both direction and strength. A person may like or dislike an attitude 
object with varying degrees of confidence or conviction. It is helpful to distinguish between 
tABLe 8.1   The Basic Multiattribute Model: Saundra’s College Decision
Beliefs (B)
Attribute (i)
importance (I)
Smith
Princeton
rutgers
northland
Academic reputation
6
8
9
6
3
All women
7
9
3
3
3
Cost
4
2
2
6
9
Proximity to home
3
2
2
6
9
Athletics
1
1
2
5
1
Party atmosphere
2
1
3
7
9
library facilities
5
7
9
7
2
Attitude score
163
142
153
131
  Marketing Pitfall
The (in)consistency be-
tween attitudes and behav-
ior links to a major public 
health problem: medica-
tion adherence. This term 
describes the extent to which people fill and 
actually take prescribed medicines. Although 
some patients unfortunately don’t  adhere to 
prescriptions because they can’t  afford them, 
many simply forget to swallow their pills. This 
breakdown between attitudes and behavior 
threatens many people’s health and it also 
adds huge costs to the healthcare system. An 
industry study estimates it costs U.S. taxpay-
ers $290 billion annually.30 The CVS chain 
found that even for chronic diseases, one-
third of their customers stopped taking their 
prescribed medicine after a month, and half 
stopped after a year. CVS aggressively reminds 
people to fill their prescriptions with texts,  
e-mails, and phone calls.31 Still, even these 
methods are only part of the solution: People 
still need to actually take the pills once they 
get them home.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
299 
Marketers focus on how a product’s 
 attributes are “new and improved” when 
they want to strengthen the linkage to a 
quality they think consumers desire.
Source: Balint Radu/Fotolia.
attitudes we hold firmly and those that are more superficial, especially because a person 
who holds an attitude with greater conviction is more likely to act on it. One study on 
environmental issues and marketing activities found, for example, that people who express 
greater conviction in their feelings regarding environmentally responsible behaviors such 
as recycling show greater consistency between attitudes and behavioral intentions.34
Social pressure also can help motivate consumers to engage in socially responsible 
behaviors. One study assessed this possibility when it compared the effectiveness of dif-
ferent ways a hotel might encourage guests to reuse their towels. When researchers used 
a social appeal (“the majority of guests reuse their towels”), this worked better than a 
functional appeal (“help save the environment”). They also found that compliance was 
boosted when they phrased the requests in terms of directly relevant others (“the majority 
of guests in this room reuse their towels”) compared to more general group appeals (“the 
majority of men and women reuse their towels”).35 As this example illustrates, the theory 
acknowledges the power of other people to influence what we do. Much as we may hate to 
admit it, what we think others would like us to do may override our own preferences. Thus, 
normative influence can result in a contradiction between what we say we will do and 
what we actually do when the moment of truth arrives.
Let’s take a closer look at Saundra’s college choice. You saw in Table 8.1 that she 
was eager to attend a predominantly female school. However, if she felt that this choice 
would be unpopular (perhaps her friends would think she was too nerdy), she might 
ignore or downgrade this preference when she made her decision. Researchers added a 
new element, the subjective norm (SN), to account for the effects of what we believe 
other people think we should do. They use two factors to measure SN: (1) the intensity of 
a normative belief (NB) that others believe we should take or not take some action and (2) 
the motivation to comply (MC) with that belief (i.e., the degree to which the consumer takes 
others’ anticipated reactions into account when she evaluates a purchase).

300 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
The newer model also measures attitude toward the act of buying (Aact), rather than 
only the attitude toward the product itself. In other words, it focuses on the perceived conse-
quences of a purchase. Knowing how someone feels about buying or using an object turns out 
to be more valid than merely knowing the consumer’s evaluation of the object itself.36
To understand this distinction, consider a marketing researcher who wants to mea-
sure college students’ attitudes toward safe sex and wearing condoms. Although many 
college students interviewed would probably report a positive attitude toward condom use, 
can the researcher conclude from the responses that these respondents will actually buy 
and use them? The researcher might get more accurate results if the same students were 
asked how likely they are to buy condoms. A person might have a positive Ao toward con-
doms, but Aact (attitude toward the act of obtaining the attitude object) might be negative 
because of the embarrassment or the hassle involved.
Obstacles to Predicting Behavior in the theory of reasoned Action
Despite improvements to the Fishbein Model, problems arise when researchers misapply 
it. As our discussion about measuring personality traits in Chapter 7 showed, sometimes 
researchers use a model in ways it was not intended or where certain assumptions about 
human behavior may not be warranted.37 Here are some other obstacles to prediction 
researchers encounter:
●
●The model tries to predict actual behavior (e.g., taking a diet pill), not the outcomes of 
behavior that some studies assess (e.g., losing weight).
●
●Some outcomes are beyond our control, such as when the purchase requires the coop-
eration of other people. For instance, a woman might want to get a mortgage, but this 
intention will be worthless if she cannot find a banker to give her one.
This Vietnamese ad employs social pressure 
(the subjective norm) to address people’s 
attitudes toward wearing helmets.
Source: Asia Injury Prevention Foundation.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
301 
●
●The basic assumption that behavior is intentional may be invalid in a variety of 
cases, including impulsive acts, sudden changes in situation, novelty seeking, or even 
simple repeat buying. One study found that such unexpected events as having guests, 
changes in the weather, or reading articles about the healthfulness of certain foods 
significantly affected actual behaviors.38
●
●Measures of attitude often do not really correspond to the behavior they are supposed 
to predict, either in terms of the Ao or when the act will occur. One common problem 
is a difference in the level of abstraction researchers employ. For example, knowing a 
person’s attitude toward sports cars may not predict whether he or she will purchase a 
BMW Z3. It is important to match the level of specificity between the attitude and the 
behavioral intention.
●
●A similar problem relates to the time frame of the attitude measure. In general, the 
longer the time between the attitude measurement and the behavior it is supposed to 
assess, the weaker the relationship will be. For example, predictability improves greatly 
if we ask a consumer the likelihood that he or she will buy a house in the next week as 
opposed to within the next 5 years.
●
●We form stronger and more predictive attitudes through direct, personal experience 
with an Ao than those we form indirectly through advertising.39 According to the at-
titude accessibility perspective, behavior is a function of the person’s immediate 
perceptions of the Ao, in the context of the situation in which he or she encounters 
it. An attitude will guide the evaluation of the object but only if a person’s memory 
activates it when he or she encounters the object. These findings underscore the 
importance of strategies that induce trials (e.g., by widespread product sampling to 
encourage the consumer to try the product at home, taste tests in grocery stores, 
test drives at car dealers, etc.) as well as those that maximize exposure to marketing 
communications.
In addition, most researchers apply the theory of reasoned action in Western settings. 
Certain assumptions inherent in the model may not necessarily apply to consumers from 
other cultures. Several cultural roadblocks diminish the universality of the theory of rea-
soned action:40
●
●The model predicts the performance of a voluntary act. Across cultures, however, 
many activities, ranging from taking exams and entering military service to re-
ceiving an inoculation or even choosing a marriage partner, are not necessarily 
voluntary.
●
●The relative impact of subjective norms may vary across cultures. For example, Asian 
cultures tend to value conformity and “face saving,” so it is possible that subjective 
norms involving the anticipated reactions of others to the choice will have an even 
greater impact on behavior for many Asian consumers. Indeed, a study conducted 
during an election in Singapore successfully predicted how people would vote as it as-
sessed their voting intentions beforehand. These intentions were in turn influenced by 
such factors as voters’ attitudes toward the candidate, attitudes toward the political 
party, and subjective norms, which in Singapore includes an emphasis on harmonious 
and close ties among members of the society.
●
●The model measures behavioral intentions and thus presupposes that consumers are 
actively thinking ahead and planning future behaviors. The intention concept as-
sumes that consumers have a linear time sense; they think in terms of past, present, 
and future. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 10, not all cultures subscribe to this perspec-
tive on time.
●
●A consumer who forms an intention implicitly claims that he or she is in control 
of  his or her actions. Some cultures (e.g., Muslim peoples) tend to be fatalistic 
and do not necessarily believe in the concept of  free will. Indeed, one study that 
compared students from the United States, Jordan, and Thailand found evidence 
for cultural differences in assumptions about fatalism and control over the 
future.

302 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
trying to Consume
Other theorists propose different perspectives on the attitude–behavior connection. For 
example, the multiple pathway anchoring and adjustment (MPAA) model empha-
sizes multiple pathways to attitude formation, including outside-in (object-centered) and 
inside-out (person-centered) pathways.41
Another perspective tries to address some of these problems because it focuses instead 
on consumers’ goals and what they believe they have to do to attain them. The theory 
of trying states that we should replace the criterion of behavior in the reasoned action 
model with trying to reach a goal. As Figure 8.3 shows, this perspective recognizes that 
additional factors might intervene between intent and performance—both personal and 
environmental barriers might prevent the individual from attaining the goal. For example, 
a person who intends to lose weight may have to deal with numerous issues: He may not 
believe he is capable of slimming down, he may have a roommate who loves to cook and 
who leaves tempting goodies lying around the apartment, his friends may be jealous of his 
attempts to diet and encourage him to pig out, or he may be genetically predisposed to obe-
sity and cutting down on calories simply will not produce the desired results.42
Persuasion: how Do Marketers Change Attitudes?
BUY NOW! Advertisers constantly bombard us with messages imploring us to change our 
attitudes—and of course buy their products. These persuasion attempts can range from 
logical arguments to graphic pictures, from peers who try to intimidate us to celebrities 
who try to charm us. Now we’ll review some of the factors that help gauge the effective-
ness of marketing communications. Our focus will be on some basic aspects of communi-
cation that specifically help to determine how and if consumers will form new attitudes or 
modify existing ones.
Persuasion involves an active attempt to change attitudes. This is of course job 
number 1 for many marketing communications. Later we’ll learn more about how mar-
keters try to accomplish this, but for now we’ll set the stage by listing some basic psycho-
logical principles that influence people to change their minds or comply with a request:43
Figure 8.3 TheOrY OF TrYINg
biei
Attitude toward
success
Expectation of
success
bjej
Attitude toward
failure
Attitude toward
trying
Social norm
toward trying
Recency of
past trying
Intention
to try
Trying
Expectation of
failure
bkek
Attitude toward
process
Frequency of
past trying

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
303 
●
●Reciprocity—We are more likely to give if first we receive. That’s why including 
money in a mail survey questionnaire (in some cases, as little as a nickel or dime) in-
creases the response rate compared to surveys that come without financial incentives 
in the envelope.
●
●Scarcity—Like people, items are more attractive when they aren’t available. In 
one study, researchers asked people to rate the quality of chocolate chip cookies. 
Participants who only got one cookie liked them better than did those who evaluated 
more of the same kind of cookie. That helps explain why we tend to value “limited-
edition” items.
●
●Authority—We believe an authoritative source much more readily than one that is 
less authoritative. That explains why the U.S. public’s opinion on an issue can shift by 
as much as 2 percent when the New York Times (but not the National Enquirer) runs an 
article about it.
●
●Consistency—As we saw previously in this chapter, people try not to contradict 
themselves in terms of what they say and do about an issue. In one study, students 
at an Israeli university who solicited donations to help disabled people doubled the 
amount they normally collected in a neighborhood if they first asked the residents 
to sign a petition supporting this cause 2 weeks before they actually asked for the 
donations.
●
●Liking—We agree with those we like or admire. A study found that good-looking 
fund-raisers raised almost twice as much as other volunteers who were not as 
attractive.
●
●Consensus—We consider what others do before we decide what to do. People are 
more likely to donate to a charity if they first see a list of the names of their neighbors 
who have already done so.
Decisions, Decisions: tactical Communications Options
Suppose Audi wants to create an advertising campaign for a new ragtop it targets to young 
drivers. As it plans this campaign, the automaker must develop a message that will arouse 
desire for the car. To craft persuasive messages that might persuade someone to buy this 
car instead of the many others available, we must answer several questions:
●
●Who will drive the car in the ad? A NASCAR driver? A career woman? A reality show 
star? The source of a message helps determine whether consumers will accept it.
●
●How should we construct the message? Should it emphasize the negative conse-
quences of being left out when others drive cool cars and you still tool around in your 
old clunker? Should it directly compare the car with others already on the market, or 
maybe present a fantasy in which a tough-minded female executive meets a dashing 
stranger while she cruises down the highway in her Audi?
Scarcity makes products more desirable.
Source: carmenbobo/Fotolia.

304 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
●
●What media should we use? Should the ad run in a magazine? Should we air it on TV? 
Sell the product door-to-door? Post the material on a Web site or create a Facebook 
group? Convince bloggers to write about it? Reward shoppers who check in on 
Foursquare at an Audi dealership? If we do produce a print ad, should we run it in the 
pages of Vogue? Good Housekeeping? Car and Driver? Sometimes where you say some-
thing is as important as what you say. Ideally, we should match the attributes of the 
medium with those of what we sell. For example, advertising in magazines with high 
prestige is more effective when we want to communicate messages about overall prod-
uct image and quality, whereas specialized expert magazines do a better job when we 
want to convey factual information.44
●
●What characteristics of the target market might lead its members to accept the ad? If 
targeted users are frustrated in their daily lives, they might be more receptive to a fan-
tasy appeal. If they’re status-oriented, maybe a commercial should show bystanders 
who swoon with admiration as the car cruises by.
the elements of Communication
Marketers traditionally rely on the communications model in 
Figure 8.4. This model specifies the elements they need to control 
to communicate with their customers. One of these is a source, 
where the communication originates. Another is the message 
itself. There are many ways to say something, and the structure 
of the message has a significant effect on how we perceive it. We 
must transmit the message via a medium, which could be TV, radio, 
magazines, billboards, personal contact, or even a matchbook 
cover. One or more receivers interpret the message in light of their 
own experiences. Finally, the source receives feedback so that the marketer can use receiv-
ers’ reactions to modify aspects of the message as necessary.
An Updated view: interactive Communications
The traditional communications model is not entirely wrong, but it also doesn’t tell the 
whole story—especially in today’s dynamic world of interactivity, where consumers have 
many more choices available to them and greater control over which messages they choose 
to process.45
In fact, the popular strategy we call permission marketing acknowledges that a 
marketer will be more successful when he or she communicates with consumers who have 
already agreed to listen to him or her; consumers who “opt out” of listening to the message 
probably weren’t good prospects in the first place.46 In contrast, those who say they want 
to learn more are likely to be receptive to marketing communications they have chosen to 
see or hear. As the permission marketing concept reminds us, we don’t have to simply sit 
Figure 8.4 The TrADITIONAl COMMUNICATIONS MODel
FEEDBACK
Source
Message
Consumer
Consumer
Consumer
Consumer
Consumer
Medium
OBjeCtive 8-6 
The communications 
model identifies several 
important components 
for marketers when they 
try to change consumers’ 
attitudes toward products 
and services.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
305 
there and take it. We have a voice in deciding what messages we choose to see and when, 
and we exercise that option more and more.
Social scientists developed the traditional model to understand mass communica-
tions in which a source transmits information to many receivers at one time—typically 
via a broadcast medium such as television. This perspective essentially views advertising 
as the process of transferring information to the buyer before a sale. It regards a message 
as perishable—the marketer repeats the same message to a large audience and then the 
message “vanishes” when a new campaign takes its place. As we’ll see, that model doesn’t 
work as well now that we can narrowcast, or finely tune our messages to suit small groups 
of receivers (sometimes even one person at a time).
How long has it been since you posted to your Facebook 
page? Exciting technological and social developments make us 
rethink the picture of passive consumers as people increasingly 
play more proactive roles in communications. In other words, we 
are to a greater extent partners—rather than couch potatoes—in 
the communications process. Our input helps to shape the mes-
sages we and others like us receive; furthermore, we may seek out 
these messages rather than sit home and wait to see them on TV 
or in the paper. For example, the popular social media platform 
Pinterest allows users to create digital scrapbooks, but in the 
process it serves as a voyage of discovery as people pull images from many sources (often 
other users’ Boards). This kind of new medium allows consumers to “dream out loud” and 
also guide one another toward many new styles and brands.47 Figure 8.5 illustrates this 
updated approach to interactive communications.
One of the early instigators of this communications revolution was the humble 
handheld remote control device. As VCRs (remember them?) began to be commonplace in 
homes, suddenly consumers had more input into what they wanted to watch—and when. 
No longer did the TV networks decide when we could watch our favorite shows, and we 
didn’t have to miss the new episode of Hawaii Five-O because it was on at the same time as 
the Bears game.
Since that time, of course, our ability to control our media environment has mush-
roomed. Just ask some of the millions of us who use digital video recorders (DVRs) such 
as TiVo to watch TV shows whenever we wish—and who blithely skip over the commer-
cials.48 Many others have access to video-on-demand or pay-per-view TV. Home-shopping 
networks encourage us to call in and discuss our passion for cubic zirconium jewelry live 
When consumers opt-in to receive 
 information from an organization they are 
more likely to pay attention to it when a 
message arrives.
Source: LiliWhite/Fotolia.
OBjeCtive 8-7 
The consumer who 
processes a message is 
not the passive receiver 
of information marketers 
once believed him or her 
to be.

306 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
on the air. Caller ID devices and answering machines allow us to decide if we will accept 
a phone call during dinner and to know if a telemarketer lurks on the other end before we 
pick up the phone. A bit of Web surfing allows us to identify kindred spirits around the 
globe, to request information about products, and even to provide suggestions to product 
designers and market researchers.
the Source
Regardless of whether we receive a message by “snail mail” (net-
heads’ slang for the postal service), email, or SMS text, common 
sense tells us that if different people say or write the same words, 
the message can still affect us differently. Researchers have dis-
cussed the power of source effects for more than 60 years. When we 
attribute the same message to different sources and measure the degree of attitude change 
that occurs after listeners hear it, we can isolate which characteristics of a communicator 
cause attitude change.49
Under most conditions, the source of a message can have a big impact on the likeli-
hood that receivers will accept it. Marketers can choose a spokesperson because she is an 
expert, attractive, famous, or even a “typical” consumer who is both likable and trustwor-
thy. Credibility and attractiveness are two particularly important source characteristics (i.e., 
how much we either believe or like the communicator).50
How do marketing specialists decide whether to stress credibility or attractiveness 
when they select a message source? There should be a match between the needs of the 
recipient and the potential rewards the source offers. When this match occurs, the recipi-
ent is more motivated to process the message. An attractive source, for example, is more 
effective for receivers who tend to be sensitive about social acceptance and others’ opin-
ions, whereas a credible, expert source is more powerful when she speaks to internally 
oriented people.51 However, even a credible source’s trustworthiness evaporates if she 
endorses too many products.52
The choice may also depend on the type of product. A positive source can reduce risk 
and increase message acceptance overall, but particular types of sources are more effective 
to reduce different kinds of risk. Experts excel when we want to change attitudes toward util-
itarian products that have high performance risk, such as vacuums, because they are com-
plex and may not work as we expect. Celebrities work better when they focus on products 
such as jewelry and furniture that have high social risk, where the users are more concerned 
about the impression others have of them. Finally, “typical” consumers, who are appealing 
sources because of their similarity to the recipient, tend to be most effective when they pro-
vide real-life endorsements for everyday products that are low risk, such as cookies.53
Source Credibility
Source credibility refers to a communicator’s expertise, objectivity, or trustworthiness. 
This dimension relates to consumers’ beliefs that this person is competent and that he or 
she will provide the necessary information we need when we evaluate competing products.
Communication
Medium
Receiver
Receiver
Sender
Sender
Receiver
Sender
Figure 8.5 AN UPDATeD COMMUNICATIONS MODel
OBjeCtive 8-8 
Several factors influence 
the effectiveness of a 
message source.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
307 
A credible source is particularly persuasive when the consumer has yet to learn much 
about a product or form an opinion of it.54 Indeed, a study demonstrated that simply let-
ting consumers know a firm is profitable leads them to put more stock in what the company 
says in its advertising.55 On the other hand, some subtle cues can diminish credibility: 
Consider for example those super fast disclaimers you often hear at the end of a com-
mercial message that supply additional information the advertiser is required to provide 
(“possible side effects may include nausea, diarrhea, or death”). Although people tend to 
assume that people who speak faster are more intelligent, they may trust them less. When 
consumers don’t already have a positive attitude toward a product, a fast-paced disclaimer 
leads them to think the advertiser has ulterior motives and they trust the company less.56
Sincerity is particularly important when a company tries to publicize its corporate 
social responsibility (CSR) activities that benefit the community. As we saw in Chapter 2, a 
company’s image can skyrocket when consumers believe it’s genuinely doing good things. 
But this effort can backfire if people question the organization’s motivations (e.g., if they 
think the firm spends more to talk about its good deeds than to actually do them).57 Not 
too surprisingly, people who see deceptive advertising experience a feeling of distrust that 
carries over to other messages from that source and even to other sources because they are 
more likely to assume that advertising in general is not credible—a true case of poisoning 
the well for other marketers!58
One widely used technique to generate credibility is to pay an expert or a celebrity 
to tout a product, but this kind of endorsement doesn’t come cheap. However, typically 
the investment is worth it simply because market analysts use the announcement of an 
endorsement contract to evaluate a firm’s potential profitability, which affects its expected 
return. On average, then, the impact of endorsements on stock returns appears to be so 
positive that it offsets the cost of hiring the spokesperson.59 Indeed, a study on the use of 
celebrities in marketing reported that ads containing a celebrity endorser produced 9.4 
percent higher consumer readership than ads without a celebrity endorser. In its analysis 
of almost 80,000 print ads, Starch Advertising Research concluded, “in terms of helping 
with the first task in … getting consumers to read your ad, these data show that a celebrity 
endorsement moves the readership needle.”60
The drawing power of famous people may even be “wired in”: One study found that 
compared to “ordinary” faces, our brains pay more attention to famous faces and more 
efficiently process information about these images.61 Celebrities increase awareness of a 
firm’s advertising and enhance both company image and brand attitudes.62 A celebrity 
endorsement strategy can be an effective way to differentiate among similar products. This 
is especially important when consumers do not perceive many actual differences among 
competitors, as often occurs when brands are in the mature stage of the product life cycle.
Although in general more positive sources tend to increase attitude change, there 
are exceptions to this rule. Sometimes we can think a source is obnoxious, yet it is still 
effective. A case in point is the irritating redhead in Wendy’s commercials who says “Now 
That’s Better.” In some instances the differences in attitude change between positive 
sources and less-positive sources become erased over time. After a while, people appear to 
“forget” about the negative source and change their attitudes anyway. We call this process 
the sleeper effect.63
The source effects issue has gained even more attention recently as a result of a hot 
trend in marketing known as native advertising. This term refers to digital messages 
designed to blend into the editorial content of the publications in which they appear. The 
idea is to capture the attention of people who might resist ad messages that pop up in the 
middle of an article or program. These messages may look a lot like a regular article, but 
they often link to a sponsor’s content. For example, native ads on Vanity Fair magazine’s 
Web site resemble editorial contributions complete with a byline, but the author is listed as 
“Vanity Fair Agenda.” An advertising executive commented, native ads “should not come 
across as anything that doesn’t belong. That is what we mean by native; it belongs.”64
A message’s credibility increases if receivers think the source’s qualifications are 
relevant to the product he or she endorses. This linkage can overcome other objections 
people may have to the endorser or the product. Ronald Biggs, whose claim to fame was 
In recent years we’ve 
witnessed a new attempt 
to manipulate attitudes 
that some call sock pup-
peting. This term de-
scribes a company executive or other biased 
source that poses as someone else as he or 
she touts the organization in social media. 
For example, it came to light that the CeO 
of Whole Foods had posted derogatory com-
ments about rival Wild Oats without revealing 
his true identity. More recently, a nonprofit 
research organization called giveWell that 
rates the effectiveness of charities had to 
discipline two of its founders who pretended 
to be other people on blogs and then re-
ferred people to the group’s Web site.65
Similar problems may dilute the cred-
ibility of Wikipedia, the open-source online 
encyclopedia that is beloved by many stu-
dents. Anyone can edit entries, so their 
reliability is not assured. Although other alert 
contributors may eventually correct false or 
self-serving entries, there is still room for 
organizations to color content in a way that 
serves their goals. For example, a visitor 
edited the Wikipedia entry for the SeaWorld 
theme parks to change all mentions of “or-
cas” to “killer whales”; he or she also de-
leted a paragraph that criticized SeaWorld’s 
“lack of respect toward its orcas.” It turns 
out the changes originated at a computer lo-
cated in Anheuser-Busch—the company that 
happens to own SeaWorld. An employee of 
PepsiCo deleted several paragraphs of the 
Pepsi entry that focused on its detrimental 
health effects, and a person at Walmart 
altered an entry about how the retailer pays 
its employees.
Another form of sock puppeting is so-
called paid influencer programs that attempt 
to start online conversations about brands 
when they encourage bloggers to write about 
them. These “sponsored conversations” can 
be effective, but again marketers need to be 
careful about the potential to distort source 
recommendations. Kmart awarded a shop-
ping spree to a group of bloggers who agreed 
to post about their experiences. Panasonic 
flew bloggers to the Consumer electronics 
Show in las Vegas, where they posted about 
the show and Panasonic products unveiled 
there. Mercedes gave a blogger use of an SUV 
for a week in exchange for posts about it.
  the tangled Web

308 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
his role in the Great Train Robbery in the United Kingdom, successfully served as a spokes-
man in Brazil for a company that makes door locks—a topic about which he is presumably 
knowledgeable!68
It’s important to note that what is credible to one consumer segment may be a turnoff 
to another. Indeed, rebellious or even deviant celebrities may be attractive to some simply 
for that reason. Tommy Hilfiger cultivated a rebellious, street-smart image when he used 
rappers Snoop Doggy Dogg—aka Snoop Dog, aka Snoop Lion, aka Snoopzilla—to help 
launch his clothing line and Coolio, a former crack addict and thief and Diddy (aka Puffy) 
as a runway model.69 Parents may not be thrilled by these message sources—but isn’t that 
the point? Charlie Sheen, please report to the studio ….
A consumer’s beliefs about a product’s attributes will weaken if he or she perceives 
that the source is biased.70 Knowledge bias implies that a source’s knowledge about a 
topic is not accurate. Reporting bias occurs when a source has the required knowledge 
but we question his or her willingness to convey it accurately—as when a racket manu-
facturer pays a star tennis player to use its products exclusively. The source’s credentials 
might be appropriate, but the fact that consumers see the expert as a “hired gun” compro-
mises believability.
Source Attractiveness: “What is Beautiful is Good”
A British dairy company enlisted Johnny Rotten, the lead singer of the Sex Pistols, to 
appear in a commercial (or advert, as they say in the United Kingdom) to promote its butter. 
Sales went up substantially when the punk legend plugged the product (rotten butter?).71 
Source attractiveness refers to the social value recipients attribute to a communicator. 
This value relates to the person’s physical appearance, personality, social status, or simi-
larity to the receiver (we like to listen to people who are like us). Our desire to know what  
our peers think helps to explain why both Facebook and Google now allow shared 
endorsements; users who follow or rate a product or service may find that their endorse-
ments show up on the advertiser’s page.72
Some sources like Johnny Rotten appeal to us because they are cool, brainy, or just 
plain famous. However, many simply are nice to look at. Almost everywhere we turn, 
beautiful people try to persuade us to buy or do something. As Chapter 6 showed us, our 
society places a high premium on physical attractiveness. We assume that good-looking 
people are smarter, hipper, and happier than the rest of us. This is an example of a halo 
effect, which occurs when we assume that persons who rank high on one dimension 
excel on others as well. We can explain this effect in terms of the consistency principle we 
discussed previously in this chapter; we are more comfortable when all of our judgments 
about a person correspond.
As a result, physically attractive people often get a boost in life because people assume 
they excel on other dimensions as well. Occasionally this halo effect can backfire if observ-
ers infer that someone has exploited their attractiveness (e.g. women who get labeled as 
“gold diggers”). One study found that good-looking children are less likely to get assistance 
from adults (at least for fairly mild problems) because people assume they are more compe-
tent and thus better able to help themselves. One implication of this work is that ironically 
charitable organizations may want to consider using less attractive kids as models to solicit 
donations!73 Note: Psychologists also refer to the opposite, forked-tail effect that describes 
our assumptions that an unattractive person also isn’t good at other things. There are a lot 
of angels and devils out there.
Star Power: Celebrities as Communications Sources
Celebrities hawk everything from grills (George Foreman) to perfumes (Jennifer Lopez). As 
our discussion about the consistency principle illustrates, these messages are more effective 
when there’s a logical connection between the star and the product. When Bob Dylan pitches 
Victoria’s Secret lingerie (yes, he really did), marketers may need to reread their consumer 
behavior textbook.74 Then again, teen idol Justin Bieber puts his name on almost everything …  
including nail polish!75
Marketing messages that consumers 
perceive as buzz (those that are authentic 
and consumer generated) tend to be more 
effective than those they categorize as hype 
(those that are inauthentic, biased, and com-
pany generated). however, the digital envi-
ronment makes it easier for a hype message 
to masquerade as buzz if the source does 
not disclose that it is in fact sponsored. The 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) toughened 
its stance on this problem in 2013, when the 
regulatory agency issued guidelines for orga-
nizations that advertise in digital media. For 
example, the FTC says, “required disclosures 
must be clear and conspicuous. In evaluating 
whether a disclosure is likely to be clear and 
conspicuous, advertisers should consider its 
placement in the ad and its proximity to the 
relevant claim. The closer the disclosure is to 
the claim to which it relates, the better.”66 The 
agency is trying to address abuses like the 
situation in which a the Pr firm for a video 
game developer had its own employees pose 
as consumers and post positive game reviews 
at the iTunes store.67

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
309 
Star power works because celebrities embody cultural meanings—they symbolize 
important categories like status and social class: A “working-class hero” (Mike of Mike 
& Molly), gender (the effeminate Cam on Modern Family), age (the youthful President 
Grant on Scandal), and even personality types (the nerdy Sheldon on The Big Bang Theory, 
cool Adam Levine on The Voice). Ideally, the advertiser decides what meanings the prod-
uct should convey (that is, how it should position the item in the marketplace) and then 
chooses a celebrity who embodies a similar meaning. The product’s meaning thus moves 
from the manufacturer to the consumer, using the star as a vehicle.76
nonhuman endorsers
A celebrity endorsement strategy has its drawbacks. As we previously noted, stars’ 
motives may be suspect if they plug products that don’t fit their images or if consum-
ers begin to believe the celebrities never met a product they didn’t like (for a fee). They 
may be involved in a scandal or deviate from a brand’s desired image—for example, 
the Milk Processor Education Program suspended “Got Milk?” ads featuring Mary-
Kate and Ashley Olsen after Mary-Kate entered a treatment facility for an undisclosed 
health issue.
For these reasons, some marketers seek alternative sources, including cartoon char-
acters and mascots. As the marketing director for a company that manufactures costumed 
Celebrities, major and minor, frequently 
serve as communications sources in  
advertisements, promotions and 
infomercials.
Source: Blend Images/Corbis.
  Marketing Pitfall
Celebrities (and their man-
agers) don’t necessarily 
jump at the chance to 
endorse just any product. 
After all, they have a brand 
image to protect as well. For years one popular 
strategy has been to film commercials overseas 
and stipulate that they are not to air at home. 
The practice is so widespread in Japan that it’s 
even got its own portmanteau word: Japander, 
a combination of Japanese and pandering, 
which describes a western star acting in Japan 
advertisements and endorsing products they 
are unlikely to use in order to make a large 
amount of money quickly. It also implies em-
barrassing oneself in Japanese media. Check 
out japander.com to see actors such as Arnold 
Schwarzenegger, george Clooney, and Jennifer 
Aniston in commercials they’d prefer their U.S. 
fans didn’t see.77

310 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
characters for sports teams and businesses points out, “You don’t have to worry about your 
mascot checking into rehab.”78 Researchers report that spokescharacters, such as the 
Pillsbury Doughboy, Chester Cheetah, and the GEICO Gecko, do, in fact, boost viewers’ recall 
of claims that ads make and also yield higher brand attitudes.79 Some of the most popular 
spokescharacters in recent years include Old Spice’s The Man Your Man Could Smell Like 
(played by former NFL athlete Isaiah Mustafa), Snoopy (who appears in commercials for 
MetLife), the talking M&Ms, Flo for Progressive insurance, and Allstate’s Mayhem Man.80
As we saw in Chapter 7, an avatar is one increasingly popular alternative to a flesh-and-
blood endorser. Avatar is a Hindu term for a deity that appears in superhuman or animal 
form. In the computing world, it means a character you can move around inside a visual, 
graphical world. Consumers who inhabit virtual worlds such as Second Life, Habbo Hotel, and 
The Sims design their avatars to reflect their own unique personalities, desires, and fantasies.
Spokescharacters boost the effectiveness of 
advertising claims.
Source: Pat Canova/Alamy.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
311 
The advantages of using virtual avatars compared to flesh-and-blood models include 
the ability to change the avatar in real time to suit the needs of the target audience. From 
an advertising perspective, they are likely to be more cost effective than hiring a real person. 
From personal-selling and customer-service perspectives, they handle multiple customers 
at one time, they are not geographically limited, and they are operational 24/7; therefore, 
they free up company employees and sales personnel to perform other activities.81
the Message
Subtle aspects of the way a source delivers a message can influence 
our interpretation of what he or she says. For example, if a source 
refers to the brand as “you,” “we,” or more abstractly “the brand” 
this changes how people feel about the product. A more intimate ref-
erence can bolster feelings about brands with whom the consumer 
has a positive relationship, but it can also be off-putting if it’s incon-
sistent with how the person feels about the product.82
Even the layout in a print ad sends a message about how the consumer should relate 
to the advertised item. A brand that wants customers to see it as a “friend” by depicting a 
model using it is more effective when the product image appears horizontally and near the 
model. On the other hand, if a brand wants customers to see it as a “leader” the advertiser 
will have better luck if it physically places the brand above the user and farther away “(it’s 
lonely at the top). 83
A major study of more than 1,000 commercials identified factors that determine 
whether a commercial message will be persuasive. The single most important feature: 
Does the communication stress a unique attribute or benefit of the product?84 Table 8.2 
lists some other good and bad elements of commercial messages.
Consumers may find commercials confusing, but what’s even worse is when we find them 
annoying. In a landmark study of irritating advertising, researchers examined more than 500 
prime-time network commercials that had registered negative reactions by consumers. The 
most irritating commercials were for feminine hygiene products, hemorrhoid medication or 
laxatives, and women’s underwear. The researchers identify these as prime offenders:
●
●The commercial shows a sensitive product (e.g., hemorrhoid medicine) and empha-
sizes its usage.
●
●The situation is contrived or overdramatized.
●
●A person is put down in terms of appearance, knowledge, or sophistication.
OBjeCtive 8-9 
The way a marketer 
structures his or her 
message determines how 
persuasive it will be.
tABLe 8.2   Characteristics of good and Bad Messages
Source: Adapted from David W. Stewart and David H. Furse, “The Effects of Television Advertising Execution on Recall, Comprehension, and Persuasion,” Psychology & Marketing 2 
(Fall 1985): 135–60. Copyright © 1985 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted by permission.
Positive effects
negative effects
Showing convenience of use
extensive information on components, ingredients, or nutrition
Showing new product or improved features
Outdoor setting (message gets lost)
Casting background (i.e., people are incidental to message)
large number of on-screen characters
Indirect comparison to other products
graphic displays
Demonstration of the product in use
Demonstration of tangible results (e.g., bouncy hair)
An actor playing the role of an ordinary person
No principal character (i.e., more time is devoted to the product)

312 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
●
●An important relationship, such as a marriage, is threatened.
●
●There is a graphic demonstration of physical discomfort.
●
●The commercial created uncomfortable tension because of an argument or an an-
tagonistic character.
●
●It portrays an unattractive or unsympathetic character.
●
●It includes a sexually suggestive scene.
●
●The commercial suffers from poor casting or execution.
Characteristics of the message itself help determine its impact on attitudes. These 
variables include how we say the message as well as what we say. Depending on the mar-
keter’s objectives and the nature of the product, different kinds of messages produce differ-
ent results. A marketer faces some crucial issues when she creates a message:
●
●Should the message be conveyed in words or pictures?
●
●How often should the message be repeated?
●
●Should the message draw a conclusion, or should this be left up to the listener?
●
●Should the message present both sides of an argument?
●
●Should the message explicitly compare the product to competitors?
●
●Should the message include a blatant sexual appeal?
●
●Should the message arouse negative emotions such as fear?
●
●How concrete or vivid should the arguments and imagery be?
●
●Should the message be funny?
Should We Use Pictures or Words?
The saying “One picture is worth a thousand words” captures the idea that visuals are 
effective, especially when the communicator wants to influence receivers’ emotional 
responses. For this reason, advertisers often rely on vivid illustrations or photography.85
However, a picture is not always as effective when it communicates factual informa-
tion. Ads that contain the same information elicit different reactions when the marketer 
presents them in visual versus verbal form. The verbal version affects ratings on the utili-
tarian aspects of a product, whereas the visual version affects aesthetic evaluations. Verbal 
elements are more effective when an accompanying picture reinforces them, especially if 
they frame the illustration (the message in the picture strongly relates to the copy).86
Because it requires more effort to process, a verbal message is most appropriate for 
high-involvement situations, such as print contexts where the reader really pays atten-
tion to the advertising. Verbal material decays more rapidly in memory, so these messages 
require more frequent exposures to obtain the desired effect. Visual images, in contrast, 
allow the receiver to chunk information at the time of encoding (see Chapter 4). Chunking 
results in a stronger memory trace that aids retrieval over time.87
The concrete discussion of a product attribute in ad copy also influences the impor-
tance of that attribute because it draws more attention. For example, in a study where 
participants read two versions of ad copy for a watch, the version that claimed “According 
to industry sources, three out of every four watch breakdowns are due to water getting 
into the case,” was more effective than the version that simply said, “According to industry 
sources, many watch breakdowns are due to water getting into the case.”88
Should We repeat the Message?
Repetition can be a double-edged sword for marketers. As we noted in Chapter 4, we usually 
need multiple exposures to a stimulus before learning occurs. Contrary to the saying “famil-
iarity breeds contempt,” people tend to like things that are more familiar to them, even if 
they were not that keen on them initially.89 Psychologists call this the mere exposure 
phenomenon.
Advertisers find positive effects for repetition even in mature product categories: 
Repeating product information boosts consumers’ awareness of the brand, even though 
the marketer says nothing new.90 However, as we saw in Chapter 6, too much repeti-
tion creates habituation, whereby the consumer no longer pays attention to the stimulus 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
313 
because of fatigue or boredom. Excessive exposure can cause advertising wear-out, 
which can result in negative reactions to an ad after we see it too much.91 Research 
evidence indicates that “three’s the charm” when it comes to exposing an audience to a 
product claim. Additional messages tend to trigger skepticism and actually reverse any 
positive impact.92
The two-factor theory explains the fine line between familiarity and boredom; it 
proposes that two separate psychological processes operate when we repeatedly show 
an ad to a viewer. The positive side of repetition is that it increases familiarity and thus 
reduces uncertainty about the product. The negative side is that over time boredom 
increases with each exposure. At some point the amount of boredom exceeds the amount 
of uncertainty the message reduces, and this results in wear-out. Figure 8.6 depicts this 
pattern. Its effect is especially pronounced when each exposure is of a fairly long duration 
(such as a 30-second commercial).93
The two-factor perspective implies that advertisers can overcome this problem if they 
limit the amount of exposure per repetition (e.g., use 15-second spots instead of longer 
commercials). They can also maintain familiarity but alleviate boredom if they slightly 
vary the content of ads over time—although each spot differs, the campaign still revolves 
around a common theme. Recipients who see varied ads about the product absorb more 
information about product attributes and experience more positive thoughts about the 
brand than do those who see the same information repeatedly. This additional information 
also allows the person to resist attempts to change his or her attitude in the face of a coun-
terattack by a competing brand.94
how Do We Structure the Argument?
Many marketing messages are like debates or trials: A source presents an argument and 
tries to convince the receiver to shift his or her opinion. As you’ve no doubt guessed, the 
way we present the argument may be as important as what we say. It’s often a good idea 
to relate the product to a person’s identity to ramp up involvement as we discussed in 
Chapter 5. On the other hand, there’s the temptation to push too hard. A recent study 
shows how that can happen: Respondents were asked to focus on their attitudes toward 
environmental issues to activate that aspect of their identities. Then they were divided into 
three groups, each of which was shown a separate slogan for Charlie’s Soap, a real biode-
gradeable cleanser. One message just said the soap was “a good choice for consumers.” A 
second version related to the issue by calling the soap “a good choice for green consum-
ers.” The third message pushed the envelope farther: “the only choice for green consum-
ers!” Although many real managers predicted that the last choice would be most effective, 
in fact the second one was most effective because the last choice just pushed too hard.96
    
    
    
    
     
     
   P
osit
ive 
Lear
ning
 Fac
tor 
Ne
t 
Ef
fe
ct
 
Negative
 Tedium 
Factor 
NUMBER OF EXPOSURES
POSITIVE
AFFECT
NEUTRAL
AFFECT
NEGATIVE
AFFECT
Figure 8.6 TWO-FACTOr TheOrY OF MeSSAge rePeTITION
The Pandora music site at-
tracts about 70 million listen-
ers, who tune in to playlists 
Pandora creates based on 
their initial preferences for 
certain artists. The site uses a music intelli-
gence algorithm to dissect the characteristics 
of favorite songs and serve up others that are 
similar. Pandora’s engineers constantly tweak 
the playlists as they experiment with variations 
of the experience. For example, do listeners 
want to hear mostly familiar songs, or do they 
want to discover new music? One of the big-
gest issues they wrestle with: how frequently 
should Pandora repeat the same song or art-
ist in a playlist? The site constantly tries new 
variations to arrive at the optimal number 
of repetitions, but it turns out a lot depends 
on other factors such as the time of day and 
where listeners are when they tune in. For 
example, Pandora’s data show that users wel-
come new music instead of the same old same 
old, but when they’re at work not so much. The 
company continues to tweak its algorithm as it 
tries to answer the elusive question, “Can you 
have too much of a good thing?”95
  net Profit

314 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
CB AS i See it
Pierre Chandon INSEAD, France
taxes, bans) are resisted by the food 
industry, which has focused on food 
reformulation instead. Unfortunately, 
these efforts have all had limited 
success because they are perceived 
as a threat to our freedom to eat the 
food that we know and like.
My research shows that regulators 
and food companies can unite to fight 
obesity by making people happier to 
spend more for less food, a triple win 
for public health, business, and eating 
enjoyment. Here is how:
●
●
Improve perception of food portion 
and package sizes. Visual biases 
make us strongly underestimate 
today’s supersized portions and 
resist downsizing. Drawing on 
our knowledge of these biases, 
we can increase acceptance 
of portion downsizing, by bring-
ing original small sizes back to 
lunchroom menus (to reframe 
perceptions of and preferences 
for a “normal” size), or by us-
ing “stealth” downsizing that 
elongates, instead of shortening, 
packages in supermarkets.
●
●
Focus on the sensory pleasure of 
eating, rather than on food quantity, 
or even health. We show that 
highlighting sensory pleasure 
(which peaks with the first 
mouthful) leads school kids and 
fast-food patrons to choose, pre-
fer, and pay more for smaller por-
tions. This can be done easily in 
schools through sensory imagery 
training and in restaurants with 
more vivid menu descriptions.
Food and eating are fascinating 
research areas because they touch 
upon cognitive as well as social 
psychology, but also economics, 
sociology, and even the branch of 
philosophy related to taste (aesthetics). 
Because we all eat, it is rare to find 
someone who is not interested in 
the factors that, unbeknownst to us, 
influence what, when, and how much 
we eat. For example, in another study, 
I showed that people eat more, and 
less healthy, after their favorite football 
team was defeated, especially if it 
was a narrow defeat against a rival 
of the same strength, and eat less 
and more healthy after a victory. We 
also show that this happens because 
fans see the defeat of their team as 
their own failure (we say “we lost,” not 
“they lost”), which makes it harder to 
self-regulate.97
I am interested in food marketing, 
how it makes people fat, and how 
consumer research can help find 
solutions that improve health without 
killing the pleasure of eating or the 
food industry.
The obesity epidemic is largely 
driven by ever-increasing food portion 
sizes. Yet, our efforts to fight obesity 
have focused on trying to influence 
what people eat instead of how 
much they eat. Traditional public 
policy solutions (warnings, labels, 
Most messages merely present one or more positive attributes about the product or 
reasons to buy it. These are supportive arguments. An alternative is to use a two-sided mes-
sage, in which the message presents both positive and negative information. Research indi-
cates that two-sided ads can be quite effective, yet marketers rarely use them.98
Why would a marketer want to devote advertising space to publicize a product’s nega-
tive attributes? Under the right circumstances, refutational arguments that first raise 
a negative issue and then dismiss it can be quite effective. This approach increases source 
credibility because it reduces reporting bias; this means that the receiver assumes the 
source has carefully considered both sides of the argument. Also, people who are skeptical 
about the product may be more receptive to a balanced argument instead of a “white-
wash.”99 For example, after General Motors declared bankruptcy, an ad declared: “Let’s be 
completely honest: No company wants to go through this.”100 Research evidence indicates 
that when experts have strong arguments on their side, they are actually more effective if 
they express some uncertainty rather than stating unequivocally that they are correct.101
This doesn’t mean the marketer should go overboard and confess to major problems 
with the product (though hopefully there aren’t any major ones to admit to). The typical 
refutational strategy discusses relatively minor attributes that may present a problem 
or fall short when the customer compares a product to competitors. Positive, important 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
315 
attributes then refute these drawbacks. For example, Avis got a lot of mileage when it 
claimed to be only the “No. 2” car rental company, whereas an ad for Volkswagen woefully 
described one of its cars as a “lemon” because there was a scratch on the glove compart-
ment chrome strip.102 A two-sided strategy appears to be the most effective when the 
audience is well educated (and presumably more impressed by a balanced argument).103 
It is also best to use when receivers are not already loyal to the product—“preaching to the 
choir” about possible drawbacks may raise doubts unnecessarily.
One important structural question: Should the argument draw conclusions, or 
should the marketer merely present the facts and let the consumer arrive at his or her own 
decision? On the one hand, consumers who make their own inferences instead of having 
ideas spoon-fed to them will form stronger, more accessible attitudes. On the other hand, 
leaving the conclusion ambiguous increases the chance that the consumer will not form 
the desired attitude.
The response to this issue depends on the consumer’s motivation to process the ad 
and the complexity of the arguments. If the message is personally relevant, people will 
pay attention to it and spontaneously form inferences. However, if the arguments are hard 
to follow or consumers lack the motivation to follow them, it’s safer for the ad to draw 
conclusions.104
Should We Compare Our Product to Our Competitors?
In 1971 the FTC issued guidelines that encouraged advertisers to name competing brands 
in their ads. The government did this to improve the information available to consumers in 
ads, and indeed recent evidence indicates that, at least under some conditions, this type of 
presentation does result in more informed decision making.105 However, advertisers need to 
tread lightly, especially when they risk ruffling the feathers of other companies. Fox rejected 
a commercial that Sodastream submitted for the 2015 Super Bowl because the actress 
Scarlett Johansson sensually sips her homemade soda and says, “Sorry, Coke and Pepsi.”106
Comparative advertising refers to a message that compares two or more recognizable 
brands and weighs them in terms of one or more specific attributes.107 An Arby’s campaign 
to promote its chicken sandwiches used this approach: One commercial, set in a fictitious 
McDonald’s boardroom, featured a young man who tries to convince McDonald’s execu-
tives to serve a healthier type of chicken. He proposes that McDonald’s offers 100 percent  
all-natural chicken instead of 70 percent chicken—the other 30 percent allegedly consisting 
of phosphates, salt, and water added to the chicken. The room erupts in laughter. At the end 
of the spot, a voice-over says that, unlike McDonald’s, Arby’s chicken sandwiches contain 
100 percent natural chicken.
This strategy can cut both ways, especially if the sponsor depicts the competition 
in a nasty or negative way. Although some comparative ads result in desired attitude 
changes, they may also be lower in believability and stir up source derogation (i.e., the 
consumer may doubt the credibility of a biased presentation).108 Indeed, in some cultures 
(such as Asia), comparative advertising is rare because people find such a confrontational 
approach offensive.
new Message Formats: the Social Media revolution
The novel “ice-bucket challenge” that swept the Internet in fall 2014 was a novel way to 
harness social media for a good cause; the movement that asked people to take a selfie of 
themselves dousing their heads in a bucket of ice water went viral and raised more than 
$115 million for A.L.S. research. Researchers explain this success by pointing to several 
elements of the message including: the 24-hour deadline to either take the cold shower 
or pay the money (a specific goal as opposed to a more abstract one); the public nature of 
the challenge that allowed participants to share their selfies online; and the slight amount 
of self-sacrifice that was involved. Yes, people tend to donate more money when they have 
to suffer a bit for the cause; researchers label this the martyrdom effect. As one put it, 
“We’re supposed to prefer pleasure to pain but, when it comes to charity, you don’t hear 
about massage-a-thons or dessert-a-thons.” 109

316 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
The “ice-bucket challenge” that swept the 
Internet was a novel way to harness social 
media for a good cause.
Source: Jurgen Falchle/Fotolia
An array of new ways to transmit information in both text and picture form offers 
marketers exciting alternatives to traditional advertising on TV, billboards, magazines, and 
so on.110 M-commerce (mobile commerce), where marketers promote their goods and 
services via wireless devices, including cell phones, PDAs, and iPods, is red-hot. European 
and Asian consumers already rely on their cell phones to connect them to the world in 
ways we are only starting to see in the United States. In Asia, tiny cell phone screens have 
become electronic wallets that buy Cokes from vending machines and devices that dole out 
McDonald’s coupons on the phone screen. Among the Chinese, cell phones have become 
such important status symbols that relatives at funeral rites burn paper cell phone effigies 
so the dead will have their mobiles in the afterlife.
If you’re on Facebook, Twitter, or LinkedIn (and the odds are good that you are), you’re 
one of the billions of people who use social media applications globally. This term refers 
to the set of technologies that enable users to create content and share it with thousands 
or even millions of others. We’ll dive into social media in more detail in Chapter 14. In 
addition to “the obvious suspects” (i.e. popular social media platforms including Facebook, 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
317 
Pinterest, Foursquare, Tumblr, and so on), there are many other alternatives for marketers 
that want to harness these new technologies to communicate with customers. Some of 
these may even use multiple platforms, unfold over a period of time, and integrate social 
media with real world experiences. A transmedia storytelling strategy typically includes 
communications media that range from Web sites, blogs, and email to recorded phone calls 
and even graffiti messages scrawled in public spaces.
reality engineering
The Pennsylvania city of Altoona temporarily renamed itself 
“POM Wonderful Presents: The Greatest Movie Ever Sold” to 
promote a popular movie that parodies product-placement adver-
tising; the movie’s producers sold the title to the maker of POM Wonderful pomegran-
ate juice for $1 million.113 Reality engineering occurs when marketers appropriate 
elements of popular culture and use them as promotional vehicles.114 It’s hard to know 
what’s real anymore; specialists even create “used jeans” when they apply chemical 
washes, sandpaper, and other techniques to make a new pair of jeans look like they’re 
ready for retirement. The industry has a term for this practice that sums up the contradic-
tion: new vintage!115
The grassroots efforts we often witness today to capture our attention epitomize 
guerrilla marketing: Promotional strategies that use unconventional means and ven-
ues to encourage word of mouth about products. This has nothing to do with monkey 
business; the term implies that the marketer “ambushes” the unsuspecting recipient 
because the message pops up in a place where he or she wasn’t expecting to see an adver-
tisement. These campaigns often recruit legions of real consumers who agree to engage 
in some kind of street theater or perhaps place messages in unconventional locations like 
public restrooms or on city sidewalks to get in the face of media-saturated consumers.
Reality engineers have many tools at their disposal; they plant products in movies, 
pump scents into offices and stores, attach video monitors in the backs of taxicabs, buy 
ad space on police patrol cars, or film faked “documentaries” such as The Blair Witch 
Project.116 This process is accelerating: Historical analyses of Broadway plays, best-selling 
novels, and the lyrics of hit songs, for example, clearly show large increases in the use of 
real brand names over time.117
Here are some examples of reality engineering:
●
●Mattel announced that it was putting a “for sale” sign on the Barbie Malibu 
Dreamhouse, where the doll character supposedly has lived in comfort since the in-
troduction of Malibu Barbie in 1971. The campaign mixed actual and imaginary 
elements. A section of the real estate Web site Trulia carried the for-sale listing that 
described the property as “the dreamiest of dream houses.”118
●
●The Quill.com division of the office supply retail chain Staples carries a line of prod-
ucts from the Dunder Mifflin Paper Company of Scranton, PA. As any fan knows, that 
is the fictional setting of the TV show The Office, which recently went off the air after 
nine seasons.119
●
●The Coachella music festival made headlines with a “virtual performance” (via holo-
gram) of the deceased performer Tupac Shakur. YouTube reported more than 15 mil-
lion views of the spectacle within 48 hours, and Tupac’s greatest hits album made the 
Billboard 200 for the first time in 12 years. Plans are underway to debut holograms of 
other dead stars including Elvis Presley and Michael Jackson.120
●
●A New York couple funded their $80,000 wedding by selling corporate plugs; they 
inserted coupons in their programs and tossed 25 bouquets from 1-800-FLOWERS.
Product Placement
When the new James Bond movie, Spectre, came out in 2015 the heroes and villains 
chased one another in flashy cars including an Aston Martin, Range Rover, and Jaguar 
C-X75.121 A music video for the Jennifer Lopez song “Live It Up” (featuring Pitbull) hyped 
The band Nine Inch Nails was 
one of the first marketers to 
use a transmedia storytell-
ing technique. To promote 
the Year Zero album, game 
players searched for clues to reveal images 
from “the future.” The first clue appeared on 
the back of a shirt promoting Nine Inch Nails’ 
european tour. On the back of the shirt sev-
eral letters were highlighted that spelled out 
“I am trying to believe.” The words led fans 
to the Web site iamtryingtobelieve, which 
describes a drug named “Parepin” that, in 
the Year Zero story, is being added to the 
water supply to cloud people’s minds.111 
Other clues linked back to the band, such as 
a USB flash drive left in a bathroom stall at a 
concert, which in turn led fans to other Web 
sites that let them download printable stick-
ers, stencils, and posters. eventually, some 
players obtained special mobile phones that 
rang later with instructions to find a bus that 
took them to—drumroll—a special live perfor-
mance by the band.112
  net Profit
OBjeCtive 8-10 
Many modern marketers 
are reality engineers.

318 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Swarovski, Nokia, Ice Watches, and Beluga vodka. Apple took top honors in 2014 movie 
product placements; its products appeared in about one-fourth of all number-one box-
office hits during the year that ran the gamut from Birdman to Sex Tape. Target stores 
played a role in episodes of the CW’s Jane the Virgin TV show and a Toyota car was written 
into the plot of an episode of ABC’s Modern Family.122
That’s quite a change; In the not-so-distant past, TV networks demanded that pro-
ducers “geek” (alter) brand names before they appeared in a show, as when Melrose Place 
changed a Nokia cell phone to a “Nokio.”123 Today, real products pop up everywhere. 
Well-established brands lend an aura of realism to the action, while upstarts benefit tre-
mendously from the exposure. In the movie version of Sex and the City, Carrie’s assistant 
admits that she “borrows” her pricey handbags from a rental Web site called Bag Borrow 
or Steal. The company’s head of marketing commented about the mention, “It’s like the 
Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval. It gives us instant credibility and recognition.”124
Bag Borrow or Steal got a free plug (oops, they got another one here!). In many cases, 
however, these “plugs” are no accident. Product placement is the insertion of real prod-
ucts in fictional movies, TV shows, books, and plays. Many types of products play starring 
(or at least supporting) roles in our culture; the most visible brands range from Coca-Cola 
and Nike apparel to the Chicago Bears football team and the Pussycat Dolls band.125
Product placement is by no means a casual process: Marketers pay about $25 billion 
per year to plug their brands in TV and movies. Several firms specialize in arranging these 
appearances; if they’re lucky, they manage to do it on the cheap when they get a client’s 
product noticed by prop masters who work on the shows. For example, in a cafeteria scene 
during an episode of Grey’s Anatomy, it was no coincidence that the character Izzie Stevens 
happened to drink a bottle of Izze Sparkling Pomegranate fruit beverage. The placement 
company that represents PepsiCo paid nothing to insert the prop in that case, but it prob-
ably didn’t get off so easily when the new brand also showed up in HBO’s Entourage and 
CBS’s The Big Bang Theory and The New Adventures of Old Christine.126
Today, most major releases brim with real products, even though a majority of 
consumers believe the line between advertising and programming is becoming too fuzzy 
and distracting (though as we might expect, concerns about this blurring of boundar-
ies are more pronounced among older people than younger).127 A study reported that 
consumers respond well to placements when the show’s plot makes the product’s benefit 
clear. Similarly, audiences had a favorable impression when a retailer provided furniture, 
clothes, appliances, and other staples for the struggling families who get help on ABC’s 
Extreme Makeover: Home Edition.128
Some researchers claim that product placement aids consumer decision making 
because the familiarity of these props creates a sense of cultural belonging while they 
generate feelings of emotional security. Another study found that placements consistent 
with a show’s plot do enhance brand attitudes, but incongruent placements that aren’t 
consistent with the plot affect brand attitudes negatively because they seem out of place.129
Advergaming
If you roar down the streets in the Need for Speed Underground 2 video racing game, you’ll 
pass a Best Buy store as well as billboards that hawk Old Spice and Burger King.130 
America’s Army, produced by the U.S. government as a recruitment tool, is one of the most 
successful advergames. Twenty-eight percent of those who visit the America’s Army Web 
page click through to the recruitment page.
About three-quarters of U.S. consumers now play video games, yet to many market-
ers the idea of integrating their brands with the stories that games tell is still a well-kept 
secret. Others, including Axe, Mini Cooper, and Burger King, have figured this out: They 
create game narratives that immerse players in the action. Orbitz offers playable banner-
games that result in the highest click-through rate of any kind of advertising the online 
travel site does. However, these linkages sometimes draw criticism if they seem to encour-
age violent behavior. Recently, as the game maker Electronic Arts (EA) took steps to launch 
its Medal of Honor Warfighter game, the company put up a Web site that included links to 
the catalogs of the manufacturers of the real kinds of guns, knives, and combat-style gear 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
319 
the game includes, such as a powerful sniper’s rifle and accessories for assault weapons. 
After gamers protested, EA disabled the links.131
Even so, the future is bright for advergaming, where online games merge with 
interactive advertisements that let companies target specific types of consumers. These 
placements can be short exposures such as a billboard that appears around a racetrack, or 
they can take the form of branded entertainment and integrate the brand directly into the 
action. The mushrooming popularity of user-generated videos on YouTube and other sites 
creates a growing market to link ads to these sources as well. This strategy is growing so 
rapidly that there’s even a new (trademarked) term for it. Plinking™ is the act of embed-
ding a product or service link in a video.
Why is this new medium so hot?132
●
●Compared to a 30-second TV spot, advertisers can get viewers’ attention for a much 
longer time. Players spend an average of 5 to 7 minutes on an advergaming site.
●
●Physiological measures confirm that players are highly focused and stimulated when 
they play a game.
●
●Marketers can tailor the nature of the game and the products in it to the profiles of 
different users. They can direct strategy games to upscale, educated users, while they 
gear action games to younger users.
●
●The format gives advertisers great flexibility because game makers now ship PC video 
games with blank spaces in them to insert virtual ads. This allows advertisers to 
change messages on the fly and pay only for the number of game players that actu-
ally see them. Sony Corporation now allows clients to directly insert online ads into 
PlayStation 3 videogames; the in-game ads change over time through a user’s Internet 
connection.
●
●There’s great potential to track usage and conduct marketing research. For example, 
an inaudible audio signal coded into Activision’s Tony Hawk’s Underground 2 skating 
game on PCs alerts a Nielsen monitoring system each time the test game players view 
Jeep product placements within the game.
types of Message Appeals
A persuasive message can tug at the heartstrings or scare you, make you laugh, make you 
cry, or leave you yearning to learn more. In this section, we’ll review the major alternatives 
available to communicators.
emotional versus rational Appeals
Colgate-Palmolive’s Total brand was the first toothpaste to claim that it fights gingivitis, a 
benefit that let Colgate inch ahead of Procter & Gamble’s Crest for the first time in decades. 
Colgate initially made a scientific pitch for its new entry because it emphasized Total’s 
germ-fighting abilities. In newer ads, however, former model Brooke Shields cavorted with 
two children (not hers) as soft music played in the background. She stated, “Having a 
healthy smile is important to me. Not just as an actress but as a mom.”133
So, which is better: to appeal to the head or to the heart? The answer often depends on 
the nature of the product and the type of relationship consumers have with it. It’s hard to 
gauge the precise effects of rational versus emotional appeals. Although recall of ad con-
tent tends to be better for “thinking” ads than for “feeling” ads, conventional measures of 
advertising effectiveness (e.g., day-after recall) may not be adequate to assess cumulative 
effects of emotional ads. These open-ended measures assess cognitive responses, and they 
may penalize feeling ads because the reactions are not as easy to articulate.134
Sex Appeals
A risqué ad campaign for Kraft’s Zesty Italian salad dressing attracted the attention of a 
conservative activist group called One Million Moms. Members took to the Web to protest a 
print ad featuring a hunky male model having a naked picnic. They described the ad, which 

320 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
appeared in an issue of People magazine, as the most disgusting ad they had ever seen pro-
duced by Kraft. They implied that the food giant was selling itself through blatant eroticism. 
Kraft defended its campaign as a light-hearted and coy way of engaging with their consum-
ers. They said that the response they received has been overwhelmingly positive.
Echoing the widely held belief that “sex sells,” many marketing communications for 
products from perfumes to autos feature heavy doses of erotic suggestions that range from 
subtle hints to blatant displays of skin. Of course, the prevalence of sex appeals varies from 
country to country. Even U.S. firms run ads elsewhere that would not go over at home. For 
example, a “cheeky” ad campaign designed to boost the appeal of U.S.-made Lee jeans among 
Europeans features a series of bare buttocks. The messages are based on the concept that if 
bottoms could choose jeans, they would opt for Lee: “Bottoms feel better in Lee Jeans.”135
Perhaps not surprisingly, female nudity in print ads generates negative feelings and 
tension among female consumers, whereas men’s reactions are more positive—although 
women with more liberal attitudes toward sex are more likely to be receptive.136 In a case 
of turnabout being fair play, another study found that males dislike nude males in ads, 
whereas females responded well to undressed males—but not totally nude ones like the 
guy in the Kraft ad.137 Women also respond more positively to sexual themes when they 
occur in the context of a committed relationship rather than just gratuitous lust.138
So, does sex work? Although erotic content does appear to draw attention to an ad, 
its use may actually be counterproductive. In one survey, an overwhelming 61 percent 
of the respondents said that sexual imagery in a product’s ad makes them less likely to 
buy it.139 Ironically, a provocative picture can be too effective; it can attract so much 
attention as to hinder processing and recall of the ad’s contents. Sexual appeals appear 
to be ineffective when marketers use them merely as a “trick” to grab attention. They 
do, however, appear to work when the product is itself related to sex (e.g., lingerie or 
Viagra).140
A research firm explored how men and women look at sexually themed ads and what 
effect, if any, what they choose to look at might have on the ads’ effectiveness. One part of 
the study used special software to follow the visual behavior of respondents as they looked 
at print ads. The ad sample consisted of two U.S. print ads, one sexual and one nonsexual, 
from each of five product categories. When the participants looked at a sexual ad, men 
tended to ignore the text as they focused instead on the woman in it, whereas the women 
participants tended first to explore the ad’s text elements. Men said they liked the sexual 
ads more, they liked the products advertised in them more, and they would be more likely 
to buy those products. In contrast, women scored the sexual ads lower than the nonsexual 
ones on all three of those criteria.141
humor Appeals
A TV commercial for Metamucil showed a National Park Service ranger who pours a glass 
of the laxative down Old Faithful and announces that the product keeps the famous geyser 
“regular.” Yellowstone National Park started getting letters from offended viewers. Park 
officials also had their own concerns: They didn’t want people to think that the geyser 
needed “help” or that it’s OK to throw things down into it!142
Do humor appeals work? Overall, funny advertisements do get attention. One 
study found that recognition scores for humorous liquor ads were better than average. 
However, the verdict is mixed as to whether humor affects recall or product attitudes 
in a significant way.143 One reason silly ads may shift opinions is that they provide a 
source of distraction. A funny ad inhibits counterarguing (in which a consumer thinks 
of reasons why he or she doesn’t agree with the message); this increases the likelihood 
of message acceptance because the consumer doesn’t come up with arguments against 
the product.144
Fear Appeals
Volkswagen’s advertising campaign for its Jetta model’s safety features got a lot of people 
to sit up and take notice. The spots show passengers in deep conversation as they drive 
down the street, completely unprepared for the vehicles that suddenly appear and collide 
  Marketing Pitfall
A series of funny ads cre-
ated by a german agency 
didn’t make everyone 
laugh. grey germany did 
three condom ads for a 
pharmacy chain. They implied that if more peo-
ple used condoms the world would have been 
spared such figures as Mao Tse-Tung, Adolf 
hitler, and Osama bin laden. each execution 
depicted a swimming sperm with a likeness of 
one of the despised characters. Critics com-
plained that the ads were racist, offensive, and 
inappropriate; the campaign apparently didn’t 
exactly enhance the retailer’s image.145

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
321 
violently with their cars. One spot also showed a passenger’s head striking an airbag. 
The spots ended with a focus on the stunned passengers and the damaged Jetta. The ads 
seemed so real that the company received several calls asking whether the people in the ad 
were hurt.
Fear appeals emphasize the negative consequences that can occur unless the con-
sumer changes a behavior or an attitude. These types of messages are fairly common in 
advertising, although they are more common in social marketing contexts in which orga-
nizations encourage people to convert to healthier lifestyles by quitting smoking, using 
contraception, or relying on a designated driver. Several countries including the United 
States are looking at tough new guidelines for cigarette advertising and packaging. These 
options include requiring a range of horrific images to appear directly on the cigarette 
packaging (and in cigarette ads) to show people who have suffered from the ravages of 
cigarettes, such as a man with cigarette smoke coming out of a tracheotomy hole in his 
throat and a cadaver on an autopsy table. In 2013 a U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that 
these images, along with the phone number 1-800-QUIT-NOW, are “unabashed attempts 
to evoke emotion” and “browbeat consumers” to stop buying the companies’ products. 
However, the FDA still plans to continue the fight.146
This tactic, if and when it’s implemented, may well scare away would-be smokers, 
but do fear appeals work more generally? Most research on this topic indicates that these 
negative messages are most effective when the advertiser uses only a moderate threat and 
when the ad presents a solution to the problem. Otherwise, consumers will tune out the ad 
because they can do nothing to solve or avoid the threat.147
When a weak threat is ineffective, there may be insufficient elaboration of the harm-
ful consequences of the behavior. When a strong threat doesn’t work, there may be too 
much elaboration that interferes with the processing of the recommended change in 
behavior; the receiver is too busy thinking of reasons the message doesn’t apply to him or 
her to pay attention to the offered solution.148 A study that manipulated subjects’ degree 
of anxiety about AIDS, for example, found that they evaluated condom ads most positively 
when the ads used a moderate threat. Copy that promoted use of the condom because 
“Sex is a risky business” (moderate threat) resulted in more attitude change than either a 
weaker threat that emphasized the product’s sensitivity or a strong threat that discussed 
the certainty of death from AIDS.149
Similarly, scare tactics have not generally been an effective way to convince teenag-
ers to curb their use of alcohol or drugs. Teens simply tune out the message or deny its 
relevance to them.150 However, a study of adolescent responses to social versus physical 
threat appeals in drug prevention messages found that social threat (such as being ostra-
cized by one’s peers) is a more effective strategy.151
the Message as Art Form: Metaphors Be with You
Just like novelists, poets, and artists, marketers are storytellers. Their communications 
take the form of stories because they describe intangible product benefits. The story-
teller, therefore, must express these in some concrete form so that consumers will get the 
message.
Advertising creatives rely (consciously or not) on well-known literary devices to com-
municate these meanings. For example, characters such as Mr. Goodwrench, the Jolly 
Green Giant, and Charlie the Tuna may personify a product or service. Many ads take the 
form of an allegory, which is a story about an abstract trait or concept that advertisers 
tell in the context of a person, animal, vegetable, or object.
A metaphor places two dissimilar objects into a close relationship such that “A is 
B,” whereas a simile compares two objects, “A is like B.” A and B, however dissimilar, 
share some quality that the metaphor highlights. Metaphors allow the marketer to apply 
meaningful images to everyday events. In the stock market, “white knights” battle “hostile 
raiders” with the help of “poison pills”; Tony the Tiger equates cereal with strength and 
“you’re in good hands with Allstate” insurance.152
Resonance is another type of literary device advertisers frequently use. It is a 
form of presentation that combines a play on words with a relevant picture. Whereas 

322 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
metaphor substitutes one meaning for another by connecting two things that are in 
some way similar, resonance employs an element that has a double meaning—such as a 
pun, in which two words sound similar but have different meanings. For example, an ad 
for a diet strawberry shortcake dessert might bear the copy “berried treasure” so that the 
brand conveys qualities we associate with buried treasure such as valuable and hidden. 
An ad for ASICS athletic shoes proclaimed, “We believe women should be running the 
country” as it depicted a woman jogging, whereas a Bounce fabric softener ad asked “Is 
there something creeping up behind you?” as it showed a woman’s dress bunched up on 
her back as a result of static. Because the text departs from expectations, it creates a state 
of tension or uncertainty on the part of the viewer until he or she figures out the word-
play. Once the consumer “gets it,” he or she may prefer the ad to a more straightforward 
message.153
Just as a novelist or artist can tell a story in words or pictures, we can choose several 
ways to address our consumer audiences. Advertisers structure commercials like other 
art forms; as we’ve seen, they borrow conventions from literature and art to communi-
cate.154 One important distinction is between a drama and a lecture.155 A lecture is like a 
speech: The source speaks directly to the audience to inform them about a product or to 
persuade them to buy it. Because a lecture clearly implies an attempt at persuasion, the 
audience will regard it as such. Assuming it motivates listeners, they weigh the merits 
of the message along with the source’s credibility. Cognitive responses occur (e.g., “How 
much did Coke pay him to say that?”). Consumers accept the appeal if it overcomes 
objections and is consistent with their beliefs.
the Source versus the Message:  
Do We Sell the Steak or the Sizzle?
We’ve discussed two major components of the communications 
model: the source and the message. At the end of the day, which 
component persuades consumers to change their attitudes? Should 
we worry more about what we say or how we say it and who says it?
Surprise! The answer is it depends. As we saw in Chapter 5, 
consumers’ level of involvement determines which cognitive 
A fear appeal from South Africa.
Source: Courtesy of brandhouse
OBjeCtive 8-11 
Audience characteristics 
help to determine 
whether the nature of the 
source or the message 
itself will be relatively 
more effective.

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
323 
processes will activate when they receive a message. This in turn influences which aspects 
of a communication they process. Like travelers who come to a fork in the road, they choose 
one path or the other. The direction they take determines which aspects of the marketing 
communication will work and which will fall on deaf ears.
The Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) assumes that, under conditions of high 
involvement, we take the central route to persuasion. Under conditions of low involvement, 
we take a peripheral route instead. Figure 8.7 diagrams this model.156
the Central route to Persuasion
According to the ELM, when we find the information in a persuasive message relevant 
or interesting, we pay careful attention to it. In this event, we focus on the arguments 
the marketer presents and generate cognitive responses to this content. An expectant 
mother who hears a radio message that warns about drinking while pregnant might say 
to herself, “She’s right. I really should stop drinking alcohol now that I’m pregnant.” Or 
she might offer counterarguments, such as, “That’s a bunch of baloney. My mother had 
a cocktail every night when she was pregnant with me, and I turned out fine.” If people 
generate counterarguments in response to a message, it’s less likely that they will yield 
to the message, whereas if they generate further supporting arguments, it’s more likely 
they’ll comply.157
The central route to persuasion involves the standard hierarchy of effects we dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter. Recall this assumes that we carefully form and evaluate 
beliefs; the strong attitudes that result in turn guide our behavior. The implication is that 
message factors, such as the quality of arguments an ad presents, will determine attitude 
change. Prior knowledge about a topic results in more thoughts about the message and 
also increases the number of counterarguments.158
the Peripheral route to Persuasion
In contrast, we take the peripheral route when we’re not really motivated to think about 
the marketer’s arguments. Instead, we’re likely to use other cues to decide how to react to 
the message. These cues include the product’s package, the attractiveness of the source, 
or the context in which the message appears. We call sources of information extraneous 
to the actual message peripheral cues because they surround the actual message.
The peripheral route to persuasion highlights the paradox of low involvement: 
When we don’t care as much about a product, the way it’s presented (e.g., who endorses 
it or the visuals that go with it) increases in importance. The implication here is that we 
may buy low-involvement products chiefly because the marketer designs a “sexy” pack-
age, chooses a popular spokesperson, or creates a stimulating shopping environment. In 
Figure 8.7 The elABOrATION lIKelIhOOD MODel (elM) OF PerSUASION
High-Involvement
Processing
Central Route
Peripheral Route
Attention and
Comprehension
COMMUNICATION
(source, message,
channel)
Cognitive
Responses
Belief and
Attitude Change
Behavior
Change
Low-Involvement
Processing
Belief
Change
Behavior
Change
Attitude
Change

324 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
other words, especially when a consumer engages in emotional or behavioral decision 
making, these environmental cues become more important than when he or she performs 
cognitive decision making; as a result, he or she looks more carefully at the product’s per-
formance or other objective attributes.
To recap, the basic idea of the ELM is that highly involved consumers look for the 
“steak” (e.g., strong, rational arguments). Those who are less involved go for the “sizzle” 
(e.g., the colors and images in packaging or famous people’s endorsements). It is impor-
tant to remember, however, that the same communications variable can be both a central 
and a peripheral cue, depending on its relation to the attitude object. The physical attrac-
tiveness of a model might serve as a peripheral cue in a car commercial, but her beauty 
might be a central cue for a product such as shampoo where a major product benefit is to 
enhance attractiveness.159
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. It is important for consumer researchers to understand 
the nature and power of attitudes.
An attitude is a predisposition to evaluate an object or 
product positively or negatively. We form attitudes toward 
products and services, and these attitudes often determine 
whether we will purchase or not.
2. Attitudes are more complex than they first appear.
Three components make up an attitude: beliefs, affect, and 
behavioral intentions.
3. We form attitudes in several ways.
Attitude researchers traditionally assumed that we learn atti-
tudes in a fixed sequence: First we form beliefs (cognitions) about 
an attitude object, then we evaluate that object (affect), and 
then we take some action (behavior). Depending on the con-
sumer’s level of involvement and the circumstances, though, 
his attitudes can result from other hierarchies of effects as well. 
A key to attitude formation is the function the attitude holds for 
the consumer (e.g., is it utilitarian or ego defensive?).
4. A need to maintain consistency among all of our 
attitudinal components often motivates us to alter one 
or more of them.
One organizing principle of attitude formation is the impor-
tance of consistency among attitudinal components—that 
ChAPtEr SummAry
is, we alter some parts of an attitude to be in line with 
others. Such theoretical approaches to attitudes as cogni-
tive dissonance theory, self-perception theory, and balance 
theory stress the vital role of our need for consistency.
5. Attitude models identify specific components and combine 
them to predict a consumer’s overall attitude toward a 
product or brand.
Multiattribute attitude models underscore the complexity 
of attitudes: They specify that we identify and combine a 
set of beliefs and evaluations to predict an overall attitude. 
Researchers integrate factors such as subjective norms 
and the specificity of attitude scales into attitude measures 
to improve predictability.
6. the communications model identifies several important 
components for marketers when they try to change 
consumers’ attitudes toward products and services.
Persuasion refers to an attempt to change consumers’ at-
titudes. The communications model specifies the elements 
marketers need to transmit meaning. These include a 
source, a message, a medium, a receiver, and feedback.
7. the consumer who processes a message is not the 
passive receiver of information marketers once believed 
him or her to be.
The traditional view of communications regards the per-
ceiver as a passive element in the process. New develop-
ments in interactive communications highlight the need to 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
325 
consider the active roles a consumer plays when he or she 
obtains product information and builds a relationship with 
a company. Advocates of permission marketing argue that 
it’s more effective to send messages to consumers who have 
already indicated an interest in learning about a product 
than trying to hit people “cold” with these solicitations.
8. Several factors influence the effectiveness of a message 
source.
Two important characteristics that determine the effec-
tiveness of a source are its attractiveness and credibility. 
Although celebrities often serve this purpose, their credi-
bility is not always as strong as marketers hope. Marketing 
messages that consumers perceive as buzz (those that are 
authentic and consumer generated) tend to be more ef-
fective than those they categorize as hype (those that are 
inauthentic, biased, and company generated).
9. the way a marketer structures his or her message 
determines how persuasive it will be.
Some elements of a message that help to determine its ef-
fectiveness include the following: conveyance of the mes-
sage in words or pictures; employment of an emotional or 
a rational appeal; frequency of repetition; conclusion draw-
ing; presentation of both sides of the argument; and inclu-
sion of fear, humor, or sexual references. Advertising mes-
sages often incorporate elements from art or literature, such 
as dramas, lectures, metaphors, allegories, and resonance.
10. many modern marketers are reality engineers.
Reality engineering occurs when marketers appropriate ele-
ments of popular culture to use in their promotional strate-
gies. These elements include sensory and spatial aspects of ev-
eryday existence, whether in the form of products that appear 
in movies, scents pumped into offices and stores, billboards, 
theme parks, or video monitors attached to shopping carts.
11. Audience characteristics help to determine whether 
the nature of the source or the message itself will be 
relatively more effective.
The relative influence of the source versus the message de-
pends on the receiver’s level of involvement with the commu-
nication. The Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) specifies 
that source effects are more likely to sway a less-involved con-
sumer, whereas a more-involved consumer will be more likely 
to attend to and process components of the actual message.
ABC model of attitudes, 286
Advergaming, 318
Affect, 286
Allegory, 321
Attitude object (Ao), 285
Attitude, 285
Attitude accessibility perspective, 301
Attitude models, 296
Attitude toward the act of buying  
(Aact), 300
Balance theory, 292
Basking in reflected glory, 294
Behavior, 286
Buzz, 308
Celebrity endorsements, 296
Cognition, 286
Cognitive-affective model, 289
Communications model, 304
Comparative advertising, 315
Compliance, 289
Counterarguing, 320
Disclaimers, 307
Ego-defensive function, 285
Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM), 323
Experiential hierarchy of effects, 287
Fear appeals, 321
Fishbein Model, 297
Foot-in-the-door technique, 292
Functional theory of attitudes, 285
Guerrilla marketing, 317
Halo effect, 308
Hierarchy of effects, 286
High-involvement hierarchy, 286
Humor appeals, 320
Hype, 308
Identification, 289
Independence hypothesis, 289
Internalization, 289
Knowledge bias, 308
Knowledge function, 286
Latitudes of acceptance and rejection, 292
Low-involvement hierarchy of effects, 286
Martyrdom effect, 315
M-commerce, 316
Medication adherence, 298
Mere exposure phenomenon, 312
Metaphor, 321
Multiattribute attitude models, 296
Multiple pathway anchoring and 
adjustment (MPAA) model, 302
Native advertising, 307
Normative influence, 299
Paradox of low involvement, 323
Permission marketing, 304
Persuasion, 302
Plinking™, 319
Principle of cognitive consistency, 290
Product placement, 318
Reality engineering, 317
Refutational arguments, 314
Reporting bias, 308
Resonance, 321
Self-perception theory, 291
Sex appeals, 320
Shared endorsements, 308
Simile, 321
Sleeper effect, 307
Social judgment theory, 292
Social media, 316
Sock puppeting, 307
Source attractiveness, 308
Source credibility, 306
Source derogation, 315
Spokescharacters, 310
Subjective norm (SN), 299
Theory of Reasoned Action, 298
Theory of Trying, 302
Transmedia storytelling, 317
Two-Factor Theory, 313
Utilitarian function, 285
Value-expressive function, 285
KEy tErmS

326 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
rEvIEW
 
8-1 How can an attitude play an ego-defensive function?
 
8-2 Describe the ABC model of attitudes.
 
8-3 List the three hierarchies of attitudes, and describe the 
major differences among them.
 
8-4 How do levels of commitment to an attitude influence 
the likelihood that it will become part of the way we 
think about a product in the long term?
 
8-5 We sometimes enhance our attitude toward a product 
after we buy it. How does the theory of cognitive disso-
nance explain this change?
 
8-6 What is the foot-in-the-door technique? How does self-
perception theory relate to this effect?
 
8-7 What are latitudes of acceptance and rejection? How 
does a consumer’s level of involvement with a product 
affect his latitude of acceptance?
 
8-8 According to balance theory, how can we tell if a triad 
is balanced or unbalanced? How can consumers restore 
balance to an unbalanced triad?
 
8-9 Describe a multiattribute attitude model and list its key 
components.
 8-10 “Do as I say, not as I do.” How does this statement relate 
to attitude models?
 8-11 What is a subjective norm, and how does it influence 
our attitudes?
 8-12 What are three obstacles to predicting behavior even if 
we know a person’s attitudes?
 8-13 Describe the Theory of Reasoned Action. Why might it 
not be equally valuable when we apply it to non-West-
ern cultures?
 8-14 List three psychological principles related to persuasion.
 8-15 Describe the elements of the traditional communica-
tions model, and tell how the updated model differs.
 8-16 What is source credibility, and what are two factors that 
influence our decision as to whether a source is credible?
 8-17 What is the difference between buzz and hype?
 8-18 What is a halo effect, and why does it happen?
 8-19 What is an avatar, and why might an advertiser choose 
to use one instead of hiring a celebrity endorser?
 8-20 Marketers must decide whether to incorporate rational 
or emotional appeals in a communications strategy. 
Describe conditions that are more favorable to one or 
the other.
 8-21 When should a marketer present a message visually ver-
sus verbally?
 8-22 How does the Two-Factor Theory explain the effects of 
message repetition on attitude change?
(a)  When is it best to present a two-sided message 
versus a one-sided message?
 8-23 Do humorous ads work? If so, under what conditions?
 
 (a)  Should marketers ever try to arouse fear to persuade 
consumers?
 8-24 Why do marketers use metaphors to craft persuasive 
messages? Give two examples of this technique.
 8-25 What is the difference between a lecture and a drama?
 8-26 Describe the Elaboration Likelihood Model, and summa-
rize how it relates to the relative importance of what is 
said versus how it’s said.
 8-27 The Federal Trade Commission recently sponsored a con-
ference on “Blurred Lines: Advertising or Content?” that 
reflects the agency’s concerns about the resemblance 
between native ads and “real” articles. 160 The chapter 
discusses the problem of sock puppeting where executives 
masquerade as everyday consumers and post negative 
reviews about their competitors. Numerous cases have 
come to light of hotels, restaurants, and other businesses 
that pay customers to write positive evaluations on review 
sites. Wikipedia can be edited by anyone. Do we care about 
source credibility anymore? What does the future look 
like for source effects in an age when anyone can post 
content, and pretend it came from a credible source?
 8-28 Corporate sponsorship of universities in the United 
States and the United Kingdom is commonplace; the 
sponsored universities have attracted millions of dol-
lars. Chinese universities are following suit. However, 
this process was strongly criticized following the spon-
sorship of a building at Tsinghua University in 2011. 
The No. 4 Teaching Building was adorned with big 
gold letters proclaiming it to be the Jeanswest Building. 
Within days of the sign going up, it was defaced with 
spray paint. Students at the university believed the insti-
tution had “sold out” and that it was a laughing stock 
across China. The sign was eventually taken down. The 
university was trying to raise $114 million in sponsor-
ship and had offered the naming rights for 14 of its 
buildings. Had Tsinghua University crossed the line and 
brought the institution into disrepute?
 8-29 Across the globe there is a growing demand for free 
mobile phone content, mainly in the form of apps. In 
turn, this is having a marked influence on mobile adver-
tising. The biggest increase in mobile advertising is tak-
ing place in the Asia Pacific region. According to the 
analyst firm Gartner, the region is the largest market for 
mobile advertising. Gartner predicts that mobile adver-
tising will grow at a rate of 400 percent until 2016. At 
that point, the market will be worth an estimated $24.5 
ConSumEr BEhAvIor ChAllEngE
●
■DiSCUSS

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
327 
billion. How do you think the marketplace will react 
to this new advertising medium as it becomes more 
common?161
 8-30 Against the backdrop of Chinese consumers’ fear of 
buying contaminated food, a new industry emerged 
in 2013. Online suppliers promised products directly 
from the farm. This followed a food scare surround-
ing contaminated rice and cooking oil. Two of the new 
businesses, COFO Ltd. And Shunfeng Express, are aim-
ing to capture a market share of the 1.3 billion Chinese 
consumers in a position to pay for the premium and 
guaranteed range of organic products. Online sales of 
fresh produce reached $6.5 billion in 2013, which rep-
resented a growth in excess of 400 percent. Is it ethical 
to base a business model on fear?
 8-31 Google updated its terms of service to allow shared 
endorsements though it’s likely most users don’t read 
these terms too carefully. Not everyone is thrilled about 
finding out his or her comments appear in an ad with-
out giving explicit permission. Users who claimed the 
company had not adequately notified them about how 
it was using endorsements sued Facebook.162 What 
should be the platform’s obligation to ask permission? 
Are we as consumers responsible for whatever it does so 
long as we agree to the site’s terms of service (and read 
the fine print)?
 8-32 Jeff Chown and Mick Carter of Davie Brown Entertain-
ment work with brands such as AT&T, Gillette, Nokia, 
and Pizza Hut. They try to match these major brands 
with the world’s most popular celebrities and sports 
stars. They use a celebrity database index to look at 
consumer perceptions of celebrities and score them 
across a range of different attributes such as appeal, 
trust, awareness, aspiration, endorsement, influence, 
and whether they are seen as trendsetters. Perhaps 
one of the most important considerations is consumer 
awareness. If no one knows who the celebrity is, then 
it is irrelevant that they might have all of the other key 
attributes. Chown and Carter also look at an attribute 
they call “breakthrough,” which is the ability of the 
celebrity to capture the attention of the consumer.163 
If you were a marketer and looking for a celebrity for 
clients, what kind of attributes would you be looking 
for? Consider a celebrity for a bank and for an energy 
drink.
 8-33 What do you understand by sock puppeting? Is it ethical?
 8-34 Should corporations use their activities in the field of 
CSR as marketing tools? Is the point of CSR to be a better 
corporate neighbor rather than a tool to market prod-
ucts and services?
 8-35 Discuss some conditions that would cause you to advise 
a marketer to use a comparative advertising strategy.
 8-36 The American Medical Association encountered a fire-
storm of controversy when it agreed to sponsor a line 
of healthcare products that Sunbeam manufactured (a 
decision it later reversed). Should trade or professional 
organizations, journalists, professors, and others endorse 
specific products at the expense of other offerings?
 8-37 Many, many companies rely on celebrity endorsers as 
communications sources to persuade. Especially when 
they target younger people, these spokespeople often are 
“cool” musicians, athletes, or movie stars. In your opin-
ion, who would be the most effective celebrity endorser 
today, and why? Who would be the least effective? Why?
 8-38 Swiss Legend, a watch brand, gets famous people to wear 
its colorful timepieces. One way it does this is to give 
away its products at awards shows. Publicists call this 
common practice “gifting the talent”: Companies pro-
vide stars with “goody bags” full of complimentary prod-
ucts.164 What do you think about the practice of “gifting 
the talent” to accumulate endorsements? Is this a sound 
strategy? Is it ethical for celebrities to accept these gifts?
 8-39 Watchdog groups have long decried product placements 
because they blur the line between content and advertis-
ing without adequately informing viewers. The networks 
themselves appear to be divided on how far they want to 
open the gate. According to one study, the effectiveness 
of product placement varies by product category and 
type of placement. Consumers indicate that product 
placements have the most influence on their grocery, 
electronics, and apparel purchases. The most common 
platform for a placement is to get a brand shown on a 
T-shirt or other piece of an actor’s wardrobe.165 What 
do you think about this practice? Under what conditions 
is product placement likely to influence you and your 
friends? When (if ever) is it counterproductive?
 8-40 Research featured in the Journal of Consumer Psychol-
ogy would seem to suggest that chewing gum or eating 
makes a consumer completely immune to the effects of 
advertising. Most advertising relies on fairly simple fea-
tures, such as a powerful and memorable message or, in 
many cases, by repeating the advertisement so that the 
full effects of the mere exposure phenomenon work on 
the audience. Eating, it would seem, interrupts both of 
these effects. The advertisement reaches our minds by 
pre-vocalising the message. We then silently articulate 
the message to ourselves. The mechanics of chewing 
something means that the individual creates oral-motor 
interference. 
There are important messages for advertisers to learn 
if this is truly the case—they should avoid advertis-
ing when they know that people might be eating. They 
should also avoid advertising in social situations; the 
audience might not be paying attention and they might 
be eating too.166 The other important message is to 
avoid advertising around digital content. The audience 
is pre-vocalizing the content they are interested in and 
will ignore banner advertisements. The only way adver-
tising will work in these cases is to interrupt the digital 
content. In your view, does this mean that the concept 
of mere exposure is no longer applicable as a concept 
and practice?  What does this mean for advertising? 

328 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
●
■APPLY
 8-41 Think of a behavior someone does that is inconsistent 
with his or her attitudes (e.g., attitudes toward choles-
terol, drug use, or even buying things to make him or 
her stand out or attain status). Ask the person to elabo-
rate on why he or she does the behavior, and try to iden-
tify the way the person resolves dissonant elements.
 8-42 Devise an attitude survey for a set of competing auto-
mobiles. Identify areas of competitive advantage or dis-
advantage for each model you include.
 8-43 Construct a multiattribute model for a set of local res-
taurants. Based on your findings, suggest how restau-
rant managers could improve their establishment’s 
image via the strategies described in this chapter.
 8-44 Locate foreign ads at sites like japander.com in which celeb-
rities endorse products that they don’t pitch on their home 
turf. Ask friends or classmates to rate the attractiveness of 
each celebrity, then show them these ads and ask them to 
rate the celebrities again. Does the star’s “brand image” 
change after it’s paired with cheesy ads? Based on these 
results, what advice would you give to a manager who has 
to choose among endorsement offers for a famous client?
 8-45 Why would a marketer consider saying negative things 
about her product? When is this strategy feasible? Can 
you find examples of it?
 8-46 Collect ads that rely on sex appeal to sell products. How 
often do they communicate benefits of the actual product?
 8-47 UK-based Reverse Graffiti specializes in guerrilla mar-
keting. They sell DIY Snow Graffiti packages for under 
$300. The package includes a stencil, a biodegradable 
spray maker, and a pair of latex gloves, and a full set 
of instructions. Is guerrilla marketing just vandalism 
under an assumed title?
 8-48 The chapter discusses the important problem of medi-
cation adherence. How can healthcare marketers 
strengthen the link between intentions and behavior to 
boost the rate at which people actually take their pre-
scribed medications? Devise a communications strategy 
to increase the adherence rate.
 8-49 In Europe, comparative advertising is a dangerous area 
to get involved in. There are many legal pitfalls, and 
many consumers do not respond well to advertisements 
that depict competitors in a poor light. Some consum-
ers get the impression that if a brand needs to men-
tion another brand in their advertising, then they are 
worried about them. Find some examples of compara-
tive advertising in your country. Are they effective and 
persuasive?
 8-50 Collect examples of ads that rely on the use of meta-
phors or resonance. Do you feel these ads are effective? 
If you were marketing the products, would you feel more 
comfortable with ads that use a more straightforward, 
“hard-sell” approach? Why or why not?
 8-51 The elaboration likelihood model (ELM) assumes that 
under conditions of high-involvement, we take the cen-
tral route to persuasion. What does this mean, and how 
does it work?
 8-52 According to this chapter, “Just like novelists, poets, and 
artists, marketers are storytellers.” To what extent can 
this be taken seriously? There is certainly a case for it 
when you consider the fact that communications can 
often take the form of stories, as they need to illustrate 
an intangible aspect of product or service. The story is 
a concrete form of getting the message across. Do you 
agree?
that three-quarters of consumers use conditioner in addition to 
shampoo, and these numbers are even higher for women.
One way that consumers try to simplify the purchase pro-
cess is by referring to compelling advertising, so ad agencies 
work hard to create effective messages that can reinforce cur-
rent brand loyalty or persuade consumers to try a new brand. 
Hair care product advertising relies heavily on television, print, 
the Internet, and outdoor advertising, most commonly in the 
form of billboards. In addition, many ad campaigns feature 
appealing celebrity endorsers such as Katie Holmes, Nicole 
Scherzinger, and Sofia Vergara.
And it’s not only women in the United States who 
scratch their heads over these choices. To the women of 
Singapore and the Philippines, the choice of  hair conditioner 
poses the same challenges. To connect with women in these 
countries, Unilever tried a nontraditional campaign to show 
ShAmPoo BuyIng: A “BAd hAIr” dAy?
When was the last time you purchased shampoo or other hair 
care products? How long did it take you to choose? How did you 
decide?
The hair care aisle of a typical drugstore has more than 
200 choices for shampoo. The packages promote a myriad 
of benefits including repair, protection, hydration, control, 
and nourishment. How does a consumer make the match 
between his or her needs and the brand benefits? It’s not easy 
to choose, and therefore not a surprise that many shoppers 
spend about 20 minutes in this aisle when they select a sham-
poo brand.
The confusion builds when you consider that it is not just 
shampoo that we buy. There are gels, mousses, hairsprays, shine 
enhancers, and conditioners. A recent Mintel survey shows 
●■Case Study 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
329 
dISCuSSIon QuEStIonS
CS  8-1 Describe Cream Silk’s promotion within the context of 
the multiattribute model: Which attribute(s) were cen-
tral to the promotion and how does the model explain 
what the company was trying to accomplish with the 
“Human Hair Quartet?” What limitations might this 
model have for predicting consumer’s attitudes and 
purchase behavior towards Cream Silk? (Hint: Take a 
look at the Theory of Reasoned Action.)
CS 8-2 In contrast to the Cream Silk promotion, Old Spice used its 
characteristically quirky approach to persuade men to try 
its hair care products. The integrated campaign, “That’s 
the Power of Hair,” incorporated a popular Huey Lewis 
tune, an interactive Web site, and funny ads featuring 
animated hair. Discuss the type of message appeal and the 
Elaboration Likelihood Model route each campaign used.
Sources: “Shampoo, Conditioners and Styling Products—US—April 2013,” 
Mintel Oxygen, accessed August 4, 2013; “JWT and Unilever Demonstrate the 
Power of Cream Silk with First Ever Human Hair Quartet,” J. Walter Thompson, 
http://www.jwt.com/en/news/singapore/singapore/jwtandunile-verdemon 
stratethepowerofcreamsilkwithfirsteverhumanhairquartet/, accessed August 
5, 2013; Andrew Adam Newman, “In Shampoo Ads for Men, It’s Not Just the 
Hair, It’s What It Does For You,” (February 18, 2014), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2014/02/18/business/media/in-shampoo-ads-for-men-its-not-just-the-
hair-its-what-it-does-for-you.html?_r=0, accessed May 25, 2015.
the benefit of  Cream Silk Hair Fall Defense, a conditioner 
brand the company sells in those countries. Cream Silk’s 
core benefit is the “strength” it gives hair. With the help of 
advertising agency JWT, Unilever was able to break through 
the advertising clutter and deliver its message in an entirely 
new format.
JWT began by contacting Paul Goh, the leading violin bow-
maker in Singapore. For this promotion, Mr. Goh was asked to 
switch out the horsehair violin bows he traditionally used and 
exchange them with human hair on four of his violin bows. This 
hair had been washed and conditioned with Cream Silk. To dem-
onstrate the strength of the hair, a string quartet used the bows 
as it played during a 4-hour concert in a busy shopping mall in 
Manila. Good news for Unilever: The entire concert concluded 
without even one broken hair on the violin bows! You can view 
the video yourself on YouTube; just search “The Human Hair 
Quartet.” 
According to JWT, the event was fully successful in engag-
ing Cream Silk’s target market. The people who flocked to the 
concert rose to as high as 600 at one point. Over 450 samples of 
the shampoo were distributed. A survey conducted at the event 
showed that most of the consumers left with a positive impres-
sion about Cream Silk. What do you think? If you were looking 
for stronger hair, would this advertising convince you? How is 
this approach superior or inferior to others that conditioner 
brands typically use?
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
8-53 A government agency wants to encourage people who have been drinking to use 
designated drivers. What advice could you give the organization about construct-
ing persuasive communications? Discuss some factors that might be important, 
including the structure of the communications, where they should appear, and 
who should deliver them. Should it use fear appeals? If so, how?
8-54 Contrast the hierarchies of effects the chapter outlines. How should marketers 
take these different situations into account when they choose their marketing mix?
notES
Robert Lavidge and Gary Steiner, “A Model for Predictive Measurements of 
Advertising Effectiveness,” Journal of Marketing 25 (October 1961): 59–62.
 
8. Stephanie Thompson, “Bad Breakup? There, There, B&J Know Just How 
You Feel,” Advertising Age (January 24, 2005): 8.
 
9. Daniel J. Howard and Charles Gengler, “Emotional Contagion Effects on Product 
Attitudes,” Journal of Consumer Research 28 (September 2001): 189–201; 
Andrew B. Aylesworth and Scott B. MacKenzie, “Context Is Key: The Effect of 
Program-Induced Mood on Thoughts About the Ad,” Journal of Advertising 27 
(Summer 1998): 17; Angela Y. Lee and Brian Sternthal, “The Effects of Positive 
Mood on Memory,” Journal of Consumer Research 26 (September 1999): 115–
128; Michael J. Barone, Paul W. Miniard, and Jean B. Romeo, “The Influence of 
Positive Mood on Brand Extension Evaluations,” Journal of Consumer Research 
26 (March 2000): 386–401. For a study that compared the effectiveness of 
emotional appeals across cultures, see Jennifer L. Aaker and Patti Williams, 
“Empathy Versus Pride: The Influence of Emotional Appeals Across Cultures,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 25 (December 1998): 241–261. For research that 
relates mood (depression) to acceptance of health-related messages, see Punam 
Anand Keller, Isaac M. Lipkus, and Barbara K. Rimer, “Depressive Realism and 
Health Risk Accuracy: The Negative Consequences of Positive Mood,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 29 (June 2002): 57–69.
 
1. Robert A. Baron and Donn Byrne, Social Psychology: Understanding Human 
Interaction, 5th ed. (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1987).
 
2. Daniel Katz, “The Functional Approach to the Study of Attitudes,” 
Public Opinion Quarterly 24 (Summer 1960): 163–204, Richard J. Lutz, 
“Changing Brand Attitudes Through Modification of Cognitive Structure,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 1 (March 1975): 49–59.
 
3. Russell H. Fazio, T. N. Lenn, and E. A. Effrein, “Spontaneous Attitude 
Formation,” Social Cognition 2 (1984): 214–234.
 
4. Sharon Shavitt, “The Role of Attitude Objects in Attitude Functions,” Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology 26 (1990): 124–148; see also J. S. Johar and M. 
Joseph Sirgy, “Value Expressive Versus Utilitarian Advertising Appeals: When and 
Why to Use Which Appeal,” Journal of Advertising 20 (September 1991): 23–34.
 
5. Aaron Baar, “New Subaru Campaign Takes Aim with Cupid’s Arrow,” 
Marketing Daily (April 28, 2008), http://publications.mediapost.com/Index 
.Cfm?Fuseaction=Articles.San&S=81435&Nid=420..., accessed April 28, 2008.
 
6. Michael Ray, “Marketing Communications and the Hierarchy-of-Effects,” 
in Peter Clark, ed., New Models for Mass Communication Research (Beverly 
Hills, CA: Sage, 1973), 147–176.
 
7. Herbert Krugman, “The Impact of Television Advertising: Learning 
Without Involvement,” Public Opinion Quarterly 29 (Fall 1965): 349–356; 

330 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
 10. Punam Anand, Morris B. Holbrook, and Debra Stephens, “The Formation of 
Affective Judgments: The Cognitive–Affective Model Versus the Independence 
Hypothesis,” Journal of Consumer Research 15 (December 1988): 386–391; 
Richard S. Lazarus, “Thoughts on the Relations Between Emotion and 
Cognition,” American Psychologist 37, no. 9 (1982): 1019–1024; Robert B. 
Zajonc, “Feeling and Thinking: Preferences Need No Inferences,” American 
Psychologist 35, no. 2 (1980): 151–175.
 11. See Sharon E. Beatty and Lynn R. Kahle, “Alternative Hierarchies of the 
Attitude–Behavior Relationship: The Impact of Brand Commitment and 
Habit,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 16 (Summer 1988): 1–10.
 12. J. R. Priester, D. Nayakankuppan, M. A. Fleming, and J. Godek, “The 
A(2)SC(2) Model: The Influence of Attitudes and Attitude Strength on 
Consideration Set Choice,” Journal of Consumer Research 30, no. 4 (2004): 
574–587.
 13. Chester A. Insko and John Schopler, Experimental Social Psychology (New 
York: Academic Press, 1972).
 14. Insko and Schopler, Experimental Social Psychology.
 15. Robert E. Knox and James A. Inkster, “Postdecision Dissonance at Post 
Time,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 8, no. 4 (1968): 319–323.
 16. Daryl J. Bem, “Self-Perception Theory,” in Leonard Berkowitz, ed., Advances 
in Experimental Social Psychology (New York: Academic Press, 1972): 
1–62; cf. more recently Keisha M. Cutright, Eugenia C. Wu, Jillian C. 
Banfield, Aaron C. Kay, and Gavan J. Fitzsimons, “When Your World Must 
Be Defended: Choosing Products to Justify the System,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 38, no. 1 (June 2011): 62–77.
 17. Jonathan L. Freedman and Scott C. Fraser, “Compliance Without 
Pressure: The Foot-in-the-Door Technique,” Journal of Personality & Social 
Psychology 4 (August 1966): 195–202. For further consideration of pos-
sible explanations for this effect, see William DeJong, “An Examination 
of Self-Perception Mediation of the Foot-in-the-Door Effect,” Journal of 
Personality & Social Psychology 37 (December 1979): 221–231; Alice M. 
Tybout, Brian Sternthal, and Bobby J. Calder, “Information Availability 
as a Determinant of Multiple-Request Effectiveness,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 20 (August 1988): 280–290.
 18. David H. Furse, David W. Stewart, and David L. Rados, “Effects of Foot-in-
the-Door, Cash Incentives and Follow-ups on Survey Response,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 18 (November 1981): 473–478; Carol A. Scott, “The 
Effects of Trial and Incentives on Repeat Purchase Behavior,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 13 (August 1976): 263–269.
 19. Bob Fennis, Loes Janssen, and Kathleen D. Vohs, “Acts of Benevolence: 
A Limited-Resource Account of Compliance with Charitable Requests,” 
Journal of Consumer Research (2009): 906–925.
 20. See Joan Meyers-Levy and Brian Sternthal, “A Two-Factor Explanation 
of Assimilation and Contrast Effects,” Journal of Marketing Research 30 
(August 1993): 359–368.
 21. Mark B. Traylor, “Product Involvement and Brand Commitment,” Journal 
of Advertising Research (December 1981): 51–56.
 22. Fritz Heider, The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations (New York: Wiley, 
1958).
 23. K. Woolley and A. Fishbach, “A Recipe for Friendship: Similarity in Food 
Consumption Promotes Affiliation and Trust,” talk presented at the 
October 2014 Association for Consumer Research, Baltimore, MD.
 24. Robert B. Cialdini, Richard J. Borden, Avril Thorne, Marcus Randall Walker, 
Stephen Freeman, and Lloyd Reynolds Sloan, “Basking in Reflected Glory: 
Three (Football) Field Studies,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 
34: 366–375.
 25. Quoted in Jon Weinbach, “Ad Score! Major League Soccer Teams Will Sell Ad 
Space on Players’ Jerseys,” Wall Street Journal (September 28, 2006): B1.
 26. Debra Z. Basil and Paul M. Herr, “Attitudinal Balance and Cause-Related 
Marketing: An Empirical Application of Balance Theory,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 16, no. 4 (2006): 391–403.
 27. Leslie Kaufman, “Enough Talk,” Newsweek (August 18, 1997): 48–49.
 28. Allan Wicker, “Attitudes Versus Actions: The Relationship of Verbal and 
Overt Behavioral Responses to Attitude Objects,” Journal of Social Issues 25 
(Autumn 1969): 65.
 29. Martin Fishbein, “An Investigation of the Relationships Between Beliefs 
About an Object and the Attitude Toward that Object,” Human Relations 16 
(1983): 233–240.
 30. Medication Adherence in America 2013, National Community Pharmacists 
Association, https://www.ncpanet.org/pdf/reportcard/AdherenceReportCard_
Abridged.pdf, accessed March 30, 2015.
 31. Stephanie Clifford, “Using Data to Stage-Manage Paths to the Prescription 
Counter,” New York Times (June 19, 2013), http://bits.blogs.nyt 
.com/2013/06/19/using-data-to-stage-manage-paths-to-the-prescrip-
tion-counter/, accessed February 3, 2015.
 32. Icek Ajzen and Martin Fishbein, “Attitude–Behavior Relations: A 
Theoretical Analysis and Review of Empirical Research,” Psychological 
Bulletin 84 (September 1977): 888–918.
 33. Morris B. Holbrook and William J. Havlena, “Assessing the Real-to-Artificial 
Generalizability of Multi-Attribute Attitude Models in Tests of New Product 
Designs,” Journal of Marketing Research 25 (February 1988): 25–35; Terence 
A. Shimp and Alican Kavas, “The Theory of Reasoned Action Applied to 
Coupon Usage,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (December 1984): 795–809.
 34. R. P. Abelson, “Conviction,” American Psychologist 43 (1988): 267–75; 
Richard E. Petty and Jon A. Krosnick, Attitude Strength: Antecedents and 
Consequences (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1995); Ida E. Berger and Linda F. 
Alwitt, “Attitude Conviction: A Self-Reflective Measure of Attitude Strength,” 
Journal of Social Behavior & Personality 11, no. 3 (1996): 557–572.
 35. Noah J. Goldstein, Robert B. Cialdini, and Vladas Griskevicius, “A Room with 
a Viewpoint: Using Social Norms to Motivate Environmental Conservation 
in Hotels,” Journal of Consumer Research 35 (October 2008): 472–482.
 36. Blair H. Sheppard, Jon Hartwick, and Paul R. Warshaw, “The Theory of 
Reasoned Action: A Meta-Analysis of Past Research with Recommendations 
for Modifications and Future Research,” Journal of Consumer Research 15 
(December 1988): 325–343.
 37. Joseph A. Cote, James McCullough, and Michael Reilly, “Effects of 
Unexpected Situations on Behavior–Intention Differences: A Garbology 
Analysis,” Journal of Consumer Research 12 (September 1985): 188–194.
 38. Robert E. Smith and William R. Swinyard, “Attitude–Behavior Consistency: 
The Impact of Product Trial Versus Advertising,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 20 (August 1983): 257–267.
 39. For a recent similar application, cf. Nader T. Tavassoli and Gavan J. 
Fitzsimons, “Spoken and Typed Expressions of Repeated Attitudes: Matching 
Response Modes Leads to Attitude Retrieval Versus Construction,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 33, no. 2 (2006): 179–187.
 40. Kulwant Singh, Siew Meng Leong, Chin Tiong Tan, and Kwei Cheong Wong, 
“A Theory of Reasoned Action Perspective of Voting Behavior: Model and 
Empirical Test,” Psychology & Marketing 12, no. 1 (January 1995): 37–51; 
Joseph A. Cote and Patriya S. Tansuhaj, “Culture Bound Assumptions in 
Behavior Intention Models,” in Thomas K. Srull, ed., Advances in Consumer 
Research 16 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1989), 105–109.
 41. Joel B. Cohen and Americus Reed II, “A Multiple Pathway Anchoring and 
Adjustment (MPAA) Model of Attitude Generation and Recruitment,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 33 (June 2006): 1–15.
 42. Richard P. Bagozzi and Paul R. Warshaw, “Trying to Consume,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 17 (September 1990): 127–140.
 43. Robert B. Cialdini and Kelton V. L. Rhoads, “Human Behavior and the 
Marketplace,” Marketing Research (Fall 2001): 13.
 44. Gert Assmus, “An Empirical Investigation into the Perception of Vehicle 
Source Effects,” Journal of Advertising 7 (Winter 1978): 4–10. For a more thor-
ough discussion of the pros and cons of different media, see Stephen Baker, 
Systematic Approach to Advertising Creativity (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1979).
 45. Alladi Venkatesh, Ruby Roy Dholakia, and Nikhilesh Dholakia, “New 
Visions of Information Technology and Postmodernism: Implications for 
Advertising and Marketing Communications,” in Walter Brenner and 
Lutz Kolbe, eds., The Information Superhighway and Private Households: Case 
Studies of Business Impacts (Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag, 1996), 319–337; 
Donna L. Hoffman and Thomas P. Novak, “Marketing in Hypermedia 
Computer-Mediated Environments: Conceptual Foundations,” Journal of 
Marketing 60, no. 3 (July 1996): 50–68. For an early theoretical discus-
sion of interactivity in communications paradigms, see B. Aubrey Fisher, 
Perspectives on Human Communication (New York: Macmillan, 1978).
 46. Seth Godin, Permission Marketing: Turning Strangers into Friends, and Friends 
into Customers (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999).
 47. Barbara J. Phillips, Jessica Miller, and Edward F. McQuarrie, “Dreaming Out 
Loud on Pinterest: New Forms of Indirect Persuasion,” International Journal 
of Advertising, 33, no. 4 (2014): 633.
 48. Brad Stone, “The War for Your TV,” Newsweek (July 29, 2002): 46–47.
 49. Carl I. Hovland and W. Weiss, “The Influence of Source Credibility on 
Communication Effectiveness,” Public Opinion Quarterly 15 (1952): 635–650; 
for a recent treatment, cf. Yong-Soon Kang and Paul M. Herr, “Beauty and the 
Beholder: Toward an Integrative Model of Communication Source Effects,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 33 (June 2006): 123–130.
 50. Herbert Kelman, “Processes of Opinion Change,” Public Opinion Quarterly 
25 (Spring 1961): 57–78; Susan M. Petroshius and Kenneth E. Crocker, 
“An Empirical Analysis of Spokesperson Characteristics on Advertisement 
and Product Evaluations,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 17 
(Summer 1989): 217–226.
 51. Kenneth G. DeBono and Richard J. Harnish, “Source Expertise, Source 
Attractiveness, and the Processing of Persuasive Information: A Functional 
Approach,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 55, no. 4 (1988):  
541–546.
 52. Joseph R. Priester and Richard E. Petty, “The Influence of Spokesperson 
Trustworthiness on Message Elaboration, Attitude Strength, and Advertising 
Effectiveness,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 13, no. 4 (2003): 408–421.
 53. Hershey H. Friedman and Linda Friedman, “Endorser Effectiveness by 
Product Type,” Journal of Advertising Research 19, no. 5 (1979): 63–71. 
For a study that looked at nontarget market effects—the effects of adver-
tising intended for other market segments—see Jennifer L. Aaker, Anne 
M. Brumbaugh, and Sonya A. Grier, “Non-Target Markets and Viewer 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
331 
 70. Alice H. Eagly, Andy Wood, and Shelly Chaiken, “Causal Inferences About 
Communicators and Their Effect in Opinion Change,” Journal of Personality 
& Social Psychology 36, no. 4 (1978): 424–435.
 71. Patrick Loughran, “Sex Pistol Sends Dairy Crest Butter Sales Soaring,” 
Times of London (February 3, 2009), www.timesonline.co.uk, accessed Feb-
ruary 4, 2009.
 72. Claire Cain Miller and Vindu Goel, “Google to Sell Users’ Endorsements,” 
New York Times  (October 11, 2013), http://www.nyt.com/2013/10/12/tech  
nology/google-sets-plan-to-sell-users-endorsements.html?pagewanted=1& 
ref=todayspaper, accessed February 19, 2015.
 73. R. J. Fisher and Y. Ma, “The Price of Being Beautiful: Negative Effects of 
Attractiveness on Empathy for Children in Need,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 41, no. 2 (2014): 436–450.
 74. Brian Steinberg, “Bob Dylan Gets Tangled Up in Pink: Victoria’s Secret 
Campaign Drafts Counterculture Hero; Just Like the Rolling Stones,” Wall 
Street Journal (April 2, 2004): B3.
 75. Robert Klara, “Brands by Bieber,” Brandweek (January 1, 2011), http://
www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/brands-bieber-126241, 
accessed February 23, 2011.
 76. Grant McCracken, “Who Is the Celebrity Endorser? Cultural Foundations 
of the Endorsement Process,” Journal of Consumer Research 16, no. 3 
(December 1989): 310–321.
 77. Quoted in www.japander.com, accessed March 7, 2013.
 78. Nat Ives, “Marketers Run to Pull the Plug When Celebrity Endorsers Say 
the Darnedest Things,” New York Times (July 16, 2004), www.nyt.com, ac-
cessed July 16, 2004.
 79. Judith A. Garretson and Scot Burton, “The Role of Spokescharacters as 
Advertisement and Package Cues in Integrated Marketing Communications,” 
Journal of Marketing 69 (October, 2005): 118–132.
 80. Jeff Bercovici, “America’s Most Loved Spokescharacters,” Forbes (March 14,  
2011), http://www.forbes.com/2011/03/11/old-spice-snoopy-m-and-m-
most-loved-spokescharacters.html, accessed April 30, 2011.
 81. Natalie T. Wood and Michael R. Solomon, eds., Virtual Social Identity 
(Newport, CA: Sage, 2010).
 82. Aner Sela, S. Christian Wheeler, and Gülen Sarial-Abi, “We Are Not The Same  
as You and I: Causal Effects of Minor Language Variations on Consumers’  
Attitudes Toward Brands,” Journal of Consumer Research 3, no. 3 (2012): 644–661.
 83. Xun Huang, Xiuping Li, and Meng Zhang, “‘Seeing’ the Social Roles of 
Brands: How Physical Positioning Influences Brand Evaluation,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 23, no. 4 (2013): 509–514.
 84. Kathy Crosett, “Consumers Confused by TV Commercials,” Adology 
(October 4, 2010), http://www.marketingforecast.com/archives/7538, 
accessed May 30, 2011; David W. Stewart and David H. Furse, “The 
Effects of Television Advertising Execution on Recall, Comprehension, and 
Persuasion,” Psychology & Marketing 2 (Fall 1985): 135–160.
 85. Robert C. Grass and Wallace H. Wallace, “Advertising Communication: 
Print vs. TV,” Journal of Advertising Research 14 (1974): 19–23.
 86. Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Michael R. Solomon, “Utilitarian, Aesthetic, 
and Familiarity Responses to Verbal Versus Visual Advertisements,” in 
Thomas C. Kinnear, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 11 (Provo, UT: 
Association for Consumer Research, 1984): 426–431.
 87. Terry L. Childers and Michael J. Houston, “Conditions for a Picture-
Superiority Effect on Consumer Memory,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 
(September 1984): 643–654.
 88. Scott B. MacKenzie, “The Role of Attention in Mediating the Effect of 
Advertising on Attribute Importance,” Journal of Consumer Research 13 
(September 1986): 174–195.
 89. Robert B. Zajonc, “Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure,” Journal of 
Personality & Social Psychology 8 (1968): 1–29.
 90. Giles D’Souza and Ram C. Rao, “Can Repeating an Advertisement More 
Frequently Than the Competition Affect Brand Preference in a Mature 
Market?” Journal of Marketing 59 (April 1995): 32–42.
 91. George E. Belch, “The Effects of Television Commercial Repetition on 
Cognitive Response and Message Acceptance,” Journal of Consumer Research 
9 (June 1982): 56–65; Marian Burke and Julie Edell, “Ad Reactions Over 
Time: Capturing Changes in the Real World,” Journal of Consumer Research 
13 (June 1986): 114–118; Herbert Krugman, “Why Three Exposures May 
Be Enough,” Journal of Advertising Research 12 (December 1972): 11–14.
 92. Susannah Jacob, “The Power of Three: Three Is the Right Number for 
Persuasion, a Study Says,” New York Times (January 3, 2014), http://www 
.nyt.com/2014/01/05/fashion/Three-Persuasion-The-Power-of-Three 
.html?ref=style, accessed January 30, 2015.
 93. Robert F. Bornstein, “Exposure and Affect: Overview and Meta-Analysis 
of Research, 1968–1987,” Psychological Bulletin 106, no. 2 (1989): 
265–289; Arno Rethans, John Swasy, and Lawrence Marks, “Effects of 
Television Commercial Repetition, Receiver Knowledge, and Commercial 
Length: A Test of the Two-Factor Model,” Journal of Marketing Research 23 
(February 1986): 50–61.
 94. Curtis P. Haugtvedt, David W. Schumann, Wendy L. Schneier, and Wendy 
L. Warren, “Advertising Repetition and Variation Strategies: Implications 
Distinctiveness: The Impact of Target Marketing on Advertising Attitudes,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 9, no. 3 (2000): 127–140.
 54. S. Ratneshwar and Shelly Chaiken, “Comprehension’s Role in Persuasion: 
The Case of Its Moderating Effect on the Persuasive Impact of Source 
Cues,” Journal of Consumer Research 18 (June 1991): 52–62.
 55. Steven S. Posavac, Michal Herzenstein, Frank R. Kardes, and Suresh 
Sundaram, “Profits and Halos: The Role of Firm Profitability Information 
in Consumer Inference,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 20, no. 3 (2010): 
327–337.
 56. Kenneth C. Herbst, Eli J. Finkel, David Allan, and Gráinne M. Fitzsimons, 
“On the Dangers of Pulling a Fast One: Advertisement Disclaimer Speed, 
Brand Trust, and Purchase Intention,” Journal of Consumer Research 38, 
no. 5 (2012): 909–919.
 57. Yeosun Yoon, Zeynep Gurhan-Canli, and Norbert Schwarz, “The Effect of 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Activities on Companies with Bad 
Reputations,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 16, no. 4 (2006): 377–390.
 58. Peter R. Darke and Robin J. B. Ritchie, “The Defensive Consumer: 
Advertising Deception, Defensive Processing, and Distrust,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 44 (February 2007): 114–127.
 59. Jagdish Agrawal and Wagner A. Kamakura, “The Economic Worth of 
Celebrity Endorsers: An Event Study Analysis,” Journal of Marketing 59 
(July 1995): 56–62.
 60. “Report: Charlie Sheen May Not Shine, But Stars Are Aligned as Print Ad 
Activists,” NYSportsJournalism.com (February 25, 2011), http://nysports 
journalism.squarespace.com/study-stars-shine-in-print-ads/?SSScroll 
Position=0&VK=94964620, accessed April 30, 2011.
 61. Heather Buttle, Jane E. Raymond, and Shai Danziger, “Do Famous Faces 
Capture Attention?,” paper presented at Association for Consumer 
Research Conference, Columbus, OH (October 1999).
 62. Michael A. Kamins, “Celebrity and Noncelebrity Advertising in a Two-
Sided Context,” Journal of Advertising Research 29 (June–July 1989): 34; 
Joseph M. Kamen, A. C. Azhari, and J. R. Kragh, “What a Spokesman Does 
for a Sponsor,” Journal of Advertising Research 15, no. 2 (1975): 17–24; 
Lynn Langmeyer and Mary Walker, “A First Step to Identify the Meaning in 
Celebrity Endorsers,” in Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., 
Advances in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1991): 364–371.
 63. Anthony R. Pratkanis, Anthony G. Greenwald, Michael R. Leippe, and 
Michael H. Baumgardner, “In Search of Reliable Persuasion Effects: 
III. The Sleeper Effect Is Dead, Long Live the Sleeper Effect,” Journal of 
Personality & Social Psychology 54 (1988): 203–218.
 64. Stuart Elliott, “A Message that Tries to Blend In,” New York Times (December 
12, 2013), http://www.nyt.com/2013/12/13/business/media/a-message- 
that-tries-to-blend-in.html?_r=0, accessed February 23, 2015.
 65. Stephanie Strom, “Nonprofit Punishes a 2nd Founder for Ruse,” New York 
Times 
(January 
15, 
2008), 
www.nyt.com/2008/01/15/us/15givewell 
.html?ex=1201064400&en=97effb249, accessed January 15, 2008; Ross 
D. Petty and J. Craig Andrews, “Covert Marketing Unmasked: A Legal and 
Regulatory Guide for Practices That Mask Marketing Messages,” Journal of 
Public Policy & Marketing (Spring 2008): 7–18; James B. Stewart, “Whole 
Foods CEO Threatens Merger, Fuels Arbitrage,” Smart Money (July 18, 2007), 
www.smartmoney.com/investing/stocks/whole-foods-ceo-threatens-merger-
fuels-arbitrage-21550/?hpadref=1, accessed June 4, 2009; Brian Morrissey, 
“‘Influencer Programs’ Likely to Spread,” Adweek (March 2, 2009), http://
www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/influencer-programs-likely-
spread-98542, accessed March 2, 2009; Katie Hafner, “Seeing Corporate 
Fingerprints in Wikipedia Edits,” New York Times (August 19, 2007), www.nyt 
.com/2007/08/19/technology/19wikipedia.html?_r=1&oref=slogin, accessed 
August 19, 2007; Brian Bergstein, “New Tool Mines: Wikipedia Trustworthiness 
Software Analyzes Reputations of the Contributors Responsible for Entries,” 
MSNBC (September 5, 2007), www.msnbc.msn.com/id/20604175, accessed 
September 5, 2007; http://wikiscanner.virgil.gr, accessed June 4, 2009.
 66. Quoted in “.com Disclosures: How to Make Effective Disclosures in Digital 
Advertising,” Federal Trade Commission (March 2013), https://www.ftc 
.gov/sites/default/files/attachments/press-releases/ftc-staff-revises-online-
advertising-disclosure-guidelines/130312dotcomdisclosures.pdf, accessed 
March 31, 2015.
 67. Ameet Sachdev, “FTC Cracks Down on Fake Online Endorsements: Agency 
Attempts to Punish Fake Reviews, Force Disclosure,” Chicago Tribune  
(October 11, 2010),  http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2010-10-11/business/ 
ct-biz-1011-web-reviews-20101011_1_ftc-cracks–endorsements-mary-
engle, accessed April 15, 2011.
 68. “Robber Makes It Biggs in Ad,” Advertising Age (May 29, 1989): 26.
 69. Gaby Wilson, “A$AP Rocky Wears Throwback Tommy Hilfiger on Under 
the Influence of Music Tour,” MTV.com (August 7, 2013), http://style.mtv 
.com/2013/08/07/asap-rocky-tommy-hilfiger/, accessed March 31, 2015; 
“Snoop Doggy Dogg aka Snoop Lion has Changed His Name to Snoopzilla,” 
news.com.au (October 17, 2013), http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/ 
music/snoop-doggy-dogg-aka-snoop-lion-has-changed-his-name-to-
snoopzilla/story-e6frfn09-1226741490306, accessed March 31, 2015.

332 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Evaluation of Comparative Advertising Messages: Subjects’ Responses to 
Perceptual Dimensions,” in B. B. Anderson, ed., Advances in Consumer 
Research 3 (Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research, 1976), 
53–57.
 109. Quoted in Ian McGugan, “The Ice-Bucket Racket,” New York Times Magazine 
(November 14, 2014), http://www.nyt.com/2014/11/16/magazine/the-
ice-bucket-racket.html?module=Search&mabReward=relbias%3Ar%2C%7B
%221%22%3A%22RI%3A10%22%7D&_r=0, accessed January 30, 2015.
 110. Geoffrey A. Fowler, “Asia’s Mobile Ads,” Wall Street Journal (April 25, 2005), 
www.wsj.com, accessed April 25, 2005; Brooks Barnes, “Coming to Your 
Cell: Paris Hilton,” Wall Street Journal (March 17, 2005), www.wsj.com, 
 accessed March 17, 2005; Alice Z. Cuneo, “Marketers Dial in to Messaging,” 
Advertising Age (November 1, 2004): 18; Stephen Baker and Heather Green, 
“Blogs Will Change Your Business,” BusinessWeek (May 2, 2005): 56.
 111. http://www.iamtryingtobelieve.com/, accessed March 31, 2015; Matt 
Linderman, “Year Zero” project = “the way a viral campaign should be run,” 
signalvnoise (May 1, 2007), https://signalvnoise.com/posts/403-year-zero-proj-
ect-the-way-a-viral-campaign-should-be-run, accessed March 31, 2015.
 112. Jon Zahlaway, “Nine Inch Nails’ Year Zero Plot Hits the Web,” SoundSpike, 
February 22, 2007, http://www.livedaily.com/news/11570.html?t=102, 
May 30, 2011.
 113. Erica Orden, “This Book Brought to You by …,” Wall Street Journal (April 26,  
2011), http://professional.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704132
204576285372092660548.html?mg=reno–WallStreetJournal, accessed 
April 28, 2011.
 114. Michael R. Solomon and Basil G. Englis, “Reality Engineering: Blurring the 
Boundaries Between Marketing and Popular Culture,” Journal of Current 
Issues & Research in Advertising 16, no. 2 (Fall 1994): 1–17.
 115. Austin Bunn, “Not Fade Away,” New York Times (December 2, 2002), www 
.nyt.com, accessed December 2, 2002.
 116. Marc Santora, “Circle the Block, Cabby, My Show’s On,” New York Times 
(January 16, 2003), www.nyt.com, accessed January 16, 2003; Wayne Parry, 
“Police May Sell Ad Space,” Montgomery Advertiser (November 20, 2002): A4.
 117. This process is described more fully in Michael R. Solomon, Conquering 
Consumerspace: Marketing Strategies for a Branded World (New York: AMACOM, 
2003); cf. also T. Bettina Cornwell and Bruce Keillor, “Contemporary Literature 
and the Embedded Consumer Culture: The Case of Updike’s Rabbit,” in Roger 
J. Kruez and Mary Sue MacNealy, eds., Empirical Approaches to Literature and 
Aesthetics: Advances in Discourse Processes 52 (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1996), 
559–572; Monroe Friedman, “The Changing Language of a Consumer 
Society: Brand Name Usage in Popular American Novels in the Postwar Era,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 11 (March 1985): 927–937; Monroe Friedman, 
“Commercial Influences in the Lyrics of Popular American Music of the Postwar 
Era,” Journal of Consumer Affairs 20 (Winter 1986): 193.
 118. Stuart Elliott, “Leaving Behind Malibu in Search of a New Dream Home,”  
New York Times (February 6, 2013), http://www.nyt.com/2013/02/07/ 
business/media/barbie-to-sell-her-malibu-dreamhouse.html?_r=0, accessed 
February 17, 2013.
 119. http://www.quill.com/content/index/authentic-dunder-mifflin-office-supplies/
default.cshtml, accessed April 1, 2015; Stuart Elliott, “Expanding Line of 
Dunder Mifflin Products Shows Success in Reverse Product Placement,” 
New York Times (November 23, 2012), http://mediadecoder.blogs.nyt 
.com/2012/11/23/expanding-line-of-dunder-mifflin-products-shows- 
success-in-reverse-product–placement/, accessed February 17, 2013.
 120. Mark J. Miller, “Hologram Virtual Performances Put Dead Celebs on the 
Comeback Trail,” Brandchannel (June 19, 2012), http://www.brandchannel 
.com/home/post/2012/06/19/Hologram-Virtual–Performances-061912 
.aspx, accessed February 17, 2013.
 121. Mark J. Miller, “007 Branding: Jaguar Land Rover Joins SPECTRE Product 
Placement Roster,” Brandchannel (February 10, 2015), http://www 
.brandchannel.com/home/post/2015/02/10/150210-James-Bond-SPECTRE- 
Product-Placement.aspx, accessed February 23, 2015.
 122. Abe Sauer, “Announcing the 2015 Brandcameo Product Placement 
Awards,” (February 20, 2015), Brandchannel, http://www.brandchannel 
.com/home/post/150220-2015-Brandcameo-Product-Placement-
Awards.aspx, accessed March 31, 2015.
 123. Fara Warner, “Why It’s Getting Harder to Tell the Shows from the Ads,” 
Wall Street Journal (June 15, 1995): B1.
 124. Quoted in Simona Covel, “Bag Borrow or Steal Lands the Role of a Lifetime,  
Online Retailer Hopes to Profit from Mention in ‘Sex and the City,’” Wall Street  
Journal (May 28, 2008), http://online.wsj.com/article/SB12118414901692 
1095.html?mod=rss_media_and_marketing, accessed May 28, 2008; www.bag 
borroworsteal.com, accessed April 1, 2015.
 125. “Top 10 Product Placements in First Half of ’07,” Marketing Daily (September 
26, 2007), www.mediapost.com, accessed September 26, 2007.
 126. Brian Steinberg, “Getting Izze to Izzie on ‘Grey’s Anatomy’: How PepsiCo 
Placed Beverage Brand in ABC Show without Paying a Thing,” Advertising 
Age (April 1, 2009), www.adage.com, accessed April 1, 2009.
 127. Claire Atkinson, “Ad Intrusion Up, Say Consumers,” Advertising Age 
(January 6, 2003): 1.
for Understanding Attitude Strength,” Journal of Consumer Research 21 
(June 1994): 176–189.
 95. John Paul Titlow, “At Pandora, Every Listener is a Test Subject,” Fast Com-
pany (August 14, 2013), http://www.fastcolabs.com/3015729/in-pandoras- 
big-data-experiments-youre-just-another-lab-rat, accessed February 18, 2015.
 96. Amit Bhattacharjee, Jonah Berger and Geeta Menon, “When Identity 
Marketing Backfires: Consumer Agency in Identity Expression,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 41, no. 2 (2014): 294–309.
 97. Pierre Chandon and Brian Wansink, “Is Obesity Caused by Calorie 
Underestimation? A Psychological Model of Meal Size Estimation,” Journal 
of Marketing Research 44, no. 1 (2007):84–99; Nailya Ordabayeva and 
Pierre Chandon, “Predicting and Managing Consumers’ Package Size 
Impressions,” Journal of Marketing 77, no. 5 (2013): 123–137; Yann Cornil 
and Pierre Chandon, “Pleasure as a Substitute for Size: Using Multisensory 
Imagery to Increase Preferences for Smaller Food Portions,” 2014; Yann 
Cornil and Pierrre Chandon, “From Fan to Fat? Vicarious Losing Increases 
Unhealthy Eating But Self-Affirmation Is an Effective Remedy,” Psychological 
Science 24, no. 10 (2013): 1936–1946; Brian Wansink and Pierre Chandon, 
“Slim by Design: Redirecting the Accidental Drivers of Mindless Overeating,” 
Journal of Consulting and Clincial Psychology 24, no. 3 (2014): 413–431.
 98. Linda L. Golden and Mark I. Alpert, “Comparative Analysis of the Relative 
Effectiveness of One- and Two-Sided Communication for Contrasting 
Products,” Journal of Advertising 16 (1987): 18–25; Michael A. Kamins, 
“Celebrity and Noncelebrity Advertising in a Two-Sided Context,” Journal 
of Advertising Research 29 (June–July 1989): 34; Robert B. Settle and 
Linda L. Golden, “Attribution Theory and Advertiser Credibility,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 11 (May 1974): 181–185.
 99. Cf. Alan G. Sawyer, “The Effects of Repetition of Refutational and Supportive 
Advertising Appeals,” Journal of Marketing Research 10 (February 1973): 
23–33; George J. Szybillo and Richard Heslin, “Resistance to Persuasion: 
Inoculation Theory in a Marketing Context,” Journal of Marketing Research 
10 (November 1973): 396–403.
 100. Rupal Parekh and Jean Halliday, “New Ad Introduces Consumers to ‘New 
GM,’” Advertising Age (June 1, 2009), http://adage.com/article?article_
id=137010, accessed June 6, 2009.
 101. Uma R. Karmarkar and Zakary L. Tormala, “Believe Me, I Have No Idea What 
I’m Talking About: The Effects of Source Certainty on Consumer Involvement 
and Persuasion,” Journal of Consumer Research 36 (April 2009): 1033–1049.
 102. Golden and Alpert, “Comparative Analysis of the Relative Effectiveness 
of One- and Two-Sided Communication for Contrasting Products”; Gita 
Venkataramani Johar and Anne L. Roggeveen, “Changing False Beliefs 
from Repeated Advertising: The Role of Claim-Refutation Alignment,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 17, no. 2 (2007): 118–127.
 103. George E. Belch, Michael A. Belch, and Angelina Villareal, “Effects of 
Advertising Communications: Review of Research,” in Research in Marketing 
9 (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1987): 59–117.
 104. Frank R. Kardes, “Spontaneous Inference Processes in Advertising: The 
Effects of Conclusion Omission and Involvement on Persuasion,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 15 (September 1988): 225–233.
 105. Belch, Belch, and Villareal, “Effects of Advertising Communications: 
Review of Research”; Cornelia Pechmann and Gabriel Esteban, “Persuasion 
Processes Associated with Direct Comparative and Noncomparative 
Advertising and Implications for Advertising Effectiveness,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 2, no. 4 (1994): 403–432.
 106. Bruce Horovitz, “Sodastream’s Super Bowl Spot Gets Rejected—Again,” 
USA Today (January 25, 2014), http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/
business/2014/01/25/5-biggest-advertisers-going-for-it-in-super-
bowl/4835695//business/2014/01/24/sodastream-banned-super-bowl-
ad-coke-pepsi-scarlett-johannson/4838575/, accessed February 16, 2015.
 107. Cornelia Dröge and Rene Y. Darmon, “Associative Positioning Strategies 
Through Comparative Advertising: Attribute vs. Overall Similarity App-
roaches,” Journal of Marketing Research 24 (1987): 377–389; Darrell Muehling 
and Norman Kangun, “The Multidimensionality of Comparative Advertising: 
Implications for the FTC,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing (1985): 112–128;  
Beth A. Walker and Helen H. Anderson, “Reconceptualizing Comparative 
Advertising: A Framework and Theory of Effects,” in Rebecca H. Holman 
and Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: 
Association for Consumer Research, 1991), 342–347; William L. Wilkie and 
Paul W. Farris, “Comparison Advertising: Problems and Potential,” Journal of 
Marketing 39 (October 1975): 7–15; R. G. Wyckham, “Implied Superiority 
Claims,” Journal of Advertising Research (February–March 1987): 54–63.
 108. Stephen A. Goodwin and Michael Etgar, “An Experimental Investigation 
of Comparative Advertising: Impact of Message Appeal, Information 
Load, and Utility of Product Class,” Journal of Marketing Research 17 
(May 1980): 187–202; Gerald J. Gorn and Charles B. Weinberg, “The 
Impact of Comparative Advertising on Perception and Attitude: Some 
Positive Findings,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (September 1984): 
719–727; Terence A. Shimp and David C. Dyer, “The Effects of Comparative 
Advertising Mediated by Market Position of Sponsoring Brand,” Journal 
of Advertising 3 (Summer 1978): 13–19; R. Dale Wilson, “An Empirical 

 
ChAPter 8   Attitudes and Persuasive Communications 
333 
also Ashesh Mukherjee and Laurette Dubé, “The Use of Humor in Threat-
Related Advertising” (unpublished manuscript, McGill University, June 
2002).
 144. David Gardner, “The Distraction Hypothesis in Marketing,” Journal of 
Advertising Research 10 (1970): 25–30.
 145. Chris Abraham, “Global Web Means Your ‘Fart Jokes’ Can Be Heard Out of 
Context,” Advertising Age (June 15, 2009), http://adage.com/digitalnext/
article?article_id=137273, accessed June 16, 2009.
 146. U.S. Gives Up on Graphic Cigarette Package Warnings – for Now, Advertising 
Age (March 20, 2013), http://adage.com/article/news/u-s-graphic- 
cigarette-package-warnings/240436/, accessed April 1, 2015.
 147. Michael L. Ray and William L. Wilkie, “Fear: The Potential of an Appeal 
Neglected by Marketing,” Journal of Marketing 34, no. 1 (1970): 54–62.
 148. Punam Anand Keller and Lauren Goldberg Block, “Increasing the 
Effectiveness of Fear Appeals: The Effect of Arousal and Elaboration,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 22 (March 1996): 448–459.
 149. Ronald Paul Hill, “An Exploration of the Relationship Between AIDS-
Related Anxiety and the Evaluation of Condom Advertisements,” Journal 
of Advertising 17, no. 4 (1988): 35–42.
 150. Randall Rothenberg, “Talking Too Tough on Life’s Risks?” New York Times 
(February 16, 1990): D1.
 151. Denise D. Schoenbachler and Tommy E. Whittler, “Adolescent Processing 
of Social and Physical Threat Communications,” Journal of Advertising 25, 
no. 4 (Winter 1996): 37–54.
 152. Barbara B. Stern, “Medieval Allegory: Roots of Advertising Strategy for the 
Mass Market,” Journal of Marketing 52 (July 1988): 84–94.
 153. Edward F. McQuarrie and David Glen Mick, “On Resonance: A Critical 
Pluralistic Inquiry into Advertising Rhetoric,” Journal of Consumer Research 
19 (September 1992): 180–197.
 154. Cf. Linda M. Scott, “The Troupe: Celebrities as Dramatis Personae in 
Advertisements,” in Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances 
in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1991): 
355–363; Barbara Stern, “Literary Criticism and Consumer Research: Overview 
and Illustrative Analysis,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 (1989): 322–334; 
Judith Williamson, Decoding Advertisements (Boston: Marion Boyars, 1978).
 155. John Deighton, Daniel Romer, and Josh McQueen, “Using Drama to 
Persuade,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 (December 1989): 335–343.
 156. Richard E. Petty, John T. Cacioppo, and David Schumann, “Central and 
Peripheral Routes to Advertising Effectiveness: The Moderating Role of 
Involvement,” Journal of Consumer Research 10, no. 2 (1983): 135–146.
 157. Jerry C. Olson, Daniel R. Toy, and Philip A. Dover, “Do Cognitive Responses 
Mediate the Effects of Advertising Content on Cognitive Structure?” Journal 
of Consumer Research 9, no. 3 (1982): 245–262.
 158. Julie A. Edell and Andrew A. Mitchell, “An Information Processing 
Approach to Cognitive Responses,” in S. C. Jain, ed., Research Frontiers 
in Marketing: Dialogues and Directions (Chicago, IL: American Marketing 
Association, 1978): 178-183.
 159. Richard E. Petty, John T. Cacioppo, Constantine Sedikides, and Alan J. 
Strathman, “Affect and Persuasion: A Contemporary Perspective,” 
American Behavioral Scientist 31, no. 3 (1988): 355–371.
 160. Stuart Elliott, “A Message That Tries to Blend In,” New York Times (December 
12, 2013), http://www.nyt.com/2013/12/13/business/media/a-message-
that-tries-to-blend-in.html?_r=0, accessed February 23, 2015.
 161. Kunur Patel, “Apple, Campbell’s Say iAds Twice as Effective as TV,” Ad 
Age Digital (February 3, 2011), http://adage.com/article/digital/apple- 
campbell-s-iads-effective-tv/148630/, accessed April 15, 2011.
 162. Claire Cain Miller and Vindu Goel, “Google to Sell Users’ Endorsements,” 
New York Times (October 11, 2013), http://www.nyt.com/2013/10/12/ 
technology/google-sets-plan-to-sell-users-endorsements.html?pagewanted 
=1&ref=todayspaper, accessed February 19, 2015.
 163. Warc, “Celebrity Endorsement: The Trigonometry of Talent,” http://www 
.warc.com/Topics/AdmapSeptember2012.topic.
 164. Rob Walker, “The Gifted Ones,” New York Times Magazine (November 14, 
2004), www.nyt.com, accessed September 29, 2007.
 165. Center for Media Research, “Product Placement, Sampling, and Word-of-
Mouth Collectively Influence Consumer Purchases” (October 22, 2008), www 
.mediapost.com, accessed October 22, 2008; Brian Steinberg and Suzanne 
Vranica, “Prime-Time TV’s New Guest Stars: Products,” Wall Street Journal 
(January 12, 2004), www.wsj.com, accessed January 12, 2004; Karlene 
Lukovitz, “‘Storyline’ Product Placements Gaining on Cable,” Marketing Daily 
(October 5, 2007), www.mediapost.com, accessed October 5, 2007.
 166. Sascha Topolinski, Sandy Lindner, and Anna Freudenberg, “Popcorn in 
the Cinema: Oral Interference Sabotages Advertising Effects,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 24, no. 2 (April 2014): 169–176.
 128. Motoko Rich, “Product Placement Deals Make Leap from Film to Books,” 
New York Times (June 12, 2006), www.nyt.com, accessed June 12, 2006.
 129. Cristel Antonia Russell, “Investigating the Effectiveness of Product 
Placements in Television Shows: The Role of Modality and Plot Connection 
Congruence on Brand Memory and Attitude,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 29 (December 2002): 306–318; Denise E. DeLorme and Leonard 
N. Reid, “Moviegoers’ Experiences and Interpretations of Brands in Films 
Revisited,” Journal of Advertising 28, no. 2 (1999): 71–90; Barbara B. Stern 
and Cristel A. Russell, “Consumer Responses to Product Placement in 
Television Sitcoms: Genre, Sex and Consumption,” Consumption, Markets & 
Culture 7 (December 2004): 371–394.
 130. Louise Story, “More Marketers Are Grabbing the Attention of Players 
During Online Games,” New York Times (January 24, 2007), www.nyt.com, 
accessed January 24, 2007; Shankar Gupta, “King of the Advergames,” www 
.mediapost.com, accessed December 22, 2006; “Plinking,” Fast Company (April 
2007): 31; Sarah Sennott, “Gaming the Ad,” Newsweek (January 31, 2005): E2; 
“Advertisements Insinuated into Video Games,” New York Times (October 18,  
2004), www.nyt.com, accessed October 18, 2004; Jack Loechner, “Adver-
gaming,” Research Brief (October 24, 2007), http://www.mediapost.com/ 
publications/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=69570&passFuse 
Action=PublicationsSearch.showSearchReslts&art_searched=&page_num 
ber=0, accessed September 13, 2011; Tim Zuckert, “Become One with the Game, 
Games Offer Brands a Unique Way to Be the Entertainment—Not Just Sponsor 
It,” Advertising Age (June 16, 2008), www.adage.com, accessed June 16, 2008.
 131. Barry Meier and Andrew Martin, “Real and Virtual Firearms Nurture a 
Marketing Link,” New York Times (December 24, 2012), http://www.nyt 
.com/2012/12/25/business/real-and-virtual-firearms-nurture-marketing- 
link.html, accessed February 17, 2013.
 132. Nick Wingfield, “Sony’s PS3 to Get In-Game Ads,” Wall Street Journal (June 
4, 2008): B7; Jeffrey Bardzell, Shaowen Bardzell, and Tyler Pace, Player 
Engagement and In-Game Advertising (November 23, 2008), http://class 
.classmatandread.net/pp/oto.pdf, accessed September 13, 2011.
 133. Louise Kramer, “In a Battle of Toothpastes, It’s Information vs. Emotion,” 
New York Times (January 17, 2007): C6.
 134. Hubert A. Zielske, “Does Day-After Recall Penalize ‘Feeling’ Ads?” Journal 
of Advertising Research 22 (1982): 19–22.
 135. Allessandra Galloni, “Lee’s Cheeky Ads Are Central to New European 
Campaign,” Wall Street Journal (March 15, 2002), www.wsj.com, accessed 
March 15, 2002.
 136. Belch, Belch, and Villareal, “Effects of Advertising Communications: Review 
of Research”; Alice E. Courtney and Thomas W. Whipple, “Sex Stereotyping 
in Advertising,” Signs 10 (Spring 1985): 583–585; Michael S. LaTour, 
“Female Nudity in Print Advertising: An Analysis of Gender Differences in 
Arousal and Ad Response,” Psychology & Marketing 7, no. 1 (1990): 65–81; 
B. G. Yovovich, “Sex in Advertising—The Power and the Perils,” Advertising 
Age (May 2, 1983): M4–M5. For an interesting interpretive analysis, see 
Richard Elliott and Mark Ritson, “Practicing Existential Consumption: The 
Lived Meaning of Sexuality in Advertising,” in Frank R. Kardes and Mita 
Sujan, eds., Advances in Consumer Behavior 22 (1995): 740–745; Jaideep 
Sengupta and Darren W. Dahl, “Gender-Related Reactions to Gratuitous Sex 
Appeals,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 18 (2008): 62–78.
 137. Penny M. Simpson, Steve Horton, and Gene Brown, “Male Nudity in 
Advertisements: A Modified Replication and Extension of Gender and 
Product Effects,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 24, no. 3 
(1996): 257–262.
 138. Jaideep Sengupta and Darren W. Dahl, “Gender-Related Reactions to 
Gratuitous Sex Appeals,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 18 (2008): 62–78; 
Darren W. Dahl, Jaideep Sengupta, and Kathleen Vohs, “Sex in Advertising: 
Gender Differences and the Role of Relationship Commitment,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 36 (August 2009): 215–231.
 139. Mark Dolliver, “Seeing Too Much Sex in Ads, or Too Little?” Adweek (December  
6, 2010), http://teens.adweek.com/aw/content_display/datacenter/research/ 
e3i5b647315f27310efc8f6df37dcb48e9b, accessed April 15, 2011.
 140. Michael S. LaTour and Tony L. Henthorne, “Ethical Judgments of Sexual 
Appeals in Print Advertising,” Journal of Advertising 23, no. 3 (September 
1994): 81–90.
 141. “Does Sex Really Sell?” Adweek (October 17, 2005): 17.
 142. Katharine Q. Seelye, “Metamucil Ad Featuring Old Faithful Causes a Stir,” 
New York Times (January 19, 2003), www.nyt.com, accessed January 19, 
2003.
 143. Thomas J. Madden, “Humor in Advertising: An Experimental Analysis,” 
working paper, no. 83-27, University of Massachusetts, 1984; Thomas 
J. Madden and Marc G. Weinberger, “The Effects of Humor on Attention 
in Magazine Advertising,” Journal of Advertising 11, no. 3 (1982): 8–14; 
Marc G. Weinberger and Harlan E. Spotts, “Humor in U.S. Versus U.K. TV 
Commercials: A Comparison,” Journal of Advertising 18 (1989): 39–44; see 

334
R
ichard has had it! There’s only so much longer he 
can go on watching TV on his tiny, antiquated set. 
It was bad enough trying to squint at The Walking 
Dead. The final straw was when he couldn’t tell the Titans 
from the Jaguars during an NFL football game. When he went 
next door to watch the second half on Mark’s home theater 
setup, he finally realized what he was missing. Budget or not, 
it was time to act: A man has to have his priorities.
Where to start looking? The Web, naturally. Richard 
checks out a few comparison-shopping Web sites, including 
pricegrabber.com and bizrate.com. After he narrows down his 
options, he ventures out to check on a few sets in person. He 
figures he’ll probably get a decent selection (and an affordable 
price) at one of those huge “big box” stores. Arriving at Zany 
Zack’s Appliance Emporium, Richard heads straight for the 
Video Zone in the back; he barely notices the rows of toasters, 
microwave ovens, and stereos on his way. Within minutes, a smiling salesperson in a cheap suit accosts 
him. Even though he could use some help, Richard tells the salesperson he’s only browsing. He figures 
these guys don’t know what they’re talking about, and they’re simply out to make a sale no matter what.
Richard examines some of the features on the 60-inch flatscreens. He knew his friend Evey 
had a set by Prime Wave that she really liked, and his sister Alex warned him to stay away from 
the Kamashita. Although Richard finds a Prime Wave model loaded to the max with features such 
 Chapter 9 ● Decision Making
 9-1 The three categories of consumer decision making are 
cognitive, habitual, and affective.
 9-2 A cognitive purchase decision is the outcome of a series 
of stages that results in the selection of one product over 
competing options
 9-3 The way information about a product choice is framed 
can prime a decision even when the consumer is un-
aware of this influence.
 9-4 We often rely on rules-of-thumb to make routine decisions.
 9-5 Marketers often need to understand consumers’ behavior 
rather than a consumer’s behavior.
 9-6 The decision-making process differs when people choose 
what to buy on behalf of an organization rather than for 
personal use.
 9-7 Members of a family unit play different roles and have 
different amounts of influence when the family makes 
purchase decisions.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
Source: stefanocapra/Fotolia

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
335 
as a sleep timer, on-screen programming menu, cable-compatible tuner, and picture-in-picture, he 
chooses the less expensive Precision 2000X because it has one feature that really catches his fancy: 
stereo broadcast reception.
Later that day, Richard is a happy man as he sits in his easy chair and watches Sheldon match 
wits with Leonard, Howard, and the others on The Big Bang Theory. If he’s going to be a couch potato, 
he’s going in style.
What’s Your problem?
Richard’s decision represented his response to a problem. In fact 
every consumer decision we make is a response to a problem. 
Of course, the type and scope of these problems varies enor-
mously; our needs range from simple physiological priorities such 
as quenching thirst to whether we will spend our hard-earned 
money on a television to abstract intellectual or aesthetic quandaries such as choosing a 
college major—or perhaps what to wear to that upcoming Rihanna concert.
Because some purchase decisions are more important than others, the amount of 
effort we put into each differs. Sometimes the decision-making process is almost automatic; 
we seem to make snap judgments based on little information. At other times it resembles a 
full-time job. A person may literally spend days or weeks agonizing over an important pur-
chase such as a new home, a car, or even an iPhone versus a Samsung Galaxy.
We make some decisions thoughtfully and rationally as we carefully weigh the pros 
and cons of different choices. In other cases we let our emotions guide us to one choice 
over another as we react to a problem with enthusiasm, joy, or even disgust. Still other 
actions actually contradict what those rational models predict. For example, purchase 
momentum occurs when our initial impulse purchases actually increase the likelihood 
that we will buy even more (instead of less as we satisfy our needs); it’s like we get “revved 
up” and plunge into a spending spree (we’ve all been there!).1
hyperchoice
Given the range of problems we all confront in our lives, clearly it is difficult to apply a one-
size-fits-all explanation to the complexities of consumer behavior. Things get even more 
complicated when we realize just how many choices we have to make in today’s informa-
tion-rich environment. Ironically, for many of us one of our biggest problems is not having 
too few choices, but rather too many.
This condition of consumer hyperchoice forces us to make repeated decisions that 
may drain psychological energy while decreasing our abilities to make smart choices.2 
A study conducted in a grocery store illustrates how having too much can handicap our 
thought processes. Shoppers tried samples of flavored fruit jams in two different condi-
tions: in the “limited choice” condition they picked from six flavors, whereas those in 
the “extensive choice” group saw 24 flavors. Thirty percent of consumers in the limited 
group actually bought a jar of jam as a result, and a paltry 3 percent of those in the exten-
sive group did.
Part of what we’re going to discuss in this chapter already is familiar ground to you. 
In Chapter 4 we reviewed approaches to learning that link options to outcomes, where 
over time we come to link certain choices to good or bad results. In Chapter 5 we talked 
about affective decision making; how our emotional responses drive many of our choices. 
And, in Chapter 8 we reviewed three hierarchies of effects, or the sequence of steps involv-
ing thinking, feeling, and eventually doing. These ideas really relate to types of decision 
making because they remind us that depending on the situation and the importance of 
what we’re dealing with, our choices can be dominated by “hot” emotions, “cold” infor-
mation processing, or even “lukewarm” snap decisions. Figure 9.1 summarizes the three 
“buckets” of consumer decision making.
ObjeCtive 9-1 
The three categories 
of consumer decision 
making are cognitive, 
habitual, and affective.

336 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Researchers now realize that decision makers actually possess a repertoire of strate-
gies. The perspective of constructive processing argues that we evaluate the effort 
we’ll need to make a particular choice and then tailor the amount of cognitive “effort” 
we expend to get the job done.3 When the task requires a well-thought-out, rational 
approach, we’ll invest the brainpower to do it. Otherwise, we look for shortcuts such as 
“just do what I usually do,” or perhaps we make “gut” decisions based on our emotional 
reactions. In some cases, we actually create a mental budget that helps us to estimate 
what we will consume over time so that we can regulate what we do in the present. If the 
dieter knows he will be chowing down at a big BBQ tomorrow, he may decide to skip that 
tempting candy bar today.4
Self-regulation
The buckets of decision making don’t necessarily work independently of one another. 
Think for example about Orlando, a 28-year-old marketing manager who has decided 
to embark on a weight-loss program. The pressure is on to drop the pounds before he 
marries Amanda this summer. Orlando knows he needs a plan if he has any chance to 
succeed.
A person’s efforts to change or maintain his or her actions over time, whether these 
involve dieting, living on a budget, or training to run a marathon, involve careful planning 
that is a form of self-regulation. If we have a self-regulatory strategy, this means that we 
specify in advance how we want to respond in certain situations. These “if-then” plans or 
implementation intentions may dictate how much weight we give to different kinds of 
information (emotional or cognitive), a timetable to carry out a decision, or even how we 
will deal with disruptive influences that might interfere with our plans (like a bossy sales-
person who tries to steer us to a different choice).5
Orlando may engage in cognitive decision making as he carefully selects a diet 
and perhaps compiles a list of foods he will “ban” from his kitchen. In addition, he may 
have to recognize that he has a behavioral pattern of snacking on junk food in the mid-
afternoon whether he’s really hungry or not. Simple, but powerful, behavioral cues in 
the environment like that Snickers bar sitting on his coworker Arya’s desk can lead us to 
quick and sometimes rash actions (how will Orlando explain the “disappearance” of that 
candy bar to Arya?) He may also have to recognize that some emotional “triggers” set 
him off so when his boss yells at him his first response is to reach for the sweets to cheer 
himself up.
Orlando may have to “argue” with himself as he weighs the long-term benefits of a 
successful diet against short-term temptations. In some cases, this involves some creative 
tinkering with the facts—for example, consumers engage in counteractive construal 
when they exaggerate the negative aspects of behaviors that will interfere with the ulti-
mate goal.6 Orlando may inflate the number of calories in the snack to help him to resist its 
lure. He may even go public with his weight loss plan by posting his weekly weigh-in on a 
phone app like DietBet so that others can watch his progress—and even bet on his success 
or failure.7
Cognitive
deliberate,
rational,
sequential
behavioral,
unconscious,
automatic
emotional,
instantaneous
Habitual
Affective
Figure 9.1 THE THREE “BuCKETS” OF CONSuMER DECISION MAKINg

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
337 
In recent years, researchers and marketers have become more aware of the role they 
can play in changing consumer behavior by helping people to regulate their own actions. 
This help may take the form of simple feedback like a phone app for dieters or perhaps 
a wearable computing device like the Fitbit that tells you how many steps you take in a 
day (and how many more you should take). These applications provide a feedback loop 
to help with self-regulation. The basic premise is amazingly simple: Provide people with 
information about their actions in real time, and then give them a chance to change those 
actions so that you push them to improve. A common feedback loop we increasingly see 
on highways comes from those “dynamic speed displays” that use a radar sensor to flash 
“Your Speed” when you pass one. This isn’t new information; all you have to do is look at 
Dynamic speed displays provide a feedback 
loop to help drivers regulate their speed.
Source: cre250/Fotolia.

338 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
your speedometer to know the same thing. Yet on average these displays result in a 10 
percent reduction in driving speed among motorists for several miles following exposure 
to the feedback loop.8
Now, the bad news: As any frustrated dieter knows, self-regulation doesn’t neces-
sarily work. Just because we devise a well-meaning strategy doesn’t mean we’ll follow it. 
Sometimes our best-laid intentions go awry literally because we’re too tired to fight temp-
tation. Research shows that our ability to self-regulate declines as the day goes on. The 
Morning Morality Effect shows that people are more likely to cheat, lie, or even commit 
fraud in the afternoon than in the morning. Scientists know that the part of the brain they 
call the executive control center that we use for important decision making, including 
moral judgments, can be worn down or distracted even by simple tasks like memorizing 
numbers.9 As one researcher nicely put it, “To the extent that you’re cognitively tired, 
you’re more likely to give in to the devil on your shoulder.” 10
Cb aS i See it
Wendy Liu, University of California, San Diego
one can plan out exactly how much to 
spend in a given month, and such a 
budget will help keep one’s spending 
in check. One can also plan out one’s 
food consumption the next day, in 
the hopes that one will stick to the 
plan and stay on track towards one’s 
fitness goal. But if only self-control 
was this easy! Alas, the world is filled 
with temptations that conspire to 
lead us astray, and as we all have 
personally experienced, it’s much 
easier to make a great plan of self-
control than to carry out the plan.
Recent research has added deeper 
understanding to the art and science 
of goal setting and planning, as it 
finds that all plans are not created 
equal. Whereas some planning 
activities facilitate self-control, others 
might actually hinder self-control 
efforts. Further, people in different 
circumstances may need different 
kinds of planning.
For example, my colleague and I 
asked one group of study participants 
to make a detailed plan for their food 
intake for the day, whereas another 
group were not asked to make such 
a plan. Looking at their plans, we 
saw that everyone made fairly healthy 
plans. Thus everyone had great 
intentions. The key is, would they 
stick to their plans when faced with a 
temptation?
Later we offered all participants 
an unhealthy snack. Was the group 
who planned better able to resist 
the snack, compared to those who 
didn’t plan? What we found is that the 
effectiveness of planning depended 
upon the current fitness status of the 
participants; in particular, how far the 
person is from his or her goal weight. 
For those participants who are pretty 
close to their goal weight (i.e., only a 
couple of pounds to lose), planning 
indeed facilitated self-control as those 
who planned were less likely to take 
the snack than those who did not 
plan. However, among those who are 
far away from their goal weight, the 
concrete planning actually backfired; 
those who planned were even more 
likely than those who didn’t plan to 
take the snack.
Why is this happening? We found 
that for those who are far from their 
goal weight, making a concrete, 
detailed plan further highlighted 
for them how difficult it would be 
for them to lose weight, and they 
became demotivated to stick to their 
plan. In general, researchers have 
found that nearness to the goal is a 
significant differentiator for self-control 
strategies. Strategies that work for 
those with only one mile to walk differ 
from that for those with a mountain to 
climb.
One of the toughest tasks for a 
consumer is to exert self-control 
in order to achieve some long-term 
results. For example, one may wish to 
save money for a down payment on a 
house, or to keep a healthy diet and 
exercise routine for long-term fitness. 
The conventional wisdom says that 
planning can help people achieve 
these long-term goals. For example, 

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
339 
Other studies show that, ironically the act of planning itself can undermine our ability to 
attain goals. When a person is not happy with his or her progress toward a goal like weight loss, 
the act of thinking about what he or she needs to do to improve performance can cause emo-
tional distress. This angst in turn results in less self-control.11 As we saw in the last chapter’s 
discussion of attitudes and behavior, “the road to hell is paved with good intentions!”
Cognitive Decision Making
Traditionally, consumer researchers approached decision mak-
ing from a rational perspective. According to this view, people 
calmly and carefully integrate as much information as possible 
with what they already know about a product, painstakingly 
weigh the pluses and minuses of each alternative, and arrive at 
a satisfactory decision. This kind of careful, deliberate thinking 
is especially relevant to activities such as financial planning that 
call for a lot of attention to detail and many choices that impact a consumer’s quality of 
life.13 When marketing managers believe that their customers in fact do undergo this kind 
of planning, they should carefully study steps in decision making to understand just how 
consumers weigh information, form beliefs about options, and choose criteria they use to 
select one option over others. With these insights in hand, they can develop products and 
promotional strategies that supply the specific information people look for in the most 
effective formats.14
Steps in the Cognitive Decision-Making process
Let’s think about Richard’s process of buying a new TV that we described at the begin-
ning of the chapter. He didn’t suddenly wake up and crave a new flatscreen. Richard went 
through several steps between the time he felt the need to replace his TV and when he 
actually brought one home. We describe these steps as (1) problem recognition, (2) infor-
mation search, (3) evaluation of alternatives, and (4) product choice. Of course, as we 
saw in Chapter 4, after we make a decision, its outcome affects the final step in the process, 
in which learning occurs based on how well the choice worked out. This learning process 
in turn influences the likelihood that we’ll make the same choice the next time the need 
for a similar decision occurs. And so on and so on. Figure 9.2 provides an overview of this 
decision-making process. Let’s briefly look at each step.
Step 1: problem recognition
Ford’s plan to promote its Fusion hybrid model focused on people who aren’t think-
ing about buying a new car—at least not right now. Its TV commercials target what 
the auto industry terms the “upper funnel,” or potential buyers down the road. Ford’s 
research found that a large number of U.S. drivers still are unaware of the Fusion. The 
company is confident that it can close sales if and when customers decide to buy a new 
car. But, its weak spot is to get people into the frame of mind where they want to do that. 
To create desire where none yet exists, visitors to a special Web site entered to win a trip 
and a new Fusion. Ford publicized the sweepstakes on Twitter and Facebook; during the 
first two weeks of the promotion, almost 70,000 people requested more information 
about the car.15
Problem recognition occurs at what Ford terms the upper funnel, when we experi-
ence a significant difference between our current state of affairs and some state we desire. 
As we noted at the beginning of the chapter, this problem requires a solution. A person 
who unexpectedly runs out of gas on the highway has a problem, as does the person who 
becomes dissatisfied with the image of his car, even though there is nothing mechani-
cally wrong with it. Although the quality of Richard’s TV had not changed, he altered his 
standard of comparison, and as a result he had a new problem to solve: how to improve his 
viewing experience.
ObjeCtive 9-2 
A cognitive purchase 
decision is the outcome 
of a series of stages that 
results in the selection 
of one product over 
competing options
Can your Facebook page 
make you lose control of  
your life? Recent research 
implies that it may, ironi-
cally because when you 
focus on your close friends this makes you 
feel better. Researchers argue that the mo-
mentary boost in self-esteem we get in turn 
prompts us to lose self-control and engage 
in impulsive behaviors such as binge eat-
ing and even reckless spending that lowers 
credit scores.12
  the tangled Web

340 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Figure 9.3 shows that a problem arises in one of two ways. The person who runs out 
of gas experiences a decline in the quality of his actual state (need recognition). In contrast, 
the person who craves a newer, flashier car moves his ideal state (opportunity recognition) 
upward. Either way, there is a gulf between the actual state and the ideal state.16 Richard 
perceived a problem because of opportunity recognition: He moved his ideal state upward 
in terms of the quality of TV reception he craved.
Step 2: information Search
Once a consumer recognizes a problem, he or she needs the 411 to solve it. Information 
search is the process by which we survey the environment for appropriate data to make 
a reasonable decision. You might recognize a need and then search the marketplace for 
specific information (a process we call prepurchase search). However, many of us, especially 
veteran shoppers, enjoy browsing just for the fun of it or because we like to stay up to date 
on what’s happening in the marketplace. Those shopaholics engage in ongoing search.17
As a general rule, we search more when the purchase is important, when we have 
more of a need to learn more about the purchase, or when it’s easy to obtain the relevant 
information.18 Consumers differ in the amount of search they tend to undertake, regard-
less of the product category in question. All things equal, younger, better-educated people 
who enjoy the shopping/fact-finding process tend to conduct more information searches. 
Women are more inclined to search than are men, as are those who place greater value on 
style and the image they present.19
Problem Recognition
Richard realizes he’s fed up
with a black-and-white
TV that has bad
sound reproduction.
Information Search
Richard surfs the
Web to learn
about TVs.
Evaluation of Alternatives
Richard compares several
models in the store in
terms of reputation
and available features.
Product Choice
Richard chooses one model
because it has a feature
that really appeals to him.
Outcomes
Richard brings home the TV
and enjoys his purchase.
Figure 9.2 STAgES IN CONSuMER DECISION MAKINg
Marketing pitfall
Product labels assist us 
with problem solving, but  
some are more useful than 
others. Here are some 
exa mples of the not- 
so-helpful variety:20
●
●Instructions for folding up a portable 
baby carriage: “Step 1: Remove baby.”
●
●On a Conair Pro Style 1600 hair dryer: 
“WARNINg: Do not use in shower. Never 
use while sleeping.”
●
●At a rest stop on a Wisconsin highway: 
“Do not eat urinal cakes.”
●
●On a bag of Fritos: “You could be a win-
ner! No purchase necessary. Details in-
side.”
●
●On some Swanson frozen dinners: “Serv-
ing suggestion: Defrost.”
●
●On Tesco’s Tiramisu dessert (printed 
on bottom of box): “Do not turn upside 
down.”
●
●On Marks & Spencer bread pudding: 
“Product will be hot after heating.”
●
●On packaging for a Rowenta iron: “Do 
not iron clothes on body.”
●
●On Nytol sleeping aid: “Warning: May 
cause drowsiness.”

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
341 
OPPORTUNITY
RECOGNITION
NO PROBLEM
NEED
RECOGNITION
Actual
Ideal
Ideal
Ideal State
Actual State
Actual
Figure 9.3 PROBLEM RECOgNITION: SHIFTS IN ACTuAL OR IDEAL STATES
Does knowing something about the product make it more or less likely that we will 
engage in search? The answer to this question isn’t as obvious as it first appears: Product 
experts and novices use different strategies when they make decisions. “Newbies” who 
know little about a product should be the most motivated to find out more about it. 
However, experts are more familiar with the product category, and thus they should be bet-
ter able to understand the meaning of any new product information they might acquire.
So, who searches more? The answer is neither: Search tends to be greatest among 
those consumers who are moderately knowledgeable about the product. Typically we find 
an inverted-U relationship between knowledge and search effort, as Figure 9.4 shows. 
People with limited expertise may not feel they are competent to search extensively. In 
fact, they may not even know where to start. Richard, who did not spend a lot of time 
AMOUNT OF SEARCH
PRODUCT KNOWLEDGE
Figure 9.4 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AMOuNT OF INFORMATION SEARCH  
AND PRODuCT KNOWLEDgE

342 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
researching his purchase, is typical. He visited one store, and he looked only at brands 
with which he was already familiar. In addition, he focused on only a small number of 
product features.21
Because experts have a better sense of what information is relevant to the decision, 
they engage in selective search, which means their efforts are more focused and efficient. In 
contrast, novices are more likely to rely on the opinions of others and on “nonfunctional” 
attributes, such as brand name and price, to distinguish among alternatives. Finally, 
novice consumers may process information in a “top-down” rather than a “bottom-up” 
manner; they focus less on details than on the big picture. For instance, they may be more 
impressed by the sheer amount of technical information an ad presents than by the actual 
significance of the claims it makes.22
Step 3: evaluate alternatives
Much of the effort we put into a purchase decision occurs at the stage where we have to 
put the pedal to the metal and actually choose a product from several alternatives. This 
may not be easy; modern consumer society abounds with choices. In some cases, there 
may be literally hundreds of different brands (as in cigarettes) or different variations of the 
same brand (as in shades of lipstick).
Ask a friend to name all the brands of perfume she can think of. The odds are she will 
reel off three to five names rather quickly, then stop and think awhile before she comes 
up with a few more. She’s probably familiar with the first set of brands, and in fact she 
probably wears one or more of these. Her list may also contain one or two brands that she 
doesn’t like; to the contrary, they come to mind because she thinks they smell nasty or are 
unsophisticated. Note also that there are many, many more brands on the market that she 
did not name at all.
If your friend goes to the store to buy perfume, it is likely that she will consider buying 
some or most of the brands she listed initially. She might also entertain a few more possi-
bilities if these come to her attention while she’s at the fragrance counter (for example, if 
an employee “ambushes” her with a scent sample as she walks down the aisle).
We call the alternatives a consumer knows about the evoked set and the ones he 
or she seriously considers the consideration set.23 Recall that Richard did not know 
much about the technical aspects of television sets, and he had only a few major brands in 
memory. Of these, two were acceptable possibilities and one was not.
Consumers often consider a surprisingly small number of alternatives, especially with 
all the choices available to us. A cross-national study found that people generally include 
just a few products in their consideration set, although this amount varies by product cat-
egory and across countries. For example, U.S. beer consumers on average considered only 
three brands, whereas Canadian consumers typically considered seven brands. In con-
trast, whereas auto buyers in Norway studied two alternatives, U.S. consumers on average 
looked at more than eight models before they decided.24 We seem to be a lot pickier about 
our wheels than our brews.
For obvious reasons, a marketer who finds that his brand is not in his target market’s 
evoked set has cause to worry. You often don’t get a second chance to make a good first 
impression; a consumer isn’t likely to place a product in his evoked set after he has already 
considered it and rejected it. Indeed, we’re more likely to add a new brand to the evoked set 
than one that we previously considered but passed over, even after a marketer has provided 
additional positive information about it.25 For marketers, a consumer’s reluctance to give 
a rejected product a second chance underscores the importance of ensuring that it per-
forms well from the time the company introduces it.
Step 4: product Choice
Once we assemble and evaluate the relevant options in a category, eventually we have 
to choose one.26 Recall that the decision rules that guide our choices range from simple 
and quick strategies to complicated processes that require a lot of attention and cognitive 
processing.27 Our job isn’t getting any easier as companies overwhelm us with more and 
more features. We deal with 50-button remote controls, digital cameras with hundreds of 

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
343 
mysterious features and book-length manuals, and cars with dashboard systems worthy 
of the space shuttle. Experts call this spiral of complexity feature creep. As evidence that 
the proliferation of gizmos is counterproductive, Philips Electronics found that at least half 
of the products buyers return have nothing wrong with them; consumers simply couldn’t 
understand how to use them! What’s worse, on average the buyer spent only 20 minutes 
trying to figure out how to use the product and then gave up.
Why don’t companies avoid this problem? One reason is that we often assume the 
more features the better. It’s only when we get the product home that we realize the virtue 
of simplicity. In one study, consumers chose among three models of a digital device that 
varied in terms of how complex each was. More than 60 percent chose the one with the 
most features. Then, when the participants got the chance to choose from up to 25 fea-
tures to customize their product, the average person chose 20 of these add-ons. But when 
they actually used the devices, it turns out that the large number of options only frus-
trated them; they ended up being much happier with the simpler product. As the saying 
goes, “Be careful what you wish for.”28
Step 5: postpurchase evaluation
Another old saying goes, “the proof of the pudding is in the eating.” In other words, 
the true test of our decision-making process is whether we are happy with the choice 
we made after we undergo all these stages. Postpurchase evaluation closes the loop; 
it occurs when we experience the product or service we selected and decide whether it 
meets (or maybe even exceeds) our expectations. We’ll take a closer look at that in the 
next chapter.
neuromarketing
Is there a “buy button” in your brain? Some corporations, including Google, CBS, Disney, 
and Frito-Lay, have teamed up with neuroscientists to find out.29 Neuromarketing uses 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (or fMRI), a brain-scanning device that tracks 
blood flow as we perform mental tasks to take an up-close look at how our brains respond 
to marketing messages and product design features. In recent years, researchers have 
discovered that regions in the brain, such as the amygdala, the hippocampus, and the 
As feature creep becomes more of a 
problem, just providing clear instructions 
to users is a major “pain point” for many 
manufacturers.
Source: supercavie/Shutterstock.

344 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
(the highly attractive design). We 
found this robust pattern of results 
across multiple product categories 
(e.g., vacuum cleaners, USB drives, 
or computer mice). Our results 
therefore support the proposition 
that consumers’ perceptions are 
based on two general sets of beliefs: 
Belief 1 “a beautiful product is a good 
product,” but also Belief 2, “when 
a product is too beautiful, it can’t be 
as good.”
Further, our research into this 
phenomenon has shown also that 
Belief 1 is perceptually based and 
automatic and does not require 
cognitive efforts, whereas Belief 2 is 
only at play when consumers have 
sufficient cognitive resources to 
engage in this type of more elaborate 
thinking. We also showed that 
Belief 2 is invoked when the product 
brand is not disclosed or when the 
disclosed brand does not have strong 
brand equity. For strong brands, we 
did not find the inverted U-shaped 
relationship; in these cases the 
results suggest that “more beautiful is 
always better.”
In conclusion, our research 
confirms that investments in superior 
visual product designs generally are 
good strategies. However, weaker 
or newer brands should be careful 
not to overreach. They need to 
proceed with caution in order to take 
advantage of their design investments, 
otherwise they risk a backfiring 
effect on perceptions of quality and 
performance.
Cb aS i See it
Frédéric Brunel, Boston University
A product’s visual design is 
often the first piece of product 
information that is perceived by 
consumers and it is key in creating 
initial impressions, sustaining 
interest and signaling an owner’s 
identity to others. The accepted 
common wisdom is that “more 
beautiful should the better”; in 
other words, superior-looking 
products will be more liked by 
consumers and more successful 
in the market. The role of physical 
attractiveness is not only true for 
products, but it is also true for how 
we perceive others. For example, in 
psychology, implicit personality theory 
research has shown that, in the 
absence of additional information, 
more attractive individuals are 
perceived to be more intelligent 
and more socially competent. Yet, 
psychologists have also shown that 
when someone is considered highly 
attractive, there is a backfiring effect 
and perceptions of intelligence and 
social competence go down.
In our research, we extend these 
social psychological principles to 
the study of visual product design. 
For example, in a study involving the 
design of kitchen toasters, we show 
that although design A is perceived 
as visually less attractive than design 
B, and design B is perceived as 
visually less attractive than design 
C, perceptions of product quality 
and product performances are 
highest for design B (the reasonably 
attractive design), not design C 
Today, more than ever, competitors 
are often able to match each other 
on product features, quality and 
price. As a result, many have argued 
that the key to differentiating offers, 
creating value and winning and 
keeping customers is via superior 
product design. Whether we think of 
electronics goods, food packages, 
household or industrial goods, 
these design investments and 
increased attention to product visual 
appearance is evident everywhere 
around us. However, my colleagues 
Rishtee Kumar-Batra and Suchi 
Chandran and I have been wondering 
if selling a more attractive product 
is always a winning strategy. In 
particular, we have been trying to 
understand if some products might 
end up looking too good?
hypothalamus, are dynamic switchboards that blend memory, emotions, and biochemical 
triggers. These interconnected neurons shape the ways in which fear, panic, exhilaration, 
and social pressure influence our choices.
Scientists know that specific regions of the brain light up in these scans to show 
increased blood flow when a person recognizes a face, hears a song, makes a decision, or 
senses deception. Now they hope to harness this technology to measure consumers’ reac-
tions to movie trailers, automobiles, the appeal of a pretty face, and even their loyalty to 
specific brands. DaimlerChrysler took brain scans of men as they looked at photos of cars 
and confirmed that sports cars activated their reward centers. The company’s scientists 

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
345 
found that the most popular vehicles—the Porsche- and Ferrari-style sports cars—-trig-
gered activity in a section of the brain they call the fusiform face area, which governs facial 
recognition. A psychiatrist who ran the study commented, “They were reminded of faces 
when they looked at the cars. The lights of the cars look a little like eyes.”
A study that took brain scans of people as they drank competing soft-drink brands 
illustrates how loyalty to a brand affects our reactions, even at a basic, physiological level. 
When researchers monitored brain scans of 67 people who took a blind taste test of Coca-
Cola and Pepsi, each soft drink lit up the brain’s reward system. The participants were 
evenly split as to which drink they preferred—even though three out of four participants 
said they preferred Coke. When told they were drinking Coke, the regions of the brain that 
control memory lit up, and this activation drowned out the area that simply reacts to 
taste cues. In this case, Coke’s strong brand identity trumped the sensations coming from 
respondents’ taste receptors.
In another application, Frito-Lay gave electroencephalograms (EEGs), which measure 
fluctuations in the electrical activity directly below the scalp, to test subjects to learn how 
they respond to Cheetos cheese puffs. Researchers reported that people had a powerful 
reaction to the orange residue of cheese dust the snack leaves on their hands; one account 
described this as “a sense of giddy subversion that consumers enjoy over the messiness of 
the product.” Frito-Lay went on to develop an advertising campaign it called “The Orange 
Underground”; the edgy Cheetos mascot Chester Cheetah encouraged people to commit 
subversive acts with the product. In one spot, a guy sitting on a plane sticks Cheetos up the 
nostrils of his snoring seatmate. Do not try this.
Neuromarketing techniques rely on  
sophisticated devices like the fMRI to  
understand how our brains respond to  
marketing messages.
Source: James Steidl/123RF.

346 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Online Decision Making
With the tremendous number of Web sites and apps available and the huge number of 
people who spend big chunks of their day online, how can people organize information 
and decide where to click? A cybermediary often is the answer. This term describes a Web 
site or app that helps to filter and organize online market information so that customers 
can identify and evaluate alternatives more efficiently. Many consumers regularly link to 
comparison-shopping sites, such as Bizrate.com or Pricegrabber.com, for example, that list 
online retailers that sell a given item along with the price each charges.30 Directories and 
portals, such as Yahoo! or The Knot, are general services that tie together a large variety of 
different sites. Forums, fan clubs, and user groups offer product-related discussions to help 
customers sift through options. Intelligent agents are sophisticated software programs 
that use collaborative filtering technologies to learn from past user behavior to recommend 
new purchases.31 When you let Amazon.com suggest a new book, the site uses an intelli-
gent agent to propose novels based on what you and others like you have bought in the past.
What’s the most common way for us to conduct information search today? Google 
it, of course! Although there are other search engines out there such as Microsoft’s 
Bing, Yahoo! or even You Tube, Google’s version of the software that examines the 
Web for matches to terms like “home theater system” or “tattoo removal services” is so 
 dominant—with 96 percent of the world’s mobile search market—the name has become 
a verb. However, even a giant like Google can’t rest on its laurels because changes in how 
we search will probably reduce our reliance on search engines. Increasingly consumers 
bypass Google as they go directly on their smartphones or tablets to apps like Yelp to read 
and write product reviews.32
However, as anyone who’s ever Googled knows, the Web delivers enormous amounts 
of product and retailer information in seconds. The biggest problem Web surfers face 
these days is to narrow down their choices, not to beef them up. In cyberspace, simplifi-
cation is key. Still, the sad reality is that in many cases we simply don’t search as much as 
we might. If we Google a term, most of us are only likely to look at the first few results at 
the top of the list.
Indeed, that’s one reason why search engine optimization (SEO) is so important 
today; this term refers to the procedures companies use to design the content of Web 
sites and posts to maximize the likelihood that their content will show up when someone 
searches for a relevant term. Our goal is to persuade people to access our content. Just like 
an expert fisherman chooses his spot and carefully selects the right lure to catch a fish, 
SEO experts create online content that will attract the attention of the search algorithms, 
or mathematical formulas, that companies like Google use to determine which entries will 
turn up in a search. The algorithm will hunt for certain keywords, and it also will consider 
who uses them. For example, if a lot of influential people share an entry, the formula will 
weight it more. Site creators try to ensure that they use the right keywords and that these 
show up in one or more elements of the post including:
●
●Meta tag: Code embedded in a Web page. Meta tags are visible to site visitors but only 
by viewing the source code for the page.
●
●Title tag: An HTML tag that defines the page’s title. The title is displayed in the brows-
er’s title bar, in search engine results, and in RSS feeds.
●
●Heading tag: An HTML tag that is used to section and describe content.
●
●Title: The headline or the main indicator of a page’s content. Although a traditional 
headline in a magazine article may be indirect, an optimized title needs to be more 
literal. Search algorithms are smart, but they don’t get puns or jokes. For example, 
a print ad for an expensive Louis Vuitton handbag may read “High Fashion Replicas 
Indistinguishable from the Real Thing.” An optimized title might read “Shop Wise: 
5 Tips for Ensuring that a Vuitton Bag Is Real, Not Fake, Fashion” to ensure that the 
search would index on keywords such as Vuitton, shop, and bag. Titles also should use a 
hook that increases the likelihood people will click on it. Social media pros refer to the 
careful crafting of a title that markets the content as linkbaiting.33

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
347 
Can you imagine choosing a restaurant before you check it out online? Increasingly 
many of us rely on online reviews to steer us toward and away from specific restaurants, 
hotels, movies, garments, music, and just about everything else. A survey of 28,000 
respondents in 56 countries reported that online user ratings are the second-most trusted 
source of brand information (after recommendations from family and friends). We usually 
put a lot of stock in what members of our social networks recommend. Unfortunately, 
user ratings don’t link strongly to actual product quality that objective evaluation services 
like Consumer Reports provide. And, there’s evidence that mobile reviews may be less help-
ful than desktop reviews, even when the same reviewer writes both. Comments posted via 
mobile devices are more emotional and more negative.34
Regardless of their accuracy, customer product reviews are a key driver of satisfaction 
and loyalty. Another advantage these reviews provide is that consumers learn about other, 
less popular options they may like as well, and at the same time products such as movies, 
books, and CDs that aren’t “blockbusters” are more likely to sell. At the online DVD rental 
company Netflix, for example, fellow subscribers recommend about two-thirds of the films 
that people order. In fact, between 70 and 80 percent of Netflix rentals come from the 
company’s back catalog of 38,000 films rather than recent releases.35
This aspect of online customer review is one important factor that’s fueling an 
important business model called the long tail.36 The basic idea is that we no longer need 
to rely solely on big hits (such as blockbuster movies or best-selling books) to find profits. 
Companies can also make money if they sell small amounts of items that only a few 
people want—if they sell enough different items. For example, Amazon.com maintains 
an inventory of 3.7 million books, compared to the 100,000 or so you’ll find in a large 
retail store like Barnes & Noble. Most of these stores will sell only a few thousand copies 
(if that), but the 3.6 million books that Barnes & Noble doesn’t carry make up a quarter 
of Amazon’s revenues! Other examples of the long tail include successful microbrewer-
ies and TV networks that make money on reruns of old shows on channels like the Game 
Show Network.
how Do We put products into Categories?
Consumers are in the middle of a love affair with yogurt, and new varieties like Greek 
yogurt do well among people who crave healthy, filling snacks. Now we see other offerings 
that allow people to drink their yogurt in the form of smoothies, kefir and other blends that 
blur the lines among beverages, desserts, snacks and even supplements like probiotics.37 
How can consumers make sense of these new products?
Remember that when consumers process product information, they don’t do it in 
a vacuum. They evaluate its attributes in terms of what they already know about the 
item or other similar products. A person who thinks about a particular 35-mm camera 
will most likely compare it to other 35-mm cameras rather than to a disposable camera. 
Because the category in which a consumer places a product determines the other products 
he or she will compare it to, the way we classify a brand in our minds plays a big role in 
how we evaluate it.38
And, as is the case with drinkable yogurts, sometimes companies like to play with 
these categories; they create new ones when they introduce hybrid products that fea-
ture characteristics from two distinct domains. Thus, we have the crossover utility vehicle 
(CUV) that mixes a passenger car and a sport utility vehicle (SUV) and the recent “cronut” 
craze (a combination croissant and donut) that started with a New York bakery and made 
its leap to national stardom courtesy of Dunkin’ Donuts.39
A recent study that examined how consumers use calorie information demonstrates 
why the categories we use to define products are important. When people saw menus that 
listed the calorie count of individual items, they chose more dietetic items. However, when 
the lower calorie items were grouped into a single “low-calorie” category on the menu, 
diners actually selected them less frequently. The researchers explain that consumers 
have negative associations with low-calorie labels, so they’re more likely to dismiss these 
options in the early stages of the decision process. As a result individual items are less 

348 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
likely to make the cut into diners’ consideration sets so ironically this menu information 
results in less healthier choices overall.40
Consumers cognitively represent product information in a knowledge structure. This 
term refers to a set of beliefs and the way we organize these beliefs in our minds. These struc-
tures matter to marketers like Stonyfield, Green Valley and Trader Joe’s that sell yogurt-related 
items because they want to ensure that customers correctly group their products. Typically, 
we represent a product in a knowledge structure at one of three levels. To understand this 
idea, consider how someone might respond to these questions about an ice cream cone: What 
other products share similar characteristics, and which would you consider as alternatives to 
eating a cone? These questions may be more complex than they first appear. At one level, a 
cone is similar to an apple because you could eat both as a dessert. At another level, a cone is 
similar to a piece of pie because you could eat either for dessert and both are fattening. At still 
another level, a cone is similar to an ice cream sundae—you could eat either for dessert, both 
are made of ice cream, and both are fattening. Figure 9.5 depicts these three levels.
It’s easy to see that the foods a person associates with the category “fattening des-
sert” influence his or her decision about what to eat after dinner. The middle level, or basic 
level category, is typically the most useful for classifying products. At this level, the items 
we group together tend to have a lot in common with each other, but still permit us to 
consider a broad enough range of alternatives. The broader superordinate category is more 
abstract, whereas the more specific subordinate category often includes individual brands.41 
Of course, not all items fit equally well into a category. Apple pie is a better example of the 
subordinate category “pie” than is rhubarb pie, even though both are types of pies. This is 
because it’s more prototypical, and most people would think of apple as a pie flavor before 
they thought of rhubarb. In contrast, true pie experts probably know a lot about both typi-
cal and atypical category examples.42
Strategic implications of product Categorization
The way we categorize products has a lot of strategic implications for marketers. That’s 
because this process affects which products consumers will compare to our product and 
also the criteria they’ll use to decide if they like us or the other guys.
position a product. The success of a positioning strategy hinges on the marketer’s ability 
to convince the consumer to consider its product within a given category. For example, the 
orange juice industry tried to reposition orange juice as a drink people can enjoy all day 
long (“It’s not just for breakfast anymore”). However, soft-drink companies attempt the 
opposite when they portray sodas as suitable for breakfast consumption. They are trying 
to make their way into consumers’ “breakfast drink” category, along with orange juice, 
grapefruit juice, and coffee. Of course, this strategy can backfire, as Pepsi-Cola discovered 
when it introduced Pepsi a.m. and positioned it as a coffee substitute. The company did 
such a good job of categorizing the drink as a morning beverage that customers wouldn’t 
drink it at any other time, and the product failed.43
Dessert
BASIC LEVEL
SUBORDINATE
LEVEL
Nonfattening Dessert
SUPERORDINATE LEVEL
Ice Cream
Pie
Cake
Low-fat
Ice Cream
Yogurt
Fruit
Fattening Dessert
Figure 9.5 LEVELS OF CATEgORIZATION

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
349 
identify Competitors. At the abstract, superordinate level, many different product forms 
compete for membership. The category “entertainment” might comprise both bowling 
and the ballet, but not many people would substitute one of these activities for the other. 
Products and services that on the surface are quite different, however, actually compete 
with each other at a broad level for consumers’ discretionary dollars. Although bowling or 
ballet may not be a likely tradeoff for many people, a symphony might try to lure away sea-
son ticket holders to the ballet by positioning itself as an equivalent member of the super-
ordinate category “cultural event.” We’re often faced with choices between noncomparable 
categories, where we can’t directly relate the attributes in one to those in another (the old 
problem of comparing apples and oranges). When we can create an overlapping category 
that encompasses both items (e.g., entertainment, value, usefulness) and then rate each 
alternative in terms of that superordinate category comparison, the process is easier.44
Create an exemplar product. As we saw with the case of apple pie versus rhubarb pie, 
if a product is a really good example of a category, then it is more familiar to consumers 
and they more easily recognize and recall it.45 The characteristics of category exem-
plars tend to exert a disproportionate influence on how people think of the category in 
general.46 In a sense, brands we strongly associate with a category get to “call the shots”:  
They define the criteria we use to evaluate all category members.
Locate products in a Store. Product categorization also can affect consumers’ expecta-
tions regarding the places where they can locate a desired product. If products do not 
clearly fit into categories (e.g., is a rug furniture?), this may diminish our ability to find 
them or figure out what they’re supposed to be once we do. For instance, a frozen dog food 
that pet owners had to thaw and cook before they served it to Fido failed in the market, 
partly because people could not adapt to the idea of buying dog food in the “frozen foods 
for people” section of their grocery stores.
evaluative Criteria
When Richard looked at different television sets, he focused on one or two product fea-
tures and completely ignored several others. He narrowed down his choices as he only 
This ad for Sunkist lemon juice attempts to 
establish a new category for the product by 
repositioning it as a salt substitute.
Source: Courtesy of Sunkist Growers

350 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
considered two specific brand names, and from the Prime Wave and Precision models, he 
chose one that featured stereo capability. Table 9.1 summarizes the attributes of the TV 
sets that Richard considered. Now, let’s see how a comparison of these attributes can alter 
Richard’s choice of a specific brand depending on the rules he uses to consider them.
Evaluative criteria are the dimensions we use to judge the merits of competing 
options. When he compared alternative products, Richard could have chosen from among 
many criteria that ranged from functional attributes (“Does this TV come with remote 
control?”) to experiential ones (“Does this TV’s sound reproduction make me imagine I’m 
in a concert hall?”).
Another important point is that criteria on which products differ from one another carry 
more weight in the decision process than do those where the alternatives are similar. If all 
brands a person considers rate equally well on one attribute (e.g., if all TVs come with remote 
control), Richard needs to find other reasons to choose one over another. Determinant 
attributes are the features we actually use to differentiate among our choices.
tabLe 9.1   Hypothetical Alternatives for a TV Set
brand ratings
 
attribute
importance 
ranking
 
prime Wave
 
precision
 
Kamashita
Size of screen
1
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Stereo broadcast 
capability
2
Poor
Excellent
good
Brand reputation
3
Excellent
Excellent
Poor
Onscreen 
programming
4
Excellent
Poor
Poor
Cable-ready 
capability
5
good
good
good
Sleep timer
6
Excellent
Poor
good
This French ad provides a vivid way to  
suggest an evaluative criterion.
Source: SOORUZ/PUBLICIS Conseil Paris/
Photographers: Cesar Ancelle-Hancelle/Jacques 
Demarcillac—Producer: Charles Denis.

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
351 
Marketers often educate consumers about which criteria they should use as determi-
nant attributes. For example, consumer research from Church & Dwight indicated that 
many consumers view the use of natural ingredients as a determinant attribute. As a 
result, the company promoted its toothpaste made from baking soda, which the company 
already manufactured for Church & Dwight’s Arm & Hammer brand.47
To effectively recommend a new decision criterion, a marketer should convey three 
pieces of information:48
1 It should point out that there are significant differences among brands on the 
attribute.
2 It should supply the consumer with a decision-making rule, such as if … (deciding 
among competing brands), then … (use the attribute as a criterion).
3 It should convey a rule that is consistent with how the person made the decision on 
prior occasions. Otherwise, she is likely to ignore the recommendation because it re-
quires too much mental work.
Under conditions of high cognitive involvement, people tend to think carefully about 
the pros and cons of different options, almost like a computer that would follow a some-
what complicated formula to make a decision. This is a compensatory rule; it allows a 
product to make up for its shortcomings on one dimension by excelling on another. There 
are two basic types of compensatory rules:
1 The simple additive rule leads to the option that has the largest number of positive 
attributes. A person may use this process when it’s difficult to get more information. 
It’s not the best solution because some of the attributes may not be meaningful to the 
customer. Thus, we may be impressed by a brand that boasts a laundry list of features 
even though most of them are not determinant attributes.
2 A weighted additive rule allows the consumer to take into account the relative 
importance of the attributes by weighting each one. If this sounds familiar, it should: 
The calculation process strongly resembled the multiattribute attitude model we dis-
cussed in Chapter 8.
Compensatory rules require the decision maker to carefully consider the attributes 
of competing options, but we all know that we don’t necessarily do that. When we make 
habitual or emotional decisions we typically use a noncompensatory rule.51 This 
means that if an option doesn’t suit us on one dimension, we just reject it out of hand and 
Product authenticity has become a  
determinant attribute for many consumers.
Source: CarmenKarin/Shutterstock.
Consumers today often 
want to know just where 
the things they buy came 
from. The J. Peterman Com - 
pany clothing catalogs tell  
stories about the apparel they sell, and up-
scale grocery stores such as Whole Foods 
provide great detail about the specific farms 
where produce and meat were raised. prod-
uct authenticity is becoming a determinant 
attribute. Researchers claim that although 
authenticity can be a hard concept to pin 
down, it seems to be composed of three attri-
butes: heritage, sincerity, and commitment to 
quality.49 That explains why many companies 
like to tout their “authentic” story; for exam-
ple New Balance describes its Maine factory 
like this: “Built in 1945, the Depot Street 
building is the workplace of almost 400 as-
sociates. Each pair of shoes they produce is 
a proud work of craftsmanship that carries a 
little bit of the long history that is the town 
and its people.”50
Marketing Opportunity

352 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
move on to something else rather than think about how it might meet our needs in other 
ways: “I’ve never heard of that brand,” or maybe “That color is gross.”
●
●The lexicographic rule says, “select the brand that is the best on the most important 
attribute.” If a decision maker feels that two or more brands are equally good on that 
attribute, he or she then compares them on the second-most important attribute. This 
selection process goes on until the tie is broken. In Richard’s case, because both the 
Prime Wave and Precision models were tied on his most important attribute (a 60-
inch screen), he chose the Precision because of its rating on his second-most impor-
tant attribute: its stereo capability.
●
●The elimination-by-aspects rule is similar to the lexicographic rule because the 
buyer also evaluates brands on the most important attribute. In this case, though, he 
or she imposes specific cut-offs. For example, if Richard had been more interested in 
having a sleep timer on his TV (i.e., if it had a higher importance ranking), he might 
have stipulated that his choice “must have a sleep timer.” Because the Prime Wave 
model had one and the Precision did not, he would have chosen the Prime Wave.
●
●Whereas the two former rules involve processing by attribute, the conjunctive rule 
entails processing by brand. As with the elimination-by-aspects procedure, the deci-
sion maker establishes cut-offs for each attribute. He chooses a brand if it meets all 
the cutoffs, but rejects a brand that fails to meet any one cut-off. If none of the brands 
meet all the cutoffs, he may delay the choice, change the decision rule, or modify the 
cutoffs he chooses to apply.
If Richard stipulated that all attributes had to be rated “good” or better, he would not 
have been able to choose any of the available options. He might then have modified his 
decision rule, conceding that it was not possible to attain these high standards in his price 
range. In this case, perhaps Richard could decide that he could live without on-screen pro-
gramming, so he would reconsider the Precision model.
If we’re willing to allow good and bad product qualities to cancel each other out, we 
arrive at a different choice. For example, if Richard were not concerned about having 
stereo reception, he might have chosen the Prime Wave model. But because this brand 
doesn’t feature this highly ranked attribute, it doesn’t stand a chance when he uses a non-
compensatory rule.
habitual Decision Making
Richard’s meditations about the exact TV to buy probably don’t 
resemble most of the choices he makes. If he’s anything like most of 
us, he deals with dozens of decisions everyday and he makes most of 
them almost automatically. “Cream and sugar?” “Fries with that?”
The decision-making steps we’ve reviewed are well and good, but common sense tells 
us we don’t undergo this elaborate sequence every time we buy something.52 If we did, 
we’d spend our entire lives making these decisions. This would leave us little time to enjoy 
the things we eventually decide to buy. Some of our buying behaviors simply don’t seem 
“rational” because they don’t serve a logical purpose (you don’t use that navel ring to hold 
a beach towel). Habitual decision making describes the choices we make with little or no 
conscious effort. Many purchase decisions are so routine we may not realize we’ve made 
them until we look in our shopping carts! Although decisions we make on the basis of little 
conscious thought may seem dangerous or at best stupid, this process actually is quite effi-
cient in many cases. The journalist Malcolm Gladwell hit the bestseller list with his book 
Blink, which demonstrated how snap judgments that occur in the blink of an eye can be 
surprisingly accurate. 53, 54
When a person buys the same brand over and over, does this mean it’s just a habit or is 
he or she truly loyal to that product? The answer is, it depends: In some cases, the explana-
tion really is just inertia, which means that it involves less effort to throw a familiar package 
ObjeCtive 9-4
We often rely on rules- 
of-thumb to make  
routine decisions.

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
353 
into the cart. Brand loyalty is a totally different story. This describes a pattern of repeat 
purchasing behavior that involves a conscious decision to continue buying the same brand.
As you might imagine, though both inertia and brand loyalty yield the same result 
the latter is harder to achieve, but also much more valuable because it represents a true 
commitment by the consumer. One simple test that may help to tell the difference: If the 
consumer discovers that a store is out of his or her normal brand, will he or she just choose 
another one or defer the purchase to find this brand somewhere else? If the answer is “my 
way or the highway,” that marketer has a loyal customer.
priming and nudging
A study of the influence of company logos found that, when 
respondents were exposed to a brief flash of either an Apple or 
an IBM logo on a screen, their behavior changed even though they 
weren’t even aware they had seen the logo. Creativity, nonconformity, 
and innovation are traits many consumers associate with the 
Apple brand, whereas they link tradition, intelligence, and respon-
sibility with IBM.55 Sure enough, those who saw the Apple logo 
subsequently provided more creative and innovative responses on a task than those who 
saw the IBM logo.
Researchers continue to identify factors that bias our decisions, and many of these 
are factors that operate beneath the level of conscious awareness.56 In one study, respon-
dents’ attitudes toward an undesirable product—curried grasshoppers! —improved when 
they were asked to approach it. This physical movement typically links to liking; even our 
own body movements or other physiological reactions can influence what goes on in our 
minds.57 To help understand this process, try to force yourself to smile or frown and then 
carefully gauge your feelings; you may find that the old prescription to “put on a happy 
face” to cheer yourself up may actually have some validity.58
Often it’s just a matter of framing, or how we pose the question to people or what exactly 
we ask them to do. For example, people hate losing things more than they like getting things; 
economists call this tendency loss aversion. In one study, teachers who had the opportu-
nity to improve student performance didn’t make the grade in terms of improved test scores. 
However, those who got extra money at the beginning of the year and were told they would 
lose it if their students did not show sufficient progress managed to bring up their scores.
To see how framing works, consider the following scenario: You’ve scored a free ticket 
to a sold-out football game. At the last minute, though, a sudden snowstorm makes it 
somewhat dangerous to get to the stadium. Would you still go? Now, assume the same 
game and snowstorm—except this time you paid a small fortune for the ticket. Would you 
head out in the storm in this case?
Researchers who work on prospect theory analyze how the value of a decision 
depends on gains or losses; they identify principles of mental accounting that relate to the 
way we frame the question as well as external issues that shouldn’t influence our choices, 
but do anyway. In this case, researchers find that people are more likely to risk their personal 
safety in the storm if they paid for the football ticket than if it’s a freebie. Only the most die-
hard fan would fail to recognize that this is an irrational choice because the risk is the same 
regardless of whether you got a great deal on the ticket. Researchers call this decision-mak-
ing bias the sunk-cost fallacy: If we’ve paid for something, we’re more reluctant to waste it.
The notion that even subtle changes in a person’s environment can strongly influ-
ence the choices he or she makes has emerged on center stage in the study of consumer 
behavior in recent years. Unlike standard economic theory that regards people as rational 
decision makers, the rapidly growing field of behavioral economics focuses on the 
effects of psychological and social factors on the economic decisions we make, and many 
of these choices are anything but “rational.” Indeed it turns out that it’s quite possible to 
modify the choices of individuals and groups merely by tinkering with the way we pres-
ent information to them. This research holds enormous implications, especially for public 
policy issues because it turns out the way organizations frame their messages can exert a 
ObjeCtive 9-3 
The way information 
about a product choice 
is framed can prime a 
decision even when the 
consumer is unaware of 
this influence

354 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
big influence on the numbers of consumers who will stop smoking, eat healthy foods, or 
save more money for retirement. There are important ethical issues as well, especially as 
studies continue to identify ways that organizations including governments and compa-
nies can subtly but powerfully influence what we “freely” choose to do.59
Much of the emerging work in behavioral economics focuses on the role of priming: 
Cues in the environment that make us more likely to react in a certain way even though 
we’re unaware of these influences. A prime is a stimulus that encourages people to focus 
on some specific aspect of their lives such as their financial well-being or the environment:
●
●A group of undergraduates was primed to think about money; they saw phrases 
like “she spends money liberally,” or pictures that would make them think of money. 
Then this group and a control group that wasn’t focused on money answered ques-
tions about moral choices they would make. Those students who had been primed to 
think of money consistently exhibited weaker ethics. They were more likely to say they 
would steal a ream of paper from the university’s copying room and more likely to say 
they would lie for financial gain.60
●
●When people see pictures of “cute” products, they are more likely to engage in indul-
gent behavior such as eating larger portions of ice cream. 61
●
●In a field study in a wine store, researchers played either stereotypically French or 
German music on alternate days. On the days when French music was in the back-
ground, people bought more French versus German wine and the reverse happened on 
German music days. Follow-up questionnaires indicated customers were not aware of 
the impact of the music on their choices.62
Much of the current work in behavioral economics demonstrates how a nudge—a 
deliberate change by an organization that intends to modify behavior—can result in dra-
matic effects. 63 A simple “nudge” that changes how people act is to switch from asking 
consumers to “opt in” to a program to asking them to “opt out” of a program if they don’t 
want to participate. In Europe, countries that ask drivers to indicate if they want to be an 
organ donor convince less than 20 percent of drivers to do so. In contrast, those that require 
drivers to opt out if they don’t want to be donors get more than 95 percent participation.
This default bias—where we are more likely to comply with a requirement than to 
make the effort not to comply— can be applied to numerous choice situations. For exam-
ple, people are more likely to save for retirement if their employers automatically deduct a 
set amount from their paychecks than if they have to set up this process themselves. It is 
also how many software companies and social media platforms encourage users to adopt 
their products and privacy policies (e.g., when you must opt out of Facebook’s right to 
share your data with others).64
heuristics: Mental Shortcuts
The default bias we previously described illustrates that we often take the easy way out 
when we make decisions. Unlike the cognitive decision strategies we’ve already described 
we use when we want to arrive at the best result possible—a maximizing solution—in 
fact we often are quite content to exert less mental effort and simply receive an adequate 
outcome—a satisficing solution. This “good enough” perspective on decision making is 
called bounded rationality.
We’ve seen that many habitual decisions we make are subject to mental account-
ing biases. In addition, we often fall back on other shortcuts to simplify our choices. For 
example, Richard made certain assumptions instead of conducting an extensive informa-
tion search. In particular, he assumed that the selection at Zany Zack’s was more than 
sufficient, so he did not bother to shop at any other stores.65
We refer to these shortcuts as heuristics. These “mental rules-of-thumb” range from 
the general (“higher-priced products are higher-quality products” or “buy the same brand 
I bought last time”) to the specific (“buy Domino, the brand of sugar my mother always 
bought”).66 Sometimes these shortcuts may not be in our best interests. A car shopper 

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
355 
who personally knows one or two people who have had problems with a particular vehicle, 
for example, might assume that he would have similar trouble with it rather than taking 
the time to find out that it actually has an excellent repair record.67 Table 9.2 lists a set of 
market beliefs that many of us share. Let’s summarize a few of the most prevalent heu-
ristics we commonly use.
Covariation
A person who sells a used car probably makes sure the car’s exterior is clean and shiny. 
Potential buyers often judge the vehicle’s mechanical condition by its appearance, even though 
this means they may drive away in a clean, shiny clunker.68 When we only have incomplete 
product information, we often base our judgments on our beliefs about covariation—our 
associations among events that may or may not actually influence one another.69
Country of origin
A product’s “address” matters. We Americans like to buy Italian shoes, Japanese cars, and 
microwave ovens built in South Korea. Consumers strongly associate certain items with 
specific countries, and products from those countries often attempt to benefit from these 
linkages. That’s why country of origin (COO) often is an important heuristic. Indeed, 
marketers often go out of their way to link a brand with a country to capitalize on associa-
tions people have with a specific COO: French wines, Italian sports cars, even Häagen-Dazs 
ice cream with that authentic Danish taste (but actually owned by Nestlé and made in 
Scandinavian strongholds like New Jersey).
tabLe 9.2   Market Beliefs
Brand
All brands are basically the same.
generic products are just name brands sold under a different label at a lower price.
The best brands are the ones that are purchased the most.
When in doubt, a national brand is always a safe bet.
Store
Specialty stores are great places to familiarize yourself with the best brands; but once you figure out what you want, it’s 
cheaper to buy it at a discount outlet.
A store’s character is reflected in its window displays.
Salespeople in specialty stores are more knowledgeable than other sales personnel.
Larger stores offer better prices than small stores.
Locally owned stores give the best service.
A store that offers a good value on one of its products probably offers good values on all of its items.
Credit and return policies are most lenient at large department stores.
Stores that have just opened usually charge attractive prices.
Prices/Discounts/Sales
Sales are typically run to get rid of slow-moving merchandise.
Stores that are constantly having sales don’t really save you money.
Within a given store, higher prices generally indicate higher quality.
Advertising and Sales 
Promotion
“Hard-sell” advertising is associated with low-quality products.
Items tied to “giveaways” are not a good value (even with the freebie).
Coupons represent real savings for customers because they are not offered by the store.
When you buy heavily advertised products, you are paying for the label, not for higher quality.
Product/Packaging
Largest-sized containers are almost always cheaper per unit than smaller sizes.
New products are more expensive when they’re first introduced; prices tend to settle down as time goes by.
When you are not sure what you need in a product, it’s a good idea to invest in the extra features, because you’ll prob-
ably wish you had them later.
In general, synthetic goods are lower in quality than goods made of naturals materials.
It’s advisable to stay away from products when they are new to the market; it usually takes the manufacturer a little 
time to work the bugs out.
Source: Adapted from Calvin P. Duncan, “Consumer Market Beliefs: A Review of the Literature and an Agenda for Future Research,” in Marvin E. Goldberg. Gerald Gorn, and Richard 
W. Pollay eds., Advances in Consumer Research 17 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1990):729–35.

356 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Familiar brand names
In a study the Boston Consulting Group conducted of the market leaders in 30 product 
categories, 27 of the brands that were number one in 1930 (such as Ivory Soap and 
Campbell’s Soup) still were at the top more than 50 years later.70
higher prices
Many people assume that a higher-priced alternative is better quality than a lower-priced 
option.71 This assumption is often correct; you do tend to get what you pay for. However, 
let the buyer beware: The price–quality relationship is not always justified.72
Collective Decision Making
As if the decision-making process we’ve reviewed in this chapter 
wasn’t complicated enough, the full story is even more “interest-
ing.” That’s because many of the decisions we make are collabora-
tive. In these cases, other people participate in the problem-solv-
ing sequence—from initial problem recognition and information 
search to evaluation of alternatives and product choice. To fur-
ther muddy the waters, these decisions often include two or more 
ObjeCtive 9-5 
Marketers often need to 
understand consumers’ 
behavior rather than a 
consumer’s behavior.
A Dutch shoe ad reminds us that a product’s 
address matters.
Source: Courtesy of Grey/Copenhagen.

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
357 
people who may not have the same level of investment in the outcome, the same tastes 
and preferences, or the same consumption priorities. If you’ve ever debated where to go 
out to eat with your friends, or perhaps bickered about whose turn it is to do the dishes, 
you get the picture. You can read 50 restaurant reviews on Yelp!, and still it’s like pulling 
teeth to reach a consensus.
In this section we examine collective decision-making situations in which more 
than one person chooses the products or services that multiple consumers use. First, 
we’ll look at organizational decision making, in which multiple employees select goods or 
services on behalf of a larger group. We then focus more specifically on one of the most 
important organizations to which we belong: the family unit. We’ll consider how members 
of a family negotiate among themselves and how important changes in modern family 
structure affect this process.
Why do we lump together big corporations and small families? One important similar-
ity is that in both cases individuals or groups play a number of specific roles when they 
choose products or services for their organizational unit.73 Depending on the decision, the 
choice may include some or all of the group members, and different group members play 
important roles in what can be a complicated process. These roles include the following:
●
●Initiator—The person who brings up the idea or identifies a need.
●
●Gatekeeper—The person who conducts the information search and controls the flow 
of information available to the group. In organizational contexts, the gatekeeper iden-
tifies possible vendors and products for the rest of the group to consider.
●
●Influencer—The person who tries to sway the outcome of the decision. Some people 
may be more motivated than others to get involved, and participants also possess dif-
ferent amounts of power to get their point across.
●
●Buyer—The person who actually makes the purchase. The buyer may or may not 
actually use the product.
●
●User—The person who actually consumes the product or service.
b2b Decision Making
Many employees of corporations or other organizations make pur-
chase decisions on a daily basis. Organizational buyers are peo-
ple who purchase goods and services on behalf of companies for 
the companies’ use in manufacturing, distribution, or resale. These 
individuals buy from business-to-business (B2B) marketers 
that must satisfy the needs of organizations such as corporations, 
government agencies, hospitals, and retailers. In terms of sheer 
 volume, B2B is where the action is: Roughly $2 trillion worth of products and services 
change hands among organizations, which is actually more than end consumers purchase.
Organizational buyers have a lot of responsibility. They decide on the vendors with 
whom they want to do business and what specific items they require from these suppliers. 
The items they consider range in price and significance from paper clips (by the case, not 
the box) to multimillion-dollar computer systems. A number of factors influence the orga-
nizational buyer’s perception of the purchase situation. These include his or her expectations 
of the supplier (e.g., product quality, the competence and behavior of the firm’s employees, 
and prior experiences in dealing with that supplier), the organizational climate of the com-
pany (i.e., how it rewards performance and what it values), and the buyer’s assessment of his 
or her own performance (e.g., whether he or she believes in taking risks).74
Like other consumers, organizational buyers engage in a learning process in which 
employees share information with one another and develop an “organizational memory” 
that consists of shared beliefs and assumptions about the best choices to make.75 Just as 
the “market beliefs” we discussed previously influence a consumer while shopping with 
the family on the weekend, the same thing happens at the office. He or she (perhaps with 
fellow employees) solves problems as they search for information, evaluate alternatives, 
and decide.76 There are, of course, some important differences between the two situations.
ObjeCtive 9-6 
The decision-making 
process differs when 
people choose what 
to buy on behalf of an 
organization rather than 
for personal use.

358 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
how Does b2b Decision Making Compare to Consumer 
Decision Making?
Let’s summarize the major differences between organizational and industrial purchase 
decisions versus individual consumer decisions:77
●
●The purchase decisions that companies make frequently involve many people, includ-
ing those who do the actual buying, those who directly or indirectly influence this 
decision, and the employees who will actually use the product or service.
●
●Organizations and companies often use precise technical specifications that require a 
lot of knowledge about the product category.
●
●Impulse buying is rare (industrial buyers do not suddenly get an “urge to splurge” on 
lead pipe or silicon chips). Because buyers are professionals, they base their decisions 
on past experience and they carefully weigh alternatives.
●
●Decisions often are risky, especially in the sense that a buyer’s career may ride on his 
judgment.
●
●The dollar volume of purchases is often substantial; it dwarfs most individual consum-
ers’ grocery bills or mortgage payments. One hundred to 250 organizational custom-
ers typically account for more than half of a supplier’s sales volume, which gives the 
buyers a lot of influence over the supplier.
●
●B2B marketing often emphasizes personal selling more than advertising or other 
forms of promotion. Dealing with organizational buyers typically requires more face-
to-face contact than when marketers sell to end consumers.
We must consider these important features when we try to understand the purchas-
ing decisions organizations make. Having said that, however, there are actually more 
similarities between organizational buyers and ordinary consumers than many people 
realize. True, organizational purchase decisions do tend to have a higher economic or 
functional component compared to individual consumer choices, but emotional aspects 
do play a role. Organizational buyers may appear to the outsider to be models of rational-
ity, but at times they base their decisions on brand loyalty, on long-term relationships with 
particular suppliers or salespeople, or even on aesthetic preferences. Even investors, who 
are supposed to make cold, calculated judgments about the worth of companies based on 
financial indicators, sometimes are influenced instead by other concerns; for instance, 
they may be biased toward companies that provide better working conditions for employ-
ees or that are unusual in some other way.78
As you’d expect, the organizational decision-making process depends on the pur-
chase. As when individuals choose, the more complex, novel, or risky the decision, the 
more effort the group devotes to information search and to evaluating alternatives. 
However, if these buyers rely on a fixed set of suppliers for routine purchases, this greatly 
reduces their information search and effort.79 Typically, a group of people (members of 
a buying center) plays different roles in more complex organizational decisions. As we 
will see later on, this joint involvement is somewhat similar to family decision making, in 
which family members are likely to participate in more important purchases. Note: Unlike 
a shopping center, a buying center does not refer to a physical place, but rather the group 
of people who make the decision.
The classic buyclass theory of purchasing divides organizational buying decisions 
into three types that range from the least to the most complex. Three decision-making 
dimensions describe the purchasing strategies of an organizational buyer:80
1 The level of information he or she must gather prior to the decision.
2 The seriousness with which he or she must consider all possible alternatives.
3 The degree to which he or she is familiar with the purchase.
In practice, these three dimensions relate to how much cognitive effort the buyer 
expends when he decides. Three types of “buyclasses,” or strategies determined by these 

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
359 
dimensions, encompass most organizational decision situations.81 Table 9.3 summarizes 
these strategies.
●
●A straight rebuy is a habitual decision. It’s an automatic choice, as when an inven-
tory level reaches a preestablished reorder point. Most organizations maintain an 
approved vendor list, and as long as experience with a supplier is satisfactory, there is 
little or no ongoing information search or evaluation.
●
●A modified rebuy situation involves limited decision making. It occurs when an or-
ganization wants to repurchase a product or service but also wants to make some mi-
nor modifications. This decision might involve a limited search for information among 
a few vendors. One or a few people will probably make the final decision.
●
●A new task involves extensive problem solving. Because the company hasn’t made a 
similar decision already, there is often a serious risk that the product won’t perform as 
Organizations often assemble teams to 
make purchasing decisions.
Source: Courtesy of Capstone Turbine Corporation.

360 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
it should or that it will be too costly. This is when the organization designates a buying 
center with assorted specialists to evaluate the purchase, and they typically gather a 
lot of information before they come to a decision.
b2b e-Commerce
Business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce refers to Internet interactions between two 
or more businesses or organizations. This includes exchanges of information, products, 
services, or payments. The Web revolutionized the way companies communicate with 
other firms and even the way they share information with their own people. Today the 
majority of B2B companies, even those that until recently relied heavily on “old-school” 
techniques such as cold calls and mailed newsletters, use social media to connect with 
customers and business partners.82
In the simplest form of B2B e-commerce, the Internet provides an online catalog 
of products and services that businesses need. Companies like Dell Computer use their 
Internet site to deliver online technical support, product information, order status infor-
mation, and customer service to corporate customers. Early on, Dell discovered that it 
could serve the needs of its customers more effectively if it tailored its Internet presence to 
different customer segments. Today Dell’s Internet site allows shoppers to get recommen-
dations based on their customer segment (home, home office, government, small business, 
and education). The company saves millions of dollars a year as it replaces hard-copy 
manuals with electronic downloads. For its larger customers, Dell provides customer- 
specific, password-protected pages that allow business customers to obtain technical sup-
port or to place an order.83
prediction Markets
Are all of us smarter than each of us? A prediction market is one of the hottest trends 
in organizational decision-making techniques. This approach asserts that groups of 
people with knowledge about an industry are, collectively, better predictors of the future 
than are any of them as individuals. In a prediction market framework, companies from 
Microsoft to Eli Lilly and Hewlett-Packard empower their employees as “traders.” Like a 
stock market, traders place bets on what they think will happen regarding future sales, 
the success of new products, or how other firms in a distribution channel will behave, 
—and they often receive a cash reward if their “stock picks” pan out. For example, the 
pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly routinely places multimillion-dollar bets on drug candi-
dates that face overwhelming odds of failure. The relatively few new compounds that do 
succeed have to make enough money to cover the losses the others incur. Obviously, the 
company will benefit if it can separate the winners from the losers earlier in the process. 
Lilly ran an experiment in which about 50 of its employees involved in drug develop-
ment, including chemists, biologists, and project managers, traded six mock drug can-
didates through an internal market. The group correctly predicted the three most suc-
cessful drugs.84 Or, surf over to the Hollywood Stock Exchange (hsx.com) to check out 
tabLe 9.3   Types of Organizational Buying Decisions
buying Situation
extent of effort
risk
buyer’s involvement
Straight rebuy
Habitual decision-making
Low
Automatic reorder
Modified rebuy
Limited problem solving
Low to moderate
One or a few
New task
Extensive problem solving
High
Many
Source: Adapted from Patrick J. Robinson, Charles W. Faris, and Yoram Wind, Industrial Buying and Creative Marketing 
(Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1967).

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
361 
which celebrities and new movie releases traders think will succeed or bomb; you can bet 
Hollywood executives do!85
Prediction markets are one element of crowdsourcing, which describes the grow-
ing practice of soliciting ideas for new products and even advertising campaigns from 
a user community. Under this model, companies no longer market to customers, they 
market with them.86 The wisdom of crowds perspective (from a book by that name) 
argues that, under the right circumstances, groups are smarter than the smartest people 
in them. If this is true, it implies that large numbers of consumers can predict successful 
products.87
the intimate Corporation: Family 
Decision Making
The decision process within a household unit resembles a business 
conference. Certain matters go on the table for discussion, differ-
ent members advocate different actions based on their differing 
priorities and agendas, and there may be power struggles to rival 
any tale of corporate intrigue. In just about every living situation, 
whether it’s a conventional family or students who share a sorority house or apartment, 
group members assume different roles just as purchasing agents, engineers, account 
executives, and others do within a company.
ObjeCtive 9-7 
Members of a family unit 
play different roles and 
have different amounts 
of influence when the 
family makes purchase 
decisions.
Threadless crowdsources product ideas and 
then sells the most popular ones to the com-
munity it maintains.
Source: Courtesy of Threadless.
Companies as diverse as 
Budweiser (which crowd-
sourced its new Black 
Crown beer) to handbag 
designer Alexander Wang 
today offer products that originated from 
ideas employees or customers submitted.88 
At Threadless, customers rank T-shirt designs 
ahead of time, and the company prints the 
winning ideas. Every week, contestants upload 
T-shirt designs to the site, where about 700 
compete to be among the six that it prints dur-
ing that time. Threadless visitors score designs 
on a scale of 0 to 5, and the staff members 
select winners from the most popular entrants. 
Threadless sells out of every shirt it offers.89
ModCloth, an online retailer of affordable 
women’s clothing and accessories, launched 
an entire private label collection made up 
mostly of designs submitted and voted on by 
its Facebook community. At Kickstarter.com, 
a crowdsourced funding site, participants 
have pledged more than $320 million to fund 
greater than 18,000 projects that range from 
movies to a Bluetooth-enabled watch.90
Marketing Opportunity

362 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
how Families Decide
Families make two basic types of decisions:92
1 In a consensual purchase decision members agree on the desired purchase; they 
disagree only in terms of how they will make it happen. In these circumstances, the 
family will most likely engage in problem solving and consider alternatives until they 
find a way to satisfy everyone in the group. For example, in a family that decides to get 
a dog, some of the members (you can guess who) voice concerns about who will take 
care of it. The solution is to draw up a chart that assigns family members to specific 
duties.
2 In an accommodative purchase decision however, group members have different 
preferences or priorities and can’t agree on a purchase that satisfies everyone’s needs. 
It is here that they use bargaining, coercion, and compromise to achieve agreement 
on what to buy or who gets to use it. Conflict occurs when there is incomplete corre-
spondence in family members’ needs and preferences. Although household spending 
and budgeting is the most common source of conflict in these disputes, TV viewing 
choices come in a close second!93
Decisions create conflict among family members to the extent that the issue is some-
how important or novel; conflict also occurs if individuals have strong opinions about 
good and bad alternatives. The degree to which these factors generate conflict determines 
the type of decision the family will make.94 Some specific factors that determine how 
much family decision conflict there will be include:95
American girl produces historical-period 
characters complete with books, dolls, and 
accessories, as well as modern-period dolls. 
The company also operates The American 
girl Place, where young girls who own the 
dolls drag their parents and grandparents 
to attractions including dioramas and a 
doll hair salon. Consumer researchers who 
studied the American girl phenomenon 
concluded that part of the brand’s huge 
popularity is due to its multigenerational 
 appeal. After they interviewed numerous 
girls, mothers, and grandmothers, they found 
that consumers of all ages valued the op-
portunities for family connection and also 
learning about their heritage and those of 
other cultures.91
Source: Reprinted with permission of American 
Girl, Inc.

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
363 
●
●Interpersonal need—(a person’s level of investment in the group): A teenager may 
care more about what her family buys for the house than will a college student who 
lives in a dorm.
●
●Product involvement and utility—(the degree to which a person will use the prod-
uct to satisfy a need): A mother who is an avid coffee drinker will obviously be more 
interested in the purchase of a new coffeemaker than will her teenage son who swigs 
Coke by the gallon.
●
●Responsibility—(for procurement, maintenance, payment, and so on): People are 
more likely to have disagreements about a decision if it entails long-term conse-
quences and commitments. For example, a family decision about getting a dog may 
involve conflict over who will be responsible for walking and feeding it.
●
●Power—(or the degree to which one family member exerts influence over the oth-
ers): In traditional families, the husband tends to have more power than the wife, 
who in turn has more than the oldest child, and so on. Conflict can arise when one 
person continually uses the power he has within the group to satisfy his own pri-
orities. For example, if a child believed that his life would end if he did not receive a 
Kinect for his birthday, he might be more willing to “cash in some chips” and throw 
a tantrum.
Marketers need to figure out who makes the buying decisions in a family because 
this information tells them who to target and whether they need to reach both spouses to 
influence a choice. Researchers pay special attention to which spouse plays the role of the 
family financial officer (FFO)—the individual who keeps track of the family’s bills and 
decides how to spend any surplus funds. In traditional families (and especially those with 
low educational levels), women are primarily responsible for family financial management: 
The man makes it and the woman spends it. Each spouse “specializes” in certain activi-
ties.96 The pattern is different among families where more modern sex-role norms operate. 
These couples believe that both people should participate in family maintenance activities. 
In these cases, husbands assume more responsibility for laundering, housecleaning, gro-
cery shopping, and so on, in addition to such traditionally “male” tasks as home mainte-
nance and garbage removal.97
The synoptic ideal calls for the husband and wife to act as joint decision makers. 
Together they thoughtfully weigh alternatives, assign one another well-defined roles, 
and calmly make mutually beneficial consumer decisions. This model is widely accepted 
among U.S. couples, especially younger ones: They agree the ideal marriage is one in 
Roommates have to make collaborative  
decisions just as spouses do.
Source: Gadelshina Dina/Shutterstock.

364 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
which husband and wife both work and share child care and household duties. That’s a 
big change from just 20 years ago, when less than half of the population approved of the 
dual-income family, and less than half of 1 percent of husbands knew how to operate a 
sponge mop.98
Still, the synoptic ideal is just that—an ideal. In real life, couples often don’t have the 
luxury to make calm and rational joint decisions. Instead spousal decision making may 
be more about choosing whatever option will result in less conflict. A couple “reaches” 
rather than “makes” a decision. Researchers simply describe this process as “muddling 
through.”99 One common technique to simplify the decision-making process uses heuris-
tics, like the ones we discussed previously in the chapter. The following decision-making 
patterns, which realtors frequently observe when a couple decides on a new house, illus-
trate how couples use heuristics:
●
●The couple defines their areas of common preference on obvious, objective dimensions 
rather than subtler, hard-to-define cues. For example, they may easily agree on the 
number of bedrooms they need in the new home, but they have a harder time when 
they need to agree on how the home should look.
●
●The couple negotiates a system of task specialization in which each is responsible for 
certain duties or decision areas and does not intrude on the other’s “turf.” For many 
couples, sex roles often dictate just what these territories are. For example, the wife 
may do advance scouting for houses that meet their requirements, and the husband 
determines whether the couple can obtain a mortgage.
●
●The likelihood of one partner conceding to the wishes of the other depends on how 
passionately each person desires a specific outcome. One spouse yields to the influence 
of the other in many cases simply because his or her preference for a certain attribute 
is not particularly intense. In other situations, he is more willing to fight for what he 
wants (in other words, “choose your battles”).100 In cases where intense preferences 
for different attributes exist, rather than attempting to influence each other, spouses 
will “trade off” a less-intense preference for a more strongly felt desire. For example, a 
husband who is somewhat indifferent about kitchen design may give in to his wife in 
exchange for permission to design his own “Man Cave.”
So, who “wears the pants” in the family? Sometimes it’s not obvious which spouse 
makes the decisions. Indeed, although many men literally wear the pants, it’s women who 
buy them. Haggar’s research showed that nearly half of married women bought pants 
for their husbands without the husbands being present, so the firm started to advertise its 
menswear products in women’s magazines. When one family member chooses a product, 
this is an autonomic decision. In traditional households, for example, men often have 
sole responsibility to select a car, whereas decorating choices fall to women. Syncretic 
decisions, such as a vacation destination, involve both partners. These choices are com-
mon for vacations, homes, appliances, furniture, home electronics, and long-distance 
phone services. As the couple’s educational level increases, they are more likely to make 
decisions together.101
One analysis of family decision making took a closer look at the idea that family 
members mutually construct a family identity that defines the household both to mem-
bers and to outsiders.103 According to this perspective (which is similar to the role theory 
approach to consumer behavior we discussed in Chapter 1), family rituals, narratives 
(stories the members tell about the family), and everyday interactions help families main-
tain their structure, maintain their family character (day-to-day characteristics of family 
life), and clarify members’ relationships to one another. The value of this approach to 
marketers is that it reminds us of how often products and services help to define the fam-
ily identity. For example, a father might take his young children out for ice cream every 
Saturday afternoon, so this becomes a predictable ceremony that defines their relation-
ship. Or, a mom might seek the comfort of her Beats headphones to shield her from the 
noise when her kids play after school, while a TiVo “saves marriages” because it allows 
family members to compromise when they decide who gets access to the TV.
Who’s minding the chil-
dren? In social media, 
parents still do: One in 
two parents say they 
joined Facebook just to 
keep tabs on their kids. About 40 percent 
check their child’s profile on a daily basis 
and specifically look at status updates and 
tagged photos. When they post on the kid’s 
page (the kiss of death?), the most common 
terms they use for daughters are “beautiful,” 
“all grown,” and “baby,” whereas for sons they 
write “good luck,” “money,” and “game.102
  the tangled Web
Facebook has an impact 
on couples’ relationships, 
perhaps 
because 
the 
platform makes it easier 
for people to rekindle old 
romances. In a recent survey of attorneys, two-
thirds of divorce lawyers identified Facebook as 
the primary source of evidence in their cases. 
The large majority reports that evidence for in-
fidelity also turns up on online photo albums, 
profile pages, and Tweets.105 As one attorney 
noted, the “huge popularity as well as the lure 
of sites like Second Life, Illicit Encounters, 
and Friends Reunited are tempting couples to 
cheat on each other.” Apparently many divorces 
occur when partners find “flirty messages” on 
their spouse’s Facebook wall. She also offered 
some timely advice to people in the middle of 
a divorce proceeding: “Avoid posting photos of 
your new lover until it’s all over.”106
  the tangled Web

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
365 
Cb aS i See it
Amber Epp University of Wisconsin–Madison
Do we spend enough family time 
together? Constant sharing on 
social media makes parenting (or 
certain images of parenting) more 
visible and transparent, increasing 
expectations and raising the pressure 
on parents to make good choices. 
Nowhere is this reality more evident 
than in current debates surrounding 
child care.
Increasingly, parents are 
outsourcing an expanding array of 
caregiving activities. Services now 
exist for everything a parent could 
imagine including nannies, potty 
training, planning birthday parties, 
etiquette classes, teaching children 
how to ride a bike, helping with 
school projects, and accompanying 
kids on college tours. These services 
blur the boundaries between family 
and the market, and prompt new 
questions about what is acceptable 
to outsource and how parents 
make sense of these sometimes 
contentious decisions.
In a recent study, my co-author 
and I conducted in-depth interviews 
with 23 sets of parents across five 
major cities to address three research 
questions: (1) how do parents make 
choices about which care activities to 
outsource? (2) what tensions emerge 
when parents outsource, and how are 
these tensions managed? and (3) how 
do parents justify and revise the mix of 
resources they use in care provision?
We found that when parents 
outsource care they experience 
tensions of control, intimacy, and 
substitutability. For instance, when 
contemplating whether or not to 
enlist others for help in planning 
a child’s birthday party, parents 
might ask, isn’t it my job as a 
parent to do this (substitutability)? 
What if the party planner doesn’t 
do things the way I want them 
to be done (control)? Shouldn’t 
I be the person who created the 
excitement and joy on my child’s 
face (intimacy)? Despite struggling 
with these questions and resulting 
tensions, parents still outsourced. 
However, parents generated specific 
strategies to manage tensions such 
as customizing services, using them 
infrequently, or deconstructing care 
(e.g., baking the birthday  
cake themselves, but hiring  
someone else to plan and 
coordinate).
Our data also suggest that 
who parents outsource to (e.g., 
family, village, public, or market) 
matters immensely, as each has 
the potential to spark or relieve 
different tensions. For example, 
although family and village resources 
frequently heighten control tensions, 
the market often resolves control 
tensions more effectively because 
of its for-hire, contractual nature. 
Modern-day parental support comes 
in many forms, but the optimal mix 
of resources varies across families 
and depends on the tensions parents 
face.104
Family influence is inescapable 
because, even as consumers make 
decisions, they are always immersed 
in family relationships. As a dominant 
cultural institution, family is a 
main organizing force that shapes 
consumers’ choices and experiences 
in the marketplace. More so than 
other types of decisions, families’ 
choices often are scrutinized in the 
public eye and lead to feelings of 
guilt and stress about whether they 
are making the “right” decisions. 
Parents might ask, are we eating 
healthy meals? What rules should 
we have about technology use? 
the Wife
As women continue to work outside the home in great number, their influence on 
household purchase decisions grows accordingly. The share of mothers employed 
full- or part-time has quadrupled since the 1950s and today accounts for nearly three-
quarters of women with children at home. The number of women who are their fami-
lies’ sole or primary breadwinner also has soared, to 40 percent today from 11 percent 
in 1960.
When the husband is the primary or sole breadwinner, household spending deci-
sions divide roughly equally. He makes about a third of them, she makes a third, and 

366 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
they make a third jointly. However, it’s increasingly common for the wife to command 
a higher salary than the husband; almost 40 percent of married working women bring 
in more than their partner. When the wife earns more she is likely to make a much 
higher proportion of decisions about how the family unit spends its money. This is true 
even in areas where men traditionally make decisions: Women make up almost half of 
the $200 billion consumer-electronics business, and $105 billion of the $256 billion 
home-improvement market.107
Of course women pay a price for this enhanced role. Working mothers often struggle 
with what one researcher calls the juggling lifestyle: a frenzied, guilt-ridden compromise 
between conflicting cultural ideals of motherhood and professionalism.108 This frantic 
way of life isn’t surprising in light of a survey by the U.S. Department of Labor showing 
that the average working woman spends about twice as much time as the average working 
man on household chores and the care of children. She also gets about an hour less sleep 
each night than the average stay-at-home mom.109
And, despite this shift in decision-making responsibilities, women are still primarily 
responsible for the continuation of the family’s kin-network system, They maintain 
ties among family members, both immediate and extended. Women are more likely to 
coordinate visits among relatives, stay in touch with family members, send greeting cards, 
and arrange social engagements.110 This organizing role means that women often make 
important decisions about the family’s leisure activities, and they are more likely to decide 
with whom the family will socialize.
the husband
It’s increasingly common to tune into TV commercials that depict a domestic version of 
fathers who tenderly and wisely look after the kids. Indeed this updated picture even has 
its own name: Dadvertising. A Cheerios commercial, for example, shows a confident 
dad taking charge of a hectic weekday morning. The campaign also features a dedicated 
Tumblr page and Twitter hashtag, #HowToDad.111
As we’ve seen, women’s roles within the family decision-making unit are changing, but 
so are those of men. For one thing, single men remain a powerful and often ignored force in 
the marketplace. Right now, 3 out of 10 men are single, and more than 80 percent of them 
make the sole or key big-ticket decisions in their households.
Another driver of this change is that as we’ve just seen, more women are work-
ing outside the home and at better-paying jobs. This means that a growing number 
of husbands today stay home with the kids: The Census Bureau reports that one-fifth 
of fathers with preschool-age children and working wives are the primary caretaker. 
As one marketing executive observed, “Kids are going to grow up with dads that give 
them baths and drive them to soccer and are cutting up oranges for team snacks.” 
Already, by some estimates men do more than half of the grocery shopping in the 
United States.
This shift causes marketers to reexamine how they sell a range of products as they try 
to appeal to Dads: Both Lego and Mattel now offer construction toys. Procter & Gamble 
is developing special sections at big retailers as the company finds that women aren’t as 
likely as before to choose personal care products for their husbands. The so-called “man 
aisle” organizes men’s products in one place with shelf displays and even small TV moni-
tors to help them pick out the appropriate items. 112
Group Shopping
We shop differently when we’re doing it with a group. For example, people who shop with 
at least one other person tend to make more unplanned purchases, buy more, and cover 
more areas of a store than do those who browse solo.113 The famous Tupperware party is 
a successful example of a home shopping party that capitalizes on group pressures to 
boost sales.114

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
367 
Social shopping is an emerging form of e-commerce that allows an online shop-
per to simulate the experience of shopping with others in a brick-and-mortar store. New 
technologies allow a consumer to “try on” a garment via an avatar and also to access115 
feedback from others in his or her social network either prior to or after deciding on a 
purchase. As the technology continues to mature, social shopping may offer an even 
more compelling purchase experience than the in-store interactions it replaces. The social 
shopping mechanisms now being introduced at a rapid rate take the form of product rat-
ings, reviews, product montages, design competitions, style advice, live outfit reviews, 
visual scrapbooking, and crowdsourced advice. Table 9.4 summarizes some of the current 
approaches to social shopping.
The Mega Bloks Barbie Build ’n Style line 
construction sets are marketed to girls but 
also are intended to appeal to their Dads.
Source: BARBIE and associated trademarks and 
trade dress are owned by, and used under per-
mission from, Mattel. © 2015 Mattel. All Rights 
Reserved.
Home shopping parties capitalize on group 
pressure to generate sales.
Source: Madhourses/Shutterstock.

368 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. The three categories of consumer decision making are 
cognitive, habitual, and affective.
Consumer decision making is a central part of con-
sumer behavior, but the way we evaluate and choose 
products (and the amount of thought we put into these 
choices) varies widely, depending on such dimensions 
as the degree of novelty or risk related to the decision. 
We almost constantly need to make decisions about 
products. Some of these decisions are important and en-
tail great effort, whereas we make others on a virtually 
automatic basis. Perspectives on decision making range 
from a focus on habits that people develop over time to 
novel situations involving a great deal of risk in which 
consumers must carefully collect and analyze informa-
tion before making a choice. Many of our decisions are 
highly automated; we make them largely by habit. The 
way we evaluate and choose a product depends on our 
degree of involvement with the product, the marketing 
message, or the purchase situation. Product involve-
ment can range from low, where purchase decisions are 
made via inertia, to high, where consumers form strong 
bonds with what they buy.
ChApTEr SummAry
2. A cognitive purchase decision is the outcome of a 
series of stages that results in the selection of one 
product over competing options.
A typical decision involves several steps. The first is prob-
lem recognition, when we realize we must take some 
 action. This recognition may occur because a current pos-
session malfunctions or perhaps because we have a desire 
for something new. Once the consumer recognizes a prob-
lem and sees it as sufficiently important to warrant some 
action, he or she begins the process of information search. 
This search may range from performing a simple memory 
scan to determine what he or she has done before to resolve 
the same problem to extensive fieldwork during which he 
or she consults a variety of sources to amass as much in-
formation as possible. The World Wide Web has changed 
the way many of us search for information. Today, our 
problem is more likely to weed out excess detail than to 
search for more information. Comparative search sites and 
intelligent agents help to filter and guide the search pro-
cess. We may rely on cybermediaries, such as Web portals, 
to sort through massive amounts of information as a way 
to simplify the decision-making process. In the evalua-
tion of alternatives stage, the options a person considers 
constitute his or her evoked set. Members of the evoked 
set usually share some characteristics; we categorize them 
tabLe 9.4   Social Shopping Applications
Social Shopping Web Site Categories
virtual 
Wish Lists/ 
Scrapbooking
 
try it On Sites 
and apps
 
pre-purchase 
Feedback
 
 
Competitions
Social 
Shopping 
advocacy
Group 
purchasing 
Sites
Linking and 
networking 
‘Sign On’
Supply
gotryiton
ASOS
ASOS
Klout
Living Social
Facebook 
Connect
Polyvore
Fashionism
Facebook
The Fancy
groupon
Modcloth
Pinterest
Justboughtit
Twitter
Sneakpeeq
BuyWithMe
Wanelo
vi.sualize.us
Motilo
Fab
Mydeco
Daily grommet
Source: Adapted from Rachel Ashman, Michael R. Solomon and Julia Wolny, “An Old Model for a New Age: Applying the EKB in Today’s Participatory Culture,” Journal of Customer 
Behaviour, 2015, 14(2): 127–146.

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
369 
similarly. The way the person mentally groups products 
influences which alternatives she will consider, and usu-
ally we associate some brands more strongly with these 
categories (i.e., they are more prototypical). When the 
consumer eventually must make a product choice from 
among alternatives, he uses one of several decision rules. 
Noncompensatory rules eliminate alternatives that are de-
ficient on any of the criteria we’ve chosen. Compensatory 
rules, which we are more likely to apply in high-involve-
ment situations, allow us to consider each alternative’s 
good and bad points more carefully to arrive at the overall 
best choice. Once the consumer makes a choice, he or she 
engages in postpurchase evaluation to determine whether 
it was a good one; this assessment in turn influences the 
process the next time the problem occurs.
3. The way information about a product choice is framed 
can prime a decision even when the consumer is 
unaware of this influence.
Principles of mental accounting demonstrate that the way 
a problem is framed and whether it is put in terms of gains 
or losses influences what we decide. In addition, other cues 
in the environment—including subtle ones of which we 
may not even be aware—may prime us to choose one op-
tion over another. A prime is a stimulus that encourages 
people to focus on some specific aspect of their lives. Much 
of the current work in behavioral economics demonstrates 
how a nudge—a deliberate change by an organization that 
intends to modify behavior—can result in dramatic effects.
4. We often rely on rules-of-thumb to make routine decisions.
In many cases, people engage in surprisingly little search. 
Instead, they rely on various mental shortcuts, such as 
brand names or price, or they may simply imitate others’ 
choices. We may use heuristics, or mental rules-of-thumb, 
to simplify decision making. In particular, we develop 
many market beliefs over time. One of the most common 
beliefs is that we can determine quality by looking at the 
price. Other heuristics rely on well-known brand names or 
a product’s country of origin as signals of product quality. 
When we consistently purchase a brand over time, this 
pattern may be the result of true brand loyalty or simply 
inertia because it’s the easiest thing to do.
5. marketers often need to understand consumers’ 
behavior rather than a consumer’s behavior.
More than one person actually makes many purchasing 
decisions. Collective decision making occurs whenever two 
or more people evaluate, select, or use a product or service. 
In organizations and in families, members play several 
different roles during the decision-making process. These 
roles include gatekeeper, influencer, buyer, and user.
6. The decision-making process differs when people 
choose what to buy on behalf of an organization rather 
than for personal use.
Organizational buyers are people who make purchasing deci-
sions on behalf of a company or other group. Although many 
of the same factors that affect how they make decisions in 
their personal lives influence these buyers, their organizational 
choices tend to be more rational. Their decisions are also likely 
to involve more financial risk, and as the choices become more 
complex, it is probable that a greater number of people will be 
involved in making the decision. The amount of cognitive ef-
fort that goes into organizational decisions relates to internal 
factors, such as the individuals’ psychological characteristics, 
and external factors, such as the company’s willingness to 
tolerate risk. One of the most important determinants is the 
type of purchase the company wants to make: The extent of 
problem-solving required depends on whether the product or 
service it procures is simply a reorder (a straight rebuy), a reor-
der with minor modifications (modified rebuy), or something 
it has never bought before or something complex and risky 
(new task). Online purchasing sites revolutionize the way or-
ganizational decision makers collect and evaluate product 
information in business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce.
7. members of a family unit play different roles and have 
different amounts of influence when the family makes 
purchase decisions.
Marketers have to understand how families make deci-
sions. Spouses in particular have different priorities and 
exert varying amounts of influence in terms of effort and 
power. Working women tend to command more power in 
purchasing decisions, but on the other hand the significant 
growth in the number of stay-at-home fathers also influ-
ences this dynamic.
Accommodative purchase decision, 362
Autonomic decision, 364
Behavioral economics, 353
Bounded rationality, 354
Brand loyalty, 353
Business-to-business (B2B)  
e-commerce, 360
Business-to-business (B2B)  
marketers, 357
Buyclass theory of purchasing, 358
Buying center, 358
Category exemplars, 349
Collective decision making, 357
Compensatory rule, 351
Conjunctive rule, 352
Consensual purchase decision, 362
Consideration set, 342
Counteractive construal, 336
Constructive processing, 336
Consumer hyperchoice, 335
Country of origin (COO), 355
KEy TErmS

370 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
rEviEW
 
9-1 Why can “mindless” decision making actually be more 
efficient than devoting a lot of thought to what we buy?
 
9-2 List the steps in the model of cognitive decision making.
 
9-3 What is purchase momentum, and how does it relate (or 
not relate) to the model of rational decision making?
 
9-4 Explain how a consumer can display signs of purchase 
momentum.
 
9-5 Name two ways in which a consumer problem arises.
 
9-6 Give an example of the sunk-cost fallacy.
 
9-7 What is prospect theory? Does it support the argument 
that we are rational decision makers?
 
9-8 “Marketers need to be extra sure their product works as 
promised when they first introduce it.” How does this 
statement relate to what we know about consumers’ 
evoked sets?
 
9-9 Describe the difference between a superordinate cat-
egory, a basic level category, and a subordinate category.
 9-10 What is an example of an exemplar product?
 9-11 List three product attributes that consumers use as 
product quality signals and provide an example of each.
 9-12 How does a brand name work as a heuristic?
 9-13 Describe the difference between inertia and brand loyalty.
 9-14 What is the difference between a noncompensatory 
and a compensatory decision rule? Give one example of 
each.
 9-15 What is a prime? How does it differ from a nudge?
 9-16 What are some factors that influence how an organiza-
tional buyer evaluates a purchase decision?
 9-17 What is a prediction market?
 9-18 Distinguish between straight rebuy and modified rebuy.
 9-19 How can a marketer manipulate the social and physical 
surroundings in a retail store to influence purchasing 
decisions? How does it work?
 9-20 In terms of temporal factors, what does slow or fast 
mean?
 9-21 Helicopter moms may be an American phenomenon, but 
is there anything similar to this in your own country?
 9-22 Describe the role of family financial officer. How does this 
role change over time?
 9-23 What is meant by the concept of the synoptic deal? Is it 
relevant in most cases?
 9-24 How would you distinguish between a consensual pur-
chase decision and an accommodative one? Provide an 
example of each of them.
 9-25 Excessive food consumption may link to emotional issues 
such as feelings of inferiority or low self-esteem. In some 
situations people consume products (especially food) as 
a reaction to prior life experiences such as loss of a loved 
one or perhaps abuse as a child. A British man whom the 
U.K. news media once dubbed “the world’s fattest man” 
ConSumEr BEhAvior ChALLEngE
●
■DiSCuSS
Covariation, 355
Crowdsourcing, 361
Cybermediary, 346
Dadvertising, 366
Default bias, 354
Determinant attributes, 350
Elimination-by-aspects rule, 352
Evaluative criteria, 350
Evoked set, 342
Executive control center, 338
Family financial officer (FFO), 363
Family identity, 364
Feature creep, 343
Feedback loop, 337
Framing, 353
Habitual decision making, 352
Heuristics, 354
Home shopping party, 366
Hook, 346
Hybrid products, 347
Implementation intentions, 336
Inertia, 352
Information search, 340
Intelligent agents, 346
Juggling lifestyle, 366
Kin-network system, 366
Knowledge structure, 348
Lexicographic rule, 352
Linkbaiting, 346
Long tail, 347
Loss aversion, 353
Market beliefs, 355
Maximizing solution, 354
Mental accounting, 353
Mental budget, 336
Modified rebuy, 359
Morning Morality Effect, 338
Neuromarketing, 343
New task, 359
Noncompensatory rule, 351
Nudge, 354
Organizational buyers, 357
Postpurchase evaluation, 343
Prediction market, 360
Priming, 354
Problem recognition, 339
Product authenticity, 351
Prospect theory, 353
Purchase momentum, 335
Rational perspective, 339
Satisficing solution, 354
Search engine optimization (SEO), 346
Search engines, 346
Self-regulation, 336
Simple additive rule, 351
Social shopping, 367
Straight rebuy, 359
Sunk-cost fallacy, 353
Syncretic decisions, 364
Synoptic ideal, 363
Weighted additive rule, 351
Wisdom of crowds, 361

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
371 
when he weighed in at 980 pounds is a case in point. He 
explained that as an adult his insatiable desire to con-
stantly eat stemmed from an abusive father and sexual 
abuse by a relative: “I still had all these things going 
around in my head from my childhood. Food replaced 
the love I didn’t get from my parents.” (The good news: 
after a gastric bypass operation this man has lost almost 
two-thirds of his body weight).116 Obviously this is an 
extreme case, and it certainly doesn’t mean that everyone 
who struggles with his or her weight is a victim of abuse! 
Nonetheless, emotion often plays a role—a dieter may feel 
elated when he weighs in at three pounds less than last 
week; however, if he fails to make progress he may become 
discouraged and actually sabotage himself with a Krispy 
Kreme binge.117 Is it ethical for food companies to exploit 
these issues by linking their products to enhanced moods?
 9-26 The chapter discusses ways that organizations can use 
“nudges” to change consumer behavior. Critics refer to 
them as benevolent paternalism because they argue they 
force people to “eat their vegetables” by restricting the 
freedom to choose. For example, several cities including 
New York and Philadelphia have tried (unsuccessfully 
thus far) to ban the sales of extra large portions of sug-
ary drinks. What’s your take on these efforts – should 
local, state or federal governments be in the business of 
nudging citizens to be healthier?
 9-27 Why is it difficult to place a product in a consumer’s 
evoked set after the person has already rejected that 
product? What strategies might a marketer use to 
accomplish this goal?
 9-28 Technology has the potential to make our lives easier 
as it reduces the amount of clutter we need to work 
through to access the information on the Internet that 
really interests us. However, perhaps intelligent agents 
that make recommendations based only on what we 
and others like us have chosen in the past limit us, in 
that they reduce the chance that we will stumble on 
something (e.g., a book on a topic we’ve never heard of 
or a music group that’s different from the style we usu-
ally listen to) through serendipity. Will the proliferation 
of “shopping bots” make our lives too predictable by 
only giving us more of the same? If so, is this a problem?
 9-29 It’s increasingly clear that many postings on blogs and 
product reviews on Web sites are fake or are posted there 
to manipulate consumers’ opinions. How big a problem 
is this if consumers increasingly look to consumer-gen-
erated product reviews during the stage of information 
search? What steps, if any, can marketers take to nip 
this problem in the bud?
 9-30 Commercial Alert, a consumer group, is highly criti-
cal of neuromarketing. The group’s executive director 
wrote, “What would happen in this country if corporate 
marketers and political consultants could literally peer 
inside our brains and chart the neural activity that leads 
to our selections in the supermarket and voting booth? 
What if they then could trigger this neural activity by 
various means, so as to modify our behavior to serve 
their own ends?”118 What do you think? Is neuromar-
keting dangerous?
 9-31 Research supports the argument that the way we pay 
for a product changes the way we perceive it. More spe-
cifically, credit cards prime people to focus less on the 
costs of the item and more on the benefits. Using plastic 
decouples the expense of the purchase so we tend to buy 
more when we can charge it.119 Newer innovations like 
digital wallets take this a step further so payment—at 
least at the time of purchase—is even less painful. Are 
these formats going to create problems if they prime us 
to think more about short-term gratification and less 
about the long-term hit to our budgets? Do marketers 
have an obligation to try to prevent these problems?
 9-32 As more people enter virtual worlds like Second Life and 
Kaneva, family decision-making research may have to 
include our virtual partners (and children?) as well.120 
Do you agree? How do you think consumer researchers 
could use a virtual world to help them understand deci-
sion making in the real world?
 9-33 Industrial purchase decisions are totally rational. Aes-
thetic or subjective factors don’t—and shouldn’t—play 
a role in this process. Do you agree?
 9-34 We can think of college students who live away from 
home as having a substitute “family.” Whether you live 
with your parents, with a spouse, or with other stu-
dents, how are decisions made in your college residence 
“family”? Do some people take on the role of mother, 
father, or child? Give a specific example of a decision 
that had to be made and the roles members played.
 9-35 There is an increasing trend toward using crowdsourc-
ing as a research and development tool.  According 
to Gartner, by 2017 around 75 percent of all product 
development capabilities carried out by consumer goods 
manufacturers will be derived from crowdsourcing.121 
Their predictions went on to suggest that consumer 
goods companies that use crowdsourcing would see a 
distinct 1 percent increase in their revenue compared 
to competitors that did not use crowdsourcing. Accord-
ing to Gartner, consumer goods companies are actively 
seeking consumer engagement. It is technological 
development that is making this approach more popu-
lar and workable; companies use online communities to 
help them solve problems and develop new consumer-
created products and ideas. 
This type of crowdsourcing is a great way to interact 
with customers. It enables a business to turn custom-
ers into loyal brand advocates and to reward them for 
the ideas that they contribute. These initiatives aim to 
encourage the most qualified and creative individuals 
to offer their ideas and to improve projects and prod-
ucts. Crowdsourcing is not a cheap alternative; it takes 
investment to be able to scan and evaluate the ideas 
that are being generated. Some companies, such as 
Kimberly-Clark, actually invite parents to submit ideas. 

372 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
appLY
 9-36 Find examples of electronic recommendation agents on 
the Web. Evaluate these. Are they helpful? What charac-
teristics of the sites you locate are likely to make you buy 
products you wouldn’t have bought on your own?
 9-37 Neuromarketing is a growing area of marketing, but 
few really understand the science behind it. Some sug-
gest that it is a means by which the decision-making 
processes and behaviors of the consumer can be truly 
understood; they believe that consumers do not actu-
ally know their own mind, and that neuromarketing 
reveals the truth.122 On the one hand, it is claimed that 
neuromarketing effectively casts the consumer as an 
unknowing, passive, and unreliable entity; on the other, 
neuromarketing claims to speak for the consumer using 
technology rather than opinion—consumer opinions 
have become secondary and neuromarketers can speak 
for them.  Is neuromarketing correct in positing that 
consumers are really driven by emotion rather than 
rational choice?
 9-38 Define the three levels of product categorization the 
chapter describes. Diagram these levels for a health 
club.
 9-39 Choose a friend or parent who grocery shops on a 
regular basis and keep a log of his or her purchases of 
common consumer products during the term. Can you 
detect any evidence of brand loyalty in any categories 
based on consistency of purchases? If so, talk to the 
person about these purchases. Try to determine if his 
or her choices are based on true brand loyalty or on 
inertia. What techniques might you use to differentiate 
between the two?
 9-40 Hershey’s stresses the determinant attribute of prod-
uct authenticity when the chocolate company states: 
“Hershey, PA is where it all started more than 100 years 
ago, and it’s still where the famous Hershey’s Kisses are 
made.”123 Find examples of other companies that appeal 
to their heritage. How effective are these messages?
 9-41 Form a group of three. Pick a product and develop a 
marketing plan based on either cognitive or habitual 
decision making. What are the major differences in 
emphasis between the two perspectives? Which is the 
most likely type of decision-making process for the prod-
uct you selected?
 9-42 Identify a person who is about to make a major pur-
chase. Ask that person to make a chronological list of all 
the information sources he or she consults before decid-
ing what to buy. How would you characterize the types 
of sources he or she uses (i.e., internal versus external, 
media versus personal, etc.)? Which sources appeared to 
have the most impact on the person’s decision?
 9-43 Perform a survey of country of origin stereotypes. Com-
pile a list of five countries and ask people what products 
they associate with each. What are their evaluations 
of the products and likely attributes of these different 
products? The power of a country stereotype can also be 
demonstrated in another way. Prepare a brief descrip-
tion of a product, including a list of features, and ask 
people to rate it in terms of quality, likelihood of pur-
chase, and so on. Make several versions of the descrip-
tion, varying only the country from which it comes. Do 
ratings change as a function of the country of origin?
 9-44 Ask a friend to “talk through” the process he or she used 
to choose one brand rather than others during a recent 
purchase. Based on this description, can you identify the 
decision rule that he or she most likely employed?
 9-45 Think of a product you recently shopped for online. 
Describe your search process. How did you become 
aware that you wanted or needed the product? How 
did you evaluate alternatives? Did you wind up buying 
online? Why or why not? What factors would make it 
They also offer help develop the ideas and provide funds 
to create prototypes. If, in the end, the company does 
not want the product, they will help the parents find a 
manufacturing partner. Another example comes from 
Madison Electric Products, which manufactures prod-
ucts for the professional electrician. They rebranded in 
2010 and used crowdsourcing as an integral part of the 
process—the company developed new products based 
on the ideas and opinions of electricians who responded 
to the crowdsourcing. The inventors of the new prod-
ucts could choose to sell their idea to the company, earn 
royalties on sales, or licence their idea to the company. 
Since 2010, every one of the company’s new product 
launches has derived from crowdsourced ideas. The 
company can thus be assured that they are developing 
and marketing products that their professional mar-
ket needs and will buy. Madison Electric Products dis-
covered that it was vital to quickly evaluate ideas and 
respond to contributors. 
Is it right to use ideas from customers with little or 
no reward? How would you go about ensuring that a 
crowdfunded project attracted a high and consistent 
level of participation?

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
373 
more or less likely that you would buy something online 
versus in a traditional store?
 9-46 Can you replicate Richard’s decision-making process as 
he chose a TV brand for other consumers or other prod-
ucts? Create a grid for a different product category that 
lists available brands and the features each offers. (Hint: 
Product Web sites for computers, cars, and other com-
plex products often generate these grids when they allow 
you to choose the “compare products” option.) Present 
this grid to several respondents and ask each to talk aloud 
as they evaluate their options. Based on their description, 
can you identify which decision rule they seem to use?
 9-47 Extraneous characteristics of the choice situation can 
influence our selections, even though they wouldn’t if 
we were totally rational decision makers. Create two 
versions of this scenario (alternate the text you see in 
parentheses as directed) and ask a separate group of 
people to respond to each:
You are lying on the beach on a hot day. All you have to 
drink is ice water. For the past hour you have been think-
ing about how much you would enjoy a nice cold bottle 
of your favorite brand of beer. A companion gets up to 
go make a phone call and offers to bring back a beer from 
the only nearby place where beer is sold (either a fancy 
resort hotel or a small, run-down grocery store, depend-
ing on the version you’re given). He says that the beer 
might be expensive and so asks how much you are willing 
to pay for it. What price do you tell him?
When researchers gave both versions of this ques-
tion to respondents, they found that the median price 
participants who read the fancy-resort version gave was 
$2.65, but those who got the grocery-store version were 
only willing to pay $1.50. In both versions, the consump-
tion act is the same, the beer is the same, and they don’t 
consume any “atmosphere” because they drink the beer 
on the beach.124 How do these results compare to yours?
 9-48 Arrange to interview two married couples, one younger 
and one older. Prepare a response form that lists five prod-
uct categories—groceries, furniture, appliances, vaca-
tions, and automobiles—and ask each spouse to indicate, 
without consulting the other, whether purchases in each 
category are made by joint or unilateral decisions, and to 
indicate whether the unilateral decisions are made by the 
husband or the wife. Compare each couple’s responses for 
agreement between husbands and wives relative to who 
makes the decisions, and compare both couples’ overall 
responses for differences relative to the number of joint 
versus unilateral decisions. Report your findings and 
conclusions.
 9-49 Collect ads for three different product categories that tar-
get families. Find another set of ads for different brands 
of the same items that don’t feature families. Prepare a 
report comparing the probable effectiveness of the two 
approaches. Which specific categories would most likely 
benefit from a family emphasis?
 9-50 Pick three married couples and ask each husband and 
wife to list the names of all cousins, second cousins, and 
so on for both sides of the family. Based on the results, 
what can you conclude about the relative role of men 
and women in maintaining the kin-network system?
and sometimes conflicting influences” and points to Sue Elms’ 
suggestion that marketers need to plan for “meaningful coinci-
dences” rather than targeting consumers at specific points on 
the path to purchase.
Marketers must replace outdated strategies that are based 
on misinterpretations of the decision journey. Today’s reality is 
the prevalence of consumers moving seamlessly back and forth 
between physical and virtual shopping worlds, while using a va-
riety of devices across multiple channels. “The Path to Purchase: 
Tracking the Consumer Journey,” tells us that 67 percent of shop-
per journeys now start online; 65 percent of those journeys are 
purely mobile. Despite that, many consumers still feel a compel-
ling connection to physical shopping for firsthand involvement 
with the product and the actual purchase. In this kind of an 
environment, marketers must find new ways to offer “frictionless” 
customer experiences, remembering that “every touchpoint is a 
brand experience and an opportunity to engage the consumer.”
TESLA moTorS: Driving ForWArD WiTh A 
nEW ConSumEr DECiSion JournEy
The consumer decision-making process is undergoing major 
change and will never be the same. Consumers are more informed 
than ever, with access to virtually endless information. But that 
wealth of information is leading to many distractions and frustra-
tions along the path to purchase. What experts used to illustrate as 
a linear or funnel-like decision making path now looks more like a 
circular, looping journey where distractions often lead consumers 
to revisit information search and alternative evaluation, just when 
it seemed like a purchase decision should have been reached.
Dr. Carl Marci at Innerscope Research says “the linear path 
to the register has been replaced with a roller-coaster ride that 
spans platforms and screens, through social media and tradi-
tional word of mouth.” In his blog, Nigel Hollis describes moving 
away from a consumer loop into a view of a “cloud of turbulent 
●■Case Study 

374 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
of the Tesla car as they drove by the store window, “That’s how 
cool this car is. You feel like you’re part of something bigger, a 
new age of motor vehicles.” In addition, the media have picked 
up on the buzz created by the brand, a lot of it through social 
media, and played their own public relations role in increasing 
awareness of the company and its vehicles.
Tesla is working hard to rewrite the traditional attitudes 
that consumers have about vehicles and the things they consider 
in the purchase process. The company’s consistent message is 
that it is building the best car ever, not just the best electric car. It 
wants to disassociate the company from the typical perceptions 
that consumers have of gas vehicles and their attributes—dirty, 
complex, unreliable, hard to maintain. In fact, Tesla service 
centers have white floors to emphasize the clean nature of the 
vehicles and the lack of mess involved in servicing them.
Despite the unusual purchase process Tesla Motors has 
created (or maybe because of it!), the demand for its vehicles 
continues to outpace production, with buyers placing orders 
for customized cars well in advance of their production and 
receipt of the vehicle. It also continues to push forward with 
game-changing innovation—adding to its network of 2,000 
car superchargers worldwide, working to perfect autonomous-
driving technology, achieving better mileage range and safety 
features, and bringing the price of the vehicles within reach of 
more consumers.
CS 9-1 How does Tesla Motors’ marketing strategy connect 
with the changes going on in the consumer deci-
sion journey today? Do you believe that they can be 
successful over the long-term with this kind of an 
approach?
CS 9-2 The chapter identifies three different categories of con-
sumer decision making: cognitive, habitual, and affec-
tive. How does Tesla seem to view the type of decision 
making that consumers go through when they pur-
chase their vehicles?
Sources: Carl Marci, “The Path to Purchase is Paved With Emotion,” http://
www.cmo.com/articles/2015/3/19/the-path-to-purchase-is-paved-with-
pure-emotion.html, accessed June 5, 2015; Nigel Hollis, “Goodbye Purchase 
Funnel, Hello Loyalty Loop?” http://www.millwardbrown.com/global-navi 
gation/blogs/post/mb-blog/2012/01/19/Goodbye-purchase-funnel-hello-
loyalty-loop.aspx, accessed June 10, 2015; Edwin van Bommel, David 
Edelman, and Kelly Ungerman, “Digitizing the Consumer Decision Journey,” 
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/marketing_sales/digitizing_the_con-
sumer_decision_journey?cid=other-eml-ttn-mip-mck-oth-1412, accessed  
June 5, 2015; Chris Newberry, “The Path to Purchase: Tracking the Consumer  
Journey,” http://www.marketingtechnews.net/news/2015/jan/09/path-
purchase-tracking-consumer-journey/, accessed June 13, 2015; Paul J. D’Arcy,  
January 2013, http://scienceofrevenue.com/tag/tesla-marketing-strategy/,  
accessed June 16, 2015; Casey Neal, “Tesla Motors: Inspiration in Design,  
Innovation in Marketing,” February, 19, 2015, http://www.brittonmdg 
.com/the-britton-blog/tesla-motors-inspiration-in-design-innovation-in-
marketing, accessed June 16, 2015; Simon Reynolds, “Why You Should  
Copy Tesla’s Way of Marketing,” http://www.forbes.com/sites/siimonre 
ynolds/2013/09/01/why-you-should-copy-teslas-way-of-marketing/,  
accessed June 17, 2015; “Cheaper Tesla Model Expected to Debut at 2015  
Detroit Show,” http://www.autotrader.com/research/article/car-news/218158/ 
cheaper-tesla-model-e-expected-to-debut-at-2015-detroit-show.jsp, accessed  
June 5, 2015; Steve Fowler, “Tesla Model 3 to Challenge BMW 3 Series,”  
March 5, 2015, http://www.autoexpress.co.uk/tesla/87867/tesla-model-3- 
to-challenge-bmw-3-series-world-exclusive.
One company that has responded to this changing con-
sumer decision journey is Tesla Motors, a manufacturer of high-
end all-electric cars. Tesla Motors came on the scene in 2006, 
introducing its first vehicle, the sporty all-electric Roadster with 
a 200-mile range and a price tag of $100,000. The car won 
Time’s Best Inventions award in the transportation category. 
Following its unique purchase process, the company took orders 
ahead of time for the cars and went into production in 2008.
In 2012 it introduced the new Model S electric luxury 
sedan and by the end of 2013 had sold 18,000 through a non-
traditional channel structure, becoming the best-selling full-size 
luxury sedan overall in the market. The Model S won Motor 
Trend’s Car of the Year and was awarded a five-star safety rating 
by the National Highway Safety Administration.
Next up, Tesla will be delivering the Model X, a crossover 
SUV. It has also announced the introduction of the latest version 
of the Model S, the Model S 70D, an all-wheel drive version with 
a 250-mile range and has plans to roll out a Model 3, which will 
sell at a price point of $35,000, appealing to a much broader 
target market. In 2015, Tesla expected to sell 55,000 vehicles 
overall, up 74 percent from 2014.
So how has Tesla reinvented the consumer’s car buying 
journey? They believe they have overcome the notoriously frus-
trating process and created a new model of buying and owning 
a car through a customized, socially engaging buying experi-
ence. Their approach attempts to create that frictionless, en-
gaging set of consumer touch points and experiences that’s 
so important. As pointed out by Paul J. D’Arcy, “Since people 
start (their decision journey) online, Tesla designed its process 
around online information, commerce and community.” This 
strategy emphasizes an engaging, content-rich online experi-
ence, using a corporate Web site and social media. The Web site 
is clean and clear, but information-intensive and features a blog 
by Elon Musk, a majority owner and “lead product architect,” 
who has become the visible face of the company.
Tesla also wants consumers to feel a personal, emotional 
connection to the brand—to be passionate about owning a Tesla 
and to want to share that passion with other consumers. It has 
made user forums and a user community important parts of the 
online experience. The company does virtually no traditional 
advertising; it relies more on creating fans of the brand who are 
willing to generate word of mouth excitement about the vehicles.
However, keeping in mind the role that physical interac-
tion with products can play, the company has introduced “tiny, 
brand-centric storefronts in upscale shopping malls.” These kiosk 
stores typically feature one vehicle and have a brand expert on 
hand. The stores are aimed at making the brand more accessible 
to the general public through high visibility, low maintenance 
outlets. The car design is so unique and compelling that consum-
ers are drawn in while they’re doing other shopping and can ask 
questions without the high-pressure, commission-driven sales 
tactics typically associated with car dealerships. When consum-
ers are ready to buy they place a refundable deposit online or 
they can arrange for a test drive by making a deposit.
The stores have become a big part of the company’s adver-
tising. As one observer said about consumers snapping pictures 

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
375 
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
9-51 If people are not always rational decision makers, is it worth the effort to study 
how they make purchasing decisions?
9-52 According to retail analysts Mintel, 84 percent of women state that they influence 
important household financial decisions, compared to just 49 percent of men.125 
In a stereotypical nuclear family, the members are parts of a decision-making unit. 
Within the household there are power struggles and intrigue, just like on the board 
of a corporation. Each individual may have a clear set of requirements and strate-
gies that they deploy to influence decision-making situations. How do the household 
member roles inform us about the decision-making unit? Do the recognized roles 
have any relevance to non-stereotypical households? Does the framework have any 
value in other cultures and societies? 
noTES
Impacts Effort Allocation Now,” Journal of Consumer Research 37 (June 
2010): 98–107.
 14. John C. Mowen, “Beyond Consumer Decision-Making,” Journal of Consumer 
Marketing 5, no. 1 (1988): 15–25.
 15. Jean Halliday, “With Fusion Campaign, Ford Targets ‘Upper Funnel’ Car 
Buyers: $60M to $80M Ad Blitz Aimed at Consumers Not Yet Ready to Buy 
New Vehicle,” Advertising Age (March 2, 2009), www.advertisingage.com, 
accessed March 2, 2009.
 16. Gordon C. Bruner, II, and Richard J. Pomazal, “Problem Recognition: The 
Crucial First Stage of the Consumer Decision Process,” Journal of Consumer 
Marketing 5, no. 1 (1988): 53–63.
 17. Peter H. Bloch, Daniel L. Sherrell, and Nancy M. Ridgway, “Consumer 
Search: An Extended Framework,” Journal of Consumer Research 13 (June 
1986): 119–126.
 18. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice,” Marketing Science 4 (1985): 
199–214.
 19. Girish N. Punj and Richard Staelin, “A Model of Consumer Search 
Behavior for New Automobiles,” Journal of Consumer Research 9 (March 
1983): 366–380. For recent work on online search that decomposes 
search strategies in terms of type of good, cf. Peng Huang, Nicholas H. 
Lurie, and Sabyasachi Mitra, “Searching for Experience on the Web: An 
Empirical Examination of Consumer Behavior for Search and Experience 
Goods,” Journal of Marketing 73 (March 2009): 55–69.
 20. Examples provided by Dr. William Cohen, personal communication, 
October 1999.
 21. Cobb and Hoyer, “Direct Observation of Search Behavior”; Moore and 
Lehmann, “Individual Differences in Search Behavior for a Nondurable”; 
Punj and Staelin, “A Model of Consumer Search Behavior for New 
Automobiles”; Brian T. Ratchford, M. S. Lee, and D. Toluca, “The Impact of 
the Internet on Information Search for Automobiles,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 40, no. 2 (2003): 193–209.
 22. James R. Bettman and C. Whan Park, “Effects of Prior Knowledge and 
Experience and Phase of the Choice Process on Consumer Decision 
Processes: A Protocol Analysis,” Journal of Consumer Research 7 (December 
1980): 234–248.
 23. Mary Frances Luce, James R. Bettman, and John W. Payne, “Choice 
Processing in Emotionally Difficult Decisions,” Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 23 (March 1997): 384–405; 
example provided by Professor James Bettman, personal communication 
(December 17, 1997).
 24. Some research suggests that structural elements of the information available, 
such as the number and distribution of attribute levels, will influence how 
items in a consideration set are processed; cf. Nicholas H. Lurie, “Decision-
Making in Information-Rich Environments: The Role of Information 
Structure,” Journal of Consumer Research 30 (March 2004): 473–486.
 25. John R. Hauser and Birger Wernerfelt, “An Evaluation Cost Model of 
Consideration Sets,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 (March 1990): 393–408.
 26. Mita Sujan and James R. Bettman, “The Effects of Brand Positioning Stra-
tegies on Consumers’ Brand and Category Perceptions: Some Insights from 
Schema Research,” Journal of Marketing Research 26 (November 1989): 
454–467.
 
1. Ravi Dhar, Joel Huber, and Uzma Khan, “The Shopping Momentum Effect,” 
paper presented at the Association for Consumer Research, Atlanta, GA, 
October 2002.
 
2. David Glen Mick, Susan M. Broniarczyk, and Jonathan Haidt, “Choose, 
Choose, Choose, Choose, Choose, Choose, Choose: Emerging and Prospective 
Research on the Deleterious Effects of Living in Consumer Hyperchoice,” 
Journal of Business Ethics (2004), 52: 207–211; Barry Schwartz, The Paradox 
of Choice: Why More is Less, New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2005.
 
3. James R. Bettman, “The Decision Maker Who Came in from the Cold” 
(presidential address), in Leigh McAllister and Michael Rothschild, eds., 
Advances in Consumer Research 20 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1993): 7–11; John W. Payne, James R. Bettman, and Eric 
J. Johnson, “Behavioral Decision Research: A Constructive Processing 
Perspective,” Annual Review of Psychology 4 (1992): 87–131.
 
4. Parthasarathy Krishnamurthy and Sonja Prokopec, “Resisting That Triple-
Chocolate Cake: Mental Budgets and Self-Control,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 37 (June 2010): 68–79.
 
5. Peter M. Gollwitzer and Paschal Sheeran, “Self-Regulation of Consumer 
Decision Making and Behavior: The Role of Implementation Intentions,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19 (2009): 593–607.
 
6. Ying Zhang, Szu-chi Huang, and Susan M. Broniarczyk, “Counteractive 
Construal in Consumer Goal Pursuit,” Journal of Consumer Research 37 
(June 2010): 129–142.
 
7. DietBet.com, accessed April 4, 2015;
 
8. Thomas Goetz, “Harnessing the Power of Feedback Loops,” Wired (June 19, 
2011), http://www.wired.com/2011/06/ff_feedbackloop/all/1, accessed  
February 3, 2015.
 
9. Maryan Kouchadki and Isaac H. Smith, “The Morning Morality Effect: 
The Influence of Time of Day on Unethical Behavior,” Psychological Science 
(January 2014), 25 no. 1: 95–102.
 10. Quoted in Matt Richtel, “That Devil on Your Shoulder Likes to Sleep 
In,” New York Times (November 1, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/ 
11/02/business/that-devil-on-your-shoulder-likes-to-sleep-in.html?modul
e=Search&mabReward=relbias%3As%2C%7B%221%22%3A%22RI%3A
6%22%7D, accessed February 16, 2015.
 11. Claudia Townsend and Wendy Liu, “Is Planning Good for You? The Dif-
ferential Impact of Planning on Self-Regulation,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 39, No. 4 (December 2012): 688–703.
 12. “Can Facebook Make You Fat and Poor?,” Mashable (December 13, 2012), 
http://mashable.com/2012/12/13/facebook-fat-poor/?WT.mc_id=en_
my_stories&utm_campaign=My%2BStories&utm_medium=email&utm_
source=newsletter?WT.mc_id=en_my_stories&utm_campaign= 
My%2BStories&utm_medium=email&utm_source=newsletter, accessed 
February 25, 2015; Keith Wilcox and Andrew T. Stephen, “Are Close 
Friends the Enemy? Online Social Networks, Self-Esteem, and Self-Control,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (2013): 90–103.
 13. John G. Lynch, Richard G. Netemeyer, Stephen A. Spiller, and Alessandra 
Zammit, “A Generalizable Scale of Propensity to Plan: The Long and 
the Short of Planning for Time and for Money,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 37 (June 2010): 108–128; Anick Bosmans, Rik Pieters, and 
Hans Baumgartner, “The Get Ready Mind-Set: How Gearing Up for Later 

376 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
S. Isaac and R. M. Schindler, “The Top-Ten Effect: Consumers’ Subjective 
Categorization of Ranked Lists,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 6 
(2014): 1181–1202.
 43. Michael R. Solomon, “Mapping Product Constellations: A Social Cate gorization 
Approach to Symbolic Consumption,” Psychology & Marketing 5, no. 3 (1988): 
233–258.
 44. Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Michael R. Solomon, “Competition and 
Cooperation among Culture Production Systems,” in Ronald F. Bush and 
Shelby D. Hunt, eds., Marketing Theory: Philosophy of Science Perspectives 
(Chicago: American Marketing Association, 1982): 269–272.
 45. Michael D. Johnson, “The Differential Processing of Product Category and 
Noncomparable Choice Alternatives,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 
(December 1989): 300–339.
 46. Mita Sujan, “Consumer Knowledge: Effects on Evaluation Strategies 
Mediating Consumer Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Research 12 (June 
1985): 31–46.
 47. Ronald Alsop, “How Boss’s Deeds Buff a Firm’s Reputation,” Wall Street 
Journal (January 31, 2007): B1.
 48. Stuart Elliott, “Pepsi-Cola to Stamp Dates for Freshness on Soda Cans,” 
New York Times (March 31, 1994): D1; Emily DeNitto, “Pepsi’s Gamble Hits 
Freshness Dating Jackpot,” Advertising Age (September 19, 1994): 50.
 49. Julie Napoli, Sonia J. Dickinson, Michael B. Beverland and Francis Farrelly, 
“Measuring Consumer-Based Brand Authenticity,” Journal of Business 
Research 67, no. 6 (2014): 1090–1098.
 50. George E. Newman and Ravi Dhar, “Authenticity Is Contagious: Brand 
Essence and the Original Source of Production,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 51, no. 3 (June 2014): 371–386; Quoted in Matthew Hutson, 
“Quenching Consumers’ Thirst for ‘Authentic’ Brands,” New York Times, 
(December 27, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/28/business/
quenching-consumers-thirst-for-authentic-brands.html?module=Search
&mabReward=relbias%3Ar%2C%7B%221%22%3A%22RI%3A11%22
%7D&_r=0, accessed February 18, 2015.
 51. C. Whan Park, “The Effect of Individual and Situation-Related Factors on 
Consumer Selection of Judgmental Models,” Journal of Marketing Research 
13 (May 1976): 144–151.
 52. Richard W. Olshavsky and Donald H. Granbois, “Consumer Decision-
Making—Fact or Fiction,” Journal of Consumer Research 6 (September 1989): 
93–100; Geoffrey C. Kiel and Roger A. Layton, “Dimensions of Consumer 
Information Seeking Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research 28 (May 1981): 
233–239; see also Narasimhan Srinivasan and Brian T. Ratchford, “An 
Empirical Test of a Model of External Search for Automobiles,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 18 (September 1991): 233–242; Alex Mindlin, “Buyers 
Search Online, But Not by Brand,” New York Times (March 13, 2006), www.
nytimes.com, accessed March 13, 2006; Cathy J. Cobb and Wayne D. Hoyer, 
“Direct Observation of Search Behavior,” Psychology & Marketing 2 (Fall 
1985): 161–179; Sharon E. Beatty and Scott M. Smith, “External Search 
Effort: An Investigation across Several Product Categories,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 14 (June 1987): 83–95; William L. Moore and Donald R. Lehmann, 
“Individual Differences in Search Behavior for a Nondurable,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 7 (December 1980): 296–307. Tanya L. Chartrand, Joel 
Huber, Baba Shiv, and Robin J Tanner, “Non conscious Goals and Consumer 
Choice,” Journal of Consumer Research 35, 2 (August 2008): 189–201. 
Beth Snyder Bulik, “Behavioral Economics Helping Marketers Better 
Understand Consumers Practice Gives Advertisers Insight into Shoppers’ 
Brand Selection,” Ad Age CMO Strategy (July 26, 2010), http://adage.com/ 
article/cmo-strategy/behavioral-economics-helping-marketers–under 
stand-consumers/145091/, accessed April 17, 2011; cf. also Robin L. 
Soster, Ashwani Monga, and William O. Bearden, “Tracking Costs of Time 
and Money: How Accounting Periods Affect Mental Accounting,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 37, no. 4 (2010): 712–721.
 53. Malcolm Gladwell, Blink: The Power of Thinking without Thinking (New York: 
Little Brown & Company, 2005).
 54. Geoffrey C. Kiel and Roger A. Layton, “Dimensions of Consumer Infor-
mation Seeking Behavior,” Journal of  Marketing Research 28 (May 1981): 
233–239; see also Narasimhan Srinivasan and Brian T. Ratchford, 
“An Empirical Test of a Model of External Search for Automobiles,” 
Journal of  Consumer Research 18 (September 1991): 233–242; Alex 
Mindlin, “Buyers Search Online, But Not by Brand,” New York Times 
(March 13, 2006), www.nytimes.com, accessed March 13, 2006; Cathy 
J. Cobb and Wayne D. Hoyer, “Direct Observation of Search Behavior,” 
Psychology & Marketing 2 (Fall 1985): 161–179; Sharon E. Beatty and 
Scott M. Smith, “External Search Effort: An Investigation across Several 
Product Categories,” Journal of  Consumer Research 14 (June 1987): 83–
95; William L. Moore and Donald R. Lehmann, “Individual Differences 
 27. See William P. Putsis, Jr., and Narasimhan Srinivasan, “Buying or Just 
Browsing? The Duration of Purchase Deliberation,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 31 (August 1994): 393–402.
 28. Robert E. Smith, “Integrating Information from Advertising and Trial: 
Processes and Effects on Consumer Response to Product Information,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 30 (May 1993): 204–219.
 29. Carmen Nobel, “Neuromarketing: Tapping Into the ‘Pleasure Center’ of 
Consumers,” Forbes (February 1, 2013), http://www.forbes.com/sites/
hbsworkingknowledge/2013/02/01/neuromarketing-tapping-into-the-
pleasure-center-of-consumers/, accessed April 2, 2015; www.neuroscience 
marketing.com/blog, accessed April 2, 2015; Martin Reimann, Oliver 
Schilke, Bernd Weber, Carolin Neuhaus, and Judith L. Zaichkowsky, “Func-
tional Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Consumer Research: A Review and 
Application,” Psychology & Marketing 28, no. 6 (2011): 608–637; Sandra 
Blakeslee, “If You Have a ‘Buy Button’ in Your Brain, What Pushes It?” New 
York Times (October 19, 2004), www.nytimes.com, accessed October 19, 
2004; Clive Thompson, “There’s a Sucker Born in Every Medial Prefrontal 
Cortex,” New York Times (October 26, 2003), www.nytimes.com, accessed 
September 29, 2007.
 30. Michael Porter, Competitive Advantage (New York: Free Press, 1985).
 31. Jeffrey M. O’Brien, “You’re Sooooooo Predictable,” Fortune (November 27, 
2006): 230.
 32. Claire Cain Miller, “Mobile Apps Drive Rapid Change in Searches New York 
Times (January 7, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/08/business/ 
mobile-apps-drive-rapid-changes-in-search-technology.html?ref= 
business, accessed February 22, 2015.
 33. Tracy W. Tuten and Michael R. Solomon, Social Media Marketing 2nd ed. 
London: SAGE, 2016.
 34. Nicholas Lurie, Sam Ransbotham, and Hongju Liu, “The Content and 
Impact of Mobile vs. Desktop Reviews.” Paper presented at the 2013 an-
nual meeting of the Association for Consumer Research, Chicago, IL; Bart 
de Langhe, Philip Fernback, and Donald Lichtenstein, “Navigating by the 
Stars: What Do Online User Ratings Reveal About Product Quality?” Paper 
presented at the 2014 annual meeting of the Association for Consumer 
Research, Baltimore, MD.
 35. “Customer Product Reviews Drive Online Satisfaction and Conversion,” 
Marketing Daily (January 24, 2007), www.mediapost.com, accessed January  
24, 2007.
 36. Chris Anderson, The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business Is Selling Less of 
More (New York: Hyperion, 2006).
 37. “Drinking Yogurt Taste Test: The Best And The Worst (PHOTOS),” HuffPost 
Taste (April 3, 2013), http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/04/03/best-
drinking-yogurt_n_2993975.html, accessed July 29, 2015.
 38. Cait Poyner and Stacy Wood, “Smart Subcategories: How Assortment 
Formats Influence Consumer Learning and Satisfaction,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 37 (June 2010): 159–175; Kenneth C. Manning and 
David E. Sprott, “Price Endings, Left-Digit Effects, and Choice,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 36, no. 2 (2009): 328–335; Sandra J. Milberg, 
Francisca Sinn, and Ronald C. Goodstein, “Consumer Reactions to Brand 
Extensions in a Competitive Context: Does Fit Still Matter?” Journal of 
Consumer Research 37, no. 3 (2010): 543–553; David Sleeth-Keppler 
and S. Christian Wheeler, “A Multidimensional Association Approach to 
Sequential Consumer Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 21, no. 
1 (2011): 14–23; Aner Sela, Jonah Berger, and Wendy Liu, “Variety, Vice, 
and Virtue: How Assortment Size Influences Option Choice,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 35, no. 6 (2009): 941–951.
 39. Noah Rayman, “Dunkin’ Donuts Now Has Its Own Version of the Cronut,” 
Time (October 27, 2014), http://time.com/3542225/dunkin-donuts-crois 
sant-donut-cronut/, accessed April 3, 2015.
 40. Jeffrey R. Parker and Donald R. Lehmann, “How and When Grouping Low-
Calorie Options Reduces the Benefits of Providing Dish-Specific Calorie 
Information,” Journal of Consumer Research 41, no. 1 (2014): 213–235; cf. 
also Avni M. Shah, James R. Bettman, Peter A. Ubel, Punam Anand Keller, 
and Julie A. Edell, “Surcharges Plus Unhealthy Labels Reduce Demand for 
Unhealthy Menu Items,” Journal of Marketing Research 51, no. 6 (2014): 
773–789.
 41. Robert M. McMath, “The Perils of Typecasting,” American Demographics 
(February 1997): 60.
 42. Eleanor Rosch, “Principles of Categorization,” in E. Rosch and B. B. Lloyd, 
eds., Recognition and Categorization (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1978); cf. also 
Joseph Lajos, Zsolt Katona, Amitava Chattopadhyay, and Miklos Savary, 
“Category Activation Model: A Spreading Activation Network Model 
of Subcategory Positioning When Categorization Uncertainty Is High,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 1 (June 2009): 122–136; cf also M. 

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
377 
 71. Calvin P. Duncan, “Consumer Market Beliefs: a Review of the Literature 
and an Agenda For Future Research”, in NA - Advances in Consumer 
Research 17, eds. Marvin E. Goldberg, Gerald Gorn, and Richard W. Pollay 
(Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1990): 729–736.
 72. Chr. Hjorth-Andersen, “Price as a Risk Indicator,” Journal of Consumer 
Policy 10 (1987): 267–281; David M. Gardner, “Is There a Generalized 
Price–Quality Relationship?” Journal of Marketing Research 8 (May 1971): 
241–243; Kent B. Monroe, “Buyers’ Subjective Perceptions of Price,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 10 (1973): 70–80.
 73. Fred E. Webster and Yoram Wind, Organizational Buying Behavior (Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1972).
 74. See J. Joseph Cronin, Jr., and Michael H. Morris, “Satisfying Customer 
Expectations: The Effect on Conflict and Repurchase Intentions in 
Industrial Marketing Channels,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 
17 (Winter 1989): 41–49; Thomas W. Leigh and Patrick F. McGraw, 
“Mapping the Procedural Knowledge of Industrial Sales Personnel: A 
Script-Theoretic Investigation,” Journal of Marketing 53 (January 1989): 
16–34; William J. Qualls and Christopher P. Puto, “Organizational Climate 
and Decision Framing: An Integrated Approach to Analyzing Industrial 
Buying,” Journal of Marketing Research 26 (May 1989): 179–192.
 75. James M. Sinkula, “Market Information Processing and Organizational 
Learning,” Journal of Marketing 58 (January 1994): 35–45.
 76. Allen M. Weiss and Jan B. Heide, “The Nature of Organizational Search 
in High Technology Markets,” Journal of Marketing Research 30 (May 
1993): 220–233; Jennifer K. Glazing and Paul N. Bloom, “Buying Group 
Information Source Reliance,” Proceedings of the American Marketing 
Association Educators’ Conference (Summer 1994): 454.
 77. B. Charles Ames and James D. Hlaracek, Managerial Marketing for Industrial 
Firms (New York: Random House Business Division, 1984); Edward F. Fern 
and James R. Brown, “The Industrial/Consumer Marketing Dichotomy: A 
Case of Insufficient Justification,” Journal of Marketing 48 (Spring 1984): 
68–77.
 78. Jaakko Aspara, “Aesthetics of Stock Investments,” Consumption Markets & 
Culture 12 (June 2009): 99–131.
 79. Daniel H. McQuiston, “Novelty, Complexity, and Importance as Causal 
Determinants of Industrial Buyer Behavior,” Journal of Marketing 53 (April 
1989): 66–79.
 80. Patrick J. Robinson, Charles W. Faris, and Yoram Wind, Industrial Buying 
and Creative Marketing (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1967).
 81. Erin Anderson, Wujin Chu, and Barton Weitz, “Industrial Purchasing: An 
Empirical Examination of the Buyclass Framework,” Journal of Marketing 
51 (July 1987): 71–86.
 82. Julie Moreland, “Does ‘Liking’ a Bulldozer Help Sell More of Them?” Fast 
Company, (November 29, 2012), http://www.fastcompany.com/3003479/
does-liking-bulldozer-help-sell-more-them?partner=newsletter, accessed 
January 30, 2015.
 83. http://www.dell.com/us/business/p/, accessed June 14, 2011.
 84. Barbara Kiviat, “The End of Management,” Time Inside Business (July 12, 
2004), www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,994658,00.html, 
accessed October 5, 2007.
 85. ww.hsx.com, accessed April 13, 2015.
 86. Cf. C. Page Moreau and Kelly B. Herd, “To Each His Own? How Comparisons 
with Others Influence Consumers’ Evaluations of Their Self–Designed 
Products,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 5 (February 2010): 806–
819; Wendy Liu and David Gal, “Bringing Us Together Or Driving Us 
Apart: The Effect of Soliciting Consumer Input on Consumers’ Propensity 
to Transact with an Organization,” Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 2 
(August 2011): 242–259.
 87. James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds (New York: Anchor, 2005); Jeff 
Howe, “The Rise of Crowdsourcing,” Wired (June 2006), www.wired.com/
wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html, accessed April 12, 2015.
 88. Emma Hutchings, “Budweiser Will Crowdsource Its Next Beer,” Mashable 
(November 7, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/11/07/budweiser-crowd 
sourced-beer/, accessed March 19, 2013; Stephanie Buck, “Alexander Wang 
Teams Up with Samsung for Crowdsourced Handbag,” Mashable (February 
11, 2013), http://mashable.com/2013/02/11/alexander-wang-samsung/, 
accessed March 19, 2013.
 89. www.threadless.com, accessed April 12, 2015; Mark Weingarten, 
“Designed to Grow,” Business 2.0 (June 2007): 35–37. For a contrarian 
view, cf. Joseph P. Simmons, Leif D. Nelson, Jeff Galak, and Shane Frederick, 
“Intuitive Biases in Choice Versus Estimation: Implications for the Wisdom 
of Crowds,” Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 1 (June 2011): 1–15.
 90. Lauren Indvik, “ModCloth Launches Clothing Collection of User-Generated 
Designs,” Mashable (May 23, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/05/23/
in Search Behavior for a Nondurable,” Journal of  Consumer Research 7 
(December 1980): 296–307.
 55. Tanya L. Chartrand, Joel Huber, Baba Shiv, and Robin J Tanner, “Non-
conscious Goals and Consumer Choice,” Journal of Consumer Research 35, 
no. 2 (August 2008): 189–201.
 56. Beth Snyder Bulik, “Behavioral Economics Helping Marketers Better 
Understand Consumers Practice Gives Advertisers Insight into Shoppers’ 
Brand Selection,” Ad Age CMO Strategy (July 26, 2010), http://adage.com/ 
article/cmo-strategy/behavioral-economics-helping-marketers–under 
stand-consumers/145091/, accessed April 17, 2011; cf. also Robin L. 
Soster, Ashwani Monga, and William O. Bearden, “Tracking Costs of Time 
and Money: How Accounting Periods Affect Mental Accounting,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 37, no. 4 (2010): 712–721.
 57. Aparna A. Labroo and Jesper H. Nielsen, “Half the Thrill Is in the Chase: 
Twisted Inferences from Embodied Cognitions and Brand Evaluations,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 37 (June 2010): 143–158.
 58. Leslie Z. McArthur, Michael R. Solomon, and Rebecca H. Jaffe, “Weight 
Differences in Emotional Responsiveness to Proprioceptive and Pictorial 
Stimuli,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39, no. 2 (1980): 308–319.
 59. Steven J. Levitt and Stephen G. Dubner, Freakonomics: A Rogue Economist 
Explores the Hidden Side of Everything (New York, NY: Harper Perennial, 
2009); Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our 
Decisions (New York: HarperCollins, 2008).
 60. Eduardo Porter, “How Money Affects Morality,” New York Times (January 
3, 2013), http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/06/13/how-money-
affects-morality/, accessed February 23, 2015.
 61. Gergana Y. Nenkov and Maura L. Scott, “So Cute I Could Eat It Up”: 
Priming Effects of Cute Products on Indulgent Consumption,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 41, no. 2 (August 2014): 326–341.
 62. Adrian C. North, David J. Hargreaves, and Jennifer McKendrick, “The 
Influence of In-Store Music on Wine Selections,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology 84, no. 2 (1999): 271–276.
 63. Rob Girling, “Design’s Next Frontier: Nudging Consumers into Making 
Better Life Choices,” Fast Company (February 15, 2012), http://www 
.fastcodesign.com/1669055/designs-next-frontier-nudging-consumers-
into-making-better-life-choices?partner=homepage_newsletter, accessed 
February 18, 2015; for examples in the health and wellness area, cf. Zoe 
Chance, Margarita Gorlin, and Ravi Dhar, “Why Choosing Healthy Foods 
Is Hard, and How to Help: Presenting the 4Ps Framework for Behavior 
Change,” Customer Needs and Solutions 1, no. 4 (2014): 253–262.
 64. Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions About 
Health, Wealth, and Happiness (New York: Penguin Books, 2009); Rob 
Girling, Design’s Next Frontier: Nudging Consumers Into Making Better Life 
Choices, Co. Design (February 29, 2012), http://www.fastcodesign.com/ 
1669055/designs-next-frontier-nudging-consumers-into-making-better-
life-choices?partner=homepage_newsletter, accessed February 16, 2013; 
John A. Bargh and Tanya L. Chartrand, “The Unbearable Automaticity 
of Being,” American Psychologist 54, no. 7 (1999): 462–479; J. A. Bargh 
and M. J. Ferguson, “Beyond Behaviourism: On the Automaticity of Higher 
Mental Processes,” Psychological Bulletin 126, no. 6 (2000): 925–945.
 65. Laurie J. Flynn, “Like This? You’ll Hate That (Not All Web Recommendations 
Are Welcome),” New York Times (January 23, 2006), www.nytimes.com, 
accessed January 23, 2006.
 66. Robert A. Baron, Psychology: The Essential Science (Boston: Allyn &-Bacon, 
1989); Valerie S. Folkes, “The Availability Heuristic and Perceived Risk,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 15 (June 1989): 13–23; Daniel Kahneman 
and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under 
Risk,” Econometrica 47, no. 2 (1979): 263–291.
 67. Wayne D. Hoyer, “An Examination of Consumer Decision-Making for a 
Common Repeat Purchase Product,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 
(December 1984): 822–829; Calvin P. Duncan, “Consumer Market Beliefs: 
A Review of the Literature and an Agenda for Future Research,” in Marvin 
E. Goldberg, Gerald Gorn, and Richard W. Pollay, eds., Advances in Consumer 
Research 17 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1990): 
729–735; Frank Alpert, “Consumer Market Beliefs and Their Managerial 
Implications: An Empirical Examination,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 
10, no. 2 (1993): 56–70.
 68. Michael R. Solomon, Sarah Drenan, and Chester A. Insko, “Popular 
Induction: When Is Consensus Information Informative?” Journal of 
Personality 49, no. 2 (1981): 212–224.
 69. Howard Beales, Michael B. Mazis, Steven C. Salop and Richard Staelin, 
“Consumer Search and Public Policy,” Journal of Consumer Research 8, 
no. 1 (June 1981): 11–22.
 70. Adam Bryant, “Message in a Beer Bottle,” Newsweek (May 29, 2000): 43.

378 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
.com/publications/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=146421& 
nid=124595, accessed April 19, 2011.
 106. Richard Alleyne, “Facebook Increasingly Implicated in Divorce,” The Tele-
graph (UK) (January 21, 2011), http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/ 
facebook/8274601/Facebook-increasingly-implicated-in-divorce.html,  
accessed January 2, 2013.
 107. Natalie Angier, “The Changing American Family,” New York Times 
(November 25, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/26/health/ 
families.html?_r=0, accessed February 20, 2015; Belinda Luscombe, 
“Woman Power: The Rise of the Sheconomy,” Time Magazine (Novem ber 22, 
2010), http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2030913- 
3,00.html, accessed April 19, 2011; Sarah Mahoney, “New Rules of 
Mama Marketing: Older, Greener,” Marketing Daily (July 12, 2010), http://
www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_
aid=131754, accessed April 19, 2011.
 108. Craig J. Thompson, “Caring Consumers: Gendered Consumption Meanings 
and the Juggling Lifestyle,” Journal of Consumer Research 22 (March 1996): 
388–407.
 109. Edmund L. Andrews, “Survey Confirms It: Women Outjuggle Men,” New 
York Times (September 15, 2004), http://www.nytimes.com/2004/09/15/
politics/15labor.html, accessed April 10, 2015.
 110. Micaela DiLeonardo, “The Female World of Cards and Holidays: Women, 
Families, and the Work of Kinship,” Signs 12 (Spring 1942): 440–453.
 111. Tanya Irwin, “Study: Men Defy Marketing Stereotypes,” Marketing Daily 
(April 25, 2011), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/149272/ 
study-men-defy-marketing-stereotypes.html, accessed April 10, 2015; 
Stephanie Clifford, “More Dads Buy the Toys, So Barbie, and Stores, Get 
Makeovers,” New York Times (December 3, 2012), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2012/12/04/business/more-dads-buy-the-toys-so-barbie-and-
stores-get-makeovers.html?_r=0, accessed April 10, 2015. Emily Bryson 
York, “Retailers Adjust Marketing As More Men Take Over Grocery 
Shopping,” Los Angeles Times (December 29, 2011), http://articles.latimes 
.com/2011/dec/29/business/la-fi-male-shoppers-20111229, accessed April 10, 
2015; Gokcen Coskuner-Balli and Craig J. Thompson, “The Status Costs 
of Subordinate Cultural Capital: At-Home Fathers’ Collective Pursuit of 
Cultural Legitimacy through Capitalizing Consumption Practices,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (June 2013): 19–41.
 112. Quoted in Molly Soat, “Cheerios Leverages the Power of ‘Dadvertising’,” 
Marketing News Weekly (February 25, 2015), https://www.ama.org/pub 
lications/eNewsletters/Marketing-News-Weekly/Pages/cheerios-how-to-
dad.aspx, accessed April 10, 2015.
 113. Donald H. Granbois, “Improving the Study of Customer In-Store 
Behavior,” Journal of Marketing 32 (October 1968): 28–32; Tamara F. 
Mangleburg, Patricia M. Doney, and Terry Bristol, “Shopping with Friends 
and Teens’ Susceptibility to Peer Influence,” Journal of Retailing 80 (2004): 
101–116.
 114. Len Strazewski, “Tupperware Locks in New Strategy,” Advertising Age 
(February 8, 1988): 30.
 115. Rachel Ashman, Michael R. Solomon and Julia Wolny, “An Old Model for 
a New Age: Applying the EKB in Today’s Participatory Culture,” Journal of 
Customer Behaviour, 2015, 14(2): 127–146.
 116. Quoted in Sarah Lyall, “One-Third the Man He Used to Be, and Proud 
of It,” New York Times (February 6, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2013/02/06/world/europe/paul-mason-is-one-third-the-man-he-used-
to-be.html?_r=0, accessed February 6, 2013.
 117. Claudia Townsend and Wendy Liu, “Is Planning Good for You? The 
Differential Impact of Planning on Self-Regulation,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 38 (December 2012): 688–703.
 118. Sandra Blakeslee, “If You Have a ‘Buy Button’ in Your Brain, What 
Pushes it?” New York Times (October 9, 2004), http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2004/10/19/science/19neuro.html?_r=0, accessed April 2, 2015.
 119. Promothesh Chatterjee and Randall L. Rose, “Do Payment Mechanisms Change 
the Way Consumers Perceive Products?,” Journal of Consumer Research, (2012), 
38, 6: 38–43.
 120. Emily Friedman, “Does Virtual Cheating Still Count?,” ABC News (August 
13, 2007), http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/story?id=3473291&page=1, 
accessed August 13, 2007; Regina Lynn, “Virtual Rape Is Traumatic, 
but Is It a Crime?” Wired (May 4, 2007); www.wired.com/culture/life 
style/commentary/sexdrive/2007/05/sexdrive_0504, accessed June 16, 2009; 
“Representative Kirk Wants to Ban Second Life’s ‘Rape Rooms’ from Schools,” 
Virtual Worlds News (May 7, 2008), www.virtualworldsnews.com/2008/05/
representative.html?cid=113790134, accessed June 16, 2009.
 121. “Gartner Reveals Top Predictions for IT Organizations and Users for 2014 
and Beyond,” Gartner Newsroom, October 8, 2013, http://www.gartner.
com/newsroom/id/2603215
modcloth-user-generated-fashion-label/?WT.mc_id=en_business&utm_
campaign=Business&utm_medium=email&utm_source=newsletter, 
 accessed January 10, 2013; kickstarter.com, accessed April 12, 2015.
 91. Nina Diamond, John F. Sherry Jr., Albert M. Muñiz Jr., Mary Ann McGrath, 
Robert V. Kozinets, and Stefania Borghini, “American Girl and the Brand 
Gestalt: Closing the Loop on Sociocultural Branding Research,” Journal of 
Marketing 73 (May 2009): 118–134.
 92. Harry L. Davis, “Decision-Making Within the Household,” Journal of Con-
sumer Research 2 (March 1972): 241–260; Michael B. Menasco and David 
J. Curry, “Utility and Choice: An Empirical Study of Wife/Husband Decision-
Making,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 (June 1989): 87–97; Conway 
Lackman and John M. Lanasa, “Family Decision-Making Theory: An 
Overview and Assessment,” Psychology & Marketing 10 (March–April 1993): 
81–94.
 93. Shannon Dortch, “Money and Marital Discord,” American Demographics 
(October 1994): 11.
 94. For research on factors affecting how much influence adolescents exert in 
family decision-making, see Ellen Foxman, Patriya Tansuhaj, and Karin 
M. Ekstrom, “Family Members’ Perceptions of Adolescents’ Influence in 
Family Decision-Making,” Journal of Consumer Research 15 (March 1989): 
482–491; Sharon E. Beatty and Salil Talpade, “Adolescent Influence 
in Family Decision-Making: A Replication with Extension,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 21 (September 1994): 332–341; for a study that com-
pared the influence of parents versus siblings, cf. June Cotte and Stacy L. 
Wood, “Families and Innovative Consumer Behavior: A Triadic Analysis 
of Sibling and Parental Influence,” Journal of Consumer Research 31, no. 1 
(2004): 78–86.
 95. Daniel Seymour and Greg Lessne, “Spousal Conflict Arousal: Scale 
Development,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (December 1984): 810–821.
 96. Karlene Lukovitz, “Women in Wealthy Homes Make 2 of 3 Buying 
Decisions,” Marketing Daily (May 15, 2008), www.mediapost.com, accessed 
May 15, 2008; Dennis L. Rosen and Donald H. Granbois, “Determinants of 
Role Structure in Family Financial Management,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 10 (September 1983): 253–258; Robert F. Bales, Interaction 
Process Analysis: A Method for the Study of Small Groups (Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 1950). For a cross-gender comparison of food shopping 
strategies, see Rosemary Polegato and Judith L. Zaichkowsky, “Family Food 
Shopping: Strategies Used by Husbands and Wives,” Journal of Consumer 
Affairs 28, no. 2 (1994): 278–299.
 97. Alma S. Baron, “Working Parents: Shifting Traditional Roles,” Business 
37 (January–March 1987): 36; William J. Qualls, “Household Decision 
Behavior: The Impact of Husbands’ and Wives’ Sex Role Orientation,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 14 (September 1987): 264–279; Charles M. 
Schaninger and W. Christian Buss, “The Relationship of Sex-Role Norms 
to Household Task Allocation,” Psychology & Marketing 2 (Summer 1985): 
93–104.
 98. Natalie Angier, “The Changing American Family,” New York Times (Novem ber 
25, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/26/health/families.html?_r=0,  
accessed February 20, 2015.
 99. C. Whan Park, “Joint Decisions in Home Purchasing: A Muddling-Through 
Process,” Journal of Consumer Research 9 (September 1982): 151–162; 
see also William J. Qualls and Francoise Jaffe, “Measuring Conflict in 
Household Decision Behavior: Read My Lips and Read My Mind,” in John 
F. Sherry Jr. and Brian Sternthal, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 19 
(Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1992): 522–531.
 100. Kim P. Corfman and Donald R. Lehmann, “Models of Cooperative Group 
Decision-Making and Relative Influence: An Experimental Investigation of 
Family Purchase Decisions,” Journal of Consumer Research 14 (June 1987): 
1–13.
 101. Diane Crispell, “Dual-Earner Diversity,” American Demographics (July 1995): 
32–37.
 102. Elisha Hartwig, “Half of Parents Join Facebook to Creep on Their Kids,” 
Mashable (February 16, 2013), http://mashable.com/2013/02/16/face 
book-parents-kids/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_ca
mpaign=Feed%3A+Mashable+%28Mashable%29, accessed February 23, 
2015.
 103. Amber M. Epp and Linda L. Price, “Family Identity: A Framework of 
Identity Interplay in Consumption Practices,” Journal of Consumer Research 
35 (June 2008): 50–70; Robert Lohrer, “Haggar Targets Women with $8M 
Media Campaign,” Daily News Record (January 8, 1997): 1.
 104. Amber M. Epp and Sunaina Velagaleti, “Outsourcing Parenthood: How 
Families Manage Care Assemblages Using Paid Commercial Services,” 
Journal of Consumer Research, 41 (December 2014): 911–935.
 105. Erik Sass, “Facebook Is Now Leading Source of Evidence in Divorce Cases,” 
Social Media & Marketing Daily (March 10, 2011), http://www.mediapost 

 
Chapter 9   Decision Making 
379 
Accounting and Changes in Price: The Frame Dependence of Reference 
Dependence,” Journal of Consumer Research 22, no. 1 (June 1995): 90–97.
 125. Sean Poulter, “Mothers Make the Important Financial Decisions in Most 
Families . . . and Choose Where to Go on Holiday, Research Finds,” The Daily 
Mail, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3228614/Mothers-make-
important-financial-decisions-families-choose-holiday-research-finds.
html#ixzz48kOAQ8Oq; “Spousal Roles in Family Purchase Decision Making 
Process,” http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/10360/9/09_
chapter%201.pdf; Lars Perner, “Families and Family Decision Making,” 
http://www.consumerpsychologist.com/cb_Family_Decision_Making.html.
 122. Tanja Schneider and Steve Woolgar, “Technologies of Ironic Revelation: 
Enacting Consumers in Neuromarkets,” Institute for Science, Innovation 
and Society (InSIS) and Saïd Business School, University of Oxford, 
Consumption Markets & Culture 15, no. 2 (June 2012): 169–189.
 123. Quoted in George E. Newman and Ravi Dhar, “Authenticity Is Contagious: 
Brand Essence and the Original Source of Production,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 51, no. 3 (2014): 371–386.
 124. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis 
of Decision under Risk,” Econometrica 47 (March 1979): 263–291; 
Timothy B. Heath, Subimal Chatterjee, and Karen Russo France, “Mental 

380
K
yle is really psyched. The big day has actually arrived: He’s going to 
buy a car! He’s had his eye on that silver 2009 Honda Accord parked 
in the lot of Jon’s Auto-Rama for weeks now. Although the sticker 
says $2,999, Kyle figures he can probably get this baby for a cool $2,000. 
Besides, Jon’s dilapidated showroom and seedy lot make it look like just the 
kind of place that’s hungry to move some cars. Kyle did his homework on the 
Web. First he found out the wholesale value of similar used Accords from the 
Kelley Blue Book (kbb.com), and then he scouted out some cars for sale in his 
area at cars.com. So, Kyle figures he’s coming in loaded for bear—he’s going 
to show these guys they’re not dealing with some newbie. Unlike some of the 
newer, flashy car showrooms he’s been in lately, this place is a real nuts-and-
bolts operation; it’s so dingy and depressing he can’t wait to get out of there 
and take a shower. Kyle dreads the prospect of haggling over the price, but 
he hopes to convince the salesperson to take his offer because he knows the real market value of 
the car he wants. At the Auto-Rama lot, big signs on all the cars proclaim that today is Jon’s Auto-
Rama Rip Us Off Day! Things look better than Kyle expected—maybe he can get the car for even less 
than he hoped. He’s a bit surprised when a salesperson comes over to him and introduces herself 
as Kristen. He expected to deal with a middle-aged man in a loud sport coat (a stereotype he has 
about used-car salespeople), but this is better luck: He reasons that he won’t have to be so tough if 
he negotiates with a woman his age. Kristen laughs when he offers her $1,800 for the Honda; she 
points out that she can’t take such a low bid for such a sweet car to her boss or she’ll lose her job. 
Kristen’s enthusiasm for the car convinces Kyle all the more that he has to have it. When he finally 
writes a check for $2,700, he’s exhausted from all the haggling. What an ordeal! In any case, Kyle 
reminds himself that he at least convinced Kristen to sell him the car for less than the sticker price, 
and maybe he can fix it up and sell it for even more in a year or two. That Web surfing really paid off: 
He’s a tougher negotiator than he thought.
Chapter 
Objectives
 Chapter 10 ● Buying, Using, and Disposing
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
 10-1 Many factors at the time of purchase dramatically influ-
ence the consumer’s decision-making process.
 10-2 The information a store’s layout, Web site, or salespeople 
provides strongly influences a purchase decision.
 10-3 The growth of a “sharing economy” changes how many con-
sumers think about buying rather than renting products.
 10-4 Our decisions about how to dispose of a product are as 
important as how we decide to obtain it in the first place.
Source: Mandy Godbehear/Shutterstock.

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
381 
Situational effects  
on Consumer Behavior
Many consumers dread the act of buying a car. But change is in 
the wind, as dealers transform the car showroom. Car shoppers 
like Kyle log on to Internet buying services, call auto brokers who 
negotiate for them, buy cars at warehouse clubs, and visit giant auto malls where they 
can easily comparison shop. Indeed, the average car buyer today visits only 1.6 auto deal-
erships, as compared to five just a decade ago.1 Kyle’s experience when he bought a car 
illustrates some of the concepts we’ll discuss in this chapter. He did a lot of legwork before-
hand, and elements of the physical environment where he bought his Honda influenced 
his decision. Making a purchase is often not a simple, routine matter where you just pop 
into a store and make a quick choice.
As Figure 10.1 illustrates, many contextual factors affect our choice, such as our mood, 
whether we feel time pressure to make the purchase, and the particular reason we need the 
product. In some situations, such as when we buy a car or a home, the salesperson or realtor 
plays a pivotal role in our final selection. Also, today people like Kyle often use the Web to 
arm themselves with product and price information before they even enter a dealership or a 
store; this puts more pressure on retailers to deliver the value their customers expect.
the Consumption Situation
A consumption situation includes a buyer, a seller, and a product or service—but also 
many other factors, such as the reason we want to make a purchase and how the physical 
environment makes us feel.2 Common sense tells us that we tailor our purchases to specific 
occasions and that the way we feel at a specific point in time affects what we want to do—or 
buy. Smart marketers understand these patterns and plan their efforts to coincide with 
situations in which we are most prone to purchase. For example, book clubs invest heavily 
in promotional campaigns in June because many people want to stock up on “beach books” 
to read during the summer; for the same reason, we get tons of featured fun fiction books for 
our Kindles and Nooks in April and May. Our moods even change radically during the day, so 
at different times we might be more or less interested in what a marketer offers. Social media 
platforms also are looking at ways to adapt quickly to situational changes. Facebook is test-
ing ads targeted in real time based on users’ status updates (“What’s on your mind?”) and 
wall posts. Theoretically, a user who posts near the end of his workday that “It’s Miller time” 
could immediately be served a promotion from Miller Coors or another beer company.3
A study used a technique called the day reconstruction method to track these changes. 
More than 900 working women kept diaries of everything they did during the day, from 
reading the paper in the morning to falling asleep in front of the TV at night. The next day 
OBjeCtive 10-1
Many factors at the time 
of purchase dramatically 
influence the consumer’s 
decision-making process.
ANTECEDENT
STATES
• Situational Factors
• Usage Contexts
• Time Pressure
• Mood
• Shopping Orientation
PURCHASE
ENVIRONMENT
• The Shopping
 Experience
• Point-of-Purchase
 Stimuli
• Sales Interactions
POSTPURCHASE
PROCESSES
• Consumer
 Satisfaction
• Product Disposal
• Alternative Markets
Figure 10.1 ISSUeS RelATeD TO PURCHASe AnD POSTPURCHASe ACTIvITIeS

382 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
they relived each diary entry and rated how they felt at the time (annoyed, happy, etc.). 
Overall, researchers found that the study participants woke up a little grumpy but soon 
entered a state of mild pleasure. This mood increased by degrees through the day, though 
it was punctuated by occasional bouts of anxiety, frustration, and anger. Not surprisingly, 
the subjects were least happy when they engaged in mundane activities like commuting to 
work and doing housework, whereas they rated sex, socializing with friends, and relaxing 
as most enjoyable. Contrary to prior findings, however, the women were happier when 
they watched television than when they shopped or talked on the phone. They ranked 
taking care of children low, below cooking and not far above housework. The good news: 
Overall, people seem to be pretty happy, and these ratings aren’t influenced much by fac-
tors such as household income or job security. By far, the two factors that most upset daily 
moods were a poor night’s sleep and tight work deadlines.4
In addition to the functional relationships between products and usage situation, 
another reason to take environmental circumstances seriously is that a person’s situ-
ational self-image—the role he or she plays at any one time—helps to determine what 
he or she wants to buy or consume.5 A guy who tries to impress his date as he plays the 
role of “man-about-town” may spend more lavishly, order champagne instead of beer, 
and buy flowers; purchases he would never consider when he hangs out with his friends, 
slurps brew, and plays the role of “one of the boys.” Let’s see how these dynamics affect the 
way people think about what they buy.
If we systematically identify important usage situations, we can tailor market seg-
mentation strategies to ensure that our offerings meet the specific needs these situations 
create. For example, we often tailor our furniture choices to specific settings. We prefer 
different styles for a city apartment, a beach house, or an executive suite. Similarly, we dis-
tinguish motorcycles in terms of how riders use them, including commuting, riding them 
as dirt bikes, or on a farm versus highway travel.6
Table 10.1 gives one example of how a marketer fine-tunes its segmentation strategy 
to the usage situation. When we list the major contexts in which people use a product (e.g., 
snow skiing and sunbathing for a suntan lotion) and the different types of people who use 
the product, we can construct a matrix that identifies specific product features we should 
emphasize for each situation. During the summer, a lotion manufacturer might promote 
the fact that the bottle floats and is hard to lose, but during the winter season it could tout 
its nonfreezing formula.
A consumer’s physical and social environment affects his or her motives to use a 
product, as well as how he or she will evaluate the item. Important cues include his or 
her immediate environment as well as the amount and type of other consumers who are 
there as well. Dimensions of the physical environment, such as decor, odors, and even 
temperature, can significantly influence consumption. One study even found that if a Las 
Vegas casino pumped certain odors into the room, patrons fed more money into the slot 
machines!7 We’ll take a closer look at some of these factors a bit later in this chapter when 
we consider how important store design is to consumer behavior.
temporal Factors
Time is one of our most precious resources. We talk about “making time” or “spending 
time,” and we frequently remind others that “time is money.” Common sense tells us that 
we think more about what we want to buy when we have the luxury to take our time. Even 
a normally meticulous shopper who never buys before he or she compares prices might 
sprint through the mall at 9:00 pm on Christmas Eve to scoop up anything left on the 
shelves if he or she needs a last-minute gift. The same logic applies to online marketing; 
open rates (the percentage of people who open an email message from a marketer) vary 
throughout the day. The peak time for high open rates: mid-day on weekdays (presumably 
when all those people at work take a lunch break).8
Time is an economic variable; it is a resource that we must divide among our activi-
ties.9 We try to maximize satisfaction when we allocate our time to different tasks. Of 

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
383 
Source: Adapted from Peter R. Dickson, “Person-Situation: Segmentation’s Missing Link,” Journal of Marketing 46 (Fall 1982): 62. By permission of American Marketing 
Association.
taBle 10.1   A Person-Situation Segmentation Matrix for Suntan lotion: Our Social and Physical Surroundings
 
 
Situation
Young Children
teenagers
adult Women
adult Men
Fair  
Skin
Dark 
Skin
Fair  
Skin
Dark 
Skin
Fair  
Skin
Dark 
Skin
Fair  
Skin
Dark 
Skin
 
Benefits/Features
Beach/boat 
sunbathing
Combined  
insect repellent
Summer 
perfume
a.  Product serves as 
windburn protection
b.  Formula and container 
can stand heat
c.  Container floats and is 
distinctive (not easily 
lost)
Home-poolside 
sunbathing
Combined 
moisturizer
a.  Product has large 
pump dispenser
b.  Product won’t stain 
wood, concrete, 
furnishings
Sunlamp 
bathing
Combined 
moisturizer  
and massage  
oil
a.  Product is designed 
specifically for type of 
lamp
b.  Product has an 
artificial tanning 
ingredient
Snow skiing
Winter 
perfume
a.  Product provides 
special protection from 
special light rays and 
weather
b.  Product has antifreeze 
formula
Person 
benefit/ 
features
Special  
protection
a.  Protection is 
critical
b.  Formula is  
non-poisonous
Special  
protection
a.  Product fits  
in jean 
pocket
b.  Product used 
by opinion 
leaders
Special  
protection
Female  
perfume
Special 
 protection
Male 
perfume
course, people’s allocation decisions differ; we all know people who seem to play all of 
the time, and others who are workaholics. An individual’s priorities determine his or her 
timestyle.10 People in different countries also “spend” this resource at different rates. A 
social scientist compared the pace of life in 31 cities around the world as part of a study 
on timestyles.11 He and his assistants timed how long it takes pedestrians to walk 60 feet 
and the time postal clerks take to sell a stamp. Based on these responses, he claims that the 
fastest and slowest countries are:
Fastest countries—(1) Switzerland, (2) Ireland, (3) Germany, (4) Japan, (5) Italy
Slowest countries—(31) Mexico, (30) Indonesia, (29) Brazil, (28) El Salvador,  
(27) Syria

384 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Many consumers believe they are more pressed for time than ever before; marketers 
label this feeling time poverty. The problem appears to be more perception than fact. The 
reality is that we simply have more options for spending our time, so we feel pressured by 
the weight of all of these choices. In 1965, the average U.S. woman spent about 32 hours 
per week on housework; the time today is about half of that. Of course, there are plenty 
of husbands who share these burdens more: The average U.S. man spent just more than 
4 hours per week on household tasks and that number has more than doubled. Women 
report feeling more rushed than men, though even they have more leisure time now than 
they did in the 1960s (about 30 hours of free time in a typical week).12
In addition to physical cues, other people who are in the situation affect purchase 
decisions. In some cases, the sheer presence or absence of co-consumers, the other 
patrons in a setting, actually is a product attribute; think about an exclusive resort or 
boutique that promises to provide privacy to privileged customers. At other times, the 
presence of others can have positive value. A sparsely attended ball game or an empty 
bar can be a depressing sight. The type of consumers who patronize a store or service or 
who use a product affects our evaluations. We often infer something about a store when 
we examine its customers. For this reason, some restaurants require men to wear jackets 
for dinner (and supply rather tacky ones if they don’t), and bouncers at some “hot” night-
spots handpick people who wait in line based on whether they have the right “look” for the 
club. To paraphrase the comedian Groucho Marx, “I would never join a club that would 
have me as a member!”
“Time flies when you’re having fun,” but other situations (like some classes—but 
certainly not consumer behavior) seem to last forever. Our experience of time is subjective; 
our immediate priorities and needs determine how quickly time flies. It’s important for 
marketers to understand psychological time because we’re more likely to be in a con-
suming mood at certain times than we are at others.
A study examined how the timestyles of a group of U.S. women influenced their 
consumption choices.13 The researchers identified four dimensions of time: (1) the social 
dimension refers to individuals’ categorization of time as either “time for me” or “time 
with/for others”; (2) the temporal orientation dimension depicts the relative significance 
individuals attach to past, present, or future; (3) the planning orientation dimension alludes 
to different time management styles varying on a continuum from analytic to spontane-
ous; and (4) the polychronic orientation dimension distinguishes between people who prefer 
to do one thing at a time from those who have multitasking timestyles. After they inter-
viewed and observed these women, the researchers identified a set of five metaphors that 
they say capture the participants’ perspectives on time:
●
●Time is a pressure cooker—These women are usually analytical in their planning, 
other-oriented, and monochronic in their timestyles. They treat shopping in a me-
thodical manner and they often feel under pressure and in conflict.
●
●Time is a map—These women are usually analytical planners; they exhibit a future 
temporal orientation and a polychronic timestyle. They often engage in extensive-
information search and comparison shop.
●
●Time is a mirror—Women in this group are also analytical planners and have a 
polychronic orientation. However, they have a past temporal orientation. Because of 
their risk averseness in time use, these women are usually loyal to products and ser-
vices they know and trust. They prefer convenience-oriented products.
●
●Time is a river—These women are usually spontaneous in their planning orientation 
and have a present focus. They go on unplanned, short, and frequent shopping trips.
●
●Time is a feast—These women are analytical planners with a present temporal 
orientation. They view time as something they consume to pursue sensory plea-
sure and gratification, and for this reason they value hedonic consumption and 
variety-seeking.

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
385 
McDonald’s is testing a “Create Your Taste” platform that allows customers to skip 
the line and order from a kiosk, where they can customize their burger with a selection 
of buns, cheese, and toppings. The chain is hoping to boost satisfaction by giving diners 
greater control and less waiting time.14 The psychological dimension of time—how we 
actually experience it—is an important factor in queuing theory, the mathematical 
study of waiting lines. As we all know, our experience when we wait has a big effect on our 
evaluations of what we get at the end of the wait. Although we assume that something 
must be pretty good if we have to wait for it, the negative feelings that long waits arouse 
can quickly turn people off.15
the Shopping experience
Many analysts who study consumer satisfaction, or those who 
design new products or services to increase it, recognize that it 
is crucial to understand how people actually interact with their 
environment to identify potential problems. To do so, they typi-
cally conduct focus groups, in which a small set of consumers 
comes into a facility to try a new item while company personnel 
observe them from behind a mirror. However, some researchers advocate a more up-close-
and-personal approach that allows them to watch people in the actual environment where 
they consume the product. This perspective originated in the Japanese approach to total 
quality management (TQM), which is a complex set of management and engineering 
procedures that aims to reduce errors and increase quality.
To help companies achieve more insight, researchers go to the gemba, which to 
the Japanese means “the one true source of information.” According to this philosophy, 
it’s essential to send marketers and designers to the precise place where consumers use 
the product or service rather than to ask laboratory subjects to use it in a simulated 
environment.
Figure 10.2 illustrates this idea in practice. Host Foods, which operates food conces-
sions in major airports, sent a team to the gemba—in this case, an airport cafeteria—to 
identify problem areas. Employees watched as customers entered the facility, and then fol-
lowed them as they inspected the menu, procured silverware, paid, and found a table. The 
findings were crucial to Host’s redesign of the facility. For example, the team identified a 
common problem that many people traveling solo experience: the need to put down one’s 
luggage to enter the food line and the feeling of panic you get because you’re not able to 
keep an eye on your valuables when you get your meal. This simple insight allowed Host to 
modify the design of its facilities to improve a patron’s line-of-sight between the food area 
and the tables.16
Mood
In Chapter 5 we discussed the importance of affect on the buying experience. Our mood 
at the time of purchase can really affect what we feel like buying.17 If you don’t believe it, 
try grocery shopping on an empty stomach! Or make a decision when you’re stressed, and 
you’ll understand how a physiological state impairs information-processing and problem-
solving abilities.18
Two basic dimensions, pleasure and arousal, determine whether we will react positively 
or negatively to a consumption environment.19 What it boils down to is that you can either 
enjoy or not enjoy a situation, and you can feel stimulated or not. As Figure 10.3 indicates, 
different combinations of pleasure and arousal levels result in a variety of emotional states. 
An arousing situation can be either distressing or exciting, depending on whether the con-
text is positive or negative (e.g., a street riot versus a street festival). So, a specific mood is 
some combination of pleasure and arousal. The state of happiness is high in pleasantness 
OBjeCtive 10-2
 The information a 
store’s layout, Web site, 
or salespeople provides 
strongly influences a 
purchase decision.

386 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
and moderate in arousal, whereas elation is high on both dimensions.20 A mood state 
(either positive or negative) biases our judgments of products and services in that direc-
tion.21 Put simply, we give more positive evaluations when we’re in a good mood (this 
explains the popularity of the business lunch!).
Many factors, including store design, the weather, and whether you just had a fight 
with your significant other, affect your mood. Music and television programming do as 
well.22 When we hear happy music or watch happy programs, we experience more posi-
tive reactions to commercials and products.23 And when we’re in a good mood, we process 
UNPLEASANT
PLEASANT
AROUSING
Distressing
Exciting
Gloomy
Relaxing
SLEEPY
Figure 10.3 DIMenSIOnS OF eMOTIOnAl STATeS
Leave dirty tray
on table
Enter
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Can’t see bags!
Go get them.
Trays
Silver
Food
Trash
Cashier
Beverages
Put
bags
down.
Need
Silverware!
Ooops . . . Not
supposed to use
the trash can.
The Gemba – Take 4
Figure 10.2 GOInG TO THe GeMBA
Source: © Quality Function Deployment Institute. Used with permission.

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
387 
ads with less elaboration. We pay less attention to the specifics of the message and we rely 
more on heuristics (see Chapter 9).24
When the Going Gets tough, the tough Go Shopping
We all know some people who shop simply for the sport of it, and others whom we have 
to drag to a mall. Shopping is how we acquire needed products and services, but social 
motives for shopping also are important. Thus, shopping is an activity that we can per-
form for either utilitarian (functional or tangible) or hedonic (pleasurable or intangible) 
reasons.25
So, do people hate to shop or love it? We segment consumers in terms of their shop-
ping orientation, or general attitudes about shopping. These orientations vary depend-
ing on the particular product categories and store types we consider. One consumer might 
hate to shop for a car, but love to browse in music stores. A shopper’s motivation influ-
ences the type of shopping environment that will be attractive or annoying; for example, a 
person who wants to locate and buy something quickly may find loud music, bright colors, 
or complex layouts distracting, whereas someone who is there to browse may enjoy the 
sensory stimulation.26
Some scale items that researchers use to assess our shopping motivations illustrate 
the diverse reasons we may shop. One item that measures hedonic value is “During the 
trip, I felt the excitement of the hunt.” When we compare that type of sentiment to a 
functional statement, “I accomplished just what I wanted to on this shopping trip,” there’s 
a clear contrast between these two dimensions.27 Hedonic shopping motives include the 
following:28
●
●Social experiences—The shopping center or department store replaces the tradi-
tional town square or county fair as a community gathering place. Many people (es-
pecially in suburban or rural areas) have almost no other places to spend their leisure 
time. That probably explains the popularity of late-night games college students in 
some rural areas play at their local Walmart. In addition to sports such as scavenger 
hunts, aisle football, and a relay race limbo under the shopping-cart stand, “10 in 
The business lunch is a tried-and-true way to 
get clients in a good mood.
Source: bikeriderlondon/Shutterstock.

388 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
10” is a big attraction. To play this game, students form into teams; each team has 10 
minutes to put 10 items from anywhere in the store in a shopping cart. Then they turn 
their cart over to the opposing team, which has to figure out where the items came 
from and return them to the shelves where they belong (not so easy in a store stocked 
with more than 100,000 different items). The first team back to the checkout counters 
with an empty cart wins.29 Note: If you get busted for playing this game, you did not 
learn about it here.
●
●Sharing of  common interests—Stores frequently offer specialized goods that allow 
people with shared interests to communicate.
●
●Affiliation—Shopping centers are a natural place to congregate. The shopping mall 
is a favorite “hangout” for teenagers. It also represents a controlled, secure environ-
ment for the elderly, and many malls now feature “mall walkers’ clubs” for early morn-
ing workouts.
●
●Status—As every salesperson knows, some people savor the experience of being 
waited on, even though they may not necessarily buy anything. One men’s clothing 
salesman offered this advice: “Remember their size, remember what you sold them 
last time. Make them feel important! If you can make people feel important, they are 
going to come back. Everybody likes to feel important!”30 When a team of researchers 
conducted in-depth interviews with women to understand what makes shopping a 
pleasurable experience, they found one motivation was role-playing. For example, one 
respondent dressed up for shopping excursions to upscale boutiques because she liked 
to pretend she was wealthy and have salespeople fall all over her.31
●
●The thrill of  the hunt—Some people pride themselves on their knowledge of the mar-
ketplace. They may love to haggle and bargain, and even view this process as a sport.
e-Commerce: Clicks versus Bricks
Pssst … want to hear a secret? People are buying a lot of stuff online these days. Oh, you 
knew that already. Consumers worldwide spend about $1.5 trillion per year on e-com-
merce sites.32 Analysts predict that soon about one-fourth of these transactions will occur 
on a mobile device. Already, about three-fourths of the world’s population has access to a 
mobile phone and users download about 30 billion apps in a year.33 Then add in the explo-
sive growth of tablets: We’re even more likely to use these devices when we’re in the mood 
to shop. Their bigger screens make it easier to browse items, and often even more efficient 
than computers because shoppers can zoom in or drag items to their carts with their fin-
gers.34 That helps to explain why in recent years people have purchased even more mer-
chandise from tablets than they have from phones (or from the newer so-called phablets, 
which are a hybrid of a phone and a tablet).
The experience of acquiring a product or service may be quite different offline versus 
online. This aspect of the transaction provides value over and above what you actually 
buy. We clearly see this difference between the two worlds when we compare how people 
gamble in casinos versus online. When researchers interviewed 30 gamblers to explore 
these experiences, they found sharp contrasts. Those who enjoy casino gambling have 
a strong sense of connection to fellow gamblers, so it’s very much a social experience. 
Online gamblers enjoy the anonymity of the Internet. Casino gamblers get turned on by 
the sensual experiences and excitement of the casino, whereas online gamblers gravitate 
more to the feeling of safety and control they get because they stay at home. Casino gam-
blers talked about the friendly atmosphere, whereas those who stayed online reported 
behaviors that a real casino wouldn’t tolerate, such as taunts and bullying.35 Although 
both groups aim to have fun and hope to make money, it’s a safe bet that their experiences 
are quite different.
As more and more Web sites pop up to sell everything from refrigerator magnets to 
Mack trucks, marketers continue to debate how the online world affects their business. In 
particular, many lose sleep as they wonder whether e-commerce will replace traditional 
retailing, work in concert with it, or perhaps even fade away to become another fad your 
kids will laugh about someday (OK, that’s not real likely). Still, the rising availability of 
Is cash obsolete? In the past 
few years we’ve seen a fire-
storm of activity to promote 
various kinds of virtual cur-
rency and encourage con-
sumers to switch from cash and credit cards 
to digital wallets, which are electronic devices 
that allow an individual to make e-commerce 
transactions. A lot of this activity is propelled 
by the spread of near field communications 
(nFC) technology that allows devices near to 
one another (like a smartphone and a nFC 
terminal in a store) to establish radio com-
munication. Apple Pay is a mobile payment 
service that lets users use their iPhones and 
Apple Watches to pay in stores and online. 
Google’s joined an initiative called SoftCard 
backed by AT&T, T-Mobile, and verizon; Sam-
sung bought loop Pay to enable customers 
to pay digitally. Twitter bought CardSpring, a 
mobile payments infrastructure company that 
allows merchants to offer deals to consumers 
that can be loaded onto to their credit cards 
so when you pay the discount is automati-
cally applied to the purchase. Facebook is 
testing a new “Buy” feature that allows users 
to make purchases from businesses directly 
from within a social network.36 The contro-
versial Bitcoin system uses peer-to-peer 
technology to operate with no central author-
ity or banks; it’s the most prominent form of 
cryptocurrency that relies upon encryption 
techniques rather than banks to regulate the 
generation of units of currency and verify the 
transfer of funds. Some big companies in-
cluding Dell, expedia, PayPal, and Microsoft 
already work with partners to process bitcoin 
payments.37 Don’t unload those benjamins in 
your wallet just yet, but get ready for the cur-
rency revolution.
  net profit

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
389 
comparison shopping phone apps does threaten the existence of many retailers as con-
sumers engage in what they call showrooming. This means that a shopper visits a store 
like Best Buy to explore options for big-ticket items like TVs or appliances and then he or 
she finds a cheaper price for the specific model online.
For marketers, the growth of online commerce is a sword that cuts both ways. On 
the one hand, they reach customers around the world even if they’re physically located  
100 miles from nowhere. On the other hand, they now compete not only with the store 
across the street but also with thousands of Web sites that span the globe. Also, when con-
sumers obtain products directly from the manufacturer or wholesaler, this eliminates the 
intermediary—the loyal, store-based retailers that carry the firm’s products and sell them 
at a marked-up price.38 In addition, as we discussed in Chapter 2, there are huge issues 
relating to data security and privacy yet to be resolved.
So what makes e-commerce sites successful? Some e-tailers take advantage of tech-
nology to provide extra value to their customers that their land-locked rivals can’t. eBay 
offers a feature within its Fashion app called “See It On” that allows the user to virtually 
try on sunglasses in real time. He or she can adjust the fit; choose different styles, frames, 
lenses, and colors to find the perfect look; and then browse through eBay to find the perfect 
price.39 Other new fashion sites, such as Net-a-Porter and Gilt Groupe, directly connect 
buyers and sellers so that designers can be more nimble and react quickly to changing 
consumer tastes. Indeed, the high-fashion site ModaOperandi bills itself as a pretailer; 
it provides exclusive styles by prodding manufacturers to produce runway pieces they 
wouldn’t otherwise make because store buyers weren’t sure anyone would pay the money 
for them.40
More generally, online shoppers value these aspects of a Web site:
●
●The ability to click on an item to create a pop-up window with more details about the 
product, including price, size, colors, and inventory availability.
●
●The ability to click on an item and add it to your cart without leaving the page you’re 
on.
●
●The ability to “feel” merchandise through better imagery, more product descriptions, 
and details.
●
●The ability to enter all data related to your purchase on one page, rather than going 
through several checkout pages.
●
●The ability to mix and match product images on one page to determine whether they 
look good together.41
retailing as theater
The competition for customers becomes even more intense as nonstore alternatives, from 
Web sites and print catalogs to TV shopping networks and home shopping parties, con-
tinue to multiply. With all of these shopping alternatives available, how can a traditional 
store compete? Many malls are giant entertainment centers, almost to the point that 
their traditional retail occupants seem like an afterthought. Today, it’s commonplace to 
find carousels, miniature golf, skating rinks or batting cages in a suburban mall. Hershey 
opened a make-believe factory smack in the middle of Times Square. It features four steam 
machines and 380 feet of neon lighting, plus a moving message board that lets visiting 
chocoholics program messages to surprise their loved ones.42
The quest to entertain means that many stores go all out to create imaginative envi-
ronments that transport shoppers to fantasy worlds or provide other kinds of stimulation. 
We call this strategy retail theming. Innovative merchants today use four basic kinds of 
theming techniques:
1 Landscape themes rely on associations with images of nature, Earth, animals, and 
the physical body. Bass Pro Shops, for example, creates a simulated outdoor environ-
ment, including pools stocked with fish.
2 Marketscape themes build on associations with man-made places. An example is The 
Venetian hotel in Las Vegas, which lavishly recreates parts of the real Italian city.
One popular theming strat-
egy is to convert a store 
into a being space. This  
kind of environment rese-
mbles a sort of commer-
cial living room, where we can go to relax, be 
entertained, hang out with friends, escape 
the everyday, or even learn. When you think 
of being spaces, Starbucks probably comes 
to mind. The coffee chain’s stated goal is to 
become our “third place” where we spend 
the bulk of our time, in addition to home 
and work. Starbucks led the way when it 
outfitted its stores with comfy chairs and 
Wi-Fi. But there are many other marketers 
who meet our needs for exciting commercial 
spaces—no matter what those needs are. In 
Asia, venues such as Manboo and Fujiyama 
land provide havens where gamers can do 
their thing 24/7—and even take a shower 
on-site during a break. Other spaces cater to 
the needs of minipreneurs (one-person busi-
nesses) as they offer work-centered being 
spaces. At new York’s Paragraph, writers who 
need a quiet place to ruminate can hang out 
in a loft that’s divided into a writing room 
and a lounge area. TwoRooms (“You Work, 
They Play”) provides office space and child 
care for home-based workers.44
Reflecting the ever-quickening pace of 
our culture, many of these being spaces come  
and go rapidly—on purpose. pop-up stores 
appear in many forms around the world. Typi-
cally, these are temporary installations that 
do business only for a few days or weeks 
and then disappear before they get old. 
For example, the Swatch Instant Store sells 
limited-edition watches in a major city until 
the masses discover it; then it closes and 
moves on to another “cool” locale. The Dutch 
beer brand Dommelsch organized pop-up 
concerts: Fans entered barcodes they found 
on cans, beer bottles, and coasters on the 
brewer’s Web site to discover dates and loca-
tions. You may even run into a pop-up store 
on your campus; several brands, including 
the Brazilian flip-flop maker Havaianas, vic-
toria’s Secret’s Pink, and sustainable-clothing 
brand Rvl7, run pop-up projects around the 
United States.45
Marketing Opportunity

390 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
3 Cyberspace themes build on images of information and communications technology. 
eBay’s retail interface instills a sense of community among its vendors and traders.
4 Mindscape themes draw on abstract ideas and concepts, introspection and fantasy, 
and often possess spiritual overtones. The Kiva day spa in downtown Chicago offers 
health treatments based on a theme of American Indian healing ceremonies and 
religious practices.43
Store image
As so many stores compete for customers, how do we ever pick one over others? Just 
like products (see Chapter 7), stores have “personalities.” Some shops have clearly 
defined images (either good or bad). Others tend to blend into the crowd. What factors 
shape this personality, or store image? Some of the important dimensions of a store’s 
image are location, merchandise, suitability, and the knowledge and congeniality of 
the sales staff.
These design features typically work together to create an overall impression. When 
we think about stores, we don’t usually say, “Well, that place is fairly good in terms of 
convenience, the salespeople are acceptable, and services are good.” We’re more likely to 
proclaim, “That place gives me the creeps,” or “It’s so much fun to shop there.” We quickly 
get an overall impression of a store, and the feeling we get may have more to do with 
intangibles, such as interior design and the types of people we find in the aisles, than with 
the store’s return policies or credit availability. As a result, some stores routinely pop up 
in our consideration sets (see Chapter 9), whereas we never consider others (“Only geeks 
shop there!”).46
atmospherics
Retailers want you to come in—and stay. Careful store design increases the amount of 
space the shopper covers, and stimulating displays keep them in the aisles longer. This 
“curb appeal” translates directly to the bottom line: Researchers tracked grocery shopper’s 
movements by plotting the position of their cell phones as they moved about a store. They 
found that when people lingered just 1 percent longer, sales rose by 1.3 percent.
Of course, grocers know a lot of tricks after years of observing shoppers. For example, 
they call the area just inside a supermarket’s entrance the “decompression zone”: People 
tend to slow down and take stock of their surroundings when they enter the store, so 
store designers use this space to promote bargains rather than to sell. Similarly, Walmart’s 
Bass Pro Shops use a landscape theme to 
connect shoppers with nature.
Source: Stuart Abraham/Alamy.

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
391 
CB aS i See it
Julie Baker, Texas Christian University
awnings, building materials used, and 
architectural style are visual cues that 
shape consumers’ perceptions of and 
feelings about a store, which in turn 
influence their preference and choice.
In addition, individuals have 
two basic needs regarding the 
environments with which they 
interact: to understand and to 
explore. Understanding focuses 
on how a space is laid out, and 
includes coherence (whether an 
environment appears organized) and 
legibility (whether it appears that an 
individual can navigate within the 
environment). Exploration focuses on 
whether one wants to discover more 
within the environment, and includes 
mystery (the promise that one could 
see more upon entering a setting) 
and complexity (how much is going 
on in a particular view). Storefront 
design can reflect differing degrees 
of coherence, legibility, mystery and 
complexity. For example, we have 
found that darkened windows and 
awnings are design features that 
shoppers correlate with mystery, while 
architectural symmetry and windows 
that shoppers can see through 
increase coherence and legibility. 
Ornamentation and multiple colors 
are associated with complexity.
Whether shoppers are attracted 
to a storefront design that leads 
to understanding or exploration 
depends on store characteristics 
and consumer characteristics. To 
illustrate, one store characteristic 
that we propose influences 
preference is the type of store. If a 
store is utilitarian in nature, where 
the products/services sold fulfill 
basic needs (i.e., a drugstore or 
dry cleaner), consumers should 
prefer storefronts that promote 
understanding. On the other hand, if 
the store is more hedonic in nature, 
where the products/services sold 
are more pleasurable (i.e., boutiques 
or spa settings), consumers should 
prefer storefronts that encourage 
exploration. An example of a shopper 
characteristic that would influence 
preference is the personality of 
that shopper. One of our study 
respondents told us,” I am very clean 
and organized, so I would avoid any 
store that appears messy.” Similarly, 
a shopper’s gender could influence 
storefront preference. Females have 
been found to perceive the same 
architectural design to be more 
complex than did males.
Retail managers and retail 
architects can use this knowledge 
to collaborate in designing retail 
storefronts that encourage shoppers 
to enter their stores. Storefront 
architecture is a visible and effective 
brand-building strategy for retailers 
and provides a way for designers 
and managers to control shoppers’ 
perceptions of stores.
How does the architecture of a 
retail storefront influence you as a 
shopper? What visual features of the 
design either encourage you to enter, 
or cause you to avoid a retailer? These 
are questions that my co-author Nancy 
Sirianni and I are researching in our 
study on consumer responses to retail 
storefronts.
We know that consumers depend 
heavily on visual cues found in the 
physical environment when making 
decisions, especially when they have 
no past experience with an entity, 
like a retail store. Storefront features 
such as windows, doorways, lighting, 
“greeters” help customers to settle in to their shopping experience. Once they get a serious 
start, the first thing shoppers encounter is the produce section. Fruits and vegetables can 
easily be damaged, so it would be more logical to buy these items at the end of a shopping 
trip. But fresh, wholesome food makes people feel good (and righteous) so they’re less 
guilty when they throw the chips and cookies in the cart later.47
Because marketers recognize that a store’s image is an important part of the retailing 
mix, store designers pay a lot of attention to atmospherics, the “conscious designing of 
space and its various dimensions to evoke certain effects in buyers.”48 These dimensions 
include colors, scents, and sounds. For example, stores with red interiors tend to make 
people tense, whereas a blue decor imparts a calmer feeling.49
A store’s atmosphere in turn affects what we buy. In one study, researchers asked 
shoppers how much pleasure they felt five minutes after they entered a store. Those who 

392 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
enjoyed their experience spent more time and money.50 To boost the entertainment value 
of shopping (and to lure online shoppers back to brick-and-mortar stores), some retailers 
create activity stores that let consumers participate in the production of the products or 
services they buy there. One familiar example is the Build-A-Bear Workshop chain, where 
customers dress bear bodies in costumes.51
In addition to visual stimuli, all sorts of sensory cues influence us in retail settings.52 
For example, patrons of country-and-western bars drink more when the jukebox music 
is slower. According to a researcher, “Hard drinkers prefer listening to slower-paced, wail-
ing, lonesome, self-pitying music.”53 Music also can affect eating habits. Another study 
found that diners who listened to loud, fast music ate more food. In contrast, those who 
listened to Mozart or Brahms ate less and more slowly. The researchers concluded that din-
ers who choose soothing music at mealtimes can increase weight loss by at least 5 pounds 
a month!54
in-Store Decision Making
Despite all their efforts to “pre-sell” consumers through advertising, marketers increas-
ingly recognize that the store environment exerts a strong influence on many purchases. 
Women tell researchers, for example, that store displays are one of the major information 
sources they use to decide what clothing to buy.55
This influence is even stronger when we shop for food: Analysts estimate that shop-
pers decide on about two out of every three supermarket purchases while they walk 
through the aisles.56 Research evidence indicates that consumers use mental budgets 
for grocery trips that are typically composed of both an itemized portion and in-store slack. 
This means they typically decide beforehand on an amount they plan to spend, but then 
they have an additional amount in mind (slack) they are willing to spend on unplanned 
purchases—if they come across any they really want to have.57 Here are some “tricks of 
the trade”:
●
●Sell sweets at eye level, midway along aisles, where shoppers’ attention lingers 
longest.
●
●Use the ends of aisles to generate big revenues—endcap displays account for 45 per-
cent of soft drink sales.
Mobile shopping apps on 
smartphones provide imagi-
native new ways for retailers 
to guide shoppers through 
the experience, as they do 
everything for you: locate merchandise, iden-
tify the nearest restroom in a mall, or scout 
out sales. Some help you remember where 
you parked your car; others actually provide 
reward points when you visit certain stores. 
The apps also promise to provide a solution 
to the major hassles that drive consumers 
away from brick-and-mortar stores, espe-
cially long checkout times and incompetent 
sales associates. One survey reported that 
nearly 3 in 10 store visits ended with an 
average of $132 unspent because shop-
pers gave up in frustration and abandoned 
their carts. The study also found that more 
than 40 percent of shoppers who received 
guidance from a retail associate armed with 
a handheld mobile computer reported an 
improved shopping experience. To rub salt 
into the wound, more than half of store em-
ployees agreed that because use of online 
shopping tools is escalating, their custom-
ers were more knowledgeable about their 
products than the salespeople are! More 
than one-third of U.S. shoppers have down-
loaded at least one food or beverage app.59 
note: Some recent research indicates that 
when shoppers use in-store mobile technol-
ogy their behavior changes. Shoppers buy 
more unplanned items and also concentrate 
net profit
Patrons tend to drink more when they listen 
to country-and-western music than to other 
types.
Source: Radharc Images/Alamy.

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
393 
●
●Use free-standing displays toward the rear of the supermarket and on the left side of 
aisles. Shoppers tend to move through a store in a counterclockwise direction and they 
are more likely to choose items from shelves to their left.
●
●Sprinkle the same product throughout the store, rather than grouping it in one spot to 
boost sales through repetitive exposure.
●
●Group ingredients for a meal in one spot.
●
●Post health-related information on kiosks and shelf tags to link groceries to good 
health in shoppers’ minds, even though only 23 percent of them say they always look 
for nutritional information on labels.58
Spontaneous Shopping
When a shopper suddenly decides to buy something in the store, one of two different pro-
cesses explains why:
1 He or she engages in unplanned buying when he or she is unfamiliar with a store’s 
layout or perhaps he or she is under some time pressure. Or, if he or she sees an item 
on a store shelf, this might remind her he or she needs it. About one-third of all un-
planned buying occurs because a shopper recognizes a new need while he or she is in 
the store.62
2 He or she engages in impulse buying when he or she experiences a sudden urge she 
simply can’t resist, like the sketch of a “typical” impulse purchaser an actual con-
sumer drew in Figure 10.4.63
Retailers typically place so-called impulse items, such as candy and gum, near the 
checkout to cater to these urges. Similarly, many supermarkets install wider aisles to 
less on the information they find in the store. 
Ironically, if they talk on their phones while 
they shop they are less likely to buy items they  
planned to purchase and actually spend less 
because they are distracted.60
even more futuristic tech is on the horizon: 61
●
●Major retailers like Macy’s and Target 
are deploying beacons in their stores. 
These devices communicate with smart-
phone apps indoors through a Bluetooth 
signal. They can share a coupon with a 
shopper’s phone as he or she browses 
in the aisles, or reward consumers with 
points even for just entering the store.
●
●augmented reality (ar) superimposes a 
layer of digital information over a physical 
environment. AR apps like Blippar allow 
the shopper to access additional infor-
mation from product packages. For ex-
ample, a woman who buys a Maybelline 
cosmetic product could hold her phone 
over the box to bring up a model who 
shares tips about how to apply makeup.
●
●virtual reality (vr) is a computer-simu-
lated interface that creates the impres-
sion the user is physically present. In con-
trast to AR, vR substitutes a completely 
different sensory for the user. Headsets 
like the Oculus Rift can provide a totally 
immersive experience as shoppers can 
browse a three-dimensional “store” just 
by putting one on. The U.K.-based Tesco 
grocery chain launched a virtual super-
market in Germany that allows shoppers 
to navigate a store in a 360-degree vir-
tual environment, and the Marriott ho-
tel chains offers a “4D Teleporter” that 
transports guests to exotic locales (at 
least virtually). The experience includes 
sensory inputs such as the sun on your 
face, wind in your hair, ground rumbling, 
and sea spray hitting your skin.
Think about your image of what 
kind of person an impulse buyer 
is. In the space provided below, 
draw a picture of your image of 
a typical impulse buyer who is 
about to make an impulse 
purchase. Be creative and 
don’t worry about your artistic 
skills! If you feel that some 
features of your drawing are 
unclear, don't hesitate to identify 
them with a written label.
After you have completed your 
drawing, imagine what is going 
through your character’s mind as 
he or she is 
about to make 
his or her impulse purchase. Then 
write down your shopper’s 
thoughts in a speech balloon (like 
you might see in a cartoon strip) 
that connects to your character’s 
head.
1.
2.
DRAW-A-PICTURE
Figure 10.4 One COnSUMeR’S IMAGe OF An IMPUlSe BUYeR
Source: Dennis Rock, “Is Impulse Buying (Yet) a Useful Marketing Concept?” (unpublished manuscript, University  
of Southern California, Los Angeles, 1990): Fig. 7-A. 

394 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
encourage browsing, and the widest tend to feature products with the highest profit mar-
gins. They stack low mark-up items that shoppers purchase regularly in narrower aisles to 
allow shopping carts to speed through. Starbucks encourages impulse purchasing when 
it charges customers who want to download songs they hear over the store’s speakers 
directly onto their iPhones.64 Each week the Dollar Tree chain designates an impulse item 
like a pen or candy bar as “drive items” that cashiers push at checkout. As the company’s 
CEO explained, “It’s just that one last chance to get another item in their shopping bag.”65
point-of-purchase Stimuli
Well-designed in-store display boosts impulse purchases by as much as 10 percent. That 
explains why U.S. companies spend about $19 billion each year on point-of- purchase 
(POP) stimuli.66 A POP can be an elaborate product display or demonstration, a 
CB aS i See it
Jean-Charles Chebat, HEC-Montréal, Canada and Technion, Israel.
in turn, shoppers’ cognitive activity, 
which helps them make purchase 
decisions. They also affect the relation 
between shoppers and service 
personnel. Soothing music makes 
products look more attractive. It also 
changes the perceived duration of the 
time spent walking through shopping 
malls. Crowding moderates the effects 
of music: fast ambient music improves 
shoppers experience under low 
crowding but has the opposite effects 
under high crowding (and conversely for 
slow ambient music).
Did you ever try the effects of your 
fragrance or after shave on other 
persons? They make candidates for 
a job perceived as more competent. 
Same with products and stores! If 
ambient scents are appropriate, they 
stimulate positive thoughts about 
the store and its products/services. 
The effects of arousing scents in 
malls are moderated by crowding: 
ambient citrus scents provoke 
additional spending only if stores 
were moderately busy. If they were too 
crowded or too empty, the power of 
citrus disappear.
Music and scents interact 
significantly and paradoxically. The 
effects of a given scent that enhances 
sales may be canceled by the 
presence of a given music that also 
enhances sales. In other words: pizza 
is liked by most consumers, chocolate 
is also liked; but chocolate pizza is 
generally not liked!
Retailers should be aware of 
its powerful commercial effects of 
colors. Cold colors are appeasing, 
increase the cognitive activity and help 
shoppers make buying decisions. The 
appropriateness of colors depends 
on culture: French Canadians prefer 
shopping environments in warm colors, 
English Canadians prefer colder colors.
Shoppers’ behavior significantly 
depend on whom they shop with. The 
mall seems more attractive, stimulating 
and interesting when shopping with 
friends than when shopping alone or 
with family members. Other shoppers 
affect shoppers’ behavior significantly. 
Shoppers interact with other shoppers 
and affect their behavior even if they 
don’t know each other.
These sensory factors tell shoppers 
instantly if the store is meant for 
shoppers like themselves, in terms of 
social class, gender and generation. It 
is of utmost importance for retailers 
to test their effects before using them. 
They cannot afford to be apprentice 
sorcerers! Do these atmospheric 
factors fit with their target market? If 
they don’t, they may backfire!
The future of store atmospheric 
research is with neurosciences that 
will show the direct and interactive 
effects of these environmental 
factors on the brain, especially the 
amygdala, the hippocampus, and 
the limbic system. A great new 
avenue of research is opening for 
neuromarketers.
What shoppers do and avoid in 
stores and malls significantly depends 
on intangible environmental factors, 
such as ambient scents, background 
music and colors. Store atmosphere 
affects emotions, basically arousal 
and pleasure, that affect shoppers’ 
cognitive activity and behavior, mostly 
how much time and money shoppers 
spend in stores. Many retailers 
compete on such atmospheric 
strategies. These atmospheric factors 
enhance the perception of the mall, 
perception of the store within the mall 
and, in turn its products and services 
within the store. That’s what I call 
Meta-Packaging.
Background music volume and 
tempo affect arousal and pleasure and, 

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
395 
coupon-dispensing machine, or an employee who gives out free samples of a new cookie in 
the grocery aisle.
The importance of POP in shopper decision making explains why product packages 
increasingly play a key role in the marketing mix as they evolve from the functional to the 
fantastic:
●
●In the past 100 years, Pepsi changed the look of its can, and before that its bottles, only 
10 times. Now the company switches designs every few weeks. It’s also testing cans 
that spray an aroma when you open one to match the flavor of the drink, such as a 
wild cherry scent misting from a Wild Cherry Pepsi can.
●
●Coors Light bottles sport labels that turn blue when the beer is chilled to the right 
temperature.
●
●Huggies’ Henry the Hippo hand soap bottles have a light that flashes for 20 seconds to 
show children how long they should wash their hands.
●
●Evian’s “palace bottle” turns up in restaurants and luxury hotels. The water bottle has 
an elegant swanlike neck and sits on a small silver tray.
●
●Unilever North America sells Axe shower gel bottles shaped like video game 
joysticks.
●
●Some companies are considering the insertion of a computer chip and tiny speaker 
inside a package. This gimmick might be useful for cross-promotion. For example, a 
package of cheese could say “I go well with Triscuit crackers” when a shopper takes 
it off the shelf. Of course, this attention-getting trick could backfire if everyone starts 
to do it. As one ad executive commented, “If you’re walking down a row in a super-
market and every package is screaming at you, it sounds like a terrifying, disgusting 
experience.”67
the Salesperson: a lead role in the play
The salesperson is one of the most important players in the retailing drama.68 As we saw 
way back in Chapter 1, exchange theory stresses that every interaction involves a trade 
of value. Each participant gives something to the other and hopes to receive something in 
return.69 A (competent) salesperson offers a lot of value because his or her expert advice 
makes the shopper’s choice easier.
A buyer–seller situation is like many other dyadic encounters (two-person groups); 
it’s a relationship in which both parties must reach some agreement about the roles of 
each participant during a process of identity negotiation.70 Some of the factors that 
help to define a salesperson’s role (and effectiveness) are his or her age, appearance, educa-
tional level, and motivation to sell.71
In addition, more effective salespersons usually know their customers’ traits and 
preferences better than do ineffective salespersons, and they adapt their approach to meet 
the needs of each specific customer.73 The ability to be adaptable is especially vital when 
customers and salespeople have different interaction styles.74 We each vary in the degree 
of assertiveness we bring to interactions. At one extreme, nonassertive people believe it’s 
not socially acceptable to complain, and sales situations may intimidate them. Assertive 
people are more likely to stand up for themselves in a firm but nonthreatening way. 
Aggressives may resort to rudeness and threats if they don’t get their way (we’ve all run 
into these folks).75
Ownership and the Sharing economy
A funny thing is happening when people buy products: They no 
longer want to buy them. Instead we’re witnessing the rise of the 
sharing economy, or what is sometimes called collaborative 
consumption. In this business model people rent what they 
need rather than buying it. Collaborative consumption com-
munities typically offer a Web site that allows individuals to 
At the customerssuck.com 
Web site, restaurant and 
store workers who have 
to grin and bear it all day 
go to vent. Once off the 
clock, they share their frustrations about the 
idiocy, slovenliness, and insensitivity of their 
customers. Some contributors to the Web 
site share stupid questions their customers 
ask, such as “How much is a 99-cent cheese-
burger?” whereas others complain about 
working conditions and having to be nice to 
not-so-nice people. The slogan of the site is 
“the customer is never right.”72
  the tangled Web
OBjeCtive 10-3
The growth of a “sharing 
economy” changes how 
many consumers think 
about buying rather than 
renting products.

396 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
list their services and a ratings system that allows both buyers and sellers to rate their 
experiences.
Need to use a car? Go to Zipcar and rent one by the hour. How about a camera, a 
power drill, or a blender? Go to SnapGoods and rent one of those too. Park your pet with 
a dogsitter rather than an impersonal kennel at Dog Vacay. You can even get a low inter-
est loan from other individuals at Lending Club. The sharing economy is revolutionizing 
industries including taxis (Uber and Lyft), hospitality (Airbnb), used books (Bookmooch), 
and even errand running (TaskRabbit).
What is fueling this revolution? Primarily technology that dramatically lowers trans-
action costs, so that it’s much easier to share assets and track them across large numbers 
of people. Online payment systems make it easy to exchange money. Social networks cre-
ate communities and build trust among strangers who can access each other’s histories. 
Sellers can make money from assets they don’t use much; think about how many hours 
a typical owner actually uses an electric drill compared to how much it costs to buy one. 
Many of us only use our cars a few hours per week, but we still pay a monthly loan, main-
tenance, parking fees and so on; car owners who use RelayRides to rent their vehicles on 
average make $250 a month and some make more than $1,000.
As a major player in the sharing economy, 
Zipcar is changing how many urban dwellers 
think about transportation.
Source: Islemount Images/Alamy.
Source: www.CustomersSuck.com, Art by Jennie 
Breeden www.TheDevilsPanties.com.

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
397 
However, it’s not just ease of use that explains the rise of the sharing economy. We also 
can point to a change in attitudes toward ownership, especially among younger consum-
ers. A global survey that talked to more than 10,000 respondents reported that one-third of 
Millennials already belong to a sharing service or expect to join one soon. Many people believe 
overconsumption is putting our planet at risk, and half say they could happily live without 
most of the items they own. This is consistent with discussions we’ve had in prior chapters 
about the weak relationship researchers find between owning more “stuff” and happiness.76 
In addition, many people appreciate the intimacy of exchanging items with “real people” 
rather than getting them from big companies. Many seem more than willing to do things with 
total strangers our mothers used to warn us against: They stay in their homes, get in their 
cars, and even wear their clothes.77 That’s one reason the notion of doing business with other 
consumers rather than with companies goes by the name P2P commerce (peer-to-peer).
postpurchase Satisfaction  
and Disposal
Our overall reactions to a product after we’ve bought it—what re- 
searchers call consumer satisfaction/dissatisfaction (CS/D)— 
obviously play a big role in our future behavior. It’s a lot easier to 
sell something once than to sell it again if it bombed the first time. 
We evaluate the things we buy as we use them and integrate them into our daily consump-
tion activities.78
postpurchase Satisfaction
What exactly do consumers look for in products? That’s easy: They want quality and 
value.79 However, these terms have slippery meanings that are hard for us to pin down. 
We infer quality when we rely on cues as diverse as brand name, price, product warranties, 
and even our estimate of how much money a company invests in its advertising.80
Satisfaction or dissatisfaction is more than a reaction to how well a product or ser-
vice performs. According to the expectancy disconfirmation model, we form beliefs 
about product performance based on our prior experience with the product or com-
munications about the product that imply a certain level of quality.81 When something 
performs the way we thought it would, we may not think much about it. If it fails to live 
OBjeCtive 10-4
Our decisions about how 
to dispose of a product 
are as important as how 
we decide to obtain it in 
the first place.
These watches are made from recycled 
 nespresso coffeemaker cartridges.
Source: Courtesy of Blancier Handmade Watches.

398 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
up to expectations, this may create negative feelings. However, if performance happens to 
exceed our expectations, we’re happy campers.
This perspective underscores how important it is to manage expectations. We 
often trace a customer’s dissatisfaction to his or her erroneous expectations of the 
company’s ability to deliver a product or service. No company is perfect. It’s just not 
realistic to think that everything will always turn out perfectly (although some firms 
don’t even come close!). For a while the hotel chain Holiday Inn adopted the slogan “No 
surprises” to assure guests of flawless service. Inevitably, there were surprises (no opera-
tor to answer the phone, an unmade bed) and the company had to drop its promise of 
perfection.
product Disposal
Green issues don’t end at the cash register. There is also the matter of what we do with our 
things when we’re done with them. Product disposal is also an important element of 
consumer behavior.
Food waste winds up in landfills where it 
decomposes and emits methane, a potent 
greenhouse gas.
Source: Zavalnyuk Sergey/123RF.

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
399 
Because we do form strong attachments to some products, it can be painful to get rid 
of them. Our possessions anchor our identities; our past lives on in our things.82 Some 
Japanese people ritually “retire” worn-out sewing needles, chopsticks, and even computer 
chips when they burn them in a ceremony to thank them for years of good service.83
Still, we all have to get rid of our “stuff” at some point, either because it has served its 
purpose or perhaps because it no longer fits with our view of ourselves (as when newly-
weds “upgrade” to a real place). Concern about the environment, coupled with a need for 
convenience, makes ease of product disposal a key attribute in categories from razors to 
diapers.
In many cases we acquire a new product even though the old one still functions—
that’s one of the hallmarks of our materialistic society. Some reasons to replace an item 
include a desire for new features, a change in the individual’s environment (e.g., a refrig-
erator is the wrong color for a freshly painted kitchen), or a change in the person’s role or 
self-image.84
recycling
The issue of product disposition is vital because of its enormous public policy implications. 
We live in a throwaway society, which creates problems for the environment and also 
results in a great deal of unfortunate waste. In the United States alone, we waste about 60 
million metric tons of food a year with an estimated value of $162 billion. Indeed, ana-
lysts say that one-third of the food produced globally is never consumed! To make matters 
worse, most food waste winds up in landfills where it decomposes and emits methane, a 
potent greenhouse gas.85
Product disposal is a major issue for used 
electronic items.
Source: With permission from 
RecycleYourElectronics.ca and Ontario Electronic 
Stewardship.

400 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
The underground economy in the form of 
flea markets and other used-product sales 
formats is a significant element in the U.S. 
market.
Source: Stephanie Keith/Polaris/Newscom.
How do people decide whether to discard products or recycle them? Because we dis-
card two billions tons of trash per year (and more in the United States than any other 
country), this is a pretty important question. One study reported that the perceived effort 
involved in recycling was the best predictor of whether people would go to the trouble. This 
pragmatic dimension outweighed general attitudes toward recycling and the environment 
in predicting one’s intention to recycle.86 Of course, one way to ease the pain is to reward 
consumers for recycling. The H&M store chain sponsors a Garment Recycling Program; 
customers can bring any garment from any brand in any condition into an H&M store. 
For every bag of clothes donated, H&M gives customers a 15 percent discount on the next 
item they buy.87
lateral Cycling
During lateral cycling, one consumer exchanges something he or she owns for some-
thing the other person owns. Reusing other people’s things is especially important in 
our throwaway society because, as one researcher put it, “there is no longer an ‘away’ 
to throw things to.”88 Although traditional marketers don’t pay much attention to used-
product sellers, factors such as concern about the environment, demands for quality, and 
cost and fashion consciousness make these “secondary” markets more important.89
In fact, economic estimates of this underground economy range from 3 to 30 
percent of the gross national product of the United States and up to 70 percent of the 
gross domestic product of other countries. In the United States alone, there are more 
than 3,500 flea markets—including at least a dozen huge operations such as the 60-acre 
Orange County Marketplace in California—that operate nationwide to produce upward of 
$10 billion in gross sales.90
The new trend of recommerce (a play on the term e-commerce) shows that many 
consumers want to squeeze more value out of their possessions by selling or trading 
them.91 This focus has given birth to the swishing movement, where people organize par-
ties to exchange clothing or other personal possessions with others.92

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
401 
Social media platforms like ShareSome-
Sugar base their business models around 
allowing people to share, exchange and rent 
goods in a local setting.
Source: Courtesy of www.sharesomesugar.com.
1. Many factors at the time of purchase dramatically 
influence the consumer’s decision-making process.
Many factors affect a purchase. These include the con-
sumer’s antecedent state (e.g., his or her mood, time pres-
sure, or disposition toward shopping). Time is an impor-
tant resource that often determines how much effort and 
search will go into a decision. Our moods are influenced 
by the degree of pleasure and arousal a store environment 
creates.
The usage context of a product is a segmenta-
tion  variable; consumers look for different product attri-
butes depending on the use to which they intend to put 
their purchase. The presence or absence of other people  
(co- consumers)—and the types of people they are—can also 
Chapter SuMMary
affect a consumer’s decisions. The shopping experience also 
is a pivotal part of the purchase decision. In many cases, 
retailing is like theater: The consumer’s evaluation of stores 
and products may depend on the type of “performance” 
he witnesses. The actors (e.g., salespeople), the setting (the 
store environment), and the props (e.g., store displays) in-
fluence this evaluation. Like a brand personality, a number 
of factors, such as perceived convenience, sophistication, 
and expertise of salespeople, determine store image. With 
increasing competition from nonstore alternatives, creat-
ing a positive shopping experience has never been more 
important. Online shopping is growing in importance, and 
this new way to acquire products has both good (e.g., conve-
nience) and bad (e.g., security) aspects.
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.

402 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Activity stores, 392
Atmospherics, 391
Augmented reality (AR), 393
Beacons, 393
Being space, 389
Bitcoin, 388
Co-consumers, 384
Collaborative consumption, 395
Consumer satisfaction/dissatisfaction 
(CS/D), 397
Consumption situation, 381
Cryptocurrency, 388
Digital wallet, 388
Dyadic encounters, 395
Expectancy disconfirmation model, 397
Focus groups, 385
Gemba, 385
Impulse buying, 393
Identity negotiation, 395
Lateral cycling, 400
Mental budgets, 392
Minipreneurs, 389
Mobile shopping apps, 392
NFC (Near Field Communications), 388
Open rates, 382
P2P commerce, 397
Phablets, 388
Point-of-purchase (POP) stimuli, 394
Pop-up stores, 389
Pretailer, 389
Product disposal, 398
Psychological time, 384
Queuing theory, 385
Recommerce, 400
Retail theming, 389
Sharing economy, 395
Shopping orientation, 387
Showrooming, 389
Situational self-image, 382
Store image, 390
Swishing, 400
Time poverty, 384
Timestyle, 383
Total quality management (TQM), 385
Underground economy, 400
Unplanned buying, 393
Virtual reality (VR), 393
Key terMS
 10-5 List three factors that help to determine store image.
 10-6 What is the difference between unplanned buying and 
impulse buying?
 10-7 How do business models in the sharing economy differ 
from traditional purchase processes?
 10-8 What is the difference between recycling and lateral 
cycling?
review
 10-1 What is time poverty, and how can it influence our pur-
chase decisions?
 10-2 A consumption situation has a buyer, seller, and a prod-
uct. What else would you add?
 10-3 List three separate motivations for shopping, and give 
an example of each.
 10-4 What are some important pros and cons of e-commerce?
2. the information a store’s layout, web site, or salespeople 
provides strongly influences a purchase decision.
Because we don’t make many purchase decisions until we’re 
actually in the store, Point-of-purchase (POP) stimuli 
are important sales tools. These include product samples, 
elaborate package displays, place-based media, and in-store 
promotional materials such as “shelf talkers.” POP stimuli 
are particularly useful in promoting impulse buying, which 
happens when a consumer yields to a sudden urge for a 
product. Increasingly, mobile shopping apps are also play-
ing a key role. The consumer’s encounter with a salesperson 
is a complex and important process. The outcome can be 
affected by such factors as the salesperson’s similarity to the 
customer and his or her perceived credibility.
3. the growth of a “sharing economy” changes how many 
consumers think about buying rather than renting 
products.
In the rapidly growing sharing economy people rent what 
they need rather than buy it. New technologies make this 
process much easier and online networks allow us to form 
bonds of trust with strangers. In addition, many consum-
ers no longer place a premium on owning products and 
prefer to “borrow” them only for the specific times when 
they actually need them.
4. Our decisions about how to dispose of a product are 
as important as how we decide to obtain it in the first 
place.
Concern about the environment and waste make the issue 
of product disposal key in many categories. In addition 
to understanding if and how consumers recycle, newer 
recommerce models such as swishing are emerging that 
enable people to share more of their used goods with one 
another rather than disposing of them.

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
403 
 10-9 Are pop-up stores simply a fad, or a retailing concept 
that’s here to stay?
 10-10 Think about exceptionally good and bad salespeople you 
have encountered as a shopper. What qualities seem to 
differentiate them from others?
 10-11 Discuss the concept of timestyle. Based on your own 
experiences, how might we segment consumers in 
terms of their timestyles?
 10-12 Consumers who participate in the sharing economy 
seem willing to interact with total strangers. Despite 
safety and privacy concerns, what is the long-term out-
look for this change in the way we think about inter-
acting with people whom we don’t know? How can 
businesses help to diminish worries some people may 
have about these practices?
 10-13 A tourism study based in Penang focused on why tour-
ists buy products and services.93 What is the probable 
link between this and self-image?
 10-14 Spontaneous purchases of desirable products is some-
thing all retailers want. The problem is that spontaneous 
purchasing also means spontaneous thefts.  However, 
security can be expensive and, above all, it deters con-
sumer interaction and impulse buys.94 By creating a 
theft-free environment, retailers find themselves creat-
ing a negative selling environment. How big a problem 
is shoplifting, and is store design partly to blame?
 10-15 According to the global property advisor CBRE, some 
88 percent of all European shoppers look for a good 
range of retailers and an inclusive shopping experience 
when they choose the location for their shopping trips. 
The consumers also cite price, cleanliness, and conve-
nience as being important. These factors particularly 
apply to the 18–24 age groups. From CBRE’s research 
it is clear that a retail environment’s success or failure 
depends on the shopping experience it offers. Consum-
ers demand a better experience, while retailers are only 
concerned with footfalls and sales. Retail centers need 
to offer better quality dining, entertainment, and spe-
cial events to enhance the shopping experience. What 
advice would you offer a retail center about food and 
entertainment?
 10-16 Courts often prohibit special-interest groups from dis-
tributing literature in shopping malls. Mall manage-
ments claim that these centers are private property. 
However, these groups argue that the mall is the mod-
ern-day version of the town square and as such is a 
public forum. Find some recent court cases involving 
this free-speech issue, and examine the arguments pro 
and con. What is the current status of the mall as a 
public forum? Do you agree with this concept?
 10-17 Marketers use “tricks” to minimize psychological 
waiting time. These techniques range from altering 
customers’ perceptions of a line’s length to providing 
distractions that divert attention from waiting:95
One hotel chain received excessive complaints about 
the wait for elevators, so it installed mirrors near the 
elevator banks. People’s natural tendency to check 
their appearance reduced complaints, even though the 
actual waiting time was unchanged.
Airline passengers often complain about the wait to 
claim their baggage. In one airport, they would walk 
1 minute from the plane to the baggage carousel and 
then wait 7 minutes for their luggage. When the airport 
changed the layout so that the walk to the carousel took 
6 minutes and bags arrived 2 minutes after that, com-
plaints disappeared.96
Restaurant chains are scrambling to put the “fast” 
back into fast food, especially for drive-through lanes, 
which now account for 65 percent of revenues. In a 
study that ranked the speed of 25 fast-food chains, 
cars spent an average of 203.6 seconds from the 
menu board to departure. Wendy’s was clocked the 
fastest at 150.3 seconds. To speed things up and elimi-
nate spills, McDonald’s created a salad that comes in a 
container to fit into car cup holders. Arby’s is working 
on a “high viscosity” version of its special sauce that’s 
less likely to spill. Burger King is testing see-through 
bags so customers can quickly check their orders 
before speeding off.97
What are your waiting line “pain points?” How can 
companies change their processes to make these situa-
tions easier or more enjoyable for you?
COnSuMer BehaviOr Challenge
●
■DiSCuSS

404 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
●
■applY
 10-18 Conduct naturalistic observation at a local mall. Sit 
in a central location and observe the activities of mall 
employees and patrons. Keep a log of the nonretail-
ing activity you observe (e.g., special performances, 
exhibits, socializing, etc.). Does this activity enhance 
or detract from business the mall conducts? As malls 
become more like high-tech game rooms, how valid is 
the criticism that shopping areas only encourage more 
loitering by teenage boys, who don’t spend a lot in stores 
and simply scare away other customers?
 10-19 Select three competing clothing stores in your area and 
conduct a store image study for them. Ask a group of con-
sumers to rate each store on a set of attributes and plot 
these ratings on the same graph. Based on your findings, 
are there any areas of competitive advantage or disadvan-
tage you could bring to the attention of store management?
 10-20 Using Table 10.1 as a model, construct a person–situation 
segmentation matrix for a brand of perfume.
 10-21 IKEA, the Swedish furniture and home design company, 
has 283 stores in 26 countries and generated profits of 
$3.2 billion in 2015. Their stores have a unique layout 
that cuts across image and atmosphere and creates an 
environment designed to confuse their customers. Their 
stores are maze-like; customers follow a distinct trail 
through them. The idea is to show the furniture in different 
settings to illustrate its versatility.  Customers get disorien-
tated with left and right turns and make impulse buys just 
in case they cannot find their way back to the product. By 
the time the customer gets to the warehouse area near the 
cash registers (the only place to get larger items and load 
them onto a cart), the customer is amazed at the low price 
and does not question the purchase. Smaller items such 
as candles or cushions are bought on impulse as the cus-
tomer traverses the store. IKEA themselves deny that the 
store layout is designed to confuse customers; they claim 
that the showrooms are designed to get ideas across and 
provide customers with a context in which to see the prod-
ucts. In 2015, IKEA announced that they were changing 
the layout of their stores. Research this change and decide 
whether they are right or wrong to change the layout.
 10-22 A Nielsen survey in 2015 showed that 60 percent of 
consumers browsed online before they made a purchase 
in-store. However, 51 percent of consumers browsed in-
store and then went home to make their purchase online.  
Carry out a survey with friends and family. Are their 
practices similar? Why do they choose this method?
 10-23 Interview three consumers who have used a sharing 
economy service, such as Zipcar, Airbnb, Snapgoods, 
etc. How would you characterize their experiences com-
pared to more traditional models?
polyethylene) bottles for packaging. One such innovation is the 
creation of a plastic bottle made from recyclable plant material. 
Plastic bottles are generally made from petroleum, so us-
ing other ingredients means a lower carbon footprint. Both 
international brands have developed alternatives that attempt 
to not only reduce the carbon footprint associated with the tra-
ditional plastic bottle, but also to enable the bottle to be recycled 
and reused. Coca-Cola has introduced the plantbottle, which is 
made of 30 percent sugarcane and the waste from sugarcane 
products. This bottle functions and feels exactly like a traditional 
plastic bottle, but it is not biodegradable, so consumers have 
to be encouraged to recycle them. The first prototype of this 
bottle was introduced in 2009, and more than 35 million of 
them have now been sold in 40 countries. At the moment, only 
30 percent of the bottle is from a plant-based source, though 
research is currently underway to increase this to 100 percent. 
Pepsi’s bottle is also made of plant waste, and this material al-
lows for these bottles to be turned into new Pepsi bottles.
To encouraging consumers to recycle their plastic bot-
tles, various strategies have been developed by Coca-Cola and 
Pepsi that reward consumers for their recycling activities.  
In Singapore, the Happiness Recycled campaign included a recy-
cling machine in public places that rewarded consumers every 
reCyCling plaStiCS BOttleS, Saving 
the planet
Plastic—what would we do without it? It’s an important part 
of our everyday life and serves as the packaging to many of the 
products we use on a daily basis. It’s easy it is to use, versatile 
as a packaging material, and very convenient. But it’s also one 
of the biggest contributors to waste. In the open ocean between 
Hawaii and San Francisco and between Africa and Australia 
are areas where plastic accumulates and is carried by ocean 
currents, resulting in the Great Pacific Garbage Patch and the 
Indian Ocean Garbage Patch, respectively. Needless to say, this 
represents a major hazard to wildlife in the area, but they also 
pose dangers to shipping traffic.
Current statistics suggest that about 27 percent of plas-
tic bottles are recycled, which means that there is potential 
to change behavior and increase levels of recycling. Recycled 
plastic bottles can be turned into a number of other products, 
including clothing and sleeping bags. Both Coca-Cola and Pepsi 
have identified recycling as a major issue in this industry, but 
the majority of the sales of their beverages are in plastic bot-
tles—more than 60 percent of it, in fact. This makes it impor-
tant to develop alternatives to petroleum-based plastic (PET or 
●■Case Study 

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
405 
time they recycled a plastic Coke bottle. The empty Coke bottle 
was placed in a specially-developed bottle recycling machine, 
and in return the consumer was rewarded with a number of 
different items. Some of the items that the machine dispensed 
were flowers, t-shirts, and caps, all made from recycled plastic 
bottles. Each also contained a note encouraging consumers to 
continue recycling. A total of 51,827 bottles were recycled in 
this campaign, and a video of the campaign that was uploaded 
on YouTube got 45,000 views.
Pepsi has partnered with international non-government 
agencies and local citizens in various countries in Waste to 
Wealth initiatives. This initiative encourages recycling by pro-
viding an income for those who collect recyclable items. Other 
organizations that also have products that retail in plastic bot-
tles, such as Nestlé and Johnson & Johnson, have also intro-
duced education and reward programs to increase the recycling 
rates of these items.
In the United Kingdom, rewards have been given to con-
sumers based on the pledges made to recycle in a campaign 
launched by Tesco and Coca-Cola. The purpose of the pledges 
is to educate families about the importance of recycling while 
also highlighting the importance of nature and the envi-
ronment. Rewards have been given to those pledging their 
support, such as a discount voucher or loyalty points for the 
store rewards program. A family holiday to France was also 
one of the rewards. The campaign sought to enhance educa-
tion about recycling as well as the level of involvement (and 
fun)—all geared towards increasing the levels of recycling in 
the United Kingdom.
Rewards from various organizations are not the only way to 
encourage recycling. In other European countries, consumers pay 
a deposit on the plastic bottle when buying their beverages. When 
these bottle is returned, it is placed in a recycling machine that 
returns the deposit to the consumer in the form of a voucher. This 
voucher is then presented to the retailer to get the deposit back.
DiSCuSSiOn QueStiOnS
CS  10-1 How do Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Unilever, and Johnson & 
Johnson benefit from their various strategies with re-
gard to plastic disposal? How do you feel about what 
they are doing?
CS  10-2 Why do you think Coca-Cola decided to include re-
wards and other experiences in their recycling cam-
paign in Singapore? Do you think they were appropri-
ate rewards?
CS  10-3 Suggest other ways to increase recycling in your com-
munity (besides those indicated here).
Sources: Care to Recycle Web site, http://caretorecycle.com/; The Coca-Cola 
Company, “Happiness Recycled: Coca-Cola Singapore Increases Recycle Rates 
with ‘Recycle Happiness Machine,’” http://www.coca-colacompany.com/
stories/happiness-recycled-coca-cola-singapore-increases-recycle-rates-
with-recycle-happiness-machine/; Jessica Shankleman, “Coca-Cola, Nestle, 
Tesco Launch Campaigns to up Recycling Rates,” GreenBiz, http://www 
.greenbiz.com/blog/2014/09/16/coca-cola-nestle-tesco-campaign-up- 
recycling-rates; Heritage Pioneer Corporate Group, “What Is the Coca-Cola 
PlantBottle?”, 
http://www.hpcorporategroup.com/what-is-the-coca-cola-
plantbottle.html; MRC Polymers, “Recycling Facts,” http://www.mrcpolymers 
.com/PlasticRecyclingFacts.php; Laura Parker, “Plane Search Shows World’s 
Oceans Are Full of Trash,” National Geographic, April 4, 2014, http://news 
.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/04/140404-garbage-patch-indian-
ocean-debris-malaysian-plane/; Pepsico, “Packaging,” Pepsico.com, http://
www.pepsico.com/Purpose/Environmental-Sustainability/Packaging- 
and-Waste; Marc Gunther, “Why Are Major Beverage Companies 
Refusing to Use a 90% Recycled Can?”, The Guardian, October 30, 2014, 
http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/30/
recycled-aluminum-novelis-ford-cocacola-pepsi-miller-budweiser-beer.
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
10-26 People have more leisure time than ever. Why do they feel so rushed, and how 
can marketers address this problem?
10-27 Is the customer always right? Why or why not?
nOteS
 
5. Carolyn Turner Schenk and Rebecca H. Holman, “A Sociological Approach to 
Brand Choice: The Concept of Situational Self-Image,” in Jerry C. Olson, ed., 
Advances in Consumer Research 7 (Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer  
Research, 1980): 610–614.
 
6. Peter R. Dickson, “Person–Situation: Segmentation’s Missing Link,” Journal  
of Marketing 46 (Fall 1982): 56–64.
 
7. Alan R. Hirsch, “Effects of Ambient Odors on Slot-Machine Usage in a Las 
Vegas Casino,” Psychology & Marketing 12 (October 1995): 585–594.
 
8. Tanya Irwin, “ReachMail: Email Marketers Should Focus on Mid-Day,”  
Marketing Daily (March 17, 2011), http://www.mediapost.com/publicat 
ions/?fa5Articles.showArticle&art_aid5146883&nid5124807, accessed 
April 18, 2011.
 
1. Phil LeBeau, “Americans Rethinking How They Buy Cars,” CNBC 
(February 26, 2014), http://www.cnbc.com/id/101445202, accessed 
April 7, 2015.
 
2. Pradeep Kakkar and Richard J. Lutz, “Situational Influence on Consumer 
Behavior: A Review,” in Harold H. Kassarjian and Thomas S. Robertson, eds., 
Perspectives in Consumer Behavior, 3rd ed. (Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman,  
1981): 204–214.
 
3. Christopher Heine, “Will Facebook Ads Soon Reflect ‘What’s On Your Mind?’” 
ClickZ (March 23, 2011), http://www.clickz.com/clickz/news/2036901/ 
facebook-ads-soon-reflect-whats-mind, accessed April 17, 2011.
 
4. Benedict Carey, “TV Time, Unlike Child Care, Ranks High in Mood Study,”  
New York Times (December 3, 2004), www.nytimes.com, accessed December 3,  
2004.

406 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Consumption Messages,” in Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, 
eds., Advances in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1991): 111–114.
 23. Marvin E. Goldberg and Gerald J. Gorn, “Happy and Sad TV Programs: How 
They Affect Reactions to Commercials,” Journal of Consumer Research 14 
(December 1987): 387–403; Gorn, Goldberg, and Basu, “Mood, Awareness, 
and Product Evaluation”; Curren and Harich, “Consumers’ Mood States.”
 24. Rajeev Batra and Douglas M. Stayman, “The Role of Mood in Advertising 
Effectiveness,” Journal of Consumer Research 17 (September 1990): 203; 
John P. Murry, Jr., and Peter A. Dacin, “Cognitive Moderators of Negative-
Emotion Effects: Implications for Understanding Media Context,” Journal of 
Consumer Research (March 1996), 22: 439–447.
 25. For a scale to assess these dimensions of the shopping experience, see 
Barry J. Babin, William R. Darden, and Mitch Griffin, “Work and/or Fun: 
Measuring Hedonic and Utilitarian Shopping Value,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 20 (March 1994): 644–656.
 26. Kaltcheva and Weitz, “When Should a Retailer Create an Exciting Store 
Environment?”
 27. Babin, Darden, and Griffin, “Work and/or Fun.”
 28. Edward M. Tauber, “Why Do People Shop?” Journal of Marketing 36 (October 
1972): 47–48.
 29. Ann Zimmerman and Laura Stevens, “Attention, Shoppers: Bored College 
Kids Competing in Aisle 6,” Wall Street Journal (February 23, 2005), http://
professional.wsj.com/article/SB110911598024661430-H9jfYNklaF 
4oJ2sZ32IaqiAm5.html?mg5reno-wsj, accessed September 11, 2011.
 30. Robert C. Prus, Making Sales: Influence as Interpersonal Accomplishment 
(Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1989): 225.
 31. Michael-Lee Johnstone and Denise M. Conroy, “Dressing for the Thrill: An 
Exploration of Why Women Dress Up to Go Shopping,” Journal of Consumer 
Behaviour 4, no. 4 (2005): 234.
 32. “Global B2C Ecommerce Sales to Hit $1.5 Trillion This Year,” emarketer 
.com (February 3, 2014), http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Global-B2C-
Ecommerce-Sales-Hit-15-Trillion-This-Year-Driven-by-Growth-Emerging-
Markets/1010575#sthash.LyNbIrRR.dpuf, accessed April 6, 2015.
 33. Alex Fitzpatrick, “75% of World Has Access to Mobile Phones,” Mashable 
(July 17, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/07/18/mobile-phones-world-
wide/ ?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Fe
ed%3A+Mashable+%28Mashable%29, accessed February 22, 2015.
 34. Claire Cain Miller, “Do People Actually Shop on Phones? The Answer Is 
Decidedly Yes,” New York Times (January 9, 2013), http://bits.blogs.nytimes 
.com/2013/01/09/do-people-actually-shop-on-phones-the-answer-is-
decidedly-yes/, accessed February 22, 2015.
 35. June Cotte and Kathryn A. LaTour, “Blackjack in the Kitchen: Understanding 
Online Versus Casino Gambling,” Journal of Consumer Research 35 (February 
2009): 742–758.
 36. Vindu Goel, “Coming Soon to Social Media: Click to Buy Now,” New York  
Times (July 17, 2014), http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/07/17/coming- 
soon-to-social-media-click-to-buy-now/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0, 
accessed February 19, 2015.
 37. Alex Washburn, “Digital Wallets: End of the Beginning or Beginning 
of the End?,” Wired (February 2015), http://www.wired.com/2015/02/ 
digital-wallets-end-of-the-beginning-or-beginning-of-the-end/, accessed  
April 6, 2015; Jacob Davidson, “No, Big Companies Aren’t Really Accepting  
Bitcoin,” Money (January 9, 2015), http://time.com/money/3658361/
dell-microsoft-expedia-bitcoin/, accessed April 6, 2015.
 38. Rebecca K. Ratner, Barbara E. Kahn, and Daniel Kahneman, “Choosing 
Less-Preferred Experiences for the Sake of Variety,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 26 (June 1999): 1–15.
 39. http://announcements.ebay.com/tag/see-it-on-sunglasses/, accessed April 
6, 2015.
 40. http://modaoperandi.com/, accessed April 6, 2015; http://www.net-a-porter 
.com, accessed April 6, 2015; http://www.threadless.com/, accessed April 6, 
2015; www.modcloth.com, accessed April 6, 2015.
 41. www.allurent.com/newsDetail.php?newsid520, accessed January 29, 2007.
 42. Vanessa O’Connell, “Fictional Hershey Factory Will Send Kisses to 
Broadway,” Wall Street Journal (August 5, 2002), www.wsj.com, accessed 
August 5, 2002.
 43. Millie Creighton, “The Seed of Creative Lifestyle Shopping: Wrapping 
Consumerism in Japanese Store Layouts,” in John F. Sherry Jr., ed., 
Servicescapes: The Concept of Place in Contemporary Markets (Lincolnwood, 
IL: NTC Business Books, 1998): 199–228; also cf. Robert V. Kozinets, John 
F. Sherry, Diana Storm, Adam Duhachek, Krittinee Nuttavuthisit, and 
Benet DeBerry-Spence, “Ludic Agency and Retail Spectacle,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 31 (December 2004): 658–672.
 44. http://www.paragraphny.com/, accessed March 12, 2013.
 45. Jennifer Saranow, “Retailers Give It the Old College Try,” Wall Street Journal 
(August 28, 2008): B8; March 2007 Trend Briefing, www.trendwatching 
.com/briefing, accessed March 30, 2007.
 
9. Carol Felker Kaufman, Paul M. Lane, and Jay D. Lindquist, “Exploring More 
Than 24 Hours a Day: A Preliminary Investigation of Polychronic Time 
Use,” Journal of Consumer Research 18 (December 1991): 392–401.
 10. Laurence P. Feldman and Jacob Hornik, “The Use of Time: An Integrated 
Conceptual Model,” Journal of Consumer Research 7 (March 1981): 407–419; 
see also Michelle M. Bergadaa, “The Role of Time in the Action of the 
Consumer,” Journal of Consumer Research 17 (December 1990): 289–302; 
cf. also Niklas Woermann and Joonas Rokka, “Timeflow: How Consumption 
Practices Shape Consumers’ Temporal Experiences,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 41, no. 6 (2015): 1486–1508.
 11. Alan Zarembo, “What If There Weren’t Any Clocks to Watch?” Newsweek 
(June 30, 1997): 14; based on research reported in Robert Levine, A 
Geography of Time: The Temporal Misadventures of a Social Psychologist, or 
How Every Culture Keeps Time Just a Little Bit Differently (New York: Basic 
Books, 1997).
 12. Sharon Jayson, “Men Vs. Women: How Much Time Spent on Kids, Job, 
Chores?” USA TODAY (March 14, 2013), http://www.usatoday.com/story/
news/nation/2013/03/14/men-women-work-time/1983271/, accessed 
April 6, 2015; Vivian Giang, “How Everything We Tell Ourselves About 
How Busy We Are is a Lie,” Fast Company (September 5, 2014), http://www 
.fastcompany.com/3035253/the-future-of-work/how-everything-we-tell-
ourselves-about-how-busy-we-are-is-a-lie, accessed April 6, 2015.
 13. June S. Cotte, S. Ratneshwar, and David Glen Mick, “The Times of Their 
Lives: Phenomenological and Metaphorical Characteristics of Consumer 
Timestyles,” Journal of Consumer Research 31 (September 2004): 333–345.
 14. Dale Buss, “Everything’s Possible: McDonald’s Pins Turnaround on 
‘Experience of the Future’,” Brandchannel (December 8, 2014), http://www 
.brandchannel.com/home/post/2014/12/08/141208-McDonalds-Expe 
rience-of-the-Future.aspx?utm_campaign=141208-McDonalds&utm_
source=newsletter&utm_medium=email, accessed February 25, 2015.
 15. Dhruv Grewal, Julie Baker, Michael Levy, and Glenn B. Voss, “The Effects 
of Wait Expectations and Store Atmosphere Evaluations on Patronage 
Intentions in Service-Intensive Retail Store,” Journal of Retailing 79 (2003): 
259–268; cf. also Shirley Taylor, “Waiting for Service: The Relationship 
Between Delays and Evaluations of Service,” Journal of Marketing 58 (April 
1994): 56–69.
 16. Material adapted from a presentation by Glenn H. Mazur, QFD Institute, 
2002.
 17. Laurette Dubé and Bernd H. Schmitt, “The Processing of Emotional and 
Cognitive Aspects of Product Usage in Satisfaction Judgments,” in Rebecca 
H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 
18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1991): 52–56; Lalita 
A. Manrai and Meryl P. Gardner, “The Influence of Affect on Attributions 
for Product Failure,” in Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., 
Advances in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1991): 249–254.
 18. Kevin G. Celuch and Linda S. Showers, “It’s Time to Stress Stress: The 
Stress–Purchase/Consumption Relationship,” in Rebecca H. Holman and 
Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: 
Association for Consumer Research, 1991): 284–289; Lawrence R. Lepisto, 
J. Kathleen Stuenkel, and Linda K. Anglin, “Stress: An Ignored Situational 
Influence,” in Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances 
in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 
1991): 296–302.
 19. Velitchka D. Kaltcheva and Barton A. Weitz, “When Should a Retailer 
Create an Exciting Store Environment?” Journal of Marketing 70 (January 
2006): 107–118.
 20. John D. Mayer and Yvonne N. Gaschke, “The Experience and Meta-Experience 
of Mood,” Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 55 (July 1988): 102–111.
 21. Meryl Paula Gardner, “Mood States and Consumer Behavior: A Critical 
Review,” Journal of Consumer Research 12 (December 1985): 281–300; 
Scott Dawson, Peter H. Bloch, and Nancy M. Ridgway, “Shopping Motives, 
Emotional States, and Retail Outcomes,” Journal of Retailing 66 (Winter 1990): 
408–427; Patricia A. Knowles, Stephen J. Grove, and W. Jeffrey Burroughs, 
“An Experimental Examination of Mood States on Retrieval and Evaluation of 
Advertisement and Brand Information,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science 21 (April 1993): 135–143; Paul W. Miniard, Sunil Bhatla, and 
Deepak Sirdeskmuhk, “Mood as a Determinant of Postconsumption Product 
Evaluations: Mood Effects and Their Dependency on the Affective Intensity of 
the Consumption Experience,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 1, no. 2 (1992): 
173–195; Mary T. Curren and Katrin R. Harich, “Consumers’ Mood States: 
The Mitigating Influence of Personal Relevance on Product Evaluations,” 
Psychology & Marketing 11 (March–April 1994): 91–107; Gerald J. Gorn, 
Marvin E. Goldberg, and Kunal Basu, “Mood, Awareness, and Product 
Evaluation,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 2, no. 3 (1993): 237–256.
 22. Gordon C. Bruner, “Music, Mood, and Marketing,” Journal of Marketing 
54 (October 1990): 94–104; Basil G. Englis, “Music Television and Its 
Influences on Consumers, Consumer Culture, and the Transmission of 

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
407 
 65. Quoted in Shelly Banjo and Sara Germano, “The End of the Impulse 
Shopper,” The Wall Street Journal (November 25, 2014), http://www.wsj.com/
articles/the-end-of-the-impulse-shopper-1416872108, accessed February 
23, 2015.
 66. Emily Steel, “Luring Shoppers to Stores,” Wall Street Journal (August 26, 
2010), http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527487045409045
75451841980063132.html, accessed April 18, 2011.
 67. Quoted in Louise Story, “Product Packages Now Shout to Get Your Attention,” 
New York Times (August 10, 2007), www.nytimes.com, accessed August 10, 
2007.
 68. Cf. Robert B. Cialdini, Influence: Science and Practice, 2nd ed. (Glenview, IL: 
Scott, Foresman, 1988).
 69. Richard P. Bagozzi, “Marketing as Exchange,” Journal of Marketing 39 
(October 1975): 32–39; Peter M. Blau, Exchange and Power in Social Life (New 
York: Wiley, 1964); Marjorie Caballero and Alan J. Resnik, “The Attraction 
Paradigm in Dyadic Exchange,” Psychology & Marketing 3, no. 1 (1986): 
17–34; George C. Homans, “Social Behavior as Exchange,” American Journal 
of Sociology 63 (1958): 597–606; Paul H. Schurr and Julie L. Ozanne, 
“Influences on Exchange Processes: Buyers’ Preconceptions of a Seller’s 
Trustworthiness and Bargaining Toughness,” Journal of Consumer Research 
11 (March 1985): 939–953; Arch G. Woodside and J. W. Davenport,  
“The Effect of Salesman Similarity and Expertise on Consumer Purchasing 
Behavior,” Journal of Marketing Research 8 (1974): 433–436.
 70. Mary Jo Bitner, Bernard H. Booms, and Mary Stansfield Tetreault, “The 
Service Encounter: Diagnosing Favorable and Unfavorable Incidents,” 
Journal of Marketing 54 (January 1990): 7–84; Robert C. Prus, Making 
Sales (Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1989); Arch G. Woodside 
and James L. Taylor, “Identity Negotiations in Buyer–Seller Interactions,” 
in Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Morris B. Holbrook, eds., Advances in 
Consumer Research 12 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 
1985): 443–449.
 71. Barry J. Babin, James S. Boles, and William R. Darden, “Salesperson 
Stereotypes, Consumer Emotions, and Their Impact on Information 
Processing,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 23, no. 2 (1995): 
94–105; Gilbert A. Churchill, Jr., Neil M. Ford, Steven W. Hartley, and 
Orville C. Walker, Jr., “The Determinants of Salesperson Performance: A 
Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Marketing Research 22 (May 1985): 103–118.
 72. www.customerssuck.com, accessed April 6, 2015.
 73. Siew Meng Leong, Paul S. Busch, and Deborah Roedder John, “Knowledge 
Bases and Salesperson Effectiveness: A Script-Theoretic Analysis,” Journal 
of Marketing Research 26 (May 1989): 164; Harish Sujan, Mita Sujan, 
and James R. Bettman, “Knowledge Structure Differences Between More 
Effective and Less Effective Salespeople,” Journal of Marketing Research 25 
(February 1988): 81–86; Robert Saxe and Barton Weitz, “The SOCCO Scale: 
A Measure of the Customer Orientation of Salespeople,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 19 (August 1982): 343–351; David M. Szymanski, “Determinants 
of Selling Effectiveness: The Importance of Declarative Knowledge to the 
Personal Selling Concept,” Journal of Marketing 52 (January 1988): 64–
77; Barton A. Weitz, “Effectiveness in Sales Interactions: A Contingency 
Framework,” Journal of Marketing 45 (Winter 1981): 85–103.
 74. Jagdish N. Sheth, “Buyer-Seller Interaction: A Conceptual Framework,” 
in Advances in Consumer Research 3 (Cincinnati, OH: Association for 
Consumer Research, 1976): 382–386; Kaylene C. Williams and Rosann L. 
Spiro, “Communication Style in the Salesperson-Customer Dyad,” Journal 
of Marketing Research 22 (November 1985): 434–442.
 75. Marsha L. Richins, “An Analysis of Consumer Interaction Styles in the 
Marketplace,” Journal of Consumer Research 10 (June 1983): 73–82.
 76. Cf. also Marsha L. Richins, “When Wanting is Better Than Having: 
Materialism, Transformation Expectations, and Product-Evoked Emotions 
in the Purchase Process,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (2013): 
1–18.
 77. “Airbnb, Snapgoods and 12 More Pioneers of the ‘Share Economy’,” 
Forbes, http://www.forbes.com/pictures/eeji45emgkh/airbnb-snapgoods-
and-12-more-pioneers-of-the-share-economy/, accessed April 7, 2015; 
“The New Consumer and the Sharing Economy,” Havas, http://www.ha 
vas.com/insights/studies/actualites/the-new-consumer-and-the-sharing-
economy, accessed April 7, 2015; Joel Stein, “Strangers Crashed My Car, 
Ate My Food and Wore My Pants,” Time (January 29, 2015), http://time 
.com/3686877/uber-lyft-sharing-economy/, accessed April 7, 2015.
 78. Rama Jayanti and Anita Jackson, “Service Satisfaction: Investigation of 
Three Models,” in Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., 
Advances in Consumer Research 18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1991): 603–610; David K. Tse, Franco M. Nicosia, and Peter C. 
Wilton, “Consumer Satisfaction as a Process,” Psychology & Marketing 7 
(Fall 1990): 177–193. For a recent treatment of satisfaction issues from 
a more interpretive perspective, see Susan Fournier and David Glen Mick, 
“Rediscovering Satisfaction,” Journal of Marketing 63 (October 1999): 5–23.
 46. Susan Spiggle and Murphy A. Sewall, “A Choice Sets Model of Retail 
Selection,” Journal of Marketing 51 (April 1987): 97–111.
 47. “The Science of Shopping: The Way the Brain Buys,” The Economist 
(December 18, 2008), www.economist.com, accessed April 6, 2015.
 48. Philip Kotler, “Atmospherics as a Marketing Tool,” Journal of Retailing 
(Winter 1973–1974): 10; Anna Mattila and Jochen Wirtz, “Congruency 
of Scent and Music as a Driver of In-Store Evaluations and Behavior,” 
Journal of Retailing 77, no. 2 (2001): 273–289; J. Duncan Herrington, “An 
Integrative Path Model of the Effects of Retail Environments on Shopper 
Behavior,” in Robert L. King, ed., Marketing: Toward the Twenty-First 
Century (Richmond, VA: Southern Marketing Association, 1991): 58–62; 
see also Ann E. Schlosser, “Applying the Functional Theory of Attitudes to 
Understanding the Influence of Store Atmosphere on Store Inferences,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 7, no. 4 (1998): 345–369.
 49. Joseph A. Bellizzi and Robert E. Hite, “Environmental Color, Consumer 
Feelings, and Purchase Likelihood,” Psychology & Marketing 9 (September–
October 1992): 347–363.
 50. Robert J. Donovan, John R. Rossiter, Gilian Marcoolyn, and Andrew 
Nesdale, “Store Atmosphere and Purchasing Behavior,” Journal of Retailing 
70, no. 3 (1994): 283–294; cf. also L. W. Turley and Jean-Charles Chebat, 
“Linking Retail Strategy, Atmospheric Design and Shopping Behaviour,” 
Journal of Marketing Management 18, no. 1–2 (2002): 125–144.
 51. http://www.buildabear.com/shopping/, accessed March 12, 2013.
 52. Charles S. Areni and David Kim, “The Influence of In-Store Lighting on 
Consumers’ Examination of Merchandise in a Wine Store,” International 
Journal of Research in Marketing 11, no. 2 (March 1994): 117–125.
 53. “Slow Music Makes Fast Drinkers,” Psychology Today (March 1989): 18.
 54. Brad Edmondson, “Pass the Meat Loaf,” American Demographics (January 
1989): 19.
 55. “Through the Looking Glass,” Lifestyle Monitor 16 (Fall–Winter 2002).
 56. Jennifer Lach, “Meet You in Aisle Three,” American Demographics (April 
1999): 41.
 57. Karen M. Stilley, J. Jeffrey Inman, and Kirk L. Wakefield, “Planning to Make 
Unplanned Purchases? The Role of In-Store Slack in Budget Deviation,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 2 (2010): 264–278.
 58. Michael Moss, “Nudged to the Produce Aisle by a Look in the Mirror,” New York 
Times (August 27, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/28/dining/
wooing-us-down-the-produce-aisle.html?_r=0, accessed February 23, 2015.
 59. “Mobile Draws in Deal-Seeking Grocery Shoppers,” eMarketer.com (April 22,  
2014), http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Mobile-Draws-Deal-Seeking-
Grocery-Shoppers/1010778#sthash.Z9ofCJ1Z.dpuf, accessed April 6,  
2015; Yohana Desta, “7 Fresh Apps to Upgrade Grocery Shopping,” 
Mashable (April 8, 2014), http://mashable.com/2014/04/08/apps-
grocery-shopping/, accessed April 6, 2015; “Motorola Survey: Shoppers 
Better Connected to Information than Store Associates,” Chain Store Age 
(January 17, 2011), http://www.chainstoreage.com/article/motorola-
survey-shoppers-better-connected-information- store-associates, accessed 
April 30, 2011; Kris Hudson, “Malls Test Apps to Aid Shoppers,” Wall 
Street Journal (April 26, 2011), http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001
424052748704336504576258740640080926.html?mod5dist_smart 
brief, accessed April 29, 2011.
 60. Michael Sciandra and Jeff  Inman, “Smart Phones, Bad Decisions? The 
Impact of In-store Mobile Technology Use on Consumer Decisions,” in 
eds. Simona Botti and Aparna Labroo—Advances in Consumer Research 41 
(Duluth, MN: Association for Consumer Research, 2013).
 61. Cooper Smith, “How Beacons—Small, Low-Cost Gadgets—Will Influence 
Billions in US Retail Sales,” Tech Insider (February 9, 2015), http://www 
.businessinsider.com/beacons-impact-billions-in-reail-sales-2015-2, ac-
cessed April 6, 2015; Zach Sokol, “A Virtual Reality Tesco Is Opening Shop 
In Berlin,” The Creators Project (March 18, 2014), http://thecreatorspro-
ject.vice.com/blog/tescos-using-virtual-reality-goggles-to-possibly-allow-
people-to-buy-groceries-from-bed, accessed April 6, 2015; Jordan Crook, 
“With $45 Million In Funding, Augmented Reality Platform Blippar is 
Rethinking Search,” Techcrunch, (March 6, 2015), http://techcrunch 
.com/2015/03/06/with-45-million-in-funding-augmented-reality-plat-
form-blippar-is-rethinking-search/#.h5cyu1:Ehw2, accessed April 6, 2015;  
https://travel-brilliantly.marriott.com/our-innovations/oculus-get-tele 
ported, accessed April 6, 2015.
 62. Easwar S. Iyer, “Unplanned Purchasing: Knowledge of Shopping Environment 
and Time Pressure,” Journal of Retailing 65 (Spring 1989): 40–57; C. Whan 
Park, Easwar S. Iyer, and Daniel C. Smith, “The Effects of Situational Factors 
on In-Store Grocery Shopping,” Journal of Consumer Research 15 (March 
1989): 422–433.
 63. Iyer, “Unplanned Purchasing”; Park, Iyer, and Smith, “The Effects of Situational 
Factors on In-Store Grocery Shopping.”
 64. Matt Richtel, “At Starbucks, Songs of Instant Gratification,” New York 
Times (October 1, 2007), www.nytimes.com, accessed October 1, 2007.

408 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
.nytimes.com/2015/02/26/us/food-waste-is-becoming-serious-economic-
and-environmental-issue-report-says.html?_r=1, accessed February 26, 
2015.
 86. Debra J. Dahab, James W. Gentry, and Wanru Su, “New Ways to Reach 
Non-Recyclers: An Extension of the Model of Reasoned Action to Recycling 
Behaviors,” in Frank R. Kardes and Mita Sujan, eds., Advances in Consumer 
Research 22 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research): 251–256. 
For other research, cf. Jesse R. Catlin and Yitong Wang, Recycling Gone 
Bad: When the Option to Recycle Increases Resource Consumption. Journal 
of Consumer Psychology 23, no. 1 (2013): 122–127; R. Trudel and J. 
J. Argo, “The Effect of Product Size and Form Distortion on Consumer 
Recycling Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 4 (2013),  
632–643.
 87. Alicia Ciccone, “H&M Launches Garment Recycling Program Across All 
Markets,” Brandchannel, (February 21, 2013), http://www.brandchannel 
.com/home/post/2013/02/21/HM-Garment-Recycling-Program- 
022113.aspx, accessed February 23, 2015.
 88. John F. Sherry, Jr., “A Sociocultural Analysis of a Midwestern American 
Flea Market,” Journal of Consumer Research 17 (June 1990): 13–30.
 89. Allan J. Magrath, “If Used Product Sellers Ever Get Organized, Watch Out,” 
Marketing News (June 25, 1990): 9; Kevin McCrohan and James D. Smith, 
“Consumer Participation in the Informal Economy,” Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science 15 (Winter 1990): 62.
 90. John F. Sherry, Jr., “Dealers and Dealing in a Periodic Market: Informal 
Retailing in Ethnographic Perspective,” Journal of Retailing 66 (Summer 
1990): 174.
 91. “Recommerce,” Trendwatching.com, October 2011, http://www.trend 
watching.com/trends/recommerce/, accessed April 8, 2015.
 92. http://www.swishing.com/, accessed April 7, 2015.
 93. Muhannad M A Abdallat, “Actual Self-Image, Ideal Self-Image and the 
Relation between Satisfaction and Destination Loyalty,” Tourism & Hospitality 
1, no. 4 (2012), http://www.omicsgroup.org/journals/actual-self-image-
ideal-self-image-and-the-relation-between-satisfaction-and-destination- 
loyalty-2167-0269.1000102.pdf.
 94. Shelly Branch, “Maybe Sex Doesn’t Sell, A&F Is Discovering,” Wall Street 
Journal (December 12, 2003), www.wsj.com, accessed December 12, 
2003.
 95. David H. Maister, “The Psychology of Waiting Lines,” in John A. Czepiel, 
Michael R. Solomon, and Carol F. Surprenant, eds., The Service Encounter: 
Managing Employee/Customer Interaction in Service Businesses (Lexington, 
MA: Lexington Books, 1985): 113–124.
 96. David Leonhardt, “Airlines Using Technology in a Push for Shorter Lines,” 
New York Times (May 8, 2000), www.nytimes.com, accessed May 8, 
2000.
 97. Jennifer Ordonez, “An Efficiency Drive: Fast-Food Lanes, Equipped with 
Timers, Get Even Faster,” Wall Street Journal (May 18, 2000), www.wsj 
.com, accessed May 18, 2000.
 79. Robert Jacobson and David A. Aaker, “The Strategic Role of Product 
Quality,” Journal of Marketing 51 (October 1987): 31–44. For a review of 
issues regarding the measurement of service quality, see J. Joseph Cronin, 
Jr., and Steven A. Taylor, “Measuring Service Quality: A Reexamination 
and Extension,” Journal of Marketing 56 (July 1992): 55–68.
 80. Amna Kirmani and Peter Wright, “Money Talks: Perceived Advertising 
Expense and Expected Product Quality,” Journal of Consumer Research 16 
(December 1989): 344–353; Donald R. Lichtenstein and Scot Burton, 
“The Relationship Between Perceived and Objective Price-Quality,” Journal 
of Marketing Research 26 (November 1989): 429–443; Akshay R. Rao and 
Kent B. Monroe, “The Effect of Price, Brand Name, and Store Name on 
Buyers’ Perceptions of Product Quality: An Integrative Review,” Journal 
of Marketing Research 26 (August 1989): 351–357; Shelby Hunt, “Post-
Transactional Communication and Dissonance Reduction,” Journal of 
Marketing 34 (January 1970): 46–51; Daniel E. Innis and H. Rao Unnava, 
“The Usefulness of Product Warranties for Reputable and New Brands,” in 
Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances in Consumer 
Research 18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1991): 317–
322; Terence A. Shimp and William O. Bearden, “Warranty and Other 
Extrinsic Cue Effects on Consumers’ Risk Perceptions,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 9 (June 1982): 38–46.
 81. Gilbert A. Churchill, Jr., and Carol F. Surprenant, “An Investigation into 
the Determinants of Customer Satisfaction,” Journal of Marketing Research 
19 (November 1983): 491–504; John E. Swan and I. Frederick Trawick, 
“Disconfirmation of Expectations and Satisfaction with a Retail Service,” 
Journal of Retailing 57 (Fall 1981): 49–67; Peter C. Wilton and David 
K. Tse, “Models of Consumer Satisfaction Formation: An Extension,” 
Journal of Marketing Research 25 (May 1988): 204–212. For a discus-
sion of what may occur when customers evaluate a new service for 
which comparison standards do not yet exist, see Ann L. McGill and 
Dawn Iacobucci, “The Role of Post-Experience Comparison Standards in 
the Evaluation of Unfamiliar Services,” in John F. Sherry, Jr., and Brian 
Sternthal, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 19 (Provo, UT: Association 
for Consumer Research, 1992): 570–578; William Boulding, Ajay Kalra, 
Richard Staelin, and Valarie A. Zeithaml, “A Dynamic Process Model of 
Service Quality: From Expectations to Behavioral Intentions,” Journal of 
Marketing Research 30 (February 1993): 7–27.
 82. Russell W. Belk, “The Role of Possessions in Constructing and Maintaining 
a Sense of Past,” in Marvin E. Goldberg, Gerald Gorn, and Richard W. 
Pollay, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 17 (Provo, UT: Association for 
Consumer Research, 1989): 669–676.
 83. David E. Sanger, “For a Job Well Done, Japanese Enshrine the Chip,” New 
York Times (December 11, 1990): A4.
 84. Jacob Jacoby, Carol K. Berning, and Thomas F. Dietvorst, “What About 
Disposition?” Journal of Marketing 41 (April 1977): 22–28.
 85. Ron Nixon, “Food Waste is Becoming Serious Economic and Environmental 
Issue, Report Says,” New York Times (February 25, 2015), http://www 

SeCTIOn 3  CATS, KIBBle, AnD CABle Tv 
 
BaCKgrOunD anD gOal
You were hired by PROSPEROUS PETS, a small regional 
chain of boutique pet care stores. PROSPEROUS PETS 
focuses on serving dog and cat owners for all of their pet 
needs, including pet sitting, pet training, grooming, toys, 
and food. PROSPEROUS PETS tends to serve customers 
who consider their dogs and cats “surrogate children,” and 
who, are willing to spend top dollar on quality services and 
products.
PROSPEROUS PETS is preparing to launch its first 
television advertising campaign. The top management 
team has whittled the list of cable channels to potentially 
advertise on down to 11. Your task is to analyze additional 
information about the viewers of these 11 stations and 
come up with a short list of cable channels that you believe 
will be best for PROSPEROUS PETS. To aid you in your task, 
management handed you three reports generated from GfK 
MRI. The first report deals with the quantity of pets owned 
by viewers of each channel, the second report deals with 
the types of pet services used by channel viewers, and the 
final report is about where people buy their pet food.
the Data
The data in each of the three reports can be interpreted in a 
similar manner.
●
●The (mils) column is the estimated number (in millions) 
of people or U.S. households who exhibited the target 
behavior in the row and column. For example, 15.1 mil-
lion U.S. adults report watching the cable channel AMC 
as well as who own one dog.
●
●The vertical percentage (%) column is the estimated per-
centage of all people in a column who watch the channel 
reported in the table’s row. For example, of all people 
who own one dog, 23.8 percent of them also report 
watching AMC.
●
●The horizontal percentage (%) column is the estimated 
percentage of all people in a row who also exhibit the 
 behavior reported in the table’s column. For example,  
of all people who watch AMC, 29.7 percentage of them 
own one dog.
These three pieces of information can be informative on 
their own. However, they can also be used to calculate other 
useful metrics.
task 1: understanding the Data
Use the information provided in Table 1 to answer the following questions:
1 If someone owns a dog, what is the percentage chance 
they watch Fox News? What if they own a cat?
2 Which channel is much more likely to be watched 
by someone with four or more dogs than an average 
American? What is the Index value for this channel? An 
Index value of 100 is the benchmark for an average U.S. 
adult to have four or more dogs.
3 Which channel is much less likely to be watched by some-
one with four or more cats than compared to an average 
American? What is the Index value?
4 If we wanted to reach the most two to three dog-owning 
households by advertising on only a single cable channel, 
which channel would we pick?
5 Based on these results, is it fair to say that Animal Planet 
watchers are more likely to own either a cat or dog com-
pared to the national average?
6 Regardless of the number of dogs or cats someone owns 
(including zero!), about how many U.S. adults in total said 
they watch the Cooking Channel?
 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
409 

410 
SeCtiOn 3   Choosing and Using Products
Use the information provided in Table 2 to answer the following question:
1 Your friend assumed that Animal Planet is the best channel to find pet owners who use pet services frequently. Do your 
data support or contradict her belief? Why?
taBle 1   Pet Ownership and Cable Channel viewing
1 dog
2–3 dogs
4+ dogs
1 cat
2–3 cats
4+ cats
 
Target
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
Total
63.8
100.0 26.9
39.5
100.0 16.7
5.8
100.0
2.4
29.0 100.0 12.2
21.4 100.0
9.0
5.6
100.0
2.4
HH subscribes to Cable
31.4
49.3 26.9
16.8
42.4 14.3
1.9
32.9
1.6
14.4
49.5 12.3
9.7
45.4
8.3
2.1
37.0
1.8
AMC
15.1
23.8 29.7
9.2
23.3 18.1
1.3
21.8
2.5
6.9
23.9 13.6
5.0
23.2
9.7
1.4
25.3
2.8
Animal Planet
15.5
24.2 29.8
11.4
28.9 22.0
1.6
27.5
3.1
7.5
25.8 14.4
6.0
28.0 11.6
1.6
27.9
3.0
Comedy Central
9.8
15.4 28.9
7.1
17.9 20.8
0.9
15.0
2.6
4.5
15.4 13.1
3.9
18.3 11.6
0.9
15.3
2.5
Cooking Channel
8.4
13.2 26.8
4.9
12.5 15.8
0.9
15.7
2.9
3.4
11.7 10.8
3.1
14.4
9.9
0.7
12.0
2.2
Discovery Channel
19.3
30.3 28.3
13.4
33.9 19.6
1.8
32.0
2.7
9.0
31.2 13.2
7.0
32.5 10.2
1.7
30.1
2.5
Food Network
16.2
25.4 28.6
9.7
24.5 17.1
1.5
26.4
2.7
7.0
24.2 12.4
5.6
26.0
9.8
1.3
22.5
2.2
Fox News Channel
19.1
30.0 28.0
11.3
28.7 16.6
1.6
28.6
2.4
8.3
28.5 12.1
5.9
27.8
8.7
1.4
25.7
2.1
History Channel
21.4
33.6 27.9
15.2
38.5 19.8
2.2
37.7
2.8
9.9
34.2 12.9
8.2
38.5 10.7
2.2
39.2
2.9
HGTV
14.8
23.2 30.8
8.6
21.9 18.0
1.2
20.5
2.5
5.8
20.1 12.1
4.9
22.9 10.2
1.2
21.0
2.5
Syfy
10.0
15.6 25.6
7.9
20.0 20.3
1.6
27.0
4.0
5.2
17.9 13.3
4.4
20.5 11.3
1.3
23.3
3.4
Weather Channel
19.6
30.7 26.4
12.5
31.7 16.9
2.0
34.7
2.7
9.5
32.7 12.8
6.8
31.6
9.1
2.0
36.0
2.7
taBle 2   Pet Service Usage and Cable Channel viewing
has pet insurance
used pet Daycare
used pet Grooming
1 vet visit
2–3 vet visits
4+ vet visits
 
Target
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
 
(mils)
Vert 
%
Horz 
%
Total
7.1
100.0
3.0
3.5
100.0
1.5
31.9 100.0 13.5
34.8 100.0 14.7
42.1 100.0 17.8
24.1 100.0 10.2
HH subscribes to Cable
3.3
46.5
2.8
1.6
46.7
1.4
16.1
50.4 13.7
16.8
48.3 14.4
19.9
47.3 17.1
11.0
45.8
9.4
AMC
1.5
21.8
3.0
0.9
26.0
1.8
7.9
24.7 15.5
7.8
22.4 15.3
10.2
24.2 20.1
5.3
22.1 10.4
Animal Planet
1.6
23.1
3.2
0.7
19.0
1.3
8.0
25.1 15.5
8.3
23.7 15.9
11.1
26.4 21.5
6.6
27.5 12.8
Comedy Central
1.1
15.6
3.3
0.7
19.5
2.0
5.4
16.9 15.9
5.5
15.9 16.3
7.1
16.8 20.9
4.4
18.1 12.9
Cooking Channel
0.8
11.7
2.7
0.4
11.8
1.3
4.2
13.1 13.4
4.6
13.2 14.6
5.7
13.4 18.1
2.9
12.1
9.3
Discovery Channel
2.0
28.3
2.9
1.1
31.2
1.6
10.4
32.5 15.2
10.5
30.1 15.3
13.9
33.1 20.4
7.8
32.4 11.4
Food Network
1.8
25.2
3.2
1.1
31.5
1.9
8.7
27.4 15.5
8.6
24.8 15.2
10.8
25.7 19.1
6.2
25.8 11.0
Fox News Channel
1.8
25.8
2.7
0.9
24.7
1.3
10.2
31.8 14.9
10.4
29.8 15.2
12.4
29.5 18.2
6.9
28.8 10.2
History Channel
2.4
33.7
3.1
1.2
34.5
1.6
11.9
37.4 15.6
11.9
34.1 15.5
15.3
36.3 19.9
8.8
36.5 11.5
HGTV
1.6
22.3
3.3
0.8
22.4
1.6
8.3
26.0 17.3
7.5
21.6 15.7
9.6
22.7 19.9
6.2
25.7 12.9
Syfy
1.4
20.1
3.7
0.4
11.8
1.0
5.3
16.6 13.6
6.0
17.1 15.3
8.0
19.1 20.7
4.2
17.2 10.7
Weather Channel
1.9
26.4
2.5
1.0
27.9
1.3
10.6
33.2 14.3
10.7
30.9 14.5
13.4
31.9 18.1
8.4
34.7 11.3
Source: Spring 2014 GfK MRI
Source: Spring 2014 GfK MRI

 
Chapter 10   Buying, Using, and Disposing 
411 
Use the information provided in Table 3 to answer the following questions:
1 Assuming people only buy from one of the three options, 
how many people in total bought their pet food from a 
discount store, a pet specialty store, or directly from their 
veterinarian? What percentage of this total bought from 
their veterinarian?
2 Which cable channel had the largest percentage of view-
ers who buy their pet food from a veterinarian ?
taBle 3   Pet Food Buying and Cable Channel viewing
Discount Store
pet specialty shop
veterinarian
Target
(mils)
Vert %
Horz %
(mils)
Vert %
Horz %
(mils)
Vert %
Horz %
Total
22.8
100.0
9.6
53.2
100.0
22.5
10.2
100.0
4.3
HH subscribes to Cable
10.6
46.3
9.0
25.9
48.6
22.1
5.2
50.8
4.4
AMC
5.9
25.8
11.5
12.2
22.9
23.9
2.4
23.1
4.6
Animal Planet
5.9
25.7
11.3
13.6
25.5
26.2
2.8
27.1
5.3
Comedy Central
3.6
15.9
10.7
9.0
16.9
26.6
1.7
16.8
5.0
Cooking Channel
2.9
12.6
9.2
6.9
13.1
22.2
1.3
13.1
4.3
Discovery Channel
7.5
33.0
11.0
17.0
32.0
24.9
3.4
33.0
4.9
Food Network
5.3
23.3
9.4
13.7
25.8
24.2
2.4
23.4
4.2
Fox News Channel
6.7
29.2
9.8
15.3
28.8
22.4
3.3
31.9
4.8
History Channel
8.6
37.8
11.2
18.2
34.2
23.8
3.7
36.2
4.8
HGTV
5.2
22.8
10.8
12.5
23.4
26.0
2.5
24.3
5.2
Syfy
4.1
18.0
10.6
9.0
17.0
23.2
2.0
19.4
5.1
Weather Channel
7.7
33.8
10.4
16.1
30.3
21.7
3.5
34.0
4.7
DiSCuSSiOn anD DeBate
 
1. Based only on the information provided, which three 
cable channels would you recommend as the best 
choices for promoting the business? Which three 
cable channels do you think are the poorest fit?
 
2. What other additional information would you like 
to have so that you could make a more informed 
recommendation? Why is it important? How could 
you find out this information?
 
3. If PROSPEROUS PETS told you that its services were 
much more profitable than its product (toys, food, 
etc.) sales, would that change your recommenda-
tion? Why or why not?
Source: Spring 2014 GfK MRI
GfK US LLC, Mediamark Research & Intelligence division.


     
    
Cul
tur
al S
ett
in
gs
    
    
in 
The
ir 
So
cia
l a
nd
C
O
N
S
U
M
E R
 B
E H
A
V
I
O
R
3:
 C
ho
osi
ng
a
nd
 U
sin
g P
rod
ucts
1
:
 
F
o
u
nd
ati
ons
o
f
 
C
o
n
su
me
r B
eha
vior
 
on C
onsu
mer 
Beh
avio
r
2: In
tern
al In
ﬂue
nce
s
    
    
4: 
Co
ns
um
er
s 
 
413
C h a p t e r s  a h e a d
Chapter 11 • Groups and Social Media
Chapter 12 • Income and Social Class
Chapter 13 • Subcultures
Chapter 14 • Culture
This fourth and final section focuses on the external factors that influence our identities 
as consumers and the decisions we make. Chapter 11 provides an overview of group 
processes and the role that social media plays in consumer decision making. In Chapter 
12 we focus on the ways our income and social status relative to others helps to define 
who we are. Chapter 13 discusses the subcultures that help to determine how we buy and 
consume. Finally, in Chapter 14, we dive into broad yet powerful cultural influences on con-
sumer behavior.
Section 4 ● Consumers in Their Social 
and Cultural Settings

414
Z
ach leads a secret life. During the week, he is a 
straitlaced stock analyst for a major investment firm. 
However, his day job only pays the bills to finance 
his real passion: cruising on his Harley-Davidson Road Glide 
Custom. His Facebook posts are filled with lunchtime laments 
about how much he’d rather be out on the road (hopefully his 
boss won’t try to friend him). Actually, Zach feels it’s worth the 
risk: He’s participating in Harley’s social media promotion that 
encourages riders to post their stories (“freedom statements”) 
on Facebook and Twitter to see if they’ll include one of his posts 
on a Harley banner ad.1 His girlfriend Karen worries a bit about 
his getting totaled in an accident, but Zach knows if he stays 
alert the only way that will probably happen is if he can’t kick his 
habit of texting her while he’s driving the bike.
Come Friday evening, it’s off with the Brooks Brothers suit 
and on with the black leather, as he trades in his Lexus for his 
treasured Harley. A dedicated member of Harley Owners Group 
(HOG), Zach belongs to the rich urban bikers (RUBs) faction of Harley riders. Everyone in 
his group wears expensive leather vests with Harley insignias and owns customized “low 
riders.” Just this week, Zach finally got his new Harley perforated black leather jacket at 
the company’s Motorclothes Merchandise Web page.2 As one of the Harley Web pages 
observed, “It’s one thing to have people buy your products. It’s another thing to have 
them tattoo your name on their bodies.” Zach had to restrain himself from buying more 
Harley stuff; there were vests, eyewear, belts, buckles, scarves, watches, jewelry, and even 
 11-1 Other people and groups, especially those that possess 
social power, influence our decisions.
 11-2 Word-of-mouth communication is the most important 
driver of product choice.
 11-3 Opinion leaders’ recommendations are more influential 
than others when we decide what to buy.
 11-4 Social media changes the way we learn about and select 
products.
When you finish reading this chapter, you will understand why:
 Chapter 11 ● Groups and Social Media
Chapter 
Objectives
Source: Ljupco Smokovski/Shutterstock.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
415 
housewares (“home is the road”) for sale. He settled for a set of Harley salt-and-pepper shakers that 
would be perfect for his buddy Doug’s new crib.
Zach’s experiences on social media platforms make him realize the lengths to which some of his fel-
low enthusiasts go to make sure others know they are Hog riders. Two of his riding buddies are in a lively 
competition to be “mayor” of the local Harley dealership on Foursquare, whereas many others tweet to 
inform people about a group ride that will occur later in the day—kind of a flash mob on wheels.
Zach spends a lot of money to outfit himself to be like the rest of the group, but it’s worth it. He 
feels a real sense of brotherhood with his fellow RUBs. The group rides together in two-column forma-
tion to bike rallies that sometimes attract up to 300,000 cycle enthusiasts. What a sense of power 
he feels when they all cruise together—it’s them against the world!
Of course, an added benefit is the business networking he’s accomplished during his jaunts with 
his fellow professionals who also wait for the weekend to “ride on the wild side; these days it would 
be professional suicide to let your contacts get cold, and you can’t just count on LinkedIn to stay in 
the loop.”3
Groups
Humans are social animals. We belong to groups, try to please 
others, and look to others’ behavior for clues about what we 
should do in public settings. In fact, our desire to “fit in” or to iden-
tify with desirable individuals or groups is the primary motivation 
for many of our consumption behaviors. We may go to great 
lengths to please the members of a group whose acceptance we covet.4
Social identity theory argues that each of us has several “selves” that relate to 
groups. These linkages are so important that we think of ourselves not just as “I,” but 
also as “we.” In addition, we favor others that we feel share the same identity—even if 
that identity is superficial and virtually meaningless. In numerous experiments that 
employ the minimal group paradigm, researchers show that even when they arbi-
trarily assign subjects to one group or another, people favor those who wind up in the 
same group.5
Zach’s biker group is an important part of  his identity, and this membership 
influences many of  his buying decisions. He has spent many thousands of  dollars 
on parts and accessories since he became a RUB. His fellow riders bond via their con-
sumption choices, so total strangers feel an immediate connection with one another 
when they meet. The publisher of  American Iron, an industry magazine, observed, 
“You don’t buy a Harley because it’s a superior bike, you buy a Harley to be a part of 
a family.”6
Zach doesn’t model himself after just any biker—only the RUB members with whom 
he really identifies can exert that kind of influence on him. For example, Zach’s group 
doesn’t have much to do with outlaw clubs whose blue-collar riders sport big Harley tat-
toos. The members of his group also have only polite contact with “Ma and Pa” bikers, 
whose rides are the epitome of comfort and feature such niceties as radios, heated hand-
grips, and floorboards.
Social power
Why are groups so persuasive? The answer lies in the potential power they wield over us. 
Social power describes “the capacity to alter the actions of others.”8 To the degree to 
which you are able to make someone else do something, regardless of whether that person 
does it willingly, you have power over that person. The following classification of power 
bases helps us to distinguish among the reasons a person exerts power over another, the 
We tend to think of running 
as something you do on 
your own, but today you’re 
much more likely to run 
with a group. People train 
with friends and participate in charity runs 
together. Many of us are moving away from 
running alone at home; sales of home car-
dio equipment like treadmills are way down. 
Instead people gravitate to competitions like 
the Tough Mudder obstacle course or fitness 
classes. New Balance is picking up on this 
trend as the shoe manufacturer promotes its 
“Runnovation” campaign that focuses on run-
ning as a social activity. One print ad carries 
the headline, “Redefine girls’ night out” as 
it shows a group of women running together. 
“Some go out. Others go out and make ex-
cellent happen. The night is yours. This is 
Runnovation.”7
Marketing Opportunity
ObjeCtIve 11-1 
Other people and groups, 
especially those that 
possess social power, 
influence our decisions.

416 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
degree to which the influence is voluntary, and whether this influence will continue to 
have an effect even when the source of the power isn’t around.9
●
●Referent power—If a person admires the qualities of a person or a group, he tries 
to copy the referent’s behaviors (e.g., choice of clothing, cars, leisure activities). 
Prominent people in all walks of life affect our consumption behaviors by virtue of 
product endorsements (e.g., Lady Gaga for Polaroid), distinctive fashion statements 
(e.g., Kim Kardashian’s displays of high-end designer clothing), or championing 
causes (e.g., Brad Pitt for UNICEF). Referent power is important to many marketing 
strategies because consumers voluntarily modify what they do and buy to identify with 
a referent.
●
●Information power—A person possesses information power simply because he or 
she knows something others would like to know. Editors of trade publications such as 
Women’s Wear Daily often possess tremendous power because of their ability to compile 
and disseminate information that can make or break individual designers or compa-
nies. People with information power are able to influence consumer opinion by virtue 
of their access to the knowledge that provides some kind of competitive advantage.
●
●Legitimate power—Sometimes we grant power by virtue of social agreements, such 
as the authority we give to police officers, soldiers, and yes, even professors. The le-
gitimate power a uniform confers wields authority in consumer contexts, including 
teaching hospitals where medical students don white coats to enhance their standing 
with patients.10 Marketers “borrow” this form of power to influence consumers. For 
example, an ad that shows a model who wears a white doctor’s coat adds an aura of 
legitimacy or authority to the presentation of the product (“I’m not a doctor, but I play 
one on TV”).
●
●Expert power—U.S. Robotics signed up British physicist Stephen Hawking to en-
dorse its modems. A company executive commented, “We wanted to generate trust. 
So we found visionaries who use U.S. Robotics technology, and we let them tell the 
consumer how it makes their lives more productive.” Hawking, who has Lou Gehrig’s 
disease and speaks via a synthesizer, said in one TV spot, “My body may be stuck 
in this chair, but with the Internet my mind can go to the end of the universe.”11 
Hawking’s expert power derives from the knowledge he possesses about a content 
area. This helps to explain the weight many of us assign to professional critics’ re-
views of restaurants, books, movies, and cars—even though, with the advent of blogs 
and open source references such as Wikipedia, it’s getting a lot harder to tell just who 
is really an expert!12
●
●Reward power—A person or group with the means to provide positive reinforcement 
(see Chapter 4) has reward power. The reward may be the tangible kind, such as the 
contestants on Survivor experience when their comrades vote them off the island. Or it 
can be more intangible, such as the gushing feedback the judges on The Voice deliver to 
contestants.
●
●Coercive power—We exert coercive power when we influence someone because 
of social or physical intimidation. A threat is often effective in the short term, but it 
doesn’t tend to stick because we revert to our original behavior as soon as the bully 
leaves the scene. Fortunately, marketers rarely try to use this type of power (unless you 
count those annoying calls from telemarketers!). However, we can see elements of this 
power base in the fear appeals we talked about in Chapter 8, as well as in intimidating 
salespeople who try to succeed with a “hard sell.”
reference Groups
Just because we find ourselves in the company of others doesn’t necessarily mean they 
impact what we say or do. A reference group is an actual or imaginary individual or 
group that significantly influences an individual’s evaluations, aspirations, or behavior.13 
For our friend Zach, the RUBs with whom he hangs out are a reference group.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
417 
Research on smoking cessation programs powerfully illustrates the impact of refer-
ence groups. The study found that smokers tend to quit in sets: When one person quits, 
this creates a ripple effect that motivates others in his social network to give up the death 
sticks also. The researchers followed thousands of smokers and nonsmokers for more 
than 30 years, and they also tracked their networks of relatives, coworkers, and friends. 
They discovered that over the years, the smokers tended to cluster together (on aver-
age in groups of three). As the overall U.S. smoking rate declined dramatically during 
this period, the number of clusters in the sample decreased, but the remaining clusters 
stayed the same size; this indicated that people quit in groups rather than as individuals. 
Not surprisingly, some social connections were more powerful than others. A spouse 
who quit had a bigger impact than did a friend, whereas friends had more influence 
than siblings. Coworkers had an influence only in small firms where everyone knew one 
another.14
Reference group influences don’t work the same way for all types of products and 
consumption activities. For example, we’re not as likely to take others’ preferences 
into account when we choose products that are not complex, that are low in perceived 
risk, or that we can try before we buy.15 Although two or more people normally form a 
group, we often use the term reference group a bit more loosely to describe any external 
influence that provides social cues.16 The referent may be a cultural figure that has 
an impact on many people (e.g., the Pope) or a person or group whose influence oper-
ates only in the consumer’s immediate environment (e.g., the “popular” kids in high 
school). Reference groups that affect consumption can include parents, fellow motor-
cycle enthusiasts, the Tea Party, or even the Chicago Bears, the Dave Matthews Band, 
or Spike Lee.
A membership reference group consists of people we actually know. In contrast 
although we don’t know those in an aspirational reference group, we admire them 
anyway. These people are likely to be successful businesspeople, athletes, performers, or 
anyone else who rocks our world. Not surprisingly, many marketing communications 
that specifically adopt a reference group appeal concentrate on highly visible celebrities; 
they link these people to brands so that the products they use or endorse also take on this 
aspirational quality. For example, an amateur basketball player who idolizes Miami Heat 
The Web has spawned the 
rise of a new kind of avoid-
ance group: antibrand 
communities. These groups 
also 
coalesce 
around 
a celebrity, store, or brand, but in this case 
they’re united by their disdain for it. The site 
starbucked.com asks, “Starbucked enough 
by corporate crap product and service?” and 
provides the locations of independent coffee 
houses.23 The U.K.-based anti-McDonald’s 
site McSpotlight claims, “McDonald’s spends 
over $2 billion a year broadcasting their glossy 
 image to the world. This is a small space for 
alternatives to be heard.” At Hel*Mart.com you 
can find links to numerous groups that oppose 
the practices of Walmart.
One team of researchers that studies 
these communities observes that they tend 
to attract social idealists who advocate non-
materialistic lifestyles. After they interviewed 
members of online communities who oppose 
these three companies, they concluded that 
these antibrand communities provide a meet-
ing place for those who share a moral stance; 
a support network to achieve common goals; 
a way to cope with workplace frustrations 
(many members actually work for the compa-
nies they bash!); and a hub for information, 
activities, and related resources.24
  the tangled Web
Members of a reference group can motivate 
us (or maybe our pets?) to lose weight, stop 
smoking or make other lifestyle changes.
Source: Courtesy of Jardiland and ROSAPARK 
agency Picture by www.lippoth.com, Photoshop  
artists: Graziella Vermeil & Pierrick Le Gros.

418 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Fantasy camps connect fans with their aspi-
rational reference groups.
Source: Courtesy of Rock ‘n’ Roll Fantasy Camp.
Most consumers only ad-
mire their aspirational ref-
erence groups from afar; 
however, more and more of 
them shell out big bucks 
to get up close and personal with their he-
roes. Fantasy camps are a $1 billion industry 
as people pay for the chance to hang out—
and play with—their idols. Baseball camps 
that mix retired players with fans have been 
around for many years, but now other types 
let people mingle with their favorite hockey 
players, poker players, even members of the 
U.S. women’s national soccer team. At one 
camp, 80 people each paid about $8,000 
to jam with rock stars including Nils Lofgren, 
Dickey Betts, and Roger Daltrey. One en-
thusiastic novice gushed afterward, “We all 
grow up with heroes and never get to share 
a moment with them. But I got to live out my 
fantasy.”19
Marketing Opportunity
star Dwyane Wade might drool over a pair of Air Jordan 12 Dwyane Wade PE shoes.17 
One study of business students who aspired to the “executive” role found a strong relation-
ship between products they associated with their ideal selves (see Chapter 6) and those they 
assumed that real executives own.18
Reference groups impact our buying decisions both positively and negatively. In most 
cases, we model our behavior to be in line with what we think the group expects us to do. 
Sometimes, however, we also deliberately do the opposite if we want to distance ourselves 
from avoidance groups. You may carefully study the dress or mannerisms of a group 
you dislike (e.g., “nerds,” “druggies,” or “preppies”) and scrupulously avoid buying any-
thing that might identify you with that group. Rebellious adolescents do the opposite of 
what their parents desire to make a statement about their independence. In one study, col-
lege freshmen reported consuming less alcohol when they associated it with their avoid-
ance groups.20
Your motivation to distance yourself from a negative reference group can be as pow-
erful or more powerful than your desire to please a positive group.21 That’s why advertise-
ments occasionally show an undesirable person who uses a competitor’s product. This 
kind of execution subtly makes the point that you can avoid winding up like that kind of 
person if you just stay away from the products he buys. As a once-popular book reminded 
us, “Real men don’t eat quiche!”22
Conformity
The early Bohemians who lived in Paris around 1830 made a point of behaving, well, 
differently from others. One flamboyant figure of the time earned notoriety because he 
walked a lobster on a leash through the gardens of the Royal Palace. His friends drank 
wine from human skulls, cut their beards in strange shapes, and slept in tents on the floors 
of their garrets.25 Sounds a bit like some frat houses we’ve visited.
Although in every age there certainly are those who “march to their own drummers,” 
most people tend to follow society’s expectations regarding how they should act and look 
(with a little improvisation here and there, of course). Conformity is a change in beliefs 
or actions as a reaction to real or imagined group pressure. For a society to function, its 
members develop norms or informal rules that govern behavior. Without these rules, we 
would have chaos. Imagine the confusion if a simple norm such as “always stop for a red 
traffic light” did not exist.
We conform in many small ways every day, even though we don’t always realize it. 
Unspoken rules govern many aspects of consumption. In addition to norms regarding 
appropriate use of clothing and other personal items, we conform to rules that include 
gift-giving (we expect birthday presents from loved ones and get upset if they don’t 

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
419 
materialize), sex roles (men often pick up the check on a first date), and personal hygiene 
(our friends expect us to shower regularly).
The pressure to conform conflicts with another motivation we’ve already discussed: 
The need to be unique. How can we reconcile these two goals? One study suggests that we 
try to have it both ways: We line up with a group on one dimension such as choosing a 
popular brand, but we differentiate ourselves on another by choosing a unique attribute 
such as color.27
Within limits, people approve of others who exhibit nonconforming behavior. This 
may be because we assume someone who makes unconventional choices is more powerful 
or competent, so he or she can afford to go out on a limb. Researchers term this the Red 
Sneakers Effect (to describe a brave person who sports a pair of red kicks in a profes-
sional setting). Indeed, they find that nonconforming behaviors under some conditions 
do lead to more positive impressions, but these disappear when the observer is unsure why 
the brave soul is violating a norm or if they decide the violator is not doing it intentionally 
(i.e. he or she is just clueless).28
Although we observe conformity in many settings (just remember high school!), we 
don’t mimic others’ behaviors all the time. What makes it more likely that we’ll conform? 
These are some common culprits:29
●
●Cultural pressures—Different cultures encourage conformity to a greater or lesser 
degree. Americans like to say, “the squeaky wheel gets the grease,” whereas in Japan 
a popular expression is “the nail that stands up gets hammered down.” In a study, 
groups of passengers who arrived at an airport were asked to complete a survey: They 
were offered a handful of pens to use, for example four orange and one green. People 
of European descent more often chose the one pen that stood out, and Asians chose 
the color that was like the majority of the others.30
●
●Fear of  deviance—The individual may have reason to believe that the group will 
apply sanctions to punish nonconforming behaviors. It’s not unusual to observe ado-
lescents who shun a peer who is “different” or a corporation or university that passes 
over a person for promotion because he or she is not a “team player.”
●
●Commitment—The more people are dedicated to a group and value their member-
ship in it, the greater their motivation to conform to the group’s wishes. Rock groupies 
and followers of TV evangelists may do anything their idols ask of them, and terrorists 
become martyrs for their cause. According to the Principle of Least Interest the 
person who is least committed to staying in a relationship has the most power because 
that party doesn’t care as much if the other person rejects him.31 Remember that on 
your next date.
●
●Group unanimity, size, and expertise—As groups gain in power, compliance in-
creases. It is often harder to resist the demands of a large number of people than only a 
few, especially when a “mob mentality” rules.
●
●Susceptibility to interpersonal influence—This trait refers to an individual’s 
need to have others think highly of him or her. Consumers who don’t possess this trait 
are role-relaxed; they tend to be older, affluent, and have high self-confidence. Subaru 
created a communications strategy to reach role-relaxed consumers. In one of its 
commercials, a man proclaims, “I want a car…. Don’t tell me about wood paneling, 
about winning the respect of my neighbors. They’re my neighbors. They’re not my 
heroes.”32
●
●Environmental cues—One study reported that people are more likely to conform 
when they make decisions in a warm room. Apparently the warmth caused par-
ticipants to feel closer to other decision makers and this feeling led them to assume the 
others’ opinions were more valid. In one part of the study the researchers analyzed 
betting behavior at a racetrack over a 3-year period. Sure enough, people were more 
likely to bet on the “favorite” horse on warmer days.33
When we make decisions 
as part of a group, we 
tend to have fewer re-
straints on our behavior. 
For example, we some-
times behave more wildly at costume parties 
or on Halloween than we do when others can 
easily identify us. This is the phenomenon of 
deindividuation a process whereby individual 
identities become submerged within a group. 
Deindividuation happens online as well. Res-
earchers call this the Gyges effect. The term 
comes from a myth called The Ring of Gyges: 
A shepherd discovers a ring that makes him 
invisible at will. He uses the anonymity of 
the ring to seduce the queen, assassinate 
the king, and take over the kingdom. In the 
present day, this myth reminds us that the 
anonymity of the Internet can cause other-
wise moral people to experience a loss of 
inhibition and post things they would never 
say to a person in the real world. People who 
do this are known in the industry as Internet 
trolls. They post threats about rape and other 
violence, or bullying comments.26 Trolls pose 
a big problem for social networks. As the 
head of Twitter wrote in a leaked memo, “I’m 
frankly ashamed of how poorly we’ve dealt 
with this issue during my tenure as CEO.”
  the tangled Web

420 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
brand Communities
Before it released the popular Xbox game Halo 2, Bungie Studios put up a Web site to 
explain the story line. However, there was a catch: The story was written from the point 
of view of the Covenant (the aliens who are preparing to attack Earth in the game)—and 
in their language. Within 48 hours, avid gamers around the world shared information in 
gaming chat rooms to crack the code and translate the text. More than 1.5 million people 
preordered the game before its release.36
A brand community is a group of consumers—like those zealous Halo players—
who share a set of social relationships based on usage of or interest in a product. In vir-
tually any category, you’ll find passionate brand communities (in some cases devoted to 
brands that don’t even exist anymore); examples include the 3Com Ergo Audrey (discon-
tinued Internet appliance), Apple Newton (discontinued personal digital assistant), BMW 
MINI (car), Garmin (GPS device), Jones Soda (carbonated beverage), Lomo and Holga 
(cameras), Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers (musical group), StriVectin (cosmeceutical), 
and Xena: Warrior Princess (TV program).
Unlike other kinds of communities, these members typically don’t live near each 
other—except when they may meet for brief periods at organized events or brandfests 
that community-oriented companies such as Jeep or Harley-Davidson sponsor. These 
events help owners to “bond” with fellow enthusiasts and strengthen their identification 
with the product as well as with others they meet who share their passion.
Researchers find that people who participate in these events feel more positive 
about the sponsor’s products as a result, and this enhances brand loyalty. They tend 
to forgive product failures or lapses in service quality, and they’re less likely to switch 
brands even if they learn that competing products are as good or better. Furthermore, 
these community members become emotionally involved in the company’s welfare, and 
they often serve as brand missionaries because they carry its marketing message to 
others.38
Researchers find that brand community members do more than help the product 
build buzz; their inputs actually create added value for themselves and other members 
as they develop better ways to use and customize products. It’s common for experienced 
Marketing pitfall
Social loafing happens 
when we don’t devote as 
much time and effort to a 
task as we could because 
our contribution is part of 
a larger group effort.34 You may have experi-
enced this if you’ve worked on a group project 
for a class! Waitpersons are painfully aware 
of social loafing: People who eat in groups 
tend to tip less per person than when they 
eat alone.35 For this reason, many restaurants  
 automatically tack on a fixed gratuity for groups  
of six or more.
Source: Corepics VOF/Shutterstock.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
421 
users to coach “newbies” in ways to maximize their enjoyment of the product, so that 
more and more people benefit from a network of satisfied participants.39 Figure 11.1 dem-
onstrates this process of collective value creation.
Word-of-Mouth Communication
Altoids breath mints have been around for 200 years, but the 
brand caught fire among a larger market only near the end of 
the 20th century. How did this happen? The revival began when 
the mint attracted a devoted following among smokers and cof-
fee drinkers who hung out in the blossoming Seattle club scene 
during the 1980s. Until 1993, when Kraft bought manufacturer Callard & Bowser, 
only those “in the know” sucked the mints. The brand’s marketing manager per-
suaded Kraft to hire advertising agency Leo Burnett to develop a modest promotional 
ObjeCtIve 11-2 
Word-of-mouth 
communication is the 
most important driver of 
product choice.
Varsity Brands is a leading 
supplier to cheerleaders. The 
company sponsored a big sur-
vey of teenage girls to learn 
how they decide what to buy. 
No surprises here: Half of the respondents spend 
an hour or more each day texting, and another 
third spend an hour socializing online. In con-
trast, 44 percent spend less than 15 minutes 
 actually talking on the phone (who uses the 
phone to talk anymore?). When these girls 
 discover a brand they like, three-quarters say 
they are likely to recommend it to a friend. 
About half become online fans of the brand, and 
55 percent agree that “[i]f I see a favorable post 
online about an item, it will likely influence me 
to buy it.” A Varsity marketing executive com-
mented, “When it comes to spreading ideas via 
social media, teen girls lead the pack. They are 
more likely to use online time for connecting, 
self-expression, and relationship building. They  
are more likely to have used e-mail and are 
 almost twice as likely as boys to have shared 
photos through a website, posted a comment 
on a blog or community, blogged themselves or 
kept an online journal.”37
net profit
Source: Andrew Rich/Getty Images.

422 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
campaign. The agency decided to publicize the candy with subway posters sporting 
retro imagery and other “low tech” media to avoid making the product seem main-
stream—that would turn off the original audience.41 Young people started to tune 
into this “retro” treat, and its popularity skyrocketed.
As the Altoids success story illustrates, today grassroots efforts that motivate con-
sumers to spread a brand’s message are what makes a hit product. Word-of-mouth 
(WOM) is product information that individuals transmit to other individuals. Because we 
get the word from people we know, WOM tends to be more reliable and trustworthy than 
messages from more formal marketing channels. And, unlike advertising, WOM often 
comes with social pressure to conform to these recommendations.42
Despite the huge sums of money marketers pump into lavish ads, WOM is far more 
powerful: It influences up to 50 percent of all consumer goods sales.43 If you think care-
fully about the content of your own conversations in the course of a normal day, you will 
probably agree that much of what you discuss with friends, family members, or coworkers 
is product-related: When you compliment someone on her dress and ask her where she 
bought it, recommend a new restaurant to a friend, or complain to your neighbor about 
the shoddy treatment you got at the bank, you engage in WOM.
As far back as the Stone Age (well, the 1950s, anyway), communications theorists 
challenged the assumption that advertising primarily determines what we buy. As a rule, 
advertising is more effective to reinforce our existing product preferences than to create new 
ones.44 Studies in both industrial and consumer purchase settings underscore the idea 
that although information from impersonal sources creates brand awareness, consumers 
rely on WOM in the later stages of evaluation and adoption.45 Quite simply, the more posi-
tive information consumers get about a product from peers, the more likely they will be to 
adopt the product.46
WOM is especially powerful when the consumer is relatively unfamiliar with the 
product category. We often encounter these situations in the case of new products  
(e.g., medications to prevent hair loss) or those that are technologically complex (e.g., 
smartphones). One way to reduce uncertainty about the wisdom of a purchase is to talk 
Welcoming
Empathizing
Governing
Social
Networking
Impression
Management
Brand Use
Community
Engagement
Va
lu
e
V
a
l
u
e
V
a
l
u
e
Customizing
Grooming
Commoditizing
Evangelizing
Justifying
Documenting
Badging
Milestoning
Staking
V
al
u
e
Figure 11.1 THE PROCESS OF COLLECTIVE VALUE CREATION IN BRAND COMMUNITIES
Source: Reprinted with permission from Journal of Marketing, “How Brand Community Practices Create Value,” published 
by the American Marketing Association, Hope Jensen, Albert M. Muniz, and Eric J. Arnould, September 2009, 73, 30–51.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
423 
Cb aS I See It
Eileen Fischer, York University
the interactions of avid fans of the 
reality television series, America’s 
Next Top Model. We followed their 
posts to multiple online forums,  
such as Television Without Pity and  
Fans of Reality Television, over a  
10-year period, starting from the 
show’s launch in 2003, through 
its popularity peak in 2008–2009, 
through to 2012 by which time its 
audience had fallen so low that 
rumors of its cancellation were 
circulating.40
We wanted to know if avid fans had 
played a role in the dissipation of the 
show’s audience, and we found three 
fan-fuelled processes that played a 
role. First, avid fans “reframed” new 
elements introduced to the show as 
being inconsistent with its founding 
narratives. For example, the show 
initially positioned itself as embodying 
a high fashion narrative and taught 
its audience that high fashion models 
are supposed to have unconventional 
looks, be extremely tall, and 
very thin; only women with such 
characteristics are eligible to do the 
kinds of prestigious modeling work 
reserved for “top models.” When the 
show featured an entire competition 
restricted to petite contestants, fans 
were quick to point out that the high 
fashion narrative was contradicted by 
the show’s inclusion of contestants 
who could never work as top 
models. Second, avid fans “remixed” 
elements introduced to the show 
by its creators. For example, when 
fans were displeased because they 
thought a contestant who was not 
the most qualified won a competition 
owing to favoritism exhibited by the 
show’s creator, Tyra Banks, they 
created and circulated widely both 
texts and images that drew from 
materials produced by the show, but 
that parodied the ANTM brand. The 
parodies were clever, and some drew 
the attention of mainstream media, 
which publicized them widely. Third, 
avid fans “rejected” new elements of 
the show as being inferior to those 
they replaced. For example, fans 
loudly complained that the people 
who replaced long-time cast members 
Nigel Barker, J. Alexander, and Jay 
Manuel when each was fired in 2012 
knew less about the fashion industry 
and lacked professional credibility. 
Their complaints were widely 
disseminated by mainstream media. 
Our study shows that avid brand 
fans—especially those who remain 
active participants in its community—
can play a role in undermining the 
very brand they love.
Marketers can’t control what 
happens once consumers start 
interacting with one another, and 
unforeseen consequences are 
likely. Discouraging consumers from 
sharing their passions with others 
seems unrealistic. Paying close 
attention may afford marketers a 
chance to see what’s unfolding  
and to take appropriate  
action.
You know that being involved 
in a brand community can create 
value for customers. But do you 
think that means the actions that 
consumers who are members of 
those communities are invariably 
beneficial for brands? Do you expect 
that marketers in a product category 
will routinely benefit when consumers 
come together to share their 
knowledge and opinions about those 
products? Research is beginning 
to show that there can be many 
unanticipated consequences when 
consumers who care passionately 
about brands or products start 
interacting with one another  
online.
My colleague Marie-Agnès 
Parmentier and I recently examined 
about it. Talking gives the consumer an opportunity to generate supporting arguments for 
the purchase and to garner support for this decision from others. For example, the stron-
gest predictor of a person’s intention to buy a residential solar water heating system is the 
number of solar heat users the person knows.47
Numerous professionals, such as doctors, accountants, and lawyers, as well as ser-
vices marketers like lawn-care companies and cleaning services, depend primarily on 
WOM to generate business. In many cases, consumers recommend a service provider to 

424 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
a friend or coworker, and in other cases businesspeople make recommendations to their 
customers. For example, only 0.2 percent of respondents in one study reported that they 
choose a physician based on advertising. Instead, they rely primarily on advice from family 
and friends.48
buzz building
In the “old days,” here’s how a toy company would launch a new product: Unveil a hot 
holiday toy during a spring trade fair, run a November–December saturation television 
ad campaign during cartoon prime time to plug the toy during Christmas season, sit back 
and watch as desperate parents scrambled through the aisles at Toys “R” Us, and then wait 
for the resulting media coverage to drive still more sales.
Fast forward to a more recent toy story: A Hong Kong company called Silverlit 
Toys makes the $30 Picoo Z helicopter. At one point a Google search for the term Picoo 
produced more than 109,000 URLs, with many of those links pointed to major online 
global gift retailers like Hammacher Schlemmer and Toys “R” Us. Do you think this 
huge exposure was the result of a meticulously planned promotional strategy? Think 
again. By most accounts, a 28-year-old tech worker in Chicago started the Picoo Z 
buzz; he bought his helicopter after he read about it on a hobbyist message board. A few 
months later, he uploaded his homemade video of the toy on YouTube. Within 2 weeks, 
15 of his friends had also bought the toy, and they in turn posted their own videos and 
pointed viewers to the original video. Internet retailers who troll online conversations 
This Israeli ad illustrates how “facts” often 
mutate when people repeat them.
Source: Gitam BBDO, Tel Aviv; Karmel Abuzlaf, 
Guy Bar, Shani Gershi; Eitan Cohen; Arnon Rotem; 
Miriam Moshinksy.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
425 
for fresh and exciting buzz identified the toy and started to add their own links to the 
clips. Within a few short months, there were hundreds of Picoo Z videos and more than 
a million people viewed them.49 The moral of the story: Stimulate WOM to build buzz 
around a product or service, then sit back and let your customers do the heavy lifting.
negative WOM
We know that WOM is a powerful weapon; unfortunately it’s a two-edged sword that cuts 
both ways for marketers. Informal discussions among consumers can make or break a 
product or store. Furthermore, consumers weigh negative word-of-mouth more heav-
ily than they do positive comments. Especially when we consider a new product or service, 
we’re likely to pay more attention to negative information than to positive information 
and to tell others about our nasty experience.50 Research shows that negative WOM 
reduces the credibility of a firm’s advertising and influences consumers’ attitudes toward 
a product as well as their intention to buy it.51 Dell found this out the hard way when blog-
gers denounced the computer maker’s quality and service levels; then the popular media 
picked up this discontent and magnified it.52
As we transmit information to one another, it tends to change. The resulting message 
usually does not resemble the original at all. The British psychologist Frederic Bartlett used 
the method of serial reproduction to examine how content mutates. Like the game of 
“Telephone” many of us played as kids, he asked a subject to reproduce a stimulus, such 
as a drawing or a story. He then gave another subject this reproduction and asked him 
to copy it, and repeated this process several times. Figure 11.2 illustrates how a message 
Original Drawing
Figure 11.2 THE TRANSMISSION OF MISINFORMATION

426 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
changes as people reproduce it. Bartlett found that distortions almost inevitably follow a 
pattern: They tend to change from ambiguous forms to more conventional ones as sub-
jects try to make them consistent with their preexisting schemas (see Chapter 3). He called 
this process assimilation and he noted that it often occurs as people engage in  leveling, 
when they omit details to simplify the structure; or sharpening, when they exaggerate 
prominent details.
Opinion Leadership
As Cold Stone Creamery expands to Japan, the ice cream store 
projects a somewhat different image than it has in the United 
States. The chain wants to be ultracool as it generates a buzz 
among fashion-conscious “office ladies”—as the Japanese call 
young, single, female professionals. These women are influential 
in Japan; their reactions to a new product can make or break it. 
To woo this group, Cold Stone sponsored a fashion show for young women (assuming the 
models can fit into the dresses after sampling a few of the chain’s caloric creations), and 
fashion magazines staged photo shoots at the stores.53
Although consumers get information from personal sources, they do not usually ask 
just anyone for advice about purchases. If you decide to buy a new stereo, you will most 
likely seek advice from a friend who knows a lot about sound systems. This friend may 
own a sophisticated system, or she may subscribe to specialized magazines such as Stereo 
Review and spend her free time browsing through electronics stores. However, you may 
have another friend who has a reputation for being stylish and who spends his free time 
reading Gentleman’s Quarterly and shopping at trendy boutiques. You might not bring 
up your stereo problem with him, but you may take him with you to shop for a new fall 
wardrobe.
Everyone knows people who are knowledgeable about products and whose advice 
others take seriously. These individuals, or opinion leaders, are frequently able to influ-
ence others’ attitudes or behaviors.54 Clearly, some people’s recommendations carry more 
weight than others. Opinion leaders are extremely valuable information sources because 
they possess the social power we discussed earlier in the chapter:
●
●They are technically competent, so they possess expert power.55
●
●They prescreen, evaluate, and synthesize product information in an unbiased way, so 
they possess knowledge power.56
●
●They are socially active and highly interconnected in their communities.57
●
●They are likely to hold offices in community groups and clubs and to be active outside 
of the home. As a result, opinion leaders often wield legitimate power by virtue of their 
social standing.
●
●They tend to be similar to the consumer in terms of their values and beliefs, so they 
possess referent power. Note that although opinion leaders are set apart by their 
interest or expertise in a product category, they are more convincing to the extent 
that they are homophilous rather than heterophilous. Homophily refers to the degree 
to which a pair of individuals is similar in terms of education, social status, and be-
liefs.58 Effective opinion leaders tend to be slightly higher in terms of status and edu-
cational attainment than those they influence, but not so high as to be in a different 
social class.
●
●Opinion leaders are often among the first to buy new products, so they absorb much 
of the risk. This experience reduces uncertainty for the rest of us who are not as cou-
rageous. Furthermore, whereas company-sponsored communications tend to focus 
exclusively on the positive aspects of a product, the hands-on experience of opinion 
leaders makes them more likely to impart both positive and negative information 
about product performance. Thus, they are more credible because they have no “axe 
to grind.”
ObjeCtIve 11-3 
Opinion leaders’ 
recommendations are 
more influential than 
others’ when we decide 
what to buy.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
427 
how Influential Is an Opinion Leader?
Ford’s prelaunch campaign for its crossover SUV Flex model aimed to get buzz going as it 
gave opinion leaders an exclusive look at the new car. In five cities, the company invited 
radio deejays, musicians, and other creative people to take a tour of the Flex. These influen-
tials went on an urban odyssey as fleets of the vehicles took them to art galleries, nightclubs, 
and other hot spots. In a separate campaign to plug its Fiesta model, the carmaker selected 
100 young people who got free use of a car for 6 months in return for blogging about it.59
When social scientists initially developed the concept of the opinion leader, they 
assumed that certain influential people in a community would exert an overall impact on 
group members’ attitudes. Later work, however, questioned the assumption that there is 
such a thing as a generalized opinion leader whose recommendations we seek for all types of 
purchases. Few people are capable of being expert in a number of fields (even though they 
may believe otherwise). Sociologists distinguish between those who are monomorphic, or 
expert in a limited field, and those who are polymorphic, or expert in several fields.60 Even 
opinion leaders who are polymorphic, however, tend to concentrate on one broad domain, 
such as electronics or fashion. For example, Mediamark Research & Intelligence estimates 
that 10.5 percent of the U.S. adult population, whom it labels “Big Circle Influentials,” are 
the key influencers for personal finance decisions.61
A reexamination of the traditional perspective on opinion leadership reveals that the 
process isn’t as clear-cut as some researchers thought.62 The original framework is called the 
two-step flow model of influence It proposes that a small group of influencers dissemi-
nates information because they can modify the opinions of a large number of other people.
When the authors ran extensive computer simulations of this process, they found 
that the influence is driven less by influentials and more by the interaction among those 
who are easily influenced; they communicate the information vigorously to one another 
and they also participate in a two-way dialogue with the opinion leader as part of an 
influence network These conversations create information cascades that occur 
when a piece of information triggers a sequence of interactions (much like an ava-
lanche). One study tracked, on an hourly basis, the rate at which 50 million Facebook 
users installed 2,700 apps. The researchers found clear evidence of an information 
cascade: Once an app was installed about 55 times in one day, its popularity took off. 
As Facebook friends got notified when someone installed the app, this feedback in turn 
prompted them to do it as well.63
types of Opinion Leaders
We’ve seen that early conceptions of the opinion leader role assumed a static, one-way 
process: The opinion leader absorbs information from the mass media and in turn trans-
mits data to opinion receivers. This view also confuses the functions of several different 
types of consumers.
Opinion leaders may or may not be purchasers of the products they recommend. 
Early purchasers also tend to be innovators; they like to take risks and try new things. 
Researchers call opinion leaders who also are early purchasers innovative communicators. 
One study identified characteristics of college men who were innovative communicators 
for fashion products. These men were among the first to buy new fashions, and other stu-
dents were likely to follow their lead when they made their own purchases. Other charac-
teristics of the men included the following:65
●
●They were socially active.
●
●They were appearance conscious and narcissistic (i.e., they were quite fond of them-
selves and self-centered).
●
●They were involved in rock culture.
●
●They were heavy readers of magazines like Playboy and Sports Illustrated.
●
●They were likely to own more clothing, and a broader range of styles, than other 
students.
It’s not unusual for us to 
observe herding behav-
ior among consumers as 
they blindly mimic what 
others in their group do. 
Information cascades can bias what people 
choose as they take their cues from what 
others select rather than choosing what they 
genuinely like. In a study that looked at how 
an individual’s music preferences depend on 
knowing what other people choose, test sub-
jects listened to 72 songs by new bands. A 
control group made their own individual judg-
ments about which songs to select, but in 
other groups the participants could see how 
many people downloaded particular songs. 
This feedback made a huge difference in what 
people chose. For example if a song spiked 
early in the study and respondents could see 
a lot of people chose it, many more people 
jumped on the bandwagon and downloaded 
it as well. And it turns out these cascades 
occurred regardless of whether or not people 
genuinely liked the songs: The same thing 
happened when the subjects were given false 
information about which songs a lot of other 
people were downloading.64 Round up the 
herd!
  the tangled Web

428 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Opinion leaders also are likely to be opinion seekers. They are generally more involved 
in a product category and so they actively search for information. As a result, they are 
more likely to talk about products with others and to solicit others’ opinions as well.66 
Contrary to the older, static view of opinion leadership, most product-related conversation 
does not take place in a “lecture” format where one person does all the talking. A lot of 
product-related conversation occurs in the context of a casual interaction rather than as 
formal instruction.67
the Market Maven
To publicize Clinical Therapy, a lotion brand from Vaseline, the company’s advertising 
campaign mapped the social network of Kodiak, a small town in Alaska. Company reps 
took over a storefront and gave away free bottles of the product. In return, the recipients 
had to identify the person in town who recommended Clinical Therapy to them. Through 
this process they found a woman whom many of the townspeople named as their source.68
The Alaskan woman Vaseline found (no, she isn’t former Governor Sarah Palin) is 
a market maven; she is a person who likes to transmit marketplace information of all 
types. These shopaholics are not necessarily interested in the products they recommend; 
they simply enjoy staying on top of what’s happening in the marketplace. They come 
closer to the function of a generalized opinion leader because they tend to have a solid 
overall knowledge of how and where to procure products. They’re also more confident in 
their own ability to make smart purchase decisions.
the Surrogate Consumer
In addition to everyday consumers who influence others’ purchase decisions, a class of 
marketing intermediary we call the surrogate consumer often guides what we buy. This 
term refers to a third party we retain to provide input into our purchase decisions. Unlike 
the opinion leader or market maven, we usually compensate the surrogate for his or her 
advice. Interior decorators, stockbrokers, professional shoppers, and college admissions 
consultants are surrogate consumers.
Regardless of whether they actually make the purchase on behalf of the consumer, sur-
rogate consumers can be enormously influential. The client essentially relinquishes control 
over several or all decision-making functions, such as information search, the evaluation 
of alternatives, or the actual purchase. For example, a client may commission an interior 
decorator to redo her house, and we may entrust a broker to make crucial buy/sell decisions 
on our behalf. Marketers tend to overlook surrogates when they try to convince consumers 
to buy their goods or services. This can be a big mistake, because they may mistarget their 
communications to end consumers when they should focus on the surrogates who actually 
sift through product information and recommend a purchase to their clients.69
how Do We Find Opinion Leaders?
When PepsiCo launched its Sierra Mist Ruby Splash flavor, the company hired a firm to 
identify local people in different cities who could help it recruit a select group of “influenc-
ers.” The requirements were specific: Influencers had to love lemon-lime beverages, be ages 
18 to 34, and be musicians, skateboard shop owners, people who love to throw backyard 
barbeques, or others who had laid-back lifestyles and who were well-known in their com-
munities. One influencer, for example, was a musician who hosted a backyard jam session 
for 20 friends; before the event, a crew dropped off ice-cold cans of the soft drink as well as 
branded sunglasses, misters, and car fresheners with a Ruby Splash scent. Another opin-
ion leader owned a skateboard store; he hosted an outdoor movie night to debut a new 
surf film. In all, the company sponsored more than 300 of these mini-events in a 2-month 
period. Nice job if you can get it.70
Unfortunately, because most opinion leaders are everyday consumers rather than 
celebrities, they are harder to find. A celebrity or an influential industry executive is by 
definition easy to locate. That person has national or at least regional visibility or has a list-
ing in published directories or on social media. In contrast, opinion leaders tend to operate 

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
429 
at the local level and they may influence only a small group of consumers rather than an 
entire market segment.
Self-Designation
The most commonly used technique to identify opinion leaders is simply to ask individual 
consumers whether they consider themselves to be opinion leaders. Figure 11.3 shows one 
of the measurement scales researchers use for this kind of self-designation.
PepsiCo recruited “influencers” to spread 
the word when it launched a new Sierra Mist 
flavor.
Source: Paul Sakuma/AP Images.
5
4
3
2
very often
1
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
5
4
3
2
1
never
Please rate yourself on the following scales relating to your interactions with friends and neighbors regarding _______. 
1. In general, do you talk to your friends and neighbors about __________:
2. When you talk to your friends and neighbors about __________ do you:
give a great deal of information
give very little information
3. During the past six months, how many people have you told about a new _________?
told a number of people
told no one
4. Compared with your circle of friends, how likely are you to be asked about new __________?
very likely to be asked
 not at all likely to be asked
5. In discussion of new __________, which of the following happens most?
you tell your friends about __________
your friends tell you about __________
6. Overall in all of your discussions with friends and neighbors are you:
often used as a source of advice
not used as a source of advice
Figure 11.3 OPINION LEADER SCALE

430 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Although respondents who report a greater degree of interest in a product category 
indeed are more likely to be opinion leaders, we must view the results of surveys that dis-
cover self-designated opinion leaders with some skepticism. Some people have a tendency 
to inflate their own importance and influence, whereas others who really are influential 
might not admit to this quality or be conscious of it if they are.71 The fact that we transmit 
advice about products does not mean other people take that advice.
Sociometry: the Kevin bacon phenomenon
The play Six Degrees of Separation is based on the premise that everyone on the planet 
indirectly knows everyone else—or at least knows people who in turn know them. Indeed, 
social scientists estimate that the average person has 1,500 acquaintances and that five 
to six intermediaries can connect any two people in the United States.72 A popular game 
called Six Degrees of  Kevin Bacon challenges players to link the actor Kevin Bacon 
with other actors in much the same way.73
Sociometric methods trace communication patterns among members of a group. 
These techniques allow researchers to systematically map out the interactions among 
group members. Like the Vaseline campaign in Alaska we described previously, this 
means we interview consumers and find out who they ask for product information. In 
many cases, one or a few people emerge as the “nodes” in a map—and voilá, we’ve found 
our opinion leaders. This method is the most precise, but it is difficult and expensive to 
implement because it involves close study of interaction patterns in small groups. For this 
reason, it’s best to apply a sociometric technique in a closed, self-contained social setting, 
such as in hospitals, in prisons, and on military bases, where members are largely isolated 
from other social networks.
Sociometric techniques don’t just look at who talks (or texts) to whom; they also con-
sider the type of relationships among members of a social network. Tie strength refers to 
the nature of the bond between people. It can range from strong primary (e.g., one’s spouse) 
to weak secondary (e.g., an acquaintance whom one rarely sees). Although strong ties are 
important, weak ties are as well because they perform a bridging function. This type of con-
nection allows a consumer access between subgroups. For example, you might have a regu-
lar group of friends that is a primary reference group (strong ties). If you have an interest 
in tennis, one of these friends might introduce you to a group of people in her dorm who 
play on the tennis team. As a result, you gain access to their valuable expertise through this 
bridging function. This referral process demonstrates the strength of weak ties.
We use sociometric analyses to better understand referral behavior and to locate 
strengths and weaknesses in terms of how one’s reputation flows through a commu-
nity.74 To understand how a network guides what we buy, consider a study researchers 
conducted among women who lived together in a sorority house. They found evidence 
that subgroups, or cliques, within the sorority were likely to share preferences for various 
products. In some cases, the sisters even shared their choices of “private” (i.e., socially 
inconspicuous) products (probably because of shared bathrooms in the sorority house).75
the Social Media revolution
The odds are good that you’ve already accessed social media 
today. If you checked into your Facebook page (of course not dur-
ing class!), fired off a tweet, read a restaurant review on Yelp, or 
maybe even killed off some nasty orcs on World of Warcraft, you’re 
part of the social media revolution that is changing how consumers interact with the 
marketplace and with one another. Many of us love to share details about our lives that 
our parents probably would never discuss in public. Somehow events don’t seem “official” 
until we post them: A change in relationship status on Facebook, a photo of a luscious res-
taurant appetizer on Instagram, a funky necklace pinned onto a Pinterest Board.
Sometimes people define social media in terms of hardware (like Samsung smartphones) 
or software (like Snapchat), but really it’s first and foremost about online community: The 
ObjeCtIve 11-4 
Social media changes 
the way we learn about 
and select products.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
431 
collective participation of members who together build and maintain a site.76 Indeed, many 
of us become so enmeshed in our social networks that we feel the need to check them con-
stantly to be sure we stay on top of what our (online) friends are up to 24/7 (oops, better stop 
reading this chapter and scan your Facebook, Twitter, or Foursquare posts!). Do you know 
anyone like that? Some refer to this compulsion as fear of missing out (FOMO). Certainly 
there are advantages to always feeling connected, but perhaps the downside is a vague feel-
ing of regret or inadequacy that lurks in the background in case we chose not to be some-
where—or even worse, that we weren’t invited in the first place!77
Whether we feel left out or not, it seems clear that our passion for social media exerts 
a big impact on our emotions and experiences during the course of a typical day. Indeed, 
one study even found that people on Twitter tend to follow others who share their mood: 
People who are happy tend to retweet or reply to others who are happy, whereas those who 
are sad or lonely tend to do the same with others who also post negative sentiments.78
Today, it seems that “everyone” is on Face-
book—including parents.
Source: Courtesy of Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A., Inc.

432 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Online Social networks and brand Communities
Let’s take a closer look at the underlying fabric of social media. Each online platform, such 
as Facebook, Pinterest, or Twitter, consists of a social network a set of socially relevant 
nodes connected by one or more relations.79 Nodes are members of the network (e.g., the 
more than 1 billion Facebook users) who are connected to one another. Ties stem from 
affiliations, such as kinship, friendship and affective bonds, shared experiences, and com-
mon hobbies and interests. When we think of community, we tend to think of people, but 
in principle, members of a network can be organizations, articles, countries, departments 
in a company, or any other definable unit. A good example is your university alumni 
association. The association is a community of networked individuals and organizations. 
Social networks are sometimes called social graphs though this term may also refer to a 
diagram of the interconnections of units in a network.
Flows occur between nodes. Flows are exchanges of resources, information, or 
influence among members of the network. On Facebook you share news, updates about 
your life, opinions on your favorite books and movies, photos, videos, and notes. As you 
share content, you create flows from among those in your network. In social media, these 
flows of communication go in many directions at any point in time and often on multiple 
platforms—a condition we term media multiplexity. Flows are not simply two-way or 
three-way; they may go through an entire community, a list or group within a network, or 
several individuals independently. For marketers, flows are especially important because 
they are the actionable components of any social network system in terms of the sharing 
of information, delivery of promotional materials, and sources of social influence.
Successful online communities possess several important characteristics:
●
●Standards of  behavior: Rules that specify what members can and can’t do on the 
site. Some of these rules are spelled out explicitly (e.g., if you buy an item on eBay, you 
agree that you have entered into a legal contract to pay for it), but many of them are 
unspoken. A simple example is discouragement of the practice of flaming when a 
POST CONTAINS ALL CAPITAL LETTERS TO EXPRESS ANGER.
●
●Member contributions: A healthy proportion of users need to contribute content. If 
not, the site will fail to offer fresh material and ultimately traffic will slow. Participation 
can be a challenge, though. Remember the 80/20 rule we discussed way back in 
Chapter 1? It applies to online consumption as well. The fact is that most members 
of an online community are lurkers. That’s kind of a creepy term, but it just means 
they absorb content that others post rather than contributing their own. Researchers 
estimate that only 1 percent of a typical community’s users regularly participate, and 
another nine percent do so only intermittently. The remaining 90 percent just observe 
what’s on the site. Although they don’t contribute content, they do offer value to ad-
vertisers that simply want to reach large numbers of people.
But what happens when we want to engage consumers more actively? How can a 
site convert lurkers into active users? The easier it is to participate, the more likely it is 
that the community can generate activity among a larger proportion of visitors. In part, 
this means ensuring that there are several ways to participate that vary in ease of use. 
Facebook is an example of an online community that has figured out how to offer several 
forms of participation. Members can post status updates (easy), make comments, upload 
pictures, share notes and links, play social games, answer quizzes, decorate their profiles, 
upload videos, and create events (a bit harder), among other forms of participation.
●
●Degree of  connectedness: Powerful groups are cohesive; this means the members 
identify strongly with them and are highly motivated to stay connected. Online groups 
may be even more cohesive than physical groups, even though many of the members 
will never meet one another in person. For example, compared to the “six degrees of 
separation” norm we discussed, researchers estimate that Facebook’s members on 
average have only four degrees of separation from each other. Although some users 
have designated only one friend and others have thousands, the median is about 100 
friends. The researchers found that most pairs of Facebook users could be connected 

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
433 
through four intermediate users, and this number shrank to three within a single 
country.80 Because many of us devote so much time and energy to our online group 
relationships, connectedness also reflects our real world relationships (it’s common for 
people to learn that their partner has broken up with them only after they see a change 
in “relationship status” on Facebook!). One study that analyzed 1.3 million Facebook 
users and about 8.6 billion links among them reported that couples who are in a rela-
tionship are more likely to stay together if they share a lot of mutual Facebook friends, 
and they’re more likely to break up within a few months if this indicator dips sharply 
because it implies their social lives aren’t overlapping much.81
●
●Network effects The quality of the site improves as the number of users increases. 
For example, Amazon’s ability to recommend books to you based on what other people 
with similar interests buy gets better as it tracks more and more people who enter 
search queries.
Social Games
A social game is a multiplayer, competitive, goal-oriented activity with defined rules of 
engagement and online connectivity among a community of players. Successful mobile 
games such as Candy Crush and Angry Birds boast millions of avid followers.82 These appli-
cations usually incorporate one or more elements of game design, such as leaderboards 
that indicate how each player is doing relative to others in the game and badges that 
show the community the challenges the player has mastered so far.
All Friends
One-way Communication
Mutual Communication
Maintained Relationships
A graphical representation of one person’s 
network neighborhood on Facebook.
Source: Courtesy of Dr. Cameron Marlow, Stanford 
University.

434 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Social games are built on several layers, including platform, mode, milieu, and 
genre.83 Let’s briefly review the basic dimensions of social games:
●
●A game platform refers to the hardware systems on which the game is played. 
Platforms include game consoles (consoles are interactive, electronic devices used 
to display video games, such as Sony’s PlayStation3, Microsoft’s Xbox 360, and 
Nintendo’s Wii), computers (including both online games and those that require soft-
ware installation on the player’s computer hard drive), and portable devices that may 
include smartphones or devices specifically for game play such as the Sony PSP or 
Nintendo DS.84
●
●Mode refers to the way players experience the game world. It includes aspects such as 
whether a player’s activities are highly structured, whether the game is single-player 
or multiplayer, whether the game is played in close physical proximity to other players 
(or by virtual proximity), and whether the game is real-time or turn-based.
●
●Milieu describes the visual nature of the game, such as science fiction, fantasy, horror, 
and retro.
●
●The genre of a game refers to the method of play. Popular genres include simulation, 
action, and role-playing. Simulation games depict real-world situations as accurately as 
possible. There are several subgenres, including racing simulators, flight simulators, 
and “Sim” games that enable players to simulate the development of an environment. 
Among social games, simulations include the highly popular FarmVille, Pet Resort, and 
FishVille. Action games consist of two major subgenres: first-person shooters (FPS), 
where you “see” the game as your avatar sees it, and third-person games. In role-play-
ing games (RPGs), the players play a character role with the goal of completing some 
mission. Perhaps the best-known RPG started its life as a tabletop game: Dungeons and 
Dragons. Players adopt the identity of a character in the game story and go about com-
pleting tasks and collecting points and items as they strive to accomplish the intended 
goal.
Digital Word-of-Mouth
Viral marketing occurs when an organization motivates visitors to forward online con-
tent to their friends; the message quickly spreads much like a cold virus moves among resi-
dents of a dorm. It usually takes off when the online content is entertaining or just plain 
weird. This strategy stirred up a huge amount of interest in “lap giraffes,” for example. 
Source: Bloomberg/Getty Images.
  net profit
MMOrpGs—massive 
mul-
tiplayer online role-playing 
games—truly encompass the 
social aspects of gaming. 
World of Warcraft is one of 
the largest MMORPGs with millions of players 
from around the world; other popular ones in-
clude Haven and The Sims.85 The money peo-
ple spend in virtual worlds like these grows 
rapidly. Indeed, digital virtual consumption 
(DvC) may well be the next frontier of mar-
keting. Today in the United States alone, 
consumers spend well more than $2 billion 
per year (yes, billion) to buy virtual goods 
for their online characters.86 Thousands of 
in-world residents design, create, and pur-
chase clothing, furniture, houses, vehicles, 
and other products their avatars need, and 
many do it in style as they acquire the kind 
of “bling” they can only dream about in real 
life. Some forward-thinking marketers under-
stand that these platforms are the next stage 
they can use to introduce their products into 
people’s lives, whether real or virtual. Today, 
for example, people who play The Sims can 
import actual pieces of furniture from IKEA 
into their virtual homes.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
435 
Thousands of people started to look for these cuddly pets after an online message circu-
lated about them. One hitch: There is no such thing as a lap giraffe. The scam was part of 
a marketing campaign for the cable provider DirecTV. More than half a million people put 
their names on a waiting list to receive one of the tiny animals. Presumably they’re still 
waiting to get their new pets delivered.87
There’s no doubt many of us love to share the news with others; news about new 
styles, new music, and especially new stuff that we’ve bought. Of course we do this in 
the form of online reviews in forums like Yelp or TripAdvisor. However the urge to share 
even creates new genres of communication such as haul videos that feature a proud 
fashionista describing clothing items she just bought, and unboxing videos that illustrate 
in painstaking detail exactly how to remove electronics products from their boxes and 
assemble them for use (if you don’t believe it, Google these terms!).
Twitter has emerged as a powerful social 
network, as this Australian ad reminds us.
Source: Courtesy of STIHL Pty Ltd.

436 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
The viral marketing explosion highlights the power of the Megaphone Effect. Web 
2.0 makes a huge audience available to everyday consumers. Some fashion bloggers build 
an impressive following as they share their views about what’s hot and what’s not. For 
example, more than 30,000 people read this post:
Found the perfect gray socks while shopping at Uniqlo in Tokyo with my mom/favorite shopping 
partner (she’s always down to stop randomly to eat and shares my love for finding wearable 
things in unlikely places). Vaguely sheer and just the right length. This sounds extremely trivial, 
and sort of is, but I’ve been looking for something like them forever now.88
Researchers report that written communication about brands is more likely to include 
mentions of interesting or unusual brands, and the motivation to post about these items 
is driven to a greater extent by the desire for self-enhancement. When people share their 
opinions about products with their social networks, they may do so to satisfy one of 
several goals: To manage the impression they make on others, to regulate emotions by 
expressing affective reactions, to share and acquire information, to bond with others, and 
to persuade others to change their opinions.89
Unlike a spontaneous conversation in the physical world, when consumers write 
about products they have more time to think strategically about what they’re saying—and 
Cb aS I See It
Jonah Berger, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Further, interpersonal 
communication has a big impact 
on consumer behavior. Think about 
the last book you read or movie you 
watched. Chances are you heard about 
it from someone else. Indeed, WOM 
generates more than twice the sales 
of paid advertising.
As a result, companies and 
organizations are making WOM a 
big part of their marketing strategy. 
They’re trying to create viral videos and 
starting accounts on every new social 
media property they can find.
But in all this hype around the 
newest technology, people have 
forgotten about something much more 
important: the psychology. Why does 
some content go viral while other stuff 
collects only a couple views? Why 
do some products get lots of WOM, 
whereas others are barely discussed? 
And how by understanding this 
science, can people get their product, 
ideas, and behaviors to become 
popular?
It turns out that six key factors drive 
much of what people talk about and 
share. In Contagious: Why Things Catch 
On, I put them in an acronym called 
S.T.E.P. P. S. That stands for Social 
Currency, Triggers, Emotion, Public, 
Practical Value, and Stories. Each of 
these is a psychological principle that 
drives people to share all sorts of 
news, stories, and information.
Take Emotion. We analyzed 3 
months of New York Times articles, 
almost 7,000 piece of content, to look 
at what made the most emailed list. 
Examining everything from world news 
and politics to sports and style we 
looked at which articles were highly 
shared and why. In general, we found 
that articles that evoked more emotion 
were more likely to be shared. The 
more people care, the more they share.
Further, more positive content was 
more likely to make the most emailed 
list. Sharing positive things puts 
others in a better mood, and reflects 
better on the sender. Most people 
want to be seen as Positive Pollys 
rather than Negative Nellys.
Even beyond valence though, the 
specific type of emotion articles 
evoked also mattered. Articles that 
evoked more high arousal emotions, 
like anger, anxiety, and inspiration 
were 21 to 34 percent more likely to 
go viral. Emotions that activate us can 
drive us to pass things on.
Why do some things go viral? And 
why do some products and brands get 
more WOM than others?
It’s clear that WOM is both 
frequent and important. People share 
all sorts of opinions, news, and 
information with their friends and 
colleagues. There are more than 500 
million tweets and greater than 100 
billion emails sent every day. In fact, 
you probably received an email, text, 
or social media update from someone 
while you were reading this sentence.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
437 
about how these judgments reflect on them.90 Indeed, much of what we post is actually 
about ourselves; one study reported that 80 percent of tweets people send focus on them-
selves rather than other topics.91
A study that analyzed Twitter data illustrates the care people take to portray them-
selves in a positive light, but to avoid acting like they’re bragging when they tweet about 
products they’ve bought or experienced. When the researchers looked at posts regarding 
two luxury brands—Louis Vuitton and Mercedes—they found that people commonly 
mention these items “in passing” as they comment on what they’re doing or feeling at the 
moment, or even try to downplay the brand’s positive characteristics to avoid looking too 
snobbish.92
Other researchers identified a somewhat similar phenomenon they call the 
Dispreferred Marker Effect. Online posts that are really negative may make the 
writer look harsh and judgmental, so people sometimes soften them by couching them 
in dispreferred markers, including phrases such as, “I’ll be honest,” “God bless it,” or 
“I don’t want to be mean, but …” Sure enough, readers of these kinds of posts evaluated 
the writer more positively than they did posters who just laid out the bad news, warts 
and all.93
Digital Opinion Leaders
Quick, what’s your Klout Score? Klout claims to precisely measure just how influential 
each of us is in cyberspace. The site assesses more than 12 billion pieces of data every day 
to compute a score from 0 to 100 for anyone who is online. Several indicators go into this 
number, including the ratio of comments or retweets a person generates compared to the 
amount of content he or she posts as well as the relative influence of the people who share 
this content. Not surprisingly celebrities including Justin Bieber and Zooey Deschanel boast 
high Klout scores, but plenty of influential people in other walks of life do too. Now Klout 
for Business allows brands to identify consumers with high scores so they can try to enlist 
them in spreading digital WOM about their brands. The matchmaking service Tawkify 
uses Klout scores as well, to pair people up for dates. One of the company’s executives 
observed, “We’ve found that Klout scores are an authentic measurement of sophistication, 
Klout scores measure how influential people 
are in online social networks.
Source: Courtesy of Klout, Inc.

438 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
wit, cultural savvy and appeal—a much truer and more trustworthy measurement than 
the typical online dating site bull-hockey-factors of height, weight and income.”94
Previously we saw that opinion leaders are people who are more influential than most 
when they recommend purchases to others. In online groups, opinion leaders sometimes are 
called power users. They have a strong communications network that gives them the abil-
ity to affect purchase decisions for a number of other consumers, directly and indirectly.95
Much like their offline counterparts, power users are active participants at work 
and in their communities. Their social networks are large and well developed. Others 
trust them and find them to be credible sources of information about one or more 
specific topics. They tend to have a natural sense of intellectual curiosity, which may 
lead them to new sources of information. And they post an awful lot of brand-related 
content: Forrester Research has dubbed these brand-specific mentions influence 
impressions. In advertising lingo, an impression refers to a view or an exposure to an 
advertising message. Forrester estimates that, each year, U.S. consumers generate 256 
billion influence impressions as people talk about their lives with each other, telling sto-
ries and experiences that invariably include brands.96 These influence impressions are 
primarily delivered by—you guessed it—power users: Only 6.2 percent of social media 
users are responsible for about 80 percent of these brand mentions. Forrester calls 
these influencers mass connectors.
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions in the 
MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available in MyLab 
Marketing.
1. Other people and groups, especially those that possess 
social power, influence our decisions.
We belong to or admire many different groups, and a 
desire for them to accept us often drives our purchase 
decisions. Individuals or groups whose opinions or behav-
ior are particularly important to consumers are reference 
groups. Both formal and informal groups influence the 
individual’s purchase decisions, although such factors as 
the conspicuousness of the product and the relevance of 
the reference group for a particular purchase determine 
how influential the reference group is.
Individuals have influence in a group to the extent 
that they possess social power. Types of social power in-
clude information power, referent power, legitimate power, 
expert power, reward power, and coercive power.
Brand communities unite consumers who share a 
common passion for a product. Brandfests, which compa-
nies organize to encourage this kind of community, can 
build brand loyalty and reinforce group membership.
We conform to the desires of others for two basic rea-
sons: (1) People who model their behavior after others be-
cause they take others’ behavior as evidence of the correct 
way to act are conforming because of informational social 
influence; and (2) those who conform to satisfy the expecta-
tions of others or to be accepted by the group are affected by 
ChaptEr Summary
normative social influence. Group members often do things 
they would not do as individuals because their identities be-
come merged with the group; they become deindividuated.
2. Word-of-mouth communication is the most important 
driver of product choice.
Much of what we know about products we learn through 
word-of-mouth (WOM) communication rather than formal 
advertising. We tend to exchange product-related informa-
tion in casual conversations. Although WOM often is help-
ful to make consumers aware of products, it can also hurt 
companies when damaging product rumors or negative 
WOM occur.
3. Opinion leaders’ recommendations are more influential 
than others when we decide what to buy.
Opinion leaders who are knowledgeable about a product 
and whose opinions are highly regarded tend to influence 
others’ choices. Specific opinion leaders are somewhat 
hard to identify, but marketers who know their general 
characteristics can try to target them in their media and 
promotional strategies. Other influencers include market 
mavens, who have a general interest in marketplace activi-
ties; and surrogate consumers, who are compensated for 
their advice about purchases.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
439 
Antibrand communities, 417
Aspirational reference group, 417
Avoidance groups, 418
Badges, 433
Brand community, 420
Brandfests, 420
Buzz, 425
Coercive power, 416
Collective value creation, 421
Conformity, 418
Deindividuation, 419
Digital virtual consumption (DVC), 434
Dispreferred Marker Effect, 437
Expert power, 416
Flaming, 432
Flows, 432
Fear of Missing Out (FOMO), 431
Game platform, 434
Genre, 434
Gyges Effect, 419
Haul videos, 435
Homophily, 426
Influence impressions, 438
Influence network, 427
Information cascades, 427
Information power, 416
Internet trolls, 419
Leaderboards, 433
Legitimate power, 416
Lurkers, 432
Market maven, 428
Mass connectors, 438
Media multiplexity, 432
Megaphone Effect, 436
Membership reference group, 417
Milieu, 434
Minimal group paradigm, 395
MMORPGs, 434
Mode, 434
Negative word-of-mouth, 425
Network effects, 433
Nodes, 432
Norms, 418
Online community, 430
Opinion leaders, 426
Power users, 438
Principle of Least Interest, 419
Red Sneakers Effect, 419
Reference group, 416
Referent power, 416
Reward power, 416
Serial reproduction, 425
Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon, 430
Social game, 433
Social graphs, 432
Social loafing, 420
Social identity theory, 415
Social network, 432
Social power, 415
Sociometric methods, 430
Strength of weak ties, 430
Surrogate consumer, 428
Tie strength, 430
Two-Step Flow Model  
of Influence, 427
Unboxing videos, 435
Viral marketing, 434
Virtual goods, 434
Word-of-mouth (WOM), 422
KEy tErmS
4. Social media changes the way we learn about and 
select products.
Social media platforms significantly increase our access 
to others’ opinions about products and services. Virtual 
consumption communities unite those who share a com-
mon passion for products that include apparel, cars, 
music, beer, political candidates, etc. Many social media 
users post content online that satisfies motive for self-
enhancement as well as the desire to share opinions 
and experiences about products and services. Consumers 
may engage with these brands via social games. Viral 
marketing techniques enlist individuals to spread online 
WOM about brands. Online opinion leaders play a pivotal 
role in disseminating influential recommendations and 
product information.
rEviEW
 11-1 What is buzz building, and how does it work?
 11-2 What is meant by homophily?
  11-3 Describe some ways in which marketers use the Internet 
to encourage positive word-of-mouth.
 11-4 Could a marketer create a generalized opinion leader?
 11-5 What is an opinion leader? Give three reasons why they 
are powerful influences on consumers’ opinions.
 11-6 Is there such a thing as a generalized opinion leader? 
Why or why not?
 11-7 What is klout, and how is it measured?
 11-8 How do you find a suitable opinion leader?
 11-9 What is FOMO, and why might it be important?
 11.10 List three types of social power, and give an example of 
each.
  11-11 What is a brand community, and why is it of interest to 
marketers?
 11-12 Define conformity and give an example of it. Name 
three reasons why people conform.
 11-13 How does the Principle of Least Interest relate to your 
success in a romantic relationship?

440 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
 11-14 A recent sociometric study on obesity (similar to the one 
we read about regarding clusters of smokers) provides 
a striking example of how our social networks influ-
ence what we do. The researchers analyzed a sample 
of more than 12,000 people who participated in the 
Framingham Heart Study, which closely documented 
their health from 1971 to 2003. They discovered that 
obesity can spread from person to person, much like 
a virus. The investigators knew who was friends with 
whom, as well as who was a spouse or sibling or neigh-
bor, and they knew how much each person weighed at 
various times over three decades so they could recon-
struct what happened over the years if study partici-
pants became obese. Guess what? When one person 
gains weight, close friends tend to gain weight, too. A 
person’s chances of becoming obese if a close friend 
put on the pounds increased by 57 percent! The friend’s 
influence remained even if he or she lived hundreds of 
miles away. The researchers speculated that the reason 
for this social contagion effect is that when our best buds 
get fat, this alters our perception of normal body weight 
so we aren’t as concerned when we put on a few pounds 
as well.97
How does social contagion work in your life?
 11-15 The Rio Olympics 2016 once again proved that major 
sporting events would struggle to attract the necessary 
finance and backing if it were not for the brands that 
sponsor them.98 Brand owners know that the Olympic 
Games constitute arguably the most effective interna-
tional marketing opportunity in the world.  Olympic 
partners know that their logos and names will reach bil-
lions of viewers in over 200 countries. The revenues that 
are generated the commercial partnerships account for 
over 40 percent of Olympic revenues. Commercial part-
ners also provide much-needed technical and products 
support before, during, and after the games. There are 
various levels of sponsorship that entitle sponsors to 
make use of Olympic images and trademarks. To what 
extent do you agree with the view that the Olympics 
have become a brandfest?
 11-16 McCann Worldgroup manages over 50 brand com-
munity pages with over 4 million fans. None of the 
communication strategies are exactly the same. The 
focus of the efforts is common across the pages: to 
make sure that a fully integrated campaign creates 
and maintains engagement between the brands and 
their consumers. In Malaysia, Facebook has over 
12.5 million users and has become a vital channel 
to create deep and meaningful relationships with 
consumers.99 McCann believes that brands are begin-
ning to realize that they need to invest in social media 
contacts with their customers. Customers are becom-
ing increasingly savvy and empowered, and every 
close brand friend they create can become a brand 
advocate. There is clearly a great deal of persuasion 
still required; a study by Deloitte Digital and MIT Sloan 
Management Review suggests that 80 percent of brand 
owners recognize the importance of social media in 
creating brand communities, but the majority have no 
idea how to measure the effectiveness.  What would 
you advise brand owners to do about social media and 
brand communities? How would you assess the effec-
tiveness of campaigns?
 11-17 SureBzz claims it is the first and leading word-of-mouth 
marketing service in India. The business works by cre-
ating a community of “SureBzzers.” This community is 
then used to spread the word about a brand, product, or 
service to other consumers. SureBzz uses demographic 
and behavioral data points to help identify the right kind 
of person to spread the “buzz” about the brand. Each 
SureBzzer has the opportunity to experience the prod-
uct or service first-hand; this is in order to ensure that 
the “buzz” is genuine. Typically, they are given samples, 
trials, and coupons. SureBzzers are encouraged to share 
their opinions on Facebook, Twitter, blogs, and other 
social media. The SureBzzers submit reports to the com-
pany that are then checked. How is the data used from 
this point?
 11-18 In 2013 in the United Kingdom, Channel 4’s program 
Dispatches featured an investigation into brands buying 
social media interactions. The documentary discovered 
that low-paid workers in Bangladeshi were being used 
as “click farms.” They were employed to create Facebook 
likes, Twitter followers. and multiple YouTube views.100 
The episode resulted in calls for immediate action to stop 
the practice. What action should be taken to prevent 
this?
 11-19 The strategy of viral marketing gets customers to sell a 
product to other customers on behalf of the company. 
That often means convincing your friends to climb on 
the bandwagon, and sometimes you get a cut if they 
buy something.101 Some might argue that that means 
you’re selling out your friends (or at least selling to your 
friends) in exchange for a piece of the action. Others 
might say you’re simply sharing the wealth with your 
buddies. Have you ever passed along names of your 
friends to a company or Web site? If so, what happened? 
How do you feel about this practice?
COnSumEr BEhaviOr ChallEngE
●
■DISCuSS

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
441 
●
■appLy
 11-20 Who are the fashion opinion leaders in your country? How 
do they match up with the desired profile for such leaders?
 11-21 A study on antibranding documented hostility among 
consumers who object to the gas-guzzling Hummer 
vehicle. One driver posted this message: “The H2 is a 
death machine. You’d better hope that you don’t collide 
with an H2 in your economy car. You can kiss your ass 
goodbye thanks to the H2’s massive weight and raised 
bumpers. Too bad you couldn’t afford an urban assault 
vehicle of your own.”102
Identify an antibranding site for another product. 
What functions do the site seem to serve? How can people 
who participate there be considered part of a community?
 11-22 Choose 10 people and ask them about their latest major 
purchase of a product or service. How did they decide that 
they needed that product or service? What made them 
choose the brand? Were they influenced by the views of 
an opinion leader in their decision-making process?
 11-23 List at least 10 of your friends. They can be close friends or 
acquaintances. Try to rank them in terms of their influ-
ence on your purchasing behavior. To what extent are you 
more likely to trust and follow the opinions of your closer 
friends compared to your acquaintances? What types of 
product and service purchases have they influenced?
 11-24 The power of unspoken social norms often becomes obvi-
ous only when we violate them. To witness this result 
firsthand, try one of the following: Stand facing the back 
wall in an elevator, serve dessert before the main course, 
offer to pay cash for dinner at a friend’s home, wear paja-
mas to class, or tell someone not to have a nice day.
 11-25 Identify a set of avoidance groups for your peers. Can 
you identify any consumption decisions that you and 
your friends make with these groups in mind?
 11-26 Several colleges have sponsored “social media detox” 
events. Students at Saint Mary’s College of California were 
challenged to “Disconnect, Power Off and Unplug” in 
order to rediscover “The Lost Art of Solitude;” no  Internet 
for a month! The library at Wake Forest University cre-
ated a “ZieSta Room” where technology is banned.103
Do a “detox” of your own for 48 hours. No cell-
phones. No Facebook. No social media of any kind. Keep 
a diary of your experiences.
consumers. This was an encouraging beginning, but Stokers 
wanted to take it to another level of engagement. Keeping con-
sumers interested in products and encouraging them to return 
to the site was seen as a key objective. After various attempts 
to do just that, Stokers realized that it was the use of humor 
that resulted in a significantly high level of engagement with 
customers.
Research indicates if humor is associated with a product, 
then consumers tend to have a higher consumer preference to-
ward it. Humor can also facilitate positive associations between 
a product and a consumer. A vital element of social media mar-
keting is getting consumers to actively engage, and the addition 
of humor has been consistently found to increase likes on social 
media posts. 
So it should come as no surprise that Stokers soon identi-
fied (through engagement figures) that the humor posts on 
its Facebook page received approximately 500 percent more 
engagement than posts that related to particular products only. 
The number of visitors to the Facebook page also increased by 
75 percent. The increased interaction on the social media sites 
led to an increased activity of approximately 113 percent on 
the Web site. Other measures, like Web optimization, were also 
taken to ensure the Web site uploaded quickly, and this saw a 27 
percent reduction in the bounce rate.
With figures like the above to reflect upon, the company 
made significant changes. The staff at Stokers were given clear 
directions for their daily social media activities. Any negative 
comments are picked up and dealt with straight away.
SOCial mEdia and humOr
Stokers has come a long way since its beginnings in a market 
town in West Lancashire, England, back in 1895, when Alfred 
Stoker started a business selling fabric and millinery. The fur-
niture retail firm grew to a total of 10 stores, and in 2001, 
it initiated its online presence with a Web site. Stokers began 
promoting itself, like many other companies, through Google 
ads in 2008; in 2010, it launched its Facebook page, followed 
by Twitter in 2011. 
And yet—again, like many other companies—Stokers failed 
to recognize the impact of social media; posts on Facebook 
would remain outdated and negative reviews on Facebook were 
left unaddressed, all of which often lead to a negative impression 
of a brand online. Although the idea of having a Facebook page 
had been around for years, what to do with the site had brought 
many companies both confusion and frustration.
Stokers realized that firm changes needed to be made to 
turn the companies’ online consumer experience around. It 
chose to focus on Facebook over Twitter as a first step to pro-
mote its products. Once a firm understanding of using social 
media was established, the company intended to explore other 
relevant social media—Twitter, Pinterest, and Instagram.
To begin, Stokers emulated other companies in using 
Facebook as a means to gather consumer information and in-
crease product exposure. For example, it created competitions 
that required users to leave their details in order to enter a com-
petition, thus creating a new populated database of interested 
●■Case Study 

442 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 11-27 Although social networking is red hot, could its days be numbered? Many people 
have concerns about privacy issues. Others feel that platforms such as Facebook 
are too overwhelming. As one media executive comments, “Nobody has 5,000 
real friends. At the end of the day it just becomes one big cauldron of noise.” 
What’s your stand on this: Can we have too much of a good thing? Will people 
start to tune out all of these networks?104
 11-28 The adoption of a certain brand of shoe or apparel by athletes can be a powerful 
influence on students and other fans. Should high school and college coaches be 
paid to determine what brand of athletic equipment their players wear?
nOtES
W. Schouten and James H. McAlexander, “Subcultures of Consumption: An 
Ethnography of the New Bikers,” Journal of Consumer Research 22 (June 1995): 
43–61. See also Kelly Barron, “Hog Wild,” Forbes (May 15, 2000), http://www 
.forbes.com/forbes/2000/0515/6511068a.html, accessed September 20, 
2013.
 
4. Joel B. Cohen and Ellen Golden, “Informational Social Influence and 
Product Evaluation,” Journal of Applied Psychology 56 (February 1972): 
54–59; Robert E. Burnkrant and Alain Cousineau, “Informational and 
 1. http://freecountry.harley-davidson.com/landing.php, accessed April 11, 
2015.
 
2. http://www.harley-davidson.com/shop/mens-motorcycle-clothes, accessed 
April 11, 2015.
 
3. Details adapted from John W. Schouten and James H. McAlexander, “Market 
Impact of a Consumption Subculture: The Harley-Davidson Mystique,” in 
Fred van Raaij and Gary Bamossy, eds., Proceedings of the 1992 European 
Conference of the Association for Consumer Research (Amsterdam, 1992); John 
It is difficult to quantify a direct sales relation to a particu-
lar element of digital marketing, as it involves a combination of 
many things: email marketing, site optimization, Google Ads, 
and traditional marketing. Yet the numbers are telling—digital 
marketing as a whole led to a significant increase in sales in the 
target segment of garden furniture. In the first year, there was a 
75 percent increase in sales, and in the second year it rose to 200 
percent.
Looking back, the lessons are clear. Social media will not 
work for a company that just has a Facebook page, even if 
it posts regularly. This alone will not necessarily ensure ac-
tive engagement from consumers. Social media posts also 
require constant monitoring and updating from the company 
to avoid becoming stagnant and outdated. Customers need 
a higher level of engagement. However, companies need to 
be mindful of choosing appropriate social media and ensure 
that any humor employed is appropriate for their products 
and services.
Humor in general works well with social media, with 
global brands like Oreo, Skittles, Taco Bell, and Old Spice tak-
ing full advantage of it to connect with consumers. Old Spice, 
for instance, is known to start mock battles with companies 
like Taco Bell, who then respond in the same spirit. Popchips’ 
Facebook page provides consumers with entertaining images 
and funny puns. Nandos also uses humor in its social me-
dia and has received a positive response from its customers. 
Entertaining content is one of the top five reasons people follow 
particular brands or individuals online, and as more companies 
embrace this, it can only lead to better and more engaging cus-
tomer experiences.
diSCuSSiOn QuEStiOnS
CS 11-1 Select and analyze a few online campaigns where 
the humor is used with the product and without the 
product. Are there any differences in the number of 
posts or responses to these? Which method do you 
think works best, using humor alongside the product 
or without the product? Give examples.
CS 11-2 Are there any products where humor is not appropri-
ate? How does this translate in the online world? Give 
examples.
Sources: Stokers, “Our Heritage,” www.stokers.co.uk; Jelena  Ilic, Humour 
on Facebook.  (2012) 2nd International Conference on Foreign Language 
Teaching and Applied Linguistics (FLTAL’12), 4–6 May 2012, Sarajevo; 
A. Malhotra and C.K. Malhotra, “How to Create Brand Engagement on 
Facebook,” MIT Sloan Management Review 54, No. 2, December 18, 2012; 
M. Strick, R. Van Baaren, R. Holland, and A. Van Knippenberg, “Humour in 
Advertisements Enhances Product Liking by Mere Association,” Psychology 
of Popular Media Culture, 1(S), (2011): 16–31; Casey Fleischmann, “How 
Nando’s Uses Social Media [CASE STUDY],” Link Humans, http://linkhu 
mans.com/case-study/nandos, accessed November 27, 2015; Amy Elderkin, 
“How Big Brands Are Using Humour on Social Media (and Why You Should 
Too),” Hootsuite, July 13, 2015, http://blog.hootsuite.com/how-big-brands-
are-using-humour-on-social-media/, accessed November 27, 2015.

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
443 
Normative Social Influence in Buyer Behavior,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 2 (December 1975): 206–215; Peter H. Reingen, “Test of a List 
Procedure for Inducing Compliance with a Request to Donate Money,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 67 (1982): 110–118.
 
5. Henri Tajfel and John C. Turner, “The Social Identity Theory of Intergroup 
Behaviour,” in S. Worchel and W. G. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of Intergroup 
Relations (Chicago, IL: Nelson-Hall, 1986): 7–24.
 
6. Dyan Machan, “Is the Hog Going Soft?,” Forbes (March 10, 1997): 114–119.
 
7. Andrew Adam Newman, “Campaign Redefines Running as a Social Activity,” 
New York Times (July 8, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/09/business/ 
media/campaign-redefines-running-as-a-social-activity.html?_r=3&adxnnl
=1&adxnnlx=1375297677-/ALie05m6JiubQ4oXE4qig, accessed April 11, 
2015.
 
8. Kenneth J. Gergen and Mary Gergen, Social Psychology (New York: Harcourt  
Brace Jovanovich, 1981): 312.
 
9. J. R. P. French, Jr., and B. Raven, “The Bases of Social Power,” in D. 
Cartwright, ed., Studies in Social Power (Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social 
Research, 1959): 150–167.
 10. Michael R. Solomon, “Packaging the Service Provider,” The Service Industries 
Journal 5 (March 1985): 64–72.
 11. Tamar Charry, “Unconventional Spokesmen Talk Up U.S. Robotics’ Fast 
Modems in a New TV Campaign,” New York Times (February 6, 1997), 
http://www.nytimes.com/1997/02/06/business/unconventional-spokes 
men-talk-up-us-robotics-fast-modems-in-a-new-tv-campaign.html?scp= 
44&sq=Tamar+Charry&st=nyt, accessed September 13, 2011.
 12. Patricia M. West and Susan M. Broniarczyk, “Integrating Multiple Opinions: 
The Role of Aspiration Level on Consumer Response to Critic Consensus,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 25 (June 1998): 38–51.
 13. C. Whan Park and V. Parker Lessig, “Students and Housewives: Differences 
in Susceptibility to Reference Group Influence,” Journal of Consumer Research 
4 (September 1977): 102–110.
 14. Gina Kolata, “Study Finds Big Social Factor in Quitting Smoking,” New York 
Times (May 22, 2008), www.nytimes.com/2008/05/22/science/22smoke 
.html?ex=1369195200&en=0a10910fcde1a1ac&ei=5124&partner=per
malink&exprod=permalink, accessed May 22, 2008.
 15. Jeffrey D. Ford and Elwood A. Ellis, “A Re-examination of Group Influence on 
Member Brand Preference,” Journal of Marketing Research 17 (February 1980): 
125–132; Thomas S. Robertson, Innovative Behavior and Communication (New 
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1980), Ch. 8.
 16. Gergen and Gergen, Social Psychology.
 17. http://www.sneakerfiles.com/2011/06/15/air-jordan-xii-12-dwyane-
wade-player-exclusive/, accessed June 15, 2011; Jennifer Edson Escalas 
and James R. Bettman, “You Are What You Eat: The Influence of Reference 
Groups on Consumers’ Connections to Brands,” Journal of Consumer Psycho-
logy 13, no. 3 (2003): 339–348.
 18. A. Benton Cocanougher and Grady D. Bruce, “Socially Distant Reference 
Groups and Consumer Aspirations,” Journal of Marketing Research 8 (August 
1971): 79–81.
 19. Susan B. Barnes, “Fantasy Camps: Get a Taste of a Different Life,” USA 
Today (September 16, 2014), http://experience.usatoday.com/weekend/
story/my-weekend-experience/2014/09/16/fantasy-camps-around-
the-usa/15682941/, accessed April 11, 2015; quoted in Barry Rehfeld, 
“At These Camps, Everybody Is a Star (If Only for a Day),” New York  
Times (June 12, 2005), http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/12/business/ 
yourmoney/12fantasy.html?n=Top%2FReference%2FTimes%20
Topics%2FSubjects%2FM%2FMusic&_r=0, accessed April 11, 2015.
 20. Jonah Berger and Lindsay Rand, “Shifting Signals to Help Health: Using 
Identity Signaling to Reduce Risky Health Behaviors,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 35, no. 3 (2008): 509–518.
 21. Basil G. Englis and Michael R. Solomon, “To Be and Not to Be: Reference 
Group Stereotyping and the Clustering of America,” Journal of Advertising 
24 (Spring 1995): 13–28; Michael R. Solomon and Basil G. Englis, “I Am 
Not, Therefore I Am: The Role of Anti-Consumption in the Process of 
Self-Definition” (special session at the Association for Consumer Research 
meetings, October 1996, Tucson, Arizona); cf. also Brendan Richardson 
and Darach Turley, “Support Your Local Team: Resistance, Subculture and 
the Desire for Distinction,” Advances in Consumer Research 33, no. 1 (2006): 
175–180.
 22. Bruce Feirstein, Real Men Don’t Eat Quiche (New York: Pocket Books, 
1982); www.auntiefashions.com, accessed December 31, 2002; Katherine 
White and Darren W. Dahl, “Are All Out-Groups Created Equal? Consumer 
Identity and Dissociative Influence,” Journal of Consumer Research 34 (Dec-
ember 2007): 525–536.
 23. www.starbucked.com, accessed April 26, 2015; http://www.mcspotlight 
.org/index.shtml, accessed April 26, 2015; http://www.hel-mart.com/
links.php, accessed April 26, 2015.
 24. Candice R. Hollenbeck and George M. Zinkhan, “Consumer Activism on 
the Internet: The Role of Anti-Brand Communities,” Advances in Consumer 
Research 33, no. 1 (2006): 479–485.
 25. Luc Sante, “Be Different! (Like Everyone Else!),” New York Times Magazine 
(October 17, 1999), www.nytimes.com, accessed October 3, 2007.
 26. Quoted in Stephen Marce,”The Epidemic of Facelessness,” New York Times 
(February 14, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/15/opinion/sunday/ 
the-epidemic-of-facelessness.html?ref=opinion&_r=0, accessed February 
24, 2015; “Internet Trolls And The Gyges Effect,” Milinism (August 24, 2013), 
https://milinism.wordpress.com/2013/08/24/internet-trolls-and-the- 
gyges-effect/, accessed February 24, 2015.
 27. Cindy Chan, Jonah Berger and Leaf Van Boven, “Identifiable but Not 
Identical: Combining Social Identity and Uniqueness Motives in Choice,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 3 (October 2012): 561–573.
 28. Silvia Bellezza, Francesca Gino and Anat Keinan, “The Red Sneakers 
Effect: Inferring Status and Competence from Signals of Nonconformity,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 41, no. 1 (2014): 35–54.
 29. For a study that attempted to measure individual differences in procliv-
ity to conformity, see William O. Bearden, Richard G. Netemeyer, and 
Jesse E. Teel, “Measurement of Consumer Susceptibility to Interpersonal 
Influence,” Journal of Consumer Research 15 (March 1989): 473–481.
 30. T. M. Luhrmann, “Wheat People vs. Rice People: Why Are Some Cultures 
More Individualistic Than Others?,” New York Times (December 3, 2014), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/04/opinion/why-are-some-cultures- 
more-individualistic-than-others.html?ref=international, accessed February 
16, 2015.
 31. John W. Thibaut and Harold H. Kelley, The Social Psychology of Groups (New 
York: Wiley, 1959); W. W. Waller and Reuben Hill, The Family, a Dynamic 
Interpretation (New York: Dryden, 1951).
 32. Bearden, Netemeyer, and Teel, “Measurement of Consumer Susceptibility 
to Interpersonal Influence”; Lynn R. Kahle, “Observations: Role-Relaxed 
Consumers: A Trend of the Nineties,” Journal of Advertising Research (March–
April 1995): 66–71; Lynn R. Kahle and Aviv Shoham, “Observations: Role-
Relaxed Consumers: Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Advertising Research 
(May–June 1995): 59–62.
 33. Xun Huang, Meng Zhang, Michael K. Hui, and Robert S. Wyer, Jr., 
“Warmth and Conformity: The Effects of Ambient Temperature on Product 
Preferences and Financial Decisions,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 24, 
no. 2 (2014): 241–250.
 34. B. Latané, K. Williams, and S. Harkins, “Many Hands Make Light the Work: 
The Causes and Consequences of Social Loafing,” Journal of Personality & 
Social Psychology 37 (1979): 822–832.
 35. S. Freeman, M. Walker, R. Borden, and B. Latane, “Diffusion of Responsibility 
and Restaurant Tipping: Cheaper by the Bunch,” Personality & Social Psycho-
logy Bulletin 1 (1978): 584–587.
 36. http://halo.xbox.com/en-us/intel/titles/halo2, accessed June 15, 2011; Kris 
Oser, “Microsoft’s Halo 2 Soars on Viral Push,” Advertising Age (October 25, 
2004): 46.
 37. Quoted in Sheila Shayon, “Teen Girls: Shopping and Texting, Texting and 
Shopping,” Brandchannel (November 26, 2010), http://www.brandchannel 
.com/home/post/2010/11/26/Teen-Girls-Snapshot-Shopping-and-Social-
Media.aspx, accessed February 23, 2011.
 38. Hope Jensen Schau, Albert M. Muñiz, Jr., and Eric J. Arnould, “How Brand 
Community Practices Create Value,” Journal of Marketing 73 (September 
2009), 30–51; John W. Schouten, James H. McAlexander, and Harold F. 
Koenig, “Transcendent Customer Experience and Brand Community,” 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 35 (2007): 357–368; James H. 
McAlexander, John W. Schouten, and Harold F. Koenig, “Building Brand 
Community,” Journal of Marketing 66 (January 2002): 38–54; Albert 
Muñiz and Thomas O’Guinn, “Brand Community,” Journal of Consumer 
Research (March 2001): 412–432; Scott A. Thompson and Rajiv K. Sinha, 
“Brand Communities and New Product Adoption: The Influence and 
Limits of Oppositional Loyalty,” Journal of Marketing 72 (November 2008): 
65–80.
 39. Rama K. Jayanti and Jagdip Singh, “Framework for Distributed Consumer 
Learning in Online Communities,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 6 
(2010): 1058–1081.
 40. Marie-Agnès Parmentier and Eileen Fischer, “Things Fall Apart: The 
Dynamics of Brand Audience Dissipation,” Journal of Consumer Research 41 
(February 2015): 1228–1251.
 41. Pat Wechsler, “A Curiously Strong Campaign,” BusinessWeek (April 21, 1997): 
134.
 42. Johan Arndt, “Role of Product-Related Conversations in the Diffusion of a 
New Product,” Journal of Marketing Research 4 (August 1967): 291–295.
 43. Jacques Bughin, Jonathan Doogan and Ole Jørgen Vetvik, “A New Way to 
Measure Word-Of-Mouth Marketing,” McKinsey Quarterly (April 2010), 
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/marketing_sales/a_new_way_to_
measure_word-of-mouth_marketing, accessed April 26, 2015.
 44. Elihu Katz and Paul F. Lazarsfeld, Personal Influence (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 
1955).
 45. John A. Martilla, “Word-of-Mouth Communication in the Industrial 
Adoption Process,” Journal of Marketing Research 8 (March 1971): 

444 
SeCtIOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Study of Self-fulfilling Prophecies in an Artificial Cultural Market,” Social 
Psychology Quarterly 71, no. 4 (2008): 338–355, http://www.princeton 
.edu/~mjs3/salganik_watts08.pdf, accessed April 11, 2015.
 65. Steven A. Baumgarten, “The Innovative Communicator in the Diffusion 
Process,” Journal of Marketing Research 12 (February 1975): 12–18.
 66. Laura J. Yale and Mary C. Gilly, “Dyadic Perceptions in Personal Source 
Information Search,” Journal of Business Research 32 (1995): 225–237.
 67. Russell W. Belk, “Occurrence of Word-of-Mouth Buyer Behavior as a Function 
of Situation and Advertising Stimuli,” in Fred C. Allvine, ed., Combined 
Proceedings of the American Marketing Association, series no. 33 (Chicago: 
American Marketing Association, 1971): 419–422.
 68. Stephanie Clifford, “Spreading the Word (and the Lotion) in Small-Town 
Alaska,” New York Times (October 8, 2008), www.nytimes.com/2008/10/08/
business/media/09adco.html, accessed October 9, 2008.
 69. Michael R. Solomon, “The Missing Link: Surrogate Consumers in the 
Marketing Chain,” Journal of Marketing 50 (October 1986): 208–218.
 70. Patricia Odell, “Pepsi Uses ‘Influencers’ to Launch a New Product,” PROMO 
(June 18, 2009), www.promomagazine.com, accessed June 18, 2009.
 71. William R. Darden and Fred D. Reynolds, “Predicting Opinion Leadership 
for Men’s Apparel Fashions,” Journal of Marketing Research 1 (August 1972): 
324–328. A modified version of the opinion leadership scale with improved 
reliability and validity appears in Terry L. Childers, “Assessment of the 
Psychometric Properties of an Opinion Leadership Scale,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 23 (May 1986): 184–188.
 72. Dan Seligman, “Me and Monica,” Forbes (March 23, 1998): 76.
 73. http://www.thekevinbacongame.com/, accessed April 11, 2015.
 74. Peter H. Reingen and Jerome B. Kernan, “Analysis of Referral Networks 
in Marketing: Methods and Illustration,” Journal of Marketing Research 23 
(November 1986): 370–378.
 75. Peter H. Reingen, Brian L. Foster, Jacqueline Johnson Brown, and Stephen B. 
Seidman, “Brand Congruence in Interpersonal Relations: A Social Network 
Analysis,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (December 1984): 771–783; see 
also James C. Ward and Peter H. Reingen, “Sociocognitive Analysis of Group 
Decision-Making Among Consumers,” Journal of Consumer Research 17 
(December 1990): 245–262.
 76. Some material in this section is adapted from Tracy Tuten and Michael R. 
Solomon, Social Media Marketing 2nd ed. (London: SAGE, 2015).
 77. Jenna Wortham, “Feel Like a Wallflower? Maybe It’s Your Facebook Wall,” 
New York Times (April 9, 2011), http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/10/
business/10ping.html?_r=0, accessed March 19, 2013; Lizzie Crocker, “Are 
Twentysomethings Too Afraid of Missing Out?” The Daily Beast (November 9,  
2012), http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/11/09/are-twenty 
somethings-too-afraid-of-missing-out.html, accessed March 19, 2013.
 78. Nick Bilton, “Twitter Users Congregate Based on Mood, Study Says,” New York 
Times (March 16, 2011), http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/03/16/twitter-
users-congregate-based-on-mood-study-says/, accessed April 29, 2011.
 79. Alexandra Marin and Barry Wellman, “Social Network Analysis: An 
Introduction,” in Handbook of Social Network Analysis (London: Sage, 2010). 
Chapter 2, 11-25.
 80. “Facebook Users Have Four Degrees of Separation from Each Other!” IBN 
Live, November 23, 2011, http://ibnlive.in.com/news/facebook-its-now-
4-degrees-of-separation/205084-11.html, accessed February 23, 2015.
 81. Steve Lohr, “Researchers Draw Romantic Insights from Maps of Facebook 
Networks,” New York Times (October 28, 2013), http://bits.blogs.nytimes 
.com/2013/10/28/spotting-romantic-relationships-on-facebook/, accessed 
April 11, 2015.
 82. Drew Elliott, “Opportunities for Brands in Social Games,” Ogilvy PR Blog 
(May 2010), http://blog.ogilvypr.com/2010/05/opportunities-for-brands-
in-social-games/, accessed July 12, 2010.
 83. Thomas Apperley, “Genre and Game Studies: Toward a Critical Approach 
to Video Game Genres,” Simulation & Gaming 37, no. 1 (2006): 6–23.
 84. Interactive Advertising Bureau, IAB Game Advertising Platform Status Report, 
http://www.iab.net/media/file/games-reportv4.pdf, accessed May 31, 2011.
 85. Apperley, “Genre and Game Studies: Toward a Critical Approach to Video 
Game Genres.”
 86. Mike Snider, “Virtual Goods Spending Topped $2 Billion in U.S. in 2011,” Game 
Hunters (February 29, 2012), http://content.usatoday.com/communities/
gamehunters/post/2012/02/virtual-goods-spending-topped-2-billion-in-
us-in-2011/1, accessed March 19, 2013; Janice Denegri-Knot and Mike 
Molesworth, “Concepts and Practices of Digital Virtual Consumption,” 
Consumption Markets & Culture 13, no. 2 (2010): 109–132; Natalie T. 
Wood and Michael R. Solomon, “Adonis or Atrocious: Spokesavatars and 
Source Effects in Immersive Digital Environments,” in Matthew S. Eastin, 
Terry Daugherty, and Neal M. Burns, eds., Handbook of Research on Digital 
Media and Advertising: User Generated Content Consumption (Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global, 2011): 521–534.
 87. Michael Waltzer, “Petite Lap Giraffe: A Tiny Viral Marketing Success,” 
Brandchannel (April 5, 2011), http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/ 
2011/04/05/Petite-Lap-Giraffe.aspx, accessed June 15, 2011.
173–178; see also Marsha L. Richins, “Negative Word-of-Mouth by 
Dissatisfied Consumers: A Pilot Study,” Journal of Marketing 47 (Winter 
1983): 68–78.
 46. Arndt, “Role of Product-Related Conversations in the Diffusion of a New 
Product.”
 47. Leonard-Barton, “Experts as Negative Opinion Leaders in the Diffusion of a 
Technological Innovation.”
 48. Nancy Wagner, “Referral Programs as a Marketing Strategy,” AzCentral, 
http://yourbusiness.azcentral.com/referral-programs-marketing-strategy- 
6364.html, accessed April 11, 2015.
 49. http://www.silverlit-flyingclub.com/, accessed April 11, 2015.
 50. Richard J. Lutz, “Changing Brand Attitudes Through Modification of 
Cognitive Structure,” Journal of Consumer Research 1 (March 1975): 49–59.  
For some suggested remedies to bad publicity, see Mitch Griffin, Barry 
J. Babin, and Jill S. Attaway, “An Empirical Investigation of the Impact 
of Negative Public Publicity on Consumer Attitudes and Intentions,” in 
Rebecca H. Holman and Michael R. Solomon, eds., Advances in Consumer 
Research 18 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1991): 334–341; 
Alice M. Tybout, Bobby J. Calder, and Brian Sternthal, “Using Information 
Processing Theory to Design Marketing Strategies,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 18 (1981): 73–79; see also Russell N. Laczniak, Thomas E. DeCarlo, 
and Sridhar N. Ramaswami, “Consumers’ Responses to Negative Word-
of-Mouth Communication: An Attribution Theory Perspective,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology 11, no. 1 (2001): 57–73.
 51. Robert E. Smith and Christine A. Vogt, “The Effects of Integrating Advertising 
and Negative Word-of-Mouth Communications on Message Processing and 
Response,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 4, no. 2 (1995): 133–151; Paula 
Fitzgerald Bone, “Word-of-Mouth Effects on Short-Term and Long-Term 
Product Judgments,” Journal of Business Research 32 (1995): 213–223.
 52. Keith Schneider, “Brands for the Chattering Masses,” New York Times 
(December 17, 2006), www.nytimes.com, accessed October 3, 2007.
 53. Amy Chozick, “Cold Stone Aims to Be Hip in Japan Ice-Cream Chain, Uses Word-
of-Mouth as Part of Bid for an Urban Image,” Wall Street Journal (December 14, 
2006): B10.
 54. Everett M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 3rd ed. (New York: Free Press, 
1983); cf. also Duncan J. Watts and Peter Sheridan Dodds, “Influentials, 
Networks, and Public Opinion Formation,” Journal of Consumer Research 34 
(December 2007): 441–458; Morris B. Holbrook and Michela Addis, “Taste 
Versus the Market: An Extension of Research on the Consumption of Popular 
Culture,” Journal of Consumer Research 34 (October 2007): 415–424.
 55. Dorothy Leonard-Barton, “Experts as Negative Opinion Leaders in the Diffusion 
of a Technological Innovation,” Journal of Consumer Research 11 (March 1985): 
914–926; Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations; cf. also Jan Kratzer and Christopher 
Lettl, “Distinctive Roles of Lead Users and Opinion Leaders in the Social 
Networks of Schoolchildren,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 4 (December 
2009): 646–659.
 56. Herbert Menzel, “Interpersonal and Unplanned Communications: Indis-
p ensable or Obsolete?,” in Edward B. Roberts, ed., Biomedical Innovation 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981), 155–163.
 57. Meera P. Venkatraman, “Opinion Leaders, Adopters, and Communicative 
Adopters: A Role Analysis,” Psychology & Marketing 6 (Spring 1989): 51–68.
 58. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations.
 59. Karl Greenberg, “Ford Puts Trendsetters Behind Wheel in VIP Events,” Marketing 
Daily (November 11, 2008), www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa=Articles 
.san&s=94582&Nid=49281&p=407, accessed November 11, 2008.
 60. Robert Merton, Social Theory and Social Structure (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 
1957).
 61. Center for Media Research, “Inconspicuous, But Influential” (December 
26, 2008), www.mediapost.com, accessed December 26, 2008; Charles 
W. King and John O. Summers, “Overlap of Opinion Leadership Across 
Consumer Product Categories,” Journal of Marketing Research 7 (February 
1970): 43–50.; see also Ronald E. Goldsmith, Jeanne R. Heitmeyer, and 
Jon B. Freiden, “Social Values and Fashion Leadership,” Clothing & Textiles 
Research Journal 10 (Fall 1991): 37–45; John O. Summers, “Identity of 
Women’s Clothing Fashion Opinion Leaders,” Journal of Marketing Research 
7 (1970): 178–185.
 62. Duncan J. Watts and Peter Sheridan Dodds, “Influentials, Networks, and Public 
Opinion Formation,” Journal of Consumer Research 34 (December 2007): 441–458.
 63. Tanya Irwin, “Study: Facebook Users Show ‘Herding Instinct,’” Marketing Daily 
(October 12, 2010), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa=Articles.
showArticle&art_aid=137340&nid=119587, accessed April 29, 2011.
 64. Cass R. Sunstein and Reid Hastie, “Making Dumb Groups Smarter,” 
Harvard Business Review (December 2014), https://hbr.org/2014/12/
making-dumb-groups-smarter, accessed April 11, 2015; Matthew J. 
Salganik, Peter Sheridan Dodds and Duncan J. Watts, “Experimental Study 
of Inequality and Unpredictability in an Artificial Cultural Market,” Science 
311 (February 10, 2006): 854–856, http://www.princeton.edu/~mjs3/
salganik_dodds_watts06_full.pdf, accessed April 11, 2015; Matthew J. 
Salganik and Duncan J. Watts, “Leading the Herd Astray: An Experimental 

 
Chapter 11   Groups and Social Media 
445 
klout-for-business/?utm_medium=email&utm_source=feedburner&utm_camp
aign=Feed%3A+Mashable+%28Mashable%29, accessed February 22, 2015; 
Brian Anthony Hernandez, “Dating Site Finds You a Mate Based on Your Klout 
Score,” Mashable (April 16, 2012), http://mashable.com/people/brian-anthony-
hernandez/, accessed February 22, 2015.
 95. Ed Keller and Jon Berry. The Influentials (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2003).
 96. “Introducing Peer Influence Analysis: 500 Billion Peer Impressions Each Year,” 
Empowered, (April 20, 2010), http://forrester.typepad.com/groundswell/ 
2010/04/introducing-peer-influence-analysis.html, accessed December 31, 
2010.
 97. Gina Kolata, “Find Yourself Packing It On? Blame Friends,” New York Times 
(July 26, 2007), www.nytimes.com, accessed July 26, 2007.
 98. Rio 2016, “Sponsors,” http://www.rio2016.com/en/more-information/
partners.
 99. “McCann Worldgroup Goes into Social Central Mode,” Marketing, August 
16, 2012, http://www.marketingmagazine.com.my/breaking-news-2012/
mccann-worldgroup-goes-into-social-central-mode.
 100. Matthew Chapman, “Dispatches Investigation into Social Media 
Malpractice Requires ‘Immediate Action’,” Marketing, August 06, 2013, 
http://www.marketingmagazine.co.uk/article/1194216/dispatches-in-
vestigation-social-media-malpractice-requires-immediate-action.
 101. Thomas E. Weber, “Viral Marketing: Web’s Newest Ploy May Make You an 
Unpopular Friend,” Wall Street Journal (September 13, 1999), www.wsj.com, 
accessed September 13, 1999.
 102. Marius K. Luedicke, “Brand Community Under Fire: The Role of Social 
Environments for the Hummer Brand Community,” Advances in Consumer 
Research 33, no. 1 (2006): 486–493.
 103. Carl Straumsheim, “Intersession Solitude,” Inside Higher Ed (January 15, 
2015), https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2015/01/15/saint-marys-
college-calif-students-disconnect-power-and-unplug-interim-term-course, 
accessed February 26, 2015.
 104. Quoted in Suzanne Vranica, “Ad Houses Will Need to Be More Nimble, 
Clients Are Demanding More and Better Use of Consumer Data, Web,” Wall 
Street Journal (January 2, 2008): B3.
 88. Quoted in Edward F. McQuarrie, Jessica Miller and Barbara J. Phillips, “The 
Megaphone Effect: Taste and Audience in Fashion Blogging,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 40, no. 1 (2013): 136–158.
 89. Jonah Berger, “Word of Mouth and Interpersonal Communication: A Review 
and Directions for Future Research,” Journal of Consumer Psychology 24, 
no. 4 (2014): 586–607; Eva Buechel, Jonah Berger “Facebook Therapy: 
Why People Share Self-Relevant Content Online,” presented at the 2012 
Association for Consumer Research conference, Vancouver: BC.
 90. Jonah Berger and Raghuram Iyengar, “Communication Channels and Word 
Of Mouth: How the Medium Shapes the Message,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 40, no. 3 (2013): 567–579; cf. also Andreas B. Eisingerich, HaeEun 
Helen Chun, Yeyi Liu, He Jia, and Simon J. Bell, “Why Recommend a 
Brand Face-to-face but not on Facebook? How Word-of-mouth on Online 
Social Sites Differs From Traditional Word-of-mouth,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology 25, no. 1 (2015): 120–128.
 91. John Tierney, “Good News Beats Bad on Social Networks,” New York Times 
(March 18, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/19/science/good-news-
spreads-faster-on-twitter-and-facebook.html, accessed March 19, 2013.
 92. Tejvir Sekhon, Barbara Bickart, Remi Trudel, and Susan Fournier, “Being a 
Likable Braggart: How Consumers Use Brand Mentions for Self-presentation 
on Social Media,” in Consumer Psychology in a Social Media World (London, 
Routledge 2016); cf. also Yinlong Zhang, Lawrence Feick and Vikas Mittal, 
“How Males and Females Differ in Their Likelihood of Transmitting Negative 
Word of Mouth,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 6 (2014): 1097–1108.
 93. Ryan Hamilton, Kathleen D. Vohs, and Ann L. McGill, “We’ll Be Honest, 
This Won’t Be the Best Article You’ll Ever Read: The Use of Dispreferred 
Markers in Word-of-Mouth Communication,” Journal of Consumer Research 
41, no. 1 (June 2014): 197–212.
 94. Quoted in Brian Anthony Hernandez, “Dating Site Finds You a Mate Based on 
Your Klout Score,” Mashable (April 6, 2012), http://mashable.com/2012/04/16/
tawkify-klout-scores-dating/?utm_medium=email&utm_source=newsletter, 
accessed April 15, 2015. http://klout.com/home, accessed April 11, 2015; 
Samantha Murphy Kelly, “Klout for Business Aims to Help Brands Reach Social 
Influencers,” Mashable (March 30, 2013), http://mashable.com/2013/03/20/

446
F
inally, the big day has come! Phil is going home with 
Marilyn to meet her parents. He was doing some 
contracting work at the securities firm where Marilyn 
works, and it was love at first sight. Even though Phil attended 
the “School of Hard Knocks” on the streets of Brooklyn and 
Marilyn was fresh out of Princeton, somehow they knew they 
could work things out despite their vastly different backgrounds. 
Marilyn hinted that her family has money, but Phil doesn’t feel 
intimidated. After all, he knows plenty of guys from his old neigh-
borhood who wheeled-and-dealed their way into six figures. He 
certainly can handle one more big shot in a silk suit who flashes 
a roll of bills and who shows off his expensive modern furniture 
with mirrors and gadgets everywhere you look.
When they arrive at the family estate in Connecticut, Phil 
looks for a blinged-out Escalade parked in the circular driveway, 
but he only sees a beat-up Jeep Cherokee, which must belong to 
one of the servants. Once inside, Phil is surprised by how simply 
the house is decorated and by how shabby everything seems. A faded Oriental rug covers 
the hall entryway and all of the furniture looks really old.
Phil is even more surprised when he meets Marilyn’s father. He had half-expected 
Mr. Caldwell to be wearing a tuxedo and holding a large brandy snifter like the rich people 
he’s seen in the movies. In fact, Phil has put on his best shiny Italian suit in anticipation, 
and he wore his large cubic zirconium pinky ring so this guy would know that he has some 
money, too. When Marilyn’s father emerges from his study wearing an old rumpled cardigan 
sweater and tennis sneakers, Phil realizes he’s definitely not one of those guys from the old 
neighborhood.
 12-1 Our confidence in our future, as well as in the overall 
economy, determines how freely we spend and the types 
of products we buy.
 12-2 We group consumers into social classes that say a lot 
about where they stand in society.
 12-3 Individuals’ desires to make a statement about their 
social class, or the class to which they hope to belong, 
influence the products they like and dislike.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
 Chapter 12 ● Income and Social Class
Source: Sakala/Shutterstock.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
447 
Income and Consumer Identity
As Phil’s eye-opening experience at the Caldwells’ house suggests, 
there are many ways to spend money, and there’s also a wide 
gulf between those who have it and those who don’t. Perhaps an 
equally wide gap exists between those who have had it for a long 
time and those who “made it the hard way—by earning it!” As 
this chapter begins, we briefly consider how general  economic 
conditions affect the way we allocate our money. Then, to reflect 
the adage that says, “The rich are different,” we’ll explore how people who occupy 
 different positions in society consume in very different ways.
to Spend or Not to Spend, that Is the Question
Consumer demand for goods and services depends on both our ability and our willing-
ness to buy. Although demand for necessities tends to be stable over time, we postpone or 
eliminate other expenditures if we don’t feel that now is a good time to spend money.1 For 
example, you may decide to “make do” with your current clunker for another year rather 
than buy a new car right away. Even businesses like warehouse clubs that sell staples by 
the case feel the pain when shoppers postpone their purchases; stores such as Costco and 
Sam’s Club post big losses when people no longer buy their discounted jewelry and cloth-
ing, even though sales of paper towels and pickles hold steady.2
Discretionary income is the money available to a household over and above what it 
requires to have a comfortable standard of living. How much money do people need to be 
“comfortable?” One study that analyzed survey data from more than 450,000 respondents 
concluded that the magic number is an annual income of $75,000. Emotional well-being 
steadily rises as people get to this level, but it does not significantly increase after that.3
Economists estimate that U.S. consumers wield about $400 billion a year in discre-
tionary spending power. People aged 35 to 55, whose incomes are at a peak, account for 
about half of this amount. As the population ages and income levels rise, the way a typical 
U.S. household spends its money changes. The most noticeable shift is to allocate a much 
larger share of a budget to shelter and transportation and less to food and apparel. (Note: 
This doesn’t mean that higher-income households buy less food and clothing; it’s just that 
the proportion of dollars they spend on these categories decreases.)
Especially in the wake of the Great Recession of 2009, many consumers experience 
doubts about their individual and collective futures, and they are anxious to hold on to 
what they have. Of course, not everyone has the same attitudes about money and its 
importance. We all know tightwads who hate to part with even a penny (and who actually 
experience emotional pain when they hand over their cash) and spendthrifts who enjoy 
nothing more than buying everything in sight. Research on this issue finds that (stereo-
types aside) U.S. tightwads outnumber spendthrifts. Men are more likely than women to be 
tightwads, as are older people and those with more education. How do we tell a tightwad 
from someone who’s just being frugal? One of the researchers puts it this way: “The evi-
dence suggests that frugality is driven by a pleasure of saving, as compared with tightwad-
dism, which is driven by a pain of paying.”4
Money has complex psychological meanings; we equate it with success or failure, 
social acceptability, security, love, freedom, and yes, even sex appeal.5 There are therapists 
who specialize in treating money-related disorders, and they report that some people even 
feel guilty about their success and deliberately make bad investments to reduce this feel-
ing! Some other clinical conditions include atephobia (fear of being ruined), harpaxophobia 
(fear of becoming a victim of robbers), peniaphobia (fear of poverty), and aurophobia (fear 
of gold).6
A study explored some interesting links between our need for acceptance and feelings 
about cash. In one case, participants were either led to believe that a group had rejected 
them or that it had accepted them. They then completed measures that reflected their 
ObjeCtIve 12-1 
Our confidence in our 
future, as well as in 
the overall economy, 
determines how freely we 
spend and the types of 
products we buy.

448 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
desire for money. Those whom the group rejected scored higher on these measures. At 
another stage, subjects counted either real money or pieces of paper and then experienced 
physical pain. Those who counted money reported they felt less pain than did those who 
just counted paper!7
Consumer Confidence
Our expectations about the future affect our current spending, and these individual deci-
sions add up to affect a society’s economic well-being.8 Consumers’ beliefs about what 
the future holds are an indicator of consumer confidence. This measure reflects how 
optimistic or pessimistic people are about the future health of the economy and how they 
predict they’ll fare down the road. These beliefs are important because they influence how 
much money people pump into the economy when they make discretionary purchases.
Many businesses take forecasts about anticipated spending seriously, and periodic 
surveys “take the pulse” of the U.S. consumer. The Conference Board conducts a survey of 
consumer confidence, as does the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan. 
The following are the types of questions they pose to consumers:9
●
●Would you say that you and your family are better off or worse off financially than a 
year ago?
●
●Will you be better off or worse off a year from now?
●
●Is now a good time or a bad time for people to buy major household items, such as 
 furniture or a refrigerator?
●
●Do you plan to buy a car in the next year?
When people are somewhat pessimistic about their prospects and about the state of 
the economy, as they are now, they tend to cut back on what they spend and take on less 
debt. When consumers feel optimistic about the future, they reduce the amount they save, 
they take on more debt, and they splurge on discretionary items. A range of factors influ-
ence the overall savings rate including individual consumers’ pessimism or optimism 
about their personal circumstances, such as a sudden increase in personal wealth as the 
result of an inheritance and global events such as the Great Recession.
Income Inequality and Social Mobility
Take a moment to think about this: The 80 richest people in the world are worth $1.9 tril-
lion. This is about the same amount shared by the 3.5 billion people who are in the bottom 
half of the world’s income. And, the most affluent one percent of people worldwide control 
more than half the globe’s total wealth.10 In the last few years the label One Percenter 
entered our nation’s vocabulary. Beginning with the Occupy Wall Street movement where 
we saw protestors camping out in cities across the United States, the spotlight has been on 
the people who earn the top 1 percent of income in our country. The wealthiest 160,000 
U.S. families have as much wealth as the poorest 145 million families.11
Today one of the biggest issues we hear about is income inequality, that is, the 
extent to which resources are distributed unevenly within a population. One consequence 
of rising inequality is that more consumers worry about “falling behind” if a breadwinner 
loses his or her job or if the family can no longer afford the cost of housing, transportation, 
and other necessities. For example, a researcher who conducted an in-depth study of resi-
dents of a rural trailer park identified one segment of consumers she called the Reluctant 
Emigrants. These people once lived in fixed-site homes but various economic problems 
forced them to move to the more affordable trailer park. Because their lives are on a down-
ward trajectory, their primary concerns focus on security and protection.12
Citigroup strategists coined the term plutonomy to describe an economy that’s 
driven by a fairly small number of rich people.13 This term seems increasingly appropri-
ate to describe the United States because the share of households that are in the middle-
income bracket (earning $35,000 to $100,000 per year) steadily shrinks.14 One indicator 
of income inequality is the CEO pay ratio, which compares the salary of a company’s 

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
449 
chief executive to the earnings of a typical employee. That number grew from 20 in 1965 
to 295.9 in 2013.15 This gap is larger than most other countries. Recent reports indicate 
that the United States has the largest income inequality among developed countries. The 
only countries with a bigger disparity are Chile, Mexico, and Turkey.16
Social mobility refers to the “passage of individuals from one social class to 
another.”17 Horizontal mobility occurs when a person moves from one position to another 
that’s roughly equivalent in social status; for instance, a nurse becomes an elementary 
school teacher. Downward mobility is, of course, movement none of us wants, but unfor-
tunately we observe this pattern fairly often, as farmers and other displaced workers go on 
welfare rolls or join the ranks of the homeless. By one estimate, between 2.3 million and 
3.5 million Americans experience homelessness in a year’s time.18
Despite that discouraging trend, demographics decree that overall there must be 
upward mobility in our society. The middle and upper classes reproduce less (i.e., have 
fewer children per family) than the lower classes (an effect demographers call differential 
 fertility), and they tend to restrict family size to below replacement level (i.e., they often 
have only one child). Therefore, so the reasoning goes, over time those of lower status 
must fill positions of higher status.19
Despite the well-deserved reputation of the United States as the “land of opportunity,” 
social mobility today is a harder climb in the United States than in many other developed 
economies such as Canada, Denmark, Australia, Norway, Finland, Sweden, Germany, and 
Spain. One widely cited report, for example, found that the economic advantage of hav-
ing an affluent father is much more likely to influence the fortune of his son in the United 
States than in most other Western countries.20 Another analysis found that the likelihood 
of staying in the same social class as your parents is 0.47 in the United States, compared to 
only 0.15 in Denmark. 21
Within the United States, we see the most social mobility in the Northeast, Great 
Plains, and West, whereas the odds of moving up are much lower in the Southeast and 
Midwest. One apparent factor for this difference is that, all things equal, there is more 
upward mobility in metropolitan areas where poor families live alongside relatively more 
well-off people rather than being segregated into low-income neighborhoods. Mobility 
also is more robust in areas with a greater number of two-parent households, better 
schools, and more civic engagement such as memberships in religious and community 
groups.22
Income inequality is emerging as one of the 
most important issues for many people in 
the U.S.A.
Source: Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images.
Marketing pitfall
A person’s credit score, 
that is based on his or 
her outstanding debt and 
payment histories, used 
to be an obscure figure 
that credit card and mortgage companies con-
sulted to decide if he or she qualified for a loan. 
 Today that score has become a badge that 
many use to “keep score” of a person’s worth. 
Some companies consider this magic score 
when they make hiring decisions, and increas-
ingly  individuals even use it to identify suitable 
dating partners. As one financial advisor put it, 
“Credit scores are like the dating equivalent of 
a sexually transmitted disease test. It’s a short-
hand way to get a sense of someone’s financial 
past the same way an S.T.D. test gives some 
information about a person’s sexual past.” 
 Another executive stated, “It’s the only grade 
that matters after you graduate.” Several  dating 
sites including Creditscoredating.com and 
Datemycreditscore.com use this measure to 
screen potential suitors for members.23

450 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
the Great recession and Materialism
The Great Recession officially lasted from December 2007 to June 2009. During this 
period we witnessed the largest drop in employment since the Great Depression. Even 
today, we feel the aftershocks of this economic upheaval.24 The loss of wealth prompted 
drastic changes in consumer spending that almost overnight altered the landscape of 
consumer behavior. The “go-go” years seem like a distant memory as many people sud-
denly put the brakes on their BUY NOW mentality. The new mantra: Make do with what 
you have. Save. Question every expense: Do you really need that Starbucks latte, that $80 
haircut, that fashion magazine? Thriftiness is in, eye-popping bling is out.
In our society, wealth is still more likely to be 
earned than inherited although this pattern 
seems to be shifting.
Source: From 2000 advertising campaign. 
Courtesy of The Phoenix Companies, Inc.
Some online dating sites use credit scores 
to screen potential suitors.
Source: Creditscoredating.com.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
451 
Even many fashionistas turned into frugalistas—they refuse to sacrifice style, but they 
achieve it on a budget. Now it’s cool to visit Web sites and blogs that celebrate frugality, such 
as Dollar Stretcher (stretcher.com), All Things Frugal (allthingsfrugal.com), and Frugal 
Mom (frugalmom.net).25 Today our economy is steadily recovering as income continues to 
rise each year. However, as of 2014 median income still is about 3 percent lower than it was 
before the troubles began.26 Only time will tell if frugality becomes “the new normal.”
In Chapter 2 we talked about materialism; the value people place on their possessions. 
As a by-product of the Great Recession, many consumers have been forced to reconsider 
the value of their possessions. One woman observed, “The idea that you need to go bigger 
to be happy is false. I really believe that the acquisition of material goods doesn’t bring 
about happiness.” This doesn’t necessarily mean that people will stop buying—but per-
haps, at least for a while, they will do so more carefully.
Another factor is just how much of a “buzz” we get from the stuff we buy. The 
research evidence points to the idea that consumers get more “bang for their buck” 
when they buy a bunch of smaller things over time, rather than blowing it all on one 
big purchase. This is as a result of what psychologists call hedonic adaptation; it basi-
cally means that to maintain a fairly stable level of happiness, we tend to become used to 
changes, big or small, wonderful or terrible. That means that over time the rush from a 
major purchase will dissipate and we’re back to where we started (emotionally speaking). 
So, the next time you get a bonus or find an envelope stuffed with cash on the street, take a 
series of long weekends instead of splurging on that 3-week trip to Maui.28
Income-based Marketing
A popular saying goes, “You can never be too thin or too rich.” As we recover from the 
Great Recession, the average American’s standard of living continues to improve—though 
many consumers still don’t get a full ticket to the American Dream. About 45  million 
people live in poverty, including roughly 20 percent of children younger than age 18. 
Two factors contribute to an (overall) upward income trajectory: a shift in women’s roles 
and increases in educational attainment:29
1 Mothers with preschool children are the fastest-growing segment of working people. 
Furthermore, many of them work in high-paying occupations, such as medicine 
and architecture, which men used to dominate. Although women are still a minority 
Housing prices in many 
U.S. cities skyrocket as the 
appeal of living in a cool 
ur ban environment grows. 
And, more people want to 
live alone so it’s even harder to find a suitable 
place. The single occupancy rate exceeds  
40 percent in Atlanta, Cincinnati, Denver, 
Pittsburgh, Seattle, St. Louis, and Washington, 
D.C. One solution: “Micro-sized” apartments 
that average around 300 square feet, just a 
little bigger than a typical single-car garage 
in the ’burbs. City planners like this new mini-
sizing trend because these so-called “aPod-
ments” or “micro-lofts” are both economical 
and ecofriendly. Just don’t plan on throwing 
any big parties.27
Marketing Opportunity
Micro-sized apartments are popping up in 
big cities as an affordable option for people 
who want to live on their own.
Source: Courtesy of Panoramic Interests.

452 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
in most professional occupations, their ranks continue to swell. Unfortunately, the 
 female-to-male earnings ratio is 0.78, which means that on average a woman 
earns 78 cents for every dollar a man brings home. The good news is that working 
wives account for almost half of household earnings today.
2 Although picking up the tab for college often entails great sacrifice, it still pays off in 
the long run. The college wage premium, which describes the gap between what 
workers with a college degree earn compared with those without one, has grown 
dramatically. Compared to a premium of about 40 percent in the late 1970s, today 
 degree holders earn 80 percent more. The Federal Reserve Board estimates that 
 during a lifetime on average a person with a degree will earn $830,000 more than 
someone with just a high school diploma.30 So, hang in there!
targeting the top of the pyramid: high-Income Consumers
Many marketers try to target affluent, upscale markets. This often makes sense, because 
these consumers obviously have the resources to spend on costly products that command 
higher profit margins. However, it is a mistake to assume that we should place everyone 
with a high income into the same market segment. As we noted previously, social class 
involves more than absolute income. It is also a way of life, and several factors—including 
where they got their money, how they got it, and how long they have had it—significantly 
affect wealthy people’s interests and spending priorities.31
Despite our stereotype of rich people who just party all day long, one study found 
that the typical millionaire is a 57-year-old man who is self-employed, earns a median 
household income of $131,000, has been married to the same wife for most of his adult 
life, has children, has never spent more than $399 on a suit or more than $140 for a pair 
of shoes, and drives a Ford Explorer (the humble billionaire investor Warren Buffett comes 
to mind). Interestingly, many affluent people don’t consider themselves to be rich. One 
tendency researchers notice is that these people indulge in luxury goods while they pinch 
pennies on everyday items; they buy shoes at Neiman Marcus and deodorant at Walmart, 
for example.32
SRI Consulting Business Intelligence divides consumers into three groups based on 
their attitudes toward luxury:
1 Luxury is functional—These consumers use their money to buy things that will 
last and have enduring value. They conduct extensive prepurchase research and 
make logical decisions rather than emotional or impulsive choices.
2 Luxury is a reward—These consumers tend to be younger than the first group but 
older than the third group. They use luxury goods to say, “I’ve made it.” The desire to 
be successful and to demonstrate their success to others motivates these consumers 
to purchase conspicuous luxury items, such as high-end automobiles and homes in 
exclusive communities.
3 Luxury is indulgence—This group is the smallest of the three and tends to include 
younger consumers and slightly more males than the other two groups. To these 
consumers, the purpose of owning luxury is to be extremely lavish and self-indulgent. 
This group is willing to pay a premium for goods that express their individuality and 
make others take notice. They have a more emotional approach to luxury spending 
and are more likely than the other two groups to make impulse purchases.33
People who have had money for a long time tend to use their fortunes a lot differently. 
Old money families (e.g., the Rockefellers, DuPonts, Fords, etc.) live primarily on inherited 
funds. One commentator called this group “the class in hiding.”34 Following the Great 
Depression of the 1930s, moneyed families became more discreet about exhibiting their 
wealth. Many fled from mansions such as those we still find in Manhattan (the reno-
vated Vanderbilt mansion now is Ralph Lauren’s flagship store) to hideaways in Virginia, 
Connecticut, and New Jersey.
Mere wealth is not sufficient to achieve social prominence in these circles. You also need 
to demonstrate a family history of public service and philanthropy, and tangible markers of 

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
453 
these contributions often enable donors to achieve a kind of immortality (e.g., Rockefeller 
University, Carnegie Hall, or the Whitney Museum).35 “Old money” consumers distinguish 
among themselves in terms of ancestry and lineage rather than wealth.36 Furthermore, 
they’re secure in their status. In a sense, they have trained their whole lives to be rich.
In contrast to people with old money, today there are many people—including high-
profile billionaires such as Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg, and Sir Richard Branson—who 
are “the working wealthy.”37 The Horatio Alger myth, where a person goes from “rags to 
riches” through hard work and a bit of luck, is still a powerful force in our society. That’s 
why a commercial that showed the actual garage where the two cofounders of Hewlett-
Packard first worked struck a chord in so many.
Although many people do in fact become “self-made millionaires,” they often encounter a 
problem (although not the worst problem one could think of!) after they have become wealthy 
and change their social status. The label nouveau riche describes consumers who recently 
achieved their wealth and who don’t have the benefit of years of training to learn how to spend it.
Pity the poor nouveau riches many suffer from status anxiety. They monitor the cultural 
environment to ensure that they do the “right” thing, wear the “right” clothes, get seen at the 
“right” places, use the “right” caterer, and so on.38 Their flamboyant consumption is an exam-
ple of symbolic self-completion (we discussed this in Chapter 6) because they try to display sym-
bols they believe have “class” to make up for an internal lack of assurance about the “correct” 
way to behave.39 In major Chinese cities such as Shanghai, some people wear pajamas in public 
as a way to flaunt their newfound wealth. As one consumer explained, “Only people in cities 
can afford clothes like this. In farming villages, they still have to wear old work clothes to bed.”40
targeting the bottom of the pyramid: Low-Income Consumers
Although poor people obviously have less to spend than do rich ones, they have the same basic 
needs as everyone else. Low-income families purchase staples, such as milk, orange juice, and 
tea, at the same rates as average-income families. Minimum wage–level households spend 
more than average on out-of-pocket healthcare costs, rent, and the food they eat at home.41
And, of course, the market size is huge: Although there are 6.6 billion consumers 
in the world, only 1.5 billion of them possess enough purchasing power to buy $10,000 
worth of products for themselves and their families. The other 5.1 billion people— 
78 percent of the global population—are low-income consumers.42 Analysts refer to this 
vast number of consumers as the bottom of the pyramid. Figure 12.1 provides one 
framework to help marketers make needed changes to provide for the needs of low-income 
consumers around the world.
• Promote offerings
   through mix of outlets
• Form partnerships
   with public and non-
   governmental
   organizations
The 4 A’s of addressing low-income consumers
Tailor offer
to market
Restructure
value chain
Awareness
Availability
Affordability
Acceptability
• Reduce packaging size
    for low price per unit
• Maintain operations on
    zero (or near-zero) working
    capital
• Leverage scale effects
    and sourcing network
• Reduce cost serve
• Shortern supply chain
• Select and support
    retailers
• Devise stocking strategy
• Localize sourcing
• Focus development
   on customers
• Employ innovative
   thinking to meet
   customer needs
• Establish local R&D
4 A’s
Figure 12.1 THE 4 A’s
Source: Anderson and Niels Billou, “Serving 
the World’s Poor: Innovation at the Base of the 
Economic Pyramid,” Journal of Business Strategy, 
28, 2: 14–21, reprinted in A. T. Kearney, Serving the 
Low-Income Consumer: How to Tackle This Mostly 
Ignored Market, 2011, http://www.atkearney 
.com/index.php/Publications/serving-the-low-
income-consumer.html

454 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Some multinational companies have woken up to the potential of this huge market. 
They focus on engineering innovations that allow them to produce inexpensive products 
that still function as people need them to:43
●
●The Nokia 105 is a tiny mobile phone that costs about $20.00. It includes a dust-proof 
keyboard, flashlight, alarm clock, and FM radio. The phone’s battery charge lasts  
35 days on standby.
●
●General Electric (GE) designed the Lullaby baby warmer with feedback from Indian 
doctors and nurses who advised on practical changes to turn a high-end product into 
one that many parents can access. The company replaced an expensive hand crank 
that lifts the baby’s head with a simple plastic triangle that fits under the mattress. The 
mattress is covered in a tough plastic that resists tears, and GE developed an inexpen-
sive LED device to replace the fluorescent bulbs other warmers use to create heat.
●
●A startup company called d.light sells portable solar lighting units in 62 countries to 
people who don’t have steady access to electricity.
Social Class and Consumer Identity
Members of every society divide into the “haves” and the “have-
nots” (though the amount people “have” is relative). The United 
States is a place where “all men are created equal,” but even so 
some people seem to be more equal than others. A complex set of 
variables, including income, family background, and occupation, 
determines one’s standing in society. The place you occupy in the social structure helps to 
determine not only how much money you spend but also how you spend it. The sociolo-
gist W. Lloyd Warner proposed the most influential classification of U.S. class structure in 
1941. Warner identified six social classes:46
1 Upper Upper
2 Lower Upper
3 Upper Middle
4 Lower Middle
5 Upper Lower
6 Lower Lower
The Digital Divide between the rich and the 
poor is still a reality.
Source: Deshakalyan Chowdhury/AFP/ 
Getty Images.
Because so much of what 
happens in the world to-
day happens online, peo-
ple who don’t have access 
to the Internet can be at a 
real disadvantage. The so-called Digital Divide 
between the rich and the poor is still a reality. 
According to a study by the Pew Research 
Center, 87 percent of U.S. households making 
more than $75,000 have broadband access 
at home. In contrast, only 40 percent of U.S. 
households making less than $30,000 have 
access. Whereas 95 percent of high-income 
households use the Internet at home in some 
fashion, just 57 percent of the poorest do. Not 
surprisingly, affluent people are also much 
more likely to own cell phones, computers, 
e-readers, and other entertainment devices.44
To compound the problem, it seems that 
when poorer children do use technology, they 
don’t use it as constructively. Data show that 
these kids spend much more time than do chil-
dren from affluent families to use their gadgets 
to watch videos, play games, and connect on 
social networking sites, rather than for edu-
cational purposes. One reason for this gap is 
that low-income parents are more likely to use 
these media as an “electronic babysitter” when 
they go off to work. According to one study, 
children of parents who do not have a college 
degree spent 90 minutes more per day with 
media compared to more affluent families.45
  the tangled Web
ObjeCtIve 12-2 
We group consumers into 
social classes that say 
a lot about where they 
stand in society.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
455 
Other social scientists have proposed variations on this system over the years, but 
Warner’s six levels summarize fairly well the way we still think about class, even though 
the proportion of consumers who fall into each category fluctuates over time.
pick a pecking Order
In many animal species, a social organization develops whereby the most assertive or 
aggressive animals exert control over the others and have the first pick of food, living  
space, and even mating partners. Chickens, for example, exhibit a clearly defined 
 dominance–submission hierarchy. Within this hierarchy, each hen has a position in 
which she is submissive to all the hens above her and she dominates all the ones below her 
(hence the origin of the term pecking order).47
People are not much different. We also develop a pecking order that ranks us in terms 
of our relative standing in society. This rank determines our access to such resources as 
education, housing, and consumer goods. People try to move up in the social order to 
improve their ranking. This desire to improve one’s lot in life, and often to let others know 
that one has done so, is at the core of many marketing strategies.
Just as marketers carve society into groups for segmentation purposes, sociologists 
describe divisions of society in terms of people’s relative social and economic resources. 
Some of these divisions involve political power, whereas others revolve around purely 
economic distinctions. Karl Marx, the 19th-century economic theorist, argued that a 
person’s relationship to the means of production determined his position in a society. The 
haves control resources, and they use the labor of others to preserve their privileged posi-
tions. The have-nots depend on their own labor for survival, so these people have the most 
to gain if they change the system. The German sociologist Max Weber showed that the 
rankings people develop are not one-dimensional. Some involve prestige or “social honor” 
(he called these status groups), some rankings focus on power (or party), and some revolve 
around wealth and property (class).48
We use the term social class more generally to describe the overall rank of people in a 
society. People who belong to the same social class have approximately equal social stand-
ing in the community. They work in roughly similar occupations, and they tend to have 
similar lifestyles by virtue of their income levels and common tastes. These people tend to 
socialize with one another and share many ideas and values regarding the way life should 
be lived.49
Indeed, “birds of a feather do flock together.” We tend to marry people in a social class 
similar to our own, a tendency sociologists call homogamy or assortative mating. Well more 
than 90 percent of married high school dropouts marry someone who also dropped out or 
who has only a high school diploma. On the other side of the spectrum, less than 1 percent 
of the most highly educated Americans have a spouse who did not complete high school.50
Social class is as much a state of being as it is of having: It’s also a matter of what you 
do with your money and how you define your role in society. Although we may not like the 
idea that some members of society are better off or “different” from others, most consum-
ers do acknowledge the existence of different classes and the effect of class membership 
on consumption. As one wealthy woman observed when researchers asked her to define 
social class:
I would suppose social class means where you went to school and how far. Your intelligence. 
Where you live . . . [w]here you send your children to school. The hobbies you have. Skiing, for 
example, is higher than the snowmobile . . . . It can’t be [just] money, because nobody ever knows 
that about you for sure.51
In school, some kids seem to get all the breaks. They have access to many resources, 
such as special privileges, fancy cars, large allowances, or dates with other popular 
classmates. At work, some coworkers get promoted to high-prestige jobs with higher 
salaries and perks such as a parking space, a large office, or the keys to the executive 
washroom.

456 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Social Stratification
Indeed, in virtually every context some people rank higher than others—even if they 
just have a larger number of Twitter followers. Patterns of social arrangements evolve 
whereby some members get more resources than others by virtue of their relative stand-
ing, power, or control in the group.52 The process of social stratification refers to this 
creation of artificial divisions, “those processes in a social system by which scarce and 
valuable resources are distributed unequally to status positions that become more or less 
permanently ranked in terms of the share of valuable resources each receives.”53
Whether rewards go to the “best and the brightest” or to someone who happens to be 
related to the boss, allocations are rarely equal within a social group. Most groups exhibit 
a structure, or status hierarchy in which some members are better off than others. They 
may have more authority or power, or other members simply like or respect them.
In a system in which (like it or not) we define people to a great extent by what they do 
for a living, occupational prestige is one way we evaluate their “worth.” Hierarchies of 
occupational prestige tend to be quite stable over time and across cultures. Researchers 
find similarities in occupational prestige in countries as diverse as Brazil, Ghana, Guam, 
Japan, and Turkey.54
A typical ranking includes a variety of professional and business occupations at the 
top (e.g., CEO of a large corporation, physician, and college professor); whereas jobs that 
hover near the bottom include shoe shiner, ditch digger, and garbage collector. Because 
a person’s occupation links strongly to his or her use of leisure time, allocation of family 
resources, aesthetic preferences, and political orientation, many social scientists consider 
it the single best indicator of social class.
A worldview is another way to differentiate among social classes. To generalize, the 
world of the working class (i.e., the lower-middle class) is more intimate and constricted. 
For example, working-class men are likely to name local sports figures as heroes and are 
less likely to take long vacation trips to out-of-the-way places.55 Immediate needs, such as 
a new refrigerator or TV, tend to dictate buying behavior, whereas the higher classes focus 
on more long-term goals, such as saving for college tuition or retirement.56 Working-class 
consumers depend heavily on relatives for emotional support and tend to orient them-
selves in terms of the local community rather than the world at large. They are more likely 
to be conservative and family oriented. Maintaining the appearance of one’s home and 
property is a priority, regardless of the size of the house.
One study that looked at social class and how it relates to consumers’ feelings of 
empowerment reported that lower-class men aren’t as likely to feel they have the power 
to affect their outcomes. Respondents varied from those who were what the researcher 
Occupational prestige plays an important 
role in defining a status hierarchy.
Source: wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
457 
calls potent actors (those who believe they have the ability to take actions that affect their 
world) to impotent reactors (those who feel they are at the mercy of their economic situa-
tions). This orientation influenced consumption behaviors; for example, the professionals 
in the study who were likely to be potent actors set themselves up for financial opportu-
nity and growth. They took broad perspectives on investing and planned their budgets 
strategically.57
Although they would like to have more in the way of material goods, working-class 
people do not necessarily envy those who rank above them in social standing.58 They may 
not view the maintenance of a high-status lifestyle as worth the effort. As one blue-collar 
consumer commented, “Life is very hectic for those people. There are more breakdowns 
and alcoholism. It must be very hard to sustain the status, the clothes, and the parties that 
are expected. I don’t think I’d want to take their place.”59
This person may be right. Although good things appear to go hand-in-hand with 
higher status and wealth, the picture is not that clear. The social scientist Émile Durkheim 
observed that suicide rates are much higher among the wealthy; he wrote in 1897, “The 
possessors of most comfort suffer most.”60 Durkheim’s wisdom may still be accurate 
today. Many well-off consumers seem to be stressed or unhappy despite or even because of 
their wealth, a condition some call affluenza.61
Cosmopolitanism is an aspect of worldview that is starting to receive more atten-
tion by consumer behavior researchers, who define a cosmopolitan as someone who tries 
to be open to the world and who strives for diverse experiences (not to be confused with the 
popular cocktail). This is a quality that used to be linked to the wealthy, but now—with 
improved access to media and of course the Internet—it’s no longer necessary to be rich to 
express an interest in a range of culturally diverse products. Cosmopolitans respond well 
to brands that have a “worldly” (i.e., international or global) image. They think it’s impor-
tant to own consumer electronics products and are more likely to engage in social media 
activities.62 A scale to identify these consumers includes statements like these:
●
●I enjoy exchanging ideas with people from other cultures or countries.
●
●I am interested in learning more about people who live in other countries.
●
●I find people from other cultures stimulating.
Income versus Social Class
Although we equate money with social class, they are by no means synonymous.63 
Additional income does not necessarily propel someone to a higher class. One problem is 
that even if a family adds one or more wage earners and increases its household income, 
each additional job is likely to be lower in status than the primary wage earner’s job. In 
addition, these members don’t necessarily pool their earnings toward the common good 
of the family.64
So, is social class or income a better predictor of consumer behavior? The answer 
partly depends on the type of product: Do people buy it largely for its functional value 
(what it does), or for its symbolic value (the impression it conveys to others)?
●
●Social class is a better predictor of purchases that have symbolic aspects but low to 
moderate prices (e.g., cosmetics, liquor).
●
●Income is a better predictor of major expenditures that do not have status or symbolic 
aspects (e.g., major appliances).
●
●We need both social class and income data to predict purchases of expensive, symbolic 
products (e.g., cars, homes).
how Do We Measure Social Class?
Because social class is a complex concept that depends on a number of factors, it is not 
surprising that social scientists disagree on the best way to measure it. Early measures 
included the Index of Status Characteristics from the 1940s and the Index of Social Position 

458 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Cb aS I See It
Paul Henry, University of Sydney, Australia
taken-for-granted and normalized ways 
of being and doing.
Class only comes to the fore when 
we walk into another neighborhood 
and are confronted with people 
who are not like us. The signals 
are usually subtle; slightly different 
mannerisms, aesthetic tastes, 
appearance, and dress sense. Yet 
our gut reaction is that we are in a 
place where we don’t quite fit in. You 
can easily test this out by recalling 
your own reactions to different 
suburbs you have visited. Imagine 
the different kind of clientele in the 
shops, bars, and restaurants. Think 
about how the people are different to 
you. What is it that makes you think 
that this is not a place where you fit 
in so well?
Class is of course intimately 
related to income and wealth, but 
class is more than about money. 
Think about some these other kinds 
of social markers that serve to 
distinguish people as upper or lower 
class. Take, for example the case of 
a working-class family that suddenly 
wins the lottery. Will their tastes and 
mannerisms change in line with the 
extra money; or would they still stand 
out when moving to an upmarket 
neighbourhood?
The research I’ve conducted finds 
subtle differences between classes 
in how people plan their finances and 
manage their money. It’s partly about 
money managing skills and partly 
about outlook. Money planning skills 
can be partially taught but distinctive 
outlook is harder to change. Outlook 
includes things like degree of personal 
confidence, ambitiousness, belief 
in future possibilities for growth 
and comfort with challenge and 
change. People who are stronger 
in these forms of outlook set more 
ambitious financial goals, develop 
more elaborate plans to achieve 
them and persist more doggedly their 
attainment.
On the other hand if you lack 
personal confidence, set smaller goals 
and more easily give up, then a self-
fulfilment prophesy sets in—more 
limited financial potential. Another 
part of the problem for people with 
poorer financial resources lies in the 
fact that they are more focused on 
meeting week-by-week costs. This 
is obviously stressful, emotionally 
wearing, and reinforces a short-term 
focus, where long-term goal setting 
recedes. Constant financial stress 
and frustration at lack of progress 
can leave many people at the bottom 
of the social scale feeling hopeless, 
fatalistic, and prone to spending any 
spare money on things that provide 
instant gratification: cigarettes, 
alcohol, fast food, and gambling. 
This sets up a downward health 
spiral that adds yet another layer of 
disadvantage.
How often do you think about class?
Social class is usually something 
we don’t think much about. Have you 
ever heard of the phrase “birds of a 
feather flock together?” We tend to 
hang round with people like ourselves 
because we feel comfortable with 
similar people. We live in areas where 
people are from the same class. We 
work and socialize with people like 
us. The people around us share our 
values and priorities. They share 
our cultural and social preferences 
to fashion, food, rules of etiquette, 
mannerisms, and ways of speaking. 
All these commonalities become 
from the 1950s.65 These indices combined individual characteristics (e.g., income, type of 
housing) to arrive at a label of class standing. The accuracy of these composites is still a 
subject of debate among researchers; a study claimed that for segmentation purposes, raw 
education and income measures work as well as composite status measures.66
U.S. consumers generally have little difficulty placing themselves in either the work-
ing class (lower-middle class) or middle class.67 Blue-collar workers with relatively high-
prestige jobs still tend to view themselves as working class, even though their income levels 
are equivalent to those of many white-collar workers.68 This fact reinforces the idea that 
the labels of “working class” or “middle class” are subjective. Their meanings say at least 
as much about self-identity as they do about economic well-being.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
459 
Marketing researchers were among the first to propose that we can distinguish people 
of different social classes from one another. However, many of the methods they originally 
used to place consumers into classes are badly dated and have little validity today.69 One 
reason is that social scientists designed most measures of social class with the traditional 
nuclear family in mind; this unit included a male wage earner in the middle of his career 
and a female full-time homemaker. These measures have trouble accounting for two-
income families, young singles living alone, or households headed by women, which are so 
prevalent today.
Another problem with measuring social class is the increasing anonymity of our 
society. Earlier studies relied on the reputational method, where researchers conducted 
extensive interviews within an area to determine the reputations and backgrounds of 
individuals. When they used information and also traced people’s interaction patterns, 
they could generate a comprehensive view of social standing within a community. 
However, this approach is virtually impossible to implement in most communities today. 
One compromise is to interview individuals to obtain demographic data and to combine 
these data with the interviewer’s subjective impressions of each person’s possessions and 
standard of living.
One problem when we assign any group of people to a social class is that they may 
not exhibit equal standing on all of the relevant dimensions. A person might come from 
a low-status ethnic group but have a high-status job, whereas another who did not finish 
high school may live in a fancy part of town. Social scientists use the concept of status 
crystallization to assess the impact of social class inconsistency.70 The logic is that when 
these indicators are not consistent, stress occurs, because the rewards from each part of 
such an “unbalanced” person’s life are variable and unpredictable. People who exhibit 
such inconsistencies tend to be more receptive to social change than are those whose iden-
tities are more firmly rooted.
A related problem occurs when a person’s social-class standing creates expectations 
that he or she can’t meet. Some people find themselves in the not-unhappy position of 
making more money than we expect of those in their social class. This means they are 
overprivileged, a condition we define as an income that is at least 25 to 30 percent greater 
than the median for one’s class.71 In contrast, underprivileged consumers, who earn at 
least 15 percent less than the median, must often allocate a big chunk of their income to 
maintaining the impression that they occupy a certain status. For example, some people 
talk about being “house-poor”; they pay so much for a lavish home that they can’t afford 
to furnish it. Today, many homeowners unfortunately find themselves in this position. 
Although the number of foreclosures on U.S. houses is less than half of what we saw in 
2009 and 2010 after the housing bubble burst during the Great Recession, there still were 
1.12 million  filings in 2014.72
We traditionally assume that husbands define a family’s social class, whereas wives 
must live it. Women achieve their social status through their husbands.73 Indeed, the evi-
dence indicates that physically attractive women do tend to “marry up in social class to a 
greater extent than attractive men do. Women trade the resource of sexual appeal, which 
historically has been one of the few assets they were allowed to possess, for the economic 
resources of men.74
We must strongly question the accuracy of this assumption in today’s world. Many 
women now contribute equally to the family’s well-being, and they work in positions of 
comparable or even greater status than their spouses. Employed women tend to average 
both their own and their husband’s positions when they estimate their own subjective 
status.75 Nevertheless, a prospective spouse’s social class is often an important “product 
attribute” when someone in the “marriage market” evaluates his or her options.
Social Class around the World
Every society has some type of hierarchical class structure that determines people’s access 
to products and services. Let’s take a quick look at a few important ones.

460 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Marketing pitfall
The quality of life has im-
proved dramatically for 
many Chinese in the last  
few decades, but this  
sudden prosperity comes  
with a price tag. Before the country’s finan-
cial transformation, most people were fairly 
equal (although poor), and the ratio of males 
to females was about even as well. Thus, it 
was not a big deal for matchmakers to ar-
range suitable matches between men and 
women; the Chinese called this process men-
dang hudui, meaning roughly “family doors of 
equal size.” Most people never dated anyone 
other than their future spouse before they got 
married.
The economic boom upended this stable 
structure, so that now there are sharp in-
equalities of wealth. Roughly 300 million 
people have moved from rural areas to cities 
in the last 30 years. As a result the traditional 
matchmaker solution that paired members 
from an intimate community no longer is via-
ble. To compound the problem, more Chinese 
women postpone marriage to pursue careers, 
and the gender gap is huge largely a result 
of the government’s one-child policy that for 
years encouraged parents to have boys rather 
than girls. Researchers estimate that soon 
China will have a surplus of 24 million un-
married men. Many of them now search for a 
mate online as Chinese dating services bring 
in more than $300 million each year. Wealthy 
men buy their way out of the problem; in 
one case a company sent 200 women who 
enrolled in their service to a powerful execu-
tive so that he could select a bride. However, 
men of more modest means struggle to get 
the attention of potential mates, particularly 
if they are unable to afford an apartment in 
expensive cities like Beijing. And although 
women have a huge numerical advantage, 
they face strong pressure to find a suitable 
mate before they turn 28; to be single after 
this age stigmatizes them with the label “left-
over woman.”77
China
An economic boom is creating a middle class of more than 130 million people that 
analysts project will grow to more than 400 million in 10 years. During the Cultural 
Revolution, Mao’s Red Guards seized on even the smallest possessions—a pocket watch 
or silk scarf—as evidence of “bourgeois consciousness.” Change came rapidly in the early 
1990s, after Mao’s successor Deng Xiaoping uttered the phrase that quickly became the 
credo of the new China: “To get rich is glorious.”
Because costs in China are low, a family with an annual income below the U.S. 
poverty threshold of about $14,000 can enjoy middle-class comforts, including stylish 
clothes, Chinese-made color televisions, DVD players, and cell phones. Wealthier Chinese 
entrepreneurs indulge in Cuban Cohiba cigars that sell for $25 each, a quarter of the 
average Chinese laborer’s monthly wage. In bustling Shanghai, newly minted “yuppies” 
drop their kids off for golf lessons; visit Maserati and Ferrari showrooms; buy some luxury 
items from Louis Vuitton, Hugo Boss, or Prada; then pick up some Häagen-Dazs ice cream 
before they head to an Evian spa to unwind.
Nike, which consumers in a survey named China’s coolest brand, profits mightily 
from the rise of the Chinese middle class. Nike shoes are a symbol of success, and the 
company opens an average of 1.5 new stores a day there. The company worked for a 
long time to attain this status, starting when it outfitted top Chinese athletes and spon-
sored all the teams in China’s pro basketball league. Still, becoming a fashion icon (and 
persuading consumers to spend twice the average monthly salary for a pair of shoes) 
is no mean feat in a country that’s not exactly sports crazy. So Nike affiliated with 
the NBA (which began to televise games in China) and brought over players such as 
Michael Jordan for visits. Slowly but surely, in-the-know Chinese came to call sneakers 
“Nai-ke.”76
japan
Japan is a highly brand-conscious society where upscale, designer labels are incredibly 
popular. Although the devastation from the 2011 tsunami reduced demand for luxury goods 
among many Japanese, their love affair with top brands started in the 1970s when the local 
economy was booming and many Japanese could buy Western luxury accessories for the first 
time. Some analysts say Japan’s long slump since that time may have fostered a psychologi-
cal need to splurge on small luxuries to give people the illusion of wealth and to forget their 
anxieties about the future. Single, working women are largely responsible for fueling Japan’s 
luxury-goods spending; about three-quarters of Japanese women aged 25 to 29 work out-
side the home. These “office ladies” typically save money because they live with their parents, 
so this leaves them with cash on hand to spend on clothes, accessories, and vacations.78
the Middle east
In contrast to the Japanese, few Arabic women work. This makes a search for the latest in 
Western luxury brands a major leisure activity for those with money. A major expansion 
of Western luxury brands is under way across the Middle East, home to some of the fash-
ion industry’s best customers. High-end retailers such as Saks Fifth Avenue and Giorgio 
Armani operate opulent stores that cater to this attractive market. Like China, there also 
is a growing middle class of more than 150 million people. If the 22 countries in the Arab 
League were a single country, it would be the world’s eighth-largest economy—bigger 
than India or Russia. It’s also a young economy; more than half of the people are younger 
than 25 years of age.79
the United Kingdom
England is an extremely class-conscious country, and at least until recently inherited posi-
tion and family background largely predetermined consumption patterns. Traditionally 
people defined three classes: upper, middle, and working. Members of the upper class were 
educated at schools such as Eton and Oxford, and they spoke like Henry Higgins in My Fair 
Lady. We can still find remnants of this rigid class structure. “Hooray Henrys” (wealthy 
young men) play polo at Windsor and hereditary peers still dominate the House of Lords.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
461 
However, the dominance of inherited wealth appears to have faded in Britain’s tra-
ditionally aristocratic society, as British entrepreneurs like Sir Richard Branson (of the 
Virgin empire) redefine the economy. The United Kingdom was particularly hard hit by the 
Great Recession, and a new emphasis on frugality altered people’s priorities. In addition, 
populist outrage grew after it came to light that legislators had billed the government for 
excessive expenses—among other abuses, British taxpayers footed a £2,000 bill for one 
M.P. to clean the moat surrounding his castle.80
The Great British Class Survey conducted by the BBC asked more than 161,000 people 
for their input about social class. The study concluded the number of distinct classes in the 
United Kingdom today has grown from three to seven. These range from the “elite” at the 
top who possess money, social connections, and upper-crust cultural preferences, to the 
precariat (precarious proletariat) at the bottom who live from day to day with severely con-
strained resources. The new middle categories include the “technical middle class,” a group 
that has a lot of money but few social connections or cultural activity, and “emergent ser-
vice workers,” a young, urban group that has little money but a lot of social connections 
and cultural interests. Not all Britons agreed with the new classifications. As one wrote to a 
newspaper, “There are only two classes: those with tattoos, and those without.”81
India
India’s economy is booming despite the global recession, and affluent consumers prize 
higher-end global brands—even though nearly half of India’s population lives on less than 
$1.25 a day. Brands like Gucci, Jimmy Choo, and Hermès scramble to open stores in high-
end hotels or new superluxury malls, where the management often stations guards at the 
doors to keep the destitute outside.83
A recent flap illustrates the rapid changes in Indian society. Vogue India ran a 16-page 
spread of poor people surrounded by luxury goods: a toothless old woman holds a child 
who wears a Fendi bib, a woman and two other people ride on a motorbike as she sports 
a Hermès bag that sells for more than $10,000, a street beggar grips a Burberry umbrella. 
A columnist denounced the spread as “not just tacky but downright distasteful.” The 
Marketing pitfall
British consumers are 
well aware of a type of 
person they call chavs. 
This label refers to young, 
lower-class men and women 
who mix flashy brands and accessories from 
big names such as Burberry with track suits. 
Their style icons include soccer star David 
Beckham and his wife, Victoria (aka Posh 
Spice). Despite their (alleged) tackiness, 
some marketers like chavs because they 
spend a lot of their disposable income on 
fashion, food, and gadgets. France’s Danone, 
which makes HP Sauce, a condiment the Brit-
ish have poured over bacon sandwiches and 
fries for a century, launched a series of ads 
to play up to the chav culture. One features 
a brawl over the sauce at a wedding buffet; 
another includes glammy soccer players’ 
wives mingling cattily at a party. On the other 
hand the upscale Burberry brand was long a 
favorite of chavs, and its image is only start-
ing to recover. As one author wrote, “a lot of 
people thought that Burberry would be worn 
by the person who mugged them.” The as-
sociation between chavs and Burberry hats 
and scarves got so bad that for awhile some 
restaurants and clubs barred entry to anyone 
who wore the distinctive plaid design.82
Chavs are a common social class stereotype 
in England.
Source: JJ Augustin Inc., Publishers.

462 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
magazine’s editor commented that the shoot’s message is simply that “fashion is no longer 
a rich man’s privilege. Anyone can carry it off and make it look beautiful.”84
One of Bollywood’s biggest stars, Shahrukh Khan, is “brand ambassador” for Tag Heuer 
watches, which cost thousands of dollars. He gives them away on the Indian version of Who 
Wants to Be a Millionaire?, which is the show that also formed the basis for the hit movie 
Slumdog Millionaire. India’s ascendancy is fairly recent; for decades after the country became 
independent from Britain, its economy was socialistic and traditional with a rigid class hier-
archy: Dalits, formerly known as the Untouchables, are at the bottom and forced into menial 
jobs, whereas Brahmins historically occupied the highest rung of the social ladder.85
Analysts project that soon there will be about 267 million middle-class Indian con-
sumers, a growth of about 67 percent over just a 5-year period. Although the middle class 
currently represents less than 15 percent of India’s population, it still accounts for about 
one-half of the cars, computers, and air conditioners in the country.86 Today, young 
Indian consumers watch MTV and read international fashion magazines. They exert a 
strong influence on the country’s rapid growth, especially because India’s population is 
relatively young; 54 percent of the people are younger than 25 years of age.87
Status Symbols and Social Capital
It’s getting more difficult to clearly link certain brands or 
stores with a specific class. That’s because a lot of “affordable 
luxuries” now are within reach of many consumers who could 
not have acquired them in the past. Think of college women 
you may know who buy pricey bags from Louis Vuitton or 
Coach, and then eat ramen noodles for dinner. To make mat-
ters even more confusing, a wealthy family may well buy its wine at Costco and its bath 
towels at Target—and proudly gloat about the steals they snagged.88
Rising incomes in many economically developing countries, such as South Korea 
and China, coupled with decreasing prices for quality consumer goods and services, cre-
ate explosive demand for luxury products or at least “affordable” versions of these goods. 
The biggest emerging markets go by the acronym BRIC nations: Brazil, Russia, India, and 
China. China and India alone account for more than 20 percent of the world’s gross domes-
tic product (GDP); 30 years ago this percentage was less than 5. In recent years the rapid 
growth has slowed as a result of a number of factors including the United States’ newfound 
dominance in the oil industry and, ironically, the maturation of these economies (especially 
in China) from lower-priced, production oriented systems to greater levels of consumption 
as incomes rise. Still analysts expect overall growth to continue even if at a slower rate. In 
2014, China overtook the United States as the largest economy in the world.89
This change fuels demand for mass-consumed products that still offer some degree 
of panache. Companies such as H&M, Zara, EasyJet, and L’Oréal provide creature comforts 
to a consumer segment that analysts label mass class. This term describes the hundreds 
of millions of global consumers who now enjoy a level of purchasing power that’s suf-
ficient to let them afford high-quality products—except for big-ticket items such as col-
lege educations, housing, or luxury cars. The mass-class market, for example, spawned 
several versions of affordable cars: Latin Americans have their Volkswagen Beetle (they 
affectionately call it el huevito, “the little egg”); Indian consumers have their Maruti 800 
(it sells for as little as US $4,860); and the Fiat Palio, the company’s “world car,” targets 
people in emerging countries such as Brazil, Argentina, India, China, and Turkey.90
“What Do You Use that Fork For?” taste Cultures, 
Codes, and Cultural Capital
A taste culture describes consumers in terms of their aesthetic and intellectual prefer-
ences. This concept helps to illuminate the important, yet sometimes subtle, distinctions 
in consumption choices among the social classes.93 For example, a comprehensive 
ObjeCtIve 12-3 
Individuals’ desires to make 
a statement about their 
social class, or the class to 
which they hope to belong, 
influence the products they 
like and dislike.
Marketing pitfall
Research evidence shows  
that people who identify 
with a relatively low-status  
category desire objectives  
they associate with high 
status as a way to enhance social standing.91 
This desire to compensate can ironically work 
against these individuals in the long run. For 
example, nutritionists point to supersized 
food portions and megasized cups of sugary 
drinks as prime culprits in the obesity epi-
demic we see in the United States. A research 
project demonstrated an obstacle to battling 
this prob lem: Underprivileged consumers view 
larger-sized portions as status symbols. When 
study respondents were made to feel they had 
less power, they chose bigger food portions 
to compensate. They were even more likely to 
do so when their choices were public. The re-
searchers note the irony of this situation: The 
short-term status display may ultimately lead 
to even lower status because of the stigma of 
obesity in our society.92

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
463 
analysis of social-class differences using data from 675,000 households supports the 
mass class phenomenon we discussed previously: Differences in consumption patterns 
between the upper and upper-middle classes and between the middle and working classes 
are disappearing. However, strong differences still emerge in terms of how consumers 
spend their discretionary income and leisure time. Upper- and upper-middle-class people 
are more likely to visit museums and attend live theater, and middle-class consumers are 
more likely to camp and fish. The upper classes are more likely to listen to all-news pro-
grams, whereas the middle classes are more likely to tune in to country music.94
In one of the classic studies of social differences in taste, researchers catalogued 
homeowners’ possessions as they sat in their living rooms and asked them about their 
income and occupation. As Figure 12.2 shows, they identified clusters of furnishings and 
decorative items that seemed to appear together with some regularity, and they found dif-
ferent clusters depending on the consumer’s social status. For example, they tended to 
find a cluster that consisted of religious objects, artificial flowers, and  still-life portraits 
in relatively lower-status living rooms, whereas they were likely to catalogue a cluster of 
abstract paintings, sculptures, and modern furniture in a higher-status home.95
Another approach to social class focuses on the codes (the ways consumers express 
and interpret meanings) people within different social strata use. It’s valuable for market-
ers to map these codes because they can use concepts and terms that their target custom-
ers will relate to. Marketing appeals we construct with class differences in mind result 
in quite different messages. For example, a life insurance ad that a company targets to a 
lower-class person might depict, in simple, straightforward terms, a hard-working family 
man who feels good immediately after he buys a policy. An upscale appeal might depict a 
more affluent older couple surrounded by photos of their children and grandchildren. It 
might include extensive copy that plugs the satisfaction of planning for the future.
This ad from New Zealand pokes fun at the 
tendency of some consumers to show off 
their cultural capital excessively.
Source: Courtesy of DB Breweries.

464 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
These two ways to communicate product benefits incorporate different types of codes. 
Restricted codes focus on the content of objects, not on relationships among objects. 
Elaborated codes, in contrast, are more complex and depend on a more sophisticated 
worldview. These code differences extend to the way consumers approach basic concepts 
such as time, social relationships, and objects. Table 12.1 summarizes some differences 
between these two code types.
Clearly, not all taste cultures are created equal. The upper classes have access to 
resources that enable them to perpetuate their privileged position in society. Pierre Bourdieu 
was a French theorist who wrote at length about how people compete for resources, or capi-
tal. Bourdieu did large-scale surveys to track people’s wealth, and he related this “economic 
capital” to patterns of taste in entertainment and the arts. He concluded that “taste” is a 
status-marking force, or habitus, that causes consumption preferences to cluster together. 
Traditional
+500
–500
+500
–500
Modern
14 Curtains
translucent
3 Carpet
design
ﬂoral
5 Bright
walls
8 Furniture bulky
42 Religious painting
26 Television
2 Carpet
6 Walls wood
4 Carpet solid
13
Number of
windows
18
General space
bare
1 Floor
16 Curtains
ﬂoral
53 House below average
35
Clock, sunburst
52 Organ
34 Encyclopedia
32 Knicknacks
12 Docks
22 Excellent condition
15 Curtains plain
24 Fireplace
46 Small potted plant
29 Religious objects
44 Cut
ﬂowers
38 Wall
mirror
45 Artiﬁcial
ﬂowers
36 Clock,
other
43 Still-life
print
47 Large potted plants
37 Picture windows
39 Outdoor paintings
41
Abstract painting
51 Sculpture
7 Furniture
modern
17
Curtains geometric
10 Furniture mixed
23 Furniture below average
21 Disorder
49 Antimacassars
32 Photographs
48 Trophies
30
Bible
50
Dogs/animals
27
Hi-Fi
19 General
space
dense
Low
Social
Status
High
Social
Status
11
Furniture
French
9 Furniture traditional
20
Very neat
25 Piano
28 Candle holder
Figure 12.2 LIVINg ROOM CLUSTERS AND SOCIAL CLASS
Source: Adapted from Edward O. Laumann and James S. House, “Living Room Styles and Social Attributes: The Patterning of Marerial Artifacts in a Model Urban Community,” 
 Sociology and Social Research 54 (April 1970): 321–342. Copyright, University of Southern California, April 1970. All rights reserved.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
465 
Later analyses of U.S. consumers largely confirm these relationships; for example, higher-
income people are more likely than the average consumer to attend the theater, whereas 
lower-income people are more likely to attend a wrestling match.96
Social and Cultural Capital
The Burning Man Festival began in 1986 as a Summer Solstice celebration on a San 
Francisco beach that attracted a small group of people. Some of them built an eight-foot 
tall wooden man and set it on fire. Over the years the event attracted more and more 
people who celebrated “alternative lifestyles” with bizarre costumes, primitive camps and 
ample mind-altering substances. As the event grew, organizers moved it to the desert 
to accommodate more attendees. Since that time, however, this countercultural festival 
has evolved into something quite different: A huge annual retreat in the Black Rock 
Desert north of Reno, Nevada, that attracts wealthy technology moguls who engage in 
one-upmanship to show one another just how much money they can flaunt in the name 
of weirdness. Luminaries from Facebook, Amazon, Google, Twitter, Uber, and other hot 
Silicon Valley outfits go glamping in splendor with their entourages, and fees purportedly 
reach $25,000 per person. They arrive in tricked-out RVs like the ones celebrities stay in 
on movie sets; these connect together to create private enclaves that other attendees can’t 
penetrate. Guests arrive on private jets and spend the week dining on sushi and lobster as 
they “get back to nature” in style.97
The transformation of Burning Man from what used to be known as a countercul-
tural celebration to a showcase for wealth illustrates Bourdieu’s concept of social capital. 
Exclusivity functions like a big, beefy nightclub bouncer who decides who he will admit 
past the velvet rope. An important form of “currency” is access to exclusive networks 
where business and political deals happen. In the process, paradoxically it’s not unusual to 
find that the people who originated the activity can no longer afford to participate, like the 
original Burning Man “hippies” or long-time residents who get priced out of gentrifying 
urban neighborhoods.
tabLe 12. 1   Effects of Restricted versus Elaborated Codes
Source: Adapted from Jeffrey F. Durgee, “How Consumer Sub-Cultures Code Reality: A Look at Some Code Types,” in Richard J. Lutz, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 13 
(Provo, UT: Association of Consumer Research, 1986): 332.
restricted Codes
elaborated Codes
general 
characteristics
Emphasize description and contents of objects
Have implicit meanings (context dependent)
Emphasize analysis and interrelationship between objects; 
i.e., hierarchical organization and instrumental connections
Have explicit meanings
Language
Use few qualifiers, i.e., few adjectives or adverbs
Have language rich in personal, individual qualifiers
Use concrete, descriptive, tangible symbolism
Use large vocabulary, complex conceptual hierarchy
Social relationships
Stress attributes of individuals over formal roles
Stress formal role structure, instrumental relationships
Time
Focus on present; have only general notion of future
Focus an instrumental relationship between present 
activities and future rewards
Physical space
Locate rooms, spaces in context of other rooms and 
places: e.g., “front room,” “corner store”
Identify rooms, spaces in terms of usage; formal ordering 
of spaces; e.g., “dining room,” “financial district”
Implications for 
marketers
Stress inherent product quality, contents (or trust-worthiness, 
goodness of “real-type”), spokesperson
Stress differences, advantages vis-à-vis other products in 
terms of some autonomous evaluation criteria
Stress implicit of fit of product with total lifestyle
Stress product’s instrumental ties to distant benefits
Use simple adjectives, descriptions
Use complex adjectives, descriptors

466 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Bourdieu also reminds us of the importance of cultural capital. This term refers to 
a set of distinctive and socially rare tastes and practices—knowledge of “refined” behav-
ior that admits a person into the realm of the upper class.98 The elites in a society collect 
a set of skills that enable them to hold positions of power and authority, and they pass 
these on to their children (think etiquette lessons and debutante balls). These resources 
gain in value because class members restrict access to them. That’s part of the reason 
why people compete so fiercely for admission to elite colleges. Much as we hate to admit 
it, the rich are different.
Online Social Capital
Because we spend so much time in digital environments, it’s natural that the same social 
class dynamics operate in these spaces. Let’s use the social media platform Foursquare 
to understand how online social capital works. People visit Foursquare because they can 
check in at locations and announce their arrivals to their community of friends. Some 
check-ins earn badges and coupons from participating retailers. The more people who 
become involved, the more valuable the community, and involvement grows based on 
activities that participants value. For instance, people who are into Foursquare crave the 
status of being designated as “mayor” of a location like their local Starbucks. As long as 
people value this title, the Foursquare community will attract enthusiastic participants. 
If and when people move on to something else, the social capital that flows from being a 
mayor will slow to a trickle. At that point, we’re on to the next hot site. As it declines, the 
community experiences a big drop off in participation, adherence to norms, perceived repu-
tation, and trust among members.99 Think about formerly popular online communities like 
MySpace or Friendster to understand how platforms can lose their cool almost overnight.
In the online world, many people hold others in high regard for their opinions as 
much as, or maybe even more than, for their money. The “psychic income” we get when 
we post reviews that others validate creates a reputation economy, in which the “cur-
rency” people earn is approval rather than cold hard cash.100 Retailers may “sort” clien-
tele in terms of their ability to afford the retailers’ products or services (e.g., some invest-
ment firms only accept clients with a certain net worth). Volunteers who edit Wikipedia 
entries may devote 20 to 40 hours per week. Exclusive dating sites like hotenough.org 
weed out unattractive people. The site’s home page claims, “Through our screening pro-
cess, we have filtered the masses leaving only your area’s most attractive, fit, trendy singles 
and have now included an exclusive section for our 40+ singles, the ‘BABY BOOMER 
SECTION.’ Hot Enough offers three tiers of hotties, so if you’re fit and trendy, then rest 
assured there is a place for you.”101
In general, we know that a community is healthier and more desirable when it is 
able to offer a lot of social capital as an inducement for people to join; that’s one reason 
why the competition is fierce to get admitted to Ivy League universities. This is true in the 
online world as well. In the online world, bloggers acquire social capital when a lot of other 
people start to rate their posts highly and perhaps retweet them.102 And, like exclusive 
country clubs, online gated communities that selectively allow access to some people 
may offer a high degree of social capital to the lucky few who pass the test.
The social network This.com is an invitation-only platform that allows a user to 
post only one link a day to focus those in the know on a particular topic. Journalists 
and industry insiders jockey ferociously to receive a coveted invite.103 Or, consider 
ASmallWorld.com, a social networking site that gives the wealthy access to one 
another in cyberspace—while keeping the rest of us out. It’s an invitation-only site 
that’s grown to about 150,000 registered users. The site’s founders promote it as 
a Facebook for the social elite. A few postings help to understand why. One person 
wrote, “I need to rent 20 very luxury sports cars for an event in Switzerland …. The 
cars should be: Maserati—Ferrari—Lamborghini—Aston Martin ONLY!” Another 
announced: “If anyone is looking for a private island, I now have one available for 
purchase in Fiji.”104

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
467 
Status Symbols
We tend to evaluate ourselves, our professional accomplishments, our appearance, and 
our material well-being relative to others. The popular phrase “keeping up with the 
Joneses” (in Japan, it’s “keeping up with the Satos”) refers to a desire to compare your 
standard of living with your neighbors’—and exceed it if you can.
Often it’s not enough just to have wealth or fame; what matters is that you have more 
of it than others. One study demonstrated that we assign value to loyalty programs (e.g., 
when airlines award you special status based on the number of miles you fly) at least in 
part based on our level in the hierarchy relative to other members. Subjects were assigned 
to “gold status” in a program where they were in the only tier, or a program where there 
Cb aS I See It
Benjamin G. Voyer, ESCP Europe Business School & London School of Economics, United Kingdom
goods to enhance their status, 
especially when buying brands with 
prominent designer logos.
Recently, researchers have 
started to examine conspicuous 
consumption from a different angle, 
looking at whether status-enhancing 
consumption was compatible 
with the notion of sustainability. 
Throughout history, luxury goods 
have been associated with 
unsustainability or unhealthiness. 
Plato, for instance, suggested 
that societies in which people 
were consuming luxury goods 
were “unhealthy” or “healthy” 
societies, on the other hand, were 
those in which people would limit 
themselves to necessities. Overall, 
luxury consumption has often been 
perceived as a social and moral 
transgression, denoting values of 
hedonism, expense, and affluence.
In this context, could it be that 
consumers actually find sustainable 
luxury goods less desirable than 
nonsustainable ones? We answered 
this question in a series of studies 
conducted with colleague Daisy 
Beckham and looked at whether 
luxury was seen as compatible with 
sustainability. In a first study, we 
found that consumers were more 
likely to associate luxury brands with 
words related to unsustainability 
(e.g., pollution, smoke, greed, 
fumes) versus words related to 
sustainability (e.g., conservation, 
green, trees, ecology).
In another study, we looked at the 
effect of a “sustainability label” on 
consumers’ perceptions of luxury 
goods. We asked participants to rate 
a series of six luxury handbags, three 
of them being randomly described as 
sustainable. We found that luxury bags 
receiving the label “sustainable edition” 
were rated, on average, as being less 
luxurious than bags without such a 
label. We also found that the more 
expensive consumers rated a luxury 
handbag, the less sustainable they 
thought it was. The only consumers who 
responded favorably to a sustainability 
label were those who valued 
sustainability as an important decision 
criterion when buying a handbag. A 
follow-up focus group revealed that 
participants perceived luxury as being 
conceptually opposed to the idea 
of sustainability, and that for some, 
sustainable luxury products would not 
carry the same status-enhancing effects 
than regular luxury products.
What is the bottom line of all this? 
Given that many consumers use luxury 
goods to communicate about social 
status, which is typically associated with 
breaking norms and rules, it seems that 
a sustainability label is paradoxically 
detrimental to the marketing of luxury 
goods. This is something that can 
be counterintuitive for luxury brands, 
which often communicate on product 
features, which are thought to enhance 
the perception of quality and prestige 
of their products (e.g., Made in France 
labels).
What do you typically associate with 
luxury and luxury goods? High quality, 
well-crafted products, or perhaps 
simply a waste of money? The display 
of refined tastes or a mere attempt to 
show off? Luxury goods constitute a 
unique product and service category 
in marketing and are interesting for a 
simple reason: they often challenge 
everything we know about traditional 
products and services! The buying 
behavior of luxury consumers, and 
the meaning of luxury possessions, 
has been the focus of much research 
in the field. Luxury consumption has 
been linked to wealth, social class, 
and economic power. Research 
suggests that consumers use luxury 

468 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
was also a silver tier. Although both groups were “gold,” those in the program that also 
offered a lower level felt better about it.105
A major motivation to buy is not to enjoy these items but rather to let others know 
that we can afford them. These products are status symbols. The popular bumper-sticker 
slogan, “He who dies with the most toys, wins,” summarizes the desire to accumulate 
these badges of achievement. Status-seeking is a significant source of motivation to pro-
cure appropriate products and services that we hope will let others know we’ve “made it.” 
A study demonstrated how people turn to status symbols to prop up their self-concepts, 
especially when they feel badly or uncertain about other aspects of their lives. When sub-
jects in auctions were made to feel that they had little power, they spent more to purchase 
items to compensate for this deficit.106
As we discussed previously, the rise of a mass class market means that many luxury 
products have gone down-market. Does this mean that Americans no longer yearn for 
status symbols? Hardly. The market continues to roll out ever-pricier goods and services, 
from $12,000 mother–baby diamond tennis bracelet sets to $600 jeans, $800 haircuts, 
and $400 bottles of wine. Although it seems that almost everyone can flaunt a designer 
handbag (or at least a counterfeit version with a convincing logo), our country’s wealthi-
est consumers employ 9,000 personal chefs, visit plastic surgeons, and send their children 
to $400-an-hour math tutors. A sociologist explained, “Whether or not someone has a 
flat-screen TV is going to tell you less than if you look at the services they use, where they 
live and the control they have over other people’s labor, those who are serving them.”109
Of course, the particular products that count as status symbols vary across cultures 
and locales:
●
●Although to most Americans the now-defunct Hummer vehicle is a symbol of ex-
cess, Iraqis still regard the huge gas-guzzlers as an alluring symbol of power. An Iraqi 
Hummer dealer observed, “In Iraq, people judge you by your car, and you’re not a man 
without one.” People there use an Arabic phrase to explain the need to have the biggest 
car: hasad thukuri, which roughly translates as “penis envy.”110
Marketing pitfall
Luxury goods often serve 
as status symbols, but 
the proliferation of inex-
pensive counterfeit prod-
ucts threatens to diminish  
their value (“Hey buddy, wanna buy a ‘genuine’ 
Rolex for $20?”). Fakes are a major headache 
for many manufacturers, especially in Asia;  
Officials in China estimate that 15 to 20 percent 
of the products made there are counterfeit.107
How do people who bought the real thing 
react when they see imitations of their prized 
handbags or watches parading by them on 
the street? Researchers who interviewed 
consumers who purchased luxury fashion 
brands in India and Thailand identified three 
coping strategies:
1. Flight—They stop using the brand be-
cause they don’t want to be misla-
beled as a lesser-status person who 
buys fake brands.
2. reclamation—They go out of their way 
to emphasize their long relationship 
with the brand, but express concern 
that its image will be tarnished.
3. abranding—They disguise their luxury 
items in the belief that truly high-
status people do not need to display 
expensive logos, whereas those who 
do betray lower status.108
Counterfeit luxury goods are a major head-
ache for companies that cater to high-end 
customers.
Source: © Neil Setchfield/Alamy.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
469 
●
●In China, children are status symbols (partly because the government strongly discour-
ages couples from having more than one baby). Parents want to show off their pam-
pered child and are eager to surround their “little emperors” with luxury goods. Chinese 
families spend one-third to one-half of their disposable income on their children.111
●
●The Russian economy has fallen on hard times lately because of economic sanctions 
and falling oil prices. Still there are many nouveau riches who made a fortune over the 
past decide and crave luxury goods to show off their newfound wealth. Some buy the 
GoldVish cell phone that glitters with 120 carats of diamonds encrusting a case of 
white gold. The desire to spend as much as possible on indulgences fuels a popular 
joke in Moscow: A wealthy businessman tells a friend he bought a tie for $100. The 
friend responds, “You fool! You can get the same tie for $200 just across the street.”112
●
●In Indonesia, as in many countries, a cell phone is a status symbol—but instead of a 
sleek iPhone, a decade-old Nokia model users call “the Brick” is the one to have. This 
“smart phone” never took off in the West; its bulky design makes it look dated. But 
in Jakarta, its heft is what people like about it. At a whopping half-pound, it doesn’t 
fit into a pocket, so it’s visible when models, politicians, and other celebrities cart it 
around with them. Nokia even sells a gold-plated version for $2,500. In the world of 
status symbols, anything goes as long as others don’t have it.113
The social analyst Thorstein Veblen first discussed the motivation to consume for 
the sake of consuming at the turn of the 20th century. For Veblen, we buy things to 
create invidious distinction; this means that we use them to inspire envy in others 
through our display of wealth or power. Veblen coined the term conspicuous con-
sumption to refer to people’s desires to provide prominent visible evidence of their abil-
ity to afford luxury goods. The material excesses of his time motivated Veblen’s outlook. 
Veblen wrote in the era of the “Robber Barons,” where the likes of J. P. Morgan, Henry 
Clay Frick, and William Vanderbilt built massive financial empires and flaunted their 
wealth as they competed to throw the most lavish party. Some of these events were leg-
endary, as this account describes:
There were tales, repeated in the newspapers, of dinners on horseback; of banquets for pet dogs; 
of hundred-dollar bills folded into guests’ dinner napkins; of a hostess who attracted attention 
by seating a chimpanzee at her table; of centerpieces in which lightly clad living maidens swam 
in glass tanks, or emerged from huge pies; of parties at which cigars were ceremoniously lighted 
with flaming banknotes of large denominations.114
Sounds like they really lived it up back in the old days, right? Well, maybe the more 
things change, the more they stay the same: The wave of corporate scandals involving 
companies such as AIG, Enron, WorldCom, and Tyco infuriated many consumers when 
they discovered that some top executives lived it up even as other employees were laid off. 
One account of a $1 million birthday party the chief executive of Tyco threw for his wife 
is eerily similar to a Robber Baron shindig: The party reportedly had a gladiator theme and 
featured an ice sculpture of Michelangelo’s David with vodka streaming from his penis into 
crystal glasses. The company also furnished the executive’s New York apartment with such 
“essentials” as a $6,000 shower curtain, a $2,200 gilt wastebasket, and a $17,100 “travel-
ing toilette box.”115
This phenomenon of conspicuous consumption was, for Veblen, most evident among 
what he termed the leisure class people for whom productive work is taboo. In Marxist 
terms, such an attitude reflects a desire to link oneself to ownership or control of the 
means of production, rather than to the production itself. Those who control these 
resources, therefore, avoid any evidence that they actually have to work for a living, as the 
term idle rich suggests.
To Veblen, wives are an economic resource. He criticized the “decorative” role of 
women, as rich men showered them with expensive clothes, pretentious homes, and a life 
of leisure as a way to advertise their own wealth (note that today he might have argued the 
same for a smaller number of husbands). Today we refer to these women as trophy wives. 
Fashions such as high-heeled shoes, tight corsets, billowing trains on dresses, and elaborate 

470 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
hairstyles all conspired to ensure that wealthy women could barely move without assis-
tance, much less perform manual labor. Similarly, the Chinese practice of foot-binding pre-
vented female members of the aristocracy from walking; servants carried them from place 
to place. In recent years the tables have turned as older women—who increasingly boast the 
same incomes and social capital as their male peers—seek out younger men as arm candy. 
These so-called cougars (a term popularized by the TV show Cougar Town) are everywhere; 
surveys estimate that about one-third of women older than age 40 date younger men.116
Consumers engage in conspicuous consumption as a way to display status mark-
ers, yet the prominence of these markers varies from products with large recognizable 
emblems to those with no logo at all. Those “in the know” often can recognize a subtle 
status marker when another member of their elite group displays it, such as the distinctive 
design of a bag or watch—these are “quiet signals.” In contrast, some people may feel the 
need to almost hit others over the head with their bling; they use “loud signals.”
One set of researchers labels these differences brand prominence. They assign con-
sumers to one of four consumption groups (patricians, parvenus, poseurs, and proletar-
ians) based on their wealth and need for status. When they looked at data on luxury goods, 
the authors found different classes gravitated toward different types of brand prominence. 
Brands like Louis Vuitton, Gucci, and Mercedes vary in terms of how blatant their status 
appeals (e.g., prominent logos) are in advertisements and on the products themselves—or 
in other words, in the type of status signaling they employ.
Thinking back to our discussion about “old money” compared with “new money,” for 
example, it’s not surprising that those who are wealthier and don’t have a high need for status 
(patricians) rely on “quiet signals” and likely will be put off by excessive displays. Marketers 
for status brands need to understand these distinctions because their customers may or may 
not value products with explicit logos and other highly visible cues that signal conspicuous 
consumption.117 Figure 12.3 summarizes these four types and provides one set of contrast-
ing products the researchers used in their study: quiet versus loud Gucci sunglasses.
Veblen’s inspiration came from anthropological studies of the Kwakiutl Indians, 
who lived in the Pacific Northwest. At a potlatch ceremony, the host showed off his 
wealth and gave extravagant presents to the guests. The more he gave away, the 
greater his status. Sometimes, the host employed an even more radical strategy to 
flaunt his wealth. He would publicly destroy some of his property just to demonstrate 
how much he had.
This French ad suggests that even dogs 
marry “trophy wives.”
Source: Courtesy of CLM-BBDO and Mars Petfood, 
Clive Stewart Photography.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
471 
And the plot thickens: Because guests had to reciprocate by giving a gift of equal 
value, the host could humiliate a poorer rival with an invitation to a lavish potlatch. The 
hapless guest would eventually be forced into bankruptcy because he needed to give away 
as much as the host, even though he could not afford to do so. If this practice sounds 
“primitive,” think for a moment about many modern weddings. Parents commonly invest 
huge sums of money to throw a lavish party and compete with others for the distinction of 
giving their daughter the “best” or most extravagant wedding, even if they have to dip into 
their retirement savings to do it.
Like the potlatch ritual, in modern times our desire to convince others we have a sur-
plus of resources creates the need for us to exhibit the evidence that we do. Accordingly, 
we may prioritize consumption activities that use up as many resources as possible in 
nonconstructive pursuits. This conspicuous waste, in turn, shows others that we have 
assets to spare. Veblen wrote, “We are told of certain Polynesian chiefs, who, under the 
stress of good form, preferred to starve rather than carry their food to their mouths with 
their own hands.”118
As the competition to accumulate status symbols escalates, sometimes the best tactic 
is to switch gears and go in reverse. One way to do this is to deliberately avoid status sym-
bols—that is, to seek status by mocking it. Social scientists call this sophisticated form of 
conspicuous consumption parody display.119 Hence, the popularity of old, ripped blue 
jeans (or more likely, the ones companies stonewash and treat so that they look old and 
ripped), “utility” vehicles such as Jeeps among the upper classes (like the Caldwells in the 
chapter opener), and brands with a strong blue-collar heritage like Von Dutch truckers’ hats 
and Red Wing boots.
Patrician
Patricians signal to each
other. They use quiet
signals.
Proletarian
Proletarians do not engage
in signaling.
Low
Have-
nots
Haves
High
Poseur
Poseurs aspire to be haves.
They mimic the parvenus.
Parvenu
Parvenus associate with
other haves and want to
dissociate themselves from
have-nots. They use loud
signals.
Light arrows denote associations
Dark arrows denote disassociations
Need for Status
Wealth
Figure 12.3 A TyPOLOgy OF STATUS 
SIgNALINg
Note: “Quiet” sunglasses (L) do not include 
a prominent designer logo, while “Loud” (R)  
sunglasses do.
Source: Young Jee Han, Joseph C. Nunes, and 
Xavier Drèze (2010), “Signaling Status with Luxury 
Goods: The Role of Brand Prominence,” Journal of 
Marketing 74 (July), 15–30, from Figures 2 and 3.
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.

472 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. Our confidence in our future, as well as in the overall 
economy, determines how freely we spend and the 
types of products we buy.
The field of behavioral economics studies how consumers 
decide what to do with their money. Consumer confidence—
the state of mind consumers have about their own personal 
situation, as well as their feelings about their overall eco-
nomic prospects—helps to determine whether they will pur-
chase goods and services, take on debt, or save their money.
2. We group consumers into social classes that say a lot 
about where they stand in society.
A consumer’s social class refers to his or her standing in 
society. Factors including education, occupation, and in-
come determine the class to which we belong. Virtually 
all groups make distinctions among members in terms 
of relative superiority, power, and access to valued re-
sources. This social stratification creates a status hierarchy 
in which consumers prefer some goods to others.
CHaPter Summary
Although income is an important indicator of social 
class, the relationship is far from perfect. Factors such as 
place of residence, cultural interests, and worldview also 
determine social class. As income distributions change 
around the world, it is getting more difficult to distinguish 
among members of social classes; many products succeed 
because they appeal to a newly emerging group that mar-
keters call the mass class (people with incomes high enough 
to purchase luxury items, at least on a small scale).
3. Individuals’ desires to make a statement about their 
social class, or the class to which they hope to belong, 
influence the products they like and dislike.
Conspicuous consumption, when a person flaunts his 
status by deliberately using up valuable resources, is one 
way to “buy up” to a higher social class. Nouveau riches, 
whose relatively recent acquisition of income rather 
than ancestry or breeding accounts for their enhanced 
social mobility, are the most likely to do this. We use 
status symbols (usually scarce goods or services) to com-
municate our standing to others. Parody display occurs 
when we seek status by deliberately avoiding fashionable 
products.
Affluenza, 457
Bottom of the pyramid, 453
Brand prominence, 470
BRIC nations, 462
CEO pay ratio, 448
Chavs, 461
Codes, 463
College wage premium, 452
Conspicuous consumption, 469
Consumer confidence, 448
Cosmopolitanism, 457
Cougars, 470
Credit score, 449
Cultural capital, 466
Digital Divide, 454
Discretionary income, 447
Dominance–submission hierarchy, 455
Elaborated codes, 464
Female-to-male earnings ratio, 452
Frugalistas, 451
Glamping, 465
Habitus, 464
Hedonic adaptation, 451
Homogamy, 455
Income inequality, 448
Invidious distinction, 469
Leisure class, 469
Mass class, 462
Nouveau riches, 453
Occupational prestige, 456
One Percenter, 448
Online gated communities, 466
Parody display, 471
Plutonomy, 448
Reputation economy, 466
Restricted codes, 464
Savings rate, 448
Social capital, 448
Social class, 455
Social mobility, 449
Social stratification, 456
Status anxiety, 453
Status crystallization, 459
Status hierarchy, 456
Status signaling, 470
Status symbols, 468
Taste culture, 462
Trophy wives,469
Worldview, 469
Key termS
reVIeW
 12-1 How have women contributed to the overall rise in 
income in our society?
 12-2 Define discretionary income.
 12-3 How does consumer confidence influence consumer 
behavior?
 12-4 What is a pecking order?
 12-5 Explain what is meant by achieved versus ascribed 
status.
 12-6 What is the significance of lower fertility rates in higher- 
and middle-class families?
 12-7 Is income alone a good determinant of social class?
 12-8 What is income inequality, and why is it a problem?

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
473 
 12-9 How are attitudes toward luxury categorized according 
to SRI Consulting Business Intelligence?
 12-10 In some countries it is difficult to measure and quantify 
social class. Why might this be the case?
 12-11 What are the main motivators in purchasing a status 
symbol?
 12-12 What is the term used to describe an individual’s aes-
thetic and intellectual preferences?
 12-13 Describe the difference between a restricted and an elab-
orated code. Give an example of each.
 12-14 How do the elites restrict access to their group?
 12-15 What are the three identified strategies used by con-
sumers if counterfeiting is common in their preferred 
brands?
 12-16 What roles do status symbols play in purchase decisions?
 12-17 What is meant by the term “calculated consumption”?
 12-18 What is a current example of parody display?
 12-19 Describe what we mean by the term mass class and sum-
marize what causes this phenomenon.
 12-20 Consumer confidence is an indicator of the level of opti-
mism that consumers have about the performance of 
their country’s economy. How might consumer confi-
dence affect the decisions of marketers and brand owners?
 12-21 What are some of the obstacles to measuring social class 
in today’s society? Discuss some ways to get around 
these obstacles.
 12-22 Some countries have similar stratified social classes to 
the United States and Western Europe, but many do not. 
Is it possible to apply social stratification to all societies?
 12-23 Read the brief review of the social classes in China, 
Japan, Middle East, the United Kingdom, or India pro-
vided in the chapter.  Suggest a new product or service 
suitable for the market.
 12-24 In today’s economy, it’s become somewhat vulgar to 
flaunt your money—if you have any left. Do you think 
this means that status symbols like luxury products are 
passé? Why or why not?
 12-25 Basil Bernstein (1924–2000) was the first to contrast 
restricted and elaborated codes. How would you apply 
this to a key target market in your country?
 12-26 Research suggests that social class influences how much 
compassion people show to others who need help. For 
example, one study reported that luxury car drivers were 
more likely to cut off other motorists instead of waiting 
for their turn at the intersection. Another showed that 
less-affluent people are more likely to agree with such 
statements as, “I often notice people who need help,” and 
“It’s important to take care of people who are vulner-
able.” Other studies have demonstrated that upper-class 
people are not as good at recognizing others’ emotions. 
One explanation is that more resources provide a sense 
of independence; the less we have to rely on others, the 
less we care about their feelings.120 Do you agree that 
wealthy people are less caring? Why or why not?
 12-27 This chapter observes that some marketers find “greener 
pastures” when they target low-income people. How 
ethical is it to single out consumers who cannot afford 
to waste their precious resources on discretionary 
items? Under what circumstances should we encourage 
or discourage this segmentation strategy?
COnSumer BeHaVIOr CHallenGe
●
■DISCUSS
 12-28 Compile a list of occupations and ask a sample of stu-
dents in a variety of majors (both business and nonbusi-
ness) to rank the prestige of these jobs. Can you detect 
any differences in these rankings as a function of stu-
dents’ majors?
 12-29 Conspicuous consumption is a sign of class and position 
in some societies. Is this important in your own coun-
try? Which brands are particularly prized, and why is 
this the case?
●
■appLY
consumers is their level of income. Some marketers refer to 
strategies directed at different income tiers as targeting certain 
levels of a pyramid. Marketing to the “bottom of the pyra-
mid,” focusing on consumers with very limited financial means, 
 became well-known in 2004 when C. K. Prahalad wrote The 
Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid. He envisioned companies 
SuCCeSS at tHe BOttOm Of tHe 
PyramId? P&G’S GIllette Guard SHOWS 
It’S POSSIBle 
Consumer behavior is influenced by internal and external fac-
tors. One of the external factors that sets real boundaries for 
●■Case Study 

474 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
marketing affordable products to the millions of consumers 
around the world with limited income and unmet needs. He 
believed that companies could help consumers and be profitable 
at the same time.
A number of companies have attempted to make this model 
work. Puriet, an in-home water purification system manufac-
tured by Hindustan Unilever Limited, was developed for low-
income consumers and has found success by offering a 6-month 
installment plan to make the $25 price more manageable. The 
Nokia 105, introduced by Microsoft, is a $25 basic cell phone 
with an alarm clock, flashlight, and FM radio. It was priced 
specifically for low-income consumers and has sold millions of 
phones since its introduction in 2013.
However bottom of the pyramid strategies are not always 
as workable as companies would have imagined. The Nokia 
5 has struggled to be financially sustainable and has faced 
challenges as low-income consumers gravitate toward smart 
phones that are decreasing in cost. Other companies missed 
the mark because of a lack of research, discovering in the end 
that consumers could not afford their product or could opt for a 
cheaper, more local offering. Some companies have been pushed 
by investors to show profitability in the short-term with their 
low-income market initiatives, which has been difficult to ac-
complish. In some instances the only way to make their business 
model work over the long term is to partner with a nongovern-
mental organization (NGO) which could help them to gain ac-
cess to consumers through their established connections within 
countries.
Let’s consider the possibilities in India, a country with 
considerable bottom of the pyramid potential. World Bank 
2013 data show India’s population at 1.24 billion people and 
per  capita income at $125 a month. The McKinsey Global 
Institute estimates that 78 percent of the that population fall 
into the bottom of the pyramid category, with the majority 
living in  rural India. They predict that this market may be 
worth $1.5 trillion by 2020. The sheer numbers of consum-
ers and the overall  potential make this market appealing to 
marketers, but still the low level of income poses considerable 
challenges.
For years Procter & Gamble (P&G) has worked to find ways 
to capture market share of the men’s razor market in India. 
They felt that there was a significant opportunity to meet the 
shaving needs of Indian men at the bottom of the pyramid. 
Unfortunately, early efforts, like their Vector razor, were un-
dermined by a misunderstanding of the shaving process for 
men in India, many of whom did not have access to running 
water. More recently, P&G introduced the Gillette Guard. This 
razor was developed based on 3,000 hours of research over 
18 months, some of it conducted in the homes of low-income 
Indian men. They asked the men about their shaving rituals 
and observed them in the process of shaving. What P&G found 
is that they typically shave on the floors of their huts with no 
electricity, using a bowl of water and no mirror. Their primary 
objective is to avoid cutting themselves. This research proved to 
be invaluable in the development of the new razor.
The Gillette Guard was the result of what Alberto Carvalho, 
vice president, global Gillette, described as a focus on not only 
producing a razor that would meet the needs of these consum-
ers, but doing it at “ruthless cost.” This meant paying attention 
to the smallest details, designing a stripped down single blade 
razor with only four components versus the 25 found in more 
sophisticated razors. Jim Keighley, associate director for product 
engineering, says “I can remember talking about changes to 
this product that were worth a thousandth, or two thousandths 
of a cent.” In the end they were able to produce a razor that cost 
one third of the previously introduced Vector. Selling price for 
the Gillette Guard ended up at 15 rupees (34 cents) and razor 
blades at 5 rupees (12 cents).
As a result of their painstaking research and attention to 
the needs of this unique target audience, P&G’s market share 
for razors and blades has grown significantly in India and at a 
faster rate than any other P&G brand in India. Despite the chal-
lenges they encountered it appears that the Gillette Guard can 
be considered a bottom of the pyramid success story.
dISCuSSIOn QueStIOnS
CS 12-1 Using the “4A’s” framework in Figure 12.1, analyze 
the considerations that went into the development of 
the Gillette Guard razor for the Indian market.
CS 12-2 Are companies targeting the bottom of the pyramid 
taking advantage of vulnerable consumers with lim-
ited resources?
CS 12-3 More than half of U.S. workers earn less than $30,000 
a year, barely above the poverty line for a family of five. 
What would you recommend to a company looking 
to target the bottom of the pyramid consumers in the 
United States?
Sources: Marc Gunther, “The Base of the Pyramid: Will Selling to the  
Poor Pay Off?” May 22, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable- 
business/prahalad-base-bottom-pyramid-profit-poor, accessed June 28,  
2015; Mae Anderson, “How India Helped Gillette Rethink the Razor,”  
https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2013/10/03/cheap-razor-made- 
after-watches-indians-shave/NSQpOGAotpEfarkNmxIfcK/story.html, accessed  
June 24, 2015; Procter & Gamble-India website, http://www.pg.com/en 
_IN/, accessed June 28, 2015; Ryan Britton, “Value for the Money: Four 
Ways to Advertise to the Low-Income Shopper,” http://maxpoint.com/ 
us/digital-advertising-company/onpoint-blog/2014/10/21/4-ways-to-
advertise-to-the-low-income-shopper, accessed June 29, 2015; Sophie 
Wilson, “Companies Target Billion-Dollar Potential By Marketing to the  
Poor,” http://www.globalenvision.org/2014/10/02/companies-target-billion- 
dollar-potential-marketing-poor, accessed June 28, 2015; Glyn Atwal, 
Douglas Bryson, and Ambi Parameswaran, “Decrypting the Aspiring 
Indian Low-Income Consumer,” March 26, 2015, http://www.worldfinan 
cialreview.com/?p=3648, accessed June 25, 2015.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
475 
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 12-30 Status symbols are products, such as Rolex watches or expensive sports cars, 
that we value because they show others how much money or prestige we have. 
Do you believe that your peer group values status symbols? Why or why not? If 
yes, what are the products that you think are status symbols for consumers your 
age? Do you agree with the assertion that a cell phone is a status symbol for 
many young people?
 12-31 As we continue to emerge from The Great Recession, many people live frugally; 
they cut back on visits to restaurants, buy fewer high-end clothes and other luxury 
goods, and hold onto their cars much longer. Are we witnessing a long-term shift 
in consumer behavior, or do you believe this is just a temporary situation?
nOteS
worker-pay-gap-data-remains-hidden.html?ref=business&_r=0, accessed  
April 14, 2015; Patricia Cohen, “One Company’s New Minimum Wage:  
$70,000 a Year,” New York Times (April 13, 2015), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2015/04/14/business/owner-of-gravity-payments-a-credit-card- 
processor-is-setting-a-new-minimum-wage-70000-a-year.html?ref= 
business&_r=0, accessed April 14, 2015.
 16. Mark Gongloff, “The U.S. Has the Worst Income Inequality in the Developed 
World, Thanks to Wall Street: Study,” The Huffington Post (August 15, 
2013), http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/08/15/income-inequality-
wall-street_n_3762422.html, accessed April 14, 2015.
 17. Jonathan H. Turner,  Sociology: Studying the Human System, (Santa Monica, 
CA: Goodyear, 1981), 260.
 18. See Ronald Paul Hill and Mark Stamey, “The Homeless in America: An 
Examination of Possessions and Consumption Behaviors,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 17 (December 1990): 303–321; “The Homeless Facts 
and Figures,” NOW (May 2, 2007), www.ask.com/bar?q=What+Percentag
e+of+Americans+Are+Homeless&page=1&qsrc=6&ab=0&u=http://www 
.pbs.org/now/shows/305/homeless-facts.html, accessed June 17, 2009.
 19. Joseph Kahl, The American Class Structure (New York: Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston, 1961).
 20. “A Family Affair: Intergenerational Social Mobility Across OECD Countries,” 
Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (2010), http://
www.oecd.org/tax/public-finance/chapter%205%20gfg%202010.pdf, ac-
cessed March 17, 2013; Dan Froomkin, “Social Immobility: Climbing the 
Economic Ladder Is Harder in the U.S. Than in Most European Countries,” 
The Huffington Post (September 21, 2010), http://www.huffingtonpost 
.com/2010/03/17/social-immobility-climbin_n_501788.html, accessed 
September 25, 2013.
 21. Steve Hargreaves, “The Myth of the American Dream,” CNN Money 
(December 9, 2013), http://money.cnn.com/2013/12/09/news/economy 
/america-economic-mobility/index.html, accessed April 14, 2015.
 22. David Leonhardt, “In Climbing Income Ladder, Location Matters,” New York 
Times (July 22, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/22/business/ 
in-climbing-income-ladder-location-matters.html?_r=0, accessed February  
26, 2015.
 23. Quoted in Jessica Silver-Greenberg, “Perfect 10? Never Mind That. Ask Her 
for Her Credit Score,” New York Times (December 25, 2012), http://www 
.nytimes.com/2012/12/26/business/even-cupid-wants-to-know-your-
credit-score.html, accessed April 15, 2015.
 24. “The Great Recession,” Economic Policy Institute, http://stateofworking 
america.org/great-recession/, accessed April 14, 2015.
 25. Matt Richtel, “Austere Times? Perfect,” New York Times (April 10, 2009), 
www.nytimes.com/2009/04/11/business/economy/11cheap.html?_r=1, 
accessed April 13, 2015; www.stretcher.com, accessed April 13, 2015; 
www.allthingsfrugal.com, accessed April 13, 2015;; www.frugalmom.net, 
accessed April 13, 2015.
 26. Tami Luhby, “Income is on the Rise … Finally!,” CNN Money (August 
20, 2014) http://money.cnn.com/2014/08/20/news/economy/median-
income/, accessed April 13, 2015.
 27. Wendy Koch, “Mini-apartments are the Next Big Thing In U.S. Cities,” USA 
Today (August 1, 2013), http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/ 
2013/07/30/tiny-apartments-apodments-catch-on-us-cities/2580179/, 
accessed February 18, 2015.
 
1. Christopher D. Carroll, “How Does Future Income Affect Current Con-
sumption?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (February 1994): 111–147.
 
2. “Costco Net Falls on Weak Discretionary Spending,” Reuters (May 28, 
2009), www.reuters.com/article/newsOne/idUSTRE54R1GJ20090528, 
accessed June 17, 2009.
 
3. Daniel Kahneman and Angus Deaton, “High Income Improves Evaluation 
of Life But Not Emotional Well-Being,” Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences 107, no. 38 (2010): 16489–16493, http://www.pnas.org/ 
content/107/38/16489.abstract, accessed April 14, 2015.
 
4. Quoted in Philip Jackman, “What Makes a Tightwad? Study Finds That 
People Who Are Stingy Report Feeling Emotional Pain When Spending 
Money,” Toronto Globe & Mail (March 19, 2008), www.theglobeandmail 
.com, accessed March 22, 2008; http://webuser.bus.umich.edu/srick/
Globe%20and%20Mail%203-19-08.pdf, accessed September 24, 2011.
 
5. José F. Medina, Joel Saegert, and Alicia Gresham, “Comparison of Mexican-
American and Anglo-American Attitudes Toward Money,” Journal of 
Consumer Affairs 30, no. 1 (1996): 124–145.
 
6. Kirk Johnson, “Sit Down. Breathe Deeply. This Is Really Scary Stuff,” 
New York Times (April 16, 1995): F5; cf. also Matthew J. Bernthal, David 
Crockett, and Randall L. Rose, “Credit Cards as Lifestyle Facilitators,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 32 (June 2005): 130–145.
 
7. Xinyue Zhou, Kathleen D. Vohs, and Roy F. Baumeister, “The Symbolic 
Power of Money: Reminders of Money Alter Social Distress and Physical 
Pain,” Psychological Science 20, no. 6 (2009): 700–706.
 
8. Fred van Raaij, “Economic Psychology,” Journal of Economic Psychology 1 
(1981): 1–24.
 
9. Richard T. Curtin, “Indicators of Consumer Behavior: The University of 
Michigan Surveys of Consumers,” Public Opinion Quarterly (1982): 340–352.
 10. Patricia Cohen, “Oxfam Study Finds Richest 1% is Likely to Control Half of 
Global Wealth by 2016,” New York Times (January 19, 2015), http://www 
.nytimes.com/2015/01/19/business/richest-1-percent-likely-to-control-
half-of-global-wealth-by-2016-study-finds.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-
share&smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=1, accessed February 26, 2015.
 11. Chris Matthews, “Wealth Inequality in America: It’s Worse Than You 
Think,” Fortune (October 31, 2014), http://fortune.com/2014/10/31/
inequality-wealth-income-us/, accessed April 15, 2015.
 12. Bige Saatcioglu and Julie L. Ozanne, “Moral Habitus and Status 
Negotiation in a Marginalized Working-class Neighborhood,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 40, no. 4 (2013): 692–710. cf. also N. Ordabayeva 
and P. Chandon, “Getting Ahead of the Joneses: When Equality Increases 
Conspicuous Consumption Among Bottom-Tier Consumers,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 38, no. 10 (2011): 27–41.
 13. Elizabeth Holmes, “Luxury Goods Sparkle,” Wall Street Journal (May 4, 2011), 
http://professional.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527487038348045763
00941315031916.html?mg=reno-secaucus-wsj, accessed June 16, 2011.
 14. Dionne Searcey and Robert Gebeloff, “Middle Class Shrinks Further as More 
Fall Out Instead of Climbing Up,” New York Times (January 25, 2015), http://
www.nytimes.com/2015/01/26/business/economy/middle-class-shrinks-
further-as-more-fall-out-instead-of-climbing-up.html?smid=nytcore-
iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=0, accessed February 25, 2015.
 15. Gretchen Morgenson, “Despite Federal Regulation, C.E.O.-Worker Pay Gap 
Data Remains Hidden,” New York Times (April 10, 2015), http://www 
.nytimes.com/2015/04/12/business/despite-federal-regulation-ceo-

476 
SeCtION 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
 55. Coleman and Rainwater, Social Standing in America.
 56. Jeffrey F. Durgee, “How Consumer Sub-Cultures Code Reality: A Look at 
Some Code Types,” in Richard J. Lutz, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 
13 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1986): 332–337.
 57. Paul C. Henry, “Social Class, Market Situation, and Consumers’ Metaphors 
of (Dis)Empowerment,” Journal of Consumer Research 31 (March 2005): 
766–778.
 58. David Halle, America’s Working Man: Work, Home, and Politics Among 
Blue-Collar Owners (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984); David 
Montgomery, “America’s Working Man,” Monthly Review (1985): 1.
 59. Coleman and Rainwater, Social Standing in America, 139.
 60. Roger Brown, Social Psychology (New York: Free Press, 1965).
 61. Kit R. Roane, “Affluenza Strikes Kids,” U.S. News & World Report (March 
20, 2000): 55.
 62. Mark Cleveland, Michel Laroche, and Nicolas Papadopoulos, “Cos-
mopolitanism, Consumer Ethnocentrism, and Materialism: An Eight-
Country Study of Antecedents and Outcomes,” Journal of  International 
Marketing 17, no. 1 (2009): 116–146; cf. also Dana Alden, James 
Kelley, Petra Reifler, Julie Lee, and Geoff Soutar, “The Negative Impact 
of Global Companies: A Three Country Study on Global Company 
Animosity,” Jour nal of  International Marketing, June 2013, Vol. 21, No. 2,  
pp. 17-38.
 63. See Coleman, “The Continuing Significance of Social Class to Marketing”; 
Charles M. Schaninger, “Social Class Versus Income Revisited: An Empirical 
Investigation,” Journal of Marketing Research 18 (May 1981): 192–208.
 64. Coleman, “The Continuing Significance of Social Class to Marketing.”
 65. August B. Hollingshead and Fredrick C. Redlich, Social Class and Mental 
Illness: A Community Study (New York: Wiley, 1958).
 66. John Mager and Lynn R. Kahle, “Is the Whole More Than the Sum of 
the Parts? Re-evaluating Social Status in Marketing,” Journal of Business 
Psychology 10 (Fall 1995): 3–18.
 67. Beeghley, Social Stratification in America: A Critical Analysis of Theory and 
Research.
 68. R. Vanneman and F. C. Pampel, “The American Perception of Class and 
Status,” American Sociological Review 42 (June 1977): 422–437.
 69. Coleman, “The Continuing Significance of Social Class to Marketing”; 
Donald W. Hendon, Emelda L. Williams, and Douglas E. Huffman, “Social 
Class System Revisited,” Journal of Business Research 17 (November 1988): 
259.
 70. Gerhard E. Lenski, “Status Crystallization: A Non-Vertical Dimension of 
Social Status,” American Sociological Review 19 (August 1954): 405–412.
 71. Richard P. Coleman, “The Significance of Social Stratification in Selling,” 
in Martin L. Bell, ed., Marketing: A Maturing Discipline: Proceedings of 
the American Marketing Association 43rd National Conference (Chicago: 
American Marketing Association, 1960): 171–184.
 72. Erin Carlyle, “2014 Foreclosure Filings Hit Lowest Level Since 2006, Realty 
Trac Says,” Forbes (January 15, 2015), http://www.forbes.com/sites/erin 
carlyle/2015/01/15/foreclosure-filings-drop-by-18-in-2014-hit-lowest- 
level-since-2006-realtytrac-says/, accessed April 15, 2015.
 73. E. Barth and W. Watson, “Questionable Assumptions in the Theory of 
Social Stratification,” Pacific Sociological Review 7 (Spring 1964): 10–16.
 74. Zick Rubin, “Do American Women Marry Up?” American Sociological 
Review 33 (1968): 750–760.
 75. K. U. Ritter and L. L. Hargens, “Occupational Positions and Class 
Identifications of Married Working Women: A Test of the Asymmetry 
Hypothesis,” American Journal of Sociology 80 (January 1975): 934–948.
 76. Howard W. French, “Chinese Children Learn Class, Minus the Struggle,” 
New York Times (September 22, 2006), www.nytimes.com, accessed 
September 22, 2006; Bay Fang, “The Shanghai High Life,” U.S. News 
& World Report (June 20, 2005), www.usnews.com/usnews/biztech/
articles/050620/20china.b2.htm, accessed June 20, 2005; Janine 
Gibson, “Den of Equity,” The Guardian (May 12, 2001), http://travel 
.guardian.co.uk/cities/story/0,7450,489488,00.html, accessed June 20, 
2005; Russell Flannery, “Long Live the $25 Cigar,” Forbes (December 27, 
2004): 51; Clay Chandler, “China Deluxe,” Fortune (July 26, 2004): 149–
156; Matthew Forney, “How Nike Figured Out China,” Time (November 
2004): A10–A14; J. David Lynch, “Emerging Middle Class Reshaping 
China,” USA Today (November 12, 2002): 13A.
 77. Brook Larmermach, “The Price of Marriage in China,” New York Times  
(March 9, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/10/business/in-a- 
changing-china-new-matchmaking-markets.html?pagewanted=2&_
r=0&ref=global-home, accessed February 25, 2015.
 78. Sebastian Moffett, “The Japanese Paradox: Pinched by Economic Slump, 
Women Buy More Handbags from Vuitton, Prada, Hermes,” Wall Street 
Journal (September 23, 2003), www.wsj.com, accessed September 23, 2003.
 79. Vijay Mahagjan, “Understanding the Arab Consumer,” Harvard Business 
Review (May 2013), https://hbr.org/2013/05/understanding-the-arab-con 
sumer, accessed April 15, 2015.
 28. Stephanie Rosenbloom, “But Will It Make You Happy?,” New York Times (August 
7, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/08/business/08consume.html? 
pagewanted=1&_r=2&ref=business, accessed April 10, 2011.
 29. Carmen DeNavas-Walt and Bernadette D. Proctor, Income and Poverty in 
the United States: 2013, Report Number P60-249, United States Census  
Bureau (September 16, 2014), http://www.census.gov/library/publications/ 
2014/demo/p60-249.html, accessed April 14, 2015; Occupational Employ-
ment and Wage Estimates, Bureau of Labor Statistics, www.bls.gov/oes/oes_ 
data.htm, accessed April 16, 2015.
 30. Annie Lowrey, “The Premium From a College Degree,” New York Times (June 
7, 2013), http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/06/07/the-premium- 
from-a-college-degree/, accessed April 14, 2015; Troy Onink, “Federal 
Reserve: College Education Worth $830,000 More Than High School 
Diploma,” Forbes (May 5, 2014), http://www.forbes.com/sites/troyonink/ 
2014/05/05/federal-reserve-college-education-worth-830000-more-than- 
high-school-diploma/, accessed April 14, 2015.
 31. “Reading the Buyer’s Mind,” U.S. News & World Report (March 16, 1987): 59.
 32. Shelly Reese, “The Many Faces of Affluence,” Marketing Tools (November–
December 1997): 44–48.
 33. Rebecca Gardyn, “Oh, the Good Life,” American Demographics (November 
2002): 34.
 34. Paul Fussell, Class: A Guide Through the American Status System (New York: 
Summit Books, 1983): 29.
 35. Elizabeth C. Hirschman, “Secular Immortality and the American Ideology 
of Affluence,” Journal of Consumer Research 17 (June 1990): 31–42.
 36. Richard C. Coleman and Lee Rainwater, Social Standing in America: New 
Dimensions of  Class (New York: Basic Books, 1978), 150.
 37. Kerry A. Dolan, “The World’s Working Rich,” Forbes (July 3, 2000): 162.
 38. Jason DeParle, “Spy Anxiety: The Smart Magazine That Makes Smart 
People Nervous About Their Standing,” Washingtonian Monthly (February 
1989): 10.
 39. For an examination of retailing issues related to the need for status, 
cf. Jacqueline Kilsheimer Eastman, Leisa Reinecke Flynn, and Ronald E. 
Goldsmith, “Shopping for Status: The Retail Managerial Implications,” 
Association of Marketing Theory & Practice (Spring 1994): 125–130; also 
cf. Wilfred Amaldoss and Sanjay Jain, “Pricing of Conspicuous Goods: A 
Competitive Analysis of Social Effects,” Journal of Marketing Research 42 
(February 2005): 30–42.
 40. Martin Fackler, “Pajamas: Not Just for Sleep Anymore,” Opelika-Auburn 
News (September 13, 2002): 7A.
 41. Paula Mergenhagen, “What Can Minimum Wage Buy?,” American 
Demographics (January 1996): 32–36.
 42. A. T. Kearney, Serving the Low-Income Consumer: How to Tackle This Mostly 
Ignored Market (2011), http://www.atkearney.com/index.php/Publications/
serving-the-low-income-consumer.html, accessed March 17, 2013; cf. also 
Kelly D. Martin and Ronald Paul Hill, “Life Satisfaction, Self-Determination, 
and Consumption Adequacy at the Bottom of the Pyramid,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 38, no. 6 (April 2012): 1155–1168.
 43. Stephanie Strom, “Multinational Companies Court Lower-Income 
Consumers,” New York Times (September 17, 2014), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2014/09/18/business/international/multinational-companies- 
court-lower-income-consumers.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-share& 
smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=0, accessed February 26, 2015; http://www 
.dlight.com/, accessed April 15, 2015.
 44. Teddy Wayne, “Digital Divide Is a Matter of Income,” New York Times  
(December 12, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/13/business/media/ 
13drill.html?adxnnl=1&src=busln&adxnnlx=1304179556-CFuBrgamr 
MhyRJjRfjj9Zg, accessed April 30, 2011.
 45. Matt Richtel, “Wasting Time is New Divide in Digital Era,” New York Times  
(May 29, 2012), http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/30/us/new-digital-
divide-seen-in-wasting-time-online.html, accessed April 16, 2015.
 46. Richard P. Coleman, “The Continuing Significance of Social Class to 
Marketing”; W. Lloyd Warner and Paul S. Lunt, eds., The Social Life of a 
Modern Community (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1941).
 47. Floyd L. Ruch and Philip G. Zimbardo, Psychology and Life, 8th ed. 
(Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman, 1971).
 48. Jonathan H. Turner, Sociology: Studying the Human System, 2nd ed. (Santa 
Monica, CA: Goodyear, 1981).
 49. Richard P. Coleman, “The Continuing Significance of Social Class to 
Marketing,” Journal of Consumer Research 10 (December 1983): 265–280; 
Turner, Sociology: Studying the Human System.
 50. Rebecca Gardyn, “The Mating Game,” American Demographics (July–August  
2002): 33–34.
 51. Richard C. Coleman and Lee Rainwater, Social Standing in America: New 
Dimensions of Class (New York: Basic Books, 1978): 89.
 52. Coleman and Rainwater, Social Standing in America.
 53. Turner, Sociology: Studying the Human System.
 54. Coleman and Rainwater, Social Standing in America.

 
Chapter 12   Income and Social Class 
477 
Countries,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 1 (2010): 37–56; James 
S. Coleman, “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital,” American 
Journal of Sociology 94 (1988): 95–120.
 99. Nicole Ellison, Charles Steinfield, and Cliff Lampe, “The Benefits of Facebook 
‘Friends’: Social Capital and College Students’ Use of Online Social Network 
Sites,” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 12 (2007): 1143–1168.
 100. Anya Kamenetz, “The Perils and Promise of the Reputation Economy,” Fast 
Company (November 25, 2008), www.fastcompany.com/magazine/131/ 
on-the-internet-everyone-knows-youre-a-dog.html, accessed June 17, 2009.
 101. Quoted from www.hotenough.org, accessed April 16, 2015.
 102. Charla Mathwick, Caroline Wiertz, and Ko de Ruyter, “Social Capital 
Production in a Virtual P3 Community,” Journal of Consumer Research 34 
(April 2008): 832–849; cf. also Jonah Berger and Morgan Ward, “Subtle 
Signals of Inconspicuous Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Research 37, 
no. 4 (2010): 555–569.
 103. Molly Oswaks, “‘This.’ Has People Clamoring for an Invite,” New York  
Times (January 28, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/29/fashion/ 
this-has-people-clamoring-for-an-invite.html?smid=nytcore-ipad-
share&smprod=nytcore-ipad, accessed February 25, 2015.
 104. Ruth LaFerla, “A Facebook for the Few,” New York Times (September 6,  
2007), www.nytimes.com, accessed September 6, 2007; www.asmall 
world.com, accessed April 16, 2015.
 105. Xavier Drèze and Joseph C. Nunes, “Feeling Superior: The Impact of 
Loyalty Program Structure on Consumers’ Perceptions of Status,” Journal 
of Consumer Research (April 2009): 890–905; cf. also Eesha Sharma and 
Adam L. Alter, “Financial Deprivation Prompts Consumers to Seek Scarce 
Goods,” Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 3 (October 2012): 545–560.
 106. Derek Rucker and Adam D. Galinsky, “Desire to Acquire: Powerlessness and 
Compensatory Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Research 35 (August 2008):  
257–267.
 107. “China: The Land Where Fake Brands Reign Supreme,” WeirdAsia News  
(October 22, 2010), http://www.weirdasianews.com/2010/10/22/china 
the-land-fake-brands-reign-supreme/, accessed June 16, 2011.
 108. Suraj Commuri, “The Impact of Counterfeiting on Genuine-Item Consumers’ 
Brand Relationships,” Journal of Marketing 73 (May 2009): 86–98.
 109. Quoted in Jennifer Steinhauer, “When the Joneses Wear Jeans,” New York Times  
(May 29, 2005), http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/29/national/class/CON 
SUMPTION-FINAL.html?pagewanted=all, accessed April 16, 2015.
 110. Rod Nordland, “Iraqis Snap Up Hummers as Icons of Power,” New York Times  
(March 29, 2009), http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/30/world/middleeast/30 
hummer.html?scp=1&sq=Iraqis%20Snap%20Up%20Hummers%20as%20
Icons%20of%20Power&st=cse, accessed March 29, 2009.
 111. Melissa Healy, “China’s ‘Little Emperor’ Generation Fits Stereotypes, Study 
Finds,” (January 11, 2013), Los Angeles Times, http://articles.latimes.com/ 
2013/jan/11/science/la-sci-china-little-emperors-20130111, accessed April  
16, 2015.
 112. Robert Frank, “Biggest Billionaire Losers in 2014? The Russians,” CNBC 
(March 2, 2015), http://www.cnbc.com/id/102468463, accessed April 16,  
2015. Andrew E. Kramer, “New Czars of Conspicuous Consumption,” New 
York Times (November 1, 2006), www.nytimes.com, accessed Novem ber 1, 
2006.
 113. Tom Wright, “Ringing Up Sales in Indonesia: Nokia’s Bulky Smart Phones 
Find Niche Following There as Business Status Symbol,” Wall Street Journal 
(May 22, 2007): B1.
 114. John Brooks, Showing Off in America (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1981), 13.
 115. Naughton Keith, “The Perk Wars,” Newsweek (September 30, 2002): 42–46.
 116. http://www.wikihow.com/Know-if-a-Woman-is-a-Cougar, accessed July 29,  
2013; Alexia Elejalde-Ruiz, “Age Gap: She’s Old Enough to Be his … Wife,” 
Chicago Tribune (September 19, 2012), http://articles.chicagotribune.com/ 
2012-09-19/features/sc-fam-0918-age-gap-romance-20120919_1_age- 
gap-age-difference-age-matters, accessed March 17, 2013; Jessica Lesh-
noff, “Cougars and Their Cubs,” AARP (February 2008), www.aarp.org/
family/love/articles/cougars_and_their.html, accessed June 17, 2009; 
Robert Campbell, “For the Mature Woman Who Has Everything: A Boy  
Toy,” Reuters (January 30, 2008), http://www.reuters.com/article/2008/ 
01/30/us-speeddating-odd-idUSN3061371020080130, accessed July 29, 
2013.
 117. Young Jee Han, Joseph C. Nunes, and Xavier Drèze, “Signaling Status with 
Luxury Goods: The Role of Brand Prominence,” Journal of Marketing 74 
(July 2010): 15–30.
 118. Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899; reprint, New York: 
New American Library, 1953): 45.
 119. John Brooks, Showing Off in America: From Conspicuous Consumption to 
Parody Display, 1984.
 120. Daisy Grewal, “How Wealth Reduces Compassion,” Scientific American (April  
10, 2012), http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-wealth-reduces- 
compassion/, accessed February 26, 2015.
 80. Frank Skinner, “Take Not the Moat Out of the Tory’s Eye,” Times of London 
(May 15, 2009), www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/frank_
skinner/article6289313.ece, accessed June 17, 2009.
 81. Quoted in Sarah Lyall, “Multiplying the Old Divisions of Class in Britain,” New 
York Times (April 3, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/04/world/ 
europe/multiplying-the-old-divisions-of-class-in-britain.html?_r=0, accessed  
April 11, 2013; “Huge Survey Reveals Seven Social Classes in UK,” BBC 
News UK (April 3, 2013), http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-22007058, ac-
cessed April 11, 2013.
 82. Quoted in Catherine Ostler, “As Romeo Beckham stars in their new ad, how 
Burberry went from chic to chav to chic again,” Daily Mail (November 5, 2014), 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2822546/As-Romeo-Beckham-
stars-new-ad-Burberry-went-chic-chav-chic-again.html#ixzz3XPfKw2yb, ac-
cessed April 15, 2015; Robert Guy Matthews, “Bawdy British Ads Target Hot 
Youth,” Wall Street Journal (April 20, 2005): B9.
 83. Heather Timmons, “Vogue’s Fashion Photos Spark Debate in India,”New 
York Times (August 31, 2008), www.nytimes.com/2008/09/01/business/ 
worldbusiness/01vogue.html?_r=1&ref=busi; accessed September 1, 2008.
 84. Quoted in Timmons, “Vogue’s Fashion Photos Spark Debate in India.”
 85. Sara C. Nelson, “Vagina ‘Brightener’: Indian Feminine Hygiene Product 
Promises to Make Genitals ‘Many Shades Fairer’,” Huffington Post UK, http://
www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/04/12/vagina-brightener-indian- 
feminine-hygiene-product-promises-to-make-genitals-many-shades-
fairer_n_1420052.html?just_reloaded=1, accessed January 11, 2013.
 86. “India’s Middle Class Population to Touch 267 Million in 5 Yrs,” Hindustan 
Times, http://www.hindustantimes.com/India-news/NewDelhi/India-s-middle- 
class-population-to-touch-267-million-in-5-yrs/Article1-659159.aspx, 
accessed March 17, 2013.
 87. “Indian Consumer Market: A Change from Pyramid to Sparkling Diamond,” 
KS Oils, http://www.ksoils.com/whitepapers/KS_WHITEPAPER_INDIAN_
CONSUMER_MARKET.Pdf, accessed March 17, 2013.
 88. Jennifer Steinhauer, “When the Joneses Wear Jeans,” New York Times (May 
29, 2005), www.nytimes.com, accessed May 29, 2005.
 89. “Welcome to the post-BRIC world,” The Economist (May 6th 2013,) http://www 
.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2013/05/global-economy, accessed  
April 16, 2015; Mike Bird, “China Just Overtook The US As The World’s 
Largest Economy,” Business Insider (October 8, 2014), http://www.busi 
nessinsider.com/china-overtakes-us-as-worlds-largest-economy-2014- 
10#ixzz3XU8vMG9d, accessed April 16, 2015.
 90. Paul F. Nunes, Brian A. Johnson, and R. Timothy S. Breene, “Moneyed 
Masses,” Harvard Business Review (July–August 2004): 94–104; Trend 
Update: Massclusivity, report from Reinier Evers and Trendwatching.com, 
Zyman Institute of Brand Science, Emory University, www.zibs.com, ac-
cessed February 25, 2005.
 91. Philip J. Mazzocco, Derek D. Rucker, Adam D. Galinsky, and Eric T. 
Anderson, “Direct and Vicarious Conspicuous Consumption: Identification 
with Low-Status Groups Increases the Desire for High-Status Goods,” 
Journal of Consumer Psychology 22, no. 4 (2012): 520–528.
 92. David Dubois, Derek D. Rucker, and Adam D. Galinsky, “Super Size Me: 
Product Size as a Signal of Status,” Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 6 
(2012): 1047–1062.
 93. Herbert J. Gans, “Popular Culture in America: Social Problem in a Mass 
Society or Social Asset in a Pluralist Society?” in Howard S. Becker, ed., 
Social Problems: A Modern Approach (New York: Wiley, 1966).
 94. Eugene Sivadas, George Mathew, and David J. Curry, “A Preliminary 
Examination of the Continuing Significance of Social Class to Marketing: 
A Geodemographic Replication,” Journal of Consumer Marketing 41, no. 6 
(1997): 463–479.
 95. Edward O. Laumann and James S. House, “Living Room Styles and Social 
Attributes: The Patterning of Material Artifacts in a Modern Urban 
Community,” Sociology & Social Research 54 (April 1970): 321–342; 
see also Stephen S. Bell, Morris B. Holbrook, and Michael R. Solomon, 
“Combining Esthetic and Social Value to Explain Preferences for Product 
Styles with the Incorporation of Personality and Ensemble Effects,” Journal 
of Social Behavior & Personality 6 (1991): 243–274.
 96. Morris B. Holbrook, Michael J. Weiss, and John Habich, “Class-Related 
Distinctions in American Cultural Tastes,” Empirical Studies of the Arts 22, 
no. 1 (2004): 91–115.
 97. Nick Bilton, “A Line Is Drawn in the Desert: At Burning Man, the Tech Elite 
One-Up One Another,” New York Times (August 20, 2014), http://www 
.nytimes.com/2014/08/21/fashion/at-burning-man-the-tech-elite-one-
up-one-another.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-
iphone, accessed April 16, 2015.
 98. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste 
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1984); cf. also Douglas B. 
Holt, “Does Cultural Capital Structure American Consumption?,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 1 (June 1998): 1–25; Tuba Ustuner and Douglas 
B. Holt, “Toward a Theory of Status Consumption in Less Industrialized 

478
M
aria wakes up early on Saturday morning and braces herself for a long day of 
errands and chores. As usual, her mother is at work and expects Maria to do 
the shopping and help prepare dinner for the big family gathering tonight. Of 
course, her older brother Orlando would never be asked to do the grocery shopping or help 
out in the kitchen; these are women’s jobs.
Family gatherings make a lot of work. Maria wishes that her mother would use prepared 
foods once in a while, especially on a Saturday when Maria has an errand or two of her own 
to do. But no, her mother insists on preparing most of her food from scratch. She rarely uses 
any convenience products, to ensure that the meals she serves are of the highest quality.
Resigned, Maria watches a telenovela (soap opera) on Univision while she dresses and 
then she heads down to the carnicería (small grocery store) to buy a newspaper—almost 
40 different Spanish newspapers are published in her area, and she likes to pick up new 
ones occasionally. Then Maria buys the grocery items her mother wants. The list is full of 
well-known brand names that she gets all the time, such as Casera and Goya, so she’s able 
to finish quickly. With any luck, she’ll have a few minutes to go to the mercado (shopping 
center) to pick up that new Reggaeton CD by Daddy Yankee. She’ll listen to it in the kitchen 
while she chops, peels, and stirs.
Maria smiles to herself: Los Angeles is a great place to live, and what could be better 
than spending a lively, fun evening with la familia?
 13-1 Consumer identity derives from “we” as well as “I.”
 13-2 Our memberships in ethnic, racial, and religious 
 subcultures often guide our consumption choices.
 13-3 Marketers increasingly use religious and spiritual themes 
to talk to consumers.
 13-4 Our traditional notions about families are outdated.
 13-5 We have many things in common with others because 
they are about the same age.
 13-6 Teens are an important age segment for marketers.
 13-7 Baby Boomers are the most economically powerful age 
segment.
 13-8 Seniors are a more important market segment than many 
marketers realize.
 13-9 Birds of a feather flock together in place-based 
subcultures.
When you have finished reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
 Chapter 13 ● Subcultures
Source: Evok20/Shutterstock.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
479 
ethnic and racial Subcultures
Sí, Maria lives in Los Angeles, not Mexico City. More than one in 
four Californians are Hispanic, and overall the state has more non-
white than white residents. In fact, more people watch Spanish-
language Univision in Los Angeles than any other network; it’s the fifth-largest network 
in the United States.1
Maria and other Hispanic Americans have much in common with members of other 
racial and ethnic groups who live in the United States. They observe the same national 
holidays, the country’s economic health affects what they spend, and they may root for 
Team USA in the Olympics. Nonetheless, although U.S. citizenship provides the raw mate-
rial for some consumption decisions, enormous variations in the social fabric of the country 
profoundly affect many others. The United States truly is a “melting pot” of hundreds of 
diverse groups, from Italian and Irish Americans to Mormons and Seventh-Day Adventists.
As we saw in Chapter 11, groups exert a lot of influence on our individual consumer 
decisions. Still, some of our affiliations are more central to our essence than are others.2 
In this chapter we’ll look at some of the external linkages that play a big role in defining 
who we are and what we value: gender, race/ethnicity, religion, age, and where we live. 
Each of these is a subculture, which is a group whose members share significant beliefs 
and common preferences.
The rapidly growing diversity of U.S. culture is one of the most important drivers of 
change in this century. The U.S. Census Bureau projects that by 2018, it won’t be possible 
to place a majority of children younger than the age of 18 into a single racial or ethnic 
group. Over the next 45 years, the Bureau expects the Hispanic population to more than 
double; by 2060 almost one in three Americans will identify as Hispanic. The Asian 
population will double during the same time period. Furthermore, traditional subcultural 
categories are breaking down. The Census Bureau also predicts that by 2050, people who 
identify themselves as multiracial will make up almost 4 percent of the U.S. population. 
Among U.S. children, the multiracial population has increased almost 50 percent, to  
4.2 million, since 2000, making it the fastest-growing youth group in the country. The 
number of people of all ages who identified themselves as both white and black soared 
by 134 percent since 2000 to 1.8 million people.3 Our country truly is a “melting pot” of 
people who belong to many different racial and ethnic subcultures.
Many major marketers are keenly aware of this change. McDonald’s U.S. chief market-
ing officer (CMO) observes, “The ethnic consumer tends to set trends. So they help set the tone 
for how we enter the marketplace.” He notes that feedback from minority consumers shape 
McDonald’s menu and ad choices, which it then markets to all of its customers. In fact, the 
chain’s U.S. strategy is called “Leading with Ethnic Insights.” The company includes a dis-
proportionate number of blacks, Hispanics, and Asians in focus groups. It asks its marketers 
to imagine how they would sell a product if the U.S. population were only African American, 
Hispanic, or Asian. For example, the fruit combinations in McDonald’s latest smoothies reflect 
taste preferences in minority communities. And when the company started heavily advertising 
coffee drinks last year, the ads emphasized the indulgent aspects of sweeter drinks like mochas, 
a message that resonated with African Americans. Ethnic practices also get picked up in main-
stream advertising: In one commercial called “Big Day,” a young boy at a wedding looks bored 
while watching the bride and groom kiss and jump over a broom—an African American wed-
ding tradition. His eyes light up when he gets to his seat and finds a Happy Meal.4
One important subcultural difference is how abstract or literal the group is. Sociologists 
make a basic distinction: In a high-context culture, group members tend to be tightly 
knit, and they infer meanings that go beyond the spoken word. Symbols and gestures, rather 
than words, carry much of the weight of the message. In contrast, people who belong to a 
low-context culture are more literal. Compared to Anglos (who tend to be low-context), 
many minority cultures are high context and have strong oral traditions, so consumers are 
more sensitive to nuances in advertisements that go beyond the message copy.
ObjeCtive 13-1
Consumer identity 
derives from “we” as  
well as “I.”

480 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Subcultural Stereotypes
Adidas provoked outrage when in 2014 the company posted a 
photo of a new design, the JS Roundhouse Mids, on its Facebook 
page. The shoes come with bright orange shackles and the tagline, 
“Got a sneaker game so hot you lock your kicks to your ankles?” 
Many users complained that this image is highly offensive to 
African Americans because it evokes imagery of slavery and 
chain gangs. The company claimed the design had nothing to do with these issues, but the 
damage was done.5
In the past, it was fairly common for marketers to use racial or ethnic symbolism as 
shorthand to convey certain product attributes. Before these actions became taboo, they 
often employed crude and unflattering images when they depicted African Americans as 
subservient or Mexicans as bandits.6 Aunt Jemima sold pancake mix and Rastus was a grin-
ning black chef who pitched Cream of Wheat hot cereal. The Gold Dust Twins were black 
urchins who peddled a soap powder for Lever Brothers, and Pillsbury hawked powdered 
drink mixes via characters such as Injun Orange and Chinese Cherry—who had buck 
teeth.7 As the civil rights movement gave more power to minority groups and their rising 
economic status began to command marketers’ respect, these negative stereotypes began to 
disappear. Frito-Lay responded to protests by the Hispanic community and stopped using the 
Frito Bandito character in 1971, and Quaker Foods gave Aunt Jemima a makeover in 1989.
Many subcultures have powerful stereotypes the general public associates with them. 
In these cases, outsiders assume that group members possess certain traits. Unfortunately, 
a communicator can cast the same trait as either positive or negative, depending on his or 
her biases or intentions. For example, the Scottish stereotype in the United States is largely 
positive, so we tend to look favorably on their (supposed) frugality. The 3M company uses 
Scottish imagery to denote value (e.g., Scotch tape), as does Scotch Inns, a motel chain 
that offers inexpensive lodging. However, the Scottish “personality” might carry quite 
different connotations to the British or Irish. One person’s “thrifty” is another’s “stingy.”
ethnicity and acculturation
Although some people feel uncomfortable with the notion that marketers should explicitly 
take into account people’s racial and ethnic differences when they formulate their strategies, 
the reality is that these subcultural memberships do shape many needs and wants. Research 
indicates, for example, that members of minority groups find an advertising spokesperson 
from their own group more trustworthy, and this enhanced credibility in turn translates into 
more positive brand attitudes.8 However, marketers need to avoid the temptation to paint all 
members of an ethnic or racial group with the same brush; not only are these generalizations 
inaccurate, but they also are likely to turn off the very people a company wants to reach.9
Acculturation is the process of movement and adaptation to one country’s cultural 
environment by a person from another country.10 This is an important issue for marketers 
due to our increasingly global society. As people move from place to place, they may quickly 
assimilate to their new homes, or they may resist this blending process and choose to insulate 
themselves from the mainstream culture. It’s typical for a new arrival in the United States, 
for example, to feel ambivalence or conflict about relinquishing old ways (and consumer 
behaviors) for new ones. Home Depot segments its campaigns when the retailer speaks to 
the Hispanic market; it creates different ads for “acculturated Hispanics” (second- or third-
generation Americans) than it shows to consumers who almost always speak Spanish.11
A study of Mexican immigrants that used the research technique of ethnography probed 
their acculturation as they adapted to life in the United States.12 Indeed, after the research-
ers interviewed these people in their natural settings, they reported a lot of ambivalence. On 
the one hand, they are happy about the improvements in the quality of their lives because of 
greater job availability and educational opportunities for their children. On the other hand, 
they report bittersweet feelings about leaving Mexico. They miss their friends, their holidays, 
their food, and the comfort that comes from living in familiar surroundings.
ObjeCtive 13-2
Our memberships in 
ethnic, racial, and 
religious subcultures 
often guide our 
consumption choices.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
481 
Many factors affect the nature of the transition process. Individual differences, such 
as whether the person speaks English, influence how rocky the adjustment will be. The 
person’s contact with acculturation agents—people and institutions that teach the 
ways of a culture—are also crucial. Some of these agents come from the culture of origin 
(in this case, Mexico), including family, friends, the church, local businesses, and Spanish-
language media that keep the consumer in touch with his or her country of origin. Other 
agents come from the culture of immigration (in this case, the United States) and help the 
consumer to learn how to navigate in the new environment. These include public schools, 
English-language media, and government agencies.
Several processes come into play as immigrants adapt to their new surroundings. 
Movement refers to the factors that motivate people to physically uproot themselves from 
one location and go to another. In this case, people leave Mexico because of the scarcity of 
jobs and the desire to provide a good education for their children. On arrival, immigrants 
encounter a need for translation. This means they try to master a set of rules for operating 
in the new environment, whether it’s learning how to decipher a different currency or 
figuring out the social meanings of unfamiliar clothing styles. This cultural learning leads 
to a process of adaptation, by which people form new consumption patterns. For example, 
some of the Mexican women in the study started to wear shorts and pants once they 
settled in the United States, although people in Mexico frown on this practice.
During the acculturation process, many immigrants undergo assimilation, during 
which they adopt products, habits, and values they identify with the mainstream culture. 
At the same time, there is an attempt at maintenance of practices they associate with the cul-
ture of origin. Immigrants stay in touch with people in their country, and like Maria, many 
continue to eat Hispanic foods and read Spanish-language newspapers. Their continued 
identification with Mexican culture may cause resistance because they resent the pressure to 
submerge their Mexican identities and take on new roles. Finally, immigrants (voluntarily or 
not) tend to exhibit segregation; they are likely to live and shop in places physically separated 
from mainstream Anglo consumers. These processes illustrate that ethnicity is a fluid con-
cept and that members of a subculture constantly recreate its boundaries.
The progressive learning model helps us to understand the acculturation process. 
This perspective assumes that people gradually learn a new culture as they increasingly 
come in contact with it. Thus, we expect that when people acculturate, they will mix the 
practices of their original culture with those of their new or host culture.13 Research 
that examines such factors as shopping orientation, the importance people place on vari-
ous product attributes, media preference, and brand loyalty generally supports this pat-
tern.14 When researchers take into account the intensity of ethnic identification, they find 
that consumers who retain a strong ethnic identification differ from their more assimi-
lated counterparts in these ways:15
●
●They have a more negative attitude toward business in general (probably caused by 
frustration because of relatively low income levels).
●
●They access more media that’s in their native language.
●
●They are more brand loyal.
●
●They are more likely to prefer brands with prestige labels.
●
●They are more likely to buy brands that specifically advertise to their ethnic group.
The acculturation process occurs even when we relocate from one place to another 
within the same country. If you have ever moved (and it’s likely you have), you no doubt 
remember how difficult it was to give up old habits and friends and adapt to what people in 
your new location do.
A study of Turkish people who moved from the countryside to an urban environ-
ment illustrates how people cope with change and unfamiliar circumstances. The authors 
describe a process of warming, which they describe as transforming objects and places 
into those that feel cozy, hospitable, and authentic. The study’s informants described 
what happened as they tried to turn a cold and unfamiliar house into a home that is güzel 
(“beautiful and good,” “modern and warm”). In this context, that means they integrated 

482 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
symbols of their former village life into their new homes: They blanketed them with the 
embroidered, crocheted, and lace textiles that people traditionally make by hand for brides’ 
dowries in the villages. The researchers reported that migrants’ homes contained far more 
of these pieces than they would have in their village homes because they used them to 
adorn their new modern appliances. The dowry textiles symbolize traditional norms and 
social networks of friends and family in the villages, so they link the “cold” modern objects 
with the owner’s past. Thus, the unfamiliar becomes familiar.16
Of course, it’s not unusual for consumers who don’t belong to a subculture to use 
products they associate with that group. Deethnicization occurs when a product we 
link to a specific ethnic group detaches itself from its roots and appeals to other groups as 
well. Think about the popularity of bagels, a staple of Jewish cuisine that’s mass-marketed 
today. Recent variations include jalapeño bagels, blueberry bagels, and even a green bagel 
for St. Patrick’s Day.17 Bagels now account for 3 to 6 percent of all U.S. breakfasts, and 
bagel franchisers such as Bruegger’s Corporation and the Einstein/Noah Bagel Corporation 
operate hundreds of stores in cities that had never heard of a bagel just a few years ago.18
The dominant U.S. culture historically exerted pressure on immigrants to divest 
themselves of their origins and integrate with mainstream society. As President Theodore 
Roosevelt put it in the early part of the 20th century, “We welcome the German or the 
Irishman who becomes an American. We have no use for the German or the Irishman 
who remains such.”19
Indeed, there is a tendency for ethnic groups with a relatively longer history in the 
United States to view themselves as more mainstream as they relax their identification 
with their country of origin. When the U.S. Census asked respondents to write up to two 
ancestries that defined their background, the results showed a clear decline in the num-
ber of people who identified themselves as of Irish, German, or other European origin. 
Compared to other subcultures, more people from these countries simply choose to call 
themselves “American.”20
the “big three” american ethnic Subcultures
African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Asian Americans account for much of the 
current growth of the United States. The Hispanic population is now the largest ethnic 
subculture.21 Asian Americans, though much smaller in absolute numbers, are the 
fastest-growing racial group.22
Green bagels to celebrate St. Patrick’s Day 
illustrate the concept of deethnicization.
Source: J.R. Bale/123RF.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
483 
african americans
African Americans make up more than 13 percent of the U.S. population.23 As we saw in 
the case of McDonald’s, many marketers recognize the huge impact of this racial subcul-
ture and work hard to identify products and services that will appeal to these consumers. 
The toy market is no exception; children tend to gravitate toward toys and characters that 
look like them. The Disney TV show Doc McStuffins that stars an African American char-
acter who fixes toys in her backyard clinic illustrates this appeal. The blockbuster show 
sold about $500 million in merchandise last year. Its success reflects demographic changes 
in the United States that create opportunities for a diversity of ethnic characters.24
Procter & Gamble launched a “My Black Is Beautiful” program for African American 
women after the company’s research showed that these women think mainstream media 
does not represent them very well; three-quarters of the women the company surveyed 
said programs and ads portray them more negatively than other racial groups and that 
they worry about the negative impact these messages will have on teens.25
Hispanic consumers are rapidly entering the 
mainstream market.
Source: Courtesy of Latina Magazine.

484 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Research by Unilever illustrates how the body image dynamics we discussed in 
Chapter 6 vary across subcultures; the personal care products company found that 
skin takes on a deeper meaning for African Americans. In a poll it ran in Essence 
magazine, the company asked more than 1,400 African American women aged 18 
to 64 to describe their skin, and the most common response was “beautiful” (59 per-
cent). Another 30 percent described their skin as “strong.” The survey also found that 
African American women rank skin as “most important to them” (49 percent); more so 
than their hair, figure, makeup, and clothes. About one-third say their skin is a source 
of their heritage, one-fourth say it’s a source of pride, and “almost half of African 
American women say their skin tells a story of who they are and identifies them.” This 
deep attachment is clear in posted comments such as “My skin is my life’s historian,” 
and “My skin represents the blending of my parents, an outward expression of their 
love.”26
hispanic americans
Macy’s recently launched a colorful new line of clothing and accessories with the hot 
Mexican pop star Thalía Sodi. Kmart sells a celebrity line for Hispanic women called 
Sofia by Sofia Vergara, named for the star of the popular television show Modern Family. 
Kohl’s offers a clothing line with Jennifer Lopez.29 As the attention these major retail-
ers are showering on this subculture shows, today many major corporations avidly 
The Mexican pop star Thalía Sodi has a new 
line of clothing and accessories at Macy’s in 
the Unites States.
Source: Splash News/Newscom.
The popularity of some 
graphic 
video 
games 
underscores the concern 
of critics who argue that 
these games play on ra-
cial stereotypes, including images of African 
American youths who commit violent street 
crimes. For example, Grand Theft Auto—San 
Andreas is set in a city that resembles gang-
ridden stretches of Los Angeles of the 1990s. 
It features a digital cast of African Ameri-
can and Hispanic men, some of whom wear 
braided hair and scarves over their faces 
and aim Uzis from low-riding cars.27 A recent 
study found that when white men and women 
played the game Saints Row 2 (which is simi-
lar to Grand Theft Auto) and were assigned 
a black avatar, they expressed more negative 
views of black people.28
  the tangled Web

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
485 
court Hispanic consumers. No surprise: The 2010 Census reported a record 50 million 
Hispanics, or one in every six U.S. residents; this was a 42 percent increase from the 2000 
Census. Hispanics are now the nation’s second-largest consumer market after white non-
Hispanics. They also are geographically concentrated, which makes it easier for marketers 
to reach them. About half of Hispanic consumers live in California and Texas. The other 
six states having more than 1 million Hispanics are Florida, New York, Illinois, Arizona, 
New Jersey, and Colorado.30 Note: The umbrella term Hispanic describes people of many 
different backgrounds. Nearly 60 percent of Hispanic Americans are of Mexican descent. 
The next largest group, Puerto Ricans, make up just fewer than 10 percent of Hispanics. 
Other groups the Census includes in this category are Central Americans, Dominicans, 
South Americans, and Cubans.
In some ways, this growing segment also resembles our idealized concept of 1950s 
America. On average Hispanic consumers are young (their median age is about where the 
whole nation was in 1955) and they more often live in large, traditional, married-with-
children families where grandparents log a lot of time. They’re increasingly moving to 
the suburbs, they tend to be community oriented, and they have high aspirations for their 
children. The Hispanic birth rate went down dramatically in the years since The Great 
Recession, but this subculture continues to exert a major influence on U.S. culture and 
consumer activity. 31
Many initial efforts to market to Hispanic Americans were, to say the least, counter-
productive. Companies bumbled in their efforts to translate advertising adequately or to 
compose copy that captured the nuances advertisers intended. These mistakes do not occur 
so much anymore because marketers are more sophisticated when they talk to this segment 
and they tend to involve Hispanics in advertising production to ensure that they get it right. 
These translation mishaps slipped through before Anglos got their acts together:32
●
●Budweiser was the “queen of beers.”
●
●Braniff (now defunct) promoted the comfortable leather seats on its airplanes with the 
headline, Sentado en cuero, which translates as “Sit naked.”
●
●Coors beer’s slogan to “get loose with Coors” appeared in Spanish as “get the runs 
with Coors.”
More than one in three Hispanics in the United States are younger than 18 years old. 
This means they will acculturate much faster than their parents did. Already, almost half 
report that they are at ease when they speak English. Indeed, recent research shows that 
many Hispanics don’t think of themselves as distinctly Latino or American, but rather 
somewhere in the middle or ambicultural.33
asian americans
The problems U.S. marketers encountered when they first tried to reach the Hispanic mar-
ket popped up again when they began to target Asian Americans:35
●
●When Proctor & Gamble started selling its Pampers diapers in Japan, it used the image 
of a stork delivering a baby on the packaging. However, the folk myth was unfamiliar 
to Japanese customers and only confused them.
●
●Another ad by Proctor & Gamble in Japan showed a man entering a bathroom while 
his wife is bathing and touching her. The Japanese considered the act an invasion of 
privacy and the ad in very poor taste.
●
●A footwear ad depicted Japanese women performing foot binding, which only the 
Chinese did.
Few companies would make those mistakes today. Asian Americans have surpassed 
Hispanics as the fastest-growing racial group in the nation and have become the largest 
group of new immigrants to the United States. They boast $718 billion in buying power 
Hispanic Americans spend 
triple the amount of time 
browsing online that non-
Hispanics do, and nearly 
twice as much time (on 
 average 5 hours per week) on social net-
works. One factor that accounts for this 
difference is the relative youth of this seg-
ment; Hispanics ages 13 to 34 use social 
networking sites about three times more 
than do those older than the age of 35. 
About 30  million  Hispanics—or 60 percent 
of the U.S. Hispanic population—are online. 
A study from comScore, commissioned by 
Terra (a  Spanish-language media network), 
suggests that Hispanics are more active 
 online and more receptive to new technol-
ogy than non-Hispanics. The research also 
says the Internet is the main media source of 
 information for Hispanics in terms of services 
and products. The survey of several thou-
sand respondents reported that 37  percent 
of  Hispanics versus 30 percent of non- 
Hispanics said they would respond to online 
pitches, and 35 percent of Hispanics versus 
27 percent of non-Hispanics said they are 
more open to advertising on sites where they 
read or contribute user-generated comments. 
Thirty-six percent of Hispanics, compared to 
24 percent of non-Hispanics, said that Inter-
net advertising has motivated them to visit a 
retail establishment; 35 percent of  Hispanics 
versus 25 percent of non-Hispanics are likely 
to attend movies based on their online cam-
paigns. Sixty percent of Hispanics polled, 
 versus 42 percent of non-Hispanics, said they 
like things like iPad demonstrations, virtual 
shoppers,  mobile coupons, and live stream-
ing. The study also noted that  Hispanics are 
more receptive to updates for offline activi-
ties via mobile text alerts, Twitter feeds, and 
Facebook. They are also more likely to visit 
a brand’s fan page and to follow Twitter 
 updates from artists.34
net profit

486 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
that is expected to reach $1 trillion in just 5 years, equal to the 18th-largest economy 
in the world.
Asian Americans not only make up the fastest-growing population group, they also 
are the most affluent, best educated, and most likely to hold technology jobs of any ethnic 
subculture. Their median income is 28 percent higher than the U.S. average and they 
are almost twice as likely to have graduated from college. In addition they are geographi-
cally concentrated; almost 40 percent live in Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco.  
A growing number belong in a segment Nielsen calls the “swayable shopaholics,” who are 
the most active and impulsive buyers in the country. These consumers prefer well-known 
brands and lead the nation in their rate of online shopping.
The Asian American subculture can be hard to reach because it’s composed of 
numerous culturally diverse subgroups that use different languages and dialects.36 The 
term Asian refers to 20 ethnic groups, with Chinese being the largest and Filipino and 
Japanese second and third, respectively. Filipinos are the only Asians who speak English 
predominantly among themselves; like Hispanics, most Asians prefer media in their own 
languages. The languages Asian Americans speak most frequently are Mandarin Chinese, 
Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese.
Despite this diversity, one unifying factor that helps to describe the Asian American 
subculture is an emphasis on family. A recent survey reported that 54 percent of Asian 
Americans feel that a successful marriage is one of the most important things in life 
compared to 34 percent of all Americans. However, “family” also includes grandparents, 
aunts and uncles, and so on; these consumers are twice as likely to live with other family 
members as is the average American.37
religious Subcultures
In recent years we’ve seen an explosion of religion and spirituality 
in popular culture, including the box office success of Mel Gibson’s 
movie The Passion of the Christ, the book The Da Vinci Code, and 
even the Broadway hit The Book of Mormon.38 Mainstream mar-
keters that used to avoid religion like the plague (pardon the pun) 
now actively court church members.
Family is a very high priority for many  
Asian Americans.
Source: Monkey Business/Fotolia.
ObjeCtive 13-3
Marketers increasingly 
use religious and 
spiritual themes to talk 
to consumers.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
487 
You don’t have to be active in an organized religion to “worship” products. A study of 
a brand community centered on the Apple Newton illustrates how religious themes spill 
over into everyday consumption, particularly in the case of “cult products.” Apple aban-
doned the Newton PDA years ago, but many avid users still keep the faith. The research-
ers examined postings in chat rooms devoted to the product. They found that many of 
Cb aS i See it
Jerome D. Williams, Rutgers University
Consider the results of just a few of 
our studies.
1. We examined 81 federal court 
decisions over a 12-year period 
and found evidence of custom-
ers’ allegations of race and/
or ethnic discrimination. This in-
volved subtle and overt discrimi-
natory treatment, degradation 
and denial of services, and crimi-
nal suspicion. We acknowledge 
that filing a lawsuit alone is not 
sufficient evidence of guilt by the 
marketer/retailer.
2. We analyzed negative publicity 
resulting from consumer racial 
profiling and its effect on brand 
image. We found it had a nega-
tive effect on consumers’ image 
of the retail brand, but the effect 
was temporary. However, the rate 
of image recovery varied with 
exposure to marketing commu-
nication and the personal moral 
philosophy of the consumer.
3. We examined how consumers 
perceive consumer discrimina-
tion and what actions they felt 
the victim should take. We 
found that participants’ own  
racial/ethnic backgrounds  
influenced their perceptions and 
their reactions to it. Consumers 
of color more strongly agreed 
that victims should engage  
in system-challenging  
 behaviors when confronted  
with discrimination.
4. We compared the experience of 
Hispanic, African American, and 
White mystery shoppers when 
they visited banks. The results 
showed even when the shoppers 
were identical “on paper,” minori-
ties were treated more poorly by 
bank officers than their White 
counterparts.
5. We conducted a mail survey of 
1,000 households and found 
that 86 percent of African 
Americans felt that they were 
treated differently in retail stores 
based on their race, compared 
to 34 percent of Whites. When 
comparing our results with those 
of other surveys, we found there 
always was a disparity in at-
titudes. For example, according 
to the reality show What Would 
You Do?, 54 percent of African 
Americans reported that they 
were not treated equally in retail 
stores, whereas only 15 percent 
of White respondents said they 
felt that way.
Based on our research, it is 
appropriate to continue asking the 
question “Is the glass half empty, 
or is the glass half-full?” in terms of 
progress being made in eradicating 
discrimination in the marketplace. 
If marketers continue to remain 
insensitive to multicultural consumers, 
they run the risk of alienating these 
segments and, as a result, suffering 
severe economic consequences with 
the loss of dollars as these consumers 
shift their purchasing power to 
more “diversity-friendly” shopping 
environments. So rather than thinking 
of this as solely a “black versus 
white” issue, the smart marketers will 
focus on the color that matters most 
in meeting the needs of multicultural 
consumers, namely, “green.”
Multicultural consumer segments 
are of increasing importance to 
marketers. Current projections 
indicate that the combined buying 
power of African Americans, Hispanics, 
Asians, and American Indians exceeds 
$2 trillion. Despite this growth in 
multicultural purchasing power, there 
is continuing evidence of inequality 
in the U.S. marketplace in terms of 
how these groups are treated. My 
research collaborators and I have been 
conducting studies for many years on 
discrimination in the marketplace, and 
we’ve concluded that despite progress 
in race relations over the past several 
decades, and in the areas of housing, 
employment, and education, the harsh 
reality is that there still are remnants 
of discrimination in the marketplace. 

488 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
the messages have supernatural, religious, and magical themes, including the miracu-
lous performance and survival of the brand, as well as the return of the brand creator.  
The most common postings concerned instances in which dead Newton batteries magi-
cally come back to life. Here is an excerpt from one story, posted on a listserv under the 
heading “Another Battery Miracle”:
The battery that came with the 2100 that I just received seemed dead…. I figured that the battery 
was fried and I have nothing to lose. While “charging,” I unplugged the adapter until the indicator 
said it was running on batteries again, and then plugged it back in until it said “charging” … after 
a few times, the battery charge indicator started moving from the left to right and was full within 
10 minutes! … I’ve been using the Newt for about 4 hours straight without any problems. Strange. 
It looks like there has been yet another Newton battery miracle! Keep the faith.39
In addition to organized religion, numerous other types of groups serve similar func-
tions for consumers—and indeed, they may be loosely based on religious principles (like the 
highly successful 12-step program that guides Alcoholics Anonymous and other addiction 
support groups). Weight Watchers, the world’s largest support group for weight loss, simi-
larly follows a spiritual-therapeutic model even though it is a profitable business.40
Movies and plays like The Book of Mormon 
accelerate the intersection between religion 
and popular culture.
Source: Randy Duchaine/Alamy.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
489 
Organized religion and Consumption
Marketers have not studied organized religion extensively, possibly because many view it 
as a taboo subject.41 As one research director noted, “Religion, along with sex and poli-
tics, is one of the three taboo topics that we’re never supposed to talk about.”42 Religious 
sensibilities vary around the world, and big trouble can result if marketers violate taboo 
subjects in other cultures. Here are some examples:43
●
●Winning entries in the Doritos/Pepsi MAX “Crash the Super Bowl” challenge get 
broadcast as ads during the Super Bowl. One entry caused a lot of controversy: “Feed 
the Flock” showed a “pastor” succeeding in bringing in new church parishioners 
by serving Doritos and Pepsi MAX from the altar—a scenario that some Catholics 
interpreted as mocking the religion’s sacrament of Holy Eucharist (formerly Holy 
Communion). A petition appeal went out to Catholic organizations urging PepsiCo not 
to approve the entry, which was described as a “horrific blasphemy.” The entry wasn’t 
chosen as a finalist and PepsiCo removed it from the gallery of thousands of entries 
that were posted on the contest’s Web site. However, the creators of the video posted it 
on YouTube, where it generated well more than 100,000 views.
●
●A Lipton ad won the prestigious Gold Lion award in Cannes, but the company had to 
decline the honor in the face of objections. The ad mocked the Catholic Church as it 
showed a man standing in the communion line with a bowl of onion dip in his hand.
●
●In Salt Lake City, a proposed billboard for Polygamy Porter beer aroused the ire of 
Mormons worldwide. The billboard company under contract with the brewery refused 
to erect the ad. The board, which was going to show a picture of a scantily clad man, 
cherubs, and a six-pack of spouses, advises drinkers to “take some home for the wives.”
●
●An ad for Levi’s jeans produced in London shows a young man who buys condoms 
from a pharmacist and then hides them in the small side pocket of his jeans. When 
he goes to pick up his date, he discovers that her father is the same pharmacist. The 
commercial was a hit in the United Kingdom, but people in strongly Catholic Italy and 
Spain didn’t appreciate it at all.
●
●The Urban Outfitters chain was called out recently for selling a shirt that features 
a pink triangle against gray and white stripes. The design is similar to the uniforms 
that gay male prisoners were forced to wear in Nazi concentration camps. A few years 
previously the stores caught flack when they sold a shirt by the same designer that 
sported what resembled a Star of David emblem on the pocket like the ones Jews were 
forced to wear in Nazi Europe to identify themselves.44
Despite the occasional blunder, it’s clear that religious dietary or dress requirements 
do create demand for certain products. For example, less than a third of the 6 million 
consumers who buy the 86,000 kosher products now on the market are Jewish. Seventh-
Day Adventists and Muslims have similar dietary requirements, and other people simply 
believe that kosher food is of higher quality. Indeed only 15 percent of people who buy 
kosher do it for religious reasons. That’s why some of the nation’s largest manufacturers, 
like Pepperidge Farm, offer a wide range of kosher options.45
born again Consumers
Mainstream churches are marketing themselves aggressively these days. In the United 
States, there are approximately 1600 megachurches and each serves 2,000 or more 
congregants per week (some actually attract more than 20,000 to Sunday services!).46 
As a church marketing consultant observes, “Baby boomers think of churches like they 
think of supermarkets. They want options, choices, and convenience. Imagine if Safeway 
was open only one hour a week, had only one product, and didn’t explain it in English.”47 
Clearly, religion is big business.

490 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Megachurches are spiritual homes to  
thousands of members.
Source: Frank E. Lockwood/MCT/Newscom.
In the United States, we trace most religious marketing activity to “born again” 
Christians, who follow literal interpretations of the Bible and acknowledge being born 
again through belief in Jesus. Theirs is among the fastest-growing religious affilia-
tions in the United States. One research company reported that about 72 million of the 
235  million Christians in the United States say they are born again.48
The strength of the evangelical movement has caught the attention of many mar-
keters who want to reach these consumers; marketers involved in faith-based marketing 
strategies include Pfizer, Merck, Tyson, Smucker’s, several major automakers, and even 
the Curves fitness chain. Suzuki sponsored the Christian rock band Kutless on its national 
tour to promote its motorcycle and SUV lines.49
islamic Marketing
Muslims will be more than one-quarter of the Earth’s population by 2030, and during that 
same time period analysts expect the number of U.S. Muslims to more than double. If immi-
gration patterns and Muslims’ comparatively higher birth rates continue, experts predict 
that their numbers in the United States will climb from 2.6 million people to 6.2 million. In 
several European countries, it’s predicted that Muslim populations will exceed 10 percent 
of the country’s total population.50 That’s a consumer market to take seriously. The Whole 
Foods grocery store chain recently became the first major supermarket to run a Ramadan 

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
491 
marketing campaign that caters to Muslims who eat lavish meals during the month when 
they fast each day.51
Nike committed a legendary error when it released a pair of athletic shoes in 1996 
with a logo on the sole that some Muslims believed resembled the Arabic lettering for 
Allah. Muslims consider the feet unclean, and the company had to recall 800,000 pairs of 
the shoes globally. Today, some companies listen more closely to the needs of this religious 
subculture. For example, a Malaysian commercial for Sunsilk’s Lively Clean & Fresh sham-
poo depicts a young, smiling woman, but there is not a strand of hair in sight. Her head 
is completely covered by a tudung, the head scarf worn by many Muslim women in that 
country. Sunsilk’s pitch is that it helps remove excess oil from the scalp and hair, a com-
mon problem among wearers of tudungs.
Mindful of the success of kosher certification, some Muslims recognize that halal 
foods (permissible under the laws of Islam) also may appeal to mainstream consumers.  
The Islamic Food and Nutrition Council of America certifies halal products with a 
“ crescent M,” much like the circled “O” of the Orthodox Union, the largest kosher certifier. 
Both kosher and halal followers forbid pork, and both require similar rituals for butchering 
meat. Religious Jews don’t mix milk and meat, nor do they eat shellfish, whereas religious 
Muslims don’t drink alcohol. Neither group eats birds of prey or blood.52
Halal as a descriptor is being used for more and more commodities, services, and activi-
ties, including milk, water, nonprescription medicine, holidays, washing powder, tissues, cos-
metics, Web sites, and music. Many major companies are taking steps to reassure consumers 
that all of their products—not just food—are halal by having them officially certified.
●
●Colgate-Palmolive claims to be the first international company to have obtained halal 
certification in Malaysia for toothpaste and mouthwash products. Some mouth-
washes may contain alcohol, which would be forbidden under halal guidelines. 
Colgate’s products now bear the halal logo, which also is featured in the company’s 
television commercials.
Not of This World specializes in Christian-
themed apparel and accessories.
Source: Courtesy of NOTW.

492 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
●
●Nokia introduced a phone for the Middle East and North Africa markets that came 
loaded with an Islamic Organizer including alarms for the five daily prayers, two 
Islamic e-books, and an e-card application that lets people send SMS greeting cards for 
Ramadan.
●
●Ogilvy & Mather established a new arm, Ogilvy Noor (Noor means “light” in Arabic), 
which the ad agency describes as “the world’s first bespoke Islamic branding practice.” 
Ogilvy also introduced the Noor index, which rates the appeal of brands to Muslim 
consumers. The index was formulated on the basis of how consumers ranked more 
than 30 well-known brands for compliance with Shariah, or Islamic law. Lipton tea, 
owned by Unilever, topped the list, followed by Nestlé. Ogilvy’s research shows that 
young Muslim consumers are different from their Western counterparts; they believe 
that by staying true to the core values of their religion, they are more likely to achieve 
success in the modern world.53
the Family Unit and age Subcultures
We’ve seen that subcultural identities revolve around shared expe-
riences and perspectives. That’s why it’s so important for market-
ers to think about both when consumers are born and the family 
structure into which they’re born. Age groups and the family unit 
helps to shape people’s experiences, needs, and preferences. In this section we’ll take a 
quick look at the family unit and then dive into age subcultures to understand how these 
identities influence consumer behavior.
Family Structure
Family size depends on such factors as educational level, the availability of birth control, 
and religion. Demographers define the fertility rate as the number of births per year per 
1,000 women of childbearing age. Marketers keep a close eye on the population’s birth 
rate to gauge how the pattern of births will affect demand for products in the future.
The Muslim subculture represents an 
 attractive market for many retailers.
Source: Iain Masterton/Alamy.
ObjeCtive 13-4
Our traditional notions 
about families are 
outdated.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
493 
Worldwide, surveys show that many women want smaller families today. Ironically, 
while populations boom in some underdeveloped parts of the world, industrialized coun-
tries face future crises because there will be relatively fewer young people to support their 
elders. For population levels to remain constant, the fertility rate has to be 2.0 so that 
the two children can replace their parents. That’s not happening in places such as Spain, 
Sweden, Germany, and Greece, where the fertility rate is 1.4 or lower. As a benchmark, 
the U.S. rate is 2.1. More babies were born in the United States in 2007 than in any other 
year in U.S. history—but this figure mostly reflects a greater number of women of child-
bearing age.54
The extended family used to be the most common family unit. It consists of three 
generations who live together, and it often includes grandparents, aunts, uncles, and 
 cousins. Like the Cleavers of Leave It to Beaver and other TV families of the 1950s, the 
nuclear family—a mother, a father, and one or more children (perhaps with a sheepdog 
thrown in for good measure)—largely replaced the extended family, at least in U.S. society.
However, we’ve witnessed many changes since the days of Beaver Cleaver. Although 
many people continue to base their image of the typical family on old TV shows, demo-
graphic data tell us that this “ideal” image of the family is no longer realistic. The U.S. 
Census Bureau regards any occupied housing unit as a household regardless of the 
relationships among the people who live there. Thus, one person living alone, three room-
mates, or two lovers (whether straight or gay) constitute a household.
The family unit continues to evolve and marketers need to challenge their cherished 
assumptions: 55
●
●The birth rate in the United States today is half what it was in 1960; less than one-
fourth of the people are younger than the age of 18. The fertility rate has dropped from 
about 3 in the 1970s to 2.1 now.
●
●Nearly half of all women between the ages of 25 and 29 have never been married, 
up from about a quarter of that age group in 1986. In 1950, the median age of 
first marriages was 23 for men and 20 for women. One reason for this drop is that 
it’s really expensive to raise a kid today (as if you didn’t know that): The govern-
ment estimates that it will cost the average middle-class couple $241,080 to raise 
a child to age 18. Of course, that doesn’t even count college costs. The percentage 
of women of childbearing age who define themselves as voluntarily childless is 
on the rise. Twenty percent of women ages 40 to 44 have no children, double the 
level of 30 years ago. Childless couples are an attractive market segment for some 
companies (but obviously not for others, such as Gerber Baby Food). So-called 
DINKS (double income, no kids) couples are better educated on average than are 
two-income couples with children. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 30 percent 
of childless couples consist of two college graduates, compared with 17 percent of 
those with kids. Many childless couples feel snubbed by a child-oriented society. In 
recent years they formed networking organizations such as Childfree by Choice to 
support this lifestyle decision.
●
●The likelihood of a woman following the traditional path of marriage and then a baby 
carriage is strongly influenced by social class. Whereas 90 percent of U.S. women 
who have a college degree or higher get married first, 57 percent of women with high 
school diplomas or less are unmarried when they give birth to their first child. More 
than one-quarter of these unwed mothers live with a partner who is not necessarily 
their child’s biological father. The number of couples who cohabitate (live together 
without being married) jumped from 2.9 million in 1996 to 7.8 million in 2012.
●
●Circumstances such as divorce, the need for a breadwinner to live in a different place, 
and military service make it more common for family networks to be scattered geo-
graphically so parents, children, and extended family members need to work harder 
(and rely more on digital platforms like Skype) to maintain their connections with one 
another.
●
●Children are more likely to live at home after graduating from college rather than 
taking their own places. Demographers call these returnees boomerang kids (you 

494 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
throw them out … they keep coming back). In today’s shrinking job market, many 
young people are forced to redefine the assumption that college graduation automati-
cally means living on their own. About 40 percent of adults between 25 and 29 are 
now living, or have lived recently, with their parents.
●
●Many adults care for their own parents as well as for their children. In fact, 
Americans on average spend 17 years caring for children, but 18 years assist-
ing aged parents.56 Some label middle-aged people the Sandwich Generation 
because they must support both the generation above them and the one below 
them. As family living arrangements change, home builders need to come up with 
new footprints that can accommodate boomerang children, aging parents, and 
single people. Lennar, one of the largest homebuilders in the country, offers a 3000 
square foot house that also includes a separate one-bedroom apartment with its 
own  entrance and garage.57
Because they recognize that family needs and expenditures change over time, mar-
keters apply the family life cycle (FLC) concept to segment households. The FLC com-
bines trends in income and family composition with the changes these demands place 
on this income. As we age, our preferences and needs for products and activities tend 
to change. Twenty-somethings spend less than average on most products and services 
because their households are small and their incomes are low. Income levels tend to rise 
(at least until retirement), so that people can afford more over time. Older consumers 
spend more per capita on luxury items such as gourmet foods and upscale home furnish-
ings. In addition, we don’t need to repeat many purchases we make when we start out. 
For example, we tend to accumulate durable goods such as large appliances and replace 
them only as necessary.
A life-cycle approach to the study of the family assumes that pivotal events alter role 
relationships and trigger new stages of life that alter our priorities and brand loyalties.58 In 
addition to the birth of a first child, other pivotal events include the departure of the last 
child from the house, the death of a spouse, retirement of the principal wage earner, and 
divorce. At Web sites like The Bump, women find tools such as an Ovulation Calculator 
and lists of baby names; The Knot offers a range of wedding-related services when those 
babies grow up and get hitched.
As people move through these life stages, we observe significant changes in expen-
ditures in leisure, food, durables, and services, even after we adjust the figures to reflect 
changes in income.59 We simply attribute some of these changes to variations in func-
tional needs, whereas others reflect deeper motivations as we transition from one role to 
another. For example, researchers find that new mothers undergo profound changes in 
self-concept during pregnancy and after delivery; these changes influence the types of 
products they consume to reflect their new identities.60
Over the years, researchers have proposed several models to describe family life-cycle 
stages, but with limited effect because most failed to take into account such important 
social trends as the changing role of women, the acceleration of alternative lifestyles, 
childless and delayed-child marriages, and single-parent households. We need to focus on 
four variables to adequately describe these changes:
1 Age
2 Marital status
3 The presence or absence of children in the home, and
4 The ages of children, if present.
Today, we have to relax our definition of marital status to include any couple living 
together in a long-term relationship. Thus, although we might not consider roommates 
“married,” for marketing purposes a man and woman who have established a household 
would be, as would two homosexual men or lesbian women who have a similar under-
standing. When we update our outlook, we identify a set of categories that includes many 

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
495 
more types of family situations.61 Consumers we classify into these categories show 
marked differences in consumption patterns:
●
●Young bachelors and newlyweds are the most likely to exercise; to go out to bars, concerts, 
movies, and restaurants; and to drink alcohol. Although people in their twenties account 
for less than 4 percent of all household spending in the United States, their expenditures 
are well above average in such categories as apparel, electronics, and gasoline.62
●
●Families with young children are more likely to consume health foods such as fruit, juice, 
and yogurt; those made up of single parents and older children buy more junk foods. 
The dollar value of homes, cars, and other durables is lowest for bachelors and single 
parents but increases as people go through the full-nest and childless-couple stages.
●
●Partly because they score wedding gifts, newlyweds are the most likely to own appliances 
such as toaster ovens and electric coffee grinders. Babysitter and day-care usage is, of 
course, highest among single-parent and full-nest households, whereas older couples 
and bachelors are most likely to employ home maintenance services (e.g., lawn mowing).
age Cohorts
The era in which you grow up bonds you with the millions of others 
who come of age during the same time period. Obviously, your needs 
and preferences change as you grow older—often in concert with oth-
ers of your own age (even though some of us don’t really believe we’ll 
ever get older). For this reason, our age is a big part of our identity. All 
things equal, we are more likely to have things in common with others 
of our own age than with those younger or older. These similarities can create opportunities for 
marketers (just ask any social media executive) or they can raise red flags: younger consumers, 
for example, don’t drink nearly as much coffee on a daily basis as do older people.66
An age cohort consists of people of similar ages who have similar experiences. They 
share many common memories about cultural icons (e.g., John Wayne versus Brad Pitt), 
important historical events (e.g., the Great Depression versus the Great Recession), and so 
on. Although there is no universally accepted way to sort people into age cohorts, each of us 
seems to have a pretty good idea what we mean when we refer to “my generation.” Marketers 
often target products and services to a specific age cohort; our possessions help us identify with 
others of a certain age and express the priorities and needs we encounter at each life stage.67
Although there is general consensus when analysts describe age cohorts, the labels 
and cutoff dates they use to put consumers into generational categories are subjective. 
One rough approximation looks like this:68
●
●The Interbellum Generation—People born at the beginning of the 20th century.
●
●The Silent Generation—People born between the two World Wars.
●
●The War Baby Generation—People born during World War II.
●
●The Baby Boom Generation—People born between 1946 and 1964.
●
●Generation X—People born between 1965 and 1985.
●
●Generation Y—People born between 1986 and 2002.
●
●Generation Z—People born 2003 and later.
Children: Consumers-in-training
Disney estimates the North American baby market, including staples like formula, to be 
worth $36.3 billion annually. A representative of the Disney Baby program that operates 
in 580 maternity hospitals in the United States visits a new mother and offers a free Disney 
Cuddly Bodysuit, a variation of the classic Onesie. The rep provides bedside demonstrations 
and asks mothers to sign up for email alerts from DisneyBaby.com. As one company executive 
observes, “To get that mom thinking about her family’s first park experience before her baby is 
even born is a home run.”69
  Marketing Opportunity
Almost one-third of all U.S. 
households have at least one 
pet, and 92 percent of pet 
owners consider their furry 
friends members of the fam-
ily—83 percent call them-
selves “Mommy” or “Daddy” when they talk 
to their pets.63 Many of us assume that pets 
share our emotions; perhaps that helps to ex-
plain why more than three-quarters of domes-
tic cats and dogs receive presents on holidays 
and birthdays.64 The pet industry pulls in 
more revenue (almost $40 billion annually) 
than either the toy or candy industries. Here 
are a few examples of pet-smart marketing:65
●
●Kennels look a lot more like spas for the 
furry. At some of them, dogs can hike, 
swim, listen to music, watch TV, and 
even get a pedicure—complete with nail 
polish. Heated tile floors and high-tech 
ventilation systems are common. When 
a dog stays in the “ambassador suite” 
at Club Bow-Wow, a staff member sleeps 
overnight in the room. PetSmart, the larg-
est U.S. pet-store chain, opened a chain 
of PetsHotels, where furry guests lounge 
on hypoallergenic lambskin blankets and 
snack on lactose-free, fat-free ice cream. 
The suites feature raised dog beds and a 
television that plays videos, such as Lady 
and the Tramp and 101 Dalmatians.
●
●Companies that make human products, 
such as Gucci, Juicy Couture, Harley-
Davidson, IKEA, Lands’ End, Paul 
Mitchell, and Ralph Lauren, also sell 
products for pets, ranging from sham-
poos to nail polish to gold-plated bowls. 
Harley-Davidson started its pet collection 
after it noticed that customers at rallies 
and other events bring along their dogs; 
some ride shotgun in the motorcycles’ 
saddle bags or side cars. Customers 
can buy denim and leather jackets for 
their pets, as well as riding goggles, ban-
danas, spiked leather collars, and even 
squeaky toys shaped like oil cans.
●
●Designer water for dogs? A California 
company started things off when it in-
troduced a vitamin-enriched water prod-
uct for dogs. A Florida company sells 
“DogWater” in containers that double 
as throwing toys. Then there’s K9 Water 
Inc., a company whose catalog lists 
products such as “Gutter Water” and 
chicken-flavored “Toilet Water.” Make 
that a double.
(Continued)
ObjeCtive 13-5
 We have many things 
in common with others 
because they are about 
the same age.

496 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
In Chapter 4 we discussed how people learn to be consumers. As you well know, this 
process starts when we are young. Parents often reward their kids with products and 
punish them by taking things away. This form of material parenting shapes children’s 
behavior. A recent study found that kids whose parents use products to shape behavior are 
more likely to be materialistic as adults.70
It’s a no-brainer that kids represent a huge market for toys, apparel, and even elec-
tronics; already more than half of kids aged 8 to 12 have their own cellphone and there 
are numerous tablets designed for them as well.71 However, kids also play a big role in 
many other household purchases. Parental yielding occurs when a parental decision 
maker “surrenders” to a child’s request.72 Yielding drives many product selections because 
about 90 percent of these requests are for a specific brand. Researchers estimate that chil-
dren directly influence about $453 billion worth of family purchases in a year. They report 
that on average children weigh in with a purchase request every 2 minutes when they 
shop with parents.73 In recognition of this influence, Mrs. Butterworth’s Syrup created 
a $6 million campaign to target kids directly with humorous ads that show the lengths to 
which adults will go to get the syrup bottle to talk to them. An executive who worked on 
the campaign explained, “We needed to create the nag factor [where kids demand that their 
parents buy the product].”74
Gen Y and Gen Z
In 1956, the label teenager entered the general U.S. vocabulary 
when Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers became the first pop group 
to identify themselves with this new subculture. Believe it or not, 
the concept of a teenager is a fairly new idea. Throughout most 
of history a person simply made the transition from child to adult. 
It was common for kids in their late teens to be married and start their own families (of 
course, life expectancies were much shorter as well).
The magazine Seventeen was first published in 1944; its founders realized that modern 
young women didn’t want to be little clones of Mom. Following World War II, the teen-
age conflict between rebellion and conformity began to unfold as teen culture pitted Elvis 
Presley, with his slicked hair and suggestive pelvis swivels, against the wholesome Pat 
Boone, with his white bucks and whiter teeth. Today, this rebellion continues to play out 
●
●What happens when our four-legged 
companion goes to the great kennel in 
the sky? One trend is to freeze-dry the 
departed pet rather than bury it or cre-
mate it. The bereaved say that turning 
furry friends into perma-pets helps them 
deal with loss and maintains a connec-
tion to their former companions. Once 
dried, the animal’s body doesn’t decay, 
so it can continue to occupy that special 
place on the couch.
The author’s pug, Kelbie Rae.
Source: Photo courtesy of Michael Solomon.
ObjeCtive 13-6
Teens are an important 
age segment for 
marketers.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
497 
as pubescent consumers forsake their Barbies for the likes of Paris Hilton, Lindsay Lohan 
(when they’re not in jail or rehab), Justin Bieber, or the teen heartthrob du jour.75
The global youth market is massive. It represents about $100 billion in spending 
power! Much of this money goes toward “feel-good” products: cosmetics, posters, and 
fast food—with the occasional nose ring thrown in. Because teens are interested in so 
many different products and have the resources to obtain them, many marketers avidly 
court them.
As anyone who has been there knows, puberty and adolescence are both the best 
of times and the worst of times. Many exciting changes happen as we leave the role of 
child and prepare to assume the role of adult. These transitions create a lot of uncer-
tainty about the self, and the need to belong and to find one’s unique identity as a person 
becomes pressing. At this age, our choices of activities, friends, and clothes are crucial. 
Teens constantly search for cues for the “right” way to look and behave from their peers 
and from advertising. Advertising to teens is typically action-oriented and depicts a group 
of “in” teens who use the product.
Consumers in this age subculture have a number of needs (including some that conflict 
with one another) such as experimentation, belonging, independence, responsibility, and 
approval from others. Product usage is a significant medium that lets them satisfy these 
needs. For example, many kids view smoking cigarettes as a status activity because of the 
numerous movies they’ve seen that glorify this practice. In one study, ninth graders watched 
original movie footage with either smoking scenes or control footage with the smoking edited 
out. Sure enough, when the young viewers saw the actors smoking, this enhanced their per-
ceptions of smokers’ social stature and increased their own intent to smoke. (The good news: 
When kids see an antismoking advertisement before the film, these effects cancel out.)76
Teenagers in every culture grapple with fundamental developmental issues when they 
transition from childhood to adult. Throughout history young people have coped with inse-
curity, parental authority, and peer pressure (although each generation has trouble believ-
ing it’s not the first!). According to Teenage Research Unlimited, the five most important 
social issues for teens are AIDS, race relations, child abuse, abortion, and the environment. 
Today’s teens often have to cope with additional family responsibilities as well, especially if 
they live in nontraditional families where they have significant responsibility for shopping, 
cooking, and housework. It’s hard work being a teen in the modern world. The Saatchi & 
Saatchi advertising agency identified four basic conflicts common to all teens:
●
●Autonomy versus belonging—Teens need to acquire independence, so they try to 
break away from their families. However, they need to attach themselves to a support 
structure, such as peers, to avoid being alone.
Some marketers attend 
“Trend School” to get up to 
speed on the best ways to 
talk to young people.
Source: Courtesy of The 
Intelligence Group.

498 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
●
●Rebellion versus conformity—Teens need to rebel against social standards of ap-
pearance and behavior, yet they still need to fit in and be accepted by others. They prize 
“in-your-face” products that cultivate a rebellious image.
●
●Idealism versus pragmatism—Teens tend to view adults as hypocrites, whereas 
they see themselves as being sincere. They have to struggle to reconcile their view of 
how the world should be with the realities they perceive around them.
●
●Narcissism versus intimacy—Teens tend to obsess about their appearance and 
needs. However, they also feel the desire to connect with others on a meaningful 
level.77
These needs often collide, sometimes in unpleasant ways (there’s nothing more 
venomous than a teenager who’s having a bad hair day!). One researcher explored the 
role of ridicule as a mechanism through which adolescents exchange information about 
consumption norms and values. He found that—often beginning in middle school— 
adolescents use ridicule to ostracize, haze, or admonish peers who violate consumption 
norms. One result of this painful process is that kids internalize their peers’ stereotypes 
about aspirational and avoidance groups (remember Chapter 11) and often significantly 
alter their consumption patterns to try to align themselves with the former and distance 
themselves from the latter. For example, one of the kids in the study quickly exchanged a 
pair of white sneakers for more stylish black ones after his peers ridiculed him.78
Gen Z
Gen Z describes kids who were born in the late 1990s to early 2000s, so they will start 
entering college in just a few years. This is the first generation of the 21st century and 
it’s the most diverse we’ve ever experienced: 55 percent are Caucasian, 24 percent 
are Hispanic, 14 percent are African American and 4 percent are Asian. Many have 
friends from other racial and ethnic subcultures and they assume this to be the norm. 
They are accustomed to blurred gender roles, where household responsibilities don’t 
split along traditional lines. And, of course they are “Digital Natives” who spend a big 
chunk of their time online, so they expect brands to engage them in two-way digital 
conversations.
Marketers are just starting to figure out what this new group of young consumers will 
look like. Having grown up during the Great Recession, they are not as likely to believe in 
an idealized, carefree world. They tend to be independent and gravitate to stores like Free 
People rather than Abercrombie & Fitch.80 They learn about new styles from around the 
globe via social media, so they are equally at home watching The Hunger Games or listening 
to Korean K-pop. Their idols are “self-made” Internet stars like the Swedish video producer 
PewDiePie, who has the world’s most subscribed YouTube channel, and the teenage video 
sensation Evan who has 25 million followers.
Gen Y
A brand overhaul by Pepsi that included its new smiley-face logo had the so-called Gen Y 
age segment squarely in its sights. Young people have always been Pepsi’s lifeblood, but 
that blood has drained or thinned a bit over the past few years, as young people gravitate 
toward energy drinks and fortified waters. The company’s research showed that this 
age group—which also goes by the labels Millennials and Echo Boomers—is hope-
ful about the future; almost all of them agree that it’s important to maintain a positive 
outlook on life. Pepsi also found that 95 percent of Millennials have positive associations 
with the word change and that they link the word to others like new, progress, hope, and 
excitement.82
Gen Yers were born between 1986 and 2002. They already make up nearly one-third of 
the U.S. population, and they spend $170 billion a year of their own and their parents’ money. 
They are “jugglers” who value being both footloose and connected to their “peeps” 24/7. 
The advertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi labels this new kind of lifestyle connexity. To help 
Millennials feel connected with one another, companies including Apple and Philips developed 
miniature devices such as the iPod and MP3 key ring that store music and images for kids on the 
Marketing pitfall
Marketers refer to kids 
aged 8 to 14 as tweens 
because they are “be-
tween” childhood and 
adolescence, and they 
exhibit characteristics of both age groups. 
Many marketers want to appeal to these 
consumers; they spend about $43 billion an-
nually! Tweens are keen to experiment with 
products that make them appear older, even 
though they may not be psychologically or 
physically ready. Abercrombie & Fitch crossed 
the line way back in 2002, when the clothing 
chain had to pull a line of thong underwear for 
young girls after many adults protested. Since 
that time, however, the line between childhood 
and adolescence continues to blur. In 2005 
the NPD Group reported that the average age 
at which women began to use beauty products 
was 17. By 2009, that average had dropped 
to 13. Another study by Experian found that 
43 percent of 6- to 9-year olds use lipstick 
or lip gloss, and 38 percent use hairstyling 
products. In addition to adult shows like Ex-
treme Makeover, tweens watch TV shows like 
MTV’s 16 and Pregnant and movies like Little 
Miss Perfect, which tells the story of a high 
school freshman who encounters an online 
pro- eating disorder subculture (the movie’s 
tagline: “Thinner is the winner”).79
Marketing pitfall
“Hookah pens” or “vape 
pipes” are all the rage 
among young consumers 
today. They are available 
in candy-sweet flavors 
like Bubblicious, Candyfloss, and  Caribbean 
Twist. The real twist, however, is that chemi-
cally they are virtually identical to the  
e-cigarettes older people puff, including the 
addictive nicotine and various other chemical 
additives. Analysts project that in the next de-
cade sales of these products will pass those of 
conventional cigarettes.81

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
499 
run—and they plug directly into a USB port for up- and downloading. When Toyota developed 
its youth-oriented Scion model, researchers learned that Echo Boomers practically live in their 
cars; for example, one-quarter of Gen Yers keep a full change of clothes in their vehicles. So 
Toyota’s designers made the Scion resemble a home on wheels, with fully reclining front seats so 
drivers can nap between classes and a 15-volt outlet so they can plug in their computers.83
Gen Yers love brands like Sony, Patagonia, Gap, Aveda, and Apple. However, a lot of mar-
keters have run into trouble as they try to keep up with changes in their tastes. This can be 
difficult because these consumers like to “trade up and down,” that is, they fluctuate between 
upscale brands and less expensive ones. That helps to explain why both Louis Vuitton and Target 
both make the list of their most favorite brands.84 Another issue is that apparel no longer is as 
important to this age group; youth-oriented chains like Wet Seal and Hot Topic have gone bank-
rupt because tech has replaced clothing as the hot status item. As a magazine editor observed, 
“You try to get them talking about what’s the next look, what they’re excited about purchasing 
in apparel, and the conversation always circles back to the iPhone 6. Having a cool phone to 
show you’re plugged in is a huge part of people’s style, a huge part of life these days.”85
A research firm analyzed data from several million Millennials and concluded that 
three major forces have shaped their experience:
1 Economy: The company identified a subgroup of ambitious go-getters. Women in par-
ticular seem very aware of their “self-brand” and work hard to project a professional im-
age via clothing and home décor. Men tend to identify with a “frat boy” culture and spend 
a lot of time and money on technology, gaming and sports. However, these Millennials are 
a minority. Many are stuck in “economic purgatory”; they are overeducated but underem-
ployed and focus on economizing by living with roommates and clipping coupons. Even 
this more frugal group, however, considers technology like smartphones a must-have.
2 Globalization: Millennials are eager to experience other cultures, but they do this 
in different ways. Ironically, those who are underemployed and thus less invested in 
their current jobs are more likely to travel to foreign countries. Many of those who 
are actually on a desired career path settle for being “foodies” who like to patronize 
restaurants that serve exotic cuisine so they can vicariously collect these experiences.
3 Social media: Gen Y is constantly open to public observation because every new post 
or status update reveals something about themselves. Some are what the report terms 
“Exuberants” who are avid posters and constantly blog about their experiences. However, 
most are “Collectors” who passively absorb others’ experiences. A smaller number, such 
as YouTube star Bethany Mota, are digital gatekeepers who curate or edit style options 
from the huge number of options and then advise their followers what to buy.86
Unlike their parents or older siblings, Gen Yers tend to hold relatively traditional 
values and they prefer to fit in rather than rebel. Their acculturation agents (like those 
we discussed previously in this chapter) stress teamwork—team teaching, team grading, 
collaborative sports, community service, service learning, and student juries. Violent 
crime among teenagers is down 60 to 70 percent. The use of tobacco and alcohol is at an 
all-time low, as is teen pregnancy. Five out of 10 Echo Boomers say they trust the govern-
ment, and virtually all of them trust Mom and Dad.87
We’ve already discussed the overwhelming importance of the online world in the 
lives of consumers, especially young ones. Millennials are the first generation to grow up 
with computers at home in a 500-channel TV universe. They are multitaskers who easily 
engage their cell phones, music downloads, and IMs at the same time. They are totally at 
home in a thumb culture that communicates online and by cell phone (more likely via text 
and IM than by voice).
Within the Gen Y subculture, college students are a special segment. There are more 
than 21 million students in the United States today, and they spend $163 billion per year 
on  discretionary purchases. Of this amount, about $50 billion goes to food purchases, 
$31 billion to automotive expenses, and greater than $18 billion to clothing and shoes. 
No surprise: college students love gadgets. They own an average of 6.8 devices, including 
 laptops, smartphones, and video game consoles. Although they spend much of their time 

500 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
on social media, about one third say they avoid advertising on these sites. They would rather 
 connect with brands by receiving product samples and attending sponsored events. 88
Gen X
The Gen X age subculture consists of 46 million Americans who were born between 
1965 and 1985. This group got the label following publication of the best-selling novel 
Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture by Douglas Coupland. Some called them 
“slackers” or “baby busters” because of their supposed alienation and laziness, and 
these stereotypes live on in movies such as Clueless and in music groups such as Marilyn 
Manson.89
Advertisers fell all over themselves to create messages that would not turn off the 
worldly Generation X cohort. Many of them referenced old TV shows such as Gilligan’s 
Island or showed commercials that featured disheveled actors in turned-around baseball 
caps who tried their best to appear blasé. This approach actually turned off a lot of Busters 
because it implied that they had nothing else to do but sit around and watch old television 
reruns. Subaru sponsored one of the first commercials of this genre. It showed a sloppily 
dressed young man who described the Impreza model as “like punk rock” as he denounced 
the competition as “boring and corporate.” The commercial did not play well with its 
intended audience, and Subaru eventually switched advertising agencies.
Today, Gen Xers have grown up, and in fact members of this generation are respon-
sible for many culture-changing products and companies such as Google, YouTube, and 
Amazon. A book that laments the bad rap Gen X has gotten sums it up: X Saves the World: 
How Generation X Got the Shaft But Can Still Keep Everything from Sucking.90
the Mature Market
Restylane is the top-selling dermal injection to reduce the appearance of wrinkles. The 
company decided to pitch it directly to consumers for the first time, so in keeping with new 
media trends it launched a multipronged campaign that recognizes the technical prow-
ess of many middle-aged people. A conventional TV spot features before-and-after results 
along with women who talk about how frequently men check them out after the treat-
ment. But a second component is a video skit on YouTube that supposedly takes place 
during a woman’s 50th birthday party. While her son works on a video birthday card, 
Mom gets caught smooching with a younger man on a couch. Viewers don’t know the 
skit is an ad until the last 15 seconds. A third prong is a contest to name the “Hottest Mom 
in America”: Contestants submit videos to a Web site and the winner gets cash, free treat-
ments for a year, and an interview with a modeling agency.91 Today’s Mom isn’t exactly 
June Cleaver, the ideal mother depicted in the old TV show Leave it to Beaver. Let’s take a 
closer look at the changing face of mature consumers—some of them aren’t as mature as 
they used to be.
baby boomers
The Baby Boomer age subculture consists of people whose 
 parents established families following the end of World War II 
and during the 1950s when the peacetime economy was strong 
and stable. As a general rule, when people feel confident about 
how things are going in the world, they are more likely to decide 
to have children, so this was a “boom” time for delivery rooms. As teenagers in the 1960s 
and 1970s, the “Woodstock generation” created a revolution in style, politics, and con-
sumer attitudes. As they aged, they fueled cultural events as diverse as the Free Speech 
movement and hippies in the 1960s to Reaganomics and yuppies in the 1980s. Now that 
they are older, they continue to influence popular culture.
As the Restylane campaign demonstrates, this generation is much more active and 
physically fit than its predecessors; Baby Boomers are 6 percent more likely than the 
national average to engage in some kind of sports activity.92 In addition. Baby Boomers 
ObjeCtive 13-7
Baby Boomers are 
the most economically 
powerful age segment.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
501 
are now in their peak earning years. As one commercial for VH1, the music video net-
work that caters to those who are a bit too old for MTV, pointed out, “The generation that 
dropped acid to escape reality … is the generation that drops antacid to cope with it.” A 
study found that the majority of Boomers want to be “surprised and delighted” by brands. 
Offerings that especially appeal to them include Swiffer for the home; Keurig for the palate; 
Amy’s Kitchen for organic foods, Dove, and Trader Joe’s.93
Demographers distinguish between two subgroups of Baby Boomers: “Leading-edge” 
boomers, born between 1946 and 1955, grew up during the Vietnam War and Civil Rights 
eras. “Trailing-edge” boomers, who were born between 1956 and 1964, came of age after 
Vietnam and the Watergate scandal. The Great Recession had a greater impact on trailing-
edge boomers than leading-edge boomers. The relatively older group is less burdened by 
expenses like college tuitions and mortgage payments, so they are able to buy more discretion-
ary products and experiences despite the bad economic conditions of the last 5 years or so.94
To appreciate the impact middle-aged consumers have and will have on our econ-
omy, consider this: At current spending levels, a 1 percent increase in the population of 
This 1962 Pepsi ad highlights the emphasis 
on youth power that began to shape our 
culture as Baby Boomers came of age in the 
1960s.
Source: Pepsi is a registered trademark of PepsiCo, 
Inc. Used with permission.

502 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
This British AIDS awareness message targets 
men over the age of 50.
Source: www.fpa.org.uk Created by  
theethicalagency.co.uk.
householders aged 35 to 54 results in an additional $8.9 billion in consumer spending. 
Ironically, however, most marketers neglect this incredibly important group: For example, 
although Boomers spend 38.5 percent of consumer packaged goods (CPG) dollars, Nielsen 
estimates that only 5 percent of advertising dollars are currently targeted toward adults 
35 to 64 years old. Nielsen’s research says that Boomers dominate 1,023 out of 1,083 
CPG categories, and watch 9.34 hours of video per day—more than any other segment. 
They also constitute a third of all TV viewers, online users, social media users, and Twitter 
users and are significantly more likely to have broadband Internet. As a Nielsen execu-
tive observed, “Marketers have this tendency to think the Baby Boomers—getting closer 
to retirement—will just be calm and peaceful as they move ahead, and that’s not true. 
Everything we see with our behavioral data says these people are going to be active con-
sumers for much longer. They are going to be in better health, and despite the ugliness 

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
503 
around the retirement stuff now, they are still going to be more affluent. They are going to 
be an important segment for a long time.”95
Seniors
The old woman sits alone in her dark apartment while the tele-
vision blares out a soap opera. Once every couple of days, her 
arthritic hands slowly and painfully open her triple-locked door as 
she ventures out to the corner store to buy essentials such as tea, 
milk, and cereal—of course she always picks the least expensive 
items. Most of the time she sits in her rocking chair and thinks 
sadly about her dead husband and the good times they used to 
have together.
Is this the image you have of a typical elderly consumer? Until recently, many mar-
keters did. They neglected the elderly in their feverish pursuit of the youth market. But as 
our population ages and we live longer and healthier lives, the game is rapidly changing. 
A lot of businesses are updating their old stereotype of the poor recluse. The newer, more 
accurate image is of an active person who is interested in what life has to offer, who is an 
enthusiastic consumer with the means and willingness to buy many goods and services, 
and who maintains strong loyalty to favorite brands over the years.
Think about this: The United Nations says that people older than 60 are the 
 fastest-growing age group on Earth. There are 700 million of them now, and there will be 
2 billion by midcentury. In the United States, by 2030, 20 percent of the population will be 
over the age of 65.96 By 2100, there will be 5 million of us who are at least 100 years old.97 
Few of us may be around then, but we can already see the effects of the senior market today. 
Older adults control more than 50 percent of discretionary income, and worldwide consum-
ers older than the age of 50 spend nearly $400 billion a year.98 We’re living longer and health-
ier because of more wholesome lifestyles (at least some of us), improved medical diagnoses and 
treatment, and changing cultural expectations about appropriate behaviors for the elderly.
Larger numbers of older people lead more active, multidimensional lives than we 
assume. Nearly 60 percent engage in volunteer activities, one in four seniors aged 65 to 
72 still works, and more than 14 million provide care for their grandchildren.99 It is also 
crucial to remember that income alone does not express seniors’ spending power. Older 
consumers are finished with many of the financial obligations that siphon off the income 
of younger consumers. Eighty percent of consumers older than age 65 own their own 
homes. In addition, child-rearing costs are over. As the popular bumper sticker proudly 
proclaims, “We’re Spending Our Children’s Inheritance!” Some of the important areas 
that stand to benefit from the surging gray market include exercise facilities, cruises 
and tourism, cosmetic surgery and skin treatments, and “how-to” books and university 
courses that offer enhanced learning opportunities.
Research confirms the popular wisdom that age is more a state of mind than of body. 
A person’s mental outlook and activity level have a lot more to do with longevity and qual-
ity of life than does chronological age, the actual number of years the person has actually 
been alive. That’s why perceived age, or how old a person feels, is a better yardstick to use. 
Researchers measure perceived age on several dimensions, including “feel-age” (i.e., how 
old a person feels) and “look-age” (i.e., how old a person looks).100 The older consumers 
get, the younger they feel relative to their actual age.
A study investigated what the authors call consumer identity renaissance; this 
refers to the redefinition process people undergo when they retire. The research identi-
fied two different types of identity renaissance: revived (revitalization of previous identi-
ties) or emergent (pursuit of entirely new life projects). Even though many retirees cope 
with losses (of professional identity, spouses, and so on), many of them focus on moving 
forward. They engage in a host of strategies to do this, including affiliation, where they 
reconnect with family members and friends (in many cases online), and self-expression. 
This latter strategy may involve revisiting an activity they never had time to adequately 
pursue when they were younger, learning new skills, or perhaps moving into an urban 
area to reengage with cultural activities.101
ObjeCtive 13-8
Seniors are a more 
important market 
segment than many 
marketers realize.

504 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
place-based Subcultures
Geodemography refers to analytical techniques that combine 
data on consumer expenditures and other socioeconomic factors 
with geographic information about the areas in which people live 
to identify consumers who share common consumption patterns. 
Researchers base this approach on the common assumption that “birds of a feather flock 
together”—people who have similar needs and tastes also tend to live near one another, so 
it should be possible to locate “pockets” of like-minded people whom marketers can reach 
more economically by direct mail and other methods. For example, a marketer who wants 
to reach white, single consumers who are college educated and tend to be fiscally conser-
vative may find that it is more efficient to mail catalogs to zip codes 20770 (Greenbelt, MD) 
and 90277 (Redondo Beach, CA) than to adjoining areas in either Maryland or California, 
where there are fewer consumers who exhibit these characteristics.
One popular clustering technique is Nielsen’s PRIZM system. This system classifies 
every U.S. Zip Code into 1 of 66 categories, ranging from the most affluent “Blue-Blood 
Estates” to the least well-off “Public Assistance.” It terms a resident of southern California 
“Money & Brains” if she lives in Encino (Zip Code 91316), whereas someone living in 
Sherman Oaks (Zip Code 91423) is a “Young Influential.”
Residents of different clusters display marked differences in their consumption of prod-
ucts, from annuities to Ziploc bags. The system also ranks these groupings by income, home 
value, and occupation (i.e., a rough index of social class) on a ZQ (Zip Quality) scale. Table 13.1 
provides an idea of how dramatically different the consumption patterns of two clusters can 
be. It compares consumption data for two different clusters primarily composed of young 
people without kids. You can check out your own Zip Code at MyBestSegments.com. 102
Although consumers in two different clusters may purchase a product at an equiva-
lent rate, these similarities end when we take their other purchases into account. These 
differences highlight the importance of going beyond simple product-category purchase 
data and demographics to really understand a market (remember the discussion of prod-
uct complementarity). For example, people in “Urban Gold Coast,” “Money & Brains,” and 
“Blue-Blood Estates” communities buy a lot of high-quality binoculars, but so do those in 
the “Grain Belt,” “New Homesteaders,” and “Agri-Business” clusters. The difference is that 
the former groups use the binoculars to watch birds and other wildlife, whereas the latter 
use them to help line up the animals in their gun sights. Furthermore, whereas the bird 
watchers do a lot of foreign travel, listen to classical music, and host cocktail parties, the 
bird hunters travel by bus, like country music, and belong to veterans’ clubs.
ObjeCtive 13-9
 Birds of a feather flock 
together in place-based 
subcultures.
table 13.1   A Comparison of Two Different Youth-Oriented PRIZM Clusters
Adapted from “My Best Segments,” Nielsen, http://www.claritas.com/MyBestSegments/Default.jsp?ID=30&pageName=
Segment%2Bexplorer, accessed April 21, 2015.
Segment #4: Young Digerati
Segment #24: Up-and-Comers
Tech-savvy consumers who live in trendy 
urban neighborhoods filled with fitness clubs, 
boutiques, and microbreweries.
A transition segment for young, middle-class 
singles before they marry and establish 
families. Primarily live in mid-size cities and 
includes many recent college graduates who 
are into athletic activities, technology, and 
nightlife.
Much more likely than the average consumer to:
Shop at Bloomingdale’s
Travel to Asia
Read Dwell
Watch Independent Film Channel
Drive an Audi A3
Much more likely than the average consumer to:
Order from Priceline.com
Travel to South America
Read Cigar Aficionado
Watch South Park
Drive a Nissan Altima Hybrid

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
505 
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. Consumer identity derives from “we” as well as “I.”
Consumers identify with many groups that share common 
characteristics and identities, but some of these affiliations 
are more central to how we define ourselves. Subcultures 
are large groups that exist within a society, and member-
ship in them often gives marketers a valuable clue about 
individuals’ consumption decisions. Important sources of 
consumer identity include gender, race/ethnicity, religion, 
age, and place of residence.
2. Our memberships in ethnic, racial, and religious 
subcultures often guide our consumption choices.
A person’s ethnic origins, racial identity, and religious 
background often are major components of  his or her 
identity. African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and 
Asian Americans are the three most important ethnic/
racial subcultures in the United States. Key issues to 
reach members of  racial/ethnic subcultures are con-
sumers’ degree of  acculturation into mainstream U.S. 
society and the recognition of  important cultural differ-
ences among subgroups (e.g., Puerto Ricans, Cubans, 
and Mexicans).
3. Marketers increasingly use religious and spiritual 
themes to talk to consumers.
The quest for spirituality influences demand in product cat-
egories including books, music, and cinema. Although the 
impact of religious identification on consumer behavior 
is not clear, some differences among religious subcultures 
do emerge. Marketers need to consider the sensibilities of 
believers carefully when they use religious symbolism to 
appeal to members of different denominations.
4. Our traditional notions about families are outdated.
We’ve seen that subcultural identities revolve around 
shared experiences and perspectives. That’s why it’s so im-
portant for marketers to think about both when consum-
ers are born and the family structure into which they’re 
born. Age groups and the family unit help to shape peo-
ple’s experiences, needs, and preferences. 
Chapter SuMMary
5. We have many things in common with others because 
they are about the same age.
Consumers who grew up at the same time share many 
cultural memories because they belong to a common age 
cohort, so they respond well to marketers’ nostalgia ap-
peals that remind them of these experiences.
6. teens are an important age segment for marketers.
Teenagers are in the middle of a transition from child-
hood to adulthood, and their self-concepts tend to be un-
stable. They are receptive to products that help them to be 
accepted and enable them to assert their independence. 
Because many teens earn money but have few financial 
obligations, they are a particularly important segment for 
many nonessential or expressive products, ranging from 
chewing gum to clothing fashions and music. Because of 
changes in family structure, many teens also are taking 
more responsibility for their families’ day-to-day shopping.
7. Baby Boomers are the most economically powerful age 
segment.
Baby Boomers are the most powerful age segment be-
cause of their size and economic clout. Boomers continue 
to  affect demands for housing, child care, automobiles, 
 clothing, and many other products.
8. Seniors are a more important market segment than 
many marketers realize.
As the population ages, the needs of older consumers will 
become increasingly important. Many marketers ignore 
seniors because of the stereotype that they are too inactive 
and spend too little. This stereotype is no longer accurate. 
Many older adults are healthy, vigorous, and interested in 
new products and experiences—and they have the income 
to purchase them. Marketing appeals to this age subcul-
ture should focus on consumers’ perceived ages, which 
tend to be more youthful than their chronological ages.
9. “Birds of a feather flock together.”
Geodemography refers to analytical techniques that com-
bine data on consumer expenditures and other socioeco-
nomic factors with geographic information about the 

506 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
areas in which people live to identify consumers who share 
common consumption patterns. Researchers base this ap-
proach on the common assumption that “birds of a feather 
flock together.” Marketers can increase the efficiency of 
their messages when they focus on the similarities among 
consumers who choose to live in the same place.
Acculturation, 480
Acculturation agents, 481
Age cohort, 495
Ambicultural, 485
Baby Boomer, 500
Boomerang kids, 493
Cohabitate, 493
Connexity, 498
Consumer identity renaissance, 503
Deethnicization, 482
DINKS, 493
Echo Boomers, 498
Extended family, 493
Family life cycle (FLC), 494
Fertility rate, 492
Gen X, 500
Gen Y, 498
Gen Z, 498
Geodemography, 504
Halal, 491
High-context culture, 479
Hispanic, 485
Host culture, 481
Household, 493
Low-context culture, 479
Material parenting, 496
Megachurches, 489
Millennials, 498
Nuclear family, 493
Parental yielding, 496
Perceived age, 503
PRIZM, 504
Progressive learning model, 481
Sandwich Generation, 494
Senior market, 503
Spiritual-therapeutic model, 488
Subculture, 479
Tweens, 498
Voluntarily childless, 493
Warming, 481
Key terMS
 13-18 Geodemographic techniques assume that people who 
live in the same neighborhood have other things in 
common as well. Why do they make this assumption, 
and how accurate is it?
 13-19 Should members of a religious group adapt market-
ing techniques that manufacturers customarily use to 
increase market share for their secular products? Why 
or why not?
 13-20 The United Kingdom is one of the many countries that 
do not overtly ban advertising that is likely to cause 
offense to certain religious groups. Extreme cases 
would not be authorized for broadcast or print and 
could well be subject to criminal proceedings. Instead, 
the United Kingdom’s Advertising Standards Author-
ity (ASA), a non-governmental organization, provides 
advice and guidance for advertisers. However, in an 
increasingly diverse and complex United Kingdom, 
advertisers can inadvertently make mistakes. The ASA 
advises avoiding anything linked to a central tenet or 
sacred symbol, texts, or spiritual figures. It also makes 
COnSuMer BehavIOr Challenge
●
■DiSCUSS
revIeW
 
13-1 What is a subculture?
 
13-2 One important subcultural difference is how abstract or 
literal the group is. What are the distinctions between 
the two?
 
13-3 How do marketers promote products and services to 
ethnic subcultures?
 
13-4 What is deethnicization? Give an example.
 
13-5 Why are Hispanic American consumers attractive to 
marketers?
 
13-6 What is acculturation? How does it differ from enculturation?
 
13-7 Who are acculturation agents? Give two examples.
 
13-8 Describe the processes involved when a person assimi-
lates into a new host culture.
 
13-9 Why might a marketer be interested in the second larg-
est ethnic group in a market? Is this group difficult for 
marketers to reach?
 13-10 Is it true that religious, cultural, or traditional events 
impact consumption?
 13-11 What is a nuclear family, and how is it different from an 
extended family?
 13-12 What are boomerang kids?
 13-13 What is the FLC, and why is it important to marketers?
 13-14 Can children be considered “consumers-in-waiting”?
 13-15 How important is the global youth market? Suggest 
products and services they would want to use.
 13-16 What are the rules of engagement for young 
consumers?
 13-17 What is geodemography? Is it straightforward to apply 
it to any market or country?

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
507 
the point that as Christianity is the predominant faith, 
the public are more accommodating providing the 
advertising is not disrespectful.  Is it necessary to legis-
late to protect religious beliefs?
 13-21 Describe the progressive learning model and discuss 
why this perspective is important when we market to 
subcultures.
 13-22 Discuss the pros and cons of the voluntarily childless 
movement.
 13-23 When they identify and target newly divorced couples, 
do you think marketers exploit these couples’ situa-
tions? Are there instances in which you think marketers 
may actually be helpful to them? Support your answers 
with examples.
 13-24 The Cornetto ice cream brand in Malaysia was los-
ing market share to local brands. The traditional  
Cornetto image was seen as too old-fashioned and 
not edgy enough. Internationally, Cornetto’s adver-
tising message revolved around love, but in Malaysia 
they merged love with a four-part story centering on 
the ghost characters Po and Lang to attract the high-
consumption teen market (ghost stories are very popu-
lar with teens in Malaysia). Cornetto’s new campaign 
successfully managed to make a connection with the 
target market. Four webisodes featuring the ghosts 
were released on YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter.103 
Cornetto also used vloggers and bloggers to spread the 
buzz about the story. When users clicked banner ads, 
they received a call on their mobile phone from one of 
the characters in the story. Cornetto sales rose by 21 
percent over the course of the campaign.104
This campaign is an exemplary instance of adver-
tising adaptation. Identify an advertising adaption of a 
global brand in your own country.
 13-25 Religious symbolism appears in advertising, even 
though some people object to this practice. For exam-
ple, a French Volkswagen ad for the relaunch of the 
Golf showed a modern version of The Last Supper with 
the tagline, “Let us rejoice, my friends, for a new Golf 
has been born.”105 A group of clergy in France sued 
the company and the ad was removed from 10,000 
billboards. One of the bishops involved in the suit said, 
“Advertising experts have told us that ads aim for the 
sacred in order to shock, because using sex does not 
work anymore.” Do you agree? Should religion be used 
to market products? Do you find this strategy effective or 
offensive? When and where is this appropriate, if at all?
 13-26 The human race has been on the move for countless 
generations. The process of acculturalization describes 
the process of adapting to or adopting traits from 
another culture. Populations can even shift from one 
continent to a new one. Is the process more difficult for 
these people compared to a less radical migration?
 13-27 The chapter discussed the dramatic changes in family 
structure today. The reality is that many other types 
of families continue to grow rapidly as well. Indeed, 
some experts argue that as traditional family living 
arrangements wane, we place even greater empha-
sis on siblings, close friends, and other relatives who 
provide companionship and social support.106 Some 
 people join intentional families, groups of unrelated 
 people who meet regularly for meals and who spend 
holidays together.107 Indeed, for some the act of 
meeting together to consume homemade food plays 
a central role in defining family: It is a symbolic way 
to separate a family unit from other social groups 
by allowing the cook(s) to personalize the meal and 
express affection via the effort that went into prepar-
ing the feast.108 What evidence do you find of the 
impact of nontraditional family structures? How will 
these alternative lifestyles change the way we think 
about consumer behavior?
 13-28 This chapter describes members of Gen Y as much 
more traditional and team oriented than their older 
brothers and sisters. Do you agree?
 13-29 Many parents worry about the time their kids spend 
online, but this activity may actually be good for 
them. A study by the MacArthur Foundation claims 
that surfers gain valuable skills to prepare them for 
the future. The study also finds that concerns about 
online predators are overblown; most kids socialize 
with friends they know from other situations like 
school or camp.109 What’s your take on this? Are 
concerns about excessive Web surfing unjustified?
 13-30 What are some of the positives and negatives of tar-
geting college students? Identify some specific mar-
keting strategies you feel have either been successful 
or unsuccessful. What characteristics distinguish the 
successes from the failures?
 13-31 Is it practical to assume that people age 55 and older 
constitute one large consumer market? How can mar-
keters segment this age subculture? What are some 
important variables to keep in mind when we tailor 
marketing messages to this age group?
●
■applY
 13-32 Locate current examples of marketing stimuli that 
depend on an ethnic or religious stereotype to commu-
nicate a message. How effective are these appeals?
 13-33 To understand the power of ethnic stereotypes, conduct 
your own poll. For a set of ethnic groups, ask people to 
anonymously provide attributes (including personality 

508 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
significant moment for the LGBT community and for many 
other citizens who saw the issue as national confirmation of a 
fundamental civil right for a sizable portion of the population. 
Regardless of where individuals stand on this issue, many com-
panies and brands are realizing that they must pay attention 
and respond strategically to this increasingly visible subcul-
tural group.
WellS FargO BanKS On eMBraCIng 
SaMe-Sex MarrIage
With the U.S. Supreme Court decision that upheld the consti-
tutional right to same-sex marriage in June 2015, the cultural 
landscape changed dramatically. Although only 13 states had 
continued to oppose same-sex marriage, the decision was a 
●■Case Study 
traits and products) most likely to characterize each 
group, using the technique of free association where 
they simply say what comes to mind when you mention 
each group. How much agreement do you obtain across 
respondents? To what extent do the characteristics 
derive from or reflect negative stereotypes? Compare the 
associations for an ethnic group between actual mem-
bers of that group and nonmembers.
 13-34 Observe the interactions between parents and children 
in the cereal section of a local grocery store (remem-
ber to take earplugs with you). Prepare a report on the 
number of children who expressed preferences, how 
they expressed their preferences, and how parents 
responded, including the number who purchased the 
child’s choice.
 13-35 Select a product category and, using the life-cycle stages 
this chapter describes, list the variables likely to affect a 
purchase decision for the product by consumers in each 
stage of the cycle.
 13-36 Consider three important changes in the modern family 
structure. For each, find an example of a marketer who 
seems to be conscious of this change in its product com-
munications, retailing innovations, or other aspects of 
the marketing mix. If possible, also try to find examples 
of marketers who have failed to keep up with these 
developments.
 13-37 One study asked young people in the United States and 
the Netherlands to write essays about what is “cool” and 
“uncool” and to create visual collages that represent 
what it means to be cool.110 The researchers found that 
cool has multiple meanings to kids in these two cultures. 
Some of the common dimensions include having cha-
risma, being in control, and being a bit aloof. Many of 
the respondents also agreed that being cool is a moving 
target: The harder you try to be cool, the more uncool 
you are! Here are some of their actual responses:
• “Cool means being relaxed, to nonchalantly be the boss 
of every situation, and to radiate that” (Dutch female)
• “Cool is the perception from others that you’ve got 
‘something’ which is macho, trendy, hip, etc.” (Dutch 
male)
• “Cool has something standoffish, and at the same 
time, attractive” (Dutch male)
• “Being different, but not too different. Doing your 
own thing, and standing out, without looking desper-
ate while you’re doing it” (American male)
• “When you are sitting on a terrace in summer, you 
see those machos walk by, you know, with their 
 mobile [phones] and their sunglasses. I always 
think, ‘Oh please, come back to earth!’ These guys 
only want to impress. That is just so uncool” (Dutch 
female)
• “When a person thinks he is cool, he is absolutely un-
cool” (Dutch female)
• “To be cool we have to make sure we measure up to it. 
We have to create an identity for ourselves that mir-
rors what we see in magazines, on TV, and with what 
we hear on our stereos” (American male)
Replicate this study in your area. Recruit a group of 
teenagers to construct individual collages that repre-
sent what they feel is “cool.” Analyze their choices—
what patterns do you see?
 13-38 Authenticity and evolution are the two key words when 
a brand is tackling the notoriously fickle teen market.111 
A teen chooses to eat, sleep, and breathe a particular 
lifestyle for a brief time, and the brand needs to con-
nect with this in an authentic way. A teen can always 
spot a fake brand that is based on teen stereotypes. The 
brand has to do is to recognize that teens evolve quickly. 
Their likes and dislikes can change overnight. The brand 
needs to grow and adapt with them to keep them com-
mitted.  If you were launching a new brand for teens, 
where would you start?
 13-39 Locate one or more consumers (perhaps family mem-
bers) who have emigrated from another country. Inter-
view them about how they adapted to their host culture. 
In particular, what changes did they make in their con-
sumption practices over time?
 13-40 Find good and bad examples of advertising that tar-
gets older consumers. To what degree does advertising 
stereotype the elderly? What elements of ads or other 
promotions appear to determine their effectiveness in 
reaching and persuading this group?
 13-41 Interview some retired people. How are they recon-
structing their identities? What opportunities do their 
desires present for marketers?

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
509 
The Supreme Court ruling comes at a time when public 
opinion on the issue is evolving as well. Polls indicate that 
most Americans now approve of same-sex unions and a recent 
Google study shows that almost 50 percent of Millennials would 
be more likely to support a brand after seeing an ad with a theme 
of equality.
Additional evidence of the changing marketplace includes 
a study by PR firm Edelman that identifies gay, lesbian, and 
single parents as the new traditional family. Less than half of 
today’s families fall into the 2010 U.S. Census definition of 
“traditional,” and 2 million children are being raised by lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) parents. The study points 
out that companies need to make sure that all aspects of their 
marketing, from imagery to language, lend themselves to a va-
riety of audiences, including this new family demographic. In a 
more specific finding, the study reported that 66 percent of gay 
dads are more likely to buy products that run ads reflecting their 
sexual orientation.
Some companies have already reached out to the LGBT 
market. Initial strategies focused on being involved in gay-
related events or placing ads in LGBT-specific media. In 
“Advertisers Come Out of the Closet, Openly Courting Gay 
Consumers,” Rich Ferraro, VP of communications at GLAAD, 
reminds us that the history of gay people in advertising is rel-
atively short. Brands like Bud Light and Absolut Vodka made 
early moves to market directly to gay men in gay magazines or 
at gay events.
Robert Klara from Adweek goes on to identify the “coded 
ads” that would be understood by the gay market, but missed 
by straight consumers. He points to the Volkswagen Golf ad, 
“Sunday Afternoon—DaDaDa,” an ad with two guys driv-
ing around. The two guys could be interpreted to be friends 
or boyfriends, depending on the viewer’s sexual orienta-
tion. Coding ads was seen as a step forward, while allowing 
brands to remain somewhat ambiguous and face less poten-
tial backlash.
Most recently companies with even more traditional prod-
ucts have incorporated overtly LGBT themes into mainstream 
campaigns, Honey Maid, Kindle, Marriott, Target, Burger King, 
and Chevrolet, to name a few. Do these moves represent real 
social progress? As Klara points out, the reality is probably more 
a reflection of how competitive the marketplace is today. As he 
says, “If you’re not appealing to every minority community, be 
that racial or in terms of sexual orientation, you’re missing out 
on market share.”
In the banking world, a notoriously conservative indus-
try, Wells Fargo appears to be ahead of the curve, as demon-
strated by their willingness to associate their company name 
with same-sex marriage. When they launched their 2015 ad, 
“Learning Sign Language,” they became the first U.S. bank to 
feature an LGBT relationship in a national ad campaign. The ad 
features a lesbian couple learning sign language in preparation 
to adopt a deaf child.
Wells Fargo Chief Marketing Officer Jamie Moldafsky points 
out several noteworthy aspects of the campaign:
The campaign’s goal was to reflect the diversity of cus-
tomers and to tell emotional stories that illustrate univer-
sal truths.
The bank felt that it was a great way to both represent the 
notion of family and adoption—both an important part of 
their communities and many of their customers’ lives—
and to do it in a way that felt very true to their perspectives 
about diversity and inclusion.
Wells Fargo knew that there would be potential backlash 
to the campaign. Several religious groups have publicly boycot-
ted the bank, including Franklin Graham of the Billy Graham 
Evangelical Association. Graham pulled all of his organiza-
tion’s accounts and then publicized the decision on social 
media. Wells Fargo’s reply was that they would not be swayed 
by boycotts and would continue with the ad. Moldafsky com-
mented that this ad is not their first marketing effort targeted 
at the LGBT market. The bank has supported the LGBT com-
munity over the long term in a variety of ways and even has a 
business unit that specializes in financial advice for same-sex 
couples.
DISCuSSIOn QueStIOnS
CS  13-1   Some criticize the actions of companies that try to 
align themselves with the values and views of sub-
cultures as simply moves to make more money rather 
than attempting to make a social statement. What is 
your evaluation of this criticism?
CS  13-2   Is there a point at which a subculture becomes so 
“mainstream” that unique marketing approaches are 
no longer appropriate or necessary? Discuss.
Sources: Adam Liptak, “Supreme Court Ruling Makes Same-Sex Marriage a 
Right Nationwide,” http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/27/us/supreme-court- 
same-sex-marriage.html?_r=0, accessed June 27, 2015; Sonari Glinton, “Adver- 
tisers Come Out of the Closet Openly Courting Gay Consumers,” http://www 
.npr.org/2014/06/29/326524942/advertisers-come-out-of-the-closet-openly- 
courting-gay-consumers, accessed June 24, 2015. Andrew McMains, “Wells 
Fargo Features a Lesbian Couple in Its First Big Campaign From BBDO,” 
April 23, 2015, http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/wells- 
fargo-features-lesbian-couple-its-first-big-campaign-bbdo-164245, accessed June  
3, 2015; Caroline Bologna, “Sweet Wells Fargo Ad Features Lesbian Couple 
Learning Sign Language for Their Daughter, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ 
2015/04/28/wells-fargo-lesbian-couple-asl_n_7163254.html, accessed June 25,  
2015; Dawn Ennis, “Wells Fargo Won’t Pull Ad Featuring Lesbians,” http://
www.advocate.com/politics/marriage-equality/2015/06/15/wells-fargo-
won-t-pull-ad-featuring-lesbians, accessed June 23, 2015; P. J. Bednarski, 
“Do Millennials Respond to “Equality-Themed Ads? Google Says Yes,” http://
www.mediapost.com/publications/article/248335/do-millennials-respond-to-
equality-themed-ads-g.html, accessed June 25, 2015; Jill Finney, “Tradition-
all: Marketing to the Nontraditional Family,” http://socialmediacertificate. 
net/2015/03/marketing-tradition-family/, accessed June 27, 2015; “The Modern  
Family: A Study in Marketing,” http://www.edelman.com/insights/intellectual- 
property/edelman-marketing-to-the-modern-family-study/

510 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 13-42 Some industry experts feel that it’s acceptable to appropriate symbols from 
another culture even if the buyer does not know their original meaning. They 
argue that even in the host society there is often disagreement about these 
meanings. What do you think?
 13-43 What advice would you give to a marketer who wants to appeal to Gen Y? 
What are major do’s and don’ts? Can you provide some examples of specific 
marketing attempts that work or don’t work?
nOteS
 16. Güliz Ger, “Warming: Making the New Familiar and Moral,” Journal 
of European Ethnology (special issue of the journal Ethnologia Europea), 
Richard Wilk and Orvar Lofgren, eds. (forthcoming) 35, no. 1–2: 19–21.
 17. Eils Lotozo, “The Jalapeño Bagel and Other Artifacts,” New York Times (June 26, 
1990): C1.
 18. Dana Canedy, “The Shmeering of America,” New York Times (December 26, 
1996): D1.
 19. Peter Schrag, The Decline of the WASP (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1971): 20.
 20. “Nation’s European Identity Falls by the Wayside,” Montgomery Advertiser 
(June 8, 2002): A5.
 21. U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 Brief: Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin 
(U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, 
March 2001).
 22. Padmananda Rama, “U.S. Census Show Asians Are Fastest Growing 
Racial Group,” NPR (March 23, 2012), http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-
way/2012/03/23/149244806/u-s-census-show-asians-are-fastest-
growing-racial-group, accessed March 16, 2013.
 23. U.S. Census Bureau, http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/00000.html, 
accessed March 16, 2013.
 24. Elizabeth A. Harris and Tanzina Vega,” Race in Toyland: A Nonwhite 
Doll Crosses Over,” New York Times (July 26, 2014), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2014/07/27/business/a-disney-doctor-speaks-of-identity-to-little-
girls.html?_r=0, accessed February 23, 2015.
 25. www.myblackisbeautiful.com, accessed June 18, 2009; Karl Greenberg, 
“P&G Borrows ‘Black Power’ Phrase for Campaign,” Marketing Daily, (August  
10, 2007), www.mediapost.com, accessed August 10, 2007.
 26. www.skinvoice.com, accessed June 18, 2009; Sarah Mahoney, “Unilever 
Finds Skin Takes on Deep Meaning Among Black Women,” Marketing Daily 
(May 23, 2007), www.mediapost.com, accessed May 23, 2007.
 27. http://www.rockstargames.com/sanandreas/, accessed April 17, 2015.
 28. Alan Neuhauser, “Study: Video Games May Reinforce Racist Stereotypes,” 
U.S. News & World Report (March 21, 2014), http://www.usnews.com/news/ 
articles/2014/03/20/video-games-may-reinforce-racist-stereotypes-study- 
finds, accessed April 17, 2015.
 29. Elizabeth A. Harris, “To Expand Reach, Retailers Take Aim at Hispanic 
Shoppers,” New York Times (December 5, 2013), http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2013/12/05/business/to-expand-reach-retailers-take-aim-at- hispanic-
shoppers.html?hpw&rref=business, accessed February 22, 2015.
 30. Peter Francese, “Hispanic Market Hits Tipping Point,” Advertising Age 
(July 26, 2010), http://adage.com/article/hispanic-marketing/hispanic-
market-hits-tipping-point/145095/, accessed April 24, 2011.
 31. Haya El Nasser, “Poor Economy Slows Hispanic Birthrate,” USA Today 
(November 28, 2011), http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/nation/story/ 
2011-11-27/economy-causes-drop-in-hispanic-births/51425394/1?loc=i
nterstitialskip, accessed February 18, 2015.
 32. Schwartz, “Hispanic Opportunities,” American Demographics (May 1987): 
56–59.
 33. Karl Greenberg, “More Latinos See Themselves As Bicultural,” Marketing 
Daily (February 20, 2013), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/ 
193900/more-latinos-see-themselves-as-bicultural.html?edition=56909#
axzz2LyoalJqc, accessed February 22, 2015.
 34. Karl Greenberg, “Study: Hispanics Are Ideal Online Consumers,” Marketing 
Daily (January 3, 2011), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa=Articles 
.showArticle&art_aid=142204&nid=122251, accessed April 24, 2011; Karl 
Greenberg, “Hispanics’ Web Savvy Surpassing Others,” Marketing Daily (March 
25, 2009), www.mediapost.com, accessed March 25, 2009.
 
1. Alex Cohen, “How Univision is adapting to a new generation of Latino  
viewers in the US,” KPCC Public Radio (May 8, 2012), accessed April 17, 
2015; Jaime Mejia and Gabriel Sama, “Media Players Say ‘Si’ to Latino  
Magazines,” Wall Street Journal (May 15, 2002), www.wsj.com, accessed  
May 15, 2002.
 
2. Kay Deaux, “Social Identity,” http://www.utexas.edu/courses/stross/ant 
393b_files/ARTICLES/identity.pdf, accessed March 13, 2013.
 
3. Michael Cooper, “Census Officials, Citing Increasing Diversity, Say U.S.  
Will Be a ‘Plurality Nation’,” New York Times (December 12, 2012), http:// 
www.nytimes.com/2012/12/13/us/us-will-have-no-ethnic-majority- 
census-finds.html, accessed February 18, 2015; Susan Saulny, “Census  
Data Presents Rise in Multiracial Population of Youths,” New York Times  
(March 24, 2011), http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/25/us/25race.html?_ 
r=2&ref=census, accessed April 24, 2011.
 
4. Burt Helm, “Ethnic Marketing: McDonald’s Is Lovin’ It,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek (July 8, 2010), http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/-
content/10_29/b4187022876832.htm, accessed April 24, 2011.
 
5. Shirley Brady, “Adidas Sparks Uproar with Shackled ‘Slavery Shoe’,” 
Brandchanel (June 18, 2012), http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/ 
2012/06/18/Adidas-Originals-Jeremy-Scott-Slavery-061812.aspx accessed  
January 29, 2015.
 
6. Marty Westerman, “Death of the Frito Bandito,” American Demographics 
(March 1989): 28.
 
7. Stuart Elliott, “Uncle Ben, Board Chairman,” New York Times (March 30, 
2007), www.nytimes.com, accessed March 30, 2007.
 
8. Rohit Deshpandé and Douglas M. Stayman, “A Tale of Two Cities: Dis-
tinctiveness Theory and Advertising Effectiveness,” Journal of Marketing 
Research 31 (February 1994): 57–64.
 
9. Warren Brown, “The Potholes of Multicultural Marketing,” Washington 
Post (June 10, 2007): G2.
 10. See Lisa Peñaloza, “Atravesando Fronteras/Border Crossings: A Critical 
 Eth nographic Exploration of the Consumer Acculturation of Mexican 
Immi grants,” Journal of Consumer Research 21 (June 1994): 32–54; 
Lisa  Pe ñaloza and Mary C. Gilly, “Marketer Acculturation: The Changer 
and the Changed,” Journal of Marketing 63 (July 1999): 84–104; Carol 
Kaufman-Scarborough, “Eat Bitter Food and Give Birth to a Girl; Eat Sweet 
Things and Give Birth to a Cavalryman: Multicultural Health Care Issues 
for Consumer Behavior,” Advances in Consumer Research 32, no.1 (2005): 
226–269; Søren Askegaard, Eric J. Arnould, and Dannie Kjeldgaard, 
“Postassimilationist Ethnic Consumer Research: Qualifications and 
 Ex tensions,” Journal of  Consumer Research 32, no. 1 (2005): 160.
 11. Stuart Elliott, “1,200 Marketers Can’t Be Wrong: The Future Is in Con-
sumer Behavior,” New York Times (October 15, 2007), www.nytimes.com, 
accessed October 15, 2007.
 12. Peñaloza, “Atravesando Fronteras/Border Crossings.”
 13. Melanie Wallendorf and Michael D. Reilly, “Ethnic Migration, Assimilation, 
and Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Research 10, no. 3 (December 
1983): 292–302.
 14. Ronald J. Faber, Thomas C. O’Guinn, and John A. McCarty, “Ethnicity, 
Accessed Ulturation and the Importance of Product Attributes,” Psychology 
& Marketing 4 (Summer 1987): 121–134; Humberto Valencia, “Developing 
an Index to Measure Hispanicness,” in Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Morris B.  
Holbrook, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 12 (Provo, Utah: Association 
for Consumer Research, 1985): 118–121.
 15. Rohit Deshpandé, Wayne D. Hoyer, and Naveen Donthu, “The Intensity 
of Ethnic Affiliation: A Study of the Sociology of Hispanic Consumption,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 13 (September 1986): 214–220.

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
511 
 35. Marty Westerman, “Fare East: Targeting the Asian-American Market,” 
Prepared Foods (January 1989): 48–51; Eleanor Yu, “Asian-American 
Market Often Misunderstood,” Marketing News (December 4, 1989): 11.
 36. For a discussion of Asian identity, cf. Julien Cayla and Giana M. Eckhardt, 
“Asian Brands and the Shaping of a Transnational Imagined Community,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 35 (August 2008): 216–230.
 37. State of the Asian American Consumer, Nielsen, (Quarter 3 2012), http://www 
.nielsen.com/content/dam/corporate/us/en/microsites/publicaffairs/
StateoftheAsianAmericanConsumerReport.pdf, accessed April 17, 2015; 
Anh Do, “Asian Americans’ Shopping Habits Make Retailers’ Eyes Light 
Up,” Los Angeles Times (December 5, 2013), http://articles.latimes.com/ 
2013/dec/05/local/la-me-ff-1206-asian-spending-20131206, accessed 
April 17, 2015.
 38. Dan Brown, The Da Vinci Code (New York: Doubleday, 2003).
 39. Albert M. Muñiz, Jr., and Hope Jensen Schau, “Religiosity in the 
Abandoned Apple Newton Brand Community,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 31 (March 2005): 737–747.
 40. Risto Moisio and Mariam Beruchashvili, “Questing for Well-Being at  
Weight Watchers: The Role of the Spiritual-Therapeutic Model in a Sup-
port Group,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 5 (2010): 857–875.
 41. For a couple of exceptions, see Michael J. Dotson and Eva M. Hyatt, 
“Religious Symbols as Peripheral Cues in Advertising: A Replication of 
the Elaboration Likelihood Model,” Journal of Business Research 48 (2000): 
63–68; Elizabeth C. Hirschman, “Religious Affiliation and Consumption 
Processes: An Initial Paradigm,” Research in Marketing (Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press, 1983): 131–170.
 42. Quoted in Joe Mandese, “MindShare Turns SoulShare, Puts Faith in 
Evangelicals,” Media Daily News (May 15, 2008), http://www.mediapost 
.com/publications/index.cfm?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=82586 
&passFuseAction=PublicationsSearch.showSearchReslts&art_sear 
ched=&page_number=0, accessed May 15, 2008.
 43. Karlene Lukovitz, “PepsiCo Pulls Controversial Video Entry from Site,” 
Marketing Daily (January 5, 2011), http://www.mediapost.com/publi 
cations/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=142406&nid=122346, accessed  
April 25, 2011; Jack Neff, “Dip Ad Stirs Church Ire,” Advertising Age (July 
2, 2001): 8; G. Burton, “Oh, My Heck! Beer Billboard Gets the Boot,” Salt 
Lake Tribune (November 6, 2001); “Religion Reshapes Realities for U.S. 
Restaurants in Middle East,” Nation’s Restaurant News 32 (February 16,  
1998); Sarah Ellison, “Sexy-Ad Reel Shows What Tickles in Tokyo Can 
Fade Fast in France,” Wall Street Journal (March 31, 2000), www.wsj.com, 
accessed March 31, 2000; Claudia Penteado, “Brazilian Ad Irks Church,” 
Advertising Age (March 23, 2000): 11; “Burger King Will Alter Ad That Has 
Offended Muslims,” Wall Street Journal (March 15, 2000), www.wsj.com,  
accessed March 15, 2000.
 44. Abe Sauer, “Why Wood Wood Urban Outfitters Continue to Carry 
Offensive Label?” Brandchannel (February 10, 2015), http://www.brand 
channel.com/home/post/2015/02/10/150210-Urban-Outfitters-Of 
fensive-Design.aspx?utm_campaign=150210-Urban-Outfitters&utm_
source=newsletter&utm_medium=email, accessed February 23, 2015.
 45. Kim Severson, “For Some, ‘Kosher’ Equals Pure,” New York Times (January 
12, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/13/dining/13kosh.html? 
pagewanted=all&_r=0, accessed March 15, 2013.
 46. Ed Stetzer, “The Explosive Growth of U.S. Megachurches, Even While Many 
Say Their Day is Done,” Christianity Today (February 19, 2013), http://www 
.christianitytoday.com/edstetzer/2013/february/explosive-growth-of-us- 
megachurches-even-while-many-say.html?paging=off, accessed April 17, 2015;  
Patricia Leigh Brown, “Megachurches as Minitowns: Full-Service Havens 
from Family Stress Compete with Communities,” New York Times (May 9, 
2002): D1; Edward Gilbreath, “The New Capital of Evangelicalism: Move Over, 
Wheaton and Colorado Springs—Dallas, Texas, Has More Megachurches, 
Megaseminaries, and Mega-Christian Activity Than Any Other American 
City,” Christianity Today (May 21, 2002): 38; Tim W. Ferguson, “Spiritual 
Reality: Mainstream Media Are Awakening to the Avid and Expanding Interest 
in Religion in the U.S.,” Forbes (January 27, 1997): 70.
 47. Richard Cimino and Don Lattin, Shopping for Faith: American Religion in the 
New Millennium (New York: Jossey-Bass, 2002).
 48. Michael Fielding, “The Halo,” Marketing News (February 1, 2005): 18–20.
 49. Mandese, “MindShare Turns SoulShare, Puts Faith in Evangelicals”; 
Karlene Lukovitz, “Evangelicals More Diverse Than Might Be Assumed,” 
Marketing Daily (November 7, 2007), http://www.mediapost.com/publi 
cations/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=70553, accessed November 7, 
2007.
 50. Cathy Lynn Grossman, “Number of U.S. Muslims to Double,” USA Today 
(January 27, 2011), http://www.usatoday.com/news/religion/2011-01-
27-1Amuslim27_ST_N.htm, accessed June 22, 2011. For a theoretical ac-
count, cf. E. Izberk-Bilgin, “Infidel Brands: Unveiling Alternative Meanings 
of Global Brands at the Nexus of Globalization, Consumer Culture, and 
Islamism,” Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 4 (2012): 663–687.
 51. Neal Ungerleider, “Whole Foods Celebrates, Monetizes Ramadan,” Fast 
Company (July 28, 2011), http://www.fastcompany.com/1769739/whole-
foods-celebrates-monetizes-ramadan, accessed February 22, 2015.
 52. Barry Newman, “Halal Meets Kosher in Health-Food Aisle,” Wall Street 
Journal (May 5, 2006): B1; Louise Story, “Rewriting the Ad for Muslim-
Americans,” New York Times Online (April 28, 2007), www.nytimes.com, 
accessed April 28, 2007.
 53. Liz Gooch, “Advertisers Seek to Speak to Muslim Consumers,” New York 
Times (August 11, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/12/business/ 
media/12branding.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&ref=media, accessed April 25,  
2011.
 54. Natalie Angier, “The Changing American Family,” New York Times,  
November 25, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/26/health/families. 
html?_r=0, accessed February 20, 2015: Erik Eckholm, “‘07 U.S. Births 
Break Baby Boom Record,” New York Times (March 18, 2009), www.ny 
times.com/2009/03/19/health/19birth.html?_r=1, accessed March 18, 
2009.
 55. Sabrina Tavernise, “Study Finds Women Slower to Wed, and Divorce 
Easing,” New York Times (May 18, 2011), http://www.nytimes.com/ 
2011/05/19/us/19marriage.html?_r=1&scp=1&sq=age%20of%20
marriage&st=cse, accessed June 4, 2011; Katie Zezima, “More Women 
Than Ever Are Childless, Census Finds,” New York Times (August 18, 2008),  
www.nytimes.com, accessed August 19, 2008; Amber M. Epp, Hope 
Jensen Schau, and Linda L. Price, “The Role of Brands and Mediating 
Technologies in Assembling Long-Distance Family Practices,” Journal of 
Marketing 78, no. 3 (2014): 81–101; Penelope Green, “Under One Roof, 
Building for Extended Families,” New York Times (November 29, 2012), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/30/us/building-homes-for-modern-
multigenerational-families.html, accessed February 20, 2015.
 56. “Mothers Bearing a Second Burden,” New York Times (May 14, 1989): 26.
 57. Penelope Green, “Under One Roof, Building for Extended Families,” New 
York Times (November 29, 2012), http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/30/
us/building-homes-for-modern-multigenerational-families.html, accessed 
February 20, 2015.
 58. Giang Trinh, Malcolm Wright, and Philip Stern, “The Relationship Bet-
ween Household Life Cycle and Brand Loyalty,” Paper presented at the 
annual meeting for the Association for Consumer Research, (2014), 
Baltimore, MD.
 59. http://www.thebump.com/, accessed April 20, 2015; https://www.thek 
not.com/, accessed April 20, 2015; Edmondson, “Do the Math.”
 60. The VOICE Group, “Buying into Motherhood? Problematic Consumption 
and Ambivalence in Transitional Phases,” Consumption Markets & Culture 
13, no. 4 (2010): 373–397.
 61. These categories are an adapted version of an FLC model proposed by Gilly 
and Enis (1982). Based on an empirical comparison of several compet-
ing models, Charles M. Schaninger and William D. Danko found that this 
framework outperformed others, especially in terms of its treatment of 
nonconventional households, though they recommend several improve-
ments to this model as well. See Mary C. Gilly and Ben M. Enis, “Recycling 
the Family Life Cycle: A Proposal for Redefinition,” in Andrew Mitchell, ed., 
Advances in Consumer Research 9 (Ann Arbor: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1982): 271–276; Schaninger and Danko, “A Conceptual and 
Empirical Comparison of Alternative Household Life Cycle Models,” Journal 
of Consumer Research 19, no. 4 (March 1993): 580–594; Scott D. Roberts, 
Patricia K. Voli, and Kerenami Johnson, “Beyond the Family Life Cycle: An 
Inventory of Variables for Defining the Family as a Consumption Unit,” 
in Victoria L. Crittenden, ed., Developments in Marketing Science 15 (Coral 
Gables, FL: Academy of Marketing Science, 1992): 71–75; George P. 
Moschis, “Life Course Perspectives on Consumer Behaviour,” Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science 35 (2007): 295–307.
 62. Edmondson, “Do the Math.”
 63. Rebecca Gardyn, “Animal Magnetism,” American Demographics (May 
2002): 31–37.
 64. For a review, cf. Russell W. Belk, “Metaphoric Relationships with Pets,” 
Society & Animals 4, no. 2 (1996): 121–46.
 65. “Pets Win Prizes as Recession Bites,” Virgin Money (April 23, 2009), http://
uk.virginmoney.com/virgin/news-centre/press-releases/2009/Pets_win_
prizes_as_recession_bites.jsp, accessed June 16, 2009; Carla Baranauckas, 
“A Dog’s Life, Upgraded,” New York Times (September 24, 2006), www.nytimes 
.com, accessed September 24, 2006; Thom Forbes, “PetSmart’s Hotels 
Offer Doggies the Lap of Luxury,” Marketing Daily (December 28, 2006), 
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa=Articles.printFriendly&art_
aid$$$=53099, accessed December 28, 2006; Stephanie Thompson, 
“What’s Next, Pup Tents in Bryant Park?” Advertising Age (January 29,  
2007): 4; Maryann Mott, “Catering to the Consumers with Animal Appe-
tites,” New York Times on the Web (November 14, 2004), http://www 
.nytimes.com/2004/11/14/business/yourmoney/14pet.html, accessed 
September 9, 2011; http://www.k9waterco.com/, accessed June 14, 2011; 

512 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
January 12, 2008; James Ledbetter, “Obama, the Pepsi Candidate,” Slate 
(August 21, 2008), www.slate.com/id/2198198, accessed June 19, 2009.
 83. Michael J. Weiss, “To Be about to Be,” American Demographics (September 
2003): 29–48.
 84. Dionne Searcey, “Marketers Are Sizing Up the Millennials,” New York 
Times (August 21, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/22/business/ 
marketers-are-sizing-up-the-millennials-as-the-new-consumer-model 
.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=0, accessed  
February 22, 2015.
 85. Quoted in Elizabeth A. Harris and Rachel Abrams, “Plugged-In Over  
Preppy: Teenagers Favor Tech Over Clothes,” New York Times (August 27, 
2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/28/business/less-prep-more-
plugs-teenagers-favor-tech-over-clothes.html?smid=nytcore-iphone-
share&smprod=nytcore-iphone&_r=0, accessed January 29, 2015; Hiroko 
Tabuchi, “Chapter 11 for Wet Seal as Tastes Change,” New York Times 
(January 16, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/17/business/
wet-seal-files-for-chapter-11-bankruptcy.html?_r=0, accessed February 22,  
2015; Sheila Shayon, “McDonald’s Struggles to Woo Millennials,” 
Brandchannel (March 25, 2013), http://www.brandchannel.com/home/
post/2013/03/25/McDonalds-McWrap-Millennials-032513.aspx, accessed 
February 22, 2015.
 86. “The Millennial That Marketers Are Targeting Does Not Exist,” Mashable 
(October 3, 2014), http://mashable.com/2014/10/03/millennial-marketing/, 
accessed February 22, 2015.
 87. Steve Kroft, “The Echo Boomers,” CBS News (October 3, 2004), www 
.cbsnews.com, accessed October 3, 2004.
 88. “Tech-Savvy College Students Maintain Healthy Spending, Continue to 
Gather Gadgets and Prefer Campus Marketing Tactics,” Reuters (June 
25, 2014), http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/06/25/idUSnGNX8Y
Fczg+1d8+GNW20140625, accessed April 21, 2015; The Purchasing 
Power of College Students, Retail Connection (October 2, 2013), http:// 
retailconnection.dstewart.com/2013/10/02/the-purchasing-power-of-
college-students/, accessed April 21, 2015.
 89. Paul Taylor and George Gao, “Generation X: America’s Neglected ‘Middle 
Child’,” Pew Research Center (June 5, 2014), http://www.pewresearch 
.org/fact-tank/2014/06/05/generation-x-americas-neglected-middle-
child/, accessed April 21, 2015.
 90. Jeff Gordinier, X Saves the World: How Generation X Got the Shaft But Can 
Still Keep Everything from Sucking (New York: Viking Adult, 2008); M. J. 
Stephey, “Gen-X: The Ignored Generation?” Time (April 16, 2008), www 
.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,1731528,00.html, accessed June 19,  
2009.
 91. http://www.restylaneusa.com/, accessed March 16, 2013; Angel Jennings, 
“Contests, YouTube and Commercials Converge for Skin Product,” New 
York Times Online (July 26, 2007), http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/26/ 
business/media/26adco.html?_r=0, accessed September 25, 2013; cf. also 
Isabelle Szmigin and Marylyn Carrigan, “Consumption and Community: 
Choices for Women over Forty,” Journal of Consumer Behaviour 5, no. 4 
(2006): 292.
 92. Jennings, “Contests, YouTube and Commercials Converge for Skin 
Product”; cf. also Szmigin and Carrigan, “Consumption and Community.”
 93. Gavin O’Malley, “Boomers Value Brands That Champion ‘Youthful’ 
Style,” Marketing Daily (April 13, 2011), http://www.mediapost.com/
publications/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=148507&nid=125673, 
accessed April 24, 2011.
 94. John H. Fleming, “Baby Boomers Are Opening Their Wallets,” Gallup Business 
Journal (January 30, 2015), http://www.gallup.com/businessjournal/ 
181367/baby-boomers-opening-wallets.aspx, accessed April 21, 2015.
 95. Quoted in Sarah Mahoney, “Nielsen: Time to Recommit to Boomers,” 
Marketing Daily (July 21, 2010), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/
article/132364/nielsen-time-to-recommit-to-boomers.html?edition=,  
accessed April 21, 2015.
 96. Hiawatha Bray, “At MIT’s AgeLab Growing Old Is the New Frontier,” 
Boston Globe (March 23, 2009), www.boston.com/business/technology/ 
articles/2009/03/23/at_mits_agelab_growing_old_is_the_new_
frontier/?s_campaign=8315, accessed March 23, 2009.
 97. D’Vera Cohn, “2100 Census Forecast: Minorities Expected to Account for 
60% of U.S. Population,” Washington Post (January 13, 2000): A5.
 98. Catherine A. Cole and Nadine N. Castellano, “Consumer Behavior,” in 
James E. Binnen, ed., Encyclopedia of Gerontology, vol. 1 (San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press, 1996), 329–339.
 99. Rick Adler, “Stereotypes Won’t Work with Seniors Anymore,” Advertising 
Age (November 11, 1996): 32.
 100. Benny Barak and Leon G. Schiffman, “Cognitive Age: A Nonchronological 
Age Variable,” in Kent B. Monroe, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 8 
(Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1981): 602–606.
 101. Hope Jensen Schau, Mary C. Gilly, and Mary Wolfinbarger, “Consumer 
Identity Renaissance: The Resurgence of Identity-Inspired Consumption 
Jim Carlton, “For Finicky Drinkers, Water from the Tap Isn’t Tasty Enough,” 
Wall Street Journal (March 11, 2005), www.wsj.com, accessed March 11, 
2005.
 66. Karlene Lukovitz, “Coffee Marketers Need to Woo Young Adults,” Marketing  
Daily (October 8, 2010), http://www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa=Articles 
.showArticle&art_aid=137318, accessed April 29, 2011.
 67. Anil Mathur, George P. Moschis, and Euehun Lee, “Life Events and Brand 
Preference Changes,” Journal of Consumer Behavior 3, no. 2 (December 
2003): 129–141; James W. Gentry, Stacey Menzel Baker, and Frederic B. 
Kraft, “The Role of Possessions in Creating, Maintaining, and Preserving 
Identity: Variations Over the Life Course,” in Frank Kardes and Mita Sujan, 
eds., Advances in Consumer Research 22 (Provo, Utah: Association for Con-
sumer Research, 1995): 413–418.
 68. Cf. Neil Howe and William Strauss, Generations: The History of America’s 
Future, 1584 to 2069 (New York: Harper Perennial, 1992). The yearly 
ranges in this list are the author’s synthesis of a variety of generational 
schemes and as such are approximations.
 69. www.disneybaby.com, accessed March 16, 2013; Quoted in Brooks Barnes, 
“Disney Looking into Cradle for Customers,” New York Times (February 6, 
2011), http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/07/business/media/07disney.
html?_r=1&ref=business#, accessed April 19, 2011.
 70. Marsha L. Richins and Lan Nguyen, “Material Parenting: How the Use of 
Goods in Parenting Fosters Materialism in the Next Generation. Journal of 
Consumer Research 2015, Volume 41, Issue 6 Pp. 1333 - 1357
 71. Paulina Smith, “Is Your Child Ready for a Cell Phone?” Verizon, http://www.
verizonwireless.com/mobile-living/home-and-family/cell-phones-for-
kids/, accessed April 20, 2015; “Best Tablets for Kids,” Consumer Reports, 
http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/news/2014/11/best-tablets- 
for-kids-android/index.htm, accessed April 20, 2015.
 72. Kay L. Palan and Robert E. Wilkes, “Adolescent-Parent Interaction in 
Family Decision-Making,” Journal of Consumer Research 24 (September 
1997): 159–69; cf. also Tiffany Meyers, “Kids Gaining Voice in How Home 
Looks,” Advertising Age (March 29, 2004): S4.
 73. Russell N. Laczniak and Kay M. Palan, “Under the Influence,” Marketing 
Research (Spring 2004): 34–39.
 74. Stephanie Thompson, “Mrs. Butterworth’s Changes Her Target,” Adver-
tising Age (December 20, 1999): 44.
 75. Stephen Holden, “After the War the Time of the Teen-Ager,” New York 
Times (May 7, 1995): E4.
 76. Cornelia Pechmann and Chuan-Fong Shih, “Smoking Scenes in Movies 
and Antismoking Advertisements Before Movies: Effects on Youth,” Journal 
of Marketing 63 (July 1999): 1–13.
 77. Junu Bryan Kim, “For Savvy Teens: Real Life, Real Solutions,” New York 
Times (August 23, 1993): S1.
 78. Excerpted from David B. Wooten, “From Labeling Possessions to Possessing 
Labels: Ridicule and Socialization Among Adolescents,” Journal of Con-
sumer Research 33 (September 2006): 188–198.
 79. Ilya Marritz, “Brands Target Tween Girls in Bid to Keep them as Long-
time Customers,” NPR, (April 9, 2015), http://www.npr.org/2015/04/ 
09/395091935/to-get-em-while-they-re-young-brands-target-tween-
girls, accessed April 21, 2015; Tweens ’R Shoppers: A Look at the Tween 
Market & Shopping Behavior,” POPAI (March 2013), http://www.popai 
.com/uploads/downloads/POPAIWhitePaper-Tweens-R-Shoppers-2013 
.pdf, accessed April 21, 2015; “Little Miss Perfect,” IMDB, http://www 
.imdb.com/media/rm3226402560/tt3276618?ref_=tt_ov_i, accessed 
April 21, 2015; “16 and Pregnant,” MTV, http://www.mtv.com/shows/16_
and_pregnant/, accessed April 21, 2015; Leslie Earnest, “Store’s Thongs for 
Kids Stir Outrage,” Los Angeles Times (May 23, 2002), http://articles.latimes 
.com/2002/may/23/nation/na-thong23, accessed April 21, 2015.
 80. Ruth Bernstein, “Move Over Millennials—Here Comes Gen Z,” Advertising Age 
(January 21, 2015), http://adage.com/article/cmo-strategy/move-millenn 
ials-gen-z/296577/, accessed April 20, 2015; Laurence Benhamou, 
“Everything You Need to Know About Generation Z,” Business Insider 
(February 12, 2015), http://www.businessinsider.com/afp-generation-z- 
born-in-the-digital-age-2015-2#ixzz3XsRYBXX6, accessed April 20, 2015; 
https://www.youtube.com/user/evantherock, accessed April 20, 2015.
 81. Matt Richtel, “E-Cigarettes, by Other Names, Lure Young and Worry 
Experts.” New York Times (March 4, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/ 
03/05/business/e-cigarettes-under-aliases-elude-the-authorities.html? 
action=click&module=Search&region=searchResults%230&version= 
&url=http%3A%2F%2Fquery.nytimes.com%2Fsearch%2Fsitesearch% 
2F%3Faction%3Dclick%26region%3DMasthead%26pgtype%3DHomepage 
%26module%3DSearchSubmit%26contentCollection%3DHomepage%26
t%3Dqry940%23%2Fe-cigarettes%2F24hours%2F&_r=0, accessed Jan-
uary 29, 2015.
 82. Natalie Zmuda, “Pepsi Embraces ‘Optimistic’ Millennials in New TBWA 
Work,” Advertising Age (December 11, 2008), http://adage.com/article/
news/pepsi-embraces-optimistic-millennials-tbwa-work/133211/, accessed 

 
Chapter 13   Subcultures 
513 
 108. Risto Moisio, Eric J. Arnould, and Linda L. Price, “Between Mothers and 
Markets: Constructing Family Identity Through Homemade Food,” Journal 
of Consumer Culture 4, no. 3 (2004): 361–384.
 109. Quoted in Tamar Lewin, “Teenagers’ Internet Socializing Not a Bad Thing,” 
New York Times (November 19, 2008), www.nytimes.com/2008/11/20/
us/20internet.html?ex=1384923600&en=c3467e945b431625&ei 
=5124, accessed November 24, 2008.
 110. Gary J. Bamossy, Michael R. Solomon, Basil G. Englis, and Trinske 
Antonidies, “You’re Not Cool If You Have to Ask: Gender in the Social 
Construction of Coolness,” paper presented at the Association for 
Consumer Research Gender Conference, Chicago, June 2000; see also 
Clive Nancarrow, Pamela Nancarrow, and Julie Page, “An Analysis of 
the Concept of Cool and Its Marketing Implications,” Journal of Consumer 
Behavior 1 (June 2002): 311–322.
 111. LeeAnna Buis, “Two Must-Haves for Effective Teen Marketing,” MediaPost, 
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/257640/two-must-
haves-for-effective-teen-marketing.html.
in Retirement,” Journal of Consumer Research 36 (August 2009): 255–276; 
cf. also Michelle Barnhart and Lisa Peñaloza, “Who Are You Calling 
Old? Negotiating Old Age Identity in the Elderly Consumption Ensemble,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 6 (2013): 1133–1153.
 102. http://www.claritas.com/MyBestSegments/Default.jsp, accessed April 21, 
2015.
 103. Spikes Asia 2016, “Ice Scream, You Scream: Ghostly Campaign ‘Haunts’ 
Consumers,” https://www.spikes.asia/winners/2015/media/entry.cfm?en
tryid=2113&award=101&order=4&direction=1
 104. Mobile Marketing Association, “Cornetto: The Ghost Is Calling,” http://
www.mmaglobal.com/case-study-hub/case_studies/view/36693.
 105. Penteado, “Brazilian Ad Irks Church.”
 106. Robert Boutilier, “Targeting Families: Marketing to and Through the New 
Family,” in American Demographics Marketing Tools (Ithaca, NY: American 
Demographics Books, 1993): 4–6; W. Bradford Fay, “Families in the 
1990s: Universal Values, Uncommon Experiences,” Marketing Research: A 
Magazine of Management & Applications 5 (Winter 1993): 47.
 107. Ellen Graham, “Craving Closer Ties, Strangers Come Together as Family,” 
Wall Street Journal (March 4, 1996): B1.

514
S
tephanie is at her wits’ end. It’s bad enough that she has a dead-
line looming on that new Christmas promotion for her gift shop. 
Now, there’s trouble on the home front as well: Her son Mark had 
to go and flunk his driver’s license road exam, and he’s just about suicidal 
because he feels he can’t be a “real man” if he doesn’t have a license. To 
top things off, now she’ll have to postpone her much-anticipated vacation to 
Disney World with her stepdaughter Arya because she just can’t find the time 
to get away.
When Stephanie meets up with her buddy Lenny at their local Starbucks 
for their daily “retreat,” her mood starts to brighten. Somehow the calm of 
the café rubs off as she savors her grande cappuccino. Lenny consoles her 
with the ultimate remedy to beat the blues: Go home, take a nice long bath, 
and then consume a quart of Starbucks Espresso Swirl ice cream. Yes, that’s 
the ticket. It’s amazing how the little things in life can make such a big dif-
ference. As she strolls out the door, Stephanie makes a mental note to get 
Lenny a really nice Christmas gift this year. She’s earned it.
 14-1 A culture is a society’s personality.
 14-2 We distinguish between high culture and low culture.
 14-3 Myths are stories that express a culture’s values, and in 
modern times marketing messages convey these values 
to members of the culture.
 14-4 Many of our consumption activities—including holiday 
observances, grooming, and gift-giving—relate to rituals.
 14-5 We describe products as either sacred or profane, and it’s 
not unusual for some products to move back and forth 
between the two categories.
 14-6 New products, services, and ideas spread through a 
population over time. Different types of people are more 
or less likely to adopt them during this diffusion process.
 14-7 Many people and organizations play a role in the fash-
ion system that creates and communicates symbolic 
meanings to consumers.
 14-8 Fashions follow cycles and reflect cultural dynamics.
 14-9 Western (and particularly U.S.) culture has a huge im-
pact around the world, although people in other coun-
tries don’t necessarily ascribe the same meanings to 
products as we do.
 14-10 Products that succeed in one culture may fail in another 
if marketers fail to understand the differences among 
consumers in each place.
When you finish reading this chapter you will understand why:
Chapter 
Objectives
 Chapter 14 ● Culture
Source: Rob Marmion/Shutterstock

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
515 
Cultural Systems
Stephanie’s experiences illustrate how everyday events reflect 
deeper meanings; overcoming challenges like a driver’s test, plan-
ning “pilgrimmages” to destinations like Disney World, choosing gifts to thank others, 
even calming ourselves with that daily latte or bowl of favorite ice cream. Marketers can 
only appreciate the importance of these activities when they understand what they signify 
and that’s why this final chapter will explore some of the underlying elements. Culture is 
a society’s personality. It includes both abstract ideas, such as values and ethics, and mate-
rial objects and services, such as the automobiles, clothing, food, art, and sports a society 
produces. Put another way, it’s the accumulation of shared meanings, rituals, norms, and 
traditions among the members of an organization or society.
We simply can’t understand consumption unless we consider its cultural context: 
Culture is the “lens” through which people view products. Ironically, the effects of culture 
on consumer behavior are so powerful and far-reaching that it’s sometimes difficult to 
grasp their importance. We don’t always appreciate this power until we encounter a dif-
ferent culture. Suddenly, many of the assumptions we take for granted about the clothes 
we wear, the food we eat, or the way we address others no longer seem to apply. The effect 
when we encounter such differences can be so great that the term culture shock is not an 
exaggeration.
Our culture determines the overall priorities we attach to different activities and 
products, and it also helps us decide whether specific products will satisfy these priori-
ties. A product that provides benefits to members of a culture at any point in time has a 
much better chance to achieve marketplace acceptance. For example, U.S. culture began 
to emphasize the concept of a fit, trim body as an ideal of appearance in the mid-1970s. 
The premium consumers put on thinness, which stemmed from underlying values such as 
mobility, wealth, and a focus on the self, greatly contributed to Miller’s success when the 
brewer launched its Lite beer. However, a decade earlier when Gablinger’s introduced a 
similar low-cal beer in the 1960s, the product failed. This beverage was “ahead of its time” 
because U.S. beer drinkers during that era (who were almost all men) weren’t worried 
about cutting down on calories.
The relationship between consumer behavior and culture is a two-way street. On the 
one hand, consumers are more likely to embrace products and services that resonate with 
a culture’s priorities at any given time. On the other hand, it’s worthwhile for us to under-
stand which products do get accepted, because this knowledge provides a window into the 
dominant cultural ideals of that period. Consider, for example, some U.S. products that 
successfully reflected dominant values during their time:
●
●The TV dinner reflected changes in family structure and the onset of a new informal-
ity in U.S. home life.
●
●Cosmetics made from natural materials without animal testing reflected consumers’ 
apprehensions about pollution, waste, and animal rights.
●
●Condoms packaged in pastel carrying cases for female buyers signaled changes in 
 attitudes toward sexual responsibility and openness.
Cultural Systems
Culture is not static. It evolves continually as it synthesizes old ideas with new ones. A 
 cultural system consists of these functional areas:1
●
●Ecology—The way a system adapts to its habitat. The technology a culture uses to 
obtain and distribute resources shapes its ecology. The Japanese, for example, greatly 
value products that make efficient use of space because of the cramped conditions in 
their urban centers.2
ObjeCtive 14-1
A culture is a society’s 
personality.

516 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
●
●Social structure—The way people maintain an orderly social life. This includes the 
domestic and political groups that dominate the culture (e.g., the nuclear family ver-
sus the extended family; representative government versus dictatorship).
●
●Ideology—The mental characteristics of a people and the way they relate to their 
environment and social groups. As we saw in Chapter 12, they share a common 
worldview that includes ideas about principles of order and fairness. They also share 
an ethos, or a set of moral and aesthetic principles. A theme park in Bombay called 
Water Kingdom that caters to India’s emerging middle class illustrates how distinctive 
a culture’s worldview can be. Many consumers there are unfamiliar with mixed-sex 
swimming in public, so the park rents swimsuits to women who have never worn them 
before. No thongs here, though: The suits cover the women from wrists to ankles.3
the Yin and Yang of Marketing and Culture
Even though inner-city teens represent only 8 percent of all people in that age group and have 
incomes significantly lower than their white suburban counterparts, their influence on young 
people’s musical and fashion tastes is much greater than these numbers suggest. “Urban” 
fashion now is a mainstay in the heartland, as major retail chains pick up on the craze and 
try to lure legions of young middle-class shoppers. Macy’s and JC Penney carry Sean John and 
FUBU (“for us by us”); labels like Versace, Tommy Hilfiger, Enyce, Ecko, Nautica, and Affliction 
are standard issue for junior high kids. Web sites like Krunkgrillz.com and Hiphopbling.com 
sell other emblems of hip-hop such as “pimp cups,” gold plated “grillz,” and Bellagio spoke 
rims.4 Why does this subculture influence the mass market so strongly?
Outsider heroes—whether John Dillinger, James Dean, or Dr. Dre—who achieve 
money and fame without being hemmed in by societal constraints have always fascinated 
Americans. That helps to explain the devotion of many white suburban teens to the urban 
music scene. As one executive of a firm that researches urban youth noted, “People resonate 
with the strong anti-oppression messages of rap, and the alienation of blacks.”5 It’s common 
for mainstream culture to modify symbols from “cutting-edge” subcultures for a larger audi-
ence to consume. As this occurs, these cultural products undergo a process of cooptation 
in which outsiders transform their original meanings.6 The spread of hip-hop fashions and 
music is only one example of what happens when the marketing system takes a set of subcul-
tural meanings, reinterprets them, and reproduces them for mass consumption.
Of course, the countercultures that originate these movements don’t just sit still for 
this. They develop strategies to reclaim their symbols and practices. For example, large 
food manufacturers and retailers today recognize shifting consumer tastes as they co-opt 
vegan or organic food cultures and repackage food products for mainstream grocery shop-
pers. Walmart sells organic food, and the huge conglomerate ConAgra purchased Ben & 
Jerry’s ice cream. In response, adherents of a locavore lifestyle that emphasizes the pur-
chase of locally produced meat and vegetables may find alternative channels of distribu-
tion, such as farmers’ markets, to sell their “authentic” versions to true believers.7
In this section we’ll look at how our culture creates these meanings—which often 
reside in everyday products—and how these meanings move through a society. As  
Figure 14.1 shows, the advertising and fashion industries play a key role in this process; 
they link functional products with symbolic qualities such as sexiness, sophistication, or 
just plain “cool.” These goods, in turn, impart their meanings to us as we use these prod-
ucts to create and express our identities.8
Cultural Movement
Fairy tats. Tory Burch flats. Cage-free eggs. Ke$ha. High-tech furniture. Postmodern 
architecture. Candy Crush. Vine videos. Tablets. Emojis. Real Housewives. Selfies. Electric 
cars. Costa Rican ecotours. We inhabit a world that brims with different styles and pos-
sibilities. The food we eat, the cars we drive, the clothes we wear, the places we live and 
work, the music we listen to—the ebb and flow of popular culture and fashion influences 
all of them.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
517 
At times we may feel overwhelmed by the sheer number of choices available to us 
in the marketplace. A person who wants to choose something as routine as a necktie or 
a lipstick shade may look at hundreds of alternatives! Despite this seeming abundance, 
however, the options available to us at any point in time actually represent only a small 
fraction of the total set of possibilities. Figure 14.2 shows that when we select certain 
alternatives over others—whether automobiles, dresses, computers, recording artists, 
political candidates, religions, or even scientific methodologies—our choice actually is 
Cultural Values and Symbols
Consumer Goods
Individual Consumer
Advertising and
Fashion Systems
DESTINATIONS
OF MOVEMENT
INSTRUMENTS
OF MOVEMENT
Consumption
Rituals
Figure 14.1 THE MOvEMENT Of MEANING
Formal Gatekeepers
 
Casting Directors
 
Radio Programmers
 
Textbook Authors
 
Retail Buyers
 
Restaurant Reviewers
Cultural Gatekeepers
Culture
Production
System
Communications
Subsystem
Informal Gatekeepers
 
Opinion Leaders
 
Friends
 
Spouse
 
Family Members
 
Neighbors
Consumer
Managerial
Subsystem
Creative
Subsystem
CULTURE PRODUCTION PROCESS
Consumer Innovation/Grassroots Movement
Symbol Pool
Figure 14.2 THE CuLTurE PrODuCTION PrOCESS

518 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
only the culmination of a complex filtration process that resembles a funnel. Many possi-
bilities initially compete for adoption; most of them drop out of the mix as they make their 
way down the path from conception to consumption. We call this winnowing-out process 
cultural selection.
We don’t form our tastes and product preferences in a vacuum. The many images 
mass media present to us drive our choices, as well as our observations of those around 
us, and even our desires to live in the fantasy worlds marketers create in the ads we see all 
around us. These options constantly evolve and change. A clothing style or type of cuisine 
that is “hot” one year may be “out” the next.
Hip-hop was born way back in 1968 by a DJ in the Bronx, New York. The music and 
fashions that grew up around it grew over the years and began to garner mainstream 
status when Columbia Records bought the Def Jam record label in 1985. By the mid-
2000s, entrepreneurs branched out into other categories including sports (Jay Z became 
part owner of what is now the Brooklyn Nets), beverages (Nelly launched Pimp Juice, an 
energy drink) and fragrances (Queen by Queen Latifah, Pink Friday by Nicki Minaj, Girl 
by Pharrell Williams). Ghostface Killah sold a $500 action figure of himself; it came with 
a mixtape, a real 14k gold chain, and a chalice lined with Swarovski crystals. Eventually 
hip-hop grew beyond its U.S. roots as artists in other countries (even an aborigine in 
Australia) developed their own interpretations. The widespread adoption of hip-hop style 
illustrates some of the characteristics of fashion and popular culture:
●
●Styles reflect more fundamental societal trends (e.g., politics and social conditions).
●
●A style begins as a risky or unique statement by a relatively small group of people and 
then spreads as others become aware of it.
●
●Styles usually originate as an interplay between the deliberate inventions of design-
ers and businesspeople and spontaneous actions by ordinary consumers who modify 
these creations to suit their own needs. Designers, manufacturers, and merchandisers 
who anticipate what consumers want will succeed in the marketplace. In the process, 
they help to fuel the fire when they encourage distribution of the item—especially if 
they persuade opinion leaders to use it first.
●
●Cultural products travel widely, often across countries and even continents.
●
●Influential people in the media and increasingly everyday “influencers” who are active 
in social media play a significant role in deciding which items will succeed.
●
●Most styles eventually wear out as people continually search for new ways to express 
themselves and marketers scramble to keep up with these desires.
●
●The cultural selection process never stops, so when styles become obsolete others wait 
to replace them in popular culture.
No single designer, company, or advertising agency creates popular culture. Many 
parties contribute to every hit song, hot car, or new clothing style. A culture production 
system (CPS) is the set of individuals and organizations that create and market a cultural 
product.9 The structure of a CPS determines the types of products it creates. Factors such 
as the number and diversity of competing systems and the amount of innovation versus 
conformity each influence the selection of products from which we choose at any point in 
time. For example, an analysis of the country/western music industry showed that the hit 
records it produces are similar to one another when a few large companies dominate the 
industry, but when a greater number of labels compete we see more diversity in musical 
styles.10 Table 14.1 illustrates some of the many cultural specialists that jointly create a 
hit CD like singer Beyoncé’s platinum album 4.
A culture production system has three major subsystems:
1 A creative subsystem to generate new symbols and products
2 A managerial subsystem to select, make tangible, produce, and manage the distribu-
tion of new symbols and products
3 A communications subsystem to give meaning to the new product and provide it with a 
symbolic set of attributes

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
519 
An example of the three components of a culture production system for a music 
release is (1) a singer (e.g., singer Beyoncé, a creative subsystem); (2) a company (e.g., 
Columbia Records distributes Beyoncé’s CDs, a managerial subsystem); and (3) the 
advertising agencies and corporations such as PepsiCo that work with the singer’s 
company Parkwood Entertainment to promote her music and arrange for her appear-
ances in venues including the Super Bowl and even on a limited edition set of Pepsi 
soda cans.11
Many judges or “tastemakers” have a say in the products we consider. These cul-
tural gatekeepers filter the overflow of information as it travels down the “funnel.” 
Gatekeepers include movie, restaurant, and car reviewers; interior designers; disc jockeys; 
retail buyers; magazine editors; and increasingly a fan base that obsessively follows and 
shares the latest gossip, styles, TV and film plots, and other pieces of popular culture. 
Collectively, social scientists call this set of agents the throughput sector.12
high and Low Culture
Question: What do Beethoven and Kanye West have in common? 
Although we associate both the famous composer and the rap 
singer with music, many would argue that the similarity stops 
there. Culture production systems create many kinds of products, 
but we make some basic distinctions.
An art product is an object we admire strictly for its beauty or because it inspires 
an emotional reaction in us (perhaps bliss, or perhaps disgust). In contrast, we admire 
a craft product because of the beauty with which it performs some function (e.g., a 
ceramic ashtray or hand-carved fishing lures).13 A craft tends to follow a formula that 
permits rapid production.14
tabLe 14.1   Cultural Specialists in the Music Industry
Specialist
Functions
Songwriter(s)
Compose music and lyrics; must reconcile artistic preferences with estimates of what will succeed in the 
marketplace
Performer(s)
Interpret music and lyrics; may be formed spontaneously, or may be packaged by an agent to appeal to a 
predetermined market (e.g., The Monkees, Menudo, and New Kids on the Block)
Teachers and coaches
Develop and refine performers’ talents
Agents
represent performers to record companies
A&r (artist & repertoire) executives
Acquire artists for the record label
Publicists, image consultants, 
designers, stylists
Create an image for the artists that is transmitted to the buying public
recording technicians, producers
Create a recording to be sold
Marketing executives
Make strategic decisions regarding performer’s appearances, ticket pricing, promotional strategies,  
and so on
video directors
Interpret the song visually to create a music video that will help to promote the record
Music reviewers
Evaluate the merits of a recording for listeners
Disc jockeys, radio program directors
Decide which records will be given airplay and/or placed in the radio stations’ regular rotations
record store owners
Decide which of the many records produced will be stocked and/or promoted heavily in the retail 
environment
ObjeCtive 14-2
We distinguish between 
high culture and low 
culture.

520 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
To appreciate this distinction, consider the phenomenal success of the late artist 
Thomas Kinkade. This painter sold 10 million digital reproductions of his work. Even after 
his death in 2012, his studio continues to mass-produce pictures at a factory in California, 
where workers reproduce a digital photograph of each original thousands of times onto 
thin plastic film they glue to canvasses. Then “high-lighters” sit along an assembly line 
where they dab oil paint onto set spots. The company also licenses images that appear on 
coffee mugs, La-Z-Boy recliners, and even a romance novel cover.15
As Kinkade’s “formula for success” demonstrates, the distinction between high and 
low culture is not as clear as it used to be. In addition to the possible class bias that drives 
such a distinction (i.e., we assume that the rich have culture but the poor do not), today 
high and low culture blend together in interesting ways. In addition to the appliances, 
tires, and cereals it sells by the case, the warehouse club Costco stocks fine art, including 
limited-edition lithographs by Pablo Picasso, Marc Chagall, and Joan Miró.
A multinational team of consumer researchers extended the study of high and low 
art to the realm of street art where artists create paintings, murals, and other pieces in 
public places. They identified numerous sites where the art became an instrument that 
was used for “transactions” between the artists and the people who lived in the area. 
Although not all reactions were positive, it was common to observe that people’s experi-
ences of public spaces were enhanced because the street art created a feeling of empower-
ment and ownership in formerly barren places.16
Marketers often invoke high-art imagery to promote products. They may feature 
works of art on shopping bags or sponsor artistic events to build public goodwill.17 When 
observers from Toyota watched customers in luxury car showrooms, the company found 
that these consumers view a car as an art object. The company then used this theme in an 
ad for the Lexus with the caption, “Until now, the only fine arts we supported were sculp-
ture, painting, and music.”18
Cultural Formulae
Moviegoers won’t be surprised to learn that there’s not that much new in theaters today. 
The majority of blockbuster movies are sequels, prequels, or adaptations of successful 
 franchises that include Lego, Harry Potter, Star Wars, Marvel Comics, even Fast and Furious. 
This is a steadily increasing trend: One analysis found that whereas in 1984 about 59 per-
cent of movies from major studios were based on original stories, today this proportion is 
less than 25 percent.19
Characters from popular culture often serve 
as a form of “shorthand” for companies 
the world over to communicate with their 
customers. This ad is from Nigeria but the 
figures in it are familiar to people in many 
countries.
Source: Courtesy of Noah's Ark  
Communications Ltd.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
521 
The reliance on established plots and characters illustrates how mass culture churns 
out products that aim to please the average taste of a mass audience. Rather than being 
unique, they are predictable because they follow a well-defined pattern. Many popular 
art forms, such as detective stories or science fiction, follow a cultural formula in which 
familiar roles and props occur consistently.20 For example, we expect characters in a clas-
sic western to ride horses to get around, while in a science fiction movie they use space-
ships; hard-boiled detectives drive a beat-up car and characters in a family sitcom ride in 
a minivan. Similarly, a six-gun or rifle is the weapon in a classic western, ray guns appear 
in science fiction movies, a hard-boiled detective uses a pistol or his fists, and the actors 
in a family sitcom fight one another with verbal insults. Romance novels are an extreme 
case of a cultural formula. Computer programs even allow users to “write” their own 
romances by systematically varying certain set elements of the story.21
As members of the creative subsystem rely on these formulae, they tend to recycle 
images as they reach back through time for inspiration. Thus, young people watch retro 
shows like Full House as well as remakes such as Fuller House; designers modify beaded 
dresses inspired by the hit British show Downton Abbey that is set in the early 1920s; hip-
hop deejays sample sound bites from old songs and combine them in new ways; and Gap 
ran ads that featured celebrities in khaki pants, including Humphrey Bogart, Gene Kelly, 
and Pablo Picasso. With easy access to CD burners, digital cameras, and imaging software, 
virtually anyone can “remix” the past.22
Cultural Stories and Ceremonies
Every culture develops stories and ceremonies that help its mem-
bers to make sense of the world. When we hear about some 
strange practice that goes on in another place, it may be hard 
to figure out just what these people think they’re doing. Yet, 
our own cultural practices seem quite normal—even though a 
visitor may find them equally bizarre! Just take a European to a 
NASCAR race, and you’ll understand that culture is relative.
To appreciate how “primitive” belief systems influence our supposedly “modern” 
rational society, consider the avid interest many of us have in magic. Marketers of 
health foods, anti-aging cosmetics, exercise programs, and gambling casinos often imply 
that their offerings have “magical” properties that prevent sickness, old age, poverty, 
or just plain bad luck. People by the millions play their “lucky numbers” in the lottery, 
carry rabbits’ feet and other amulets to ward off “the evil eye,” and own “lucky” cloth-
ing.23 In a set of studies, researchers examined how people come to regard products as 
lucky: They looked at conditioned superstition; consumers who don’t feel they have 
control over their outcomes come to associate a product that is paired with a reward 
with the outcome itself (see Chapter 4). You may have observed this process; for exam-
ple, a friend wears a certain T-shirt to a big game and the team wins. This person may 
choose to wear the same shirt to future games to “help” the team.24 A recent advertising 
campaign for Budweiser featured fans with bizarre superstitions and the tagline, “It’s 
only weird if it doesn’t work.”
Interest in the occult tends to spike when members of a society feel overwhelmed 
or powerless; magical remedies simplify our lives when they give us “easy” answers. 
Many consumers regard the computer with awe as a sort of “electronic magician” with 
the ability to solve our problems (or, in other cases, to cause data to magically disap-
pear!).25 Software developers even supply “wizards” that guide the uninitiated through 
their programs! Or, we may even think a person’s soul inhabits an object: Kids (and 
maybe some adults as well) believe that when they put on their Air Nikes they magi-
cally absorb some of the athletic ability of Michael Jordan or Dwyane Wade. Sound 
preposterous? The movie Like Mike had this exact storyline. In this section, we’ll discuss 
myths and rituals, two aspects of culture common to all societies from the ancients to 
the modern world.
ObjeCtive 14-3
Myths are stories that 
express a culture’s 
values, and in modern 
times marketing 
messages convey these 
values to members of the 
culture.

522 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Myths
A myth is a story with symbolic elements that represents a culture’s ideals. The story 
often focuses on some kind of conflict between two opposing forces, and its outcome serves 
as a moral guide for listeners. In this way, a myth reduces anxiety because it provides con-
sumers with guidelines about their world. Most members of a culture learn these stories, 
but usually we don’t really think about their origins.
The familiar Little Red Riding Hood myth started as a peasant’s tale in 16th-century 
France, where a girl meets a werewolf on her way to Granny’s house (there is historical 
evidence for a plague of wolf attacks during this time, including several incidents where 
men were put on trial because they allegedly turned themselves into the deadly animals). 
The werewolf has already killed Granny, stored her flesh in the pantry, and poured her 
blood in a bottle. Contrary to the version we know, however, when the girl arrives at the 
house she snacks on Granny, strips naked, and climbs into bed with the wolf! To make the 
story even more scandalous, some versions refer to the wolf as a “gaffer” (a contraction of 
“grandfather”), implying incest as well. This story first appeared in print in 1697; it was a 
warning to the loose ladies of Louis XIV’s court (the author puts her in red in this version 
because this color symbolizes harlots). Eventually, the Brothers Grimm wrote their own 
version in 1812, but they substituted violence for sex to scare kids into behaving. And to 
reinforce the sex-role standards of that time, in the Grimm version, a man rescues the girl 
from the wolf.26 So, this myth sends vivid messages about such cultural no-no’s as canni-
balism, incest, and promiscuity.
In some cases marketers adapt these stories and (perhaps unconsciously) pattern 
their messages along a mythic structure. Consider, for example, the way that McDonald’s 
takes on “mythical” qualities.27 The “golden arches” are virtually synonymous with U.S. 
culture. They offer sanctuary to Americans around the world, who know exactly what to 
expect once they enter. Basic struggles involving good versus evil play out in the fantasy 
world McDonald’s advertising creates; for example, when Ronald McDonald confounds 
the Hamburglar. McDonald’s even has a “seminary” (Hamburger University) where 
inductees go to learn the ways of the Golden Arches.
Corporations often have myths and legends in their history. Nike designates senior 
executives as “corporate storytellers” who explain the company’s heritage to the hourly 
workers at Nike stores. They recount tales about the coach of the Oregon track team who 
poured rubber into his family waffle iron to make better shoes for his team—the origin of 
the Nike waffle sole. The stories emphasize the dedication of runners and coaches to rein-
force the importance of teamwork. Rookie hires visit the track where the coach worked to 
help them appreciate the importance of the Nike legends. And rumor has it that senior 
Nike executives (including the CEO) have a “swoosh” tattoo on their backsides.28
Myths serve four interrelated functions in a culture:29
1 Metaphysical—They help to explain the origins of existence.
2 Cosmological—They emphasize that all components of the universe are part of a 
single picture.
3 Sociological—They maintain social order because they authorize a social code for 
members of a culture to follow.
4 Psychological—They provide models for personal conduct.
When we analyze myths, we examine their underlying structures, a technique the 
French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss (no relation to the blue jeans company) pio-
neered. Lévi-Strauss noted that many stories involve binary opposition which represents 
two opposing ends of some dimension (e.g., good versus evil, nature versus technology).30 
Often a mediating figure resolves the conflict between mythical opposing forces; this links 
the opposites as it shares characteristics of each. For example, many myths are about ani-
mals that have human abilities (e.g., a talking snake) to bridge the gap between humanity 
and nature, just as marketers often give cars (technology) animal names (nature) such as 
Cougar, Cobra, or Mustang.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
523 
We associate myths with the ancient Greeks and Romans, but in reality comic 
books, movies, holidays, and yes, even commercials embody our own cultural myths. 
Furthermore, researchers report that some people create their own consumer fairy 
tales. They tell stories that include magical agents, donors, and helpers to overcome vil-
lains and obstacles as they seek out goods and services in their quest for happy endings.31
Smart marketers are more than happy to help us live out these fairy tales. Consider 
the popularity of the elaborate weddings Disney stages for couples who want to reenact 
their own version of a popular myth: At Disney World, the princess bride wears a tiara 
and rides to the park’s lakeside wedding pavilion in a horse-drawn coach, complete with 
two footmen in gray wigs and gold lamé pants. At the exchange of vows, trumpets blare 
as Major Domo (he helped the Duke in his quest for Cinderella) walks up the aisle with two 
wedding bands he gently places in a glass slipper on a velvet pillow. Disney stages about 
2,000 of these extravaganzas each year. The company continues to expand the appeal 
of this myth as it moves into the bridal gown business. It sells a line of billowing princess 
gowns complete with crystal tiaras. Fairy tale brides can walk down the aisle costumed as 
Elsa, Cinderella, Snow White, Belle, Sleeping Beauty, Jasmine, or Ariel.32
Many “blockbuster” movies and hit TV shows draw directly on mythic themes. 
Although dramatic special effects and attractive stars certainly don’t hurt, a number of 
these movies also owe their huge appeal to their presentation of characters and plot struc-
tures that follow mythic patterns. Here are three examples of mythic blockbusters:33
●
●Gone with the Wind—Myths often take place in times of upheaval such as wars. In 
this story, the North (which represents technology and democracy) battles the South 
(which represents nature and aristocracy). The movie depicts a romantic era (the an-
tebellum South) when love and honor were virtues. Following the war, newer values of 
materialism and industrialization (i.e., modern consumer culture) replace these priori-
ties. The movie paints a picture of a lost era where man and nature existed in harmony.
●
●E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial—E.T. represents a familiar myth involving messianic 
visitation. The gentle creature from another world visits Earth and performs miracles 
(e.g., he revives a dying flower). His “disciples” are neighborhood children; they help 
him combat the forces of modern technology and an unbelieving secular society. The 
myth teaches that the humans God chooses are pure and unselfish.
●
●Star Trek—The multiple television series and movies, prequels, and sequels that docu-
ment the adventures of the starship Enterprise also link to myths, such as the story of the 
New England Puritans who explore and conquer a new continent (“the final frontier”). 
Encounters with the Klingons mirror skirmishes with American Indians. In addition, at 
least 13 out of the original 79 episodes employed the theme of a quest for paradise.34
Advertisements sometimes represent mythic themes. Commercials for Pepperidge Farm 
ask consumers to “remember” the good old days (lost paradise) when products were whole-
some and natural. Avis famously used the theme of the underdog prevailing over the stron-
ger foe (i.e., David and Goliath).35 A commercial that encouraged Hispanic consumers to 
buy more milk featured a female phantom who wails as she walks through a home. She is La 
Llorona (the crying one), a character in a Hispanic myth who murders her children, commits 
suicide, and roams for all eternity as she seeks her lost family. In this version, however, the 
moaning phantom makes her way to the refrigerator, only to find an empty milk carton.36
rituals
A ritual is a set of multiple, symbolic behaviors that occurs in 
a fixed sequence and is repeated periodically.37 Bizarre tribal 
ceremonies, perhaps involving animal or human sacrifice, may 
come to mind when you think of rituals. In reality many contem-
porary consumer activities are ritualistic. Researchers find that 
when people consume products like chocolate as part of a ritual, 
they report they enjoy them more than if there is no context.38
ObjeCtive 14-4
Many of our consumption 
activities—including 
holiday observances, 
grooming, and gift-
giving—relate  
to rituals.

524 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Consider a ritual that many beer drinkers in 
the united Kingdom and Ireland hold near 
and dear to their hearts: the spectacle of a 
pub bartender “pulling” the perfect pint of 
Guinness. According to tradition, the slow 
pour takes exactly 119.5 seconds as the 
bartender holds the glass at a 45-degree 
angle, fills it three-quarters full, lets it settle, 
and tops it off with its signature creamy 
head. Guinness wanted to make the pull 
faster so the bar could serve more drinks on 
a busy night, so it introduced fastPour, an 
ultrasound technology that dispenses the 
dark brew in only 25 seconds. You probably 
guessed the outcome: The brewer had to 
scrap the system when drinkers resisted the 
innovation. Note: Diageo (which owns  
Guinness) hasn’t given up, and it continues 
to experiment with more efficient techniques 
in markets where this ritual isn’t so inbred. 
A system it calls Guinness Surger shows up 
in Tokyo bars, many of which are too small to 
accommodate kegs: The bartender pours a 
pint from a bottle, places the glass on a  
special plate, and zaps it with ultrasound 
waves that generate the characteristic 
head.39
Source: Oli Scarff/Getty Images
Many businesses benefit because they supply ritual artifacts to consumers. These 
are items we need to perform rituals, such as wedding rice, birthday candles, diplomas, 
specialized foods and beverages (e.g., wedding cakes, ceremonial wine, or even hot dogs 
at the ball park), trophies and plaques, band uniforms, greeting cards, and retirement 
watches.40 In addition, we often follow a ritual script to identify the artifacts we need, the 
sequence in which we should use them, and who uses them. Examples include graduation 
programs, fraternity manuals and etiquette books.
A wedding ceremony is one of our most familiar rituals. If you’ve ever planned or partic-
ipated in a wedding, you know the many scripted activities are serious stuff. They’re expen-
sive, too: Americans spend $70 billion a year on weddings, more than we spend on pets, 
coffee, toothpaste and toilet paper combined.41 The massive wedding industry continues to 
find new ways for consumers to compete in their own potlach ceremonies (see Chapter 12)  
as they vie to offer the most lavish or novel attractions. Destination weddings, online gift 
retirement is a milestone that includes 
ritual artifacts.
Source: bst2012/Fotolia

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
525 
robots are popping up as guests at 
weddings.
Source: Kaku Kurita/Newscom
registries, save-the-date cards, chocolate fountains; you name it and someone will have it. 
A company called Anybots even rents robots to guests who can’t attend; the mechanical 
wedding crashers boogie with the crowd and allow the absent revelers to videoconference 
during the event.42
As we’ll see shortly, some rituals symbolize a transition from one status to another. 
Certainly weddings do that, as two single people now become a unit. Many parts of the 
ritual script hold great meaning, even if most of us today don’t remember the original 
symbolism:43
●
●Giving away the bride: Years ago it was common for fathers to use daughters as 
currency to pay off a debt or to appease a member of a more powerful tribe. The bride 
wore a veil so that the payee would not refuse her as payment in case she turned out to 
be less attractive than he desired.
●
●The best man: His original job was to stand next to the couple to be sure the bride 
wasn’t kidnapped during the ceremony. He was chosen because he was “best” with his 
sword. Similarly, bridesmaids were instructed to dress similarly to the bride to confuse 
potential kidnappers and evil spirits; somehow this custom evolved to the design of 
hideous gowns that make the bride look better by comparison!
●
●The tossing of  the garter: At one time the bride and groom were expected to con-
clude the marriage ceremony and retire immediately to a nearby room to “close the 
deal.” To make the consummation official, witnesses would crowd around the nuptial 
bed and hope to grab a lucky piece of the bride’s gown as it was ripped from her body. 
Over time, modesty prevailed and the guests had to settle for a symbolic piece of her 
undergarments.
●
●Throwing rice: Rice is a symbol of fertility; this action is supposed to encourage the 
newlyweds to get busy and start producing offspring. More recently many couples 
have replaced rice with butterflies or other items because of the false rumor that birds 
who eat the rice will die when it expands in their stomachs.
Many colleges boast unique rituals in which students engage in some scripted group 
activity, though in recent years some institutions have abolished these because of safety 
concerns or because they encourage underage drinking. Casualties include spring couch 
burning at the University of Vermont and Texas A&M’s bonfire on the eve of the annual 
football game against the University of Texas (the bonfire ritual has since been revived 
off campus).44 However, UC–Santa Barbara still offers an Undie Run. Naked Harvard 
Tailgating at college and 
pro ballgames is one of the 
most visible group rituals 
around today. According to 
legend, this practice started 
in the 19th century when fans had to cook 
meals in their carriages after they journeyed 
to the site of a football game. Today tailgating 
is also big business. A survey Coca-Cola spon-
sored reported that 41 percent of tailgaters 
spend more than $500 a season on food and 
supplies. Now, everyone from food conglomer-
ates to camping suppliers tries to get a piece 
of these boisterous pregame rituals:44 The NfL 
sells $100 million a year of tailgating mer-
chandise, including keg-shaped grills. The Buf-
falo Bills provide showers and changing rooms 
in the parking lot, and the Denver Broncos 
pick a “most valuable tailgater” at each home 
game. The Houston Texans sponsor “Tailgating 
101” classes at a local sporting goods store. 
for the truly hard-core, California customizer 
Galpin Motors sells a tailgaters’ pickup truck 
complete with a huge grill, taps for two beer 
kegs, a blender, and a flip-down Tv screen for 
“only” $70,000.
Marketing Opportunity

526 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
students let off steam just before finals in The Primal Scream, and Yale seniors run naked 
through campus libraries at the end of each semester to toss candy at underclass students 
as they cram for finals. Denison University celebrates Naked Week and Tufts has a Naked 
Quad Run. Are you starting to see a pattern here?
A study the BBDO Worldwide advertising agency conducted illustrates the close 
relationship between brands and rituals.46 It labels items that we use to perform our ritu-
als fortress brands because once they become embedded in our ceremonies—whether 
we use them to brush our teeth, drink a beer, or shave—we’re unlikely to replace them. 
The study ran in 26 countries, and the researchers found that, overall, people worldwide 
practice roughly the same consumer rituals. The agency claims that 89 percent of people 
always use the same brands in their sequenced rituals; three out of four are disappointed 
or irritated when something disrupts their ritual or their brand of choice isn’t available. 
For example, the report identifies one common ritual category it calls preparing for battle. 
For most of us this means getting ready for work. Relevant rituals include brushing the 
teeth, taking a shower or bath, having something to eat or drink, talking to a family mem-
ber or partner, checking email, shaving, putting on makeup, watching TV or listening to 
the radio, and reading a newspaper.
Rituals occur at several levels. Some reinforce broad cultural or religious values. 
Public rituals such as the Super Bowl, presidential inaugurations, and graduation ceremo-
nies are communal activities that affirm our membership in the larger group and reassure 
us that we are reading from the same script as everyone else.47 In one study, researchers 
documented the collective ritual of head banging at heavy metal music concerts. They 
showed how participants, who tend to come from lower economic classes and feel dis-
empowered in other settings, participate collectively in a performance that is a cathartic 
experience where they are rejuvenated and validated (perhaps this presents an opportu-
nity for companies that sell headache remedies?).48
A modern take on a wedding ritual.
Source: Courtesy of Prolam Y&R

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
527 
Tailgating is a hugely popular group ritual.
Source: Mike Stobe/NHLI/ Getty Images
Cb aS i See it
Cele C. Otnes, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
delays and ultimately, a canceled flight. 
With passengers forced to spend 
the night in hotels and fly the next 
morning, Virgin Atlantic’s hoped-for 
fanfare transitioned quickly into fiasco.
Practitioners and scholars would 
describe this (chaotic) episode as an 
example of a “marketplace ritual,” a 
concept based on the consumption 
ritual, introduced by marketing 
scholar Dennis Rook more than 30 
years ago.48 Rook argues that often, 
seemingly ordinary consumption-laden 
activities help structure people’s lives 
and contribute to their individual and 
social identities. Meaningful, repeated 
activities also can serve as sources 
of reassurance and relaxation (think 
stress-reducing bubble baths or 
Thursday night pizza parties). Rook 
identifies four key aspects of these 
rituals: (1) artifacts (symbolic items); 
(2) scripts (rules that specify how the 
ritual unfolds); (3) performance roles 
(who does what), and (4) the ritual 
audience (non-participants who observe 
how others engage in the event).
Expanding on Rook, we recently 
define marketplace rituals as activities 
in commercial spaces (e.g., stores or 
service sites) that are often repeated, 
involve a performance of some kind, 
and symbolically mark an occurrence 
significant to a firm or its stakeholders 
(e.g., customers, stockholders, or 
employees).50 Marketers’ goals for 
offering such rituals can include 
enhancing the customer’s marketplace 
experience, fostering long-term brand 
loyalty, spurring word-of-mouth (WOM), 
or deepening consumers’ emotional 
connections to brands. Some 
marketplace rituals specifically involve 
consumer co-creation. For example, a 
bakery could set up a space where its 
employees help customers decorate 
baked goods being purchased, to 
enhance the personal and creative 
dimensions of the purchase experience.
Our study also found that when 
marketers design rituals for their 
customers, they rely on all four of 
Rook’s ritual dimensions. But they 
also stressed the need to include two 
other elements: (1) the aesthetics of 
the ritual, or the way it is designed to 
appeal to have sensory appeal and 
(2) the language providers employ 
when engaging in the ritual. Consider 
how the Ritz-Carlton hotel chain 
trains its staff to greet customers 
with their correctly pronounced 
name. Furthermore, employees at 
every level, from housekeepers to 
managers, adhere to this ritual form 
of greeting. In fact, we found a wide 
range of marketplace rituals in use, 
from simple greetings/partings to 
incredibly elaborate experiences. Just 
ask the Hollywood stars attending 
the Oscars who receive gift bags with 
contents worth thousands of dollars!
In 2015, Virgin Atlantic chose to 
celebrate its new nonstop route 
between Manchester, United Kingdom, 
and Atlanta, Georgia, by offering 
the first planeload of U.S.-bound 
customers a special send-off. The plan 
was to “christen” the plane with spray 
from a high-pressure water cannon. 
Unfortunately, the employee in charge 
pressed the button marked “foam” 
instead of “water,” shooting gallons of 
goopy muck into the plane’s delicate 
engines. What could have been an 
enjoyable event cascaded into hours of 

528 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Grooming rituals
Whether you brush your hair 100 strokes a day or give yourself a pep talk in the mirror 
before a big date, virtually all of us practice private grooming rituals. These ceremonies 
help us to transition from our private self to our public self. Grooming rituals help to 
inspire confidence before we face the world, and they “cleanse” us of impurities. When 
consumers talk about their grooming rituals, some of the dominant themes that emerge 
from these stories reflect the almost mystical qualities we attribute to grooming prod-
ucts and behaviors. Many people emphasize a before-and-after phenomenon, whereby 
the person feels magically transformed after she uses certain products (similar to the 
Cinderella myth).51
Some companies that make personal care products understand the power of these 
rituals and supply the artifacts we need to make them happen. Nair, the depilatory 
maker, expanded its customer base when it targeted younger girls with its Nair Pretty 
product—a market the industry calls “first-time hair removers.” Researchers conducted 
focus groups with mothers and their daughters, where they learned that “[w]hen a girl 
removes hair for the first time, it’s a life-changing moment.” Some of the respondents 
actually held hair removal slumber parties, where the moms bought products for the 
teens to remove their hair. So, instead of a focus on boys or romance, ads for Nair Pretty 
suggest that the depilatory is a stubble-free path to empowerment. “I am a citizen of the 
world,” reads the ad copy. “I am a dreamer. I am fresh. I am so not going to have stubs 
sticking out of my legs.”52
Grooming rituals express two kinds of binary opposition: private/public and work/lei-
sure. Many beauty rituals reflect a transformation from a natural state to the social world 
(as when a woman “puts on her face”) or vice versa. To her, a bath may be a cleansing 
time, a way to wash away the “sins” of the profane world.53 In these daily rituals, women 
reaffirm the value their culture places on personal beauty and the quest for eternal youth. 
This cleansing ritual is clear in ads for Oil of Olay Beauty Cleanser that proclaim, “And so 
your day begins. The Ritual of Oil of Olay.”
Gift-Giving rituals
In a gift-giving ritual, we procure the perfect object, meticulously remove the price tag, 
carefully wrap the object (where we symbolically change the item from a commodity to 
a unique good), and deliver it to the recipient.54 Gifts can be store-bought objects, home-
made items, or services. Some recent research even argues that music file-sharing systems 
such as Megaupload (which the government shut down), KaZaa, or Morpheus are really 
all about gifting. This work finds, for example, clear evidence of the gift-giving norm of 
reciprocity; people who download files but who don’t leave their own files available to oth-
ers are “leeches.”55
Researchers view gift-giving as a form of economic exchange in which the giver trans-
fers an item of value to a recipient, who in turn must reciprocate. However, gift-giving also 
involves symbolic exchange. In fact, researchers who analyzed the personal memoirs of 
World War II concentration camp inmates found that even in such a brutal environment, 
where people had to focus primarily on survival, a need to express humanity through gen-
erosity prevailed. The authors found that gift-giving, which symbolized recognition of oth-
ers’ plight as well as one’s own, was an act of defiance against the dehumanizing existence 
the camps forced on their prisoners.56
Some research indicates that gift-giving evolves as a form of social expression. It is 
more exchange oriented (instrumental) in the early stages of a relationship (where we 
keep track of exactly what we give and receive to be sure we’re not getting ripped off), but it 
becomes more altruistic as the relationship develops.57
Every culture dictates certain occasions and ceremonies to give gifts, whether for per-
sonal or professional reasons. The birthday gift ritual alone is a significant contributor to 
our economy. Each American on average buys six birthday gifts a year—about 1 billion gifts 
in total.58 Business gifts are an important way to define and maintain professional relation-
ships. Expenditures on business gifts exceed $1.5 billion per year, and givers take great care 
to ensure that they purchase the appropriate gifts (sometimes with the aid of professional 

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
529 
gift consultants). Most executives believe that corporate gift-giving provides both tangible 
and intangible results, including improved employee morale and higher sales.59
The gift-giving ritual proceeds in three distinct stages:60
1 During gestation the giver procures an item to mark some event. This event may be 
either structural (i.e., prescribed by the culture, as when people buy Christmas pres-
ents) or emergent (i.e., the decision is more personal and idiosyncratic).
2 The second stage is presentation or the process of gift exchange. The recipient re-
sponds to the gift (either appropriately or not), and the donor evaluates this response.
3 In the reformulation stage, the giver and receiver redefine the bond between 
them (either looser or tighter) to reflect their new relationship after the exchange. 
Negativity can arise if the recipient feels the gift is inappropriate or of inferior quality. 
For example, the hapless husband who gives his wife a vacuum cleaner as an anni-
versary present is just asking to sleep on the couch, and the new suitor who gives his 
girlfriend intimate apparel probably won’t score many points. The donor may feel that 
the response to the gift was inadequate or insincere or a violation of the reciprocity 
norm, which obliges people to return the gesture of a gift with one of equal value.61
Japanese gift-giving rituals show how tremendously important these acts are in 
that culture, where the wrapping is as important (if not more so) than the gift itself. The 
Japanese view gifts as an important aspect of one’s duty to others in one’s social group. 
Giving is a moral imperative (giri). Highly ritualized acts occur when a person gives both 
household/personal gifts and company/professional gifts. Each individual has a well-
defined set of relatives and friends with which he shares reciprocal gift-giving obligations 
(kosai). People give personal gifts on social occasions, such as at funerals, for a hospitaliza-
tion, to mark movements from one life stage to another (e.g., weddings, birthdays), and as 
greetings (e.g., when one meets a visitor). They give company gifts to commemorate the 
anniversary of a corporation’s founding, the opening of a new building, or the announce-
ment of new products. In keeping with the Japanese emphasis on saving face, the recipient 
doesn’t open the present in front of the giver so that he won’t have to hide any disappoint-
ment with what he gets.62
holiday rituals
On holidays, we step back from our everyday lives and perform ritualistic behaviors 
unique to those occasions.63 Each cultural celebration typically relates to the adventures 
of one or more special characters, such as St. Patrick in Ireland or Yue Lao in China. These 
special events require tons of ritual artifacts and scripts. The Thanksgiving holiday script 
includes serving (in gluttonous portions) foods such as turkey and cranberry sauce that 
many of us consume only on that day, complaining about how much we’ve eaten (yet ris-
ing to the occasion to find room for dessert), and (for many) a postmeal trip to the couch 
for the obligatory football game.
The courtship process often involves  
gift-giving from men to women, but what 
happens when the relationship ends? The 
founders of the Web site ExBoyfriendJewelry 
.com provide a market for jilted women who 
want to make some money and perhaps vent 
about their ex-partners. The site proclaims 
“You don’t want it. He can’t have it back.” 
users sell, auction, trade, or simply giveaway 
the refuse of their former romances—but 
they also have to share the story behind 
every gift.
Source: Courtesy of exboyfriendjewelry.com

530 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Most holidays commemorate a cultural myth, often with a historical (e.g., Miles 
Standish on Thanksgiving) or imaginary (e.g., Cupid on Valentine’s Day) character as the 
story’s hero. These holidays persist because their basic elements appeal to our deep-seated 
needs.65
●
●Christmas—Myths and rituals fill the Christmas holiday, from Santa’s adventures at 
the North Pole to others’ adventures under the mistletoe. The meaning of Christmas 
evolved quite dramatically during the past few hundred years. In colonial times, 
Christmas celebrations resembled carnivals and public rowdiness was the norm. Most 
notable was the tradition of “wassailing,” in which roving packs of rowdy young men 
laid siege to the rich and demanded food and drink. By the end of the 1800s, the mobs 
were so unruly that city fathers in Protestant America invented a tradition whereby 
families conducted Christmas gatherings around a tree, a practice they “borrowed” 
from early pagan rites. In an 1822 poem Clement Clarke Moore, the wealthy son of 
a New York Episcopal bishop, invented the modern-day myth of Santa Claus. The 
Christmas ritual slowly changed to a focus on children and gift-giving.66 One of the 
most important holiday rituals, of course, stars Santa, a mythical figure for whose ar-
rival children eagerly await (even if their house doesn’t have a fireplace). Indeed, an 
Australian study that analyzed the letters children write to Santa found they specify 
their brand preferences quite carefully and often employ sophisticated request strate-
gies to be sure they get what they want from the Big Guy.67 In opposition to Christ, 
Santa is a champion of materialism. Perhaps it is no coincidence, then, that he ap-
pears in stores and shopping malls—secular temples of consumption. Whatever his 
origins, the Santa Claus myth socializes children because it teaches them to expect a 
reward when they are good and that people get what they deserve (which may be a 
lump of coal).
●
●Halloween—Halloween began as a pagan religious ceremony, but it’s clearly a 
secular event today. However, in contrast to Christmas, the rituals of Halloween 
(e.g., trick-or-treating and costume parties) primarily involve nonfamily members. 
Halloween is an unusual holiday because its rituals are the opposite of many other 
cultural occasions. In contrast to Christmas, it celebrates evil instead of good and 
death rather than birth. It encourages revelers to extort treats with veiled threats of 
“tricks” rather than rewards for the good. Because of these oppositions, Halloween 
is an antifestival—an event that distorts the symbols we associate with other holi-
days. For example, the Halloween witch is an inverted mother figure. The holiday also 
parodies the meaning of Easter because it stresses the resurrection of ghosts, and it 
mocks Thanksgiving because it transforms the wholesome symbolism of the pumpkin 
pie into the evil jack-o-lantern.68 Furthermore, Halloween provides a ritualized, and 
therefore socially sanctioned, context that allows people to try on new roles: Children 
can go outside after dark, stay up late, and eat all the candy they like for a night. The 
otherwise geeky guy who always sits in the back of class dresses as Jason from Friday 
the 13th and turns out to be the life of the party. Halloween of course is big business as 
well: Americans spend $350 million in costumes, and that’s just what they’re shelling 
out for their pets’ getups.69
●
●Valentine’s Day—On Valentine’s Day, we relax our standards about sex and love and 
we express feelings we may hide during the rest of the year (in Japan, it’s the women 
who send gifts to the men). A study that investigated Valentine’s Day rituals explored 
how marketing communications help to shape the holiday. The authors identify five 
familiar classes of rituals:
1 Exchanging gifts and cards
2 Showing affection
3 Going out
4 Preparing and consuming food and drink
5 Special attention to grooming and clothing
The Chinese e-commerce gi-
ant Alibaba single-handedly 
turned a minor holiday into a 
blockbuster sales event. Tra-
ditionally, unmarried Chinese 
men gathered together each year on November 
11 to lament their single status on what was 
called Bachelors’ Day. They chose this date 
because the calendar shows it as 11.11 (four 
singles). The company decided to turn this day 
into an excuse for shopping and in 2009 it 
began to promote Singles’ Day. By 2014, this 
“anti-valentine’s Day” surpassed Black friday 
as the most lucrative online shopping day. 
The company racked up $9 billion in sales in  
a 24-hour period. That’s a lot of lonely 
bachelors.64
  net profit

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
531 
Many of their informants (primarily men) understood the holiday as an obligatory 
occasion for them to buy their partners expensive, “romantic” gifts. One guy posted this 
warning: “If you want her happy always remember: the gift has to shine or smell [good] 
or she should be able to wear it! Otherwise, you’re doomed.” Some informants expressed 
negative associations with the holiday, including painful emotions because of broken rela-
tionships (or a lack of relationships altogether) and aversion to the “forced” consumption 
and artificial displays of affection the day requires.70 But, as much as some of us may 
grumble about it, this holiday ritual is too powerful to ignore (unless you like sleeping on 
the couch).
rites of passage
What does a dance for recently divorced people have in common with a fraternity Hell 
Week? Both are modern rites of passage, rituals we perform to mark a change in social 
status. Every society, both primitive and modern, sets aside times for these changes. Some 
may occur as a natural part of our life cycles (e.g., puberty or death), whereas others are 
more individual (e.g., getting divorced and reentering the dating market).
Much like the metamorphosis of a caterpillar into a butterfly, a rite of passage consists 
of three phases. Let’s see how this works for a young person who changes his social status 
to become a college student:71
1 In the first stage, separation, he detaches from his original group or status as a high 
school kid and leaves home for campus.
Costumes are big business during Hallow-
een, and many of those are for our pets.
Source: Courtesy of Beneva Flowers

532 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
2 Liminality is the middle stage, where he is in limbo between statuses. Think of those 
bewildered new first-year students who try to find their way around campus during 
orientation.
3 In the aggregation stage, he returns to society with his new status. Our hero returns 
home for Thanksgiving break as a cocky college “veteran.”
Many types of people undergo rites of passage, including fraternity pledges, recruits 
at boot camp, or novitiates at a convent. We observe a similar transitional state when 
people prepare for occupational roles. For example, athletes and fashion models typically 
undergo a “seasoning” process. They leave their normal surroundings (athletes go to 
training camps, young models move to Paris or New York), they get indoctrinated into a 
new subculture, and then they return to the real world in their new roles (if they success-
fully pass the trials of their initiation and don’t “get cut”).
Death also involves rites of passage. Funeral ceremonies help the living organize 
their relationships with the deceased. Action is tightly scripted, down to the costumes 
(e.g., the ritual black attire, black ribbons for mourners, the body laid out in its best 
clothes) and specific behaviors (e.g., sending condolence cards or holding a wake). 
Passing motorists award special status to the cortege (the funeral motorcade) when they 
obey the strong social norm that prohibits cutting in as the line of cars proceeds to the 
cemetery.72
Funeral practices vary across cultures, but they’re always rich in symbolism. For 
example, a study of funeral rituals in Ghana found that the community there deter-
mines a person’s social value after he dies; this status depends on the type of funeral his 
family gives him. One of the main purposes of death rituals is to negotiate the social 
identities of deceased persons. This occurs as mourners treat the corpse with a level of 
respect that indicates what they think of him. The Asante people who were the subjects 
of the study don’t view death as something to fear; it’s just part of a broader, ongoing 
process of identity negotiation.73 People in parts of Madagascar go a step further: They 
regularly remove the bodies of their ancestors from their tombs so that family members 
can caress the skeletal outlines that protrude through their burial shrouds. This ritual 
is called a famadihana, and many believe this is a time to convey the latest family news to 
the deceased and ask them for blessings and guidance.74
funeral ceremonies are a rite of passage 
that include scripted symbolism including a 
cortege.
Source: mario beauregardFotolia
As we’ve seen, the marriage 
ritual represents a rite of pas-
sage. Social scientists have 
long studied how people pre-
pare themselves for these 
transitions or what we referred to as liminality. 
Now a group of researchers has looked at the 
way people represent these changes in their 
online behavior. They identified more than 900 
Twitter accounts that belonged to people who 
posted publicly that they had become engaged 
and then analyzed their posts both before and 
after these announcements. The study found 
that not too surprisingly the people they stud-
ied were less likely to use the terms boyfriend 
or girlfriend after the engagement and more 
likely to talk instead about a fiancé or fiancée. 
They included the word we in their posts to 
a greater extent, and they shared more com-
ments about things they did as a couple such 
as cooking and traveling together. And, some 
of the engaged people they studied used so-
cial media to vent about the stress of preparing 
for the wedding. One posted this complaint: 
“Two of my bridesmaids are coworkers. They 
have not ONCE asked me if they could help 
with anything. They don’t ask how anything is 
going.”75
  net profit

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
533 
Sacred and profane Consumption
Nike recently had to pull a new line of Pro Tattoo Tech Gear clothing line for women after 
the news came out that the graphics it used came from a sacred Samoan tattoo that only 
men wear. Consumers started a Change.org petition online and bombarded the brand’s 
Facebook page with negative comments.76
As we saw when we discussed the structure of myths, many types of consumer activi-
ties involve the demarcation, or binary opposition, of categories, such as good versus bad, 
male versus female—or even regular cola versus diet. One of the most important distinc-
tions we find is between the sacred and the profane. Sacred consumption occurs when 
we “set apart” objects and events from normal activities and treat them with respect 
or awe. Note that in this context the term sacred does not necessarily carry a religious 
meaning, although we do tend to think of religious artifacts and ceremonies as “sacred.” 
Profane consumption in contrast, describes objects and events that are ordinary or 
everyday; they don’t share the “specialness” of sacred ones. Again, note that in this con-
text we don’t equate the word profane with obscenity, although the two meanings do share 
some similarities.
Often we’re unaware of the distinction between these two domains—until they con-
flict with one another. Then, the sparks fly—sort of like the collision between matter and 
antimatter on Star Trek. A conflict in Thailand illustrates this process. It seems that several 
Bangkok nightclubs, inspired by the film Coyote Ugly about women who dance seductively 
on a New York bar, began to feature their own “Coyote Girls” dancers. The trend caught 
on and soon the dancers showed up at auto shows, in shopping malls, and at outdoor 
festivals. That’s when the trouble started: Thailand’s queen learned of one performance 
the girls put on near a Buddhist temple on a holy day that marks the end of a 3-month 
period where Buddhists refrain from impure thoughts and deeds (sort of like the Christian 
season of Lent). When the queen saw TV news reports about a motorcycle shop that hired 
Coyote Girls to promote its wares, she was outraged by the intrusion of profane activity 
into a sacred domain. Coyote Girls are now banned from dancing in public places.77
Sacralization
Sacralization occurs when ordinary objects, events, and even people take on sacred 
meaning. Many consumers regard events such as the Super Bowl and people such as Elvis 
Presley as sacred. Indeed, virtually anything can become sacred. Skeptical? Consider the 
Web site that sells unlaundered athletic wear that members of the Dallas Cowboys foot-
ball team have worn. Former quarterback Troy Aikman’s shoes sold for $1,999, and an 
unwashed practice jersey that retains the sweat of an unknown player goes for $99. Used 
socks fly out the door at $19.99 a pair. Says the owner, “Fans who have never been able to 
touch the Cowboys before now have an opportunity.”78
Objectification occurs when we attribute sacred qualities to mundane items (such 
as smelly socks). One way that this process occurs is via contamination whereby objects 
we associate with sacred events or people become sacred in their own right. This explains 
many fans’ desire for items that belonged to (or were even touched by) famous people. Even 
the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC, maintains a display that features such 
“sacred items” as the ruby slippers from The Wizard of Oz, a phaser from Star Trek, and 
Archie Bunker’s chair from the television show All in the Family—all reverently protected 
behind sturdy display glass.79
In addition to museum exhibits that display rare objects, we often set apart mundane, 
inexpensive things in collections; when we do so we transform them from profane items to 
sacred ones. An item is sacralized as soon as it enters a collection, and it takes on special 
significance to the collector that outsiders may find hard to comprehend. For example, you 
may know someone who collects matchbooks that mark visits to out-of-town restaurants: 
Just try to use one of these books if you actually need to light a match.

534 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Collecting refers to the systematic acquisition of a particular object or set of objects. 
We distinguish this from hoarding, which reflects a reluctance to discard used objects.80 
Hoarding is a problem in some cities where residents’ refusal to properly dispose of old 
newspapers, food, or even deceased pets results in fires, eviction, and even the removal of 
children from the home. A dozen cities run hoarding task forces to combat this problem.81
Collecting typically involves both rational and emotional components. On the one 
hand, avid collectors carefully organize and exhibit their treasures.82 On the other hand, 
they are ferociously attached to their collections. A teddy bear collector summed up this fixa-
tion: “If my house ever burns down, I won’t cry over my furniture, I’ll cry over the bears.”83
Some consumer researchers feel that collectors acquire their “prizes” to gratify their 
materialism in a socially acceptable manner. When he systematically amasses a collec-
tion, the collector “worships” material objects but he doesn’t have to feel guilty or petty. 
Another perspective argues that collecting is actually an aesthetic experience; for many 
collectors, the pleasure comes from creating the collection. Whatever the motivation, 
hard-core collectors often devote a great deal of time and energy to maintaining and 
expanding their collections, so for many this activity becomes a central component of 
their extended selves (see Chapter 6).84
Domains of Sacred Consumption
Sacred consumption events permeate many aspects of our lives. 
We find ways to “set apart” all sorts of places, people, and events. 
In this section, we’ll look at ways that “ordinary” consumption is 
sometimes not so ordinary after all.
Sacred places
A society “sets apart” sacred places because they have religious 
or mystical significance (e.g., Bethlehem, Mecca, Stonehenge) or because they commemo-
rate some aspect of a country’s heritage (e.g., the Kremlin, the Emperor’s Palace in Tokyo, 
the Statue of Liberty, or Ground Zero in Manhattan). Contamination makes these places 
sacred: Something sacred happened on that spot, so the place itself takes on sacred quali-
ties. Hard-core fans buy Yankees Sod, the first officially licensed grass. Although it costs a 
few thousand dollars to fill out a good-sized lawn, proud fans can boast of turf that grows 
from the same seeds the groundskeepers use at the stadium, and the sod comes with a cer-
tificate of authenticity from Major League Baseball and a counterfeit-proof hologram that 
declares it the official grass of the New York Yankees.85
Still other places start out as profane, but we endow them with sacred qualities. 
Grauman’s Chinese Theater in Hollywood, where movie stars leave their footprints in 
concrete for posterity, is one such place. Theme parks are a form of mass-produced fantasy 
that take on aspects of sacredness. In particular, Disney World and Disneyland (and their 
outposts in Europe, Japan, and China) are destinations for “pilgrimages” by consumers 
around the globe. Disney World displays many characteristics of more traditional sacred 
places. Some even believe it has healing powers, which helps to explain why a trip to the 
park is the most common “last wish” for terminally ill children.86
As the saying goes, “Home is where the heart is.”87 In many cultures, the home is a 
particularly sacred place. It’s a barrier between the harsh, external world and consumers’ 
“inner space.” Americans spend more than $50 billion a year on interior decorators and 
home furnishings, and our home is a central part of our identity. People all over the world 
go to great lengths to create a feeling of “homeyness.” They personalize their dwellings 
with door wreaths, mantel arrangements, and a “memory wall” for family photos.88 Even 
public places such as Starbucks cafés strive for a homelike atmosphere to shelter custom-
ers from the harshness of the outside world.
Sacred people
Two friends in San Francisco maintain Tumblr and Instagram sites, #WWYW or What 
Would Yeezus Wear, devoted to their idols, the glam couple Kim Kardashian and Kanye 
ObjeCtive 14-5
We describe products as 
either sacred or profane, 
and it’s not unusual for 
some products to move 
back and forth between 
the two categories.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
535 
West. They post paparazzi photos of the celebs’ outfits, then add photos of themselves 
wearing the same things. Hundreds of fan clubs like Always Elvis memorialize the King. 
Katy Perry has more than 40 million “Katy Cat” followers on Twitter.89
We idolize sacred people as we set them apart from the masses, and sometimes people 
come to believe that these individuals have “superhuman” abilities. Souvenirs, memora-
bilia, and even mundane items these celebrities have touched acquire special meanings 
(the celebrities “contaminate” the items). Newspapers pay paparazzi hundreds of thou-
sands of dollars for candid shots of stars or royalty. Indeed, many businesses thrive on 
our desire for products we associate with the famous. There is a flourishing market for 
celebrity autographs, and objects that celebrities owned, such as Princess Diana’s gowns 
or John Lennon’s guitars, sell on eBay for astronomical prices.
Sacred events
Sometimes public events resemble sacred, religious ceremonies. Think about fans who hold 
their hands over their hearts and solemnly recite the “Pledge of Allegiance” before a ball 
game, or how others reverently light matches (or hold up illuminated cell phones) during a 
rock concert.90
The world of sports is sacred to many of us (recent doping and gambling scandals 
aside). We find the roots of modern sports events in ancient religious rites, such as fertility 
festivals (e.g., the original Olympics).91 And it’s not uncommon for teams to join in prayer 
prior to a game. The sports pages are like the scriptures (and we all know ardent fans who 
read them “religiously”), the stadium is a house of worship, and the fans are members 
of the congregation. Devotees engage in group activities, such as tailgate parties and the 
“Wave,” where sections of the stadium take turns standing up. The athletes and coaches 
that fans come to see are godlike; devotees believe they have almost superhuman powers. 
One study documented more than 600 children whose parents named them after the leg-
endary University of Alabama coach Paul “Bear” Bryant!92
Athletes are central figures in a common cultural myth known as the hero tale. In 
these stories, the player must prove himself under strenuous circumstances, and he 
achieves victory only through sheer force of will. On a more mundane level, devotees con-
sume certain ritual artifacts during these ceremonies (such as hot dogs at the ballpark). 
Sales of snack foods and beverages spike around the time of the Super Bowl; people spend 
$10 million more on tortilla chips than during a normal 2-week period and more than 
$15 million extra on beer in the weeks surrounding the big game.93
Tourism is another category of sacred experience. People occupy sacred time 
and space when they travel on vacation (though you may not think so if you get 
stuck sleeping on an airport floor because of a plane delay). The tourist searches for 
“authentic” experiences that differ from his normal world (think of Club Med’s motto, 
“The antidote to civilization”).94 This traveling experience involves binary oppositions 
between work and leisure and being “at home” versus “away.” Often, we relax every-
day (profane) norms regarding appropriate behavior as tourists, and participate in 
illicit or adventurous experiences we would never engage in at home (“What happens 
in Vegas, stays in Vegas”).
The desire of travelers to capture these sacred experiences in objects forms the bed-
rock of the souvenir industry, which really sells sacred memories. Whether it’s a person-
alized matchbook from a wedding or New York City salt-and-pepper shakers, a souvenir 
represents a tangible piece of the consumer’s sacred experience.95 In addition to personal 
mementos, such as ticket stubs you save from a favorite concert, these are some other 
sacred souvenir icons:96
●
●Local products (e.g., wine from California)
●
●Pictorial images (e.g., postcards)
●
●“Piece of the rock” (e.g., seashells, pine cones)
●
●Symbolic shorthand in the form of literal representations of the site (e.g., a miniature 
Statue of Liberty)
●
●Markers (e.g., Hard Rock Cafe T-shirts)

536 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
From Sacred to profane, and back again
Just to make life interesting, some consumer activities move back and forth between 
the sacred and profane spheres over time.97 A study of tea preparation in Turkey illus-
trates this movement. Although we are more likely to think of thick Turkish coffee, in 
reality Turks consume more tea per capita than any other country. In Turkish culture 
people drink tea continuously, like (or instead of) water. Tea is an integral part of daily 
life; many households and offices boil water for tea in the traditional çaydanlik (double 
teapot) first thing in the morning, and keep it steaming all day so that the beverage is 
ready at any time. The tea drinking process links to many symbolic meanings—includ-
ing the traditional glasses, clear to appreciate the tea’s color, and hourglass-shaped 
like a woman’s body—and rituals, such as blending one’s own tea, knowing how finely 
to grind the tea leaves, and how long to steep the tea for optimal flavor. When Lipton 
introduced the modern tea bag in 1984, Turkey was intent on modernization and 
soon consumers snapped up electric çaydanliks and mugs instead of small, shapely tea 
glasses. Tea became a symbol of the quick and convenient, and the drinking act became 
more of a fashion statement. Now, many Turkish consumers opt to return to the 
sacred, traditional rituals as a way to preserve authenticity in the face of rapid societal 
changes.98
The transition of Turkish tea to a mass-market product illustrates the process of 
desacralization. This occurs when we remove a sacred item or symbol from its special 
place or duplicate it in mass quantities so that it loses its “specialness” and becomes 
profane. Souvenir reproductions of sacred monuments such as the Washington 
Monument or the Eiffel Tower, artworks such as the Mona Lisa or Michelangelo’s David, 
A souvenir commemorates a consumer’s 
 sacred experience.
Source: glowonconcept/Fotolia

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
537 
or reproductions of sacred symbols such as the U.S. flag on T-shirts eliminate their spe-
cial aspects. They become inauthentic commodities with relatively little value.
Religion itself has to some extent become desacralized. Religious symbols like stylized 
crosses or New Age crystals often pop up on fashion jewelry.99 Critics often charge that 
Christmas has turned into a secular, materialistic occasion devoid of its original sacred 
significance. A similar process occurs in relatively Westernized parts of the Islamic Middle 
East, where the holy month of Ramadan (that people traditionally observe by fasting and 
praying) is starting to look like Christmas: People buy lights in the shape of an Islamic 
crescent moon, send Ramadan cards to one another, and attend lavish fast-breaking 
feasts at hotels.100
the Diffusion of innovations
The originators of skateboarding in 1970s southern California 
(who were portrayed in the popular documentary Dogtown and 
Z-Boys) wouldn’t recognize the sport today. At that time, board-
ers were outlaws; as one of the main characters in the film says, 
“We get the beat-down from all over. Everywhere we go, man, 
people hate us.”
Now skateboarding is about as countercultural as The 
Simpsons. More kids ride skateboards than play basketball, and 
many of them snap up pricey T-shirts, skate shoes, helmets, and other accessories. In 
fact, boarders spend almost six times as much on “soft goods,” such as T-shirts, shorts, 
and sunglasses (about $4.4 billion in a year), than on hard-core equipment, including 
the boards themselves. To real afficionados, skateboarding has simply become a way for 
big companies like Nike to sell its SB Dunks and Janoski shoes.101
The progression of skateboarding from a cult-like activity with rebellious under-
tones to a mainstream sport mirrors the journey many products and services take 
through popular culture. Diffusion of innovations refers to the process whereby a 
new product, service, or idea spreads through a population. An innovation is any 
product or service that consumers perceive to be new. It may take the form of an activity 
(skateboarding), a clothing style (Thom Browne T-shirts), a new manufacturing tech-
nique (the ability to design your own running shoe at nike.com), a new variation on an 
existing product (Parkay Fun Squeeze Colored Margarine in electric blue and shocking 
pink), a new way to deliver a product (Uber), or a new way to package a current product 
(Campbell’s Soup at Hand Microwaveable Soup that comes in a travel mug).102
The social media explosion takes the diffusion process to a whole different level. As 
we’ve seen, the media democratization we witness today means that there are funda-
mental disruptions in the way consumers become aware of new products and the rate at 
which these innovations reach their markets. In this section, we’ll step back and examine 
the basic process of diffusion.
If an innovation is successful (most are not!), it spreads through the population. First 
only a trickle of people decides to try it. Then, more and more consumers decide to adopt 
it, until sometimes it seems that almost everyone is buying it—if it’s a “hit.” The rate at 
which a product diffuses varies. For example, within 10 years after introduction, 40 per-
cent of U.S. households watched cable TV, 35 percent listened to compact discs, 25 percent 
used answering machines, and 20 percent bought color TVs. It took radio 30 years to 
reach 60 million users and TV 15 years to reach this number. In contrast, within 3 years 
90 million of us surfed the Web.103
how Do We Decide to adopt an innovation?
Our adoption of an innovation resembles the decision-making sequence we discussed in 
Chapter 9. We move through the stages of awareness, information search, evaluation, 
trial, and adoption. The relative importance of each stage differs, however, depending on 
ObjeCtive 14-6
New products, services, 
and ideas spread 
through a population 
over time. Different types 
of people are more or 
less likely to adopt them 
during this diffusion 
process.

538 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
how much we already know about an innovation as well as on cultural factors that affect 
our willingness to try new things.104
As Figure 14.3 shows, roughly one-sixth of the population (innovators and early 
adopters) are quick to adopt new products, and one-sixth (laggards) are slow. The other 
two-thirds, so-called late adopters are somewhere in the middle. These consumers are 
the mainstream public. They are interested in new things, but they do not want them to 
be too new. In some cases, people deliberately wait to adopt an innovation because they 
assume that the company will improve its technology or that its price will fall after it has 
been on the market awhile (have you been holding off on that iPhone purchase to see 
what Apple will come up with next?).105 Keep in mind that the proportion of consumers 
who fall into each category is an estimate; the actual size of each depends on such factors 
as the complexity of the product, its cost, and how much risk people associate with it.
Even though innovators represent only about 2.5 percent of the population, mar-
keters are eager to identify them. These are the brave souls who are always on the lookout 
for novel products or services and who are first to try something new. An innovator tends 
to be a risk-taker. He or she also is likely to have a relatively high educational and income 
level and to be socially active. In some cases an innovator is an admired celebrity to whom 
others look for leadership. Luxury brands understand this, and they often work hard to 
“seed adoptions” by providing their exclusive items to high-profile people. This is the strat-
egy Apple followed when the company launched its Apple Watch. Rather than making the 
new item widely available as it does with iPhones, Apple at first restricted access to celeb-
rities including Pharrell Williams, Katy Perry, Drake, and Beyoncé. As Apple hoped, the 
celebs in turn posted Instagram photos of themselves sporting their new toys that stoked 
the fires of desire for the rest of us.106
Early adopters share many of the same characteristics as innovators. An important 
difference is their high degree of concern for social acceptance, especially with regard to 
expressive products such as clothing and cosmetics. Generally speaking, an early adopter 
is receptive to new styles because he or she is involved in the product category and he or 
she values being in fashion.
What appears on the surface to be a fairly high-risk adoption (e.g., wearing a skirt 
three inches above the knee when most people wear them below the knee) is actually not 
that risky. Innovators who truly took the fashion risk have already “field-tested” the style 
change. We’re likely to find early adopters in “fashion-forward” stores that feature the lat-
est “hot” designer brands. In contrast, we’re more likely to find true innovators in small 
boutiques that carry merchandise from as-yet-unknown designers.
Maturity
Growth
Introduction
2.5%
13.5%
34%
Decline
34%
16%
PERCENTAGE ADOPTING
LIFE CYCLE
Ea
rly
 M
aj
or
it
y
Late Majority
Lagg
ard
s
In
nov
ator
s E
arly
 Ad
opt
ers
Figure 14.3 TYPES Of ADOPTErS

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
539 
behavioral Demands of innovations
We categorize innovations by the degree to which they demand adopters to change 
their behavior. One widely used approach to predicting whether people will adopt a 
new form of technology or information system is the Technology Acceptance Model 
(TAM). The TAM suggests that the likelihood of change is based on two factors: The 
perceived usefulness of the new option and its perceived ease of use. This model is based 
the theory of reasoned action we discussed in Chapter 8; it stresses that because there 
may be other constraints at work such as access to resources or the expectations of 
our peers, we can’t necessarily predict if an innovation will be successful just because 
consumers have a positive or negative attitude toward it. We also have to consider 
whether they believe it will provide utility for them (e.g., if they believe that by using 
the new item this will enhance their performance in some way). The TAM model has 
been used to understand, for example, whether consumers will use e-commerce plat-
forms depending on how useful they perceive them to be relative to traditional purchase 
strategies.107
Researchers identify three major types of innovations, though these three categories 
are not absolutes. They refer, in a relative sense, to the amount of disruption or change 
they bring to people’s lives.
1 A continuous innovation is a modification of an existing product, such as when 
General Mills introduces a Honey Nut version of Cheerios or Levi’s promotes shrink-
to-fit jeans. The company makes small changes to position the product, add line 
extensions, or merely alleviate consumer boredom. Most product innovations are of 
this type; they are evolutionary rather than revolutionary. When a consumer adopts 
this kind of new product, she only has to make minor changes in her habits. A type-
writer company, for example, many years ago modified its product to make it more 
“user friendly” to secretaries. Its engineers made the tops of the keys concave because 
women told them it was hard to type with long fingernails on a flat surface. This 
change endures today on our computer keyboards.
2 Some innovations present us with a new way to use an existing product. This may 
be more effective, but we still have to alter our habits to use it. A Japanese clothing 
company introduced a line of Shower Clean business suits that allow traveling ex-
ecutives to bypass the dry cleaner; they wash their suits in a warm shower and need 
not press or iron them.108 A dynamically continuous innovation is a significant 
change to an existing product. When IBM introduced its Selectric typewriter that 
used a typing ball rather than individual keys, the new design permitted secretaries 
to instantly change the typeface of manuscripts as they replaced one Selectric ball 
with another.
3 A discontinuous innovation creates really big changes in the way we live. Major 
inventions, such as the airplane, the car, the computer, and the television, radically 
changed modern lifestyles. The personal computer replaced the typewriter; it also al-
lows some of us to “telecommute” from our homes. Of course, the cycle continues, as 
new continuous innovations such as mobile apps and cloud software transform how 
we access data and connect to others online.
What Determines if an innovation Will Diffuse?
Regardless of how much we have to change what we do, a successful innovation should 
possess these attributes:109
●
●Compatibility—The innovation should be compatible with consumers’ lifestyles. 
A manufacturer of personal care products tried unsuccessfully several years ago to 
introduce a cream hair remover for men as a substitute for razors and shaving cream. 
This formulation was similar to what many women use to remove hair from their legs. 
M-pesa (M for mobile, pesa is 
Swahili for money) is a mobile- 
phone-based money transfer 
service that is popular in parts 
of Africa, where most consum-
ers do not have access to bank branches. As 
many other people around the world start to 
transact more of their banking business online, 
M-PESA provides valuable lessons on how to 
design an app that transforms how we relate 
to our financial institutions. This service is an 
example of reverse innovation (or trickle-up 
innovation). This term refers to the process 
whereby a product is initially to meet the needs 
of developing nations and then is adapted else-
where. Battery-operated medical instruments 
first designed for use in countries with limited 
infrastructure are another example.
  net profit

540 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Although the product was simple and convenient to use, it failed because men were 
not interested in a product they perceived to be too feminine and thus a threat to their 
masculine self-concepts.
●
●Trialability—Because we think an unknown product is risky, we’re more likely to 
adopt an innovation if we can experiment with it before making a commitment. To 
reduce this risk, companies may spend a lot of money to distribute free “trial-size” 
samples of new products.
●
●Complexity—The product should be low in complexity. All things being equal, we 
will choose a product that’s easier to understand and use rather than a more complex 
one. This strategy requires less effort from us and it also lowers our perceived risk. 
Manufacturers of DVD recorders, for example, put a lot of effort into simplifying usage 
(e.g., on-screen programming) to encourage nontechies to adopt them.
●
●Observability—Innovations that are readily apparent are more likely to spread be-
cause we can learn about them more easily. The rapid proliferation of fanny packs 
(pouches people wear around the waist in lieu of wallets or purses) was a result of 
their high visibility. It was easy for others to see the convenience this alternative offered 
(even if they were a bit nerdy).
●
●Relative advantage—Most importantly, the product should offer relative advantage 
over other alternatives. The consumer must believe that it will provide a benefit other 
products cannot offer. For example, the Bugchaser is a wristband that contains insect 
repellent. Mothers with young children like it because it’s nontoxic and nonstaining—
these are clear advantages over alternatives. In contrast, the Crazy Blue Air Freshener, 
which emits a fragrance when you turn on your car wipers, fizzled: People didn’t see 
the need for the product and felt there were simpler ways to freshen their cars.
the Fashion System
Style is important to many of us, even when the style is to not be 
in style. That was the case in recent years as a fashion movement 
known as Normcore started to take off. This term describes 
a trend among young urbanites to foresake hipster styles like 
skinny jeans, wallet chains, and flannel shirts, for bland, sub-
urban attire like Gap cargo shorts, a Coors Light T-shirt, a Nike 
golf hat, white sneakers, and “dad jeans.” More broadly, some analysts stated that norm-
core reflected an effort by young bohemain types to “get over themselves.” They devoted 
tremendous effort to set themselves apart from others with quirky style flourishes like 
handlebar moustaches and drinking obscure microbrews, and so they felt a need to throw 
themselves back into mainstream culture. The normcore buzz grew quickly, to the point 
where a Google search of the term yields almost 1 million hits. Fashion insiders couldn’t 
take it anymore; one person created the Google Chrome extension No More #NORMCORE, 
which blocks references to the term.110 Time to move on to the next trend.
The fashion system includes all the people and organizations that create symbolic 
meanings and transfer those meanings to cultural goods. Although we often equate fash-
ion with clothing, it’s important to keep in mind that fashion processes affect all types of 
cultural phenomena, including music, art, architecture, and even science (i.e., certain 
research topics and individual scientists are “hot” at any point in time). Even business 
practices are subject to the fashion process; they evolve and change depending on which 
management techniques are in vogue, such as total quality management (TQM), just-
in-time inventory control (JIT), or managing by walking around (MBWA). All of these 
domains are affected by the “movement of meaning” in a culture that we discussed previ-
ously in this chapter.
At the outset, let’s distinguish among some confusing terms. Fashion is the process 
of social diffusion by which some group(s) of consumers adopts a new style. In contrast, 
a fashion (or style) is a particular combination of attributes (say, stovepipe jeans that 
women wear with a tunic top). To be in fashion means that some reference group positively 
ObjeCtive 14-7
Many people and 
organizations play a 
role in the fashion 
system that creates and 
communicates symbolic 
meanings to consumers.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
541 
evaluates this combination (i.e., Vogue endorses this look as “in” for this season). Thus, the 
term Danish Modern refers to particular characteristics of furniture design (i.e., a fashion 
in interior design); it does not necessarily imply that Danish Modern is a fashion that con-
sumers currently desire.111
behavioral Science perspectives on Fashion
Fashion is a complex process that operates on many levels. At one extreme, it’s a societal 
phenomenon that affects many of us simultaneously. At the other, it exerts a personal 
effect on individual behavior. Many of us desire to be in fashion, and this motivates us as 
to what we buy. Fashion products also are aesthetic objects that reflect a culture’s artistic 
traditions and history. For this reason, there are many perspectives on the origin and diffu-
sion of fashion. Let’s summarize some major approaches.112
psychological Models of Fashion
Many psychological factors help explain what motivates us to be fashionable. These 
include conformity, desires for variety seeking, the need to express personal creativity, and 
sexual attraction. For example, many consumers seem to have a “need for uniqueness”: 
They want to be different (though not necessarily too different!).113 As a result, people may 
conform to the basic outlines of a fashion, but still improvise to make a personal statement 
within these general guidelines.
One of the earliest theories of fashion argued that “shifting erogenous zones (sexually 
arousing areas of the body) accounted for fashion changes and that different zones become 
the object of interest because they reflect societal trends. J. C. Flugel, a disciple of Freud, pro-
posed in the 1920s that sexually charged areas wax and wane as we grow bored with them; 
clothing styles change to highlight or hide the parts that currently are the focus of attention. 
For example, it was common for Renaissance-era women to drape their abdomens in fabrics 
to give a swollen appearance; successful childbearing was a priority in the disease-ridden 
14th and 15th centuries. Now, some suggest that the current prevalence of the exposed 
midriff in women’s fashion reflects the premium our society places on fitness.114
economic Models of Fashion
Economists approach fashion in terms of the model of supply and demand. Items in lim-
ited supply have high value, whereas our desire decreases for readily available products. 
The recent Normcore style reflects the fash-
ion of not being in fashion.
Source: Eugenio Marongiu/Shutterstock

542 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Rare items command respect and prestige. As we discussed in Chapter 12, the writer 
Thorstein Veblen argued that the wealthy practice conspicuous consumption to display 
their prosperity. As we also noted, this approach is somewhat outdated; upscale con-
sumers today engage in parody display where they deliberately buy inexpensive products 
(especially during a recession). Other factors also influence the demand curve for fashion-
related products. These include a prestige–exclusivity effect where high prices still cre-
ate high demand, and a snob effect whereby lower prices actually reduce demand (“If it’s 
that cheap, it can’t be any good”).115
Sociological Models of Fashion
This perspective focuses on a subculture’s adoption of a fashion (idea, style, etc.) and its 
subsequent diffusion into society as a whole. To understand this process, think about the 
integration of Goth culture into the mainstream. This fashion started as an expression of 
rebellion by young outcasts who admired 19th-century romantics. Goths defied conven-
tional styles with their black clothing (often including over-the-top fashion statements 
This ad for Maidenform illustrates that 
 fashions have accentuated different parts of 
the female anatomy throughout history.
Source: Courtesy of Hanesbrands Inc.
Marketing pitfall
The sociological perspec-
tive that emphasizes the 
tension between domi-
nant and subordinate 
groups highlights a basic 
paradox of fashion. A brand often has cachet 
because only a select group of people own 
it; either because it is expensive or perhaps 
because only people “in the know” select 
it. As more consumers outside of this inner 
circle start to adopt it, it is no longer exclusive 
and its original meaning is lost. Therefore, 
the item is a victim of its own success. 
Popular brands including Levi Strauss and 
Harley-Davidson continue to struggle with this 
problem as their core users abandon them 
precisely because they gain wider market 
acceptance. Some companies such as the 
luxury car brand Aston Martin even limit ac-
cess to some of their models only to current 
customers.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
543 
such as Count Dracula capes, fishnet stockings, studded collars, and black lipstick) and 
punk music from bands such as Siouxsie & the Banshees and Bauhaus. Today, music 
stores sell vampire-girl lunchboxes, and mall outlets sell tons of clunky cross jewelry and 
black lace. You can find a T-shirt that looks like a corset at Kmart. At the Hot Topic Web 
site, teen surfers can buy a “multi-ring choker.” Hard-core Goths are not amused, but hey, 
that’s fashion for you.116
Trickle-down theory which the sociologist Georg Simmel first proposed in 1904, is 
one of the most influential sociological perspectives on fashion. It states that two conflict-
ing forces drive fashion change. First, subordinate groups adopt the status symbols of the 
groups above them as they attempt to climb up the ladder of social mobility. Dominant 
styles thus originate with the upper classes and trickle down to those below.
Now the second force kicks in: Those people in the superordinate groups keep a wary 
eye on the ladder below them to be sure followers don’t imitate them. When lower-class 
consumers mimic their actions, they adopt new fashions to distance themselves from 
the mainstream. These two processes create a self-perpetuating cycle of change—the 
machine that drives fashion.117
The integration of hip-hop phrases into our vocabulary illustrates how people who set 
fashions resist mainstream adoption by the broader society. The street elite shunned some 
slang terms, such as bad, fresh, and jiggy, once they became too mainstream. The rap com-
munity even held a funeral (with a eulogy by Reverend Al Sharpton) for the word def once 
the Oxford English Dictionary included it in its new edition.118
Trickle-down theory applies to a society with a stable class structure that allows us 
to easily identify lower- versus upper-class consumers. This task is no longer so easy. In 
contemporary Western society, we have to modify this theory to account for new develop-
ments in mass culture:120
●
●A perspective we base on class structure can’t account for the wide range of styles now 
available. We have many more choices today because of technological advances that 
let manufacturers drastically speed up production times and real-time media that keep 
us informed of style changes in minutes. Stores such as Zara and H&M can replenish 
their inventories in weeks rather than months. Suburban tweens watch MTV, chat on 
Facebook, or browse the virtual world Stardoll.com to stay on top of the latest trends; 
mass fashion thus replaces elite fashion because our media allow many market seg-
ments to learn about a style simultaneously.
●
●Consumers today are more influenced by opinion leaders who are similar to them, 
even if these innovators don’t live in the same town or even country. As a result, each 
social group has its own fashion innovators who determine fashion trends. It’s more 
accurate to speak of a trickle-across effect where fashions diffuse horizontally 
among members of the same social group.121
●
●Finally, current fashions often originate with the lower classes and we observe a 
trickle-up effect. Grassroots innovators typically are people who lack prestige in the 
dominant culture (e.g., urban youth). Because they are less concerned with maintain-
ing the status quo, they are free to innovate and take risks.122
a Medical Model of Fashion
For many years, the lowly Hush Puppy was a shoe for nerds. Suddenly—almost over-
night—the shoe became a chic fashion statement even though its manufacturer did noth-
ing to promote this image. Why did this style diffuse through the population so quickly? 
Meme theory explains this process with a medical metaphor. A meme is an idea or 
product that enters the consciousness of people over time—examples include tunes, styles 
like the Hush Puppy, or even catch-phrases: The singer Taylor Swift trademarked several 
phrases from her album 1989, including “Party like it’s 1989,” “this sick beat,” and “nice 
to meet you, where you been.”124
In this view, memes spread among consumers in a geometric progression just as a 
virus starts off small and steadily infects increasing numbers of people until it becomes 
an epidemic. Memes “leap” from brain to brain via a process of imitation. The memes 
Big rewards await those 
who can identify memes or 
create new ones. Case in 
point: Ben Huh, a young en-
trepreneur, dipped into his 
own savings and bought a quirky site from 
two  Hawaiian bloggers—the hugely success-
ful I Can Has Cheezburger that pairs photos 
of cats with quirky captions. He realized that 
there’s a huge demand for content that sat-
isfies people’s quirky cravings and now he’s 
expanded his empire—The Cheezburger Net-
work—to include numerous sites that serve 
up all kinds of offbeat humor. These include 
Fail Blog for photos and videos of disastrous 
mishaps and There I Fixed It where people 
post photos of bad repair jobs. There are also 
user-created meme animals such as Philo-
soraptor, Anti-Joke Chicken, Art Student Owl, 
and Pickup Line Panda. The network employs 
more than 40 people who scour the Web for 
new ideas to post. They are essentially meme 
miners who monitor cyberspace for themes 
that emerge on forums, blogs, and video sites. 
As the creator of a video series called “Know 
Your Meme” explained, “Cheezburger figures 
out what’s starting to get popular and then 
harvests the humor from the chaff. Things 
like Lolcats and fail are easy to make, easy 
to spread and hit on an emotional level that 
crosses a lot of traditional boundaries.”123
  net profit
One pair of researchers distinguishes be-
tween two types of non-core users, however: 
They describe brand immigrants who try to 
claim membership within the community of 
users, and brand tourists who buy the brand 
but who do not claim membership. They 
found that brand immigrants do potentially 
dilute the value of the brand for core us-
ers, but brand tourists do not. Instead they 
can actually enhance the value of the brand 
because their experimentation with it dem-
onstrates that the brand has value, but this 
usage does not threaten the identities of the 
core users. So, can a prestige brand have its 
cake and eat it too? These findings suggest 
one strategy: Create a museum dedicated to 
the myth of the brand (as Louis vuitton, val-
entino, Gucci, and Nike have done) and allow 
tourists to look but not touch.119

544 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
that survive tend to be distinctive and memorable, and the hardiest ones often combine 
aspects of prior memes. For example, the Star Wars movies evoke prior memes that relate 
to the legend of King Arthur, religion, heroic youth, and 1930s adventure serials. Indeed, 
George Lucas studied comparative religion and mythology as he prepared his first draft of 
the Star Wars saga, The Story of Mace Windu.125
The diffusion of many products in addition to Hush Puppies seems to follow the 
same basic path. A few people initially use the product, but change happens in a hurry 
when the process reaches the moment of critical mass—what one author calls the 
tipping point126 For example, Sharp introduced the first low-priced fax machine in 
1984 and sold about 80,000 in that year. There was a slow climb in the number of 
users for the next 3 years. Then, suddenly, in 1987 enough people had fax machines 
that it made sense for everyone to have one, and Sharp sold a million units. Cell 
phones followed a similar trajectory. Do you remember when you first heard about 
Instagram or Vine?
Cycles of Fashion adoption
In the early 1980s, Cabbage Patch dolls were all the rage among 
U.S. children. Faced with a limited supply of the product, some 
retailers reported near-riots among adults as they tried desper-
ately to buy the dolls for their children. A Milwaukee deejay 
jokingly announced that people should bring catcher’s mitts to a local stadium because 
an airplane was going to fly overhead and drop 2,000 dolls. He told his listeners to hold 
up their American Express cards so their numbers could be photographed from the plane. 
More than two dozen anxious parents apparently didn’t get the joke: They showed up in 
subzero weather, mitts in hand.128
The Cabbage Patch craze lasted for a couple of seasons before it eventually died out, 
and consumers moved on to other things, such as Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, which 
grossed more than $600 million in 1989. The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers eventu-
ally replaced the Turtles, and Beanie Babies and Giga Pets in turn deposed them before the 
invasion of Pokémon, followed by Yu-Gi-Oh! cards, Webkinz, Transformers, Squinkies and 
Zoobles, Furbys, and on and on.129
Figure 14.4 illustrates that fashions begin slowly, but if they “make it,” they dif-
fuse rapidly through a market, peak, and then retreat into obscurity. We identify differ-
ent classes of fashion when we look at the relative length of their acceptance cycles. 
Many fashions have a moderate cycle, taking several months or even years to work their 
way through the stages of acceptance and decline; others are extremely long lived or 
short-lived.
A classic is a fashion with an extremely long acceptance cycle. It is in a sense “anti-
fashion” because it guarantees stability and low risk to the purchaser for a long period of 
time. Keds sneakers, introduced in 1917, appeal to those who are turned off by the high-
fashion, trendy appeal of Nike or Reebok. When researchers asked consumers in focus 
groups to imagine what kind of building Keds would be, a common response was a coun-
try house with a white picket fence. In other words, consumers see the shoes as a stable, 
classic product. In contrast, participants described Nikes as steel-and-glass skyscrapers to 
reflect that brand’s more modern image.130
A theme park in Japan offers “amusement baths” to visitors, including a wine bath, a 
green-tea bath, a coffee bath, a sake bath, and even a ramen-noodle bath. When they don 
their bathing suits and jump into the ramen bath (which looks like a soup bowl), they frolic 
in pepper-flavored water that contains collagen and garlic extracts the Japanese believe 
will improve the skin. A man dressed as a chef dispenses noodle-shaped bath additives and 
soy sauce to everyone in the tub.131 A fad is a short-lived fashion. Relatively few people 
adopt a fad product, but it can spread quickly. Adopters may all belong to a common sub-
culture, and the fad “trickles across” members but rarely breaks out of that specific group.
The streaking fad hit college campuses in the mid-1970s because it was briefly popu-
lar for students to run nude through classrooms, cafeterias, dorms, and sports venues. 
Two 12 year-old Wiscon-
sin girls stabbed a class-
mate 19 times, and later 
explained they did this at 
the urging of someone 
called “Slenderman.” It turns out that he is not 
a real person; he’s an Internet meme. The thin, 
faceless character in a dark suit appears in 
numerous YouTube videos, in PhotoShopped 
pictures and on blogs that described “sight-
ings” around the country. The girls read about 
Slenderman on the Web site Creepypasta, 
where fans submit small fictional accounts of 
scary characters including zombies, vampires, 
and aliens. His creator, whose Web handle 
is “victor Surge,” says he invented Slender-
man in 2009 as an “attempt to cooperatively 
create new folklore” by mixing a stock hor-
ror theme with the ability of the Internet to 
spread the message.127 His formula seems 
to be working; in 2015 people in the united 
Kingdom started to post video sightings of 
Slenderman as well.
  the tangled Web
ObjeCtive 14-8
Fashions follow cycles 
and reflect cultural 
dynamics.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
545 
Although the practice quickly spread across many campuses, it was primarily restricted to 
college settings. Streaking highlights several of a fad’s “naked truths:”132
●
●The fad is nonutilitarian; it does not perform any meaningful function.
●
●The fad often spreads impulsively; people do not undergo stages of rational decision 
making before they join in.
●
●The fad diffuses rapidly, gains quick acceptance, and dies just as quickly.
F
a
d
Cl
a
s
s
ic
F
a
s
hi
o
n
NUMBER OF ADOPTERS
TIME
Figure 14.4 COMPArISON Of THE ACCEPTANCE CYCLES Of fADS, fASHIONS, AND CLASSICS
Music, furniture, and other cultural products 
undergo cycles of fashion adoption.
Source: Creative Director: João Santos, Art 
Director: Mariana Moreira, Copy: Daniel Pereira

546 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Global Consumer Culture
As if understanding the dynamics of one’s own culture weren’t hard enough, these issues 
get even more complicated when we consider what drives consumers in other cultures. 
The consequences of ignoring cultural sensitivities can be costly. Think about prob-
lems a prominent multinational company such as McDonald’s encounters as it expands 
 globally—even as today the iconic U.S. chain’s worldwide operations are far bigger than its 
U.S. domestic business: 133
●
●During the 1994 soccer World Cup, the fast-food giant reprinted the Saudi Arabian 
flag, which includes sacred words from the Koran, on disposable packaging it used in 
promotions. Muslims around the world protested this borrowing of sacred imagery, 
and the company had to scramble to correct its mistake.
●
●In 2002, McDonald’s agreed to donate $10 million to Hindu and other groups as par-
tial settlement of litigation involving its mislabeling of French fries and hash browns 
as vegetarian (it cooked them in oil tainted with meat residue).
●
●Also in 2002, the company abruptly cancelled its plans to introduce its new McAfrika 
sandwich in its Norwegian restaurants. The CEO of McDonald’s in Norway acknowl-
edged on national television that introducing this menu item at a time of growing 
famine in Africa was “coincidental and unfortunate.”
●
●In India, the company doesn’t sell any of its famous beef hamburgers. Instead, it 
offers customized entrées such as a Pizza McPuff, McAloo Tikki (a spiced-potato 
burger), Paneer Salsa McWrap, and even a Crispy Chinese burger, to capitalize on the 
great popularity of Chinese food in India. It makes its mayonnaise without eggs, and 
all stores maintain separate kitchen sections for vegetarian and nonvegetarian dishes. 
Workers from the nonvegetarian section must shower before they cross over to the 
other area.
●
●In 2005, McDonald’s introduced the spicy Prosperity Burger in nine countries, from 
South Korea to Indonesia, in recognition of the Lunar New Year.
●
●Although the Japanese are well-known for their healthy diets, McDonald’s numerous 
customers there are clamoring for high-calorie sandwiches—even as the company’s 
U.S. consumers welcome new diet-friendly entrées like the Premium Southwest salad. 
As part of its new Big America 2 campaign, McD’s in Japan offer the 713-calorie 
Idaho burger (topped with melted cheese, a deep-fried hash brown, strips of bacon, on-
ions, and pepper-and-mustard sauce) and several other U.S.-themed items.134 It seems 
there’s more than one way to translate “Big America.”
●
●McDonald’s introduced a new entrée to the German market: The McCurrywurst is a 
mix of pork bratwurst chunks in a spicy tomato sauce accompanied by shaker packs 
of either mild or sharp curry powder. This follows on the mini Nürnburger brat sand-
wich the chain introduced a few years ago. Germans love their bratwurst, so now they 
can eat it Golden Arches style.135
●
●Asian consumers regard McDonald’s as less of an inexpensive meal on the run and 
more of a middle-class experience. People regard Western fast food chains as safe 
 options: Food safety is a major concern, particularly in China because of a series 
of scandals involving contaminated products that resulted in deaths. McDonald’s 
emphasized the quality of its ingredients with its Chickileaks campaign (the actual 
translation from the Chinese is “unveil the secret of chicken grown”), that focused on 
the integrity of the company’s chicken supply chain.136 Unfortunately, recent events 
show that these companies can’t rest on their laurels: Sales at McDonald’s as well 
as KFC slumped when in 2014 Chinese television uncovered yet another food safety 
problem; this time with a local supplier who was selling meat to both companies past 
its expiration date.137
More than 60 countries have a gross national product of less than $10 billion. There 
are at least 135 transnational companies that post more revenue than that figure. Many 
multinational firms are household names, widely recognized by literally billions of people. 

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
547 
The dominance of these marketing powerhouses creates a global consumer culture 
that unites people around the world by their common devotion to brand-name consumer 
goods, movie stars, celebrities, and leisure activities.138 As developing countries generate 
millions of new middle-class consumers, people the world over value well-known brands 
that symbolize prosperity. Shopping evolves from a wearying, task-oriented struggle to 
locate even basic necessities to a leisure activity.
it’s a branD-new World
Although Chinese consumers enjoy exotic beverages such as 
snake bile wine and fresh-squeezed cucumber juice, they still 
buy more than one billion bottles of good old U.S. Coca-Cola per 
year. The National Basketball Association sells $500 million of 
licensed merchandise every year outside of the United States; 
China is its largest foreign market.139 Patrons of the Starlite 
Cb aS i See it
Julien Cayla, Nanyang Business School, Singapore
are extremely different. While many 
Chinese consumers are interested 
in the way luxury items signal status 
and allow them to build relationships 
or guanxi, the Japanese were often 
more interested in limited editions of 
luxury brands. These differences can 
be partly explained by the fact that 
the penetration of luxury brands in 
Japan is much higher than in China. 
The Japanese market hence requires 
a completely different approach, 
emphasizing exclusivity.
In India, many luxury brands 
have struggled to generate sales 
given the high taxes and duties 
imposed on luxury products. But 
some brands have successfully 
adapted to the idiosyncracies of 
the Indian luxury market. A case in 
point is Louis Vuitton. After building 
an understanding of the local 
culture, Louis Vuitton’s management 
decided to focus more specifically on 
weddings. Building from the ancient 
custom in which the Indian bride takes 
a trunk of belongings with her when 
she joins her husband’s household, 
Louis Vuitton uses its expertise in 
customizing luggage to deliver unique 
luggage pieces for lavish weddings, an 
occasion when even otherwise frugal 
Indian families are willing to splurge. 
Overall, what our research and other 
evidence suggest is that treating Asia 
or Asian consumers as homogenous, 
or summarizing their behavior as 
“collectivist” is misleading given the 
huge diversity and the complexity 
hiding behind those labels.
Second, I remain fascinated by 
the various types of exchanges and 
connections that exist between Asian 
nations. For instance, the Korean wave 
of pop culture or hallyu has generated 
a huge following and promoted the 
sense of an ideal Korean beauty, with 
features such as big eyes, tiny button 
noses, v-line shaped jaws and wide 
cheeks, in many parts of East Asia. 
An after-effect of this success has 
been the rise of Seoul as a cosmetic 
surgery center, with large numbers 
of Chinese tourists flocking to South 
Korea every year to resemble Korean 
television and pop music stars. In 
our research with Giana Eckhardt, we 
looked at some of these connections 
between Asian nations, and at the 
type of modernity promoted in Asia. 
We found that brands often invoked 
a very urban modernity, and the idea 
that Asians are experiencing the 
same dynamic wave of economic 
development. This dynamism, the 
connections existing between Asian 
cities, and the fascinating history of 
the region, is what appeals to me 
as I continue to do more work on 
consumer behavior in Asia.
The more research I do in the Asia-
Pacific region, the more I am amazed 
at the sheer diversity of consumer 
cultures, and the interconnections 
between cultures. With my French 
colleague Jean Baptiste Welté, I am 
currently involved in doing research 
on luxury boutiques in Asia, and 
we find that luxury consumers from 
Tokyo, Shanghai, and New Delhi 
ObjeCtive 14-9
Western (and particularly 
U.S.) culture has a huge 
impact around the world, 
although people in other 
countries don’t necessarily 
ascribe the same meanings 
to products as we do.

548 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Urban Drive-In in London sit in rows of cars as they watch U.S. “classics” like Grease and 
Dirty Dancing while they chow down on burgers, meatloaf, and sweet potato pie, followed 
by ice cream sundaes or chocolate brownies and cream. Starstruck fans of the reality 
show Keeping up with the Kardashians lined up 30 hours in advance for a chance to see Kim 
at a shopping mall in Sydney, Australia.
Walk the streets of Lisbon or Buenos Aires, and the sight of Nike hats, Gap T-shirts, 
and Levi’s jeans will accost you at every turn. The allure of U.S. consumer culture spreads 
throughout the world, but with a lot of pushback in many places. Critics in other coun-
tries deplore the creeping Americanization of their cultures because of what they view as 
excessive materialism. One French critic summarized this resistance to the diffusion of U.S. 
culture: He described the Euro Disney theme park as “a horror made of cardboard, plastic, 
and appalling colors—a construction of hardened chewing gum and idiotic folklore taken 
straight out of a comic book written for obese Americans.”140
A survey in Beijing found that nearly half of all children younger than age 12 think 
McDonald’s is a domestic Chinese brand!141 The West (and especially the United States) 
is a net exporter of popular culture. Many consumers equate Western lifestyles in gen-
eral and the English language in particular with modernization and sophistication, and 
numerous U.S. brands slowly but surely insinuate themselves into local cultures. Indeed, 
some global brands are so widespread that many are only vaguely aware of their coun-
tries of origin. In surveys, consumers routinely guess that Heineken is German (it’s really 
Dutch) and that Nokia is Japanese (it’s Finnish).142
One study looked at how Chinese consumers think about Western brands. The 
researchers found that their interpretations depended on their unique perspective about the 
history of relations between China and the West. The researchers in fact identified four dif-
ferent narratives (themes) in their sample: West as liberator, as oppressor, as subjugated, and 
as partner. Depending on which view they endorsed, respondents viewed Western brands 
as instruments of democratization, domination, a symbol of Asian ascendancy as Chinese 
domestic brands start to gain traction, or as instruments of economic progress that will help 
China to grow its economy in partnership with the United States and Western Europe.143
As the global consumption ethic spreads, rituals and product preferences in different 
cultures become homogenized. For example, some urbanites in Muslim Turkey now celebrate 
Christmas even though gift-giving is not customary in many parts of the country—even 
on birthdays. In China, Christmas fever grips China’s newly rising urban middle class as an 
excuse to shop, eat, and party. People there snap up Christmas trees, ornaments, and Christian 
religious objects (even though the street vendors who peddle images of Jesus and Mary can’t 
always identify who they are). Chinese consumers embrace Christmas because to them the 
holiday is international and modern, not because it’s a traditional Christian celebration. The 
government encourages this practice because it stimulates consumer spending. To make the 
holiday even merrier, China exports about $1 billion worth of Christmas products every year, 
and its factories churn out $7.5 billion of the toys people worldwide put under their trees.144
Does this homogenization mean that in time consumers who live in Nairobi, New 
Guinea, or the Netherlands will all be indistinguishable from those in New York or 
Nashville? Probably not, because the meaning of consumer goods mutates to blend with 
local customs and values. For example, in Turkey some urban women use their ovens 
to dry clothes and their dishwashers to wash muddy spinach. A person in Papua New 
Guinea may combine a traditional clothing style such as a bilum with Western items such 
as Mickey Mouse shirts or baseball caps.145
These processes make it unlikely that global homogenization will overwhelm local 
cultures, but it is likely that there will be multiple consumer cultures, each of which blends 
global icons such as Nike’s pervasive “swoosh” with indigenous products and meanings. 
In Vietnam, for example, local fast-food chains dominate the market as they duplicate a 
McDonald’s approach but add a local flavor. The country’s hugely successful Kinh Do red 
and yellow outlets sell specialties like dried squid buns. In the Philippines, the Jollibee Foods 
Corp. burger chain also copies the McDonald’s look—and it outsells McDonald’s there.146
Creolization occurs when foreign influences integrate with local meanings. In 
India, beggars sell bottles of Coke from tricycles, and Indipop, a popular music hybrid, 

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
549 
mixes traditional styles with rock, rap, and reggae.147 Young Hispanic Americans 
bounce between hip-hop and Rock en Español, blend Mexican rice with spaghetti sauce, 
and spread peanut butter and jelly on tortillas.148 In Argentina, Coca-Cola launched 
Nativa, a soft drink flavored with the country’s traditional yerba mate herbal tea, as 
part of a strategy to broaden its portfolio with products it makes from indigenous 
ingredients.149
Rather than ignore the global characteristics of their brands, firms have to manage 
them strategically. That’s critical, because future growth for most companies will come 
from foreign markets. In 2002, developed countries in North America, Europe, and East 
Asia accounted for 15 percent of the world’s population of 6.3 billion. By 2030, according 
to the World Bank, the planet’s population will rise to 9 billion—and 90 percent of these 
people will live in developing countries.
As corporations compete in many markets around the world, the debate intensifies: 
Should an organization develop separate marketing plans for each culture, or should it 
craft a single plan to implement everywhere? Let’s briefly consider each viewpoint.
adopt a Standardized Strategy
As Procter & Gamble strategizes about the best way to speak to consumers around the 
world, the company finds large segments in many countries that share the same outlooks, 
style preferences, and aspirations. These include teenagers, working women who try to 
juggle careers and families, and baby boomers. As the head of P&G’s Global Health and 
Feminine Care division explained, “We’re seeing global tribes forming around the world 
that are more and more interconnected through technology. If you focus on the simi-
larities instead of the differences [in these tribes], key business opportunities emerge.” For 
example, brand managers find that teenage girls everywhere have the same concerns 
and questions about puberty, so the company makes the same content available in 40 
countries.150
Proponents of a standardized marketing strategy argue that many cultures, espe-
cially those of industrialized countries, are now so homogenized that the same approach 
will work throughout the world. If it develops one approach for multiple markets, a com-
pany can benefit from economies of scale, because it does not have to incur the substan-
tial time and expense to develop a separate strategy for each culture.151 This viewpoint 
represents an etic perspective, which focuses on commonalities across cultures. An etic 
approach to a culture is objective and analytical; it reflects impressions of a culture as 
outsiders view it.
adopt a Localized Strategy
Unlike Disney World in Orlando, visitors to the Walt Disney 
Studios theme park at Disneyland Paris don’t hear the voices of 
U.S. movie stars narrating their guided tours. Instead, European 
actors such as Jeremy Irons, Isabella Rossellini, and Nastassja 
Kinski provide commentary in their native tongues.
Disney learned the hard way about the importance of being 
sensitive to local cultures after it opened its Euro Disney Park 
in 1992. The company got slammed because its new location 
didn’t cater to local customs (such as serving wine with meals). Visitors to Euro Disney 
from many countries took offense, even at what seem to be small slights. For example, 
initially the park only sold a French sausage, which drew complaints from Germans, 
Italians, and others who believed their own local versions to be superior. Euro Disney’s 
CEO explained, “When we first launched there was the belief that it was enough to be 
Disney. Now we realize that our guests need to be welcomed on the basis of their own cul-
ture and travel habits.”152
Disney applied the lessons it learned in cultural sensitivity to its newer Hong Kong 
Disneyland. Executives shifted the angle of the front gate by 12 degrees after they 
ObjeCtive 14-10
Products that succeed 
in one culture may fail 
in another if marketers 
fail to understand the 
differences among 
consumers in each place.
Marketing pitfall
The language barrier is 
one obvious problem that 
marketers who wish to 
break into foreign mar-
kets must navigate. Trav-
elers abroad commonly encounter signs in 
tortured English, such as a note to guests at 
a Tokyo hotel that proclaims, “You are invited 
to take advantage of the chambermaid,” a 
notice at a hotel in Acapulco reassuring peo-
ple that “The manager has personally passed 
all the water served here,” or a dry cleaner 
in Majorca who urges passing customers 
to “drop your pants here for best results.” 
Local product names often raise eyebrows 
on visiting Americans who might stumble 
on a Japanese coffee creamer called Creap, 
a Mexican bread named Bimbo, or even a 
Scandinavian product to unfreeze car locks 
named Super Piss.

550 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
consulted a feng shui specialist, who said the change would ensure prosperity for the park. 
Disney also put a bend in the walkway from the train station to the gate to make sure the 
flow of positive energy, or chi, did not slip past the entrance and out to the China Sea. Cash 
registers are close to corners or along walls to increase prosperity. The company burned 
incense as it finished each building, and it picked a lucky day (September 12) for the open-
ing. One of the park’s main ballrooms measures 888 square meters, because eight is a 
lucky number in Chinese culture. And because the Chinese consider the number four bad 
luck, you won’t find any fourth-floor buttons in hotel elevators.
Disney’s experience supports the view of marketers who endorse an emic perspec-
tive that stresses variations across cultures. They feel that each culture is unique, with its 
own value system, conventions, and regulations. This perspective argues that each coun-
try has a national character, a distinctive set of behavior and personality characteris-
tics.153 A marketer must therefore tailor its strategy to the sensibilities of each specific cul-
ture. An emic approach to a culture is subjective and experiential: It attempts to explain a 
culture as insiders experience it.
Sometimes this strategy means that a manufacturer has to modify what it makes or a 
retailer has to change the way it displays the product so that it’s acceptable to local tastes. 
When Walmart started to open stores abroad in the early 1990s, it offered a little piece 
of America to foreign consumers—and that was the problem. It promoted golf clubs in 
soccer-mad Brazil and pushed ice skates in Mexico. It trained its German clerks to smile at 
customers—who thought they were flirting. Now Walmart tries to adapt to local prefer-
ences. Its Chinese stores sell live turtles and snakes and lure shoppers who come on foot or 
bicycle with free shuttle buses and home delivery for refrigerators and other large items.154
In some cases, consumers in one place simply do not like some products that are 
popular elsewhere, or their different lifestyles require companies to rethink their designs. 
IKEA finally realized that Americans use a lot of ice in their drinks and so they didn’t buy 
the smaller European glasses the stores stocked. The Swedish furniture chain also figured 
out that compared to Europeans, Americans sleep in bigger beds, need bigger bookshelves, 
and like to curl up on sofas rather than sit on them.155 Listerine sells an alcohol-free ver-
sion in Muslim countries where spirits are forbidden and a Green Tea–flavored mouth-
wash in Asia. Cheetos come in many flavors around the world that have little to do with 
cheese, including Seaweed (Taiwan), Avocado Salad (Japan), Ketchup (Canada), Masala 
Balls (India), and Strawberry Yogurt (Vietnam).156
So, which perspective is correct, the emic or the etic? As you might guess, the best bet 
probably is a combination of both.161 Some researchers argue that the relevant dimen-
sion to consider is consumer style: A pattern of behaviors, attitudes, and opinions that 
influences all of a person’s consumption activities—including attitudes toward advertis-
ing, preferred channels of information and purchase, brand loyalty, and price conscious-
ness. These researchers identified four major clusters of consumer styles when they looked 
at data from the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany:162
●
●Price-sensitive consumers
●
●Variety seekers
●
●Brand-loyal consumers
●
●Information seekers
Given the sizable variations in tastes within the United States alone, it is hardly sur-
prising that people around the world develop their own unique preferences. Panasonic 
touted the fact that its rice cooker kept food from getting too crisp—until the company 
learned that consumers in the Middle East like to eat their rice this way. Unlike Americans, 
Europeans favor dark chocolate over milk chocolate, which they think of as a children’s 
food. Sara Lee sells its pound cake with chocolate chips in the United States, raisins in 
Australia, and coconut in Hong Kong. Crocodile handbags are popular in Asia and Europe 
but not in the United States.163
One of the most widely used measures of cross-cultural values is an instrument a 
Dutch researcher developed called Hofstede Dimensions of National Culture.164 
One technique marketers use to avoid 
this problem is back-translation in which a 
different interpreter retranslates a translated 
ad back into its original language to catch 
errors. Here are some errors that could have 
used a bit of back-translation:157
●
●Audi calls its sporty electric car the e-
tron. unfortunately, to a french speaker 
the word étron hardly connotes motoring 
sophistication. Instead, it translates as 
“excrement.”158
●
●Kraft foods reorganized recently and 
renamed itself Mondele–z International. 
Monde is french for world in french, and 
delez, with a long E in the final syllable, 
is a play on delish. However, to russians 
the word sounds like a term for oral 
sex.159
●
●The Scandinavian company that makes 
Electrolux vacuum cleaners sold them 
in the united States with this slogan: 
“Nothing sucks like an Electrolux.”
●
●fresca (a soft drink) is Mexican slang 
for lesbian.
●
●ford discovered that a truck model it 
called Fiera means “ugly old woman” in 
Spanish. Its Caliente model is slang for 
a streetwalker. In Brazil, Pinto is a slang 
term for “small male appendage.”
●
●When rolls-royce introduced its Silver 
Mist model in Germany, it found that 
the word mist translates as excrement. 
Similarly, Sunbeam’s hair-curling iron, 
called the Mist-Stick, translates as ma-
nure wand. To add insult to injury, Vicks 
is German slang for sexual intercourse, 
so the company had to change its name 
to Wicks in that country.
●
●IKEA had to explain that the Gutvik chil-
dren’s bunk bed is named “for a tiny town 
in Sweden” after German shoppers noted 
that the name sounded a lot like a phrase 
that means “good f***.” IKEA has yet to 
issue an explanation for its fartfull work-
bench or its Jerker computer table.160

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
551 
This measure scores a country in terms of its standing on six dimensions so that users can 
compare and contrast values:165
●
●Power Distance—The extent to which the less powerful members of organizations 
and institutions (like the family) accept and expect that power is distributed unequally.
●
●Individualism—The degree to which individuals are integrated into groups.
●
●Masculinity—The distribution of roles between the genders.
●
●Uncertainty Avoidance—A society’s tolerance for uncertainty and ambiguity.
●
●Long-Term Orientation—Values associated with long-term orientation are thrift 
and perseverance; values associated with short-term orientation are respect for tradi-
tion, fulfilling social obligations, and protecting one’s “face.”
●
●Indulgence versus Restraint—The extent to which a society allows relatively free 
gratification of basic and natural human drives related to enjoying life and having fun. 
A culture high on restraint suppresses gratification of needs and regulates it by means 
of strict social norms.
These dimensions are useful to marketers that want to understand how members 
of specific cultures may respond quite differently even though they encounter the same 
situations or marketing messages. For example, researchers found that there is a lower 
level of prosocial behavior, such as donating to charities, in countries characterized by 
lower Power Distance. They argue that because people expect and accept greater levels of 
inequality among citizens, they don’t feel as much responsibility to help others.166
An entirely different analysis argued that Spanish consumers score high on the 
Uncertainty Avoidance dimension, which motivates them to avoid new products com-
pared to other Europeans. It underscores the importance of providing “uncertain” 
customers like these with a relatively familiar experience and then gently innovating 
on that, rather than trying to introduce entirely new products. In Spain it is now popu-
lar to drink what the locals call a “gintonic.” Specialty bars serve imaginative varia-
tions of the traditional “gin and tonic” that use tonic flavors like kaffir lime and pink 
peppercorn and gin infused with fresh fruits and spices. Apparently Spaniards consider 
these new offerings “easy to taste” because they are used to bitter-tasting brands of 
sparkling water. As a successful restaurateur explains it, “It’s almost like we’re seeing 
baby steps. Like we’re not ready to take everything at once, but, for now, we’ll try a 
cupcake. And then we’ll try a burger. And then we will try a grapefruit slice in a gin 
and tonic. You take these little bits that, for whatever reason, you are comfortable 
with, and they are your first steps towards becoming multicultural.” Spanish consum-
ers suddenly became the second-highest per capita consumers of gin worldwide (the 
British still hold the title).167
Does Global Marketing Work?
So, what’s the verdict? Does global marketing work or not? Perhaps the more appropriate 
question is, “When does it work?” Although the argument for a homogenous world culture is 
appealing in principle, in practice it hasn’t worked out too well. One reason is that consumers 
in different countries have varying conventions and customs, so they simply do not use prod-
ucts the same way. Kellogg, for example, discovered that in Brazil people don’t typically eat a 
big breakfast; they’re more likely to eat cereal as a dry snack.
Some large corporations, such as Coca-Cola, have successfully crafted a single, interna-
tional image. Still, even the soft-drink giant must make minor modifications to the way it pres-
ents itself in each culture. Although Coke commercials are largely standardized, the company 
permits local agencies to edit them so they highlight close-ups of local faces.168 Coke’s suc-
cessful Share a Coke campaign started in Australia, then expanded to more than 50 countries 
where cans and bottles are imprinted with the most popular names in each place.
To maximize the chances of success for these multicultural efforts, marketers must 
locate consumers in different countries who nonetheless share a common worldview. This 
is more likely to be the case among people whose frame of reference is relatively more 

552 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
international or cosmopolitan, or who receive much of their information about the world 
from sources that incorporate a worldwide perspective. Who is likely to fall into this cat-
egory? Two consumer segments are particularly good candidates: (1) affluent people who 
are “global citizens” and who come into contact with ideas from around the world through 
their travels, business contacts, and media experiences; and (2) young people whose tastes 
in music and fashion are strongly influenced by MTV and other media that broadcast 
many of the same images to multiple countries. For example, viewers of MTV Europe in 
Rome or Zurich can check out the same “buzz clips” as their counterparts in London or 
Luxembourg.169
A large-scale study of consumers in 41 countries identified the characteristics that 
people associate with global brands, and it also measured the relative importance of those 
dimensions when consumers buy products.170 The researchers grouped consumers who 
evaluate global brands in the same way. They identified four major segments:
●
●Global citizens—The largest segment (55 percent of consumers) uses the global suc-
cess of a company as a signal of quality and innovation. At the same time, they are 
concerned about whether companies behave responsibly on issues such as consumer 
health, the environment, and worker rights.
●
●Global dreamers—The second-largest segment, at 23 percent, consists of consumers 
who see global brands as quality products and readily buy into the myths they author. 
They aren’t nearly as concerned with social responsibility as are the global citizens.
●
●Antiglobals—Thirteen percent of consumers are skeptical that transnational com-
panies deliver higher-quality goods. They dislike brands that preach U.S. values, and 
they don’t trust global companies to behave responsibly. They try to avoid doing busi-
ness with transnational firms.
●
●Global agnostics—The remaining 9 percent of consumers don’t base purchase de-
cisions on a brand’s global attributes. Instead, they evaluate a global product by the 
same criteria they use to judge local brands and don’t regard its global nature as merit-
ing special consideration.
MyLab Marketing
To complete the problems with the 
, go to EOC Discussion Questions  
in the MyLab as well as additional Marketing Metrics questions only available  
in MyLab Marketing.
Now that you have finished reading this chapter, you should 
understand why:
1. A culture is a society’s personality.
A society’s culture includes its values, ethics, and the ma-
terial objects its members produce. It is the accumulation 
of shared meanings and traditions among members of a 
society. We describe a culture in terms of ecology (the way 
people adapt to their habitat), its social structure, and its 
ideology (including moral and aesthetic principles).
2. We distinguish between high culture and low culture.
Social scientists distinguish between high (or elite) 
forms and low (or popular) forms of  culture. Products 
ChApter SummAry
of  popular culture tend to follow a cultural formula 
and contain predictable components. However, these 
distinctions blur in modern society as marketers in-
creasingly incorporate imagery from “high art” to sell 
everyday products.
3. myths are stories that express a culture’s values, and 
in modern times marketing messages convey these 
values to members of the culture.
Myths are stories with symbolic elements that express the 
shared ideals of a culture. Many myths involve a binary op-
position, defining values in terms of what they are and what 
they are not (e.g., nature versus technology). Advertising, 
movies, and other media transmit modern myths.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
553 
4. many of our consumption activities—including holiday 
observances, grooming, and gift-giving—are rituals.
A ritual is a set of multiple, symbolic behaviors that occur 
in a fixed sequence and that we repeat periodically. Ritual 
is related to many consumption activities that occur in 
popular culture. These include holiday observances, gift-
giving, and grooming.
A rite of passage is a special kind of ritual that marks 
the transition from one role to another. These passages 
typically entail the need to acquire ritual artifacts to facili-
tate the transition. Modern rites of passage include gradu-
ations, fraternity initiations, weddings, debutante balls, 
and funerals.
5. We describe products as either sacred or profane, and 
it’s not unusual for some products to move back and 
forth between the two categories.
We divide consumer activities into sacred and profane 
domains. Sacred phenomena are “set apart” from ev-
eryday activities or products. Sacralization occurs when 
we set apart everyday people, events, or objects from the 
ordinary. Objectification occurs when we ascribe sacred 
qualities to products or items that sacred people once 
owned. Desacralization occurs when formerly sacred ob-
jects or activities become part of the everyday, as when 
companies reproduce “one-of-a-kind” works of art in 
large quantities.
6. New products, services, and ideas spread through a 
population over time. Different types of people are 
more or less likely to adopt them during this diffusion 
process.
Diffusion of innovation refers to the process whereby a 
new product, service, or idea spreads through a popula-
tion. Innovators and early adopters are quick to adopt new 
products, and laggards are slow. A consumer’s decision 
to adopt a new product depends on his or her personal 
characteristics as well as on characteristics of the innova-
tion itself. We are more likely to adopt a new product if 
it demands relatively little behavioral change, is easy to 
understand, and provides a relative advantage compared 
to existing products.
7. many people and organizations play a role in the fashion 
system that creates and communicates symbolic 
meanings to consumers.
The fashion system includes everyone involved in creat-
ing and transferring symbolic meanings. Many differ-
ent products express common cultural categories (e.g., 
gender distinctions). Many people tend to adopt a new 
style simultaneously in a process of collective selec-
tion. According to meme theory, ideas spread through 
a population in a geometric progression much as a virus 
infects many people until it reaches epidemic propor-
tions. Other perspectives on motivations for adopting 
new styles include psychological, economic, and socio-
logical models of fashion.
8. Fashions follow cycles and reflect cultural dynamics.
The styles prevalent in a culture at any point in time reflect 
underlying political and social conditions. We term the 
set of agents responsible for creating stylistic alternatives 
a culture production system. Factors such as the types of 
people involved in this system and the amount of compe-
tition by alternative product forms influence the choices 
that eventually make their way to the marketplace for con-
sideration by end consumers.
Fashions follow cycles that resemble the product life 
cycle. We distinguish between two extremes of fashion 
adoption, classics and fads, in terms of the length of this 
cycle.
9. Western (and particularly u.S.) culture has a huge 
impact around the world, although people in other 
countries don’t necessarily ascribe the same meanings 
to products as we do.
The United States is a net exporter of popular culture. 
Consumers around the world eagerly adopt U.S. prod-
ucts, especially entertainment vehicles and items they link 
to a U.S. lifestyle (e.g., Marlboro cigarettes, Levi’s jeans). 
Despite the continuing “Americanization” of world cul-
ture, some people resist globalization because they fear it 
will dilute their own local cultures. In other cases, they 
exhibit creolization as they integrate these products with 
existing cultural practices.
10. products that succeed in one culture may fail in 
another if marketers fail to understand the differences 
among consumers in each place.
Because a consumer’s culture exerts such a big influence 
on his or her lifestyle choices, marketers must learn as 
much as possible about differences in cultural norms and 
preferences when they do business in more than one coun-
try. One important issue is the extent to which we need to 
tailor our marketing strategies to each culture. Followers 
of an etic perspective believe that people in many cultures 
appreciate the same universal messages. Believers in an 
emic perspective argue that individual cultures are too 
unique to permit such standardization; marketers must in-
stead adapt their approaches to local values and practices. 
Attempts at global marketing have met with mixed suc-
cess. In many cases this approach is more likely to work if 
the messages appeal to basic values or if the target markets 
consist of consumers who are internationally rather than 
locally oriented.

554 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Acceptance cycles, 544
Antifestival, 530
Art product, 519
Back-translation, 550
Binary opposition, 522
Brand immigrants, 543
Brand tourists, 543
Classic, 544
Collecting, 534
Compatibility, 539
Complexity, 540
Conditioned superstition, 521
Consumer fairy tales, 523
Consumer style, 550
Contamination, 533
Continuous innovation, 539
Cooptation, 516
Craft product, 519
Creolization, 548
Cultural formula, 521
Cultural gatekeepers, 519
Cultural selection, 518
Culture, 515
Culture production system (CPS), 518
Desacralization, 536
Diffusion of innovations, 537
Discontinuous innovation, 539
Dynamically continuous innovation, 539
Early adopters, 538
Ecology, 515
Emic perspective, 550
Erogenous zones, 541
Etic perspective, 549
Fad, 544
Fashion, 540
Fashion system, 540
Fortress brands, 526
Gestation, 529
Gift-giving ritual, 528
Global consumer culture, 547
Grooming rituals, 528
Hoarding, 534
Hofstede Dimensions of National 
Culture, 550
Ideology, 516
Innovation, 537
Innovators, 538
Laggards, 538
Late adopters, 538
Locavore, 516
M-PESA, 539
Meme theory, 543
Myth, 522
National character, 550
Normcore, 540
Objectification, 533
Observability, 540
Paradox of fashion, 542
Presentation, 529
Prestige–exclusivity effect, 542
Profane consumption, 533
Reciprocity norm, 529
Reformulation, 529
Relative advantage, 540
Reverse innovation, 539
Rites of passage, 531
Ritual, 523
Ritual artifacts, 524
Ritual script, 524
Sacralization, 533
Sacred consumption, 533
Snob effect, 542
Social structure, 516
Street art, 520
Technology Acceptance  
Model (TAM), 539
Tipping point, 544
Trialability, 540
Trickle-across effect, 543
Trickle-down theory, 543
Trickle-up effect, 543
Key termS
revieW
 14-1 What is culture? List three dimensions that social scientists 
use to describe a culture and give an example of each.
 14-2 A myth is a special kind of story. What makes it special? 
What is an example of a modern myth?
 14-3 How might a consumer behave if they exhibited signs of 
conditioned superstition?
 14-4 What is a ritual? Describe three kinds of rituals and pro-
vide an example of each.
 14-5 List the three stages of a rite of passage ritual.
 14-6 What is the difference between sacred and profane con-
sumption? Provide one example of each.
 14-7 How is a collection sacred? What is the difference 
between collecting and hoarding?
 14-8 What is collective selection? Give an example.
 14-9 Describe a culture production system and list its three 
components.
 14-10 Define a cultural gatekeeper, and give three examples.
 14-11 Describe the difference between arts and crafts.
 14-12 What is a cultural formula? Give an example.
 14-13 What are the two factors that underpin the technology 
acceptance model?
 14-14 What are the differences among fashion, a fashion, and in 
fashion?
 14-15 Summarize some of the major approaches we can use to 
understand fashion from the perspectives of psycholo-
gists, economists, and sociologists.
 14-16 What is an example of a meme?
 14-17 What is the trickle-down effect? List some reasons why 
this theory is no longer as valid as it used to be.
 14-18 What is the difference between a fad, a fashion, and a 
classic fashion life cycle?

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
555 
 14-19 Is it possible for a commercial building or attraction 
to attain a status that borders on the sacred? Give an 
example from your own country or region.
 14-20 Illustrate the concepts of separation, liminality, and 
aggregation in relation to your own specific culture. Are 
the concepts readily applicable?
 14-21 Some products can be classified as being either sacred or 
profane. It is not usual for some products to move back 
and forth between the two categories. Why?
 14-22 How could packaging design be used to suggest the 
binary opposition of natural and processed foods?
 14-23 There is a tradition, particularly in subcultures, of hav-
ing to go through some kind of entry rite at some point 
of time. Identify an example from your own country to 
illustrate this process.
 14-24 Religious festivals and ceremonies are not immune to 
marketing. Many have become another opportunity for 
businesses to make sales. To what extent is this true? 
Give reasons for your answer.
 14-25 Bridal registries specify clearly the gifts that the 
couple wants. How do you feel about this practice? 
Should people actually specify what you should buy 
for them, or should a gift be a more personal expres-
sion from you?
 14-26 When a couple marry, the choice of gift is commonly 
either chosen from a wedding list or is a sum of money, 
often determined by culture. How does this work in 
your country?
 14-27 Movie companies often conduct market research when 
they produce big-budget films. If necessary, they will 
reshoot part of a movie when viewers say they don’t like 
it. Some people oppose this practice: They claim that mov-
ies, like books, songs, plays, and other artistic endeavors, 
should not conform to what the market wants, lest they 
sacrifice their integrity. What do you think?
 14-28 Boots with 6-inch heels were a fashion rage among 
young Japanese women a few years ago. Several teens 
died after they tripped over their shoes and fractured 
their skulls. However, followers of the style claimed 
they were willing to risk twisted ankles, broken bones, 
bruised faces, and other dangers the platform shoes 
caused. One teenager said, “I’ve fallen and twisted my 
ankle many times, but they are so cute that I won’t give 
them up until they go out of fashion.”171 Many consum-
ers around the world seem willing to suffer for the sake 
of fashion. Others argue that we are merely pawns in 
the hands of designers, who conspire to force unwieldy 
fashions down our throats. What do you think? What is 
and what should be the role of fashion in our society? 
How important is it for people to be in style? What are 
the pros and cons of keeping up with the latest fashions? 
Do you believe that we are at the mercy of designers?
CONSumer BehAviOr ChAlleNge
●
■DiSCuSS
●
■appLY
 14-29 Cristiano Ronaldo is one of the world’s greatest foot-
ballers, but he may also be one of the most supersti-
tious.172 The Real Madrid star has built up a series of 
rituals that he insists on following while playing a game. 
He always steps on the pitch leading with his right foot. 
He always insists on wearing long-sleeve shirts regard-
less of the weather conditions. He always makes sure 
that he is the last member of his team to step onto the 
pitch, unless he is captaining the side (in which case he 
must be first). When traveling to and from a game, he 
demands to be seated at the front of an aircraft, but at 
the back of a coach or bus. 
Many of us adopt strange superstitious rituals. Ask 
some people you know about their rituals. How did they 
develop? What do they fear might happen if they are not 
followed?
 14-30 Interview people you know who collect some kind 
of object. How do they organize and describe their 
collections? Do you see any evidence of sacred versus 
profane distinctions?
 14-31 Ask friends to describe an incident in which they 
received a gift they thought was inappropriate. Why did 
they feel this way, and how did this event influence the 
relationship between them and the gift giver?
 14-32 How might the rise of peer-to-peer music sharing influ-
ence the structure of the music CPS? One guess is that 
this method erodes the dominance of the big labels 
because listeners are more likely to access music from 
lesser-known groups. Survey your friends to determine 
whether this in fact is happening. Do they listen to a 
wider variety of artists, or simply download more from 
the big-time groups?
 14-33 Identify examples of high or low culture from your 
country or region in terms of music, art, literature, and 
TV entertainment. Which cultural formulae can be 
used to distinguish them?

556 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
 14-34 U.S. television inspires knockoffs around the world. 
But to be fair, many U.S. viewers don’t realize that U.S. 
reality show hits such as Big Brother and American Idol 
started out as European concepts that U.S. producers 
imported. In fact, the U.K. version of Big Brother briefly 
went off the air after a fight broke out and housemates 
threatened to kill each other.173 In contrast, a Malay-
sian show that borrows the American Idol format is 
called Imam Muda (Young Leader). Contestants debate 
religious topics and recite passages from the Koran. The 
winner doesn’t get a recording contract. Instead, he 
receives a job as an imam, or religious leader; a scholar-
ship to study in Saudi Arabia; and an all-expenses-paid 
pilgrimage to Mecca, Islam’s holiest city.174 See if you 
can identify foreign versions of familiar reality shows. 
You should be able to find them online. How have the 
creators of these programs adapted them to appeal to 
local customs?
Through its research, IKEA pays special attention to the 
subtle differences that are so important in international market-
ing. It also takes its time to develop strategy. For instance, it’s 
taken the company 6 years to move into South Korea, but even 
with that kind of lead time mistakes were still made; for instance 
a map mislabeled what South Koreans call the East Sea as the 
Sea of Japan.
Much of IKEA’s recent international growth has been built 
on the growing middle-class markets in emerging markets, 
which was a logical step for IKEA. It has always excelled at 
creating a sense of fantasy for customers who visit its stores. 
Tom Novak describes it as a creation of “domestic tableaux 
and scenes from a home life we imagine living.” In his Trend and 
Tonic post he describes how “these fantasies of new living are 
crucial for emerging global powers like China, India, and Brazil 
who all have rising middle classes.” IKEA is carefully tracking 
the growth of the middle class in these markets and has opened 
stores in countries like Croatia, Indonesia, Thailand, and China. 
In fact China is the market where it is experiencing the fastest 
growth and which has eight of the largest stores.
Novak argues that IKEA’s minimalism translates well across 
cultures because its simple furniture is chic yet practical. He also 
suggests that Sweden as the “country of origin” for the IKEA 
concept may enjoy the unique ability to appeal politically or 
ideologically to other cultures. It may be seen as able to fill a void 
for international consumers who are drawn to the Western fan-
tasy but who want to avoid Western controversy. In fact, prod-
ucts retain their Swedish names in markets around the world as 
a way to build on the positives of IKEA’s brand identity.
Although IKEA may work hard to keep a more universal 
product approach, when it comes to its catalogs it defers to 
adaptation of language and culture. The company prints 212 
million catalogs a year. Kowitt reports that catalogs come in 32 
languages and 67 versions, which enables the company to do 
a better job of reflecting local customers and customs. Photo 
shoots for the catalogs are all done in a studio in Sweden where 
mArKetiNg the iKeA FANtASy ArOuND 
the WOrlD
Companies who market internationally often have to work hard 
to find an effective and profitable balance between standardizing 
their marketing strategies while still reflecting an understand-
ing of the unique characteristics and consumer behavior pres-
ent in those markets.
IKEA, the Swedish furniture and furnishings company, is a 
good example of a retailer trying to find that sweet spot between 
standardization and adaptation. Its unique mission is to “create 
a better everyday life for the many people,” in particular, helping 
consumers with “thin wallets,” to be able to afford stylish furni-
ture and home furnishings, as the store describes its niche. The 
company has 370 stores in 47 countries worldwide and a goal 
of 500 stores by 2020. To put its international footprint into 
perspective, IKEA has stores in more countries than Walmart 
and these are more profitable than Target and Lowe’s. In Beth 
Kowitt’s Fortune article “How IKEA Took Over the World,” the 
company is recognized as having mastered one of the hardest 
retail challenges: selling high volumes of inventory at a consis-
tently low price in vastly different marketplaces, languages, and 
cultures. How have they achieved a successful balance between 
standardization and adaptation in their international markets?
First of all, the company credits marketing research for 
much of its success. Mikael Ydholm, head of research, says 
“The more far away we go from our culture, the more we need 
to understand, learn, and adapt.” At the same time it must look 
for points where cultures intersect. With a focus on volume 
production, IKEA does not want to have to adapt its products 
for each country market. But it has figured out how to show the 
same product working into the lifestyles of different locations 
around the world. By visiting the homes of consumers in differ-
ent countries it has uncovered the similarities and differences 
in how consumers around the world use and interact with 
IKEA products.
●■Case Study 

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
557 
DiSCuSSiON QueStiONS
CS  14-1 Discuss how IKEA’s approach has helped you to better 
understand the debate that exists between standard-
ization compared with adaptation for international 
markets.
CS  14-2 Compare and contrast two countries according to 
the Hofstede cultural model using the online tool 
at http://geert-hofstede.com/countries.html. How 
might this tool help a company like IKEA do a better 
job of marketing in each country?
CS  14-3 The text talks about the difference between low and 
high culture. Is IKEA trying to position its brand to be 
one or the other? Would this be different depending 
on the country location?
Sources: Tom Novak, “IKEA: Brand of Fantasies,” June 23, 2015, http://tren 
dandtonic.thefuturescompany.com/ikea-brand-of-fantasies/, accessed June 
26, 2015; Beth Kowitt, “How IKEA Took Over the World,” March 15, 2015, 
http://fortune.com/ikea-world-domination/, accessed June 28, 2015; Steve 
Burt, Asa Thelander, and Ulf Johansson, “Standardized Marketing Strategies 
in Retailing? IKEA’s Marketing Strategies in Sweden, the UK, and China,” 
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services (May 2011), http://www.research 
gate.net/profile/Steve_Burt/publication/223947182_Standardized_market-
ing_strategies_in_retailing_IKEAs_marketing_strategies_in_Sweden_the_
UK_and_China/links/09e41511d21b1ca3e8000000.pdf, 
accessed 
June 
25, 2015; http://franchisor.ikea.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/IKEA-
2014_IKEA-retailing-facts-and-figures.pdf, accessed June 20, 2015.
an employee is responsible for making sure that shots taken of 
each room set-up are appropriate and culturally sensitive for 
each of the different catalog versions being produced. For in-
stance, they want to ensure that the Taiwanese catalog doesn’t 
feature glass products from mainland China and that Israel’s 
catalogs don’t picture Persian rugs.
The company admits that it has made cultural faux pas in 
the past with its catalog, like photoshopping women out of cata-
logs for Saudi Arabia and removing a lesbian couple from a ver-
sion for Russia. IKEA Communications officer Kajsa Orvarson 
says, “We have done mistakes, but we are becoming more and 
more aware of how to improve and to share our values.”
IKEA has reexamined other aspects of its interational mar-
keting strategy as well. For instance, the Chinese market re-
quired some interesting adaptations. IKEA redesigned in-store 
vignettes to more closely resemble Chinese rooms and kitchens, 
reconfigured the length of sofas to better fit the dimensions of 
Chinese apartments, located stores closer to city centers and 
public transportation, and lowered prices through local product 
sourcing. In addition, Chinese consumers are not used to as-
sembling things themselves, so they typically hire cheap local la-
bor to do it for them. IKEA has had to educate customers about 
assembling the furniture and persuade them that it is worth it 
in a market with low-cost competitors who typically include as-
sembly in their price.
MyLab Marketing
Go to the Assignments section of your MyLab to complete these writing exercises.
 14-35 Identify the ritual elements of a football game.
 14-36 The chapter states that a culture is a society’s personality. If your culture were a 
person, how would you describe its personality traits?
NOteS
 
7. Craig Thompson and Gokcen Coskuner-Balli, “Countervailing Market 
Responses to Corporate Co-optation and the Ideological Recruitment of 
Consumption Communities,” Journal of Consumer Research 34 (August 
2007): 135–152.
 
8. Grant McCracken, “Culture and Consumption: A Theoretical Account of 
the Structure and Movement of the Cultural Meaning of Consumer Goods,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 13 (June 1986): 71–84.
 
9. Richard A. Peterson, “The Production of Culture: A Prolegomenon,” in Richard 
A. Peterson, ed., The Production of Culture, Sage Contemporary Social Science Issues 
33 (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 1976); Elizabeth C. Hirschman, “Resource Exchange 
in the Production and Distribution of a Motion Picture,” Empirical Studies of the 
Arts 8, no. 1 (1990): 31–51; Michael R. Solomon, “Building Up and Breaking 
Down: The Impact of Cultural Sorting on Symbolic Consumption,” in J. Sheth 
and E. C. Hirschman, eds., Research in Consumer Behavior (Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press, 1988): 325–351. For a study that looked at ways consumers interact 
with marketers to create cultural meanings, cf. Lisa Peñaloza, “Consuming the 
American West: Animating Cultural Meaning and Memory at a Stock Show 
and Rodeo,” Journal of Consumer Research 28 (December 2001): 369–398. 
Cf. also Markus Giesler, “Conflict and Compromise: Drama in Marketplace 
Evolution,” Journal of Consumer Research 34 (April 2007): 739–753.
 10. Richard A. Peterson and D. G. Berger, “Entrepreneurship in Organizations: 
Evidence from the Popular Music Industry,” Administrative Science Quarterly 
16 (1971): 97–107.
 11. Ben Sisario, “In Beyoncé Deal, Pepsi Focuses on Collaboration,” New 
York Times (December 9, 2012), http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/10/ 
 
1. Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Basic Books, 1973); 
Marvin Harris, Culture, People and Nature (New York: Crowell, 1971);  
John F. Sherry, Jr., “The Cultural Perspective in Consumer Research,” in 
Richard J. Lutz, ed., Advances in Consumer Research 13 (Provo, UT: Association 
for Consumer Research, 1985): 573–575.
 
2. William Lazer, Shoji Murata, and Hiroshi Kosaka, “Japanese Marketing: 
Towards a Better Understanding,” Journal of Marketing 49 (Spring 1985): 
69–81.
 
3. Celia W. Dugger, “Modestly, India Goes for a Public Swim,” New York Times 
(March 5, 2000), www.nytimes.com, accessed March 5, 2000; cf. also Marius 
K. Luedicke, Craig J. Thompson, and Markus Giesler, “Consumer Identity 
Work as Moral Protagonism: How Myth and Ideology Animate a Brand-
Mediated Moral Conflict,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 6 (2010): 
1016–1032.
 
4. http://www.krunkgrillz.com/CategoryItems.aspx?CategoryIDX=1, accessed 
April 22, 2015; http://www.hiphopbling.com/, accessed April 22, 2015.
 
5. Marc Spiegler, “Marketing Street Culture: Bringing Hip-Hop Style to the 
Mainstream,” American Demographics (November 1996): 29–34.
 
6. Damon Sajnani, “HipHop’s Origins as Organic Decolonization,” Decolonization 
.org (April 2, 2015), https://decolonization.wordpress.com/2015/04/02/hi 
phops-origins-as-organic-decolonization/, accessed April 22, 2015; Elizabeth 
M. Blair, “Commercialization of the Rap Music Youth Subculture,” Journal of 
Popular Culture 27 (Winter 1993): 21–34; Basil G. Englis, Michael R. Solomon, 
and Anna Olofsson, “Consumption Imagery in Music Television: A Bi-Cultural 
Perspective,” Journal of Advertising 22 (December 1993): 21–34.

558 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
Stansfield Tetreault and Robert E. Kleine, III, “Ritual, Ritualized Behavior, 
and Habit: Refinements and Extensions of the Consumption Ritual 
Construct,” in Marvin Goldberg, Gerald Gorn, and Richard W. Pollay, eds., 
Advances in Consumer Research 17 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1990): 31–38.
 38. Kathleen D. Vohs, Yajin Wang, Francesca Gino, and Michael I. Norton, 
“Rituals Enhance Consumption,” Psychological Science 24, no. 9 (2013): 
1714–1721.
 39. Deborah Ball, “British Drinkers of Guinness Say They’d Rather Take It 
Slow,” Wall Street Journal (May 22, 2003), www.wsj.com, accessed May 
22, 2003.
 40. For a study that looked specifically at rituals pertaining to birthday par-
ties, see Cele Otnes and Mary Ann McGrath, “Ritual Socialization and the 
Children’s Birthday Party: The Early Emergence of Gender Differences,” 
Journal of Ritual Studies 8 (Winter 1994): 73–93.
 41. Natalie Angier, “The Changing American Family,” New York Times, 
November 25, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/26/health/fami-
lies.html?_r=0, accessed February 20, 2015.
 42. Ashley Hoffman, “I Now Present Mr. and Mrs. Jetson,” New York Times  (January 
23, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/26/fashion/weddings/i-now- 
present-mr-and-mrs-jetson.html, accessed February 23, 2015.
 43. Jenn Grabenstetter, “The Bizarre Origins of 8 Wedding Traditions,” Mental  
Floss (June 23, 2008), http://mentalfloss.com/article/18915/bizarre-origins 
-8-wedding-traditions, accessed April 23, 2015; “Against the Grain,” Snopes 
.com, http://www.snopes.com/critters/crusader/birdrice.asp, accessed 
April 23, 2015.
 44. Emily Shire, “5 Weirdest Naked College Traditions,” The Week (September 27, 
2013), http://theweek.com/articles/459469/5-weirdest-naked-college- 
traditions, accessed April 22, 2015; Stan Beck and Jack Wilkinson, College 
Sports Traditions: Picking Up Butch, Silent Night, and Hundreds of Others 
(Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2013).
 45. Nancy Keates and Charles Passy, “Tailgating, Inc.,” Wall Street Journal 
(August 29, 2003), www.wsj.com, accessed August 29, 2003; www.tail 
gating.com, accessed April 24, 2015.
 46. Karl Greenberg, “BBDO: Successful Brands Become Hard Habit for Con-
sumers to Break,” Marketing Daily (May 14, 2007), www.mediapost.com, 
accessed May 14, 2007.
 47. Virginia Postrel, “From Weddings to Football, the Value of Communal 
Activities,” New York Times (April 25, 2002), www.nytimes.com, accessed 
April 25, 2002.
 48. Paul Henry and Marylouise Caldwell, “Headbanging as Resistance or 
Refuge: A Cathartic Account,” Consumption, Markets, and Culture, 10 (June 
2007): 159–174.
 49. Dennis Rook, “The Ritual Dimension of Consumer Behavior,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 12 (1985): 251–264.
 50. Cele C. Otnes, Behice Ece Ilhan, and Atul Anil Kulkarni, “The Language of 
Marketplace Rituals: Implications for Customer Experience Management,” 
Journal of Retailing 88 (2012): 367–383.
 51. Dennis W. Rook and Sidney J. Levy, “Psychosocial Themes in Consumer 
Grooming Rituals,” in Richard P. Bagozzi and Alice M. Tybout, eds., 
Advances in Consumer Research 10 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1983): 329–333.
 52. Quoted in Andrew Adam Newman, “Depilatory Market Moves Far Beyond 
the Short-Shorts Wearers,” New York Times (September 14, 2007), www 
.nytimes.com, accessed September 14, 2007.
 53. Diane Barthel, Putting on Appearances: Gender and Advertising (Philadelphia: 
Temple University Press, 1988).
 54. Russell W. Belk, Melanie Wallendorf, and John F. Sherry, Jr., “The Sacred and 
the Profane in Consumer Behavior: Theodicy on the Odyssey,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 16 (June 1989): 1–38; Jean-Sebastien Marcoux, “Escap-
ing the Gift Economy,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, no. 4 (December 
2009): 671–685.
 55. Markus Giesler and Mali Pohlmann, “The Anthropology of File Sharing: 
Consuming Napster as a Gift,” in Punam Anand Keller and Dennis W. 
Rook, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 30 (Provo, UT: Association for 
Consumer Research 2003); Markus Giesler, “Consumer Gift Systems,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 33, no. 2 (2006): 283.
 56. Jill G. Klein and Tina M. Lowrey, “Giving and Receiving Humanity: Gifts 
among Prisoners in Nazi Concentration Camps,” Advances in Consumer 
Research 33, no. 1 (2006): 659.
 57. Suri Weisfeld-Spolter, Cindy B. Rippé, and Stephen Gould, “Impact of Giving on 
Self and Impact of Self on Giving,” Psychology & Marketing 32, no. 1 (2015): 
1–14; Tina M. Lowrey, Cele C. Otnes, and Julie A. Ruth, “Social Influences on 
Dyadic Giving over Time: A Taxonomy from the Giver’s Perspective,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 30 (March 2004): 547–558; Russell W. Belk and Gregory 
S. Coon, “Gift Giving as Agapic Love: An Alternative to the Exchange Paradigm 
Based on Dating Experiences,” Journal of Consumer Research 20 (December 
1993): 393–417. See also Cele Otnes, Tina M. Lowrey, and Young Chan Kim, 
“Gift Selection for Easy and Difficult Recipients: A Social Roles Interpretation,” 
business/media/in-beyonce-deal-pepsi-focuses-on-collaboration.html? 
smid=tw-nytimesmusic&seid=auto&_r=1&, accessed February 16, 2013.
 12. Paul M. Hirsch, “Processing Fads and Fashions: An Organizational Set 
Analysis of Cultural Industry Systems,” American Journal of Sociology 77, 
no. 4 (1972): 639–659; Russell Lynes, The Tastemakers (New York: Harper 
& Brothers, 1954); Michael R. Solomon, “The Missing Link: Surrogate 
Consumers in the Marketing Chain,” Journal of Marketing 50 (October 
1986): 208–219.
 13. Howard S. Becker, “Arts and Crafts,” American Journal of Sociology 83 
(January 1987): 862–889.
 14. Herbert J. Gans, “Popular Culture in America: Social Problem in a Mass 
Society or Social Asset in a Pluralist Society?” in Howard S. Becker, ed., 
Social Problems: A Modern Approach (New York: Wiley, 1966).
 15. http://thomaskinkade.com/, accessed April 24, 2015; Karen Breslau, 
“Paint by Numbers,” Newsweek (May 13, 2002): 48.
 16. Luca M. Visconti, John F. Sherry Jr., Stefania Borghini, and Laurel 
Anderson, “Street Art, Sweet Art? Reclaiming the ‘Public’ in Public Place,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 37, no. 3 (2010): 511–529.
 17. Annetta Miller, “Shopping Bags Imitate Art: Seen the Sacks? Now Visit the 
Museum Exhibit,” Newsweek (January 23, 1989): 44.
 18. Kim Foltz, “New Species for Study: Consumers in Action,” New York Times 
(December 18, 1989): A1.
 19. Adam K. Raymond, “How Unoriginal Is Hollywood? Very—and We’ve 
Got the Stats to Prove It,” Yahoo! (November 4, 2014), Yahoo!, https://
www.yahoo.com/movies/how-unoriginal-is-hollywood-very-and-weve-
got-the-101773800642.html, accessed February 16, 2015.
 20. Arthur A. Berger, Signs in Contemporary Culture: An Introduction to Semiotics 
(New York: Longman, 1984).
 21. Adam Popescu, “Why Write Your Own Book When An Algorithm Can Do 
It For You?,” Readwrite (January 15, 2013), http://readwrite.com/2013/ 
01/15/why-write-your-own-book-when-an-algorithm-can-do-it-for-you, 
accessed April 23, 2015.
 22. http://www.vintagedancer.com/1920s/1920-downton-abbey-inspired-
clothing/, accessed April 22, 2015; Michiko Kakutani, “Art Is Easier the  
2d Time Around,” New York Times (October 30, 1994): E4.
 23. Cf. Karen V. Fernandez and John L. Lastovicka, “Making Magic: Fetishes in 
Contemporary Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 2 (2011): 
278–299.
 24. E. J. Hamerman and G. V. Johar, “Conditioned Superstition: Desire for Control 
and Consumer Brand Preferences,” Journal of Consumer Research 40, no. 3 
(2013), 428–443.
 25. Molly O’Neill, “As Life Gets More Complex, Magic Casts a Wider Spell,” New 
York Times (June 13, 1994): A1.
 26. Susannah Meadows, “Who’s Afraid of the Big Bad Werewolf?,” Newsweek 
(August 26, 2002): 57.
 27. Conrad Phillip Kottak, “Anthropological Analysis of Mass Enculturation,” 
in Conrad P. Kottak, ed., Researching American Culture (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 1982), 40–74; cf. also Teresa Davis and Olga 
Kravets, “Bridges to Displaced Meaning: The Reinforcing Roles of Myth 
and Marketing in Russian Vodka Labels,” Advances in Consumer Research 
32, no. 1 (2005): 480.
 28. Eric Ransdell, “The Nike Story? Just Tell It!” Fast Company (January–-
February 2000): 44.
 29. Joseph Campbell, Myths, Dreams, and Religion (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1970).
 30. Claude Lévi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology (Harmondsworth, England: 
Peregrine, 1977).
 31. Tina Lowrey and Cele C. Otnes, “Consumer Fairy Tales and the Perfect 
Christmas,” in Cele C. Otnes and Tina M. Lowrey, eds., Contemporary 
Consumption Rituals: A Research Anthology (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum, 2003).
 32. “Wedding Dresses Fit for a (Disney) Princess,” CBS News, http://www 
.cbsnews.com/pictures/disney-princess-wedding-gowns, accessed April 22,  
2015; Merissa Marr, “Fairy-Tale Wedding? Disney can Supply the Gown,” 
Wall Street Journal (February 22, 2007): B1.
 33. Elizabeth C. Hirschman, “Movies as Myths: An Interpretation of Motion 
Picture Mythology,” in Jean Umiker-Sebeok, ed., Marketing and Semiotics: 
New Directions in the Study of Signs for Sale (Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 
1987), 335–374.
 34. See William Blake Tyrrell, “Star Trek as Myth and Television as 
Mythmaker,” in Jack Nachbar, Deborah Weiser, and John L. Wright, eds., 
The Popular Culture Reader (Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green University 
Press, 1978): 79–88.
 35. Bernie Whalen, “Semiotics: An Art or Powerful Marketing Research Tool?” 
Marketing News (May 13, 1983): 8.
 36. Eduardo Porter, “New ‘Got Milk?’ TV Commercials Try to Entice Hispanic 
Teenagers,” Wall Street Journal (December 28, 2001), www.wsj.com, ac-
cessed December 28, 2001.
 37. See Dennis W. Rook, “The Ritual Dimension of Consumer Behavior,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 12 (December 1985): 251–264; Mary A. 

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
559 
.com/home/post/2013/08/15/Nike-Pulls-Tattoo-Line-081514.aspx, accessed  
February 16, 2015.
 77. “Queen Prompts Thailand to Restrict ‘Coyote Ugly’ Dance Troupes,” New 
York Times (December 28, 2006), www.nytimes.com, accessed December 
28, 2006.
 78. http://www.sportsmemorabilia.com/sports-memorabilia/football-game-
used/, accessed April 23, 2015; J. C. Conklin, “Web Site Caters to Cowboy 
Fans by Selling Sweaty, Used Socks,” Wall Street Journal (April 21, 2000), 
www.wsj.com, accessed April 21, 2000.
 79. http://americanhistory.si.edu/press/fact-sheets/ruby-slippers, accessed April 
23, 2015; George E. Newman, Gil Diesendruck, and Paul Bloom, “Celebrity 
Contagion and the Value of Objects,” Journal of Consumer Research 38, no. 2 
(August 2011): 215–228.
 80. Dan L. Sherrell, Alvin C. Burns, and Melodie R. Phillips, “Fixed Consumption 
Behavior: The Case of Enduring Acquisition in a Product Category,” in 
Robert L. King, ed., Developments in Marketing Science 14 (1991): 36–40.
 81. Anne Underwood, “Hoarders Pack It In,” Newsweek (July 26, 2004): 12.
 82. Russell W. Belk, “Acquiring, Possessing, and Collecting: Fundamental 
Processes in Consumer Behavior,” in Ronald F. Bush and Shelby D. Hunt, 
eds., Marketing Theory: Philosophy of Science Perspectives (Chicago: American 
Marketing Association, 1982): 85–90.
 83. Ruth Ann Smith, Collecting as Consumption: A Grounded Theory of Collecting 
Behavior (unpublished manuscript, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, 1994): 14.
 84. For a discussion of these perspectives, see Smith, Collecting as Consumption.
 85. John Branch, “Yankees Grass Is Now a Brand,” New York Times (March 21, 
2009), www.nytimes.com/2009/03/22/sports/baseball/22grass.html?scp= 
1&sq=Yankees%20Grass%20Is%20Now%20a%20Brand&st=cse, accessed 
March 21, 2009.
 86. Kottak, “Anthropological Analysis of Mass Enculturation.”
 87. Joan Kron, Home-Psych: The Social Psychology of Home and Decoration (New 
York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1983); Gerry Pratt, “The House as an Expression 
of Social Worlds,” in James S. Duncan, ed., Housing and Identity: Cross-
Cultural Perspectives (London: Croom Helm, 1981): 135–179; Michael 
R. Solomon, “The Role of the Surrogate Consumer in Service Delivery,” 
Service Industries Journal 7 (July 1987): 292–307.
 88. Grant McCracken, “‘Homeyness’: A Cultural Account of One Constellation 
of Goods and Meanings,” in Elizabeth C. Hirschman, ed., Interpretive 
Consumer Research (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 1989): 
168–184.
 89. Karen Mizoguchi, “Keeping Up with Kimye! Two Fans of Kim Kardashian 
and Kanye West Imitate the Fashion Icons by Posting Identical Outfit 
Pictures on Their Blog,” Daily Mail (October 29, 2014), http://www.dai 
lymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2813529/Kim-Kardashian-Kanye-West-
fans-imitate-fashion-icons-posting-nearly-identical-outfit-pictures-blog.
html#ixzz3Y9ppUNMY, accessed April 23, 2015; Always Elvis Fan Club, http://
www.alwayselvisfanclub.com/about-alwayselvi.html, accessed April 23,  
2015; Gregory E. Miller and Carrie Seim, “The 10 Most Rabid Celebrity Fan 
Groups Online,” New York Post (March 4, 2014), http://nypost.com/2014/ 
03/04/which-celebrity-has-the-craziest-fans-on-twitter/, accessed April 23, 
2015.
 90. Émile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life (New York: Free 
Press, 1915).
 91. Susan Birrell, “Sports as Ritual: Interpretations from Durkheim to Goffman,” 
Social Forces 60, no. 2 (1981): 354–376; Daniel Q. Voigt, “American Sporting 
Rituals,” in Browne, ed., Rites and Ceremonies in Popular Culture.
 92. Ronald W. Pimentel and Kristy E. Reynolds, “A Model for Consumer 
Devotion: Affective Commitment with Proactive Sustaining Behaviors,” 
Academy of Marketing Science Review 5 (2004): 1.
 93. Mark A. Stein, “Block That Snack,” New York Times (February 4, 2007): 2.
 94. Dean MacCannell, The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class (New York: 
Shocken Books, 1976).
 95. Belk et al., “The Sacred and the Profane in Consumer Behavior.”
 96. Beverly Gordon, “The Souvenir: Messenger of the Extraordinary,” Journal 
of Popular Culture 20, no. 3 (1986): 135–146.
 97. Belk et al., “The Sacred and the Profane in Consumer Behavior”; Amber M. 
Epp and Linda L. Price, “The Storied Life of Singularized Objects: Forces of 
Agency and Network Transformation,” Journal of Consumer Research 36, 
no. 5 (2010): 820–837.
 98. Güliz Ger and Olga Kravets, “Rediscovering Sacred Times in the Mundane: 
Tea Drinking in Turkey,” Consuming Routines: Rhythms, Ruptures, and the 
Temporalities of Consumption, International Workshop, European University 
Institute, Florence, Italy, May 3–5, 2007; cf. also Güliz Ger, “Religion and 
Consumption: The Profane Sacred,” Advances in Consumer Research 32, no. 
1 (2005): 79–81.
 99. Deborah Hofmann, “In Jewelry, Choices Sacred and Profane, Ancient and 
New,” New York Times (May 7, 1989), www.nytimes.com, accessed October 
11, 2007.
Journal of Consumer Research 20 (September 1993): 229–244; Burcak Ertimur 
and Ozlem Sandikci, “Giving Gold Jewelry and Coins as Gifts: The Interplay 
of Utilitarianism and Symbolism,” Advances in Consumer Research 32, no. 1 
(2005):322–327.
 58. Monica Gonzales, “Before Mourning,” American Demographics (April 
1988): 19.
 59. Alf Nucifora, “Tis the Season to Gift One’s Best Clients,” Triangle Business 
Journal (December 3, 1999): 14.
 60. John F. Sherry, Jr., “Gift Giving in Anthropological Perspective,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 10 (September 1983): 157–168.
 61. Daniel Goleman, “What’s Under the Tree? Clues to a Relationship,” 
New York Times (December 19, 1989): C1; John F. Sherry, Jr., Mary Ann 
McGrath, and Sidney J. Levy, “The Dark Side of the Gift,” Journal of Business 
Research (1993): 225–244.
 62. Colin Camerer, “Gifts as Economics Signals and Social Symbols,” American 
Journal of Sociology 94 (Supplement 1988): 5, 180–214; Robert T. Green 
and Dana L. Alden, “Functional Equivalence in Cross-Cultural Consumer 
Behavior: Gift Giving in Japan and the United States,” Psychology & 
Marketing 5 (Summer 1988): 155–168; Hiroshi Tanaka and Miki Iwamura, 
“Gift Selection Strategy of Japanese Seasonal Gift Purchasers: An Explorative 
Study,” paper presented at the Association for Consumer Research, Boston, 
October 1994; cf. also Tonya Williams Bradford, “Intergenerationally Gifted 
Asset Dispositions,” Journal of Consumer Research 36 (June 2009): 93–111.
 63. See, for example, Russell W. Belk, “Halloween: An Evolving American 
Consumption Ritual,” in Richard Pollay, Gerald Gorn, and Marvin Goldberg, 
eds., Advances in Consumer Research 17 (Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research, 1990): 508–517; Melanie Wallendorf and Eric J. Arnould, “We 
Gather Together: The Consumption Rituals of Thanksgiving Day,” Journal of 
Consumer Research 18 (June 1991): 13–31.
 64. Jennifer Booton, “Alibaba’s ‘Singles Day’ Sales Top $9 Billion, Bigger 
Than Black Friday,” Market Watch (November 11, 2014), http://www 
.marketwatch.com/story/alibabas-singles-day-bigger-than-black- 
friday-2014-11-10, accessed April 24, 2015.
 65. Bruno Bettelheim, The Uses of Enchantment: The Meaning and Importance of 
Fairy Tales (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1976).
 66. Kenneth L. Woodward, “Christmas Wasn’t Born Here, Just Invented,” 
Newsweek (December 16, 1996): 71.
 67. Aron O’Cass and Peter Clarke, “Dear Santa, Do You Have My Brand? A 
Study of the Brand Requests, Awareness and Request Styles at Christmas 
Time,” Journal of Consumer Behavior 2 (September 2002): 37–53.
 68. Theodore Caplow, Howard M. Bahr, Bruce A. Chadwick, Reuben Hill, and 
Margaret M. Williams, Middletown Families: Fifty Years of Change and Continuity 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1982).
 69. Sarah Halzack, “Shoppers to Spend $350 Million On Halloween Costumes 
This Year—For Their Pets,” The Washington Post (October 29, 2014), 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/business/wp/2014/10/29/shop-
pers-to-spend-350-million-on-halloween-costumes-this-year-for-their-
pets/, accessed April 24, 2015.
 70. Angeline Close and George M. Zinkhan, “A Holiday Loved and Loathed: A 
Consumer Perspective of Valentine’s Day,” Advances in Consumer Research 
33, no. 1 (2006): 356–365.
 71. Arnold Van Gennep, The Rites of Passage, trans. Maika B. Vizedom and 
Shannon L. Caffee (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1960; orig. published 
1908); Michael R. Solomon and Punam Anand, “Ritual Costumes and Status 
Transition: The Female Business Suit as Totemic Emblem,” in Elizabeth C. 
Hirschman and Morris Holbrook, eds., Advances in Consumer Research 12 
(Washington, DC: Association for Consumer Research, 1995): 315–318.
 72. Walter W. Whitaker, III, “The Contemporary American Funeral Ritual,” in 
Ray B. Browne, ed., Rites and Ceremonies in Popular Culture (Bowling Green, 
OH: Bowling Green University Popular Press, 1980): 316–325. For an ex-
amination of funeral rituals, see Larry D. Compeau and Carolyn Nicholson, 
“Funerals: Emotional Rituals or Ritualistic Emotions,” paper presented at 
the Association of Consumer Research, Boston, October 1994.
 73. Samuel K. Bonsu and Russell W. Belk, “Do Not Go Cheaply into That Good 
Night: Death-Ritual Consumption in Asante, Ghana,” Journal of Consumer 
Research 30 (June 2003): 41–55; cf. also Stephanie O’Donohoe and 
Darach Turley, “Till Death Do Us Part? Consumption and the Negotiation 
of Relationships Following a Bereavement,” Advances in Consumer Research 
32, no. 1 (2005): 625–626.
 74. Barry Bearak, “Dead Join the Living in a Family Celebration,” New York 
Times (September 5, 2010), http://nytimes.com/2010/09/06/world/africa/ 
06madagascar.html?scp=2&sq=madagascar&st=cse, accessed April 28, 2011.
 75. Natasha Singer, “Love in the Time of Twitter,” New York Times (February 13, 
2015), http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/02/13/love-in-the-times-of-
twitter/?smid=nytcore-iphone-share&smprod=nytcore-iphone, accessed  
February 23, 2015.
 76. Mark J. Miller, “Nike Pulls Tattoo-Inspired Line After Outcry from Samoan 
Community,” Brandchannel (August 15, 2013), http://www.brandchannel 

560 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings
 122. Alf H. Walle, “Grassroots Innovation,” Marketing Insights (Summer 1990): 
44–51.
 123. http://icanhas.cheezburger.com/tag/Memes, accessed April 23, 2015; 
Tracy Tuten and Michael R. Solomon, Social Media Marketing 2nd ed. 
(London: SAGE, 2015).
 124. Ken Paulson, “Cost of Cashing in on Catchphrases,” USA Today (February 
2, 2015), http://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2015/02/02/taylor-
swift-copyright-ken-paulson/22702801/, accessed April 23, 2015.
 125. Robert V. Kozinets, “Fandoms’ Menace/Pop Flows: Exploring the Metaphor 
of Entertainment as Recombinant/Memetic Engineering,” Association for 
Consumer Research (October 1999). The new science of memetics, which tries 
to explain how beliefs gain acceptance and predict their progress, was spurred 
by Richard Dawkins who in the 1970s proposed culture as a Darwinian 
struggle among “memes” or mind viruses. See Geoffrey Cowley, “Viruses of 
the Mind: How Odd Ideas Survive,” Newsweek (April 14, 1997): 14.
 126. Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (New York: Little, Brown, 2000).
 127. Timothy H. Evans, “The Ghosts in the Machine,” New York Times (June 7,  
2014), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/08/opinion/sunday/the-ghosts- 
in-the-machine.html?partner=rss&emc=rss, accessed February 22, 2015; 
Ollie McAteer, “Ghostly Sightings of Slender Man Reported in UK Town, Metro 
(January 25, 2015), http://metro.co.uk/2015/01/25/ghostly-sightings-of-
slender-man-reported-in-uk-town-5035922/, accessed April 23, 2015.
 128. “Cabbage-Hatched Plot Sucks in 24 Doll Fans,” New York Daily News (December 
1, 1983).
 129. www.Zoobles.com, accessed June 23, 2011; Ann Zimmerman, “How 
Toy Crazes Are Born: Collectibles Are Designed to Be Cute, Numerous, 
Affordable and Just Rare Enough,” Wall Street Journal (December 16, 
2010), http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527487048281045
76021430434938792.html, accessed April 28, 2011; John Lippman, 
“Creating the Craze for Pokémon: Licensing Agent Bet on U.S. Kids,” Wall 
Street Journal (August 16, 1999), www.wsj.com, accessed August 16, 
1999; “Turtlemania,” The Economist (April 21, 1990): 32.
 130. Anthony Ramirez, “The Pedestrian Sneaker Makes a Comeback,” New York 
Times (October 14, 1990): F17.
 131. Madden, “Japan’s Latest Fads—Marketable in U.S.?”
 132. B. E. Aguirre, E. L. Quarantelli, and Jorge L. Mendoza, “The Collective 
Behavior of Fads: The Characteristics, Effects, and Career of Streaking,” 
American Sociological Review (August 1989): 569.
 133. Peter Gumbel, “Big Mac’s Local Flavor,” CNNmoney.com (May 2, 2008), 
http://money.cnn.com/2008/04/29/news/companies/big_macs_lo 
cal.fortune/index.htm, accessed May 2, 2008; Geoffrey A. Fowler, “For 
Prosperity Burger, McDonald’s Tailors Ads to Asian Tastes,” Wall Street 
Journal (January 24, 2005), www.wsj.com, accessed January 24, 2005; 
Saritha Rai, “Tastes of India in U.S. Wrappers,” New York Times (April 29, 
2003), www.nytimes.com, accessed April 29, 2003; Gerard O’Dwyer, 
“McD’s Cancels McAfrika Rollout,” Advertising Age (September 9, 2002): 
14; “McDonald’s to Give $10 Million to Settle Vegetarian Lawsuit,” Wall 
Street Journal (June 4, 2002), www.wsj.com, accessed June 4, 2002; 
“Packaging Draws Protest,” Marketing News (July 4, 1994): 1.
 134. Mariko Sanchanta and Yoree Koh, “Beefing Up McDonald’s,” Wall Street 
Journal (January 12, 2011), http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405
2748703791904576075450692538030.html, accessed April 10, 2011.
 135. “McCurrywurst Time in Germany,” Burger Business (February 18, 2013), 
http://www.burgerbusiness.com/?p=13289, accessed February 20, 2013.
 136. Mike Ives, “McDonald’s Opens in Vietnam, Bringing Big Mac to Fans 
of Banh Mi,” New York Times (February 7, 2014), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2014/02/08/business/international/mcdonalds-chooses-its-
moment-in-vietnam.html, accessed February 21, 2015; Ariel Schwartz, 
“Chickileaks: McDonald’s and a Strange Farm-Fresh Chicken Campaign 
in China,” Fast Company (April 8, 2011), http://www.fastcompany 
.com/1745477/chickileaks-mcdonalds-and-strange-farm-fresh-chicken-
campaign-china, accessed February 21, 2015.
 137. Lian Zi, “Despite Sales Slump, Fast Food Moves Ahead in China,” 
ChinaDaily USA (December 12, 2014), http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/
us/2014-12/12/content_19069145.htm, accessed April 24, 2015.
 138. Russell W. Belk, “Hyperreality and Globalization: Culture in the Age of Ronald 
McDonald,” Journal of International Consumer Marketing 8 (1995): 23–38.
 139. “Coffee and Soft Drinks in China,” Facts and Details (January 2014), http://
factsanddetails.com/china/cat11/sub73/item1875.html, accessed April 
24, 2015; Terry Lefton, “NBA Merchandise Sales Could Set Another 
Record,” Sports Business Journal (October 20, 2014), http://www.sports 
businessdaily.com/Journal/Issues/2014/10/20/In-Depth/Merchandise 
.aspx, accessed April 24, 2015; “British Drive In Movies,” NBC.co.uk, 
http://www.vidsnet.com/nbc/watch.php?vid=10df4d623, accessed April 
24, 2015; Monica Tan, “Kim Kardashian and Her Fans Defy Polite Society 
and the Sneers of the Elite,” The Guardian (September 14, 2014), http://
www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-culture-blog/2014/sep/14/
sass-meets-ass-kim-kardashian-goes-west-and-fans-turn-out-in-force, ac-
cessed April 24, 2015.
 100. Lee Gomes, “Ramadan, a Month of Prayer, Takes on a Whole New Look,” 
Wall Street Journal (December 4, 2002), www.wsj.com, accessed December 
4, 2002.
 101. http://store.nike.com/us/en_us/pw/mens-skateboarding-shoes/7puZbrkZ9yq, 
accessed April 23, 2015; Anthony Pappalarado, “Is This the End of the 
Skateshop?” Ride (November 13, 2014), http://theridechannel.com/features/ 
2014/11/end-of-skateboard-shops, accessed April 23, 2015; Damien Cave, 
“Dogtown, U.S.A.,” New York Times (June 12, 2005), www.nytimes.com, 
 accessed June 12, 2005.
 102. Emily Nelson, “Moistened Toilet Paper Wipes Out After Launch for 
Kimberly-Clark,” Wall Street Journal (April 15, 2002), www.wsj.com, ac-
cessed April 15, 2002.
 103. Robert Hof, “The Click Here Economy,” BusinessWeek (June 22, 1998): 
122–128.
 104. Eric J. Arnould, “Toward a Broadened Theory of Preference Formation and 
the Diffusion of Innovations: Cases from Zinder Province, Niger Republic,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 16 (September 1989): 239–267; Susan B. 
Kaiser, The Social Psychology of Clothing (New York: Macmillan, 1985); 
Thomas S. Robertson, Innovative Behavior and Communication (New York: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1971).
 105. Susan L. Holak, Donald R. Lehmann, and Fareena Sultan, “The Role of 
Expectations in the Adoption of Innovative Consumer Durables: Some 
Preliminary Evidence,” Journal of Retailing 63 (Fall 1987): 243–259.
 106. Nick Bilton, “What’s That on Beyoncé’s Wrist? Let Me Guess … an 
Apple Watch,” New York Times (April 22, 2015), http://www.nytimes 
.com/2015/04/23/style/whats-that-on-beyonces-wrist-let-me-guess-an-
apple-watch.html, accessed April 23, 2015.
 107. Fred D. Davis, Richard P. Bagozzi, and Paul R. Warshaw, “User Acceptance 
of Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical Models,” 
Management Science 35 (1989): 982–1003; Viswanath Venkatesh and 
Hillol Bala, “Technology Acceptance Model 3 and a Research Agenda on 
Interventions,” Decision Sciences 39, no. 2 (2008): 273–315.
 108. “Trends in Japan,” http://web-japan.org/trends/08_lifestyle/lif080707 
.html, accessed March 19, 2013.
 109. Everett M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations, 3rd ed. (New York: Free Press, 
1983).
 110. Alex Williams, “The New Normal,” New York Times (April 2, 2014), http://
www.nytimes.com/2014/04/03/fashion/normcore-fashion-movement-
or-massive-in-joke.html?src=dayp, accessed February 18, 2015.
 111. Melanie Wallendorf, “The Formation of Aesthetic Criteria Through Social 
Structures and Social Institutions,” in Jerry C. Olson, ed., Advances in 
Consumer Research 7 (Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research, 
1980): 3–6.
 112. For more details, see Kaiser, The Social Psychology of Clothing; George B. 
Sproles, “Behavioral Science Theories of Fashion,” in Michael R. Solomon, 
ed., The Psychology of Fashion (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1985): 
55–70.
 113. C. R. Snyder and Howard L. Fromkin, Uniqueness: The Human Pursuit of 
Difference (New York: Plenum Press, 1980).
 114. Linda Dyett, “Desperately Seeking Skin,” Psychology Today (May–June 
1996): 14; Alison Lurie, The Language of Clothes (New York: Random 
House, 1981). Note: Until recently, the study of fashion focused almost 
exclusively on women. Some researchers today also probe the meanings 
of the fashion system for men, but not nearly to the same extent. Cf., for 
example, Susan Kaiser, Michael Solomon, Janet Hethorn, Basil Englis, Van 
Dyk Lewis, and Wi-Suk Kwon, “Menswear, Fashion, and Subjectivity,” 
paper presented in Special Session: Susan Kaiser, Michael Solomon, 
Janet Hethorn, and Basil Englis (Chairs), “What Do Men Want? Media 
Representations, Subjectivity, and Consumption,” at the ACR Gender 
Conference, Edinburgh, Scotland, June 2006.
 115. Harvey Leibenstein, Beyond Economic Man: A New Foundation for 
Microeconomics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1976).
 116 Nara Schoenberg, “Goth Culture Moves into Mainstream,” Montgomery 
Advertiser (January 19, 2003): 1G.
 117. Georg Simmel, “Fashion,” International Quarterly 10 (1904): 130–155.
 118. Maureen Tkacik, “‘Z’ Zips into the Zeitgeist, Subbing for ‘S’ in Hot Slang,” 
Wall Street Journal (January 4, 2003), www.wsj.com, accessed January 
4, 2003; Tkacik, “Slang from the ‘Hood Now Sells Toyz in Target,” Wall 
Street Journal (December 30, 2002), http://www.ytlcommunity.com/-com 
mnews/shownews.asp?newsid=5112, accessed September 13, 2011.
 119. Silvia Bellezza and Anat Keinan, “Brand Tourists: How Non-Core Users 
Enhance the Brand Image by Eliciting Pride,” Journal of Consumer Research 
41, no. 2 (2014): 397–417.
 120. Grant D. McCracken, “The Trickle-Down Theory Rehabilitated,” in Michael 
R. Solomon, ed., The Psychology of Fashion (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 
1985): 39–54.
 121. Charles W. King, “Fashion Adoption: A Rebuttal to the ‘Trickle-Down’ 
Theory,” in Stephen A. Greyser, ed., Toward Scientific Marketing (Chicago: 
American Marketing Association, 1963): 108–125.

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
561 
8; David A. Ricks, “Products That Crashed into the Language Barrier,” 
Business & Society Review (Spring 1983): 46–50.
 158. “Oh, Crap: Audi Mucks Up E-Tron Name in French, AutoBlog (September 13, 
2010), http://www.autoblog.com/2010/09/13/oh-crap-audi-mucks-up-e-
tron-name-in-french/, accessed February 21, 2015.
 159. Kate MacArthur, “Kraft’s Name Brings New Meaning to Snacking in 
Russia: Mondelēz International Comes Close to Local Translation for 
Oral Sex,” Advertising Age (March 22, 2012), http://adage.com/article/
global-news/kraft-s-close-russian-translation-oral-sex/233459/?utm_
source=global_news&utm_medium=newsletter&utm_campaign=adage, 
accessed February 16, 2015.
 160. Mark Lasswell, “Lost in Translation,” Business (August 2004): 68–70.
 161. For a case study that explores how the Guinness brand does this, cf. John 
Amis and Michael L. Silk, “Transnational Organization and Symbolic 
Production: Creating and Managing a Global Brand,” Consumption Markets 
& Culture 13, no. 2 (2010): 159–179.
 162. Martin McCarty, Martin I. Horn, Mary Kate Szenasy, and Jocelyn Feintuch, 
“An Exploratory Study of Consumer Style: Country Differences and 
International Segments,” Journal of Consumer Behaviour 6, no. 1 (2007): 48.
 163. Julie Skur Hill and Joseph M. Winski, “Goodbye Global Ads: Global Village 
Is Fantasy Land for Marketers,” Advertising Age (November 16, 1987): 22.
 164. Geert Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions, 
and Organizations across Nations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001).
 165. Geert Hofstede, Gert Jan Hofstede, Michael Minkov, “Cultures and 
Organizations, Software of the Mind”, Third Revised Edition, McGrawHill 
2010, ISBN 0-07-166418-1.Geert Hofstede B.V. quoted with permission.
 166. Karen Page Winterich and Yinlong Zhang, “Accepting Inequality Deters 
Responsibility: How Power Distance Decreases Charitable Behavior,” 
Journal of Consumer Research 41, no. 2 (2014): 274–293.
 167. Quoted in Libby Garrett, “G&T Moments: Influencing Conservative 
Cultures,” Canvas 8, August 2, 2012, http://www.canvas8.com/content/ 
2012/08/02/safe-space-creativity-in-conservative-markets.html, accessed  
February 18, 2015.
 168. Shahrzad Warkentin, “What Can We Learn from Coca-Cola’s International 
Marketing Success? Smartling (December 18, 2014), https://www.smartling 
.com/2014/12/18/what-can-we-learn-from-coca-colas-global-market 
ing-success/, accessed April 24, 2015.
 169. MTV Europe, personal communication, 1994; cf. also Dannie Kjeldgaard 
and Søren Askegaard, “Consuming Modernities: The Global Youth Segment 
as a Site of Consumption, Advances in Consumer Research 31 (2004): 
104–105; Teresa J. Domzal and Jerome B. Kernan, “Mirror, Mirror: Some 
Postmodern Reflections on Global Advertising,” Journal of Advertising 22 
(December 1993): 1–20.
 170. Douglas B. Holt, John A. Quelch, and Earl L. Taylor, “How Global Brands 
Compete,” Harvard Business Review (September 2004): 68–75.
 171. Calvin Sims, “For Chic’s Sake, Japanese Women Parade to the Orthopedist,” 
New York Times (November 26, 1999), www.nytimes.com, accessed Novem-
ber 26, 1999.
 172. Luis Miguel Pereira and Juan Ignacio Gallard, The Secrets of the Machine 
(Prime Books 2014).
 173. Suzanne Kapner, “U.S. TV Shows Losing Potency around World,” New York 
Times (January 2, 2003), www.nytimes.com, accessed January 2, 2003; 
“Big Brother Nipple Sparks Outrage,” BBCNews (September 10, 2004), 
www.bbcnews.com, accessed September 10, 2004.
 174. Liz Gooch, “A Reality Show Where Islam Is the Biggest Star,” New York 
Times (July 28, 2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/29/world/asia/ 
29imam.html?scp=1&sq=islamic%20reality%20show&st=cse, 
accessed 
April 10, 2011.
 140. Alan Riding, “Only the French Elite Scorn Mickey’s Debut,” New York Times 
(April 13, 1992): A1.
 141. Elisabeth Rosenthal, “Buicks, Starbucks and Fried Chicken, Still China?” New York 
Times (February 25, 2002), www.nytimes.com, accessed February 25, 2002.
 142. Special Report, “Brands in an Age of Anti-Americanism,” BusinessWeek 
(August 4, 2003): 69–76.
 143. Lily Dong and Kelly Tian, “The Use of Western Brands in Asserting Chinese 
National Identity,” Journal of Consumer Research 36 (October 2009). 504-523.
 144. David Murphy, “Christmas’s Commercial Side Makes Yuletide a Hit in 
China,” Wall Street Journal (December 24, 2002), www.wsj.com, accessed 
December 24, 2002.
 145. This example courtesy of Professor Russell Belk, University of Utah, per-
sonal communication, July 25, 1997.
 146. James Hookway, “In Vietnam, Fast Food Acts Global, Tastes Local,” Wall 
Street Journal (March 12, 2008), http://online.wsj.com/article/Sb12052 
8509133029135.html?mod=mm_hs_marketing_strat, accessed March 12,  
2008.
 147. Miriam Jordan, “India Decides to Put Its Own Spin on Popular Rock, Rap 
and Reggae,” Wall Street Journal (January 5, 2000), www.wsj.com, acc-
essed January 5, 2000; Rasul Bailay, “Coca-Cola Recruits Paraplegics for 
‘Cola War’ in India,” Wall Street Journal (June 10, 1997).
 148. Rick Wartzman, “When You Translate ‘Got Milk’ for Latinos, What Do You 
Get?” Wall Street Journal (June 3, 1999).
 149. Charles Newbery, “Coke Goes Native with New Soft Drink,” Advertising Age 
(December 1, 2003): 34.
 150. www.beinggirl.com/en_US/home.jsp, accessed June 25, 2009; Carol Hymowitz,  
“Marketers Focus More on Global ‘Tribes’ than on Nationalities,” Wall Street 
Journal (December 10, 2007): B1.
 151. Theodore Levitt, The Marketing Imagination (New York: Free Press, 1983).
 152. Geoffrey A. Fowler, “Main Street, H.K.: Disney Localizes Mickey to Boost 
Its Hong Kong Theme Park,” Wall Street Journal (January 23, 2008): B1; 
Merissa Marr, “Small World: Disney Rewrites Script to Win Fans in India; 
China, Latin America Are Also in Turnaround,” Wall Street Journal (June 
11, 2007): A1; Laura M. Holson, “The Feng Shui Kingdom,” New York 
Times (April 25, 2005), www.nytimes.com, accessed April 25, 2005; 
Keith Bradsher, “Disneyland for Chinese Offers a Soup and Lands in 
a Stew,” New York Times (June 17, 2005): A1; Paulo Prada and Bruce 
Orwall, “Disney’s New French Theme Park Serves Wine—and Better 
Sausage,” Wall Street Journal (March 12, 2002), www.wsj.com, accessed 
March 12, 2002.
 153. Terry Clark, “International Marketing and National Character: A Review 
and Proposal for an Integrative Theory,” Journal of Marketing 54 (October 
1990): 66–79.
 154. Geraldo Samor, Cecilie Rohwedder, and Ann Zimmerman, “Innocents 
Abroad? Walmart’s Global Sales Rise as It Learns from Mistakes; No More 
Ice Skates in Mexico,” Wall Street Journal (May 16, 2006): B1.
 155. Marc Gobé, Emotional Branding: The New Paradigm for Connecting Brands to 
People (New York: Allworth Press, 2001).
 156. Rachel Abrams, “Adapting Listerine to a Global Market,” New York Times 
(September 12, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/13/business/adap 
ting-listerine-to-a-global-market.html?ref=international&_r=0, accessed Feb-
ruary 21, 2015; Jeffrey Lin, “Cheetos Flavors from Around the World That 
Makes You Want to Give Up Your American Citizenship,” Foodamentals (June 
30, 2014), http://www.foodamentals.com/cheetos-flavors-from-around-the-
world-that-makes-you-want-to-give-up-your-american-citizenship/, accessed 
April 24, 2015.
 157. Shelly Reese, “Culture Shock,” Marketing Tools (May 1998): 44–49; Steve 
Rivkin, “The Name Game Heats Up,” Marketing News (April 22, 1996): 

SECTION 4  GOING GLOBAL WITH CAPABLE JuICE 
BACKgrOuND
You are the CMO (Chief Marketing Officer) for CAPABLE 
JUICE. CAPABLE JUICE is a company that sells a line of 
premium, all-natural juices. CAPABLE JUICE is marketed 
as a tasty beverage particularly well-suited for people who 
emphasize health and wellness in their lives. To date, your 
company has only sold in the United States, but you are now 
preparing to make your first expansion into a foreign market.
Previous research has narrowed the candidate countries 
down to three. Regardless of which country is selected, it 
has already been determined that CAPABLE JUICE will be 
sold to local distributors who will then be responsible for 
selling to local retailers and, ultimately, consumers. Your 
Chief Financial Officer (CFO) has provided you some prelimi-
nary financial information, and you have also been handed a 
report created from the 2014 GfK Consumer Trends Global 
Consumer Survey. This survey reports information about 
each country. Importantly, it dives deeper and also seg-
ments consumers by their relative income and occupational 
status. In the United States, income and occupation have 
been important characteristics to identify CAPABLE JUICE 
consumers.
yOur gOAl
Review the data from the CFO and from the GfK consumer 
report. Then, make some preliminary financial estimates 
about the likely financial performance of CAPABLE JUICE. 
Based on your estimates, make some preliminary rec-
ommendations for CAPABLE JUICE’s future international 
expansion.
the DAtA
 
●about the data from the CFO:
 
●priCe: The CFO has provided you with the assumed 
sale price per bottle of CAPABLE JUICE. The price has 
been adjusted into US dollars and is assumed to be 
constant for each of the three countries and for any 
quantity of CAPABLE JUICE that is sold.
 
●MarKet SiZe: The CFO has asked you to assume that 
CAPABLE JUICE will account for a specific percentage 
of the foreign market after a single year. The market 
for a country is defined as the quantity of total fruit 
juices or fruit drinks sold in a given year.
 
●about the GfK data: The GfK Consumer Trends Global 
Survey is a large survey of many countries. Results for 
each country are adjusted to be representative of the 
country’s population that is 15 years or older. Each coun-
try has results for four different consumer segments 
from the combination of income (high/low) and occupa-
tion (white collar/other occupation).
 
●Size (000s) of Group: The estimated number of people 
(in thousands) who are in each segment of a country. 
This estimate uses the CIA Factbook’s 2014 esti-
mate of the number of 15+ year olds in each country 
as the base to determine the total estimated size of 
a group.
 
●% Country: The estimated % of the entire country 
that is comprised of people within a particular 
segment
 
●% Group: The “% Group” means the percentage of 
people within a segment who meet the criteria for a 
specific survey question
 
●personal values, health and Fitness: The percentage of 
segment members who scored the 2 highest pos-
sible values on how important “health and fitness” 
were as part of their personal values.
 
●Satisfaction with primary Shopping Location: availability 
of healthy foods and beverages: The percentage of seg-
ment members who scored the 2 highest possible 
values on how satisfied they were with the availability 
of healthy foods/beverages.
 
●Drink fruit juice daily: The percentage of segment 
members who said they drink fruit juice “daily”
 
●Drink Fruit juice weekly: The percentage of segment 
members who said they drink fruit juice “weekly”
 
●Drink fruit drinks daily: The percentage of segment 
members who said they drink fruit drinks “daily”
 
●Drink fruit drinks weekly: The percentage of segment 
members who said they drink fruit drinks “weekly”
 
●regularly eat healthy, nutritious foods for: physical 
health: The percentage of segment members who 
said this is a motivation to eat healthy foods.
 
●regularly eat healthy, nutritious foods for: mental/emotional 
health: The percentage of segment members who 
said this is a motivation to eat healthy foods.
 
●regularly eat healthy, nutritious foods for: appearance: The 
percentage of segment members who said this is a 
motivation to eat healthy foods.
562 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings

Country
 
GERMANY
 
UK  
 
USA
Income 
Group
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
  
Occup. 
Group
White  
Collar
Blue 
Collar
White 
Collar
Blue 
Collar
White 
Collar
Blue 
Collar
White 
Collar
Blue 
Collar
White 
Collar
Blue 
Collar
White 
Collar
Blue  
Collar
Est. Population of Country 15+ years old (CIA 
Factbook, 2014)
(millions)
70.4
52.6
257.02
Country Segment, % of Country
% of 
Group
3.9
2.1
16.2
11.7
9.7
4.0
9.3
9.3
7.5
3.7
9.2
7.2
Size of Group
(000s)
2,745.6
1,478.4
11,404.8
8,236.8
5,102.2
2,104.0
4,891.8
4,891.8
19,276.5
9,509.7
23,645.8
18,505.4
Personal Values: Health and Fitness
% of 
Group
59.7
60.3
54.0
52.4
47.0
55.5
36.1
44.8
60.0
49.0
44.4
54.7
Satisfaction with Primary Shopping Location: 
Availability of healthy foods and beverages
% of 
Group
87.7
66.0
75.3
77.5
75.1
71.5
66.6
75.2
77.2
75.4
72.6
68.6
Drink fruit juice daily
% of 
Group
17.3
20.4
17.0
11.6
32.1
35.2
22.2
24.2
36.1
18.5
20.5
26.8
Drink Fruit juice weekly
% of 
Group
38.9
43.3
39.3
31.8
35.3
39.9
33.9
43.1
29.0
32.3
39.8
38.9
Drink fruit drinks daily
% of 
Group
6.9
3.5
5.3
3.3
13.8
12.0
12.5
15.1
21.3
5.6
8.6
14.0
Drink fruit drinks weekly
% of 
Group
31.8
25.5
25.8
23.3
31.7
48.2
29.6
32.9
38.7
15.8
33.0
34.9
Regularly eat healthy, nutritious foods for: 
physical health
% of 
Group
55.8
62.8
51.5
49.2
61.0
75.3
49.7
54.3
70.0
66.0
60.8
49.0
Regularly eat healthy, nutritious foods for: 
mental/emotional health
% of 
Group
32.7
39.3
29.9
24.1
30.2
47.7
30.5
33.9
38.5
32.7
33.2
30.7
Regularly eat healthy, nutritious foods for: 
appearance
% of 
Group
46.4
33.5
37.2
35.8
29.3
45.7
40.7
37.0
50.8
31.7
39.4
34.7
CFO Data: Price per bottle to local  
distirbutors (US $)
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
$ 0.75
Number of Daily Drinks in Segment (000s)
659.2
Beverages sold per year to segment (000s)
240,614.8
Estimated number of annual fruit juice/drink 
beverages consumed per year by segment 
member
87.64
CFO Data: Estimated Market Share within 
Segment
10%
Estimated Annual Sales (000s)
$18,046
Estimates Sales per Consumer
 
$6.57
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
563

task 1: understanding the Data
Before providing recommendations to the CFO, make sure you understand how to interpret the information presented in the 
table.
1 Which country has the segment with the fewest consum-
ers in it?
2 Which country has the largest total number of potential 
consumers in it?
3 Find the country that has the consumer segment that 
makes up the largest percentage of its total amount of 
consumers. What is that percentage?
4 Which segment prioritizes physical appearance as a moti-
vation for eating/drinking healthy?
5 Which segment prioritizes mental/emotional health as a 
motivation for eating/drinking healthy?
task 2: estimating Sales
Using some assumptions provided by the CFO, you are tasked with estimating the annual sales (in $) for each segment in 
each country. To do so, you will need to make the following assumptions:
 
●actual consumption:
 
●When someone says they drink juice or drinks fruit 
drinks “daily,” we assume they actually have 0.7 of 
that drink on a typical day.
 
●When someone says they drink juice of drinks fruit 
drinks “weekly,” we assume they actually have 0.1 of 
that drink on a typical day.
 
●For all other answers, we assume that they don’t 
drink the beverage at all.
 
●There are 365 days in a year.
 
●Using the data provided by GfK and the assumptions 
above, what are total estimated number of fruit drinks & 
juices (combined) that are estimated to be sold to con-
sumers of each segment in a typical year (365 days)? 
The answers have been provided to you for the first 
column.
 
●CaLCuLatiOn:
 
●Estimated Units Sold Per Segment per Year =
[(Segment Total Size) × (% daily drink) × (assumed 
daily consumption) + (Segment Total Size) × (% 
weekly drink) × (assumed daily consumption) + 
(Segment Total Size) × (% daily drink)*(assumed 
daily consumption) + (Segment Total Size) × (% 
weekly drink)*(assumed daily consumption)] × 365
 
●According to these estimates, how many beverages 
would we assume a typical person in each segment con-
sumes per year?
 
●CaLCuLatiOn:
 
●Average yearly consumption per consumer =
[For each segment, take the answers immediately 
above]/[total size of segment]
task 3: estimating Sales
The CFO is impressed with your initial estimates. She would like you to go even further and estimate the total sales expected 
within each segment after one year. Again, the CFO has provided you with some important estimates to help you make your 
calculations.
 
●Financial assumptions:
 
●(1) The per unit price sold to distributors will be 
$0.75, regardless of country or quantity sold.
 
●(2) The estimated market share for sales depends on 
how much a segment sees health and wellness as 
being essential to their lives. If healthy and wellness 
is a priority for a segment, the CFO assumes a 10% 
market share in that segment during the first year 
is reasonable. If health and wellness is not a major 
priority, the market share is assumed to only be 5%. 
Health and wellness is considered to not be a prior-
ity for a segment if less than 50% of the members of 
that segment identify it as a priority.
 
●Question 1: Using the GfK data and the information pro-
vided by the CFO, what is the estimated annual sales for 
each segment?
 
●CaLCuLatiOn:
 
●annual Sales $ estimated per segment =
[(Original Estimated Units Sold Per Segment per 
Year) × (Assumed Market Share, per CFO’s rules) 
× (Price per unit to distributors)]
 
●Question 2: Which country, overall, has the highest esti-
mated annual sales? Which country has the lowest esti-
mated annual sales?
 
●Question 3: Based on these estimates, how much money 
per consumer would we expect for each segment?
564 
SeCtiOn 4   Consumers in Their Social and Cultural Settings

 
Chapter 14   Culture 
565 
DiSCuSSiON AND DeBAte:
 
1. Based solely on the information that was analyzed, 
which country do you think CAPABLE JUICE should ex-
pand to? Why?
 
2. While making its financial estimates, CAPABLE JUICE 
did not consider the impact of every GfK survey ques-
tion reported in the table above. For example, CAPABLE 
JUICE did not consider if each segments’ satisfaction 
with the availability of healthy foods and beverages at 
grocery stores might impact their market share within 
a given segment. From your perspective, how might 
CAPABLE JUICE incorporate the rest of the GfK infor-
mation into their estimates? Which questions do you 
think may lead to you increasing or decreasing differ-
ent estimates?
 
3. Think about other important consumer behavior fac-
tors that might impact the success of CAPABLE 
JUICE in a foreign market. What other important 
information do you think is pertinent for CAPABLE 
JUICE to know but was not present in the table 
above? Why?
GfK Consumer Life (Roper Reports © Worldwide).

566
Many organizations in the government and private sector col-
lect information on consumer buying patterns. One good place 
to start is GfK, the international marketing research company 
that supplied data for the exercises in this book:  www.gfk.com.
A selected list of other secondary data sources and indices that 
are particularly useful to consumer researchers follows. Many of 
these sources are available in the reference section of your library.
Commercial Sources
●
●ABI/Inform Ondisc. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms 
International. These are abstracts (on compact disc) of ar-
ticles from business journals.
●
●Aging America: Trends and Projections. Washington, DC, 
Government Printing Office: U.S. Senate Special Committee 
on Aging and the American Association of Retired Persons. 
This gives data on demographic characteristics and growth 
projections on the elderly over the next 30 years.
●
●American Marketing Association International Directory & 
Marketing Services Guide. Chicago: American Marketing 
Association. This complete directory of AMA members in-
cludes both individual and corporate listings and a guide to 
marketing research firms, by area of specialization (published 
annually).
●
●Ipsos Reid Group Inc. Many syndicated studies are available 
for purchase. The cost of the surveys depends on their age.
●
●BAR/LNA Multi-Media Service. New York: Leading National 
Advertisers. This is a listing of advertising expenditures for 
media and specific brands (updated quarterly).
●
●Business Information Sources. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. Listed are sources of information about 
market research and statistical data.
●
●Business Periodicals Index. New York: H.W. Wilson Company. 
This is an index of business periodicals (updated monthly).
●
●Communication Abstracts. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 
Inc. This is an index of articles and books on topics related to 
advertising and marketing (published quarterly).
●
●Directory of Online Databases. Santa Monica, CA: Cuadra 
Associates, Inc. The directory lists databases that are acces-
sible by computer.
●
●Dissertation 
Abstracts 
International. 
Ann 
Arbor, 
MI: 
University of Microfilms International. This is an index of 
doctoral dissertations, including relevant studies in the hu-
manities and social sciences section, from major universities 
(updated monthly).
●
●Encyclopedia of Information Systems and Services. Detroit: 
Gale Research Company. The encyclopedia is a source of 
information about producers of various databases.
●
●Financial Post Canadian Markets. Toronto: Maclean-Hunter. 
Contains forecasts for consumer spending along with eco-
nomic and demographic information.
●
●FINDEX: The Directory of Market Research Reports, Studies, 
and Surveys. Bethesda, MD: Cambridge Information Group. 
This international guide to reports is produced by research 
companies.
●
●Guide to Consumer Markets. New York: The Conference 
Board. Data on consumer spending and income is published 
(annually) in this guide.
●
●Print Measurement Bureau Production Profile Guide. This is 
product data in a two-year database from a sample of more 
than 20,000 respondents (1-800-PMB-0899).
●
●Social Sciences Citation Index. Philadelphia: Institute for 
Scientific Information. This is an index of articles in social 
science periodicals (updated three times a year).
●
●Standard Directory of Advertisers. Wilmette, IL: National 
Register Publishing Company. This directory is a guide om-
panies whose advertising spending exceeds $75,000 and 
includes information such as their agencies, types of media 
used, and specific products advertised.
Sources of Secondary Data
Appendix i

 
Appendix i  Sources of Secondary data 
567 
Academic, Industry, and Nonprofit 
Sources
Center for Mature Consumer Studies
College of Business Administration
Georgia State University
University Plaza
Atlanta, GA 30303
(404) 651-4177
The Conference Board
Consumer Research Center
845 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10022
(212) 759-0900
Marketing Science Institute
1000 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138–5396
(617) 491-2060
International Sources
Statistics Canada
R.H. Coats Building
Tunney’s Pasture
Ottawa, ON K1A OT6
(613) 951-7277
The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research
P.O. Box 440
Storrs, CT 06268
(203) 486-4440
Center for International Research
U.S. Bureau of the Census
Washington, DC 20233
(301) 763-4014
Population Institute
East-West Center
1777 East-West Road
Honolulu, HI 96848
(808) 944-7450
European Society for Opinion and Marketing
Research (ESOMAR)
Central Secretariat
J.J. Viottastraat 29
1071 JP Amsterdam
Netherlands
31-20-664-21-41
Euromonitor
87–88 Turnmill Street
London ECIM 5QU
England
0171-251-8024
The European Community
2100 M Street, NW
Suite 707
Washington, DC 20037
(202) 862-9500
Latin American Demographic Centre (CELADE)
Casilla 91
Santiago, Chile
011-56-2-485051
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development
2001 L Street, NW
Suite 700
Washington, DC
20036-4905
Population Reference Bureau, Inc.
1875 Connecticut Avenue, NW
Suite 520
Washington, DC 20009
(212) 483-1100
United Nations
Public Inquiries Unit
Public Services Section
Department of Public Information
Room GA–057
New York, NY 10017
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
(202) 473-2943
Major Websites
●
●www.orcinternational.com: A commercial service that per-
forms regular industry analyses and provides one-page in-
dustry profile summaries online
●
●www.fuld.com: A competitive intelligence service with corpo-
rate information online
●
●www.marketingpower.com: American Marketing Association
●
●www.amic.com: Advertising Media Internet Center; infor-
mation about Internet commerce, a link to the Advertising 

568 
Appendix i  Sources of Secondary data
Research Foundation, a link to Georgia Tech Web-user sur-
vey, plus many more links
●
●www.nielsen.com
●
●www.kpmg.com
●
●www.ipsos.com
●
●www.comscore.com: The websites for research firms that sell 
summaries of reports on various topics
●
●www.pantone.com
●
●www.strategicbusinessinsights.com
●
●www.visioncritical.com

An understanding of consumers is, of course, essential in vir-
tually every aspect of marketing. To prepare for a career in a 
consumer-related field, consider getting involved in relevant re-
search that one of your professors may be doing. In addition to 
your Consumer Behavior course, be sure to take as many cours-
es as possible in other aspects of marketing. Also, try to achieve 
proficiency in statistics and computer skills. Courses in the social 
sciences, particularly psychology and sociology, are also helpful.
Career Paths
The following list identifies aspects of marketing where knowl-
edge of consumer behavior is particularly valuable:
●
●Marketing research: Researchers define problems and collect 
information needed to resolve them. They typically design 
projects, analyze data, present findings, and make recom-
mendations to management. Researchers may be employed 
by corporations that maintain their own market research 
staffs, or they may work for independent market research 
firms, trade organizations, advertising agencies, the govern-
ment, or nonprofit organizations.
●
●Brand management: Managers oversee and direct marketing 
efforts for a specific product or line of products. They oversee 
all aspects of product strategy, including research, packag-
ing, sales, promotion, and forecasting.
●
●Customer affairs: A customer affairs representative acts as 
a liaison between the firm and its customers. He or she 
handles complaints and may act as an advocate for the cus-
tomer within the company.
●
●Global marketing: As firms globalize their operations they 
need managers who understand the importance of cultural 
differences and who can adapt strategies to foreign markets.
●
●Advertising copywriters: Copywriters translate a brand’s po-
sitioning strategy into concrete form by creating words and 
visual images that convey this imagery. They need to under-
stand the target market to employ imagery that will create 
the desired response.
●
●Advertising account executives: An account executive super-
vises the development of a marketing plan and makes sure 
that the agency’s clients understand and are happy with the 
plan. This job requires knowledge about all aspects of mar-
keting, including an understanding of target markets.
●
●Retail managers and merchandisers: A department or store 
manager must make decisions about such factors as the 
store’s sales force and how merchandise is displayed in the 
store. He or she must understand the factors that add to or 
subtract from the quality of the customer’s experience while 
in the store.
●
●Retail buyers: A buyer purchases merchandise for a store. 
A good buyer is always “tuned in” to upcoming trends 
and fashions and is sensitive to the wants and needs of the 
store’s clientele.
●
●Public relations: A public relations specialist is responsible for 
maintaining positive public awareness of the firm and mini-
mizing negative reactions to company activities. Knowledge 
of how people’s perceptions are influenced by the media is 
integral to this job.
The Industry Route
Many entry-level jobs are available to a competent person with 
a bachelor’s degree (though in some fields it is increasingly dif-
ficult to get hired without at least a master’s degree). A typical 
starting position for a university graduate in a marketing re-
search firm, for example, would be as an assistant project man-
ager. This person assists in the design and administration of 
studies and ensures that they are enacted within the prescribed 
budget. The beginner may also be assigned to supervise field op-
erations, overseeing the actual collection of data and perhaps 
coding and analyzing it.
Over time the person would move up to a supervisory posi-
tion with increasing responsibility. Eventually the person might 
attain the position of vice-president of marketing research, 
where he or she would be responsible for the entire company’s 
Careers in Consumer Research
Appendix ii
569

570 
Appendix ii  Careers in Consumer Research
Most consumer behavior Ph.D.s who did not obtain their 
degrees in marketing were trained in psychology. Other possible 
fields of study—as the discipline’s perspective continues to wid-
en—are sociology, anthropology, economics, history, English, 
human ecology, and others.
These individuals may take faculty positions in a busi-
ness school, where they conduct research that is published in 
such academic journals as the Journal of Consumer Research. 
They may also work as consultants to corporations, advertis-
ing agencies, and the government. Also, those with Ph.D.s are 
in demand for full-time non-academic positions, such as in 
consulting firms and “think tanks,” or in advertising agencies, 
manufacturing companies, trade groups (e.g., the Wool Bureau 
or the Conference Board), or government agencies.
For further insight on these possibilities, consider asking 
your professor about his or her educational background and re-
search activities.
marketing research efforts and be part of senior management. 
Chances of moving up tend to improve greatly if the individual 
received advanced training in statistics, experimental design, 
and other aspects of consumer psychology.
The Academic Route
Another alternative is to consider training to become a scholar 
in the field of consumer behavior. Many major business schools 
offer doctoral programs in marketing in which it is possible to 
specialize in consumer behavior research. In addition, some 
 psychology departments offer doctoral programs in consumer 
psychology. The typical doctoral program involves from four 
to seven years of intensive study, during which the student is 
trained in both theoretical and technical aspects of consumer 
 research. Many doctoral students in business have already 
earned an M.B.A., though this is not always the case.

571
ABC model of attitudes a multidimensional 
perspective stating that attitudes are 
jointly defined by affect, behavior, and 
cognition
Absolute threshold the minimum amount 
of stimulation that can be detected on a 
given sensory channel
Acceptance cycles a way to differenti-
ate among fashions in terms of their 
longevity
Accommodative purchase decision the pro-
cess of using bargaining, coercion, com-
promise, and the wielding of power to 
achieve agreement among group mem-
bers who have different preferences or 
priorities
Acculturation the process of learning the be-
liefs and behaviors endorsed by another 
culture
Acculturation agents friends, family, local 
businesses, and other reference groups 
that facilitate the learning of cultural 
norms
Activation models of memory approaches 
to memory stressing different levels of 
processing that occur and activate some 
aspects of memory rather than others, 
depending on the nature of the process-
ing task
Activity stores a retailing concept that lets 
consumers participate in the production 
of the products or services being sold in 
the store
Actual self a person’s realistic appraisal of 
his or her qualities
Adaptation the process that occurs when a 
sensation becomes so familiar that it no 
longer commands attention
Advergaming online games merged with in-
teractive advertisements that let compa-
nies target specific types of consumers
Advertising wear-out the condition that oc-
curs when consumers become so used to 
hearing or seeing a marketing stimulus 
that they no longer pay attention to it
Affect the way a consumer feels about an at-
titude object
Affluenza well-off  consumers who are 
stressed or unhappy despite of, or even 
because of, their wealth
Age cohort a group of consumers of approx-
imately the same age who have under-
gone similar experiences
Atmospherics the use of space and physical 
features in store design to evoke certain 
effects in buyers
Attention the assignment of processing ac-
tivity to selected stimuli
Attitude a lasting, general evaluation of 
people (including oneself), objects, or 
issues
Attitude accessibility perspective an attitude 
will guide the evaluation of the object 
but only if a person’s memory activates 
it when she encounters the object
Attitude models frameworks that identify 
specific components and combine them 
to predict a consumer’s overall attitude 
toward a product or brand
Attitude object (Ao) anything toward which 
one has an attitude
Attitude toward the act of buying (Aact) the 
perceived consequences of a purchase
Audio watermarking a technique where com-
posers and producers weave a distinctive 
sound/motif into a piece of music that 
sticks in people’s minds over time
Augmented reality technology applications 
that layer digital information over a 
physical space to add additional infor-
mation for users
Automated attention analysis (AAA) the au-
tomated recording of how long people 
look at images, words, people, places, 
and products, if their pupils dilate, how 
their heads and postures change, how 
fast they blink, and what emotions they 
show
Autonomic decision when one family mem-
ber chooses a product for the whole 
family
Avoidance-avoidance conflict a choice 
situation where both alternatives are 
undesirable
Avoidance groups reference groups that ex-
ert a negative influence on individuals 
because they are motivated to distance 
themselves from group members
B2C e-commerce businesses selling to con-
sumers through electronic marketing
Baby Boomer a large cohort of people born 
between the years of 1946 and 1964 
who are the source of many important 
cultural and economic changes
Back-translation A technique in which 
a different interpreter retranslates a 
Agentic goals an emphasis on self-assertion 
and mastery, often associated with tradi-
tional male gender roles
AIOs (activities, interests, and opinions) the 
psychographic variables researchers use 
to group consumers
Allegory a story told about an abstract trait 
or concept that has been personified as a 
person, animal, or vegetable
Alternate-reality game (ARG) an application 
that blends online and offline clues and 
encourages players to collaborate to 
solve a puzzle
Ambicultural an identity that is a mixture of 
two subcultures
Androgyny the possession of both masculine 
and feminine traits
Anthropomorphism the tendency to attri-
bute human characteristics to objects or 
animals
Antibrand communities groups of consumers 
who share a common disdain for a celeb-
rity, store, or brand
Anticonsumption the actions taken by con-
sumers involving the deliberate deface-
ment or mutilation of products
Antifestival an event that distorts the sym-
bols associated with other holidays
Approach–approach conflict a person must 
choose between two desirable alternatives
Approach–avoidance conflict a person de-
sires a goal but wishes to avoid it at the 
same time
Archetypes a universally shared idea or be-
havior pattern, central to Carl Jung’s 
conception of personality; archetypes 
involve themes—such as birth, death, 
or the devil—that appear frequently in 
myths, stories, and dreams
Art product a creation viewed primarily as 
an object of aesthetic contemplation 
without any functional value
Aspirational reference group high-profile 
athletes and celebrities used in market-
ing efforts to promote a product
Associative network a memory system that 
organizes individual units of informa-
tion according to some set of relation-
ships; may include such concepts as 
brands, manufacturers, and stores
Asynchronous interactions message posts 
that don’t require all participants to re-
spond immediately
G l o s s a r y

572 
Glossary
Business-to-business (B2B) marketers spe-
cialists in meeting the needs of organiza-
tions such as corporations, government 
agencies, hospitals, and retailers
Buyclass theory of purchasing a framework 
that characterizes organizational buy-
ing decisions in terms of how much 
cognitive effort is involved in making a 
decision
Buying center the part of an organiza-
tion charged with making purchasing 
decisions
Buzz marketing messages that consumers 
perceive to be authentic and consumer 
generated
C2C e-commerce consumer-to-consumer 
activity through the Internet
Category exemplars brands that are par-
ticularly relevant examples of a broader 
classification
Cause marketing a strategy that aligns a 
company or brand with a cause to gen-
erate business and societal benefits
Celebrity endorsements a communications 
tactic whereby an organization retains a 
well-known person to tout a product or 
cause on its behalf
CEO pay ratio a ratio that compares the sal-
ary of a company’s chief executive to the 
earnings of a typical employee
Chavs British term that refers to young, 
lower-class men and women who mix 
flashy brands and accessories from big 
names such as Burberry with track 
suits
Chunking a process in which information is 
stored by combining small pieces of in-
formation into larger ones
Classic a fashion with an extremely long ac-
ceptance cycle
Classical conditioning the learning that oc-
curs when a stimulus eliciting a response 
is paired with another stimulus that ini-
tially does not elicit a response on its own 
but will cause a similar response over 
time because of its association with the 
first stimulus
Closure principle the Gestalt principle that 
describes a person’s tendency to supply 
missing information to perceive a holis-
tic image
Co-branding strategies linking products to-
gether to create a more desirable conno-
tation in consumer minds
Co-consumers other patrons in a consumer 
setting
Co-creation involving consumers in the pro-
cess of developing advertising and other 
marketing actions
his or her body is bigger or smaller than 
others see it
Boomerang kids grown children who return 
to their parents’ home to live
Botnets a set of computers that are pen-
etrated by malicious software known as 
malware that allows an external agent to 
control their actions
Bounded rationality a concept in behavioral 
economics that states because we rarely 
have the resources (especially the time) 
to weigh every possible factor into a de-
cision, we settle for a solution that is just 
good enough
Bottom of the pyramid the huge number of 
consumers around the world who have 
low incomes
Brand arrogance a type of brand personal-
ity that conveys a sense of smugness or 
superiority
Brand community a set of consumers who 
share a set of social relationships based 
on usage or interest in a product
Brand equity a brand that has strong positive 
associations in a consumer’s memory 
and commands a lot of loyalty as a result
Brand immigrants noncore users who try to 
claim membership within a community 
of users
Brand loyalty repeat purchasing behavior 
that reflects a conscious decision to con-
tinue buying the same brand
Brand personality a set of traits people attri-
bute to a product as if it were a person
Brand prominence the display of blatant sta-
tus symbols to ensure that others recog-
nize one’s luxury brands
Brand storytelling a marketing communi-
cations approach that emphasizes the 
importance of giving a product a rich 
background to involve customers in its 
history or experience.
Brand tourists noncore users who buy the 
brand but who do not seek admittance 
into a community of users
Brandfests a corporate-sponsored event in-
tended to promote strong brand loyalty 
among customers
BRIC nation the bloc of nations with rapid 
economic development: Brazil, Russia, 
India, and China
Bromance a relationship characterized by 
strong affection between two straight 
males
Business ethics rules of conduct that guide 
actions in the marketplace
Business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce In-
ternet interactions between two or more 
businesses or organizations
translated ad back into its original lan-
guage to catch errors
Badges evidence of some achievement con-
sumers display either in the physical 
world or on social platforms
Balance theory a theory that considers rela-
tions among elements a person might 
perceive as belonging together, and 
people’s tendency to change relations 
among elements to make them consis-
tent or “balanced”
Basking in reflected glory the practice of 
publicizing connections with successful 
people or organizations to enhance one’s 
own standing
Beacons devices in a retail environment that 
communicate with shoppers’ phones as 
they walk through the aisles
Behavior a consumer’s actions with regard 
to an attitude object
Behavioral economics the study of the be-
havioral determinants of  economic 
decisions
Behavioral learning theories the perspectives 
on learning that assume that learning 
takes place as the result of responses to 
external events
Being space a retail environment that re-
sembles a residential living room where 
customers are encouraged to congregate
Belief systems a person’s underlying beliefs; 
the extent to which people share a belief 
system is a function of individual, social, 
and cultural forces. Believers tend to be 
exposed to information that supports 
their beliefs.
Big Data the collection and analysis of ex-
tremely large datasets to identify patterns 
of behavior in a group of consumers
Big Five a set of five dimensions that form 
the basis of personality: openness to ex-
perience, conscientiousness, extrover-
sion, agreeableness, and neuroticism
Binary opposition a defining structural char-
acteristic of many myths in which two 
opposing ends of some dimension are 
represented (e.g., good versus evil, na-
ture versus technology)
Bioterrorism a strategy to disrupt the na-
tion’s food supply with the aim of creat-
ing economic havoc
Bitcoin an online currency system that uses 
peer-to-peer technology and does not 
coordinate with any central authority 
or banks
Body image a consumer’s subjective evalua-
tion of his or her physical self
Body image distortions psychological disor-
ders that cause the patient to believe that 

 
Glossary 
573 
provide evidence of a consumer’s ability 
to afford them
Constructive processing a thought process 
in which a person evaluates the effort 
he or she will need to make a particular 
choice, and then tailors the amount of 
cognitive “effort” expended to make this 
decision
Consumed consumers those people who 
are used or exploited, whether will-
ingly or not, for commercial gain in the 
marketplace
Consumer a person who identifies a need or 
desire, makes a purchase, or disposes of 
the product
Consumer addiction a physiological or psy-
chological dependency on products or 
services
Consumer behavior the processes involved 
when individuals or groups select, pur-
chase, use, or dispose of products, ser-
vices, ideas, or experiences to satisfy 
needs and desires
Consumer confidence the extent to which 
people are optimistic or pessimistic about 
the future health of the economy
Consumer confusion in legal contexts, the 
likelihood that one company’s logo, 
product design, or package is so simi-
lar to another that the typical shopper 
would mistake one for the other
Consumer culture theory (CCT) the study of 
consumption from a cultural perspective 
rather than a psychological or economic 
focus
Consumer fairy tales stories that consum-
ers create involving products that 
help them to overcome villains and 
obstacles
Consumer hyperchoice the profusion of op-
tions in the modern marketplace that 
forces us to make repeated decisions that 
may drain psychological energy while 
decreasing our abilities to make smart 
choices
Consumer identity renaissance the redefini-
tion process people undergo when they 
retire
Consumer satisfaction/dissatisfaction 
(CS/D) the overall attitude a person 
has about a product after it has been 
purchased
Consumer socialization the process by which 
people acquire skills that enable them to 
function in the marketplace
Consumerspace marketing environment 
where customers act as partners with 
companies to decide what the market-
place will offer
Compatibility in the context of diffusion of 
innovations, the extent to which a new 
product fits with a consumer’s preexist-
ing lifestyle
Compensatory consumption product choice 
driven by a threat to the self-concept
Compensatory rules a set of rules that allows 
information about attributes of com-
peting products to be averaged in some 
way; poor standing on one attribute can 
potentially be offset by good standing on 
another
Complexity in the context of diffusion of 
innovation, the extent to which a new 
product is difficult to use or to integrate 
into a person’s daily life
Compliance belief that we form an attitude 
because it helps us to gain rewards or 
avoid punishment
Compulsive consumption the process of re-
petitive, often excessive, shopping used 
to relieve tension, anxiety, depression, or 
boredom
Conditioned response (CR) a response to 
a conditioned stimulus caused by the 
learning of an association between a 
conditioned stimulus (CS) and an un-
conditioned stimulus (UCS)
Conditioned stimulus (CS) a stimulus that 
produces a learned reaction through as-
sociation over time
Conditioned superstition consumers who 
don’t feel they have control over their 
outcomes come to associate a product 
that is paired with a reward with the 
outcome itself
Conformity a change in beliefs or actions 
as a reaction to real or imagined group 
pressure
Conjunctive rule the decision maker establishes 
cut-offs for each attribute and chooses a 
brand if it meets all the cutoffs, but rejects 
a brand that fails to meet any one cut-off
Connexity a lifestyle term coined by the ad-
vertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi to 
describe young consumers who place 
high value on being both footloose and 
connected
Conscientious consumerism a new value that 
combines a focus on personal health 
with a concern for global health
Consensual purchase decision a decision in 
which the group agrees on the desired 
purchase and differs only in terms of 
how it will be achieved
Consideration set the products a consumer 
actually deliberates about choosing
Conspicuous consumption the purchase and 
prominent display of luxury goods to 
Codes the ways members of a shared cul-
ture express and interpret meanings
Coercive power influence over another per-
son because of social or physical intimi-
dation cohesiveness
Cognition the beliefs a consumer has about 
an attitude object
Cognitive-affective model proposes that an 
emotional reaction is just the last step 
in a series of cognitive processes that fol-
lows sensory recognition of a stimulus 
and retrieval of information from mem-
ory that helps to categorize it.
Cognitive learning theory approaches that 
stress the importance of internal mental 
processes; this perspective views people 
as problem solvers who actively use in-
formation from the world around them 
to master their environment
Cohabitate people who live together without 
being married
Collaborative consumption a term to describe 
the new sharing economy, where people 
rent or barter what they need rather 
than buying it
Collecting the systematic acquisition of a 
particular object or set of objects
Collective decision making situations in 
which more than one person chooses 
the products or services that multiple 
consumers use
Collective self a process of self-definition 
whereby an individual’s identity is 
largely derived from his or her group 
memberships
Collective value creation the process whereby 
brand community members work to-
gether to develop better ways to use and 
customize products
College wage premium the gap between what 
workers with a college degree earn com-
pared with those without one
Color forecasts predictions that manufac-
turers and retailers buy so they can be 
sure they stock up on the next hot hue
Communal goals an emphasis on affiliation 
and the fostering of harmonious rela-
tions, often associated with traditional 
female gender roles
Communications model a framework specify-
ing that a number of elements are neces-
sary for communication to be achieved, 
including a source, message, medium, 
receivers, and feedback
Comparative advertising a strategy in which 
a message compares two or more specifi-
cally named or recognizably presented 
brands and makes a comparison of them 
in terms of one or more specific attributes

574 
Glossary
belief in democracy; the ability to freely 
interact with other people, companies, 
and organizations; open access to ven-
ues that allow users to share content 
from simple comments to reviews, rat-
ings, photos, stories, and more; and the 
power to build on the content of others 
from your own unique point of view
Culture production system (CPS) the set of 
individuals and organizations responsi-
ble for creating and marketing a cultural 
product
Curation a source such as a store or a celeb-
rity selects a set of products to simplify 
shoppers’ decisions
Custom a norm that controls basic behaviors, 
such as division of labor in a household
Cyberbullying when one or more people post 
malicious comments online about some-
one else in a coordinated effort to harass 
him or her
Cybermediary intermediary that helps to fil-
ter and organize online market informa-
tion so that consumers can identify and 
evaluate alternatives more efficiently
Dadvertising a new trend that depicts fathers 
as wise and benevolent in advertising
Database marketing tracking consumers’ 
buying habits very closely, and then 
crafting products and messages tailored 
precisely to people’s wants and needs 
based on this information
Decay structural changes in the brain pro-
duced by learning decrease over time
Deethnicization process whereby a product 
formerly associated with a specific eth-
nic group is detached from its roots and 
marketed to other subcultures
Default bias a tendency in decision making 
that makes it more likely for people to 
comply with a requirement than to make 
the effort not to comply
Deindividuation the process whereby indi-
vidual identities get submerged within 
a group, reducing inhibitions against 
socially inappropriate behavior
Demographics the observable measurements 
of a population’s characteristics, such as 
birthrate, age distribution, and income
Desacralization the process that occurs 
when a sacred item or symbol is removed 
from its special place, or is duplicated in 
mass quantities, and becomes profane as 
a result
Determinant attributes the attributes actu-
ally used to differentiate among choices
Differential threshold the ability of a sensory 
system to detect changes or differences 
among stimuli
Counteractive construal exaggerating the 
negative aspects of behaviors that will 
impede the attainment of a goal as a 
strategy to avoid them and reach the goal
Counterarguing the tendency for consumers 
to think of reasons why they should not 
believe a message
Counterfeiting companies or individuals sell 
fake versions of real products
Country of origin (COO) original country 
from which a product is produced; it can 
be an important piece of information in 
the decision-making process
Covariation assumed associations among 
events that may or may not actually in-
fluence one another
Craft product a creation valued because of 
the beauty with which it performs some 
function; this type of product tends to 
follow a formula that permits rapid pro-
duction, and it is easier to understand 
than an art product
Credit score a measure of financial well be-
ing based upon a consumer’s debt and 
payment histories
Creolization foreign influences are absorbed 
and integrated with local meanings
Crescive norms unspoken rules that govern 
social behavior
Crowdsourcing the growing practice of solicit-
ing ideas for new products and even adver-
tising campaigns from a user community
Cryptocurrency a system that relies upon en-
cryption techniques rather than banks 
to regulate the generation of units of 
currency and verify the transfer of funds.
Cult products items that command fierce 
consumer loyalty and devotion
Cultural capital a set of distinctive and so-
cially rare tastes and practices that admits 
a person into the realm of the upper class
Cultural formula a sequence of media events 
in which certain roles and props tend to 
occur consistently
Cultural gatekeepers individuals who are 
responsible for determining the types of 
messages and symbolism to which mem-
bers of mass culture are exposed
Cultural selection the process by which some 
alternatives are selected over others by 
cultural gatekeepers
Culture the values, ethics, rituals, traditions, 
material objects, and services produced 
or valued by the members of a society
Culture jamming strategies that attempt 
to disrupt or satirize messages from 
corporations
Culture of participation the driving philoso-
phy behind social media that includes a 
Consumer style a pattern of behaviors, at-
titudes, and opinions that influences all 
of a person’s consumption activities—
including attitudes toward advertis-
ing, preferred channels of information 
and purchase, brand loyalty, and price 
consciousness
Consumption communities Web groups 
where members share views and product 
recommendations online
Consumption constellation a set of products 
and activities used by consumers to de-
fine, communicate, and perform social 
roles
Consumption situation includes a buyer, a 
seller, and a product or service—but 
also many other factors, such as the 
reason we want to make a purchase and 
how the physical environment makes 
us feel
Contamination when a place or object takes 
on sacred qualities because of its associa-
tion with another sacred person or event
Contemporary Young Mainstream Female 
Achievers (CYMFA) modern women who 
assume multiple roles
Context effects subtle cues in the environ-
ment that influence a person’s decisions
Continuous innovation a modification of an 
existing product
Contrast stimuli that differ from others 
around them
Conventions norms that regulate how we 
conduct our everyday lives
Cooptation a cultural process by which the 
original meanings of a product or other 
symbol associated with a subculture are 
modified by members of mainstream 
culture
Core values common general values held by 
a culture
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) pro-
cesses that encourage the organization 
to make a positive impact on the vari-
ous stakeholders in its community in-
cluding consumers, employees, and the 
environment
Corrective advertising messages an organi-
zation releases (voluntarily or not) that 
inform consumers of previous messages 
that were inaccurate or misleading
Cosmopolitanism a cultural value that em-
phasizes being open to the world and 
striving for diverse experiences
Cosplay a form of performance art in which 
participants wear elaborate costumes 
that represent a virtual world avatar or 
other fictional character
Cougars older women who date younger men

 
Glossary 
575 
Emic perspective an approach to studying 
(or marketing to) cultures that stresses 
the unique aspects of each culture
Emotions intense affective reactions, such as 
happiness, anger, and fear
Emotional oracle effect a finding reported by 
researchers that people who trust their 
feelings are able to predict future events 
better than those who do not
Empty self a shift toward a greater focus on 
the self as traditional points of reference 
such as family and cultural traditions re-
cede in importance
Enclothed cognition as a demonstration of 
the more general phenomenon of em-
bodied cognition, the symbolic meaning 
of clothing changes how people behave
Encoding the process in which information 
from short-term memory enters into 
long-term memory in a recognizable 
form
Enculturation the process of learning the 
beliefs and behaviors endorsed by one’s 
own culture
Endowment effect encouraging shoppers 
to touch a product encourages them 
to imagine they own it, and research-
ers know that people value things more 
highly if they own them
Endowed progress effect people are more 
motivated to attain a goal when they 
are provided with the illusion of  a 
“head start” even though the actual ef-
fort required to reach the goal does not 
change
Envy a negative emotion associated with the 
desire to reduce the gap between oneself 
and someone who is superior on some 
dimension
Episodic memories memories that relate to 
personally relevant events; this tends to 
increase a person’s motivation to retain 
these memories
Erogenous zones sexually arousing areas of 
the body
Etic perspective an approach to studying (or 
marketing to) cultures that stresses com-
monalities across cultures
Evaluations positive or negative reactions to 
events and objects that are not accom-
panied by high levels of physiological 
arousal
Evaluative criteria the dimensions used by 
consumers to compare competing prod-
uct alternatives
Evoked set those products already in mem-
ory plus those prominent in the retail en-
vironment that are actively considered 
during a consumer’s choice process
E-sports a growing activity that involves 
spectators who watch videogamers com-
pete with one another
Early adopters people who are receptive to 
new products and adopt them relatively 
soon, though they are motivated more 
by social acceptance and being in style 
than by the desire to try risky new things
Echo Boomers people born between 1986 
and 2002, also known as Gen Y and 
Millennials
Ecology the way members of a culture adapt 
to their physical habitat
Ego the system that mediates between the id 
and the superego
Ego-defensive function attitudes we form to 
protect ourselves either from external 
threats or internal feelings
80/20 rule a rule-of-thumb in volume seg-
mentation, which says that about 20 
percent of consumers in a product cate-
gory (the heavy users) account for about 
80 percent of sales
Elaborated codes the ways of expressing and 
interpreting meanings that are more 
complex and depend on a more sophis-
ticated worldview, which tend to be used 
by the middle and upper classes
Elaboration likelihood model (ELM) the ap-
proach that one of two routes to per-
suasion (central versus peripheral) 
will be followed, depending on the per-
sonal relevance of a message; the route 
taken determines the relative impor-
tance of the message contents versus 
other characteristics, such as source 
attractiveness
Elaborative rehearsal a cognitive process that 
allows information to move from short-
term memory into long-term memory by 
thinking about the meaning of a stimu-
lus and relating it to other information 
already in memory
Elimination-by-aspects rule a rule that selects 
the brand that is the best on the most im-
portant attribute, but that imposes spe-
cific cut-offs or “must haves”
Embarrassment an emotion driven by a con-
cern for what others think about us
Embeds tiny figures inserted into magazine 
advertising by using high-speed pho-
tography or airbrushing; these hidden 
figures, usually of a sexual nature, sup-
posedly exert strong but unconscious 
influences on innocent readers
Embodied cognition the perspective that our 
behaviors and observations of what we 
do and buy shape our thoughts rather 
than vice versa
Diffusion of innovations the process whereby 
a new product, service, or idea spreads 
through a population
Digital Divide the gulf between wealthy and 
poor people in terms of online access
Digital Native young people who have grown 
up with computers and mobile technol-
ogy; multitaskers with cell phones, mu-
sic downloads, and instant messaging on 
the Internet; people who are comfortable 
communicating online and by text and 
IM rather than by voice
Digital self elements of self-expression that 
relate to a person’s online identity
Digital virtual consumption (DVC) purchases 
of virtual goods for use in online games 
and social communities
Digital wallets electronic devices that al-
low an individual to make e-commerce 
transactions
DINKS acronym for double income, no kids; 
a consumer segment with a lot of dispos-
able income
Disclaimers content at the end of a com-
mercial message that supplies additional 
information the advertiser is required to 
provide
Discontinuous innovation a new product or 
service that radically changes the way 
we live
Discretionary income the money available 
to a household over and above that re-
quired for necessities
Dispreferred marker effect the tendency 
to couch negative product reviews in 
softer terms to avoid looking harsh and 
judgmental
Dominance-submission hierarchy a “peck-
ing order” within a culture that dictates 
which members are relatively higher in 
status than other members
Doppelgänger brand image a parody of a 
brand posted on a Web site that looks 
like the original but is in fact a critique 
of it
Dramaturgical perspective a view of con-
sumer behavior that views people as ac-
tors who play different roles
Drive the desire to satisfy a biological need to 
reduce physiological arousal
Drive theory concept that focuses on biologi-
cal needs that produce unpleasant states 
of arousal
Dyadic encounters relationships in which 
both parties must reach some agreement 
about the roles of each participant dur-
ing a process of identity negotiation
Dynamically continuous innovation a signifi-
cant change to an existing product

576 
Glossary
Focus groups small set of consumers tries 
out a new product while being observed 
by company personnel
Follower brands brands that enter a market 
after another brand has already tested 
the waters
Food desert a geographic area where resi-
dents are unable to obtain adequate 
food and other products to maintain a 
healthy existence
Foot-in-the-door technique approach based 
on the observation that a consumer is 
more likely to comply with a request if 
he or she has first agreed to comply with 
a smaller request
Fortress brands brands that consumers 
closely link to rituals; this makes it un-
likely they will be replaced
Framing a concept in behavioral economics 
that the way a problem is posed to con-
sumers (especially in terms of gains or 
losses) influences the decision they make
Frequency marketing a marketing technique 
that reinforces regular purchasers by 
giving them prizes with values that in-
crease along with the amount purchased
Frugalistas fashion-conscious consumers 
who pride themselves on achieving style 
on a limited budget
Frugality a personality trait that describes 
people who prioritize ways to save money
Functional theory of attitudes states that 
attitudes exist because they serve some 
function for the person; consumers who 
expect that they will need to deal with 
similar situations at a future time will be 
more likely to start to form an attitude in 
anticipation
Functionally illiterate a person whose read-
ing skills are not adequate to carry out 
everyday tasks
Game platform an online interface that allows 
users to engage in games and other social 
activities with members of a community
Gamification the process of injecting gaming 
elements into tasks that might otherwise 
be boring or routine
Gemba Japanese term for the one true source 
of information
Gen X people born between 1965 and 1985
Gen Y people born between 1986 and 
2002; also known as Echo Boomers and 
Millennials
Gen Z the age cohort born in the late 1990s 
to early 2000s
Gender-bending product a traditionally 
sex-typed item adapted to the opposite 
gender
Gender identity the elements of self-concept 
that reflect sex roles
Fantasy a self-induced shift in conscious-
ness, often focusing on some unattain-
able or improbable goal; sometimes 
fantasy is a way of compensating for a 
lack of external stimulation or for dissat-
isfaction with the actual self
Fashion the process of social diffusion by 
which a new style is adopted by some 
group(s) of consumers
Fashion system those people and organi-
zations involved in creating symbolic 
meanings and transferring these mean-
ings to cultural goods
Fatshionistas plus-sized consumers who are 
avidly interested in fashion and want 
more options from mainstream fashion 
marketers
Fattism a preference for thin people and/or 
discrimination against overweight people
Fear appeals an attempt to change attitudes 
or behavior through the use of threats or 
by highlighting negative consequences 
of noncompliance with the request
Fear of Missing Out (FOMO) a popular expla-
nation for the addictive nature of social 
networks
Feature creep the tendency of manufac-
turers to add layers of complexity to 
products that make them harder to un-
derstand and use
Feedback loop a strategy to help a person 
regulate his or her behavior by provid-
ing information about his or her actions 
in real time, and then offering a chance 
to change those actions
Female-to-male earnings ratio is 0.78, which 
means that on average a woman earns 
78 cents for every dollar a man brings 
home
Fertility rate a rate determined by the num-
ber of births per year per 1,000 women 
of childbearing age
Figure-ground principle the Gestalt principle 
whereby one part of a stimulus configu-
ration dominates a situation whereas 
other aspects recede into the background
Fishbein Model a widely-used perspective 
that measures several attributes to de-
termine a person’s overall attitude
Fixed-interval reinforcement after a specified 
time period has passed, the first response 
an organism makes elicits a reward
Fixed-ratio reinforcement reinforcement 
occurs only after a fixed number of 
responses
Flaming a violation of digital etiquette when 
a post is written in all capital letters
Flow exchanges of resources, information, 
or influence among members of an on-
line social network
Exchange a transaction in which two or 
more organizations or people give and 
receive something of value
Executive control center the part of the brain 
that we use to make important decisions
Expectancy disconfirmation model states 
that we form beliefs about product per-
formance based on prior experience with 
the product or communications about 
the product that imply a certain level of 
quality: (1) if something performs the 
way we thought it would, we may not 
think much about it; (2) if it fails to live 
up to expectations, this may create nega-
tive feelings; (3) if performance exceeds 
our initial expectations, we are satisfied
Expectancy theory the perspective that be-
havior is largely “pulled” by expectations 
of achieving desirable outcomes, or posi-
tive incentives, rather than “pushed” 
from within
Experiential hierarchy of effects an attitude 
is initially formed on the basis of a raw 
emotional reaction
Expert power influence over others as a re-
sult of specialized knowledge about a 
subject
Exposure an initial stage of perception dur-
ing which some sensations come within 
range of consumers’ sensory receptors
Extended family traditional family struc-
ture in which several generations live 
together
Extended self the external objects we con-
sider a part of our self-identity
Extinction the process whereby a learned 
connection between a stimulus and re-
sponse is eroded so that the response is 
no longer reinforced
Eyeball economy the argument that in to-
day’s media environment marketers 
compete for consumers’ attention rather 
than their money
Fad a short-lived fashion
Family branding an application of stimulus 
generalization when a product capital-
izes on the reputation of its manufac-
turer’s name
Family financial officer (FFO) the individual 
in the family who is in charge of making 
financial decisions
Family identity the definition of a house-
hold by family members that it presents 
to  members and to those outside the 
family unit
Family life cycle (FLC) a classification scheme 
that segments consumers in terms of 
changes in income and family composi-
tion and the changes in demands placed 
on this income

 
Glossary 
577 
Hoarding unsystematic acquisition of ob-
jects (in contrast to collecting)
Hofstede Dimensions of National Culture 
a measurement system that scores a 
country in terms of its standing on six 
dimensions so that users can compare 
and contrast values
Homeostasis a stable state of physiological 
arousal
Home shopping party a selling format where 
a company representative makes a 
sales presentation to a group of people 
who gather at the home of a friend or 
acquaintance
Homogamy the tendency for individuals to 
marry others similar to themselves
Homophily the degree to which a pair of indi-
viduals is similar in terms of education, 
social status, and beliefs
Hook an element in a title that increases the 
likelihood people will click on it
Horizontal revolution a fundamental change 
in how consumers communicate via 
 social media, whereby information doesn’t 
just flow from big companies and gov-
ernments; information flows across peo-
ple as well
Host culture a new culture to which a  person 
must acculturate
Household according to the U.S. Census 
 Bureau, an occupied housing unit
Humor appeals a marketing message that re-
lies upon humor to sell a product
Hybrid ad a marketing communication that 
explicitly references the context (e.g., TV 
show) in which it appears
Hybrid products items that feature char-
acteristics from two different product 
domains
Hype marketing messages that consumers 
perceive to be inauthentic and company 
generated
Hyperreality the becoming real of what is ini-
tially simulation or “hype”
Icon a sign that resembles the product in 
some way
Id the Freudian system oriented toward 
 immediate gratification
Ideal of beauty a model, or exemplar, of ap-
pearance valued by a culture
Ideal self a person’s conception of how he or 
she would like to be
Identification the process of forming an at-
titude to conform to another person’s or 
group’s expectations
Identity a component of self-concept
Identity marketing a practice whereby con-
sumers are paid to alter some aspects 
of their selves to advertise for a branded 
product
experience a loss of inhibition and post 
things they would never say to a person 
in the real world
Habitual decision making choices made with 
little or no conscious effort
Habitus ways in which we classify experi-
ences as a result of our socialization 
processes
Halal food and other products whose usage 
is permissible according to the laws of 
Islam
Halo effect a phenomenon that occurs when 
people react to other, similar stimuli in 
much the same way they respond to the 
original stimulus
Happiness a mental state of well-being char-
acterized by positive emotions
Happiness economy an economy based upon 
well-being rather than material wealth
Haptic touch-related sensations
Haul videos a genre of YouTube video that 
consists of a shopper who describes in de-
tail apparel he or she has just purchased
Heavy users a name companies use to iden-
tify their customers who consume their 
products in large volumes
Hedonic adaptation belief that to maintain 
a fairly stable level of happiness we tend 
to become used to positive and negative 
events in our lives
Hedonic consumption the multisensory, fan-
tasy, and emotional aspects of consum-
ers’ interactions with products
Heuristics the mental rules of thumb that 
lead to a speedy decision
Hierarchy of effects a fixed sequence of steps 
that occurs during attitude formation; 
this sequence varies depending on such 
factors as the consumer’s level of in-
volvement with the attitude object
Hierarchy of Needs (Maslow’s) a framework 
that specifies different levels of motives 
that depends on the consumer’s per-
sonal situation
Hierogamy when physically attractive 
women “marry up”
High-context culture group members tend to 
be close-knit and are likely to infer mean-
ings that go beyond the spoken word
High-involvement hierarchy the sequence of 
attitude formation when a person ap-
proaches a product decision as a prob-
lem-solving process.
Highlighting effect the order in which con-
sumers learn about brands determines 
the strength of  association between 
these brands and their attributes
Hispanic people whose geographic and/or 
cultural origins are in Latin American 
countries
Gender socialization elements of culture, in-
cluding advertising, that provide guide-
lines regarding “appropriate” sex role 
behavior for members
Genre in the context of social gaming, the 
method of play such as simulation, ac-
tion, and role-playing
Geodemography techniques that combine 
consumer demographic information 
with geographic consumption patterns 
to permit precise targeting of consum-
ers with specific characteristics
Geospatial platforms online applications 
that use smartphones to identify con-
sumers’ physical locations
Gestalt meaning derived from the totality of 
a set of stimuli, rather than from any in-
dividual stimulus
Gestation the first stage of the gift-giving 
ritual where the giver procures an item 
to mark the event 
Gift-giving ritual the events involved in the 
selection, presentation, acceptance, and 
interpretation of a gift
Glamping a new trend that combines camp-
ing with luxury travel
Global consumer culture a culture in which 
people around the world are united 
through their common devotion to 
brand name consumer goods, movie 
stars, celebrities, and leisure activities
Goal a consumer’s desired end state
Golden triangle the portion of a Web site 
that a person’s eyes naturally gravitate 
to first, which makes it more likely that 
search results located in that area will 
be seen
Green marketing a marketing strategy in-
volving an emphasis on protecting the 
natural environment
Greenwashing inflated claims about a prod-
uct’s environmental benefits
Gripe sites Web sites that consumers create 
to share frustrations about bad experi-
ences with companies
Grooming rituals sequences of behaviors 
that aid in the transition from the private 
self to the public self or back again
Group dieting online forums devoted to en-
couraging people to go on crash diets
Guerrilla marketing unconventional market-
ing campaigns that place unusual mes-
sages in places where consumers don’t 
expect to encounter advertising.
Guilt an individual’s unpleasant emotional 
state associated with possible objections 
to his or her actions, inaction, circum-
stances, or intentions
Gyges effect the anonymity of the Internet 
can cause otherwise moral people to 

578 
Glossary
Knowledge bias the effectiveness of a source 
decreases because we question his or her 
knowledge about the topic
Knowledge function the process of forming 
an attitude to provide order, structure, 
or meaning
Knowledge structure organized system of 
concepts relating to brands, stores, and 
other concepts
Laddering a technique for uncovering con-
sumers’ associations between specific 
attributes and general values
Laggards consumers who are exceptionally 
slow to adopt innovations
Late adopters the majority of consumers 
who are moderately receptive to adopt-
ing innovations
Lateral cycling a process in which already-
purchased objects are sold to others or 
exchanged for other items
Latitudes of acceptance and rejection in the 
social judgment theory of attitudes, the 
notion that people differ in terms of the 
information they will find acceptable 
or unacceptable; they form latitudes of 
acceptance and rejection around an at-
titude standard—ideas that fall within 
a latitude will be favorably received, but 
those falling outside of this zone will not
Leaderboards an element of game design 
that provides information about all par-
ticipants’ progress in the game
Learning a relatively permanent change in a 
behavior caused by experience
Legitimate power influence over others due 
to a position conferred by a society or 
organization
Leisure class wealthy people for whom work 
is a taboo
Lexicographic rule a simple rule that selects 
the brand that is the best on the most im-
portant attribute
Licensing popular marketing strategy that 
pays for the right to link a product or ser-
vice to the name of a well-known brand 
or designer
Lifestyle a pattern of consumption that re-
flects a person’s choices of how to spend 
his or her time and money
Lifestyle marketing perspective strategy 
based on the recognition that people sort 
themselves into groups on the basis of 
the things they like to do, how they like 
to spend their leisure time, and how they 
choose to spend their disposable income
Lifestyle segmentation typologies Research 
projects that cluster a large group of 
consumers into a set of distinct lifestyle 
groups
Information search the process by which the 
consumer surveys his or her environ-
ment for appropriate data to make a rea-
sonable decision
Innovation a product or style that is per-
ceived as new by consumers
Innovators people who are always on the 
lookout for novel developments and will 
be the first to try a new offering
Instrumental conditioning also known as 
operant conditioning, occurs as the indi-
vidual learns to perform behaviors that 
produce positive outcomes and avoid 
those that yield negative outcomes
Instrumental values goals endorsed because 
they are needed to achieve desired end 
states or terminal values
Intelligent agents software programs that 
learn from past user behavior to recom-
mend new purchases
Interference one way that forgetting occurs; 
as additional information is learned, it 
displaces the previous information
Internalization deep-seated attitudes become 
part of our value system
Internet trolls people who experience a loss 
of inhibition and post things they would 
never say to a person in the real world
Interpretant the meaning derived from a 
sign or symbol
Interpretation the process whereby mean-
ings are assigned to stimuli
Interpretivism as opposed to the dominant 
positivist perspective on consumer be-
havior, instead stresses the importance 
of symbolic, subjective experience and 
the idea that meaning is in the mind 
of the person rather than existing “out 
there” in the objective world
Intersex children children born with both 
genitals or ambiguous sex characteristics
Invidious distinction the use of status sym-
bols to inspire envy in others through 
display of wealth or power
Involvement the motivation to process prod-
uct-related information
Juggling lifestyle working mothers’ at-
tempts to compromise between conflict-
ing cultural ideals of motherhood and 
professionalism
Just noticeable difference (JND) the mini-
mum difference between two stimuli that 
can be detected by a perceiver
Kansei engineering a Japanese philosophy 
that translates customers’ feelings into 
design elements
Kin-network system the rituals intended to 
maintain ties among family members, 
both immediate and extended
Identity negotiation the process that occurs 
when both participants in an encounter 
reach agreement about the role of each 
person
Identity theft the unauthorized use of per-
sonal information
Ideology the mental characteristics of a 
people and the way they relate to their 
environment and social groups
IKEA effect the tendency for consumers to 
like products more when they are in-
volved in building or assembling them
Imbibing idiot bias the assumption that peo-
ple who drink alcohol are less intelligent
Implementation intentions “if-then” plans 
that may dictate how much weight we 
give to different kinds of information 
(emotional or cognitive), a timetable to 
carry out a decision, or even how we 
will deal with disruptive influences that 
might interfere with our plans
Impression management our efforts to “man-
age” what others think of us by strategi-
cally choosing clothing and other cues 
that will put us in a good light
Impulse buying a process that occurs when 
the consumer experiences a sudden urge 
to purchase an item that he or she can-
not resist
Incidental brand exposure motives that can 
lurk beneath the surface and cues in the 
environment that can activate a goal 
even when we don’t know it
Incidental learning unintentional acquisi-
tion of knowledge
Income inequality the extent to which re-
sources are distributed unevenly within 
a population
Independence hypothesis argues that af-
fect and cognition are separate systems 
so that it’s not always necessary to 
have a cognition to elicit an emotional 
response.
Index a sign that is connected to a product 
because they share some property
Inertia the process whereby purchase deci-
sions are made out of habit because the 
consumer lacks the motivation to con-
sider alternatives
Influence impressions brand-specific men-
tions on social media posts
Influence network a two-way dialogue be-
tween participants in a social network 
and opinion leaders
Information cascades an online communica-
tion process where one piece of informa-
tion triggers a sequence of interactions
Information power influence over others be-
cause of the possession of inside knowledge

 
Glossary 
579 
consumers to travel to other countries 
for surgical procedures that might be 
unavailable, more dangerous, or more 
expensive where they live
Medication adherence the extent to which 
people fill and actually take prescribed 
medicines
Meerkating the act of shooting a live video 
stream
Megachurches very large churches that 
serve between 2,000 and 20,000 
congregants
Megacity a metropolitan area with a total 
population of more than 10 million 
people
Megaphone effect the ability of individual 
bloggers to share their opinions about 
products with large numbers of online 
followers
Membership reference group ordinary peo-
ple whose consumption activities pro-
vide informational social influence
Meme theory a perspective that uses a medi-
cal metaphor to explain how an idea or 
product enters the consciousness of peo-
ple over time, much like a virus
Memory a process of acquiring information 
and storing it over time so that it will be 
available when needed
Mental accounting principle that states that 
decisions are influenced by the way a 
problem is posed
Mental budgets consumers’ preset expecta-
tions of how much they intend to spend 
on a shopping trip
Mere exposure phenomenon the tendency 
to like persons or things if we see them 
more often
Message involvement properties of the me-
dium and message content that influ-
ence a person’s degree of engagement 
with the message
Metaphor the use of an explicit comparison 
(“A” is “B”) between a product and some 
other person, place, or thing
Microframe a period of notoriety due to a 
surge of interest on the Internet
Milieu in the context of social gaming, the 
visual nature of the game such as sci-
ence fiction, fantasy, horror, and retro
Millennials people born between 1986 and 
2002; also known as Echo Boomers and 
Gen Y
Minimal group paradigm the common find-
ing that even when people are arbi-
trarily assigned to a group they tend to 
favor those who are placed in the same 
group
Minipreneurs one-person businesses
Market access the extent to which a con-
sumer has the ability to find and pur-
chase goods and services
Market beliefs common assumptions about 
relationships between product quality 
and other factors such as price
Market maven a person who often serves as 
a source of information about market-
place activities
Market segmentation strategies targeting a 
brand only to specific groups of consum-
ers who share well-defined and relevant 
characteristics
Marketplace sentiments consumers’ feelings 
about companies or market practices.
Martyrdom effect the tendency for people to 
donate more to a cause if they also have 
to sacrifice something or experience 
discomfort
Masculinism study devoted to the male 
image and the cultural meanings of 
masculinity
Mass class a term analysts use to describe 
the millions of global consumers who 
now enjoy a level of purchasing power 
that’s sufficient to let them afford many 
high-quality products
Mass connectors highly influential members 
of social media networks
Mass customization the personalization of 
products and services for individual cus-
tomers at a mass-production price
Materialism the importance consumers at-
tach to worldly possessions
Material accumulation the instinct to earn 
more than we can possibly consume
Material parenting a style of raising children 
that involves giving and taking away of 
possessions to shape behavior
Maximizing solution the extensive cognitive 
decision strategies we use when we want 
to identify the best possible choice
Means–end chain model assumes that people 
link specific product attributes (indi-
rectly) to terminal values such as free-
dom or safety
Media literacy a consumer’s ability to access, 
analyze, evaluate, and communicate 
information
Media multiplexity in a social media con-
text, when flows of communication go 
in many directions at any point in time 
and often on multiple platforms
Media snacker consumers who visit media 
venues about 27 times per nonworking 
hour—the equivalent of more than 13 
times during a standard half-hour TV show
Medical tourism a rapidly growing sector 
of the global economy that encourages 
Linkbaiting in website design, the careful 
crafting of a title that markets the content
List of Values (LOV) scale identifies con-
sumer segments based on the values 
members endorse and relates each value 
to differences in consumption behaviors
Locational privacy the extent to which a per-
son’s activities and movements in the 
physical world are tracked by his or her 
devices such as smartphones
Locavore a lifestyle that emphasizes the 
purchase of locally produced meat and 
vegetables
LOHAS an acronym for “lifestyles of health 
and sustainability”; a consumer seg-
ment that worries about the environ-
ment, wants products to be produced in 
a sustainable way, and spends money to 
advance what they see as their personal 
development and potential
Long tail states that we no longer need to 
rely solely on big hits (such as block-
buster movies or best-selling books) to 
find profits; instead, companies can also 
make money if they sell small amounts 
of items that only a few people want—if 
they sell enough different items
Long-term memory (LTM) the system that al-
lows us to retain information for a long 
period of time
Look-alike packaging package designs that 
mimic the shapes and colors of well-
known brands
Looking-glass self the process of imagining 
the reaction of others toward oneself
Loss aversion the tendency for people to hate 
losing things more than they like getting 
things
Lovemark a passionate commitment to a 
brand
Low-context culture in contrast to high-
context cultures that have strong oral 
traditions and that are more sensitive to 
nuance, low-context cultures are more 
literal
Low-involvement hierarchy of effects the 
process of attitude formation for prod-
ucts or services that carry little risk or 
self-identity
Lurkers passive members of  an online 
community who do not contribute to 
interactions
M-commerce the practice of promoting and 
selling goods and services via wireless 
devices including cell phones, PDAs, 
and iPods
M-PESA a mobile-phone-based money 
transfer service that is popular in parts 
of Africa

580 
Glossary
New task in the context of the buyclass 
framework, a task that requires a great 
degree of effort and information search
Nodes members of a social network con-
nected to others via one or more shared 
relationships
Noncompensatory rules decision shortcuts 
a consumer makes when a product with 
a low standing on one attribute cannot 
make up for this position by being better 
on another attribute
Normative influence the process in which a 
reference group helps to set and enforce 
fundamental standards of conduct
Normcore a trend among young urban-
ites to forsake hipster styles like skinny 
jeans, wallet chains, and flannel shirts 
for bland, suburban attire
Norms the informal rules that govern what 
is right or wrong
Nostalgia a bittersweet emotion; the past is 
viewed with sadness and longing; many 
“classic” products appeal to consumers’ 
memories of their younger days
Nouveau riches affluent consumers whose 
relatively recent acquisition of  in-
come rather than ancestry or breed-
ing accounts for their enhanced social 
mobility
Nuclear family a contemporary living ar-
rangement composed of a married cou-
ple and their children
Nudge a subtle change in a person’s en-
vironment that results in a change in 
behavior
Object in semiotic terms, the product that is 
the focus of a message
Objectification when we attribute sacred 
qualities to mundane items
Observability in the context of diffusion of 
innovations, the extent to which a new 
product is something that is easy for con-
sumers to see in use to motivate others 
to try it
Observational learning the process in which 
people learn by watching the actions of 
others and noting the reinforcements 
they receive for their behaviors
Occupational prestige a system in which we 
define people to a great extent by what 
they do for a living
One Percenter a label applied by the Occupy 
Wall Street Movement to people who 
earn the top 1 percent of income
Online community the collective participa-
tion of members who together build and 
maintain a digital social network
Online gated communities digital social 
networks that selectively allow access 
Nanoframe a very brief period of “buzz” 
about someone who posts online or who 
appears in an online video
Narrative product information in the form 
of a story
Narrative transportation the result of a 
highly involving message where people 
become immersed in the storyline
National character the belief that a country 
has a distinctive set of behavior and per-
sonality characteristics
Native advertising a new advertising strat-
egy that focuses on digital messages de-
signed to blend into the editorial content 
of the publications in which they appear
Natural user interface a philosophy of com-
puter design that incorporates habitual 
human movements
Near field communication (NFC) technology 
that allows devices near to one another 
(like a smartphone and an NFC terminal in 
a store) to establish radio communication
Need a basic biological motive
Negative reinforcement the process whereby 
the environment weakens responses to 
stimuli so that inappropriate behavior is 
avoided
Negative state relief the view that helping 
others is a way to resolve one’s own neg-
ative moods
Negative word-of-mouth consumers pass-
ing on negative experiences relating to 
products or services to other potential 
customers to influence others’ choices
Net neutrality ensures that everyone—indi-
vidual users and behemoth companies—
is guaranteed equal access to the “pipes” 
we rely on to access cyberspace
Network effect each person who uses a prod-
uct or service benefits as more people 
participate
Neuroendocrinological science the study of 
the potential role of hormonal influ-
ences on preferences for different kinds 
of products or people
Neuromarketing a new technique that uses 
a brain scanning device called functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) that 
tracks blood flow as people perform men-
tal tasks; scientists know that specific re-
gions of the brain light up in these scans 
to show increased blood flow when a per-
son recognizes a face, hears a song, makes 
a decision, senses deception, and so on; 
therefore, they are now trying to harness 
this technology to measure consumers’ 
reactions to movie trailers, choices about 
automobiles, the appeal of a pretty face, 
and loyalty to specific brands
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inven-
tory (MMPI) a widely used instrument to 
identify personality traits
Mixed emotions affect with positive and neg-
ative components
MMORPGs (massive multiplayer online 
role-playing games) online role-playing 
games that typically involve thousands 
of players
Mobile shopping apps smartphone applica-
tions that retailers provide to guide shop-
pers in stores and malls
Mode in the context of social gaming, the 
way players experience the game world
Modeling imitating the behavior of others
Modified rebuy in the context of the buy-
class framework, a task that requires a 
modest amount of information search 
and evaluation, often focused on identi-
fying the appropriate vendor
Moods temporary positive or negative af-
fective states accompanied by moderate 
levels of arousal
Mood congruency the idea that our judg-
ments tend to be shaped by our moods
More a custom with a strong moral overtone
Morning morality effect people are more 
likely to cheat, lie, or even commit fraud 
in the afternoon than in the morning.
Motivational research a qualitative research 
approach, based on psychoanalytic 
(Freudian) interpretations, with a heavy 
emphasis on unconscious motives for 
consumption
Multiattribute attitude models those models 
that assume a consumer’s attitude (eval-
uation) of an attitude object depends on 
the beliefs he or she has about several or 
many attributes of the object; the use of 
a multiattribute model implies that an 
attitude toward a product or brand can 
be predicted by identifying these specific 
beliefs and combining them to derive 
a measure of the consumer’s overall 
attitude
Multiple-intelligence theory a perspective 
that argues for other types of intelli-
gence, such as athletic prowess or musi-
cal ability, beyond the traditional math 
and verbal skills psychologists use to 
measure IQ
Multitasking processing information from 
more than one medium at a time
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator a widely-used 
personality test based upon the work of 
Carl Jung
Myth a story containing symbolic elements 
that expresses the shared emotions and 
ideals of a culture

 
Glossary 
581 
Postpurchase evaluation the final stage of 
consumer decision making when we ex-
perience the product or service we selected
Power posing standing in a confident way in 
order to increase self-confidence
Power users opinion leaders in online 
networks
Prediction market an approach based on the 
idea that groups of people with knowl-
edge about an industry are jointly bet-
ter predictors of the future than are any 
individuals
Presentation the second stage of the gift-
giving ritual when the gift is presented 
to the recipient
Prestige–exclusivity effect high prices create 
high demand
Pretailer an e-commerce site that provides 
exclusive styles by prodding manufac-
turers to produce runway pieces they 
wouldn’t otherwise make to sell in 
stores
Priming properties of a stimulus that evoke 
a schema that leads us to compare the 
stimulus to other similar ones we en-
countered in the past
Principle of cognitive consistency the belief 
that consumers value harmony among 
their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors 
and that they are motivated to maintain 
uniformity among these elements
Principle of least interest the person who is 
least committed to staying in a relation-
ship has the most power
PRIZM (Potential Rating Index by Zip Market) 
clustering technique that classifies every 
zip code in the United States into one of 
66 categories, ranging from the most af-
fluent “Blue-Blood Estates” to the least 
well off “Public Assistance.” 
Problem recognition the process that occurs 
whenever the consumer sees a signifi-
cant difference between his or her cur-
rent state of affairs and some desired or 
ideal state; this recognition initiates the 
decision-making process
Product authenticity information about an 
item’s origins and history
Product complementarity the view that prod-
ucts in different functional categories 
have symbolic meanings that are related 
to one another
Product disposal choices people make re-
garding how to get rid of items once they 
no longer are of value to them
Product involvement a consumer’s level of 
interest in a particular item
Product line extension new products based 
upon an established brand
more successful in persuading consum-
ers who have agreed to let them try
The Personal Data Notification & Protec-
tion Act pending legislation that would 
require consumers to be notified when 
their personal information has been 
compromised
Personality a person’s unique psychological 
makeup, which consistently influences 
the way the person responds to his or her 
environment
Personality traits identifiable characteristics 
that define a person
Persuasion an active attempt to change 
attitudes
Phablets a combination of the features of a 
cellphone and a tablet
Phantom Vibration Syndrome the tendency to 
habitually reach for your cell phone be-
cause you feel it vibrating, even if it is off 
or you are not even wearing it at the time
Phishing Internet scams where people re-
ceive fraudulent emails that ask them to 
supply account information
Pioneering brand the first brand to enter a 
market
Pleasure principle the belief that behavior 
is guided by the desire to maximize plea-
sure and avoid pain
Plinking™ act of embedding a product or 
service link in a video
Plutonomy an economy that a small number 
of rich people control
Point-of-purchase (POP) stimuli the promo-
tional materials that are deployed in 
stores or other outlets to influence con-
sumers’ decisions at the time products 
are purchased
Popular culture the music, movies, sports, 
books, celebrities, and other forms of en-
tertainment consumed by the mass market
Pop-up stores temporary locations that al-
low a company to test new brands with-
out a huge financial commitment
Positioning strategy an organization’s use 
of  elements in the marketing mix to 
influence the consumer’s interpreta-
tion of a product’s meaning vis-à-vis 
competitors
Positive reinforcement the process whereby 
rewards provided by the environment 
strengthen responses to stimuli and ap-
propriate behavior is learned
Positivism a research perspective that relies 
on principles of the “scientific method” 
and assumes that a single reality exists; 
events in the world can be objectively 
measured; and the causes of behavior can 
be identified, manipulated, and predicted
to people who possess criteria such as 
wealth or physical attractiveness
Open rates the percentage of people who 
open an email message from a marketer
Opinion leader person who is knowledge-
able about products and who frequently 
is able to influence others’ attitudes 
or behaviors with regard to a product 
category
Organizational buyers people who purchase 
goods and services on behalf of compa-
nies for use in the process of manufac-
turing, distribution, or resale
P2P commerce the notion of doing business 
with other consumers rather than with 
companies
Paradigm a widely accepted view or model 
of phenomena being studied; the per-
spective that regards people as rational 
information processors is currently the 
dominant paradigm, although this ap-
proach is now being challenged by a 
new wave of research that emphasizes 
the frequently subjective nature of con-
sumer decision-making
Paradox of fashion a brand has cachet because 
only a select group of people own it. As 
more consumers outside of this inner cir-
cle start to adopt it, it is no longer exclusive 
and its original meaning is lost. Therefore, 
the item is a victim of its own success.
Paradox of low involvement when we don’t 
care as much about a product, the way 
it’s presented (e.g., who endorses it or 
the visuals that go with it) increases in 
importance
Parental yielding the process that occurs 
when a parental decision-maker is influ-
enced by a child’s product request
Parody display deliberately avoiding status 
symbols; to seek status by mocking it
Pastiche mixture of images
Perceived age how old a person feels as com-
pared to his or her true chronological age
Perceived risk belief that a product has po-
tentially negative consequences
Perception the process by which stimuli are 
selected, organized, and interpreted
Perceptual defense the tendency for con-
sumers to avoid processing stimuli that 
are threatening to them
Perceptual selection process by which peo-
ple attend to only a small portion of the 
stimuli to which they are exposed
Perceptual vigilance the tendency for con-
sumers to be more aware of stimuli that 
relate to their current needs
Permission marketing popular strategy based 
on the idea that a marketer will be much 

582 
Glossary
Reputation economy a reward system based 
on recognition of one’s expertise by oth-
ers who read online product reviews
Resonance a literary device, frequently used 
in advertising, that uses a play on words 
(a double meaning) to communicate a 
product benefit
Response bias a form of contamination in 
survey research in which some factor, 
such as the desire to make a good impres-
sion on the experimenter, leads respon-
dents to modify their true answers
Restricted codes the ways of expressing and 
interpreting meanings that focus on the 
content of objects, which tend to be used 
by the working class
Retail theming strategy where stores create 
imaginative environments that trans-
port shoppers to fantasy worlds or pro-
vide other kinds of stimulation
Retail therapy the act of shopping in order to 
improve mood or mental state
Retrieval the process whereby desired in-
formation is recovered from long-term 
memory
Retro brand an updated version of a brand 
from a prior historical period
Reverse innovation the process whereby a 
product is created initially to meet the 
needs of developing nations and then is 
adapted elsewhere
Reward power a person or group with the 
means to provide positive reinforcement
Rich media elements of an online ad that 
employ movement to gain attention
Rites of passage sacred times marked by a 
change in social status
Ritual a set of multiple, symbolic behaviors 
that occur in a fixed sequence and that 
tend to be repeated periodically
Ritual artifacts items (consumer goods) used 
in the performance of rituals
Ritual script a predetermined sequence of 
effects that identifies how people should 
interact with products and services
Role theory the perspective that much of 
consumer behavior resembles actions in 
a play
Sacralization a process that occurs when or-
dinary objects, events, or people take on 
sacred meaning to a culture or to specific 
groups within a culture
Sacred consumption the process of consum-
ing objects and events that are set apart 
from normal life and treated with some 
degree of respect or awe
Sadvertising advertising that uses inspira-
tional stories to generate an emotional 
response
appropriated by marketers and become 
integrated into marketing strategies
Reality principle principle that the ego seeks 
ways that will be acceptable to society to 
gratify the id
Real-time bidding an electronic trading sys-
tem that sells ad space on the Web pages 
people click on at the moment they visit 
them
Recall the process of retrieving information 
from memory; in advertising research, 
the extent to which consumers can re-
member a marketing message without 
being exposed to it during the study
Reciprocity norm a culturally learned obliga-
tion to return the gesture of a gift with 
one of equal value
Recognition in advertising research, the ex-
tent to which consumers say they are fa-
miliar with an ad the researcher shows 
them
Recommerce the practice of trading or resell-
ing used possessions in the underground 
economy rather than purchasing new 
items from retailers
Red market the global market for body parts
Red sneakers effect we assume someone 
who makes unconventional choices is 
more powerful or competent
Reference group an actual or imaginary in-
dividual or group that has a significant 
effect on an individual’s evaluations, as-
pirations, or behavior
Referent power influence over others be-
cause they are motivated to imitate or 
affiliate with a person or group
Reformulation the third stage of the gift-giv-
ing ritual when the relationship between 
the two parties is redefined following the 
exchange
Refutational arguments calling attention to 
a product’s negative attributes as a per-
suasive strategy where a negative issue is 
raised and then dismissed; this approach 
can increase source credibility
Relationship marketing the strategic perspec-
tive that stresses the long-term, human 
side of buyer–seller interactions
Relative advantage in the context of diffu-
sion of innovations, the extent to which 
a new product or service is an improve-
ment over alternatives that are already 
available in the market
Repetition multiple exposures to a stimulus
Reporting bias the effectiveness of a source 
decreases because he or she has the 
required knowledge but we question 
his or her willingness to convey it 
accurately
Product personalization a manufacturing 
process that allows each user to custom-
ize their own design
Product placement the process of obtaining 
exposure for a product by arranging for 
it to be inserted into a movie, television 
show, or some other medium
Productivity orientation a continual striving 
to use time constructively
Profane consumption the process of consum-
ing objects and events that are ordinary 
or of the everyday world
Progressive learning model the perspective 
that people gradually learn a new cul-
ture as they increasingly come in con-
tact with it; consumers assimilate into a 
new culture, mixing practices from their 
old and new environments to create a 
hybrid culture
Prospect theory a descriptive model of how 
people make choices
Provenance the origin of a product and a 
preference for “authentic” items
Psychographics the use of psychological, so-
ciological, and anthropological factors 
to construct market segments
Psychological time a person’s subjective 
evaluation of the passage of time, which 
may not correspond closely to the actual 
time elapsed
Psychophysics the science that focuses on 
how the physical environment is inte-
grated into the consumer’s subjective 
experience
Public self-consciousness a personality trait 
that makes a person very aware of how 
he or she appears to others
Punishment the learning that occurs when 
a response is followed by unpleasant 
events
Purchase momentum initial impulses to buy 
to satisfy our needs increase the likeli-
hood that we will buy even more
Queuing theory the mathematical study of 
waiting lines
Rational perspective the assumption that 
people calmly and carefully integrate 
as much information as possible with 
what they already know about a prod-
uct, painstakingly weigh the pluses and 
minuses of each alternative, and arrive 
at a satisfactory decision
Reader-response theory an approach to un-
derstanding literature that focuses on 
the role of the reader in interpreting a 
story rather than just relying upon the 
author’s version
Reality engineering the process whereby 
elements of  popular culture are 

 
Glossary 
583 
information and then purchase the cho-
sen product online at a lower price
Shrinkage the loss of money or inventory 
from shoplifting or employee theft
Sign the sensory imagery that represents 
the intended meanings of the object
Similarity principle a view that consumers 
tend to group together objects that share 
similar physical characteristics
Simile comparing two objects that share a 
similar property
Simple additive rule select the option that has 
the largest number of positive attributes
Situational involvement the extent to which 
a shopper is engaged with a store, Web 
site, or a location where people consume 
a product or service
Situational self-image the role a person plays 
in a specific social context that helps to 
determine how he or she feels
Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon a popular game 
that illustrates how closely linked people 
are in our online culture
Slacktivism token expressions of support for 
a cause that ironically may substitute for 
more concrete actions.
Sleeper effect the process whereby dif-
ferences in attitude change between 
positive and negative sources seem to 
diminish over time
Snob effect lower prices reduce demand
Social capital organizational affiliations and 
experiences that provide access to desir-
able social networks
Social class the overall rank of people in a 
society; people who are grouped within 
the same social class are approximately 
equal in terms of their income, occupa-
tions, and lifestyles
Social comparison the basic human ten-
dency to compare ourselves to others
Social default a shortcut to learning that in-
volves the mimicry of others’ behaviors
Social game a multi-player, competitive, 
goal-oriented activity with defined rules 
of engagement and online connectivity 
among a community of players
Social graphs social networks; relationships 
among members of online communities
Social identity theory a perspective that ar-
gues each of us has several “selves” that 
relate to groups. These linkages are so 
important that we think of ourselves not 
just as “I,” but also as “we”
Social judgment theory the perspective that 
people assimilate new information about 
attitude objects in light of what they al-
ready know or feel; the initial attitude acts 
as a frame of reference, and new informa-
tion is categorized in terms of this standard
Sensory marketing marketing strategies that 
focus on the impact of sensations on our 
product experiences
Sensory memory the temporary storage of 
information received from the senses
Sensory overload a condition where con-
sumers are exposed to far more informa-
tion than they can process
Sensory threshold the point at which a stim-
ulus is strong enough to make a con-
scious impact on a person’s awareness
Sentiment analysis a process (sometimes 
also called opinion mining) that scours 
the social media universe to collect and 
analyze the words people use when they 
describe a specific product or company
Serial reproduction a technique to study 
how information changes as people 
transmit it to another where each per-
son has to repeat the stimulus for the 
next person
Serial wardrobers shoppers who buy an out-
fit, wear it once, and return it
Service scripts the sequence of events a con-
sumer expects to experience in a service 
situation
Sex appeals marketing communications 
for products that feature heavy doses of 
erotic suggestions that range from subtle 
hints to blatant displays of skin
Sex roles a culture’s expectations about how 
members of the male or female gender 
should act, dress, or speak
Sexting the growing trend of young people 
posting sexually suggestive photos of 
themselves online
Sex-typed products products that reflect stereo-
typical masculine or feminine attributes
Sex-typed traits characteristics that are ste-
reotypically associated with one gender 
or the other
Shaping the learning of a desired behavior 
over time by rewarding intermediate ac-
tions until the final result is obtained
Shared endorsements users who follow or 
rate a product or service may find that 
their endorsements show up on the ad-
vertiser’s page
Sharing economy a business model where 
people rent or barter what they need 
rather than buying it
Shopping orientation a consumer’s general 
attitudes and motivations regarding the 
act of shopping
Short-term memory (STM) the mental system 
that allows us to retain information for a 
short period of time
Showrooming the process lamented by 
traditional retailers whereby consum-
ers shop their stores to obtain product 
Salience the prominence of a brand in 
memory
Sandwich Generation a description of mid-
dle-aged people who must care for both 
children and parents simultaneously
Satisficing solution a decision strategy 
that aims to yield an adequate solution 
(rather than the best solution) to reduce 
the costs of the decision-making process
Savings rate the proportion of income con-
sumers put aside for future expenses
Schema an organized collection of beliefs 
and feelings represented in a cognitive 
category
Script a learned schema containing a se-
quence of events an individual expects 
to occur
Search engines software that examines 
the Web for matches to terms the user 
provides
Search engine optimization (SEO) the proce-
dures companies use to design the con-
tent of Web sites and posts to maximize 
the likelihood that their content will 
show up when someone searches for a 
relevant term.
Selfie a picture a smartphone user takes of 
himself or herself
Self-concept the beliefs a person holds about 
his or her own attributes and how he or 
she evaluates these qualities
Self-esteem the positivity of a person’s 
self-concept
Self-fulfilling prophecy a person acts accord-
ing to the way he or she believes others 
expect, thus confirming this assumption
Self-image congruence models research that 
suggests we choose products when their 
attributes match some aspect of the self
Self-monitors individuals who are very con-
scious of their behavior in social situations
Self-perception theory an alternative (to cog-
nitive dissonance) explanation of disso-
nance effects; it assumes that people use 
observations of their own behavior to 
infer their attitudes toward some object
Self-regulation a person’s deliberate efforts 
to change or maintain his actions over 
time
Semiotics a field of study that examines the 
correspondence between signs and sym-
bols and the meaning or meanings they 
convey
Senior market consumers over the age of 50 
who control a large amount of discre-
tionary income
Sensation the immediate response of sen-
sory receptors (eyes, ears, nose, mouth, 
fingers) to such basic stimuli as light, 
color, sound, odors, and textures

584 
Glossary
information with existing data and store 
it until needed
Straight rebuy in the context of the buyclass 
framework, the type of buying decision 
that is virtually automatic and requires 
little deliberation
Street art paintings, murals, and other 
pieces in public places
Strength of weak ties the referral process 
that provides access to members of new 
groups due to a slight connection to 
someone in that group
The Student Digital Privacy Act a law that 
would prevent companies from selling 
student data to third parties
Subculture a group whose members share 
beliefs and common experiences that 
set them apart from other members of 
a culture
Subjective norm (SN) an additional compo-
nent to the multiattribute attitude model 
that accounts for the effects of what we 
believe other people think we should do
Subliminal perception the processing of 
stimuli presented below the level of the 
consumer’s awareness
Sunk-cost fallacy the belief that if we pay 
more for something we should not waste it
Superego the system that internalizes soci-
ety’s rules and that works to prevent the 
id from seeking selfish gratification
Surrogate consumer a professional who is 
retained to evaluate or make purchases 
on behalf of a consumer
Sustainability An emphasis on creating and 
maintaining the conditions under which 
humans and nature can exist in produc-
tive harmony, that permit fulfilling the 
social, economic and other requirements 
of present and future generations
Swatting a prank where someone falsely re-
ports criminal activity in order to initiate 
a police SWAT team investigation
Swishing people organize parties to ex-
change clothing or other personal pos-
sessions with others
Symbol a sign that is related to a product 
through either conventional or agreed-
on associations
Symbolic interactionism a sociological ap-
proach stressing that relationships with 
other people play a large part in forming 
the self; people live in a symbolic envi-
ronment, and the meaning attached to 
any situation or object is determined 
by a person’s interpretation of these 
symbols
Symbolic self-completion theory the perspec-
tive that people who have an incom-
plete self-definition in some context will 
periodically rather than presenting it 
over and over at the same time
Spectacles a marketing message that takes 
the form of a public performance
Spiritual-therapeutic model organizations 
that encourage behavioral changes such 
as weight loss that are loosely based on 
religious principles
Spokescharacters the use of animated char-
acters or fictional mascots as product 
representatives
Spontaneous recovery ability of a stimulus 
to evoke a weakened response even years 
after the person initially perceived it
Spreading activation meanings in memory 
are activated indirectly; as a node is ac-
tivated, other nodes linked to it are also 
activated so that meanings spread across 
the network
Stage of cognitive development the ability 
to comprehend concepts of increasing 
complexity as a person matures
State-dependent retrieval people are bet-
ter able to access information if  their 
internal state is the same at the time 
of  recall as when they learned the 
information
Status anxiety the apprehension newly 
wealthy consumers experience as they 
try to act and consume in a way that is 
appropriate for affluent people
Status crystallization the extent to which 
different indicators of a person’s status 
(income, ethnicity, occupation) are con-
sistent with one another
Status hierarchy a ranking of social desir-
ability in terms of consumers’ access to 
resources such as money, education, and 
luxury goods
Status signaling the extent to which a brand 
employs prominent signs of status such 
as a well-known logo on merchandise
Status symbols products whose primary 
function is to communicate one’s social 
standing to others
Stimulus discrimination the process that 
occurs when behaviors caused by two 
stimuli are different, as when consum-
ers learn to differentiate a brand from its 
competitors
Stimulus generalization the process that 
happens when the behavior caused by 
a reaction to one stimulus occurs in the 
presence of other, similar stimuli
Store image a store’s “personality,” com-
posed of such attributes as location, 
merchandise suitability, and the knowl-
edge and congeniality of the sales staff
Storage stage the stage of memory pro-
cessing when we integrate incoming 
Social loafing the tendency for people not to 
devote as much to a task when their con-
tribution is part of a larger group effort
Social marketing the promotion of causes 
and ideas (social products), such as en-
ergy conservation, charities, and popu-
lation control
Social media the set of technologies that en-
able users to create content and share it 
with a large number of others
Social media addiction dependency on inter-
action with social networking platforms 
to the extent that signs of withdrawal 
appear if the person is unable to connect
Social mobility the movement of individuals 
from one social class to another
Social network a group of people who con-
nect with one another online due to 
some shared interest or affiliation
Social power the capacity of one person to 
alter the actions or outcome of another
Social shopping an emerging form of 
e-commerce that allows an online shop-
per to simulate the experience of shop-
ping in a brick-and-mortar store with 
other shoppers
Social stratification the process in a social 
system by which scarce and valuable 
resources are distributed unequally to 
status positions that become more or 
less permanently ranked in terms of 
the share of valuable resources each 
receives
Social structure the way members of a cul-
ture maintain an orderly social life
Sociometric methods the techniques for 
measuring group dynamics that involve 
tracing communication patterns in and 
among groups
Sock puppeting a company executive or other 
biased source poses as someone else to 
tout his organization in social media
Sound symbolism the process by which the 
way a word sounds influences our as-
sumptions about what it describes and 
attributes such as size
Source attractiveness the dimensions of a 
communicator that increase his or her 
persuasiveness; these include expertise 
and attractiveness
Source credibility a communication source’s 
perceived expertise, objectivity, or 
trustworthiness
Source derogation a possible downside to 
comparative advertising because the 
consumer may doubt the credibility of a 
biased presentation
Spacing effect the tendency to recall printed 
material to a greater extent when 
the advertiser repeats the target item 

 
Glossary 
585 
Underground economy secondary markets 
(such as flea markets) where transac-
tions are not officially recorded
Unipolar emotions emotional reactions that 
are either wholly positive or wholly 
negative
Unplanned buying when a shopper buys mer-
chandise she did not intend to purchase, 
often because she recognizes a new need 
while in the store
User-generated content consumers voice 
their opinions about products, brands, 
and companies on blogs, podcasts, and 
social networking sites such as Facebook 
and Twitter, and film their own com-
mercials that they post on sites such as 
YouTube
Utilitarian function states that we develop 
some attitudes toward products simply 
because they provide pleasure or pain
Value a belief that some condition is prefer-
able to its opposite
Value-expressive function states each indi-
vidual develops attitudes toward prod-
ucts because of what they say about him 
or her as a person
Value system a culture’s ranking of the rela-
tive importance of values
Values and Lifestyles System (VALS2™) a psy-
chographic segmentation system
Vanity sizing deliberately assigning smaller 
sizes to garments
Variable-interval reinforcement the time 
that must pass before an organism’s re-
sponse is reinforced varies based on some 
average
Variable-ratio reinforcement method in 
which you get reinforced after a certain 
number of responses, but you don’t 
know how many responses are required
Variety seeking the desire to choose new al-
ternatives over more familiar ones
Viral marketing the strategy of getting cus-
tomers to sell a product on behalf of the 
company that creates it
Virtual goods digital items that people buy 
and sell online
Virtual makeover software that allows con-
sumers to manipulate aspects of their 
appearance in a photograph they post 
online
Virtual reality (VR) provides a totally immer-
sive experience that transports the user 
into an entirely separate three-dimen-
sional environment
Virtual worlds immersive three-dimensional 
virtual environments such as Second Life
Voluntarily childless women of childbearing 
age who consciously decide not to have 
children
Trade dress color combinations that become 
strongly associated with a corporation
transformative consumer research (TCR) pro-
motes research projects that include the 
goal of helping people or bringing about 
social change
Transitional economies a country that is 
adapting from a controlled, centralized 
economy to a free-market system
Transmedia storytelling the use of a mix of 
social media platforms to create a plot 
that involves consumers who try to solve 
puzzles or mysteries in the narrative
Trialability in the context of diffusion of in-
novations, the extent to which a new 
product or service can be sampled prior 
to adoption
Trickle-across effect fashions diffuse hori-
zontally among members of the same 
social group
Trickle-down theory the perspective that 
fashions spread as the result of sta-
tus symbols associated with the upper 
classes “trickling down” to other social 
classes as these consumers try to emu-
late those with greater status
Trickle-up effect fashion originate in a 
lower-class group and diffuse into the 
mass market
Triple bottom-line orientation business strat-
egies that strive to maximize financial, 
social, and environmental return
Trophy wives attractive spouses that rich 
men deploy as status symbols
Tweens a marketing term used to describe 
children aged 8 to 14
Two-factor theory the perspective that two 
separate psychological processes are oper-
ating when a person is repeatedly exposed 
to an ad: repetition increases familiarity 
and thus reduces uncertainty about the 
product, but over time boredom increases 
with each exposure, and at some point 
the amount of boredom incurred begins 
to exceed the amount of uncertainty re-
duced, resulting in wear-out
Two-step flow model of influence proposes 
that a small group of influencers dis-
seminate information because they can 
modify the opinions of a large number of 
other people
Unboxing videos a genre of YouTube video that 
features consumers who show how to un-
pack a new gadget it, assemble it or use it
Unconditioned stimulus (UCS) a stimulus that 
is naturally capable of causing a response
Underdog brand biography a communica-
tions approach that includes details 
about a brand’s humble origins and how 
it defied the odds to succeed
compensate by acquiring symbols asso-
ciated with a desired social identity
Synchronous interactions a conversation 
that requires participants to respond in 
real-time
Syncretic decision purchase decision that is 
made jointly by both spouses
Synoptic ideal a model of spousal decision-
making in which the husband and wife 
take a common view and act as joint 
decision-makers, assigning each other 
well-defined roles and making mutu-
ally beneficial decisions to maximize the 
couple’s joint utility
Taste culture a group of consumers who share 
aesthetic and intellectual preferences
Technology acceptance model (TAM) a widely 
used approach to predicting whether 
people will adopt a new form of technol-
ogy or information system
Terminal values end states desired by mem-
bers of a culture
Theory of cognitive dissonance theory based 
on the premise that a state of tension is 
created when beliefs or behaviors con-
flict with one another; people are mo-
tivated to reduce this inconsistency (or 
dissonance) and thus eliminate unpleas-
ant tension
Theory of reasoned action an updated ver-
sion of the Fishbein multiattribute atti-
tude theory that considers factors such 
as social pressure and Aact (the attitude 
toward the act of buying a product), 
rather than simply attitudes toward the 
product itself
Theory of trying states that the criterion of 
behavior in the reasoned action model 
of attitude measurement should be re-
placed with trying to reach a goal
Third-gender movement the push to expand 
the definition of gender beyond the tra-
ditional categories of male and female
Tie strength the nature and potency of 
the bond between members of a social 
network
Time poverty a feeling of having less time 
available than is required to meet the 
demands of everyday living
Timestyle an individual’s priorities regard-
ing how he or she spends time as influ-
enced by personal and cultural factors
Tipping point moment of critical mass
Torn self a condition where immigrants 
struggle to reconcile their native identi-
ties with their new cultures
Total quality management (TQM) manage-
ment and engineering procedures aimed 
at reducing errors and increasing qual-
ity; based on Japanese practices

586 
Glossary
groups are smarter than the smartest 
people in them; implies that large num-
bers of consumers can predict successful 
products
Word-of-mouth (WOM) product information 
transmitted by individual consumers on 
an informal basis
Word–phrase dictionary in sentiment analysis, 
a library that codes data so that the pro-
gram can scan the text to identify whether 
the words in the dictionary appear
Worldview a perspective on social norms and 
behaviors that tends to differ among so-
cial classes
one-way transmission from producers 
to consumers
Weber’s Law the principle that the stron-
ger the initial stimulus, the greater its 
change must be for it to be noticed
Weighted additive rule select the option 
that has the largest number of positive 
attributes, but taking into account the 
relative importance of  the attributes 
by weighting each one in terms of  its 
relative importance to the decision 
maker
Wisdom of crowds a perspective that argues 
that, under the right circumstances, 
Von Restorff effect techniques like distinc-
tive packaging that increase the novelty 
of a stimulus and also improve recall
Want the particular form of consumption 
chosen to satisfy a need
Warming process of transforming new ob-
jects and places into those that feel cozy, 
hospitable, and authentic
Wearable computing devices that integrate 
digital interactions with the physical 
body
Web 2.0 the current version of the Inter-
net as a social, interactive medium 
from its original roots as a form of 

Page numbers with f represent figures, n repre-
sent notes, p represent photos, and t represent 
tables.
Name
Aaker, David A., 408n79
Aaker, Jennifer L., 55n20, 55n27, 55n46, 
170n114, 198n24, 198n33, 237n42, 
277n23, 277n89, 278n29, 278n39, 
329n9, 330n53
Aarabi, Parham, 236n21
Abelson, R. P., 330n34
Abraham, Chris, 333n147
Abrams, Rachel, 512n85, 561n156
Achenreiner, Gwen Bachmannn, 169n60
Adamy, Janet, 90n129
Adaval, Rashmi, 169n74
Addis, Michela, 444n54
Adkins, Natalie Ross, 89n73, 89n74
Adler, Alfred, 246
Adler, G., 277n12
Adler, Keith, 128n40
Adler, Rick, 512n99
Aerosmith, 231
Aggarwal, Pankaj, 129n86
Agrawal, Jagdish, 331n59
Aguirre, B. E., 560n132
Ahrensa, Anthony H., 240n153
Ahuvia, Aaron, 236n5
Aikman, Troy, 533
Aishwarya Rai, 235
Ajzen, Icek, 330n32
Aknin, Lara B., 198n33
Aksoy, Lerzan, 88n36
Alba, Joseph W., 168n25, 169n68, 170n103, 
170n108, 170n111, 199n59
Albanese, Paul J., 240n168, 277n25
Albanesius, Chloe, 88n56
Alden, Dana L., 476n62, 559n62
Alexander, J., 423
“Alex from Target,” 201
Alger, Horatio, 453
Al-Greene, Bob, 90n95
Allan, David, 331n56
Allen, Chris T., 167n10, 168n36
Allen, Michael W., 128n51
Allen, Woody, 48
Alleyne, Richard, 378n106
Allsopp, J. F., 277n25
Allvine, Fred C., 444n67
Alpert, Frank, 128n28, 377n67
Alpert, Lewis, 279n66
Alpert, Mark I., 332n98, 332n102
Alsop, Ronald, 376n47
Alt, Matt, 239n117
Alter, Adam L., 477n105
Alter, Charlotte, 240n156 
Altman, Irwin, 237n60
Alwitt, Linda F., 330n34
Amaldoss, Wilfred, 476n39
Ames, B. Charles, 377n77
Amis, John, 561n161
Anand, Punam, 330n10, 559n71
Bailay, Rasul, 561n147
Bailenson, Jeremy N., 238n81
Baird, Julia, 239n127
Bajarin, Tim, 196
Bakalar, Nicholas, 129n82
Baker, Courtney Nations, 88n47, 88n49
Baker, Julie, 391, 406n14
Baker, Stacy Menzel, 69, 87n16, 88nn47–50, 
171n146, 512n67
Baker, Stephen, 330n44, 332n111
Bala, Hillol, 560n107
Bales, Robert F., 378n96
Ball, A. Dwayne, 237n59
Ball, Deborah, 279n84, 558n39
Ball, Jeffrey, 87n6
Bamossy, Gary J., 128n27, 442n3, 513n110
Bandura, Albert, 168nn40–41
Banfield, Jillian C., 330n16
Banjo, Shelly, 407n65
Banks, Tyra, 423
Banner, Lois W., 239n145
Bannon, Lisa, 240nn148–149
Barak, Benny, 512n100
Baranauckas, Carla, 511n65
Barbaro, Michael, 168n26
Barbosa, David, 55n28
Bardhi, Fleura, 270
Bardzell, Jeffrey, 333n133
Bardzell, Shaowen, 333n133
Barger, Victor A., 128n44
Bargh, John A., 377n64
Barker, Nigel, 423
Barnes, Brooks, 127n2, 332n111, 512n69
Barnes, Susan B., 443n19
Barnhart, Michelle, 513n101
Baron, Alma S., 378n97
Baron, Robert A., 167n2, 329n1, 377n66
Barone, Michael J., 329n9
Barro, Josh, 197n6
Barron, Kelly, 442n3
Barrow, Karen, 89n69
Barth, E., 476n73
Barthel, Diane, 558n53
Bartlett, Frederic, 425
Barton, Roger, 129n70
Basil, Debra Z., 198n39, 330n26
Basil, Michael D., 198n39
Basu, Kunal, 406n21, 406n23
Batra, Rajeev, 129n69, 406n24
Baumeister, Roy F., 55n27, 55n46, 169n74, 
198n38, 236n6, 475n7
Baumgardner, Michael H., 170n102, 331n63
Baumgarten, Steven A., 444n65
Baumgartner, Hans, 278n25, 375n13
Baumgatner, Felix, 276
Baumrucker, Craig, 127n1
Beaglehole, Ernest, 237n68
Beales, Howard, 377n69
Bearak, Barry, 559n74
Bearden, William O., 376n52, 377n56, 
408n80, 443n29, 443n32
Beasley, Deena, 90n108
Beatty, Sharon E., 279n93, 330n11, 376n52, 
376n54, 378n94
Bechara, Antonie, 237n44
Beck, Stan, 558n44
Anderson, B. B., 332n109
Anderson, Chris, 376n36
Anderson, Eric T., 477n91
Anderson, Erin, 377n81
Anderson, Hans Christian, 209
Anderson, Helen H., 332n107
Anderson, Laurel, 513n111, 558n16
Anderson, Mae, 474
Anderson, Paul, 199n56, 279n94
Anderson, Ronald D., 90n122
Andreasen, Alan R., 88n34, 88n54
Andrews, Edmund L., 378n109
Andrews, J. Craig, 331n65
Andrus, Bruce W., 236n30
Andruss, Paula Lyon, 169n61
Angier, Natalie, 378n98, 378n107, 511n54, 
558n41
Aniston, Jennifer, 309
Ante, Spencer E., 90n109
Antonidies, Trinske, 513n110
Apperley, Thomas, 444n83, 444n85
Appleton-Knapp, S. L., 169n94
Aradhna, Krishna, 128n33
Areni, Charles S., 407n52
Argo, J. J., 408n86
Ariely, Dan, 199n61, 377n59
Armstrong, Gary, 169n62
Arndt, Johan, 279n66, 443n42, 443n46
Arnold, Stephen J., 238n96
Arnould, Eric J., 55n42, 55n44, 87n14, 
443n38, 510n10, 513n108, 559n63, 
560n104
Aronoff, J., 277n4
Arora, Neeraj, 199n60
Arsel, Zeynep, 278n36
Arsena, Ashley Rae, 238n98
Arthur, Lisa, 55n16
Ashford, Susan J., 236n30
Ashman, Rachel, 368t, 378n115
Ashmore, Richard D., 239n144
Askegaard, Søren, 128n27, 197n7, 279n94, 
510n10, 561n169
Aspara, Jaakko, 377n78
Assael, Henry, 278n62
Assmus, Gert, 330n44
Atalay, A. Selin, 129n67, 129n75
Atkinson, Claire, 333n128
Atkinson, R. C., 169n67
Attaway, Jill S., 444n50
Atwal, Glyn, 474
Austin, W. G., 443n5
Avery, Jill, 278n32
Aydinoğlu, Nilüfer Z., 240n157
Aylesworth, Andrew B., 128n59, 329n9
Azalea, Iggy, 144, 226
Azhari, A. C., 331n62
Baar, Aaron, 170n98, 240n188, 329n5
Babin, Barry J., 406n25, 406n27, 408n71, 
444n50
Baca-Motes, K., 89n79
Bacon, Kevin, 430
Bagozzi, Richard P., 170n126, 277n10, 
330n42, 407n69, 558n51, 560n107
Bahn, Kenneth D., 169n56
Bahr, Howard M., 559n68
I N D E X E S
587

588 
Indexes
Brooks, John, 477n114, 477n119
Brosius, Hans-Bernd, 170n120
Brothers Grimm, 522
Brown, A., 89n79
Brown, Barbara B., 237n66
Brown, Dan, 511n38
Brown, Gene, 333n139
Brown, Jacqueline Johnson, 444n75
Brown, James R., 377n77
Brown, Patricia Leigh, 511n46
Brown, Robbie, 88n38
Brown, Roger, 476n60
Brown, Warren, 510n9
Browne, Ray B., 559n72, 559n91
Brownlie, Douglas, 198n22
Bruce, Grady D., 443n18
Brucks, Merrie, 148, 168n44, 169n62, 199n58
Bruell, Alexandra, 198n23
Bruins, N., 127
Brumbaugh, Anne, 330n53
Brunel, Frédéric F., 128n22, 344
Bruner, Gordon C., II, 375n16, 406n22
Bruner, J., 169n74
Bryant, Adam, 127n17, 377n70
Bryant, Lena, 226
Bryant, Paul “Bear,” 535
Brynjolfsson, Erik, 55n16
Bryson, Douglas, 474
Buck, Stephanie, 277n22, 377n88
Buechel, Eva, 445n89
Buffett, Warren, 452
Bulik, Beth Snyder, 169n79, 277n20,  
376n52, 377n56
Bunn, Austin, 332n116
Burg, Emily, 89n78
Burke, Marian, 331n91
Burke, Raymond R., 170n99
Burks, Arthur W., 129n93
Burnett, Leo, 90n124
Burnkrant, Robert E., 442n4
Burns, Alvin C., 559n80
Burns, Neal M., 167, 444n86
Burris, Joseph, 129n63
Burroughs, J., 237n54
Burroughs, James E., 87n15, 87n19
Burroughs, W. Jeffrey, 406n21
Burson, Katherine A., 197n5
Burt, Steve, 557
Burton, G., 511n43
Burton, Scot, 237n35, 331n79, 408n80
Busch, Paul S., 408n73
Bush, George W., 295
Bush, Ronald F., 376n44, 559n82
Bush, Victoria D., 278n36
Buss, Arnold W., 237n32
Buss, Dale, 128n39, 129n99, 168n19, 
279n97, 406n14
Buss, W. Christian, 378n97
Buttle, Heather, 331n61
Byrne, Donn, 329n1
Byron, Ellen, 128n54
Caballero, Marjorie, 407n69
Cacioppo, John T., 333n159, 333n162
Cadei, Emily, 127n11
Caffee, Shannon L., 559n71
Calder, Bobby J., 88n53, 330n17, 444n50
Caldwell, Marylouise, 238n107, 558n48
Camerer, Colin, 559n62
Campbell, Joseph, 558n29
Campbell, Robert, 477n116
Campomar, Marcos Cortez, 279n94
Canedy, Dana, 510n18
Cantril, Hadley, 129n88
Billou, Anderson, 453f
Billou, Niels, 453f
Bilton, Nick, 89n68, 238n83, 444n78, 
477n96, 560n106
Bin Laden, Osama, 151, 151p, 320
Binnen, James E., 512n98
Biocca, Frank A., 236n13
Bird, Mike, 477n89
Birdwell, A. L. E., 237n50
Birrell, Susan, 559n91
Bitner, Mary Jo, 408n70
Bizer, George Y., 277n16
Bjork, R. A., 169n94
Blair, Elizabeth M., 557n6
Blair, Margaret Henderson, 170n104
Blakeslee, Sandra, 376n29, 378n118
Blankfein, Lloyd C., 227
Blanton, Dana, 240n184
Blau, Peter M., 407n69
Bloch, Peter H., 199n58, 240n170, 375n17, 
406n21
Block, Lauren Goldberg, 128n34, 169n69, 
333n151
Bloom, Paul N., 88n53, 377n76, 559n79
Bodur, H. Onur, 129n67, 129n75
Bogart, Humphrey, 521
Boles, James S., 408n71
Bologna, Caroline, 509
Bommel, Edwin van, 374
Bond, James, 317
Bone, Paula Fitzgerald, 128n35, 444n51
Bonezzi, Andrea, 207
Bonsu, Samuel K., 198n24, 559n73
Booms, Bernard H., 408n70
Boone, Pat, 496
Boote, Alfred S., 279n69
Booton, Jennifer, 559n64
Borden, Richard J., 330n24, 443n14
Borgerson, Janet, 55n26
Borghini, Stefania, 377n91, 558n16
Bornstein, Robert F., 331n93
Bosker, Bianca, 55n29
Bosmans, Anick, 375n13
Botti, Simona, 407n60
Botticelli, Sandro, 225
Bouchet, Dominique, 236n5
Boulding, William, 408n81
Bourdieu, Pierre, 464–465, 466, 477n98
Boutilier, Robert, 513n106
Boven, Leaf Van, 198n32
Bow, Clara, 225
Bower, Amanda B., 239n142
Boyd, E. B., 277n15
Brackbeen, Brian, 54
Bradford, Tonya Williams, 559n62
Bradsher, Keith, 561n152
Brady, Michael K., 88n35
Brady, Shirley, 510n5
Branch, John, 559n85
Branch, Shelly, 408n94
Branson, Richard, 217, 258, 453, 461
Brasel, S. Adam, 55n20, 128n44
Bray, Hiawatha, 512n96
Breene, R. Timothy S., 477n90
Brengman, Malaika, 101
Brenner, L., 168n35
Brenner, Walter, 330n45
Breslau, Karen, 558n15
Brin, Sergey, 227
Bristol, Terry, 378n113
Britt, Roy, 89n72
Britton, Ryan, 474
Brody, Jane E., 240n154
Broniarczyk, Susan M., 375n2, 375n6, 443n12
Becker, B. W., 279n91
Becker, Howard S., 477n93, 558nn13–14
Beckett, Kathleen, 196
Beckham, Daisy, 467
Beckham, David, 461
Beckham, Victoria, 461
Bednarski, P. J., 509
Beeghley, Leonard, 476n67
Beethoven, Ludwig von, 519
Beirne, Mike, 199n60
Belch, George E., 331n91, 332n103,  
332n105, 333n138
Belch, Michael A., 332n103, 332n105, 
333n138
Belk, Russell W., 55n44, 87n14, 87nn22–23, 
170n135, 171n141, 197n7, 238n73, 
238n75, 238n80, 278n62, 408n82, 
444n67, 511n64, 558n54, 558n57, 
559n63, 559n73, 559n82, 559n95, 
560n138, 561n145
Belkin, Lisa, 199n80
Bell, Martin L., 476n71
Bell, Simon J., 445n90
Bell, Stephen S., 237n34, 477n95
Bellenger, Danny N., 237n52
Bellezza, Silvia, 443n28, 560n119
Bellizzi, Joseph A., 128n18, 238n103, 407n49
Bellman, Eric, 238n105
Belluck, Pam, 128n20
Beltrone, Gabriel, 237n58
Bem, Daryl J., 330n16
Bem, Sandra L., 239n115
Bender, Thomas, 127n12
Benet-Martinez, Veronica, 279n89
Bengtsson, Anders, 240n182
Benhamou, Laurence, 512n80
Benioff, Marc, 227
Bercovici, Jeff, 331n80
Berenson, Alex, 378n121
Bergadaa, Michelle M., 406n10
Berger, Arthur Asa, 129n93, 558n20
Berger, D. G., 557n10
Berger, Ida E., 330n34
Berger, Jonah, 332n96, 376n38, 436, 443n20, 
443n27, 445nn89–90, 477n102
Bergh, Bruce G. Vanden, 128n40
Bergiel, J. Blaise, 168n28
Bergstein, Brian, 331n65
Berkowitz, Leonard, 237n34, 330n16
Berning, Carol K., 408n84
Bernstein, Ruth, 512n80
Bernthal, Matthew J., 476n6
Berry, Jon, 445n95
Beruchasvili, Mariam, 511n40
Berzon, Alexandra, 90n109
Best, Arthur, 88n34
Bettelheim, Bruno, 559n65
Bettencourt, Lance A., 277n18
Bettman, James R., 169n68, 170n128, 
199n58, 295, 375n3, 375nn22–23, 
375n26, 376n40, 408n73, 443n17
Betts, Dickey, 417
Beverland, Michael, 279n88, 376n49
Beyoncé, 289, 518, 519, 538
Bhalla, Gurav, 279n72
Bhasin, Kim, 276
Bhatla, Sunil, 406n21
Bhattacharjee, Amit, 332n96
Bickart, Barbara, 445n92
Bieber, Justin, 144, 227, 295, 308, 437, 496
Biehal, Gabriel, 169n85
Biggs, Ronald, 307
Bighin, Jacques, 443n43
Bijmolt, Tammo H. A., 170n96

 
Indexes 
589 
Crocker, Kenneth E., 330n50
Crocker, Lizzie, 444n77
Crockett, David, 475n6
Cronin, J. Joseph, Jr., 377n74, 408n79
Crook, Jordan, 407n61
Crosett, Kathy, 331n84
Crowley, Ayn E., 128n18, 128n32
Cryder, C. E., 278n26
Cuddy, Amy, 238n77
Cuneo, Alice Z., 332n111
Cunha, Marcus, Jr., 170nn109–110
Cunningham, Christopher, 168n29
Curnutte, Mark, 90n121
Curren, Mary T., 406n21, 406n23
Curry, David J., 378n92, 477n94
Curtin, Richard T., 475n9
Cushman, Philip, 237n36
Cutright, Keisha M., 330n16
Cyrus, Miley, 144
Czepiel, John A., 169n88, 408n95
Dacin, Peter A., 406n24
Daddy Yankee, 478
Dahab, Debra J., 408n86
Dahl, Darren W., 198n25, 199n70, 236n15, 
333n138, 333n140, 443n22
Dalakas, Vassilis, 168n47
Daltrey, Roger, 417
Danko, William D., 55n10, 511n61
Danziger, Shai, 169n89, 331n61
D’Arcy, Paul J., 374
Darden, William R., 406n25, 406n27, 408n71, 
444n71
Darke, Peter R., 128n18, 331n58
Darmody, Aron, 198n24
Darmon, Rene Y., 332n107
Daugherty, Terry, 167, 444n86
Davenport, J. W., 407–408n69
Davidson, Jacob, 407n37
Davis, Fred D., 560n107
Davis, Harry L., 378n92
Davis, Teresa, 558n27
Dawkins, Richard, 560n125
Dawson, Scott, 406n20
Day, George S., 88n53
Dean, James, 516
Deaton, Angus, 475n3
Deaux, Kay, 510n2
Deberry-Spence, Benet, 407n43
Debevec, Kathleen, 238n103
DeBock, Tine, 128n19
DeBono, Kenneth G., 330n51
DeCarlo, Thomas E., 444n50
Deighton, John, 333n158
DeJong, William, 330n17
DeLorme, Denise E., 333n130
DeMatteo, David, 237n40
Demby, Emanuel H., 279n66
DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, 476n29
Denegri-Knot, Janice, 444n86
Deng, Xiaoyan, 129n85
Deng Xiaoping, 460
DeNitto, Emily, 376n48
DeParle, Jason, 476n38
Depp, Johnny, 227
Deschanel, Zooey, 437
Deshpandé, Rohit, 510n8, 510n15
Desta, Yohana, 407n59
Deturck, Mark A., 170n129
Dhar, Ravi, 375n1, 376n50, 377n63, 378n123
Dholakia, Nikhilesh, 330n45
Dholakia, Ruby Roy, 330n45
Diamond, Nina, 377n91
Diana, Princess of Wales, 223, 535
Clark, Gary L., 88n33
Clark, Ronald A., 198n50, 277n19, 278n26
Clark, Terry, 561n153
Clarke, Peter, 329n6, 559n57
Clarkson, Joshua, 55n25
Cleveland, Mark, 278n26, 476n62
Clifford, Stephanie, 89n82, 128n53, 199n77, 
239n119, 240n165, 330n31, 
378n111, 408n98, 444n68
Clinton, William Jefferson (Bill), 246
Clooney, George, 248t, 309
Close, Angeline, 559n70
Cobb, Cathy J., 375n21, 376n52, 376n54
Cocanougher, A. Benton, 443n18
Cohen, Alex, 510n1
Cohen, Joel B., 277n10, 330n41, 442n4
Cohen, Marshall, 196
Cohen, Noam, 279n80
Cohen, Patricia, 475n10, 475n15
Cohen, William, 375n20
Cohn, D’Vera, 512n97
Cole, Catherine A., 90n120, 169n81, 512n98
Cole, S. Jason, 238n71
Coleman, James S., 477n98
Coleman, Richard P., 55n11, 454n36, 476n46, 
476n49, 454nn51–52, 454nn54–55, 
454n59, 476nn63–64, 476n69, 
476n71
Coleman-Lochner, Lauren, 239n120
Collins, A. M., 169n81
Collins, Glenn, 127n5, 238n91
Collins, Janay, 128n40
Commuri, Suraj, 477n108
Compeau, Larry D., 559n72
Conklin, J. C., 559n78
Connell, Paul M., 148, 168n44
Conner, P. E., 279n91
Conroy, Denise M., 407n31
Considine, Austin, 239n143
Cooil, Bruce, 88n36
Cook, Daniel, 169n64
Cook, Tim, 196
Cook, William A., 170n131
Cooley, Charles H., 236n29
Coolio, 308
Coon, Gregory S., 558n57
Cooper, Michael, 510n3
Corfman, Kim P., 378n100
Cornil, Yann, 332n97
Cornwell, T. Bettina, 169n83, 332n118
Coskuner-Balli, Gokcen, 49, 378n111, 557n7
Cosmas, Stephen C., 278n62
Costa, Paul T., 197n12, 277n5
Cote, Joseph A., 330n37, 330n40
Cotte, June S., 89n81, 128n41, 378n94, 
406n13, 407n35
Coulter, Keith S., 128n40
Coulter, Robin A., 128n22, 128n40
Coupland, Douglas, 500
Courtney, Alice E., 333n138
Cousineau, Alain, 442n4
Cova, Bernard, 445n99
Cova, Veronique, 445n99
Covel, Simona, 332n125
Cowley, Geoffrey, 560n125
Cox, Anthony D., 90n122
Cox, Cathryn Leigh, 237n32
Cox, Dena, 90n122
Craik, Fergus I. M., 169n81
Crandall, Christian S., 240n155
Creighton, Millie, 407n43
Creswell, Julie, 168n26
Crispell, Diane, 378n101
Crittenden, Victoria L., 511n61
Caplow, Theodore, 559n68
Carey, Benedict, 129n80, 129n90,  
237n51, 406n4
Carey, Mariah, 209
Carlson, B., 278n26
Carlson, Les, 168n50
Carlton, Jim, 512n65
Carlyle, Erin, 476n72
Carnegie, Andrew, 227
Carney, Scott, 90n113
Carr, David, 279n76
Carrigan, Marylyn, 512nn91–92
Carroll, Christopher D., 475n1
Carson, Johnny, 248t
Carson, Rachel, 68
Cartwright, D., 443n9
Carvajal, Doreen, 199n77, 238n108, 240n163
Carvalho, Alberto, 474
Casey, Marianne, 88n53
Cashdan, Elizabeth, 239n139
Castaño, Raquel, 237n44
Castellano, Nadine N., 512n98
Castillo, Stephanie, 129n66
Catlin, Jesse R., 408n86
Cave, Damien, 560n101
Cayla, Julien, 511n36, 547
Celsi, Richard L., 198n49, 277n2, 279n94
Celuch, Kevin G., 406n18
Certeau, Michel de, 49
Chadwick, Bruce A., 559n68
Chagall, Marc, 520
Chaiken, Shelly, 331n54, 331n70
Chakravarti, Dipankar, 169n85
Chalabi, Mona, 240n185
Chan, Cindy, 443n27
Chance, Zoe, 377n63
Chandler, Clay, 476n76
Chandler, Jesse, 241n191
Chandon, Pierre, 314, 332n97, 475n12
Chandran, Suchi, 344
Chandrashekaran, Murali, 169n92
Chang, Francis, 238n81
Chang, Hannah H., 198n28
Chaplin, Charlie, 48
Chaplin, Lan Nguyen, 237n45, 237n61, 
279n63
Chapman, Matthew, 239n128
Charry, Tamar, 443n11
Chartrand, Tanya, L., 197n2, 376n52, 376n55, 
377n64
Chatterjee, Promothesh, 378n119
Chatterjee, Subimal, 379n124
Chattopadhyay, Amitava, 128n18, 169n68, 
170n103, 170n111, 376n42
Chebat, Jean-Charles, 394, 407n50
Chen, Yu, 197n7
Cheng, Shirley Y. Y., 237n45
Chestnut, Robert, 199n62
Childers, Terry L., 89n65, 90n120, 128n47, 
170n112, 170n118, 331n87, 444n71
Chowdhury, T. G., 277n16
Chozick, Amy, 444n53
Chu, Wujin, 377n81
Chun, HaeEun Helen, 445n90
Chung, Mabel, 169n58
Churchill, Gilbert A., Jr., 170n130, 408n71, 
408n81
Cialdini, Robert B., 168n35, 330n24, 330n35, 
330n43, 407n68
Ciccone, Alicia, 408n87
Cimino, Richard, 511n47
Cinelli, Melissa D., 55n25
Claiborne, C. B., 237n47, 237n55
Clancy, Kevin J., 199n69

590 
Indexes
Finkel, Eli J., 331n56
Finn, Adam, 129n72, 170n127
Finney, Jill, 509
Fioravanti, Mario, 236n19
Firat, A. Fuat, 55n43
Fischer, Eileen, 238n96, 240n161, 423, 443n40
Fishbach, A., 330n23
Fishbein, Martin, 330n29, 330n32
Fisher, B. Aubrey, 330n45
Fisher, Dan, 238n71
Fisher, R. J., 331n73
Fiske, Susan T., 169n86
Fitzpatrick, Alex, 407n33
Fitzsimons, Gavan J., 197n2, 198n36, 236n15, 
330n16, 330n39
Fitzsimons, Gráinne M., 197n2, 331n56
Flannery, Russell, 476n76
Fleischmann, Casey, 442
Fleming, John H., 512n94
Fleming, M. A., 330n12
Florence, L. Carter, 240n176
Florshein, Renee, 169n59
Flugel, J. C., 541
Flynn, Emily, 239n138
Flynn, Laurie J., 377n65
Flynn, Leisa Reinecke, 198n50, 277n19, 
476n39
Fodor, Eugene M., 198n17
Folkes, Valerie S., 87n3
Foltz, Kim, 558n18
Fonda, Jane, 235
Forbes, Thom, 511n65
Ford, Jeffrey D., 443n15
Ford, Neil M., 408n71
Fordham, R., 277n12
Forehand, Mark R., 236n8
Foreman, George, 308, 309p
Forney, Matthew, 476n76
Foster, Brian L., 444n75
Fournier, Susan, 55nn20–21, 237n48, 
237n55, 238n82, 278n42, 408n78, 
445n92
Fowler, Geoffrey A., 196, 197, 239n116, 
332n111, 560n133, 561n152
Fowler, Steve, 374
Fox, Susannah, 89n65
Fox, Zoe, 89n67
Foxall, Gordon R., 168n27, 277n25
Foxman, Ellen, 378n94
Frable, Deborah E. S., 239n115
France, Karen Russo, 379n124
Francese, Peter, 510n30
Francis, Connie, 37
Frank, Mark G., 128n21
Frank, Robert, 477n112
Fraser, Scott C., 330n17
Frederick, Shane, 377n89
Freedman, Jonathan L., 330n17
Freeman, Stephen, 330n24, 443n35
Freiden, Jon B., 444n61
French, Howard W., 476n76
French, J. R. P., Jr., 443n9
Freud, Sigmund, 243, 244, 541
Frick, Henry Clay, 469
Friedman, Emily, 378n120
Friedman, Hershey H., 330n53
Friedman, Linda, 330n53
Friedman, Monroe, 332n118
Friedman, Vanessa, 197
Friedmann, Roberto, 129n88
Fromkin, Howard L., 198n18, 560n113
Froomkin, Dan, 475n20
Fuller, Thomas, 240n175, 561n173
Effrein, E. A., 329n3
Eggerton, John, 169n65
Eisenstein, E. M., 168n33
Eisingerich, Andreas B., 445n90
Ekstrom, Karin M., 378n94
Elder, Ryan S., 127n4, 199n76
Elderkin, Amy, 442
Elejalde-Ruiz, Alexia, 477n116
Elias, Jennifer, 236n28
Ellen, Pam Scholder, 128n35
Elliott, Drew, 444n82
Elliott, Richard, 333n138
Elliott, Stuart, 54n6, 167n16, 171n144, 
239n125, 278n37, 331n64, 
332nn119–120, 333n163, 376n48, 
510n7, 510n11
Ellis, Andrew W., 170n110
Ellis, Elwood A., 443n15
Ellison, Nicole, 477n99
Ellison, Sarah, 55n14, 128n42, 511n43
Elms, Sue, 373
Emme, 226
Engels, Friedrich, 227
Engineer, Tariq, 238n86
Engle, Randall W., 167n5, 168n36
Englis, Basil G., 129n79, 239n144, 332n115, 
406n22, 443n21, 513n110, 557n6, 
560n114
Enis, Ben M., 511n61
Ennis, Dawn, 509
Epp, Amber M., 365, 378nn103–104, 511n55, 
559n97
Ericksen, Mary Kay, 198n15
Erickson, McKann, 235
Ertimur, Burcak, 559n57
Escalas, Jennifer Edson, 169n75, 295, 443n17
Esteban, Gabriel, 332n105
Etgar, Michael, 332n109
Etua, Sarah F., 240n152
Evan, 498
Evans, Martinus M., 240n176
Evans, Timothy H., 560n127
Evers, Reinier, 477n90
Faber, Ronald J., 90n105, 236n6, 510n14
Fackler, Martin, 90n97, 476n40
Faith, Myles S., 238n88
Fang, Bay, 476n76
Farganis, Sondra, 240n171
Faris, Charles W., 360t, 377n80
Farrelly, Francis, 279n88, 376n49
Farris, Paul W., 332n107
Faustine, Henry, 276
Fay, Bradford, 513n106
Fazio, Russell H., 170n113, 329n3
Feick, Lawrence, 445n92
Feinberg, Richard A., 167n4
Feintuch, Jocelyn, 561n162
Feirstein, Bruce, 443n22
Feldman, Laurence P., 406n10
Fenandes, Daniel, 38
Fennis, Bob, 330n19
Fera, Rae Ann, 198n27
Ferguson, M. J., 377n64
Ferguson, Tim W., 511n46
Fern, Edward F., 377n77
Fernandez, Karen V., 558n23
Fernbach, Phillip M., 169n80, 376n34
Ferraro, Rich, 509
Fey, Tina, 253
Fiasco, Lupe, 97
Fielding, Michael, 511n48
Filiatrault, P., 278n26
DiCaprio, Leonardo, 69, 88n51
Dichter, Ernest, 244, 246, 277n6
Dickinson, Sonia J., 376n49
Dickson, Peter R., 199n58, 383t, 406n6
Diddy, 308
Diesendruck, Gil, 559n79
Dietvorst, Thomas F., 408n84
Di Justo, Patrick, 90n111, 90n114
DiLeonardo, Micaela, 378n110
Dillinger, John, 516
Di Muro, Fabrizio, 198n24
Ditto, Beth, 227
Do, Anh, 511n37
Dobson, Roger, 167n9
Dodd, Vikram, 333n166
Dodds, Peter Sheridan, 444n54, 444n62, 
444n64
Dolan, Kerry A., 476n37
Dolich, Ira J., 237n52
Dolliver, Mark, 89n84, 333n141
Domzal, Teresa J., 129n92, 561n169
Doney, Patricia M., 378n113
Dong, Lily, 561n143
Donovan, Robert J., 407n50
Donthu, Naveen, 167n14, 510n15
Donthu, Yaveroglu, 167n14
Doogan, Jonathan, 443n43
Dornoff, Ronald J., 169n92, 237n52
Dortch, Shannon, 378n93
Dotson, Michael J., 511n41
Douglas, Mary Twe, 278n49, 278n57
Dover, Philip A., 333n160
Downey, Robert, Jr., 163
Drake, 538
Dr. Dre, 516
Drenan, Sarah, 377n68
Drèze, Xavier, 168n30, 169n78, 199n60, 471f, 
477n105, 477n117
Droge, Cornelia, 88n29
Dröge, Cornelia, 332n107
Drolet, Aimee, 170n114, 198n40, 237n33
D’Souza, Giles, 331n90
Dubé, Laurette, 333n145, 406n17
Dubner, Stephen G., 377n59
Dubois, David, 236n10, 477n92
Dugger, Celia W., 557n3
Duhachek, Adam, 277n16, 407n43
Duhigg, Charles, 171n149
Duncan, Calvin P., 355t, 377n67, 377n71
Duncan, James S., 559n87
Duncan, Katherine, 171n143
Dunn, Elizabeth, 198n33
Dupri, Jermaine, 262
Durante, Kristina M., 238n98
Durgee, Jeffrey F., 245t, 277n6, 476n56
Durkheim, Émile, 457, 559n90
Dwoskin, Elizabeth, 237n41
Dyer, David C., 332n109
Dyett, Linda, 560n114
Dylan, Bob, 308
Eagly, Alice H., 331n70
Earnest, Leslie, 512n79
Eastin, Matthew S., 167, 444n86
Eastman, Jacqueline Kilsheimer, 476n39
Echikson, William, 129n101
Eckhardt, Giana M., 270, 511n36, 547
Eckholm, Erik, 511n54
Edell, Julie A., 170nn108–109, 331n91, 
333n161, 376n40
Edelman, David, 374
Edmondson, 511n59, 511n62
Edmondson, Brad, 407n54

 
Indexes 
591 
Grossman, John, 168n30, 278n44
Grossman, Randi Priluck, 167n10
Grove, Jennifer Van, 198n46
Grove, Stephen J., 90n120, 406n21
Grubb, Edward L., 237n50
Gruber, John, 196
Grybaum, Michael M., 129n102
Guéguen, Nicolas, 238n100
Guernsey, Lisa, 55n50
Gulas, Charles S., 236n14
Gumbel, Peter, 560n133
Guns, William D., 279n73
Gunther, Marc, 405, 474
Gupta, Richa, 128n51
Gupta, Shankar, 333n131
Gurhan-Canli, Zeynep, 331n57
Gutman, Evelyn G., 169n88
Gutman, Jonathan, 279n94
Guynn, Jessica, 197
Habich, John, 477n96
Hafner, Katie, 331n65
Häfner, Michael, 236n11, 236n15
Hagerty, James R., 168n21
Hagtvedt, Henrik, 197n8
Haidt, Jonathan, 375n2
Hajo, Adam, 238n78
Hakim, Danny, 87n6, 279n64
Hall, Calvin S., 197n12, 277n11
Halle, David, 476n58
Halliday, Jean, 332n100, 375n15
Halstead, Diane, 88n29
Halzack, Sarah, 559n69
Hamerman, E. J., 558n24
Hamermesh, Daniel S., 239n136
Hamilton, Bethany, 243
Hamilton, Ryan, 445n93
Hamm, Jon, 278n31
Han, Sang-Pil, 279n78
Han, Young Jee, 471f, 477n117
Hancock, Michelle, 240n172
Handelman, Jay M., 88n39
Hansen, William B., 237n60
Hargens, L. L., 476n75
Hargreaves, David J., 377n62
Hargreaves, Steve, 475n21
Harich, Katrin E., 406n21, 406n23
Harkins, S., 443n34
Harmon, Amy, 90n112
Harnish, Richard J., 330n51
Harress, Christopher, 89n88
Harris, Elizabeth A., 168n54, 510n24, 510n29, 
512n85
Harris, James Edwin, 89n74
Harris, Marvin, 557n1
Hartley, Steven W., 408n71
Hartshorne, Charles, 129n93
Hartwick, Jon, 330n36
Hartwig, Elisha, 378n102
Hasapopoulous, Tedi, 167n7
Hassay, Derek N., 90n104
Hastie, Reid, 444n64
Hastorf, Albert H., 129n88
Haugtvedt, Curtis P., 331n94
Hauser, John R., 375n25
Havlena, William J., 170n138, 330n33
Hawking, Stephen, 416
Hayes, Constance L., 55n15
Healy, Melissa, 477n111
Heath, Rebecca Piirto, 279n68
Heath, Timothy B., 379n124
Heatherton, Todd F., 198n38
Heckler, Susan E., 170n112, 170n118
Goff, Brent G., 90n107
Goffman, Erving, 55n19, 236n16, 236n22, 
237n64
Goh, Paul, 329
Goldberg, Carey, 240n158
Goldberg, Marvin E., 171n141, 377n67, 
377n71, 406n21, 406n23, 408n82, 
558n37, 559n63
Golden, Ellen, 442n4
Golden, Linda L., 332n98, 332n102
Goldhaber, Gerald M., 170n129
Goldman, Kevin, 171n148
Goldner, Diane, 238n87
Goldsmith, Ronald E., 198n50, 277n19, 
277n25, 278n26, 444n61, 476n39
Goldstein, Noah J., 330n35
Goleman, Daniel, 559n61
Gollwitzer, Peter M., 237n62, 375n5
Golonka, Sabrina, 238n76
Gomes, Lee, 129n68, 560n100
Gongloff, Mark, 475n16
Gonzales, Monica, 559n58
Gooch, Liz, 511n53, 561n175
Goodstein, Ronald C., 128n59, 376n38
Goodwin, Stephen A., 332n108
Gopaldas, Ahir, 88n31
Gordinier, Jeff, 512n90
Gordon, Beverly, 559n96
Gorlin, Margarita, 377n63
Gorn, Gerald J., 128n18, 167n15, 169n59, 
171n141, 199n70, 332n109, 377n67, 
377n71, 406n21, 406n23, 408n82, 
558n37, 559n63
Goudreau, Jenna, 167n1, 167n4, 171n144
Gough, Harrison G., 236n19
Goukens, Caroline, 240n174
Gould, Jay, 227
Gould, Stephen, 558n57
Goulding, Christina, 236n24
Grabenstetter, Jenn, 558n43
Graeff, Timothy R., 237n35
Graham, Ellen, 513n107
Graham, Franklin, 509
Granbois, Donald H., 376n52, 378n96, 
378n113
Grass, Robert C., 331n85
Graves, Michael, 99
Graya, James J., 240n152
Green, Heather, 332n111
Green, Nancy, 238n103
Green, Penelope, 511n55, 511n57
Green, Robert T., 559n62
Greenberg, Karl, 89n59, 168n50, 239n119, 
444n59, 510–511nn33–34, 510n25, 
558n46
Greenfield, Patricia M., 169n58
Greenwald, Anthony G., 170n102, 331n63
Gregan-Paxton, Jennifer, 169n57
Grégoire, Yany, 88n35
Gresham, Alicia, 475n5
Grewal, Daisy, 477n120
Grewal, Dhruv, 88n36, 406n15
Greyser, Stephen A., 88n53, 560n121
Grier, Sonya A., 168n50, 330n53
Griffin, Dale, 170n114
Griffin, Mitch, 406n25, 406n27, 444n50
Griffith, Andy, 122
Griskevicius, Vladas, 238n98, 330n35
Groden, Claire, 128n58
Groom, Nichola, 90n108
Gross, Barbara L., 279n93
Grossbart, Sanford, 168n50
Grossman, Cathy Lynn, 511n50
Furse, David H., 170n104, 199n71, 311, 
330n18, 331n84
Fussell, Paul, 476n34
Gabler, Neal, 278n43
Gagnon, John H., 239n121
Gal, David, 377n86
Galak, Jeff, 170nn108–109, 377n89
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 59
Galinsky, Adam D., 207, 236n10, 238n78, 
477nn91–92, 477n106
Gallagher, Sean, 89n88
Galloni, Allesandra, 333n137
Gangestad, Steve, 237n35
Gans, Herbert J., 477n93, 558n14
Gao, George, 512n89
Garbinsky, Emily N., 55n27, 55n46
Gardner, David M., 333n146, 377n72
Gardner, Meryl Paula, 406n17, 406n21
Gardyn, Rebecca, 476n33, 476n50, 511n63
Garolera, Jordi, 279n89
Garretson, Judith A., 331n79
Garrett, Dennis E., 88n53
Garrett, Libby, 561n167
Gaschke, Yvonne N., 406n20
Gates, Bill, 191, 453
Gates, Gary J., 239n122
Gates, Sara, 54
Gatty, Ronald, 279n66
Gaulin, Steve, 240n153
Gaylord, Becky, 128n52
Gebeloff, Robert, 475n14
Geertz, Clifford, 557n1
Gelb, Betsy D., 88n29
Geller, Martinne, 171n144
Gengler, Charles, 329n9
Gentry, James W., 239n147, 408n86,  
512n67
Ger, Güliz, 87nn23–24, 197n7, 510n16, 
559n98
Gergen, Kenneth J., 443n8, 443n16
Gergen, Mary, 443n8, 443n16
Germano, Sara, 407n65
Geyskens, Kelly, 240n174
Ghose, Anindya, 199n60
Giang, Vivian, 406n12
Gibson, Janine, 476n76
Gibson, Mel, 486
Giese, J. L., 277n25, 278n26
Giesler, Markus, 50, 557n3, 557n9, 558n55
Gilbert, Faye W., 278n36
Gilbreath, Edward, 511n46
Gillan, Tamara, 279n87
Gillette, King C., 227
Gilly, Mary C., 88n29, 444n66, 510n10, 
511n61, 512n101
Gilmore, James H., 199n59
Gilovich, Thomas, 128n21, 198n32, 279n79
Gino, Francesca, 443n28, 558n38
Gips, James, 128n44
Girling, Rob, 377nn63–64
Glader, Paul, 237n63
Gladwell, Malcolm, 352, 376n53, 560n126
Glazing, Jennifer K., 377n76
Gneezy, A., 89n79
Gobé, Marc, 128n25, 561n155
Godek, J., 330n12
Godfrey, Andrea L., 88n36
Godin, Seth, 330n46
Goel, Vindu, 198n45, 199n68, 331n72, 
333n165, 407n36
Goetz, Thomas, 375n8
Goetzl, David, 240n158

592 
Indexes
Ittersum, Koert van, 129n84
Ives, Mike, 560n136
Ives, Nat, 127n3, 331n78
Iwamura, Miki, 559n62
Iyengar, Raghuram, 199n60, 445n90
Iyer, Easwar, 238n103, 407nn62–63
Izberk-Bilgin, E., 511n50
Jackman, Philip, 475n4
Jackson, Anita, 408n78
Jackson, Michael, 296, 317
Jacob, Susannah, 331n92
Jacobson, Robert, 408n79
Jacoby, Jacob, 88n53, 199n62, 277n23, 
408n84
Jafari, Aliakbar, 236n24
Jaffe, Francoise, 378n99
Jaffe, Rebecca H., 377n58
Jain, Sanjay, 476n39
Jain, S. C., 333n161
Jambulingam, Thanigavelan, 238n84
James, LeBron, 119
James, William, 205
Jampol, Lily, 279n79
Janiszewski, Chris, 55n25, 167n6
Janssen, Loes, 330n19
Jargon, Julie, 199n55
Jaschik, Scott, 238n90
Jasthi, Sreekar, 239n129
Jaworski, Bernard J., 199n71
Jaworski, Michelle, 238n104
Jayanti, Rama, 408n78, 443n39
Jayson, Sharon, 406n12
Jay Z, 191, 262, 518
Jenner, Bruce, 221
Jenner, Caitlin, 221
Jennings, Angel, 512nn91–92
Jhally, Sut, 87n7, 278n55
Jiang, Lan, 127n7
Jing, Bing, 199n60
J-Lo. See Lopez, Jennifer (J-Lo)
Joachimsthaler, Erich, 277n23, 279n72
Jobs, Steve, 258
Johansson, Scarlett, 315
Johansson, Ulf, 557
Johar, Gita Venkataramani, 237n55, 332n102, 
558n24
Johar, J. S., 329n4
John, Deborah Roedder, 169n57, 169n60, 
169n87, 197n4, 237n61, 238n74, 
408n73
Johnson, Alex, 513n104
Johnson, Allison R., 237n49
Johnson, Bradley, 278n30
Johnson, Brian A., 477n90
Johnson, Eric J., 170n100, 170nn106–107, 
375n3
Johnson, Kerenami, 511n61
Johnson, Kirk, 168n18, 475n6
Johnson, Michael D., 376n45
Johnstone, Michael-Lee, 407n31
Jones, Thomas F., 171n147
Jordan, Michael, 191, 460, 521
Jordan, Miriam, 561n147
Joshi, Yogesh, 199n60
Jung, Carl G., 246, 251, 277n12
Kahl, Joseph, 475n19
Kahle, Lynn R., 279n93, 330n11, 443n32, 
476n66
Kahn, Barbara E., 128n32, 129n85, 199n65, 
407n38
Kahn, Gabriel, 127n14
Holson, Laura M., 561n152
Holt, Douglas B., 238n112, 477n98, 561n170
Homans, George C., 407n69
Homer, Pamela, 279n93
Honea, Heather, 199n70
Hong, Jiewen, 127n8
Hood, Jacqueline N., 87n4
Hookway, James, 561n146
Hormes, Julia M., 238n88
Horn, Martin I., 561n162
Horne, David, 237n67
Horney, Karen, 246, 277n9
Hornik, Jacob, 128n45, 406n10
Horovitz, Bruce, 89n75, 198n36, 332n106
Horowitz, David M., 88n35
Horsley, Kris, 169n58
Horton, Steve, 333n139
House, James S., 464, 477n95
Houston, Michael J., 88n53, 169n81, 
170n118, 279n90, 331n87
Hovland, Carl I., 330n49
Howard, Daniel J., 329n9
Howard, Rob, 276
Howe, Jeff, 377n87
Howe, Neil, 512n68
Hoyer, Wayne D., 88n53, 375n21, 376n52, 
376n54, 377n67, 510n15
Hsee, Christopher K., 278n58
Hsu, Michael, 88n36
Hsu, Tiffany, 240n183
Huang, Laura, 237n67
Huang, Peng, 375n19
Huang, Shirley H., 168n50
Huang, Szu-chi, 375n6
Huang, Xun, 331n83, 443n33
Huber, Joel, 375n1, 376n52, 376n55
Hudson, Kris, 407n59
Huffman, Cynthia, 198n20
Huffman, Douglas E., 476n69
Hughner, Renee Shaw, 277n18
Huh, Ben, 543
Huh, Young Eun, 168n38
Hui, Michael K., 443n33
Hull, Jay G., 236n30
Humphreys, M. S., 169n83
Hunt, David M., 88n50
Hunt, Shelby D., 376n44, 408n80, 559n82
Hupp, Gregg, 237n50
Hutchings, Emma, 377n88
Hutchinson, J. Wesley, 168n33, 170n108, 
199n58
Hutson, Matthew, 376n50
Hutton, Debra G., 236n6
Hyatt, Eva M., 511n41
Hymowitz, Carol, 561n150
Iacobucci, Dawn, 277n16, 408n81
Ikeda, Ana Akemi, 279n94
Ilic, Jelena, 442
Ilhan, Behice Ece, 558n50
Indvik, Lauren, 198n30, 241n190, 377n90
Inkster, James A., 330n15
Inman, J. Jeffrey, 407n57, 407n60
Innes, Emma, 129n65
Innis, Daniel E., 408n80
Insko, Chester A., 167n10, 330nn13–14, 
377n68
Irmak, C., 170n133, 277n16
Irons, Jeremy, 549
Irwin, Tanya, 199n52, 378n111, 406n8, 
444n63
Isaac, M .S., 376n42
Isherwood, Baron C., 278n49, 278n57
Heide, Jan B., 377n76
Heider, Fritz, 330n22
Heine, Christopher, 406n3
Heitmeyer, Jeanne R., 444n61
Heller, Steven, 129n94
Helliker, Kevin, 239n119
Helm, Burt, 55n12, 510n4
Hende, Ellis A., 278n34
Henderson, Pamela W., 128n32
Hendon, Donald W., 476n69
Henry, Paul C., 88n39, 198n21, 238n107, 
458, 476n57, 558n48
Henry, Walter A., 169n82
Henthorne, Tony L., 333n142
Hepburn, Katharine, 215
Herbst, Kenneth C., 331n56
Herd, Kelly B., 377n86
Hernandez, Brian Anthony, 445n94
Herr, Paul M., 170n113, 330n26, 
 330n49
Herrington, J. Duncan, 407n48
Herzenstein, Michal, 331n55
Heslin, Richard, 332n99
Hess, James D., 199n60
Hethorn, Janet, 560n114
Hewer, Paul, 198n22
Heyn, Dalma, 239n147
Hiestand, Michael, 278n33
Higgins, Harry (fictional), 460
Hill, Julie Skur, 561n163
Hill, Reuben, 443n31, 559n68
Hill, Ronald Paul, 88nn48–49, 333n152, 
475n18, 476n42
Hill, Sarah E., 238n98
Hillhouse, Joel J., 240n176
Hilton, Paris, 296, 496
Hilton, Perez, 201
Hine, Thomas, 278n28
Hirsch, Alan R., 406n7
Hirsch, Paul M., 558n12
Hirschman, Elizabeth C., 55n45, 127n6, 
170n111, 170n117, 331n86, 376n44, 
408n70, 476n35, 510n14, 511n41, 
557n9, 558n33, 559n71, 559n88
Hiscott, Rebecca, 198n34
Hite, Robert E., 128n18, 407n49
Hitler, Adolf, 320
Hitt, Jack, 128n36
Hjorth-Andersen, Chr., 377n72
Hlaracek, James D., 377n77
Hof, Robert, 560n103
Hoffman, Ashley, 558n42
Hoffman, Donna L., 330n45
Hoffman, Jan, 90n100
Hofmann, Deborah, 559n99
Hofstede, Geert, 561nn164–165
Holak, Susan L., 170n138, 560n105
Holbrook, Morris B., 55n45, 127n6, 170–
171n140, 170n136, 237n34, 277n25, 
278n26, 330n10, 330n33, 408n70, 
444n54, 477nn95–96, 510n14, 
559n71
Holden, Stephen, 512n75
Holland, R., 442
Hollenbeck, Candice R., 443n24
Hollingshead, August B., 476n65
Hollis, Nigel, 373, 374
Holman, Rebecca H., 55n43, 88n29, 88n35, 
277n13, 331n62, 332n107, 333n157, 
406n5, 406nn17–18, 406n22, 
408n78, 408n80, 444n50
Holmes, Elizabeth, 475n13
Holmes, Katie, 328

 
Indexes 
593 
Kuchinskas, Susan, 170n124
Kukar-Kinney, Monika, 90n105
Kulkarni, Atul Anil, 558n50
Kumanyika, Shiriki K., 168n50
Kumar, Amit, 279n79
Kumar, V., 199n60
Kumar-Batra, Rishtee, 344
Kuntze, Ronald J., 277n18
Kuse, Allan R., 170n104
Kwon, Wi-Suk, 560n114
Kyung, Park Ji, 238n74
Labroo, Aparna A., 377n57, 407n60
Lach, Jennifer, 407n56
Lackman, Conway, 378n92
Laczniak, Gene R., 88n53
Laczniak, Russell N., 444n50, 512n73
Lady Gaga, 416
LaFerla, Ruth, 477n104
Laird, Sam, 90n93
Lajos, Joseph, 376n42
Lakshmi-Ratan, Ramnath, 169n57
Lambiase, Jacqueline, 238n112
Lamont, Lawrence R., 279n87, 279n91
Lampe, Cliff, 477n99
Lanasa, John M., 378n92
Land, Deborah, 169n58
Lane, Paul M., 406n9
Langer, Ellen J., 168n34
Langhe, Bart de, 38, 376n34
Langmeyer, Lynn, 331n62
Lapidus, Richard S., 88n35
Laran, Juliano, 170nn109–110
Larmermach, Brook, 476n77
Laroche, Michel, 278n26, 476n62
Larsen, V., 129n93
Lasaleta, Jannine D., 170n139
Lassek, Will, 240n153
Lasswell, Mark, 561n160
Lastovicka, John L., 87n20, 277n18, 277n23, 
279n72, 558n23
Latané, B., 443n34, 443n35
LaTour, Kathryn A., 407n35
LaTour, Michael S., 333n138, 333n142
Lattin, Don, 511n47
Lau-Gesk, Loraine, 198n40, 237n33
Laumann, Edward O., 239n121, 464, 477n95
Lauren, Ralph, 261
Laurent, G., 169n78
Laverie, Debra A., 236n27
Lavidge, Robert, 329n7
Layton, Roger A., 376n52, 376n54
Lazarsfeld, Paul F., 443n44
Lazarus, Richard S., 330n10
Lazer, William, 557n2
Lazzari, Renato, 236n19
Lazzaro, Joseph, 277n18
Leake, Lisa, 127n1
Lea T. (model), 221
LeBeau, Phil, 406n1
LeBoeuf, Robyn A., 237n38
Leclerc, France, 278n58
Ledbetter, James, 512n82
Lee, Angela Y., 329n9
Lee, Don, 240n183
Lee, Euehun, 512n67
Lee, Jaehoon, 87n15
Lee, Julie, 476n62
Lee, Leonard, 198n29
Lee, M. S., 375n21
Lefton, Terry, 560n139
“Left Shark” (dancer), 201
Legoux, Renaud, 88n35
Key, Wayne R., 239n145
Khan, Shahrukh, 462
Khan, Uzma, 375n1
Kiel, Geoffrey C., 376n52, 376n54
Killah, Ghostface, 518
Kim, David, 407n52
Kim, E. A., 277n16
Kim, Junu Bryan, 512n77
Kim, Soo, 207
Kim, Young Chan, 558n57
King, Charles W., 444n61, 560n121
King, Julie, 238n97
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 248t
King, Robert L., 407n48, 559n80
Kinkade, Thomas, 520
Kinnear, Thomas C., 88n53, 170n111, 
170n119, 331n86
Kinski, Nastassja, 549
Kirkland, Brittany, 240n176
Kirmani, Amna, 408n80
Kitayama, S., 236nn3–4
Kitroeff, Natalie, 199n54
Kivetz, Ran, 197n9
Kiviat, Barbara, 377n84
Kjeldgaard, Dannie, 240n182, 510n10, 
561n169
Klara, Robert, 331n75, 509
Klein, Jill G., 237n67, 558n56
Kleinberg, Adam, 88n55
Kleine, Robert E., III, 236n27, 237n55, 558n37
Kleine, Susan Schultz, 87n16, 236n27, 
237n55
Klesse, Anne-Kathrin, 240n174
Kline, Stephen, 87n7, 278n55
Knasko, Susan C., 128n32
Knowles, David, 128n55, 129n104
Knowles, Patricia A., 406n21
Knox, Robert E., 330n15
Koch, Christof, 129n77
Koch, Wendy, 89n83, 475n27
Koenig, Harold F., 443n38
Koh, Yoree, 560n134
Kohák, Erazim, 87n25
Kolata, Gina, 443n14, 445n97
Kolbe, Lutz, 330n45
Kolbe, Richard H., 240n168
Kosaka, Hiroshi, 557n2
Kotler, Philip, 88n54, 407n48
Kottak, Conrad Phillip, 558n27, 559n86
Kouchadki, Maryan, 375n9
Kowitt, Beth, 556, 557
Kozinets, Robert V., 88n39, 377n91, 407n43, 
560n125
Kraft, Frederic B., 512n67
Kragh, J. R., 331n62
Kramer, Andrew E., 477n112
Kramer, Louise, 333n134
Kramer, Thomas, 201n10
Kratzer, Jan, 444n55
Kravets, Olga, 558n27, 559n98
Kreider, Holly, 169n58
Krishna, Aradhna, 127n4, 127n9, 199n76
Krishnamurthy, Parthasarathy, 375n4
Kristoffersonm, K., 88n45
Krober-Riel, Werner, 170n119
Kroft, Steve, 512n87
Kron, Joan, 559n87
Kropp, Fredric, 168n47
Krosnick, J. A., 330n34
Kruez, Roger J., 332n118
Kruger, Justin, 170nn108–109
Krugman, Herbert E., 167n12, 170n95, 
199n67, 329n7, 331n91
Kahneman, Daniel, 199n65, 377n66, 
379n124, 407n38, 475n3
Kaiser, Susan B., 238n92, 560n104, 560n112, 
560n114
Kakkar, Pradeep, 406n2
Kakutani, Michiko, 558n22
Kalamas, M., 278n26
Kalra, Ajay, 128n59, 408n81
Kaltcheva, Velitchka D., 406n19, 406n26
Kalyanaram, Gurumurthy, 169n92
Kamakura, Wagner A., 279n93, 331n59
Kamen, Joseph M., 331n62
Kamenetz, Anya, 198n43, 477n100
Kamins, Michael A., 87n3, 331n62, 332n98
Kaminski, Peter F., 88n33
Kamvar, Sepandar D., 198n24, 198n33
Kan, Christina, 169n80
Kang, Stephanie, 90n123
Kang, Yong-Soon, 330n49
Kangun, Norman, 332n107
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 278n49, 278n53
Kapner, Suzanne, 561n174
Kardashian, Kim, 191, 226, 268, 295, 416, 
534, 548
Kardes, Frank R., 169n92, 331n55, 332n104, 
333n138, 408n86, 512n67
Kareklas, Ioannis, 128n22
Karmarkar, Uma R., 332n101
Karp, Hannah, 55n8
Karrer, Holli C., 171n146
Kassarjian, Harold H., 168n39, 168n43, 
277n8, 277n23, 406n2
Katayama, Lisa, 278n50
Kates, Steven Maxwell, 168n43, 239n123
Katona, Zsolt, 376n42
Katz, Daniel, 285, 329n2
Katz, Elihu, 443n44
Kaufman, Carol Felker, 406n9
Kaufman, Leslie, 330n27
Kaufman-Scarborough, Carol, 89n65, 510n10
Kavas, Alican, 330n33
Kay, Aaron C., 330n16
Kearney, A. T., 453f, 476n42
Keates, Nancy, 558n45
Keats, John, 224
Keen, Andrew, 55n47
Keenan, E. A., 89n79
Keighley, Jim, 474
Keillor, Bruce, 332n118
Keinan, Anat, 197n9, 278n32, 443n28, 
560n119
Keiningham, Timothy L., 88n36
Keith, Naughton, 477n115
Kelleher, Kathleen, 238n101
Keller, Ed, 445n95
Keller, Kevin Lane, 167n11, 169n85, 170n105, 
170nn108–109
Keller, Punam Anand, 329n9, 333n151, 
376n40, 558n55
Kelley, Harold H., 443n31
Kelley, James, 476n62
Kelly, Gene, 521
Kelly, Grace Patricia (Princess Grace), 224
Kelly, Samantha Murphy, 445n94
Kelman, Herbert, 330n50
Kelppe, Ingeborg Astrid, 238n107
Kenhove, Patrick Van, 128n19
Kennedy, John F., 67, 248t
Kennedy, Pagan, 55n18
Kennedy, Patricia F., 236n12, 279n93
Kernan, Jerome B., 129n92, 237n55, 444n74, 
561n169
Kershaw, Sarah, 238n99

594 
Indexes
Manrai, Lalita A., 406n17
Manson, Marilyn, 500
Manuel, Jay, 423
Mao Tse-Tung, 320, 460
Marano, Hara Estroff, 240n153
Marce, Stephen, 443n26
Marci, Carl, 373, 374
Marcoolyn, Gilian, 407n50
Marcoux, Jean-Sebastien, 558n54
Marin, Alexandra, 444n79
Mark, Margaret, 246, 248t, 277n14
Markee, Nancy L., 239n147
Markoff, John, 55n49, 445n98
Marks, Lawrence, 331n93
Markus, H., 236nn3–4
Marley, Bob, 134–135
Marley, Cedella, 135
Marley, Rohan, 135
Marmorstein, Howard, 169n68
Marquis, M., 278n26
Marr, Merissa, 558n32, 561n152
Marritz, Ilya, 512n79
Marshall, Greg W., 54n3, 129n100
Martilla, John A., 443n45
Martin, Andrew, 89n82, 168n53, 333n132
Martin, Brett A. S., 128n46
Martin, Claire, 171n142
Martin, Hugo, 170n134
Martin, Ingrid, 88n35
Martin, Kelly D., 476n42
Martin, Mary C., 236n12, 239n147
Martineau, Pierre, 277n6
Marx, Groucho, 384
Marx, Karl, 227, 455
Maslow, Abraham H., 178, 198n19
Matear, Maggie, 237n49
Mateschitz, Dietrich, 276
Mathew, George, 477n94
Mathur, Aditi, 89n86
Mathur, Anil, 512n67
Mathwick, Charla, 477n102
Matthews, Chris, 475n11
Matthews, Robert Guy, 477n82
Mattila, Anna, 407n48
May, F., 170n133
Mayer, Caroline E., 333n169
Mayer, John D., 406n20
Mazis, Michael B., 377n69
Mazur, Glenn H., 128n48, 406n16
Mazzocco, Philip J., 477n91
Mazzon, Jose Alfonso, 279n93
McAfee, Andrew, 55n16
McAlexander, James H., 442n3, 443n38
McAllister, Leigh, 375n3
McArthur, Leslie Z., 377n58
McAteer, Ollie, 560n127
McCall, George J., 279n83
McCarthy, Justin, 239n124
McCarthy, Michael, 129n79
McCarty, John A., 510n14
McCarty, Martin, 561n162
McClellan, Steve, 198n26
McClelland, David C., 198n14
McCracken, Grant, 331n76, 557n8, 559n88, 
560n120
McCrae, Robert R., 197n12
McCraie, Robert R., 277n5
McCrohan, Kevin, 408n89
McCullough, James, 330n37
McDaniel, Stephen W., 198n12
McDonald, Ronald, 522
McFerran, Brent, 199n70, 236n15
McGill, Ann L., 129n86, 408n81, 445n93
McGonigal, Jane, 168n29
Loughran, Patrick, 331n71
Louis XIV, 522
Lowrey, Annie, 476n30
Lowrey, Tina, 128n41, 279n63, 558n31, 
558nn56–57
Lowry, Adam, 99
Lucas, George, 544
Luce, Mary Frances, 375n23
Luchter, Les, 199n77
Luedicke, Marius K., 50, 445n103, 557n3
Luhby, Tami, 475n26
Luhrmann, T. M., 129n81, 443n30
Lukovitz, Karlene, 279n96, 333n168, 378n96, 
511n43, 511n49, 512n66
Luna, D., 129n93
Lundell, Helen, 129n98
Lunt, Paul S., 476n46
Lurie, Alison, 560n114
Lurie, Nicholas H., 199n60, 375n19, 375n24, 
376n34
Luscombe, Belinda, 378n107
Lutz, Richard J., 168n48, 237n38, 238n103, 
278n62, 329n2, 406n2, 444n50, 
476n56, 557n1
Lwin, May O., 127n9, 128n33
Lyall, Sarah, 378n116, 477n81
Lynch, J. David, 170n111, 476n76
Lynch, John G., 153, 169n80, 170n107, 
375n13
Lynes, Russell, 558n12
Lynn, Regina, 378n120
Lynn, Steven Jay, 236n20
Lysonski, Steven, 279n87
Ma, Y., 331n73
MacArthur, Kate, 561n159
MacCannell, Dean, 559n94
MacGregor, James N., 169n77
Machan, Dyan, 443n6
MacInnis, Deborah J., 199n71
MacKenzie, Scott B., 329n9, 331n88
Mackie, Diane M., 239n118
Macklin, M. Carole, 169n55
Macmillan, Douglas, 237n41
MacNealy, Mary Sue, 332n118
Macsai, Dan, 168n20
Madden, Normandy, 560n131
Madden, Thomas J., 167n10, 168n36, 
333n145
Madonna, 296
Madzharov, Adriana, 128n34
Maeng, Ahreum, 169n72
Mager, John, 476n66
Magrath, Allan J., 408n89
Maguire, A. M., 169n83
Mahagjan, Vijay, 476n79
Mahler, Jonathan, 90n102
Mahoney, Sarah, 89n84, 238n111, 239n119, 
378n107, 510n26, 512n95
Maikewitz, Keven, 256f
Maister, David H., 408n95
Malhotra, A., 442
Malhotra, C.K., 442
Malhotra, Naresh K., 237n53
Mandela, Nelson, 248t
Mandell, Nina, 239n137
Mander, Jerry, 87n7
Mandese, Joe, 511n42, 511n49
Maney, Kevin, 90n128
Mangalindan, Mylene, 55n17
Mangleburg, Tamara F., 378n113
Manjoo, Farhad, 197
Manning, Kenneth C., 376n38
Manning-Schaffel, Vivian, 240n188
Lehmann, Donald R., 375n21, 376n40, 
376n52, 376n54, 378n100, 560n104
Leibenstein, Harvey, 560n115
Leigh, Thomas W., 277n2, 377n74
Leippe, Michael R., 170n102, 331n63
Leiss, William, 87nn7–8, 87n10, 278n55
Lemon, Stephanie C., 240n176
Lenn, T. N., 329n3
Lennon, John, 535
Lenski, Gerhard E., 476n70
Lentini, Nina M., 238n89
Leonard, Abigail W., 239n140
Leonard-Barton, Dorothy, 444n47, 444n55
Leong, Siew Meng, 330n40, 408n73
Leonhardt, David, 408n96, 475n22
Lepisto, Lawrence R., 406n18
Leshnoff, Jessica, 477n116
Lessig, V. Parker, 443n13
Lessne, Greg, 378n95
Lettl, Christopher, 444n55
Lev, Michael, 128n56
Levere, Jane L., 87n12
Levine, Adam, 309
Levine, Robert, 406n11
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 522, 558n30
Levitt, Steven J., 377n59
Levitt, Theodore, 561n151
Levy, Alan S., 236n30
Levy, Karyne, 278n45
Levy, Michael, 406n15
Levy, Sidney J., 558n51, 559n61
Lewin, Tamar, 513n109
Lewis, Richard, 278n47
Lewis, Van Dyk, 560n114
Li, Norman P., 238n98
Li, Wenjun, 240n176
Li, Xiuping, 331n83
Lichtenstein, Donald R., 237n35, 376n34, 
408n80
Lieberman, Peter, 198n35
Lifshitz, Ralph, 261
Lin, Carolyn A., 279n82
Lin, Jeffrey, 561n156
Linderman, Matt, 332n112
Lindquist, Jay D., 406n9
Lindzey, Gardner, 197n12, 277n11
Lipkus, Isaac M., 329n9
Lippman, John, 560n129
Lipscomb, Thomas, 168n45
Liptak, Adam, 509
Lisjak, Monika, 207
Littlefield, Jon, 279n81
Liu, Hongju, 376n34
Liu, Wendy, 338, 375n11, 376n38, 377n86, 
378n117
Lloyd, B. B., 376n42
Lockhart, Robert S., 169n81
Loechner, Jack, 199n81, 333n131
Loewenstein, G., 278n26
Lofgren, Nils, 417
Lofgren, Orvar, 510n16
Loftus, E. F., 169n81
Logsdon, Jeanne M., 87n4
Lohan, Lindsay, 217, 496
Lohr, Steve, 444n81
Lohrer, Robert, 378n103
Lohse, Gerald L., 129n73
Loken, Barbara, 167n7, 238nn95–96
Longo, Laura, 239n144
Longoria, Eva, 235
Lopez, Jennifer (J-Lo), 223, 226, 235, 262, 308, 
317, 484
Loren, Sophia, 248t
Lotozo, Eils, 510n17

 
Indexes 
595 
Navalpakkam, Vidhya, 129n77
Nayakankuppan, D., 330n12
Neal, Casey, 374
Neal, Meghan, 239n126
Neff, Jack, 54n5, 55n41, 88n41, 89n80, 
89n86, 240n188, 333n169, 445n101, 
511n43
Neimark, Jill, 240n167
Nelly (hip-hop artist), 518
Nelson, Emily, 560n102
Nelson, Leif D., 89n79, 377n89
Nelson, Sara C., 477n85
Nenkov, Gergana Y., 197n3, 377n61
Nesdale, Andrew, 407n50
Neslin, Scott, 199n60
Netemeyer, Richard G., 237n35, 375n13, 
443n29, 443n32
Neuhaus, Carolin, 127n12, 376n29
Neuhauser, Alan, 510n28
Neuman, William, 240n178
Newberry, Chris, 374
Newbery, Charles, 561n149
Newman, Andrew Adam, 55n22, 237n46, 
240n173, 240n175, 329, 443n7, 
558n52
Newman, Barry, 511n52
Newman, Bruce I., 279n93
Newman, George E., 376n50, 378n123, 
559n79
Newman, L. S., 169n74
Newport, Frank, 239n122
Newton, Isaac, 103
Nguyen, Lan, 512n70
Nicholson, Carolyn, 559n72
Nicosia, Franco M., 408n78
Nielsen, Jesper H., 129n74, 148, 168n44, 
377n57
Nine Inch Nails, 317
Nixon, Ron, 408n85
Noel, H., 167n6, 169n94
Noel-Murray, Peter, 237n37
Nordland, Rod, 477n110
North, Adrian C., 377n62
Norton, Michael I., 198n33, 199n61,  
558n38
Novak, Thomas P., 330n45, 556, 557
Nucifora, Alf, 559n59
Nudd, Tim, 199n66, 333n136
Nunberg, Geoff, 55n16
Nunes, Joseph C., 168n30, 471f, 477n105, 
477n117
Nunes, Paul F., 477n90
Nusbaum, Kenneth E., 89n87
Nuttavuthisit, Krittinee, 407n43
Oakes, William F., 167n10
Obama, Barack, 35, 270
O’ Brien, James, 276
O’Brien, Jeffrey M., 376n31
O’Brien, Stuart, 278n27
O’Cass, Aron, 559n67
O’Connell, Vanessa, 407n42
Odell, Patricia, 444n70
O’Donnell, Rosie, 226
O’Donohoe, Stephanie, 559n73
O’Dwyer, Gerald, 560n133
O’Guinn, Thomas, 90n105, 443n38,  
510n14
Oldham, Todd, 99
Olendzki, Gin-Fei, 240n176
Oleski, Jessica L., 240n176
Olin, Dirk, 128n26
Oliver, Suzanne, 129n71
Olney, T. J., 277n25, 278n26
Mogilner, Cassie, 198n24, 198n33,  
278n29
Mohr, Betty, 89n89
Moisio, Risto, 511n40, 513n108
Moldafsky, Jamie, 509
Molesworth, Mike, 444n86
Monga, Ashwani, 377n56
Monnier, Arnaud, 128n51
Monroe, Kent B., 90n105, 377n72, 408n80, 
512n100
Monroe, Marilyn, 225
Montgomery, David, 476n58
Moon, Mariella, 89n64
Moon, Youngme, 238n103
Mooradian, T. A., 278n26
Moore, Clement Clarke, 530
Moore, Elizabeth S., 168n48
Moore, William L., 375n21, 376n52,  
376n54
Moorman, Christine, 199n71
Morales, Andrea C., 198n36, 236n15
Moran, S., 169n89
Moreau, C. Page, 377n86
Moreland, Julie, 377n82
Morewedge, Carey K., 168n38
Morgan, J. P., 469
Morgenson, Gretchen, 475n15
Morrell, Roger W., 169n90
Morrin, Maureen, 127n9, 128n33, 128n34
Morris, Michael H., 377n74
Morrissey, Brian, 331n65
Morwitz, Vicki G., 169n69
Moschis, George P., 90n122, 168n46, 511n61, 
512n67
Mosimanna, James E., 240n152
Moss, Kate, 162, 223, 225
Moss, Michael, 237n31, 407n58
Mota, Bethany, 499
Mott, Maryann, 511n65
Mowen, John C., 278n26, 375n14
Mozur, Paul, 278n46
Muehling, Darrell, 332n107
Mugge, Ruth, 278n34
Mukherjee, Ashesh, 333n145
Muller, Joann, 54n4
Munichor, Nira, 255
Muñiz, Albert M., Jr., 377n91, 443n38, 
511n39
Munson, J. Michael, 279n90
Murata, Shoji, 557n2
Murphy, David, 561n144
Murphy, Megan, 237n40
Murphy, Patrick E., 88n53
Murphy, Samantha, 239n134
Murphy Kelly, Samantha, 239n135
Murray, Henry, 177
Murray, Jeff B., 88n54
Murray, Kyle B., 198n24
Murry, John P., Jr., 279n72, 406n24
Musk, Elon, 374
Mustafa, Isaiah, 310
Mycoskie, Blake, 85
Myers, Philip N., Jr., 236n13
Myers-Levy, Joan, 127n7
Nachbar, Jack, 558n34
Nader, Ralph, 68
Nancarrow, Clive, 513n110
Napoli, Julie, 376n49
Nardini. Gia, 237n38
Nasar, Jack L., 237n54
Nass, Clifford, 238n103
Nasser, Haya El, 510n31
Natarajan, Rajan, 90n107
McGrath, Mary Ann, 377n91, 558n40, 
559n61
McGraw, Patrick F., 377n74
McGugan, Ian, 332n110
McKeage, Kim, 236n14
McKendrick, Jennifer, 377n62
McKinley, James C., Jr., 88n44
McLonan, E., 235
McMains, Andrew, 509
McMath, Robert M., 129n83, 129n89, 376n41
McNeal, James U., 168n49, 198n12
McQuarrie, Edward F., 170n121, 198n50, 
199n57, 279n90, 330n47, 333n156, 
445n88
McQueen, Josh, 333n158
McQuiston, Daniel H., 377n79
Mead, George H., 55n19, 236n26
Meadows, Susanah, 558n26
Medina, José F., 475n5
Meier, Barry, 88n38, 333n132
Meier, Fred, 236n25
Mejia, Jaime, 510n1
Mellers, Barbara, 198n24
Menasco, Michael B., 378n92
Mendoza, Jorge L., 560n132
Menon, Geeta, 128n40, 240n182, 332n96
Menoni, Tanya, 169n70
Mensinger, Janell, 168n50
Menzel, Herbert, 444n56
Mergenhagen, Paula, 476n41
Merget, Dan, 238n81
Merton, Robert, 444n60
Meyers, Tiffany, 512n72
Meyers-Levy, Joan, 170n101, 238nn94–96, 
330n20
Michael, Robert T., 239n121
Michaels, Stuart, 239n121
Michelangelo, 469, 537
Mick, David Glen, 129n91, 129n93, 170n121, 
198n20, 333n156, 375n2, 406n13, 
408n78
Midgley, David F., 199n63
Mihm, Stephen, 240n166
Milberg, Sandra, 376n38
Miller, Annetta, 558n17
Miller, Claire Cain, 128n50, 241n192, 331n72, 
333n165, 376n32, 407n34
Miller, Cyndee, 199n64
Miller, George A., 169n76
Miller, Gregory E., 559n89
Miller, Jessica, 330n47, 445n88
Miller, Lynn Carol, 237n32
Miller, Mark J., 55n9, 128n30, 168n17, 
169n91, 238n102, 239n114, 
239n146, 278n56, 332nn121–122, 
559n76
Milner, Laura, 238n103
Milosavljevic, Milica, 129n77
Minaj, Nicki, 518
Mindlin, Alex, 170n115, 376n52,  
376n54
Miniard, Paul W., 329n9, 406n21
Miró, Joan, 520
Mischel, Walter, 277n4
Misra, Shekhar, 279n93
Mitchell, Andrew A., 198n48, 333n161, 511n61
Mitchell, Deborah J., 128n32
Mitra, Sabyasachi, 375n19
Mittal, Vikas, 445n92
Mittelstaedt, John D., 88n49
Mizoguchi, Karen, 559n89
Mizrahi, Isaac, 99
Mochan, Daniel, 199n61
Moffett, Sebastian, 476n78

596 
Indexes
Proctor, Stella, 55n43
Proctor, Tony, 55n43
Prokopec, Sonja, 375n4
Propson, Pamela, 236n30
Prus, Robert C., 407n30, 408n70
Puffy. See Diddy
Punj, Girish N., 277n24, 375n19, 375n21
Puntoni, Stefano, 236n8
Puto, Christopher P., 377n74
Putoni-Erasmus, Stefano, 38
Putsis, William P., Jr., 375n27
Qualls, William J., 377n74, 378n97, 378n99
Quarantelli, E. L., 560n132
Queen Latifah, 226, 518
Quelch, John A., 561n170
Quenqua, Douglas, 240n169
Quester, Pascale, 279n88
Raaij, Fred van, 442n3, 475n8
Raasch, Chuck, 88n55
Rados, David L., 330n18
Rafaely, V., 169n89
Rahinel, R., 278n59
Rai, Saritha, 560n133
Rainwater, Lee, 476n36, 476nn51–52, 
476nn54–55, 476n59
Rama, Padmananda, 510n22
Ramaswami, Sridhar N., 444n50
Ramirez, Anthony, 129n87, 560n130
Rampell, Catherine, 128n53
Rand, Lindsay, 443n20
Raney, Rebecca Fairley, 55n48
Rangel, Antonio, 129n77
Ransbotham, Sam, 376n34
Ransdell, Eric, 558n28
Rao, Akshay R., 240n182, 408n80
Rao, Ram C., 331n90
Rashid, Karim, 99
Rasolofoarison, Dina, 129n67, 129n75
Ratchford, Brian T., 375n21, 376n52,  
376n54
Ratner, Rebecca K., 199n65, 407n38
Ratneshwar, S., 198n20, 277n16, 331n54, 
406n13
Raven, B., 443n9
Ray, Michael L., 329n6, 333n150
Rayman, Noah, 376n39
Raymond, Adam K., 558n19
Raymond, Jane E., 331n61
Raymore, Leslie, 279n87
Read, H., 277n12
Read, J. Leighton, 168n29
Reagan, Ronald, 149
Redden, Joseph P., 170nn108–109, 278n59
Redlich, Fredrick C., 476n65
Reece, Bonnie, 169n63
Reed, Americus, 236n8
Reed, Americus, II, 236n23, 330n41
Reese, Shelly, 476n32, 561n157
Reeves, Byron, 168n29
Rehfeld, Barry, 443n19
Reichert, Tom, 238n112
Reid, Leonard N., 236n6, 333n130
Reidenbach, Eric, 88n53
Reifler, Petra, 476n62
Reilly, Michael D., 330n37, 510n13
Reimann, Martin, 127n12, 237n44, 376n29
Reingen, Peter H., 279n75, 443n4,  
444nn74–75
Rescorla, R. A., 167n5
Resnik, Alan J., 407n69
Rethans, Arno, 331n93
Reynolds, Fred D., 444n71
Pechmann, Cornelia, 332n105, 512n76, 
513n111
Peck, Joann, 128nn43–44, 128n47
Pedersen, Elaine L., 239n147
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 120, 129n93
Peloza, J., 88n45
Peñaloza, Lisa, 510n10, 510n12, 513n101, 
557n9
Pennington, Bill, 333n169
Penteado, Claudia, 511n43, 513n105
Peracchio, Laura A., 129n93, 168–169n55
Pereira, Beatriz, 197n5
Pereira, Chris, 278n47
Perilloux, Carin, 238n98
Perkins, Natalie, 54n7
Perlroth, Nicole, 89n62
Perry, Katy, 201, 295, 535, 538
Peters, Jeremy W., 199n50
Peterson, Richard A., 278n54, 557nn9–10
Petronzio, Matt, 90n103
Petroshius, Susan M., 330n509
Petty, Richard E., 277n16, 330n34, 330n52, 
333n159, 333n162
Petty, Ross D., 331n65
Pfanner, Eric, 199n77
Pham, Michel Tuan, 182, 198n28, 198n29
Phillips, Barbara J., 198n50, 330n47, 445n88
Phillips, Lynn, 88n53
Phillips, Melodie R., 559n80
Piaget, Jean, 146–147, 169n56
Picasso, Pablo, 520, 521
Pieters, Rik G. M., 129n69, 170n96, 198n37, 
375n13
Piligan, Craig, 69, 88n51
Pimentel, Ronald W., 199n51, 559n92
Pine, Joseph B., II, 199n59
Pistorius, Oscar, 209
Pitt, Brad, 200, 224, 416, 495
Pizarro, David, 198n35
Plummer, Joseph T., 279n70
Pohlmann, Mali, 558n55
Polegato, Rosemary, 198n13, 378n96
Pollack, Andrew, 378n121
Pollard, Chris, 90n98
Pollay, Richard W., 171n141, 377n67, 
377n71, 408n82, 558n37, 559n63
Pomazal, Richard J., 375n16
Poon, Leonard W., 169n90
Popescu, Adam, 558n21
Porter, Eduardo, 377n60, 558n36
Porter, Michael, 376n30
Posavac, Steven S., 331n54
Posh Spice. See Beckham, Victoria
Postrel, Virginia, 127n10, 558n47
Poulos, Basil, 279n93
Powell, Martha C., 170n113
Poyner, Cait, 376n38
Prada, Paulo, 561n152
Prahalad, C. K., 473–474
Prasad, V. Kanti, 169n59
Pratkanis, Anthony R., 331n63
Pratt, Gerry, 559n87
Prensky, Marc, 55n34
Presley, Elvis, 317, 496, 533, 536
Previte, Josephine, 198n24, 248t, 250t, 
277n14
Price, Emily, 90n96
Price, Linda L., 378n103, 511n55, 513n108, 
513n111, 559n97
Priester, Joseph R., 330n12, 330n512
Princess Diana. See Diana, Princess of Wales
Princess Grace. See Kelly, Grace Patricia  
(Princess Grace)
Proctor, Bernadette D., 476n29
Olofsson, Anna, 557n6
Olsen, Ashley, 309
Olsen, Mary-Kate, 309
Olshavsky, Richard W., 376n52
Olson, Jerry C., 198n49, 279n94, 333n160, 
406n5, 560n111
Olver, J. M., 278n26
O’Malley, Gavin, 512n93
One Direction, 144
O’Neill, Molly, 558n25
One Million Moms, 319
Onink, Troy, 476n30
Onkvisit, Sak, 237n42
Oprah. See Winfrey, Oprah
Ordabayeva, Nailya, 332n97, 475n12
Orden, Erica, 332n114
Ordonez, Jennifer, 408n97
Oremus, Will, 89n64
Orth, Ulrich R., 256f, 278n26
Orvarson, Kajsa, 557
Orwall, Bruce, 561n152
Oser, Kris, 443n36
Osselaer, Stijn van, 38
Oster, Catherine, 477n82
O’Sullivan, Terry, 168n434
Oswaks, Molly, 477n103
Otnes, Cele C., 527, 558n31, 558n40, 558n50, 
558n57, 561n171
Outkast, 262
Ozanne, Julie L., 88n46, 88n54, 89nn73–74, 
279n81, 407n69, 475n12, 513n111
Pace, Tyler, 333n133
Packard, Vance, 58, 87n8, 277n7
Page, Julie, 513n110
Pagoto, Sherry L., 240n176
Paharia, Neeru, 278n32
Painter, James, 129n84
Palan, Kay L., 512nn72–73
Palin, Sarah, 428
Palma, Tomás A., 128n23
Paltrow, Gwyneth, 223
Pampel, F. C., 476n68
Pandelaere, Mario, 128n19
Pantoja, Maurice, 169n58
Papadopoulos, Nicolas, 476n62
Papasolomou-Doukakis, Ioanna, 55n43
Pappalarado, Anthony, 560n101
Parameswaran, Ambi, 474
Parekh, Rupal, 239n119, 332n100
Park, C. Whan, 375n22, 376n51, 378n99, 
407nn62–63, 443n13
Park, Denise C., 169n90
Park, Ji Kyung, 197n4
Park, Whan C., 199n58
Parker, Jeffrey R., 376n39
Parker, Laura, 405
Parker, Ryan, 88n30
Parker, Steve, Jr., 54
Parker-Hope, Tara, 168n53
Parmar, Arundhati, 279n85
Parmentier, Marie-Agnès, 198n24, 423, 
443n40
Parry, Wayne, 332n117
Passy, Charles, 558n45
Patel, Kunur, 170n125, 333n164
Patrick, Vanessa M., 197n8
Paul, Pamela, 128n24
Paulson, Ken, 560n124
Pavlov, Ivan, 131, 133
Pavone, Michael, 88n27
Payne, John W., 375n3, 375n23
Pearson, Carol S., 246, 248t, 277n14
Pearson, Ian, 279n67

 
Indexes 
597 
Schor, Juliet B., 278n32
Schouten, John W., 240n177, 442n3,  
443n38
Schrag, Peter, 510n19
Schroeder, Jonathan, 55n26
Schultz, E. J., 198n44
Schultz, Myrna, 128n40
Schumann, David W., 331n94, 333n159
Scholz, Nadine, 199n82
Schurr, Paul H., 407n69
Schutz, Howard, 88n53
Schwartz, 510n32
Schwartz, Ariel, 560n136
Schwartz, Barry, 375n2
Schwarz, Norbert, 241n191, 331n57
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 309
Schweitzer, Maurice E., 236n18
Sciandra, Michael, 407n60
Sciolino, Elaine, 199n72
Scott, Carol A., 330n18
Scott, Jerome E., 279n87, 279n91
Scott, Linda M., 333n157
Scott, Maura L., 197n3, 377n61
Scully, Jonathan M., 240n176
Searcy, Dionne, 475n14, 512n84
Sedikides, Constantine, 170n139, 333n162
Seelye, Katharine Q., 333n144
Segal, David, 199n79
Seiders, Kathleen, 88n36
Seidman, Stephen B., 444n75
Seim, Carrie, 559n89
Sekhon, Tejvir, 445n92
Sela, Aner, 331n82, 376n38
Seligman, Dan, 444n72
Semin, Gün R., 128n23
Semuels, Alana, 199n77
Sen, Sankar, 277n16
Sengupta, Jaideep, 333n138, 333n140
Sengupta, Somini, 89n57, 238n86
Sennott, Sarah, 333n131
Serchuk, David, 199n74
Settle, Robert B., 332n98
Severson, Kim, 88n38, 129n97, 511n45
Sewall, Murphy A., 407n46
Sex Pistols, 308
Seymour, Daniel, 378n95
Shah, Avni, 376n40
Shakespeare, William, 258
Shakur, Tupac, 317
Shankleman, Jessica, 405
Shapiro, Stewart A., 129n74
Sharma, Eesha, 477n105
Sharpton, Al, 543
Shavitt, Sharon, 279n78, 329n4
Shaw, John, 237n42
Shayon, Sheila, 88n52, 128n39, 239n130, 
240n162, 443n37, 512n85
Sheen, Charlie, 308
Sheeran, Paschal, 375n5
Sheffet, Mary Jane, 277n23
Sheluga, David A., 88n53
Sheppard, Blair H., 330n36
Sherman, Chris, 129n78
Sherrell, Daniel L., 375n17
Sherrell, Dan L., 559n80
Sherry, John F., 55n44
Sherry, John F., Jr., 237n55, 377n91, 378n99, 
407n43, 408n81, 408n88, 408n90, 
557n1, 558n16, 558n54, 559nn60–61
Sheth, Jagdish N., 237n69, 238n80, 279n93, 
408n74, 557n9
Sheth, Niraj, 238n86
Shields, Brooke, 319
Shiffrin, I. M., 169n67
Rothenberg, Randall, 333n153
Rothschild, Michael, 88n53, 375n3
Rotten, Johnny, 308
Rottenstreich, Y., 168n35
Rozin Paul, 238n88
Rubin, Zick, 476n74
Rubinstein, Ruth P., 240n170
Ruch, Floyd L., 476n47
Rucker, Derek D., 207, 236n10, 477nn91–92, 
477n106
Rudmin, Floyd, 237n65
Ruiz, Rebecca R., 168n22
Rusbult, Caryl E., 237n48
Russell, Cristel Antonia, 333n130
Russell, Lillian, 224
Russell-Bennett, Rebekah, 198n24, 248t, 250t, 
277n14
Russo, J. Edward, 170n100, 170nn106–107
Ruth, Julie A., 558n57
Ruyter, Ko de, 240n174, 477n102
Ryan, Eric, 99
Saatcioglu, Bige, 88n46, 475n12
Sabar, Ariel, 88n28
Sachdev, Ameet, 331n67
Sack, Kevin, 239n129
Sadalla, E. K., 237n54
Saegert, Joel, 128n60, 475n5
Saint Louis, Catherine, 240n181
St. Patrick, 529
Sajeesh, S., 199n60
Sajnani, Damon, 557n6
Salganik, Matthew J., 444n64
Salop, Steven C., 377n69
Sama, Gabriel, 510n1
Samor, Geraldo, 561n154
Sanchanta, Mariko, 560n134
Sandikci, Ozlem, 559n57
Sanger, David E., 408n83
Sang-Hun, Choe, 445n101
Santa Claus, 530
Sante, Luc, 443n25
Santora, Marc, 332n117
Saranow, Jennifer, 407n45
Sarial-Abi, Gülen, 331n82
Sass, Erik, 90n94, 168n51, 170n97,  
378n105
Satel, Sally L., 168n37
Sauer, Abe, 239nn132–133, 332n123, 
511n44
Saulny, Susan, 510n3
Savary, Miklos, 376n42
Sawyer, Alan G., 167n6, 332n99
Saxe, Robert, 408n73
Sayre, Shay, 237n67
Scaraboto, Daiane, 240n161
Schaninger, Charles M., 55n10, 198n16, 
378n97, 476n63, 511n61
Schau, Hope Jensen, 443n38, 511n39, 
511n55, 512n101
Schenk, Carolyn Turner, 406n5
Scherzinger, Nicole, 328
Scheurich, Jim, 279n72
Schibrowsky, John A., 88n35
Schiffman, Leon G., 512n100
Schindler, Robert M., 170–171n140, 170n136, 
376n42
Schlosser, Ann E., 170n121, 407n48
Schmitt, Bernd H., 406n17
Schneider, Keith, 55n35, 444n52
Schneier, Wendy L., 331n94
Schoenbachler, Denise D., 333n154
Schoenberg, Nara, 560n116
Schopler, John, 237n32, 330nn13–14
Reynolds, Helen, 90n110
Reynolds, Kristy E., 199n51
Reynolds, Simon, 374
Reynolds, Thomas J., 279n94
Rhoads, Kelton V. L., 330n43
Rhue, Judith W., 236n20
Rice, Berkeley, 279n71
Rich, Motoko, 55n13, 333n129
Richardson, Brendan, 443n21
Riche, Martha Farnsworth, 279n73
Richins, Marsha L., 87nn17–18, 87n21, 
88n35, 199n57, 236n12, 240n170, 
279n79, 408nn75–76, 444n45, 
512n70
Richtel, Matt, 129n66, 198n31, 375n10, 
407n64, 475n25, 476n45, 512n81
Rick, Scott I., 197n5, 236n18, 278n26
Ricks, David A., 561n157
Ridgway, Nancy M., 90n105, 198n39, 375n17, 
406n21
Riding, Alan, 561n140
Rihanna, 119, 335
Rimer, Barbara K., 329n9
Rindfleisch, Aric, 87n15, 87n19, 278n38
Rink, David R., 88n33
Rippé, Cindy B., 558n57
Ritchie, Robin J., 331n58
Ritson, Mark, 333n138
Rittenburg, Terri L., 88n50
Ritter, K. U., 476n75
Rivkin, Steve, 561n157
Roane, Kit R., 476n61
Robarts, Stu, 167
Roberts, Edward B., 444n56
Roberts, Scott D., 511n61
Robertson, Kim, 169n71
Robertson, Thomas S., 168n39, 168n43, 
277n23, 406n2, 443n15, 560n104
Robin, Donald P., 88n53
Robinson, Patricia, 168n43
Robinson, Patrick J., 360t, 377n80
Roche, Sarah, 128n41
Rock, Chris, 248t
Rodgers, Joannn Ellison, 90n107
Roedder, Deborah L., 169n57
Roesler, E., 277n16
Rogers, Everett M., 444nn54–55, 444n58, 
560n109
Roggeveen, Anne L., 332n102
Rohwedder, Cecilie, 561n154
Rokeach, Milton, 279n77, 279n90
Rokka, Joonas, 406n10
Romeo, Jean B., 329n9
Romer, Daniel, 333n158
Romero, Simon, 240n178
Ronis, David L., 170n102
Rook, Dennis W., 527, 558n37, 558n49, 
558n51, 558n55
Roosevelt, Theodore, 482
Roppolo, Michael, 54
Rosa, José Antonio, 89n74
Rosch, Eleanor, 376n42
Rose, Gregory M., 168n47, 278n36
Rose, Randall L., 277n2, 378n119, 475n6
Rosen, Dennis L., 128n60, 378n96
Rosen, Meg, 128n28
Rosenberg, Morris, 236n6
Rosenbloom, Stephanie, 476n28
Rosenblum, Andrew, 127n16
Rosenthal, Elisabeth, 561n141
Ross, Ivan, 167n7
Ross, Rick, 68
Rossellini, Isabella, 549
Rossiter, John R., 407n50

598 
Indexes
Stevenson, Alexandra, 240n179
Stevenson, Seth, 278n41
Stewart, David W., 170n104, 199n71, 277n24, 
311, 330n18, 331n84
Stewart, James B., 331n65
Stigler, George, 87n11
Stilley, Karen M., 407n57
Stillwell, Arlene M., 198n38
Stone, Brad, 330n48
Storm, Diana, 407n43
Stoker, Alfred, 441
Story, Louise, 199n73, 333n131, 407n67, 
511n52
Stout, Hilary, 168n54, 238n85
Strathman, Alan J., 333n162
Straumsheim, Carl, 445n104
Strauss, William, 512n68
Strazewski, Len, 378n114
Strebel, Judi, 198n24
Strick, M., 442
Strohmaier, Heidi, 237n40
Strom, Stephanie, 331n65, 476n43
Strutton, David, 90n120
Stuart, Elnora W., 54n3, 129n100, 167n5, 
168n36
Stuenkel, J. Kathleen, 168n50, 406n18
Su, Meng, 199n60
Su, Wanru, 408n86
Sujan, Harish, 408n73
Sujan, Mita, 333n138, 375n26, 376n46, 
408n73, 408n86, 512n67
Sukhdial, Ajay, 279n93
Sullivan, Gavin P., 54
Sullivan, Harry Stack, 246
Sultan, Fareena, 560n105
Summers, John O., 444n61
Sun, Yacheng, 129n8
Sundaram, Suresh, 331n55
Sung, Yongjun, 278n36
Sunstein, Cass R., 377n64, 444n64
Surowiecki, James, 377n87
Surprenant, Carol F., 169n88, 408n81, 
408n95
Swan, John E., 408n81
Swasy, John, 331n93
Swift, Taylor, 28, 295, 543
Swinyard, William R., 330n38
Syam, Niladri, 199n60
Sypecka, Mia Foley, 240n152
Szenasy, Mary Kate, 561n162
Szmigin, Isabelle, 512nn91–92
Szybillo, George J., 332n99
Szymanski, David M., 408n73
Tabuchi, Hiroko, 512n85
Tagliabue, John, 128n49
Tajfel, Henri, 443n5
Talpade, Salil, 378n94
Tan, Chin Tiong, 330n40
Tan, Monica, 560n139
Tanaka, Hiroshi, 559n62
Tanner, Robin J., 169n72, 376n52, 376n55
Tansuhaj, Patriya S., 330n40, 378n94
Tasaki, Lori H., 237n59
Tatham, Ronald L., 237n52
Tauber, Edward M., 407n28
Tavassoli, Nader T., 330n39
Tavernise, Sabrina, 240n176, 511n55
Taylor, Curtis L., 90n106
Taylor, Earl L., 561n170
Taylor, Elizabeth, 248t
Taylor, James L., 408n70
Taylor, Paul, 512n89
Taylor, Shelley E., 168n86
Sokol, Zach, 407n61
Solomon, Michael R., 54n3, 55n19, 55n36, 
55n39, 55n43, 87n5, 88n29, 88n35, 
89n66, 89n87, 128n27, 129n79, 
129n100, 167, 169n88, 170n111, 
170n117, 198n13, 198n15, 
198nn24–25, 198n46, 236n22, 
237n32, 237n34, 237n55, 237n69, 
238nn79–80, 239n144, 240n170, 
248t, 250t, 277n14, 278nn61–62, 
331n62, 331n81, 331n86, 332n107, 
332n115, 332n118, 333n157, 368t, 
376nn33–34, 376n43, 377n58, 
377n68, 378n115, 406nn17–18, 
406n22, 408n78, 408n80, 408n95, 
443n10, 443n21, 444n50, 444n69, 
444n76, 444n86, 477n95, 513n110, 
557n6, 557n9, 558n12, 559n71, 
559n87, 560n112, 560n114, 
560n120, 560n123
Sood, Sanjay, 168n35, 236n12, 237n43
Sørenson, Elin Brandi, 279n94
Soster, Robin L., 376n52, 377n56
Soutar, Geoff, 476n62
Spangenberg, Eric R., 128n32
Spangler, Steve, 55n35
Speer, Tibbett L., 88n35
Spence, J. T., 169n67
Spence, K. W., 169n67
Spiegler, Marc, 557n5
Spiggle, Susan, 407n46
Spiller, Stephen A., 169n80, 375n13
Spiro, Rosann L., 408n74
Spotts, Harlan E., 333n145
Sproles, George B., 560n112
Sprott, David E., 376n38
Srinivasan, Narasimhan, 375n27, 376n52, 
376n54
Srull, Thom, 330n40
Srull, Thomas K., 170n99, 170n107, 170n111
Staats, Arthur W., 167n10
Staats, Caroline K., 167n10
Staelin, Richard, 375n19, 375n21, 377n69, 
408n81
Stamey, Mark, 475n18
Stan, Lavinia, 87n23
Standish, Miles, 530
Stanton, Wilbur W., 237n52
Starck, Philippe, 99
Stayman, Douglas M., 406n24, 510n8
Steel, Emily, 88n32, 407n66
Stein, Joel, 408n77
Stein, Mark A., 559n93
Steinberg, Brian, 128nn61–62, 167n13, 
278n60, 331n74, 332n127, 333n148, 
333n168
Steinberg, Earle, 237n52
Steiner, Gary, 329n7
Steinfield, Charles, 477n99
Steinhart, Yael, 255
Steinhauer, Jennifer, 477n88, 477n109
Stephen, Andrew T., 198n29, 375n12
Stephens, Debra, 330n10
Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth, 167n3
Stephey, M. J., 512n90
Stern, Barbara B., 238n112, 333n130, 
333n155, 333n157
Stern, Linda, 129n76
Stern, Philip, 511n58
Sternthal, Brian, 237n55, 329n9, 330n17, 
330n20, 378n99, 408n81, 444n50
Stettler, Nicolas, 168n50
Stetzer, Ed, 511n46
Stevens, Laura, 407n29
Shih, Chuan-Fong, 512n76
Shimp, Terence A., 167n5, 167n7, 168n36, 
168n39, 330n33, 332n109, 408n80
Shire, Emily, 558n44
Shiv, Baba, 376n52, 376n55
Shoham, Aviv, 443n32
Showers, Linda S., 406n18
Shrum, L. J., 87n15, 128n41
Shu, Suzanne B., 128n43
Sieczkowski, Cavan, 238n72
Siemaszko, Corky, 239n141
Silk, Alvin J., 170n126
Silk, Michael L., 561n161
Silver-Greenberg, Jessica, 475n23
Silverstein, Barry, 238n110
Silverstone, Alicia, 232
Simmel, Georg, 543, 560n117
Simmons, J. L., 279n83
Simmons, Joseph P., 377n89
Simpson, Penny M., 333n139
Simpson, Richard Neil, 167n8, 168n24
Sims, Calvin, 561n172
Sinclair, Upton, 66
Singer, Natasha, 88n40, 89nn57–58,  
89nn60–61, 90n130, 169n66, 
240n180, 240n185, 378n121, 559n75
Singh, Jagdip, 88n29, 443n39
Singh, Kulwant, 330n40
Singh, Surendra N., 128n60, 170n130
Singleton, Micah, 197
Sinha, Rajiv K., 443n38
Sinkula, James M., 377n75
Sinn, Francisca, 376n38
Sirdeskmuhk, Deepak, 406n21
Sirgy, M. Joseph, 198n15, 236n6, 237n47, 
237n55, 329n4
Sirianni, Nancy J., 87n20, 391
Sirsi, Ajay K., 279n75
Sisario, Ben, 557n11
Sivadas, Eugene, 477n94
Skinner, B. F., 137
Skinner, Frank, 477n80
Slackman, Michael, 236n17
Sleeth-Keppler, David, 376n38
Sloan, Lloyd Reynolds, 330n24
Slutsky, Irina, 55n32
Smit, Ronald, 199n53
Smith, Catherine, 276
Smith, Cooper, 407n61
Smith, Craig S., 238n106
Smith, Daniel C., 407nn62–63
Smith, Darlene Brannigan, 88n53
Smith, Isaac H., 375n9
Smith, James D., 408n89
Smith, Jeanne, 239n118
Smith, Kel, 89n66
Smith, Lois J., 169n59
Smith, Malcolm C., 90n104
Smith, Paulina, 512n71
Smith, Ray A., 408n93
Smith, Robert E., 330n38, 376n28, 444n51
Smith, Ruth Ann, 559nn83–84
Smith, Scott M., 238n71, 376n52, 376n54
Smith, Terry, 198n17
Smith, Will, 248t
Snider, Mike, 444n86
Snipes, Wesley, 224
Snoop Doggy Dogg, 308, 331n69
Snyder, C. R., 198n18, 560n113
Snyder, Mark, 237nn34–35
Soat, Molly, 378n112
Socrates, 103
Sodi, Thalía, 484, 485p
Sojka, J. Z., 277n25, 278n26

 
Indexes 
599 
Wallendorf, Melanie, 87n14, 199n56, 279n94, 
510n13, 558n54, 559n63, 560n111
Waller, W. W., 443n31
Walsh, Michael, 54
Waltzer, Michael, 444n87
Wang, Shirley S., 240n159
Wang, Yajin, 558n37
Wang, Yitong, 408n86
Wansink, Brian, 129n84, 238n88, 332n97
Ward, James C., 167n7, 279n75, 444n75
Ward, Morgan, 477n102
Ward, Scott, 168n43
Warhol, Andy, 201
Warkentin, Shahrzad, 561n168
Warlop, Luk, 168n25, 236n8
Warner, Fara, 332n124
Warner, W. Lloyd, 454–455, 476n46
Warren, Wendy L., 331n94
Warshaw, Paul R., 330n36, 330n42, 560n107
Wartzman, Rick, 561n148
Washburn, Alex, 407n37
Washington, George, 209
Waters, Audrey, 167
Watson, John, 279n87
Watson, W., 476n73
Watts, Duncan J., 444n54, 444n62, 444n64
Waxman, Sharon, 129n64
Wayne, John, 495
Wayne, Lil, 259
Wayne, Teddy, 476n44
Webb, Andrea, 128n44
Weber, Bernd, 127n12
Weber, Ernst, 109
Weber, Max, 455
Weber, Thomas E., 445n102
Webster, Fred E., 377n73
Wechsler, Pat, 443n41
Wedel, Michel, 114, 129n69
Weeks, C. S., 169n83
Weinbach, Jon, 330n25
Weinberger, Marc G., 333n145
Weingarten, Mark, 377n89
Weiser, Deborah, 558n34
Weisfeld-Spolter, Suri, 558n57
Weiss, Allen M., 377n76
Weiss, Liad, 237n55
Weiss, Michael J., 477n96, 512n83
Weiss, Paul, 129n93
Weiss, W., 330n49
Weitz, Barton A., 377n81, 406n19, 406n26, 
408n73
Wellman, Barry, 444n79
Wells, William D., 88n54, 265t, 279n66, 
279n69
Welté, Jean Baptiste, 547
Wernerfelt, Birger, 375n25
West, Christopher, 198n41
West, Kanye, 519, 534–535
West, Patricia M., 443n12
Westerman, Marty, 510n6, 511n35
Whalen, Bernie, 558n35
Wheeler, S. Christian, 277n16, 331n82, 
376n38
Whipple, Thomas W., 333n138
Whitaker, Walter W., III, 559n72
White, Erin, 128n42, 240n164, 278n35
White, Katherine, 88n45, 198n25, 443n22
White, Tiffany Barnett, 237n45
Whitman, Janet, 240n177
Whitney, John C., Jr., 169n87
Whittler, Tommy E., 333n154
Wickens, T. D., 169n94
Wicker, Allan, 330n28
Wicklund, Robert A., 237n62
Unnava, H. Rao, 408n80
Urbanek, Mark, 238n81
Urbany, Joel E., 199n58
Ustuner, Tuba, 477n98
Uwumarogie, Victoria, 88n44
Vacker, Barry, 239n145
Valencia, Humberto, 510n14
Valenzuela, Ana, 198n24
Vallen, Beth, 277n16
Van Boven, Leaf, 443n27
Vanderbilt, William, 469
Van Baaren, R., 442
Van Gennep, Arnold, 559n71
Van Knippenberg, A., 442
Vanhuele, M., 169n78
Vanneman, R., 476n68
Van Treuren, Ronald R., 236n30
Veblen, Thorstein, 469, 470, 471,  
477n118, 542
Veeck, Ann, 171n146
Vega, Tanzina, 510n24
Velagaleti, Sunaina, 378n104
Vellequette, Larry P., 199n78
Veludo-de-Oliveira, Tania Modesto, 279n94
Ven, Niels Van de, 198n37
Venable, Beverly T., 278n36
Venkatesh, Alladi, 55n43, 330n45
Venkatesh, Viswanath, 560n107
Venkatraman, Meera P., 444n57
Vergara, Sofia, 248t, 328, 484
Verschure, B., 237n54
Vetvik, Ole Jørgen, 443n43
Vijayenthiran, Viknesh, 278n35
Villareal, Angelina, 332n103, 332n105, 
333n138
Vinciguerra, Thomas, 55n23
Vine, Lucy, 239n113
Vinson, Donald E., 279n87, 279n91
Vipat, Padma, 169n93
Visconti, Luca M., 558n16
Viswanathan, Madhubalan, 89n74
Vitell, Scott J., 90n120
Vizedom, Maika B., 559n71
Vogel, Nadine, 89n66
Vogt, Christine A., 444n51
Vohs, Kathleen D., 55n27, 55n46, 170n139, 
278n29, 330n19, 333n140, 445n93, 
475n7, 558n38
Voigt, Daniel Q., 559n91
Voli, Patricia K., 511n61
Voorhees, Clay M., 88n35
Vosgerau, Joachim, 168n38
Voss, Glenn B., 88n36, 406n15
Voyer, Benjamin G., 467
Vranica, Suzanne, 55n35, 55n40, 168n32, 
170n116, 238n93, 332n108, 
333n168, 445n100, 445n105
Wade, Dwayne, 417, 521
Wade, Nicholas, 128n38
Wadhwa, Tarun, 54
Wagner, Nancy, 444n48
Wakefield, Kirk L., 407n57
Walker, Andrea K., 277n18
Walker, Beth, 279n94
Walker, Beth A., 332n107
Walker, Marcus Randall, 330n24, 443n34
Walker, Mary, 331n62
Walker, Orville C., Jr., 408n71
Walker, Rob, 238n70, 333n167
Wallace, Amy, 279n65
Wallace, Wallace H., 331n85
Walle, Alf H., 560n122
Taylor, Shirley, 406n15
Taylor, Steven A., 408n79
Teel, Jesse E., 443n29, 443n32
Tellegen, C. L., 169n83
Tequila, Tila, 201
Terhune, Chad, 55n35
Tetreault, Mary A. Stansfield, 408n70, 558n37
Thaler, Richard H., 375n18, 377n64
Thelander, Asa, 557
Theus, Kathryn T., 128n60
Thibaut, John W., 443n31
Thicke, Robin, 68
Thomas, Jacquelyn, 199n60
Thompson, Clive, 376n29
Thompson, Craig J., 49–50, 55n42, 55n44, 
238n112, 278n38, 279n92, 378n108, 
378n111, 557n3, 557n7
Thompson, Debora, 189
Thompson, Scott A., 443n38
Thompson, Stephanie, 329n8, 511n65, 
512n74
Thomson, Matthew, 237n49
Thorne, Avril, 330n24
Thornton, Jim, 90n106
Tian Kelly, 561n143
Tice, Dianne M., 236n6
Tierney, John, 236n7, 445n91
Tigert, Douglas J., 265t
Till, Brian D., 167n10
Timmons, Heather, 477nn83–84
Tinkham, Spencer F., 278n36
Titlow, John Paul, 197, 332n95
Tkacik, Maureen, 560n118
Toluca, D., 375n21
Tormala, Zakary L., 332n101
Townsend, Claudia, 236n12, 237n43,  
375n11, 378n117
Toy, Daniel R., 333n160
Trampe, Debra, 236n15
Trappey, Randolph J., III, 90n107
Trawick, I. Frederick, 408n81
Traylor, Mark B., 330n21
Treise, Debbie, 561n171
Triandis, Harry C., 236n3
Trinh, Giang, 511n58
Triplett, Tim, 278n40
Tripp, Thomas M., 88n35
Troester, Maura, 279n92
Trosclair, Christine, 168n28
Trout, Jack, 378n122
Trudel, Remi, 89n81, 408n86, 445n92
Tse, David K., 408n78, 408n81
Tsotsis, Alexia, 170n137
Tulving, Endel, 169n73
Turkewitz, Julie, 129n96, 168n42
Turley, Darach, 443n21, 559n73
Turley, L. W., 407n50
Turner, John C., 443n5
Turner, Jonathan H., 475n17, 476nn48–49, 
476n53
Tuten, Tracy, 55n36, 55n39, 198n46,  
376n33, 444n76, 560n123
Tversky, Amos, 377n66, 379n124
Twiggy, 223
Tyagi, Pradeep K., 277n10
Tybout, Alice M., 277n10, 330n17, 444n50, 
558n51
Tyrrell, William Blake, 558n34
Ubel, Peter A., 376n40
Umiker-Sebeok, Jean, 278n62, 558n33
Underwood, Anne, 559n81
Ungerleider. Neal, 511n51
Ungerman, Kelly, 374

600 
Indexes
Altoids, 421–422
Amazon (Amazon.com), 43, 258, 346, 347, 
433, 465, 500
Ambi Pur, 220
American Academy of Cosmetic Surgery, 230
American Anthropological Association, 45
American Apparel, 31
American Association for Public Opinion 
Research, 45
American Association of Advertising  
Agencies, 60p
American Association of Family and Consumer 
Sciences, 45
American Economic Association, 45
American Express, 78, 101, 132, 137, 544
American Girl (American Girl Place), 362p
American Heart Association, 150
American Idol, 181, 191
American Iron, 415
American Marketing Association, 45
American Society for Aesthetic Plastic  
Surgery, 209
American Society of Plastic Surgeons, 230
American Sociological Association, 45
American Statistical Association, 45
America’s Army, 318
America’s Next Top Model, 423
Amul Macho, 212–213
Amy’s Kitchen, 501
Anarchy, 220p
Android phones, 99, 253
Andy Griffith Show, The, 121–122
Angry Birds, 433
Anheuser-Busch, 307
Anomaly (ad agency), 253
Anybots, 525
Apple, 71, 99, 100, 159, 173, 186, 196, 227, 
250, 253, 258, 317, 353, 498–499, 
538
Apple Newton, 420, 486–488
Apple Pay, 388
Apple Watch, 193, 212, 388, 538
Aqua Teen Hunger Force, 78
Arby’s, 315
Are You Smarter Than a Fifth Grader?, 156
Ariel, 144
Arizona State University (ASU), 294
Armani, 187
Arm & Hammer, 351
Arthur Andersen, 67
Asda grocery chain (Britain), 105
ASICS, 91, 322
ASIMO (Honda), 53
ASmallWorld.com, 466
Associated Press, 128n31, 445n101
Association for Consumer Research, 45
Aston Martin, 317, 466, 542
ASU. See Arizona State University (ASU)
AT&T, 388
Atlanta Falcons, 193
Auburn University, 294
Audi, 30, 303–304, 550
Audi A3, 504t
Audi A6, 250
Aunt Jemima, 480
Aveda, 499
Avengers, The, 144
Avis, 315
Axe, 73, 155, 193, 212, 220p, 318, 395
Axe Lounge, The, 193
Bachelor, The, 26
Backer Spielvogel Bates, 273
Bag Borrow or Steal, 318
Yi, Tracey, 128n18
Yoda, Hiroko, 239n117
Yoffe, Emily, 236n9
Yoon, Song-Oh, 197n10
Yoon, Yeosun, 331n57
York, Emily Bryson, 168n52, 378n111
Yorkston, Eric, 128n40
Yovovich, B. G., 333n138
Yu, Eleanor, 511n35
Yue Lao, 529
Yut, Emily, 169n58
Zablocki, Benjamin D., 278n49, 278n53
Zahlaway, Jon, 332n113
Zaichkowsky, Judith Lynne, 127n12, 167n8, 
168n24, 169n93, 198n13, 198n47, 
199n56, 237n44, 376n29, 378n96
Zajonc, Robert B., 330n10, 331n89
Zammit, Alessandra, 375n13
Zarembo, Alan, 406n11
Zaslow, Jeffrey, 199n83
Zeeienberg, Marcel, 198n37
Zeithaml, Valerie A., 408n81
Zezima, Kate, 511n55
Zhang, Meng, 331n83, 443n33
Zhang, Ying, 375n6
Zhang, Yinlong, 445n92, 561n166
Zhang, Z. John, 199n60
Zhou, Xinyue, 475n7
Zhu, Rui (Juliet), 127n7
Zi, Lian, 560n137
Zichermann, Gabe, 168n29
Zielske, Hubert A., 333n135
Ziflioğlu, Verichan, 279n76
Zimbardo, Philip G., 476n47
Zimmer, Mary R., 129n88
Zimmerman, Ann, 407n29, 560n129, 
561n154
Zinkhan, George M., 443n24, 559n70
Zmuda, Natalie, 90n127, 127n15, 238n109, 
512n82
Zuckerberg, Mark, 453
Zuckert, Tim, 333n131
Company/Brand Name
ABC, 43, 110, 318
Abercrombie & Fitch, 53, 222–223, 295, 498
Absolut Vodka, 509
Ace Ventura: Pet Detective, 260
Activision, 319
Adam’s Rib, 215
Adbusters, 66–67, 88n42, 88n43
Adidas, 91, 134, 187, 258, 480
Adly.com, 295
Adweek, 509
Affliction (label), 516
AIG, 66, 67, 469
Air Asia, 217
Airbnb, 270, 396
Air Jordans, 28, 417
Air New Zealand, 206
Air Nikes, 521
Alcoholics Anonymous, 489
Alexander Wang, 361
Alibaba, 530
Alibi (liquor), 231p
All in the Family, 533
Allstate Insurance, 31, 179f, 310, 321
All Things Frugal, 451
Alpha M.O.S., 106
A.L.S., 315
Wiertz, Caroline, 477n102
Wilcox, Keith, 375n12
Wilk, Richard, 510n16
Wilkes, Robert E., 55n10, 512n72
Wilkie, Maxine, 128n37
Wilkie, William L., 168n48, 198n48, 199n58, 
332n107, 333n150
Wilkinson, Jack, 558n44
Williams, Alex, 236n2, 240n163, 560n110
Williams, Allison, 26
Williams, Emelda L., 476n69
Williams, Jerome D., 487
Williams, K., 443n34
Williams, Kaylene C., 408n74
Williams, Margaret M., 559n68
Williams, Patti, 329n9
Williams, Pharrell, 518, 538
Williams, Raymond, 87n9
Williams, Robin, 248t
Williamson, Judith, 333n157
Wilson, Andrew D., 238n76
Wilson, Aubrey, 198n41
Wilson, Chip, 263
Wilson, Gaby, 331n69
Wilson, J. P., 277n4
Wilson, R. Dale, 332n109
Wilson, Sophie, 474
Wilton, Peter C., 408n78, 408n81
Wind, Yoram, 360t, 377n73, 377n80
Winfrey, Oprah, 226
Wingfield, Nick, 168n31, 333n133
Winski, Joseph M., 561n163
Winterich, Karen Page, 561n166
Wirtz, Jochen, 407n48
Wiseman, Claire V., 240n152
Witherspoon, Reese, 253
Witkin, Georgia, 90n107
Woermann, Niklas, 406n10
Wolburg, Joyce M., 561n171
Wolfinbarger, Mary, 512n101
Wolny, Julia, 378n115
Wong, Kwei Cheong, 330n40
Wong, Nancy, 87n19, 236n5
Wood, Andy, 331n70
Wood, Molly, 54n1
Wood, Natalie T., 89n66, 167, 331n81, 
444n86
Wood, Stacy L., 128n41, 376n38, 378n94
Woodside, Arch G., 90n107, 407n69, 408n70
Woodward, Kenneth I., 559n66
Woolley, K., 330n23
Wooten, David B., 512n78
Worchel, S., 443n5
Worth, Leila T., 239n118
Worth, Robert F., 279n74
Wortham, Jenna, 169n84, 444n77
Wright, James C., 89n87
Wright, John L., 558n34
Wright, Malcolm, 511n58
Wright, Newell D., 237n55
Wright, Peter, 408n80
Wright, Richard L., 170n110
Wright, Tom, 477n113
Wu, Eugenia C., 198n36, 330n16
Wu, Zhiyan, 55n26
Wyckham, R. G., 332n107
Wyer, Robert S., Jr., 169n74, 443n33
Yale, Laura J., 444n66
Yao, Julie L., 237n48
Yardley, Jim, 279n86
Ydholm, Mikael, 556
Yee, Nick, 238n81
Yeh, Chyon-Hwa, 168n49

 
Indexes 
601 
Clueless, 500
Coach (handbags), 462
Coachella music festival, 317
Cobra (Shelby), 522
Coca-Cola (Coke), 58, 63, 79, 99, 106, 106p, 
131, 134, 149, 162, 181, 248t, 
289–290, 315, 316, 318, 322, 345, 
404, 485, 525, 547, 548, 549, 551
Coco Chanel, 248t
Coffee-Mate, 151
Coldplay, 191
Cold Stone Creamery, 426
Colgate-Palmolive Co., 319, 491–492
Columbia Records, 518, 519
Comic Con conventions, 260, 260p
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA), 
49–50
comScore, 485
ConAgra, 516
Conair Pro Style 1600, 340
Condé Nast, 136
Conference Board, 448
Consumer Electronics Show, 307
Consumer Product Safety Commission  
(CPSC), 66, 68t
Consumer Reports, 182, 347
consumerreports.org, 66
Container Store, The, 249p
Continuum, 249
Coors, 484
Coors Light, 162, 395, 540
Cornell Dairy Ice Cream, 136
Cornell University, 103  
Cosmopolitan, 200
Cosmopolitan Turkey, 268
Costco, 447, 462, 520
Cottonelle, 66
Cougar (Mercury), 522
Cougar Town, 470
Council of Better Business Bureaus, 66, 150
Cover Girl, 64–65
Coyote Girls, 533
Coyote Ugly, 533
CPSC. See Consumer Product Safety  
Commission (CPSC)
Cracker Jack, 206
Crazy Blue Air Freshener, 540
Cream of Wheat, 480
Cream Silk Hair Fall Defense, 328–329
Creap (creamer), 549
Creative Strategies, 196
creditscoredating.com, 449, 450p
creepypasta.com, 544
Crest, 285
Crocodile (handbags), 550
CrossFit, 264
CSA. See Community Supported Agriculture 
(CSA)
Curve ID System, 221
Curves, 490
customerssuck.com, 395, 396p
CVS Corporation, 298
CW (network), 318
DaimlerChrysler, 344
Dallas, 62
Dallas Cowboys, 533
Dancing with the Stars, 250
Dannon, 150
Danone, 461
Dark Temptation, 212
Dartmouth University, 118
datemycreditscore.com, 449
Dating 4 Disabled, 72
Bugchaser, 540
Build-A-Bear Workshop, 392
Bump, The, 494
Bungie Studios, 420
Burberry, 461, 462
Bureau of Labor Statistics. See U.S. Bureau of 
Labor Statistics
Burger King, 103, 149, 213, 318, 509
Cabbage Patch, 544
Cachet, 178
Cadillac, 262, 263p
Caliente (Ford), 550
Callard & Bowser, 422
Caller ID, 306
Calvin Klein, 162
Calvin Klein Eternity, 154
Camio, 205
Campaign for Real Beauty, 50
Campbell’s Soup, 103, 136, 149, 356, 537
Candy Crush, 433
Cannes Film Festival, 489
Canon PowerShot A540, 185
Capable Juice (fictional), 562–565
Cap’n Crunch, 130
Capstone Turbine Corporation, 359p
Captain CupCake, 130
Car and Driver, 185, 304
CardSpring, 388
Carlton MID (beer), 208p
Carnegie Hall, 453
Carnival, 66, 156
Cartoon Network, 78 
Casablanca, 248t
Casera, 478
Castello Bianco, 103
CBS, 43, 318, 343
Center for Media Research, 333n168, 444n61
Centers for Disease Control, 35
Chanel, 154
Change.org, 533
Chapstick, 79
Charlie’s Soap, 313
Charlie the Tuna, 255, 321
Charmin, 66, 192, 192p
Cheerios, 366, 539
Cheetos, 345, 550
Cheezburger Network, 543
Chester Cheetah, 253, 310, 345
Chevrolet, 163, 217, 509
Chevrolet Impala, 262
Chevrolet Nova, 259
Chicago Bears, 318
Chick-Fil-A, 174p, 186
Childfree by Choice, 493
Children’s Food and Beverage Initiative, 150
China Telecom, 121
Chipolte, 50, 268, 269p
Chippendale, 262
Chloé (perfume), 97
Chlormint, 132p
Christian Dior, 248t
Chrysler, 193
Chrysler Town and Country, 250
Church & Dwight, 110, 351
Cif (cleaner), 268
Cinderella, 144
Citigroup, 448
City of Angels, 248t
Clearasil, 202
Clinical Therapy, 428
Clinique, 203
Club Bow-Wow, 495
Club Med, 535
Bain & Company, 88n26
Banana Republic, 221, 259
Barbie dolls, 27, 42, 144, 225, 230, 317,  
367p, 496
Barcalounger, 130
Barnes & Noble, 347
Barney & Friends, 149
Bass Export, 190
Bass Pro Shops, 389, 390p
Bauhaus, 543
Bayer Heathcare Pharmaceuticals, 66, 255, 286
BBC, 461
BBDO Worldwide, 526
Beanie Babies, 544
Bear Stearns, 67
Beats (headphones), 364
Beautifulpeople.com, 222
Beluga vodka, 317
Ben & Jerry’s, 516
Bentley, 134, 136p
Best Buy, 71, 318, 389
Better Busines Bureau, 64
Big Ass Fans, 258
Big Bang Theory, The, 309, 318, 335
Big Is Beautiful, 227
Bijan (perfume), 216p
Bikini Sports Bar and Grill, 215
Billboard 200, 317
Billy Graham Evangelical Association, 509
Bimbo (bread), 549
Bing, 346
Biopark, 76p
Birdman, 318
Bizrate.com, 334, 346
Black Crown (beer), 361
Black & Decker, 115
Blair Witch Project, The, 317
Blippar (app), 393
Bloomingdales, 204, 504t
Blue Bell Creameries, 67
Blue Crush, 243
Blue Mars (virtual world), 211p
Blue’s Clues, 149
Bluetooth, 37p
Blurred Lines, 68
BMW, 30, 104, 182, 205–206, 262
BMW i8, 30p
BMW MINI, 420
BMW Series 25, 250
BMW Z3, 301
Bobo doll, 143
Body Shop, The, 248t
Bookmooch, 396
Book of Mormon, The, 486, 488p
Boston Consulting Group, 356
Boston Red Sox, 186
Bounce, 322
Bounty, 124, 287
boycottwalmart.meetup.com, 63
Boy Scouts, 209
BP, 66, 67
Brain Box, 155
Braniff, 484
Bravia, 214
Brides (magazine), 221
Bristol-Myers Squibb, 107
British Broadcasting Company. See BBC
Brooklyn Nets, 518
Brooks Brothers, 414
Bruegger’s Corporation, 482
Bubba Co., 33
Bud Light, 121, 248t, 509
Budweiser, 30, 119, 121, 181, 296, 361, 484, 521
Buffalo Bills, 525

602 
Indexes
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 66, 68t, 
258, 321
Footjoy Joy-Walkers, 264
Forbes.com, 54
Ford Explorer, 452
Ford F150, 250
Ford Fiesta, 427
Ford Flex, 427
Ford Fusion, 339
Ford Motor Company, 74p, 124, 550
Ford Mustang, 120, 151
Forever 21, 226
Forrester, 438
Fortune, 270, 556
for us by us. See FUBU
Fossil Inc., 162p
4 (Beyoncé), 518
Foursquare, 42, 142, 209, 304, 317, 415, 431, 
466
Fox Broadcasting, 315
FPA, 502p
Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, 496
Free People, 498
Freezy Freakies, 162
Fresca, 550
Friday the 13th, 530
Friends Reunited, 364
Friendster, 466
Frito-Lay, 138p, 343, 345, 480
Fritos, 340
Frozen, 28, 144
Frugal Mom, 451
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
FUBU, 516
Fujiyama Land, 389
Fuller House, 521
Full House, 521
Furbys, 544
Gablinger, 515
Gallup, 220, 221
Galpin Motors, 525
Game of Thrones, 122
Game Show Network, 347
Gap Inc., 31, 134, 499, 521, 540, 548
Garmin, 420
Gatorade, 173
Gecko, The, 122, 123p, 310, 310p
Geek Chic Guy, 265p
GEICO, 122, 123p, 262, 310p
General Electric, 136, 156, 454
General Mills, 150, 539
General Motors (GM), 67, 68, 314
Gentleman’s Quarterly, 426
George Foreman (grill), 308, 309p
Georgetown University, 253
Gerber Baby Food, 493
GfK, 91, 280–281, 409, 411, 562, 565
Ghost Stories, 191
Giga Pets, 544
Gillette Guard, 474
Gillette Sensor, 99
Gilligan’s Island, 500
Gilt Groupe, 389
Giorgio Armani, 460
Girl (fragrance), 518
Girls, 26
GiveWell, 307
GLAAD, 509
Glamour, 200
GlobalScan, 273
Godiva, 248t
Goldman Sachs, 227
GoldVish, 469
Electrolux, 550
Electronic Arts (EA), 318–319
Elfa, 249p
Elie Tahari, 226
Eli Lilly, 360
Elizabeth Arden Red Door, 154
eLoyalty, 246
Emperor’s Palace (Tokyo), 534
Enron, 67, 469
Entourage, 318
Enyce, 516
EPA. See U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA)
ePad Femme, 215
Epinions, 185
Equally Wed, 221
Escalade, 262, 446
ESPN, 253
Essence magazine, 484
Esso, 244
Eternal Summer, 229
e-tron (Audi), 550
E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial, 523
Euro Disney Park, 549
Evian, 395, 460
ExBoyfriendJewelry.com, 529p
Expedia, 388
Experian, 498
Export Dry, 412p, 463p
Extreme Makeover, 498
Extreme Makeover: Home Edition, 158
Exxon, 121, 244
Facebook, 26, 42, 43, 44, 53, 68, 70, 71, 73, 
79, 99, 130, 133p, 134, 142, 154, 
160p, 161, 162, 183, 185, 201, 204, 
212, 221, 222, 251, 284, 285, 291, 
304, 305, 308, 316, 339, 361, 364, 
381, 388, 414, 427, 430, 431, 431p, 
432–433, 433p, 465, 480, 485, 533, 
543
Facedeals, 53–54
Face Tune (app), 212
Fail Blog, 543
Family Guy, 250
Family Planning Association. See FPA
Fans of Reality Television, 423
FarmVille, 79, 434
Fast and Furious, 520
FastPour, 524p
Fat Bastard (wine), 258
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
FDIC. See Federal Deposit Insurance  
Corporation (FDIC)
Fear Factor Live, 97
Febreze, 184, 220
Federal Communications Commission  
(FCC), 43, 68t
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 
186, 187p
Federal Reserve Board, 452
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 66, 68t, 71, 
89n62, 149–150, 308, 315, 331n66
Fendi, 462
Ferrari, 134, 207, 345, 460, 466
Fiat Palio, 462
Fiera (Ford), 550
Fifty Shades of Gray, 122, 180
FishVille, 434
Fiskars, 288p
Fitbit, 185, 337
Fitle, 166
Flickr, 161, 205
Folgers, 104
David (Michelangelo), 469, 537
DDB. See Doyle Dane Bernbach (DDB)
DDB World Communications Group, 273
Def Jam, 518
Dell Computer, 189, 360, 388, 425
Denison University, 526
Denver Broncos, 525
Department of Agriculture, 66, 73
DeWalt, 115
Diageo, 524p
Diesel (jeans), 174, 205
DietBet (DietBet.com), 336, 375n7
Diet Coke, 227, 285. See also Coca-Cola  
(Coke)
Diet Pepsi, 78. See also PepsiCo Inc.
DiGiorno Pizza, 250
Dilbert, 98
DirecTV, 435
Dirty Dancing, 548
Discovery Channel, 158
Disney, 130, 161, 248t, 343, 495
DisneyBaby.com, 495
Disney Cuddly Bodysuit, 495
Disneyland, 182, 534
Disneyland Paris, 549
Disney World, 161, 514, 515, 523,  
534, 549
Divergent, 144
d.light (solar lights), 454
Dockers (Levi), 124
Doc McStuffins, 483
Dogtown and Z-Boys, 537
Dog Vacay, 396
DogWater, 495
Dolce & Gabbana, 216
Dole, 136
Dollar Stretcher, 451
Dollar Tree, 394
Domino, 354
Dommelsch, 389
Dora the Explorer, 149
Doritos, 130, 489
Dove, 50, 222p, 229, 501
Dove Advanced Care, 229
Dove chocolate, 182
Dove’s Campaign for Real Beauty, 228
Downton Abbey, 122, 521
Doyle Dane Bernbach (DDB), 47–48
Dreyfus Fund, 121
Drivedry, 282p, 322p
DriveNow, 30
Droga5, 191
Dropps, 56
Dr. Pepper Ten, 216
Dr. Tattoff, 231
Duke University, 253
Dunder Mifflin Paper Company, 317
Dungeons and Dragons, 434
Dunkin’ Donuts, 41p, 193, 347
Duracell, 31
Dutch Boy, 100p
EA. See Electronic Arts (EA)
Eastman Kodak, 103
EasyJet, 462
eBay, 71, 81, 82, 389, 390, 432
Ecko, 516
Economic Policy Institute, 475n24
Ecos, 56
Edelman, 509
Egg Banking, 191
eharmony.com, 249
Eiffel Tower, 536p, 537
Einstein/Noah Bagel Corporation, 482

 
Indexes 
603 
Jamba Juice, 136
Jane the Virgin, 318
Janoski (shoes), 537
Jardiland Light Biscuits, 418p
JC Penney, 44, 516
Jean Paul Gaultier, 227
Jeep, 420, 471
Jeep Cherokee, 446
Jell-O, 185
Jersey Shore, 295
JetBlue Airways, 31
Jetty Girl, 242
Jewelmint.com, 26
Jif, 292
Jim Beam Brands, 136
Jimmy Choo, 249, 461
Johnson & Johnson, 203, 405
Jollibee Food Corp., 548
Jolly Green Giant, 36, 255, 257p, 321
Jones Soda, 186, 420
Journal of Consumer Research, 45
J. Peterman Company, 351
JS Roundhouse Mids, 480
Judas Priest, 258
Juicy Couture, 154, 495
Jungle, The, 66
Justice, 181
JWT (J. Walter Thompson), 328–329
Kairos, 53
Kaneva, 43
Kansas State University, 198n22
KaZaa, 528
kbb.com, 378
Keds, 544
Keebler Elves, 253, 255
Keeping Up With the Kardashians, 62, 548
Kelley Blue Book, 378
Kellogg, 104, 150, 551
Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC), 110, 485
Keurig, 501
Kickass Cupcake, 258
Kickstarter.com, 361
Kimberly-Clark, 66
Kindle, 381, 509
Kinect, 363
King Ding Dong, 130
Kinh Do, 548
Kit and Ace, 263–264
Kitchen Aid, 258
Kiva (day spa), 390
Klout, 437, 437p
Kmart, 307, 484
K9 Water Inc., 495
Knot, The, 346, 494
Know Your Meme, 543
Kohl’s, 484
Korean K-pop, 498
KPMG Nunwood, 127
Kraft Foods, 108, 150, 185, 205, 250,  
319–320, 422, 560
Kremlin, 534
Krunkgrillz.com, 516
Kutless, 490
Lady and the Tramp, 495
La Llorona. See Llorona, La
Lamborghini, 134, 466
Lamisil, 184
Lands’ End, 105, 495
Lane Bryant, 226 
Lasix, 258
LastExitToNowhere.com, 122p
Lava Lamp, 130
High Tide (swimwear), 135
Hindustan Unilever Limited, 474
hiphopbling.com, 516
Holga camera, 420
Holiday Inn, 397
Hollywood Stock Exchange, 43, 360–361
HoloLens, 99
Holy Crap (cereal), 258
Home Depot, 70, 480
Honda, 39p, 53
Honda Accord, 378
Honey Maid, 108, 509
Honey Nut Cheerios, 539. See also Cheerios
Hong Kong Disneyland, 549–550
Hooters, 215
Hostess, 130
Host Foods, 385
Hotenough.org, 466
Hot Topic, 499, 543
Houston Texans, 525
HP. See Hewlett-Packard (HP)
HP Sauce (Danone), 461
Huggies, 395
Hugo Boss, 104, 460
Hugs, 213
Hummer, 50, 468
Hunger Games, The, 144, 498
Hush Puppy, 543, 544
HVLS Fan Company, 258
Hydrox, 186
iAds, 159
Iams, 30
Ibanez Stratocaster, 259
IBM, 48, 173, 353, 539
I Can Has Cheezburger, 543
ICC. See Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC)
ice-bucket challenge, 315, 316p
Ice Watches, 317
Igloo (refrigerators), 205
ihatestarbucks.com, 63
IKEA, 188, 258, 434, 495, 550, 556–557
Illicit Encounters, 364
Imagine Dragons, 97
Immersive Labs, 53
Independent Film Channel, 504t
Indipop, 548
Infiniti, 244
Innerscope Research, 373
Innocence en Danger, 81p
Instagram, 42, 130, 161, 205, 209, 212, 227, 
295, 430, 441, 534, 538, 544
Institute of Management Sciences, 45
Interactive Advertising Bureau, 444n84
International Communication Association, 45
International Spa Association, 144
International VALS, 266, 267f, 273
Internet Explorer, 162
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), 68t
iPad, 72, 212, 253, 485
iPhone, 26, 27, 159, 181, 184, 186, 205, 211p, 
212, 287, 335, 388, 394, 469, 499, 
538
iPod, 159, 316, 498
Islamic Food and Nutrition Council  
of America, 491
iTunes, 308
Ivory Soap, 356
IWC, 218p
Izod Lacoste, 132–133
Izze Sparkling Pomegranate, 318
Jack in the Box, 94p
Jaguar C-X75, 317
Golf Digest, 217
Gone with the Wind, 523
Good Housekeeping, 304, 318
Google, 35, 54, 71, 73, 159, 227, 248t, 249, 
253, 308, 343, 346, 388, 435, 441, 
465, 500, 509
Google Chrome, 540
Google Glass, 212
Google Goggles, 99
“Got Milk?” ads, 97, 309
Gowalla, 209
Goya, 478
GQ, 62, 136
Graduate Record Examination, 173
Grand Theft Auto—San Andreas, 484
Grateful Dead, 130
Grauman’s Chinese Theater, 534
Grease, 548
Great Train Robbery, 308
Green Giant, 119. See also Jolly Green Giant
Greenpeace, 65
Greensburg: A Story of Community Rebuilding, 69
Green Valley, 348
Grey Germany, 320
Grey Poupon, 123
Grey’s Anatomy, 66, 318
Gross National Happiness Commission,  
198n42
Ground Zero, 534
Gucci, 262, 461, 470, 495, 543
Guess, 82
Guinness, 158, 524p, 561n161
Guinness Surger, 524p
Gun Goddess, 217p
Gutter Water (K9 Water Inc.), 495
Häagen-Dazs, 248t, 355, 460
Habbo Hotel, 43, 310
Haggar, 364
Hallmark, 180, 248t
Halo 2, 420
Hamburger University, 522
Hammacher Schlemmer, 424
H&M, 398, 462, 543
Handi-Wrap, 163
Handsome Dan, 294
Hapi Food, 258
H(app)athon, 185
Happy Ho Ho, 130
Hard Rock Cafe, 535
Harley-Davidson, 42, 48, 98, 186,  
415, 420, 495, 542
Harley-Davidson Road Glide Custom, 414
Harley Owners Group, 414
Harris Interactive, 172
Harry Potter, 186, 246, 260, 520
Hartman Group Inc., The, 261f, 277n18
Harvard University, 262, 525–526
Hasbro, 144
Havaianas, 389
Haven, 434
Hawaii Five-O, 305
Hedonism (resort), 175
Heineken, 548
Heinz, 136
Hello Kitty, 260
Hel*Mart.com, 417
Henkel, 110
Her, 53
HerCampus, 26
Heritage Pioneer Corporate Group, 405
Hermès, 461, 462
Hershey Foods, 213, 389
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 253, 360, 453

604 
Indexes
M-PESA, 539
Mr. Clean, 216
Mr. Goodwrench, 321
Mr. Peanut, 255
Mrs. Butterworth’s Syrup, 496
MRC Polymers, 405
MTV, 37, 266, 462, 498, 501, 543, 552
Mugs N Jugs, 215
Museum of Bad Art, 36p
Mustang (Ford), 522. See also Ford Mustang
MyBestSegments.com, 504
My Fair Lady, 461
mymms.com, 190
MySpace, 466
Mythbusters, 158
MyTheresa.com, 162
Nabisco, 108, 221. See also RJR Nabisco
Nair, 528
Naked Coed Lacrosse, 294
Nandos, 442
Nantucket Nectars, 253
Narrative Clip, 42, 42p
NASA, 71, 246, 248t
NASCAR, 57, 521
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA). See NASA
National Association for Media Literacy 
 Education, 89n71
National Basketball Association (NBA), 
460, 547
National Community Pharmacists Association, 
330n30
National Eating Disorders Association, 226
National Enquirer, 303
National Football League (NFL), 102,  
334, 525
National Highway Safety Administration, 374
National Hockey League, 102
National Institutes of Health, 146
National Park Service, 320
National Religious Partnership for the 
 Environment, 58
National University of Singapore, 181
Nativa, 549
Nature’s Source, 76
Nautica, 516
NBA. See National Basketball Association (NBA)
NBC, 43, 221
Need for Speed Underground 2, 318
Nerd Merit Badges, 209
Nerf Rebelle Heartbreaker Exclusive Golden 
Edge Bow, 144
Nespresso, 398p
Nestlé, 150, 355, 405, 492
Net-a-Porter, 389
Netflix, 347
New Adventures of Old Christine, The, 318
New Balance, 91, 92, 351, 415
New Kids on the Block, 519t
New Wave, 273
New York City Department of Health, 184
New York Mets, 103, 131
New York Times, The, 71, 303, 436
New York Yankees, 103, 131, 534
NFL. See National Football League (NFL)
Nickelodeon, 149
Nielsen Company, 57, 146, 158, 191, 319, 486, 
502, 504, 504t
Nieman Marcus, 63t, 452
Nike, 40, 91, 92, 185, 187, 209, 258, 318, 
460, 491, 522, 533, 537, 540, 543, 
544, 548
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 173. 
See also MIT (Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology)
MasterCard, 248t
match.com, 43, 249
Matrix, The, 260
Mattel Inc., 225, 230, 317, 366
Maxim, 217
Maybelline, 393
Mayberry Motor Inn, 122
Maytag, 262
Mazda Miata, 105
McCann-Erickson, 82, 132
McDonald’s, 33, 67, 97, 110, 117, 134, 150, 
153, 315, 316, 385, 417, 479, 483, 
522, 546, 548
McKinsey Global Institute, 474
McSpotlight, 417
Medal of Honor Warfighter, 318
MediaMark Reporter (MMR), 91
Mediamark Research & Intelligence, 427
Meerkat, 205
Mega Bloks Barbie Build ’n Style, 367p
Megaupload, 528
Meister Brau, 163
Melrose Place, 318
Menudo, 519t
Mercedes, 295, 307, 437, 470
Mercedes-Benz, 30
Merck, 490
Metamucil, 320
Method, 56, 99, 99p
MetLife, 310
Miami Heat, 417
Michelin Man, 253
Michigan State University, 294
Mickey Mouse, 548
Microsoft, 99, 137, 162, 346, 360,  
388, 474
Microsoft Bing, 346
Microsoft Xbox, 420, 434
Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, 544
Mike & Molly, 309
Milk Industry Foundation, 97
Milk Processor Education Program, 309
Miller Coors, 381
Miller Lite, 176, 515
Mindset Media, 250
MINI Cooper, 159p, 318
Mintel Oxygen, 328, 329 
Miss America (pageant), 225
Mist-Stick, 550
MIT (Massachusetts Institute  
of Technology), 209
ModaOperandi, 389
ModCloth, 361
Model 3 (Tesla), 374
Model S (Tesla), 374
Model X (Tesla), 374
Modern Family, 309, 318, 484
Moët and Chandon, 248t
Molson Export, 264
Molson USA, LLC, 112–113p
Mona Lisa, 537
Mondelēz International, 550
Money Smart program (FDIC), 186
Monkees, The, 519t
Monopoly, 186
Moon Pies, 97
Morpheus, 528
Motor Trend, 374
Mountain Dew, 130
MP3 key ring, 498
Layar, 99
La-Z-Boy, 520
League of Legends, 193
Leave It to Beaver, 493, 500
Lee Jeans, 320
Lego, 520
Legos, 188, 366
Lehman Brothers, 66
Lending Club, 396
Lennar, 494
Leo Burnett, 422
Leonardo, 53
Lever Brothers, 480
Levi’s (jeans), 174, 189, 489, 548
Levi’s 501 jeans, 130
Levi’s Dockers, 124
Levi Strauss & Company, 137, 174,  
221, 539, 542
Lexus, 102, 414, 520
LG, 152
Life cereal, 157
Like Mike, 521
LinkedIn, 44, 251, 316, 415
Lipton, 489, 492
Listerine, 133, 296, 550
Little Miss Perfect, 498
Little Red Riding Hood, 522
Llorona, La, 523
Lomo Cameras, 420
LookTel Money Reader, 72
Loop Pay, 388
Lord of the Rings, The, 246
L’Oréal, 123, 177, 188p, 212, 229, 235, 462
Louis Vuitton, 207, 346, 437, 460, 462, 470, 
499, 543, 547
LowerMyBills.com, 114
Lowes, 556
Lullaby baby warmer, 454
Lululemon, 263
Lush store, 126
Lyft, 396
Maalox, 117
M.A.C., 225
Mack trucks, 388
Macy’s, 35, 225, 393, 484, 485p, 516
Mad Men, 250
Maidenform, 542p
Major League Baseball, 534
Major League Eating/Federation of Competitive 
Eating, 97
Makeup Genius (app), 212
Malibu Barbie, 317
Mall of America, 41
Manboo, 389
M&Ms, 190, 248t, 310
Manolo Blahnik, 186
The Man Your Man Could Smell Like  
(Old Spice), 310
Marco Polo Hotel, 47p
Marines. See U.S. Marines
Marks & Spencer, 340
Marlboro, 67, 120, 122, 134, 285
Marley Coffee, 135
Marriott, 393, 509
Mars, 150
Mars Snackfood USA, 189
Martha Stewart, 67
Martha Stewart Weddings, 221
Maruti 800, 462
Marvel comics, 520
Maserati, 134, 460, 466
M*A*S*H, 48

 
Indexes 
605 
Ralph Lauren, 133, 261, 452, 495
Rand Corporation, 78
Range Rover, 317
RateMyProfessors.com, 26, 43,  
213–214
Reader’s Digest, 272
Real Men Don’t Eat Quiche, 215
Red Bull, 31, 31p, 276
Red Cross, 246, 248t
Redneck Bank, 32p
Red Pepper, 53
Red Shoes, The, 209
Red Wing, 471
Reebok, 40, 68, 91, 92, 206,  
259, 544
RelayRides, 396
Renault, 204
Rent the Runway, 228p
Reputation.com, 205
Restylane, 500
Reuters, 90n115
Revlon, 248t
Ritz-Carlton, 527
RJR Nabisco, 118. See also Nabisco
Roadster, 374
Roche, 107
Rockefeller University, 453
Rock en Español, 549
Rock ’n’ Roll Fantasy Camp, 418p
Roc Skincare, 203
Rogaine, 258
Rolex, 262, 468
Rolling Stone, 272
Rolls-Royce, 550
Rothhammer, 526p
Rowenta, 340
Roxy, 243
Royal Salute Scotch, 179f
Rubbermaid, 220
Rutgers University, 298t
RVL7, 389
Saatchi & Saatchi, 497, 498
SafeAuto (insurance), 206
Safeway, 490
Saints Row 2, 484
St. Regis Hotel, 134
Saks Fifth Avenue, 460
Salesforce.com, 227
Sam’s Club, 447
Samsung, 99, 152, 388, 430
Samsung Galaxy, 184, 335
Samuel Adams, 119
Sani-Flush, 151
Sara Lee, 149, 202, 550
SAS, 34p
Sassy Bitch (wine), 258
Saving Private Ryan, 248t
SB Dunks, 537
SBI Consulting Inc., 279n73
Scandal, 309
Scarecrow, The, 50
Schlitz, 266
S.C. Johnson, 57, 76
Scope, 296
Scotch Inns, 480
Sean Jean (brand), 516
Sears Catalogue, 62
SeaWorld, 307
Second Life, 43, 44, 310, 364
Securities and Exchange Commission, 66
Seinfeld, 82
Selectric typewriter, 539
Pepperidge Farm, 489, 523
PepsiCo Inc., 78, 104, 106, 109, 109p, 130, 
149, 179f, 226, 248t, 289, 290, 296, 
307, 315, 318, 345, 348, 395, 404, 
428, 429p, 489, 498, 501p, 519
Pepsi Jazz, 156
Pepsi MAX, 489
Perdue Chicken, 484
Perfect 365 (app), 212
Periscope, 205
Pet Resort, 434
PetsHotels, 495
PetSmart, 495
PewDiePie, 498
Pew Research Center, 454
Pfizer Inc., 490
PGA European Tour, 31
Philips Electronics, 343, 476
Phineas and Ferb, 147
Phish, 260
Phoenix Wealth Management, 450p
PhotoShop (Adobe), 544
Picasa, 70
Picoo Z (toy helicopter), 424
Piercing Fans International Quarterly, 232
Pillsbury, 82, 245, 480
Pillsbury Doughboy, 36, 253, 262, 310
Pimp Juice, 518
Ping-Pong, 137
Pink Friday, 518
Pink Panther, 98
Pinterest, 26, 42, 122, 205, 305, 317, 430, 
432, 441
Pinto (Ford), 550
Pitbull, 317
Planet Green, 69
Plantars LifeSavers Company, 119
Planters Peanuts, 163
Playboy, 225
PlayStation 3. See Sony PlayStation 3
Playtex, 272–273
Plentitude, 123
Plenty of Fish, 43
Poke (Facebook), 154
Pokémon, 544
Polaroid, 416
Polygamy Porter, 489
POM Wonderful, 317
Pond’s Skin Lightening Moisturizer, 229
Pontiac, 206
Porsche, 134, 345
Power Pasta, 520p
Prada, 460
Precision 2000X, 335
Pretty Woman, 248t
Pricegrabber.com, 334, 346
Priceline.com, 504t
Prilosec, 258
Princeton University, 118, 298t
Pringles, 192, 248t, 253
Prius. See Toyota Prius
Procter & Gamble (P&G), 33, 56, 57, 66, 99, 
102, 110, 121, 133p, 192, 220, 268, 
319, 366, 474, 483, 549
Progressive, 310
Pro Tattoo Tech Gear, 533
Purdue University, 253
Puriet, 474
Pussycat Dolls, 318
Quaker Foods, 253, 254p, 256, 480
Quaker Oat Bran, 179f
Quill.com, 317
Nike Healthwalkers, 264
Nike Sole, 209
1989, 543
Nintendo Wii, 287, 434
Nissan Altima Hybrid, 504t
Noisôme, 122
Nokia, 317, 454, 469, 474, 492, 548
NoLongerLonely, 72
Nook, 381
Northland College, 297–298, 298t
Northwestern Insurance, 124
Not of This World, 491
Nova. See Chevrolet Nova
NPD Group, 196, 498
Nytol, 340
Oakley, 32, 134
Objective Logistics, 142
Obsession perfume, 137
Ocean Spray, 142
Oculus Rift, 393
Oculus VR, 99
OECD. See Organization for Economic  
Cooperation and Development  
(OECD)
Office, The, 250, 317
Ogilvy & Mather, 273, 492
Ogilvy Noor, 492
Oil of Olay, 528
OKCupid, 43
Olay, 229
Old Faithful, 320
Old Spice, 163, 220, 246, 310, 318, 442
Olympics, 248t, 269, 479, 535
Omni hotels, 99
1-800-FLOWERS, 317
1-800-QUIT-NOW, 321
101 Dalmatians, 495
Onesie, 495
Opower, 142
Oracle, 121
Oral B, 37p
Orange County Marketplace, 398
Orange is the New Black, 221
Orbitz, 318
Oreos, 96, 97, 221, 442
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD), 57
Össur, 209
OutVite.com, 221
Ovulation Calculator, 494
Owens-Corning Fiberglass Corporation, 98
Oxford English Dictionary, 543
Paintlist, 100p
Panasonic, 307
P&G. See Procter & Gamble (P&G)
Pandora, 313
Pantone, Inc., 103
Paper (magazine), 226
Paragraph (New York), 389
Parkay, 537
Passion of the Christ, The, 486
Patagonia, 499
Paul Mitchell, 495
PayPal, 26, 388
PC bang, 79
PCs, 253, 319
PDAs, 316
Peeps, 39, 39p
Pennsylvania Commission on Crime and 
 Delinquency, 89n62
People, 320

606 
Indexes
TOMS, 70, 85
TOMS Roasting Co., 86
ToneCheck, 185
Tony Hawk’s Underground 2, 319
Total, 319
Totally Stylin’ Tattoos Barbie, 230
Touched by an Angel, 248t
Tough Mudder, 415
Toyota, 134, 318, 499, 520
Toyota Prius, 49, 202, 295
Toyota Scion, 499
Toyota Venza, 431p
Toys “R” Us, 63, 424
Trader Joe’s, 348, 501
Training Club, 185
Transformers, 544
Trend School, 497p
TripAdvisor, 435 
Triscuit, 395
Trivial Pursuit, 156
Trojan, 44
Tron franchise (Disney), 130
True Religion, 174
Trulia, 317
Tufts University, 526
Tumblr, 317, 366, 534
Tupperware, 366
TV Guide, 272
Twinkies, 174, 176
Twinkie the Kid, 130
Twin Peaks, 215
Twitch, 258
Twitter, 43, 44, 130, 161, 185, 191, 201, 295, 
316, 339, 366, 388, 414, 419, 431, 
432, 435p, 437, 441, 456, 485, 502, 
532, 535
TwoRooms, 389
Tyco, 469
Tylenol, 78
Tyson, 490
Uber, 270, 396, 465, 537
Under Armour, 248t
UNICEF, 416
Unilever PLC, 73, 110, 111, 181, 228, 229, 
268, 328–329, 395, 484, 492
United Colors of Benetton, 221
United Nations, 503
Universal Studios, 97
University of Alabama, 535
University of California at Santa Barbara, 525
University of Kansas, 253
University of Miami, 294
University of Michigan, 448
University of North Carolina, 296
University of Oklahoma, 253
University of Pittsburgh, 253
University of Southern California (USC), 242
University of Tennessee, 253
University of Texas, 525
University of Vermont, 525
Univision, 478
Urban Outfitters, 295, 489
USAir, 258
US Airways, 258
U.S. Army, 179f
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 278nn51–52, 
476n29
USC. See University of Southern California (USC)
U.S. Census Bureau, 30, 72, 89n65, 366, 479, 
482, 493, 509, 510n21, 510n23
U.S. Court of Appeals, 321
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
79, 89n70
Star Trek, 523, 533
Star Wars, 248t, 260, 520, 544
Statue of Liberty, 534, 535
Stereo Review, 426
Stihl, 435p
Stoneyfield, 348
stopbullying.gov, 79, 80p
StriVectin, 420
Subaru Impreza, 500
Subaru of America, 286, 419
Sudoku, 155
Sunbeam, 547
Sun Chips, 138p
Sunkist, 349p
Sun Maid, 136
Sunsilk shampoo, 491
Superbad, 253
Super Bowl, 36, 121, 259, 315, 489, 526, 533, 
535
Super Piss (lock deicer), 549
Surge Movement, 162
Survey Research Center (University of 
 Michigan), 448
Survivor, 416
Suzuki, 215, 490
Swanson, 340
Swarovski, 317, 518
Swatch Instant Store, 389
Sweet and Sassy, 144
Swiffer, 268, 501
Syracuse University, 186
Taco Bell Chihuahua, 262, 442
Tag Heuer, 462
Tan City, 229
Taproot India, 107p
Target, 53, 63, 70, 99, 226, 318, 393, 462, 
499, 509, 556
TaskRabbit, 396
Tat2BeGone, 231
Tattoo MD, 231
Tawkify, 437
Taxi, 117
Teddy Grahams, 118
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, 544
Teenage Research Unlimited, 497
Television Without Pity, 423
Terminator, 53
Terra, 485
Tesco, 393, 405
Tesco’s Tiramisu (dessert), 340
Tesla Motors, 134, 374
Texas A&M, 136, 525
Texas A&M Jerky, 136
There I Fixed It, 543
this.com, 466
Thom Browne, 537
Threadless, 361, 361p
3Com Ergo Audrey, 420
3M, 480
Tide, 56, 57, 151
Tide Dry Cleaners, 133p
Tilted Kilt, 215
Time, 374
Tinder, 26, 27, 200
Titanic, 248t
Titleist, 154
TiVo, 305, 364
T-Mobile, 388
Today Show, The, 221
Tod’s, 134
Toilet Water (K9 Water Inc.), 495
Tommy Hilfiger, 308, 516
Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, 420
Selfridges, 217–218
Sensation Bars, 99
Sesame Street, 149
7 For All Mankind, 152, 174
Seventeen, 496
Seventh Generation, 56, 75
Seventh Heaven, 248t
Sex and the City, 186, 209, 318
Sex Tape, 318
Shanghai Tang, 40
Shang Xia, 40
ShareSomeSugar, 401p
Sharp, 544
Shearson, 163
SHOE FIEND, 91–93
Sierra Mist Ruby Splash, 428
Sigg water bottles, 265p
Silverlit Toys, 424
Silver Mist (Rolls-Royce), 550
Simmons, 220
Simpsons, The, 537
Sims, The, 310, 434
Sims 4, The, 166
Siouxsie & the Banshees, 543
Sitepal, 166
SitOrSquat.com, 192p
Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon, 430
Six Degrees of Separation, 430
16 and Pregnant, 498
Skittles, 248t, 442
Skype, 493
Slumdog Millionaire, 462
Small World, 79
Smithsonian Institution, 533
Smith University, 297, 298t
Smith & Wesson, 136
Smith & Wollensky, 288p
Smucker’s, 490
Snapchat, 154, 430
SnapGoods, 396
Snapple, 256
Snickers, 248t, 336
Snoopy, 310
Society for Consumer Psychology, 45
Society for Personality and Social  
Psychology, 45
Sodastream, 315
Sony Corporation, 70, 99, 105, 214, 248t,  
319, 499
Sony Pictures, 71
Sony PlayStation 3, 319, 434
Sooruz.com, 24p, 350p
Soul Surfer, 243
South Park, 504t
Spanx, 221
Speaking Roses International, 192
Spectre, 317
Speedy Alka-Seltzer, 255
Spic and Span, 121
SpongeBob SquarePants, 147
Sports Authority, 82
Sprint Guy, 262
Spyder Eclipse, 124
Squinkies, 544
SRI International, 266, 452
Staples, 82, 317
starbucked.com, 417
Starbucks, 42, 49, 65p, 121, 136, 153,  
187, 250, 389, 394, 450, 466,  
514, 534
starbuckseverywhere.net, 187
Starch Advertising Research, 307
Stardoll.com, 543
Starlite Urban Drive-In (London), 547–548

 
Indexes 
607 
Achievement orientation, 266
Achievers, 266
Acoustic storage, 152
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.  
See AIDS
Activation models of memory, 152, 153
Activities, interests, and opinions. See AIOs
Activity stores, 392
Actual self, 202. See also Self
Actual state, 340, 341f
Adaptation, 115, 481
Addictive consumption, 79–81. See also Con-
sumption
Adopters, 538–539, 538f
Ad-specific memory, 154. See also Memory
Advance-fee fraud artist, 82
Adventure travel, 243
Advergaming, 318–319
Advertising. See also Marketing
for alcohol, 58, 83, 112–113p
appeals in, 132p
archetypes in, 246
attitudes toward, 268, 284
bias in, 148
bogus ads, 160
for cigarette smoking, 83, 122, 134,  
321, 496
comparative, 298, 315
compelling, 328
conditioning, 132
corrective, 66
cultural effects, 479, 484, 516
deceptive, 307
effectiveness of, 28, 422
exposure to, 147, 147p, 148, 149f
hyperreality, 122, 123p
importance of, 111
impression of, 438
on Internet, 71, 485
market beliefs, 355t
mores in, 269
myths in, 523
native, 307
nudity in, 320
persuasive intent of, 149, 304
pictures in, 152, 312, 354
pictures versus words, 312
pitfalls in, 31
position of, 115
print versus television, 132
purpose of, 120
stereotypes and, 228
subliminal, 110–111, 112–113p
targets of
men as, 31–32, 44, 58, 124, 142, 220, 265
women as, 31–32, 58, 215, 220, 263,  
265, 392
teaser ads, 114
on television, 132, 147p
toward children, 44, 70, 110, 134, 147p, 
148–150, 395
toward teens, 497
word-of-mouth versus, 422
Advertising wear-out, 134
Aesthetic consumption, 289, 314. See also 
Consumption
Aesthetic innovation, 99p
a fashion, concept of, 540
Affect
affective responses, types of,  
180–181
defined, 180, 286
negative, 183–185
positive, 181–183
Wizard of Oz, The, 209, 533
Women’s Wear Daily, 416
Wonder Bread, 163
Woodstock, 130
World Bank, 474, 549
WorldCom, 469
World Cup, 193
World Health Organization, 225
World of Warcraft, 43, 212, 430, 434, 434p
World Series, 131
Wranglers, 174
Wrigley, 124
#WWYW. See What Would Yeezus Wear
Xbox. See Microsoft Xbox
Xena: Warrior Princess, 420
Xerox, 63
Yahoo!, 346
Yale University, 294, 526
Yankees. See New York Yankees
Yankelovich, Skelly & White, 273
Yankelovich Monitor, 273
Yaz, 66
Year Zero (Nine Inch Nails), 317
Yellow Pages, 103
Yellowstone National Park, 320
Yelp, 346, 357, 430, 435 
Yik Yak, 79
Young & Rubicam, 246, 247f, 277n13
YouTube, 43, 73, 159, 256, 296, 317, 319, 
329, 346, 424, 489, 498, 500, 544
Yu-Gi-Oh!, 544
Zara, 462, 543
Zen Estilo, 215
Zing’s Air Huntress, 144
Zipcar, 270, 396, 396p
Ziploc, 504
Zippo Manufacturing Co., 136
Zoobles, 544
Zumba, 180, 180p
Subject Index
Abbey Cooks Entertain, 122
ABC model of attitudes, 286. See also Affect; 
Behavior; Cognition
Abranding, 468
Absolute threshold, 108
Acceptance cycles, 544, 545f
Access-based consumption, 270. See also 
 Consumption
Accommodative purchase decision, 362
Acculturation, 268, 480–482, 484–485
Acculturation agents, 481, 499
Accuracy
of attitude scores, 297
of consumer databases, 161
of man’s role in family, 459
of product reviews, 347
self-concept and, 201
of social class descriptors, 458
of wearable computers, 212
Achievement
badges for, 209, 468
breadwinner model, 217
broadcasting on social media, 142
desire for, 78, 253, 266, 267f, 268
ideals of beauty and, 78
need for, 177
self-esteem and, 209
U.S. Department of Labor, 366
U.S. Education Department, 73
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
56, 57, 66, 68t, 74, 89n77
U.S. Marines, 248t
U.S. Robotics, 416
U.S. Supreme Court, 508–509
Valentino, 543
Vanity Fair, 307
Varsity Brands, 421
Vaseline, 428, 430
Venetian, The (hotel), 389
Verizon, 388
Versace, 516
Verve Clicquot, 248t
Veterans’ Administration, 72
VH1, 501
Vicks, 550
Victoria’s Secret, 209, 248t, 308, 389
Vidburn, 154
Villanova University, 253
Vine, 201, 544
Virgin Airlines, 216, 258, 461
Virgin America, 105
Virgin Atlantic, 527
Viva La Juicy, 154
Vogue, 62, 136, 203, 221, 304, 541
Vogue India, 462
Voice, The, 309, 416
Volkswagen, 134, 206, 315, 320–321
Volkswagen Beetle, 47–48, 462
Volkswagen Golf, 509
Volvo, 254
Volvo C70, 253
Von Dutch, 471
Wagyu beef, 136
Walking Dead, The, 334
WALL-E, 53
Wall Street Journal, 196
Walmart, 33, 35, 49, 63, 78, 110, 387,  
390–391, 417, 452, 516,  
550, 556
Warby Parker, 212
Warner-Lambert, 296
Washington Monument, 537
Washington State University, 136
Water Kingdom, Bombay (India), 516
Webkinz, 544
Wedding Crashers, 35
Weight Watchers, 176, 489
Wells Fargo, 509
Wendy’s International, Inc., 307
Westin Hotels, 61, 61p
Wet Seal, 499
What Would Yeezus Wear, 534
What Would You Do?, 487
Where the Boys Are, 37
Whirlpool, 258
White Castello, 103
White Perfect Line, 229
White Radiance, 229
Whitney Museum, 453
Whole Foods Market, 49, 57, 62, 63, 63p, 63t, 
307, 351, 491
Whole Foods Woman, 265
Whopper, 213
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, 462
Wickr, 154
Wii. See Nintendo Wii
Wikipedia, 43, 73, 307, 416, 466
Wild Cherry Pepsi, 395. See also PepsiCo Inc.
Wild Oats, 307

608 
Indexes
Back-translation, 550
Badges, 209, 433
Bait-and-switch, 58
Balance theory, 292–296, 293p, 294f
Basic level category, 348, 348f
Basking in reflected glory, 294, 295p
Beacons, 393
Beards, 227
Beauty
catering to, 145p
evolution of, 224–225
of females, 224–227, 224p
ideals of, 78, 222–228, 229
of males, 227–228
media and, 223 
rituals in, 528
self-esteem and, 202, 209, 223, 226
today’s ideal of, 226–227
universality of, 223–224
western beauty, 225–226
Beer. See Alcohol
Behavior. See also Consumer behavior
archetypes of, 246
decision making and, 336, 419
defined, 286
embodied cognition and, 210–211
feedback and, 337–338, 337p
Freudian theory and, 243–244
functional theory of attitudes and, 285
intentions versus, 298–300
modeling, 143
nonconforming, 419
observable, 131
patterns of, 262
predicting, 298–301
referral behavior, 430
sex roles and, 216
standards of, 432
Behavioral economics, 353–354
Behavioral learning theories, 131–133, 142, 
156, 287f
Being space, 389
Beliefs, 296. See also Proposition
Belief systems, 268
Believers, 266
Belonging, need for, 179, 497
Benign envy, 184
Bias. See also specific types
in advertising, 148
in decision making, 353, 354
information cascades, 427
interpretational, 119
mood and, 386
Big Data, 34–35, 34p
Big Five personality dimensions, 250, 250t
Billboards. See also Advertising
anticonsumption and, 83
digital (smart) technology on, 53, 70, 114
marketing practices and, 58, 229
prevalence of, 97
visibility/readability of, 108, 115
Binary opposition, 522, 528
Binge eating, 226, 227, 339
Biological needs, 58, 173. See also Needs
Biometric profiles, 53
Bioterrorism, 78
Birthday gift ritual, 419, 495, 524,  
528, 548
Bitcoin system, 388
Bittersweet memories, 161–163
Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking 
(Gladwell), 352
Blogs
credibility of, 307, 416
health concerns of, 227
marketing toward, 485–486
population of, 33
Aspirational reference groups, 417, 418p
Assertive people, 395
Assimilation, 426, 481
Assimilation effect, 292
Associative networks, 153–154, 154f
Assortative mating. See Homogamy
Asynchronous interactions, 43
Atephobia, 447
Atmospherics, 390–392, 394
Attention, 111–117, 143f, 150f
Attitude accessibility perspective, 301
Attitude object, 285, 296–297,  
300, 301
Attitudes
ABC model of, 286
balance theory, 292–296, 293p, 294f
behavior and, 76, 298–301
brand loyalty and, 154, 190
business ethics, 57
consistency principle, 290
consumer socialization, 144
defined, 285
equality of, 289–290
Fishbein model, 297, 298, 300
forming, 289–296
functional theory of, 285
hierarchies of effects, 286–289
intentions versus behavior, 298–300
levels of commitment in, 289–290
marketer’s perspective, 29f
models of, 296–298
motivational conflicts, 175–177, 176f
multiattribute attitude models,  
296–298, 298t
multiple pathway anchoring and adjustment 
model, 302
perception and, 124
power of, 285–286
self-perception theory, 291–292
shopping, 387
social judgment theory, 292
social psychology, 45t
Attitude toward the act of buying, 300
Attractiveness, 144, 306, 308, 324, 344. See 
also Beauty
Attributes, 124, 296, 298, 347. See also 
 Determinant attributes
Auctions, 71, 81–82
Audio watermark, 104
Augmented reality, 99, 393
Aurophobia, 447
Authenticity, 351p
Authoritarian parents, 145
Authority, 303
Automated attention analysis, 114
Automaticity, 157
Automobile Information Disclosure Act  
(1958), 67t
Autonomic decision, 364
Autonomic responses, 131–132
Autonomy, need for, 177, 497
Avatars, 166, 212, 284, 310–311, 484. See also 
Virtual worlds
Averaging, 160
Avoidance-avoidance conflict, 177
Avoidance groups, 417
Babies for sale, 81–82
Baby Boomers (Baby Boom Generation), 490, 
495, 500–503
Bachelor’s Day, 530
Affective decision making, 182, 336f. See also 
Decision making
Affiliation, need for, 177, 388, 503
Affluenza, 457
African Americans
buying power of, 487
Generation Z, 498
health concerns of, 227
marketing toward, 479, 483–484
population of, 33
stereotypes of, 480
Age
color and, 102
as demographic, 31
subcultures of (See specific subcultures)
Age cohorts, 495
Agentic goals, 214
Aggregation stage, 532
Aggressiveness, 246
Aggressive people, 395
Agreeableness, 250, 250t
AIDS, 502p
AIOs, 264, 265t
Alcohol
addiction to, 79, 80, 489
advertising for, 58, 83, 112–113p
anticonsumption, 83
consumption of, 32, 35, 181, 245t, 252, 323, 
417, 495, 499
culture and, 491
impressions with, 202
personality traits of, 256p
scare tactics and, 321
social class and, 458
Allegory, 321
Alternate reality games, 191
Alternative energy, 77t
Alternative lifestyles, 465, 494
Alternatives, evaluating, 340f, 342
Alternative transportation, 77t
Ambicultural, 485
American exceptionalism, 50
American Indians, 228, 229, 390, 487, 523
Analytical psychology, 246
Androgyny, 217–220, 219p
Animal symbolism, 244
Anorexia, 226, 227
Antecedent states, 379f
Anthrax, scare of, 78
Anthropomorphism, 253
Anthropomorphization, 118
Antibrand communities, 417
Anticonsumption, 83
Antifestivals, 530
Antiglobals, 552. See also Consumers
Apparel industry, 226. See also Beauty
Approach-approach conflict, 176
Approach-avoidance conflict, 176–177
Archetypes, 246, 247f, 248t
Argument, structure of, 313–315. See also 
Message(s)
Arousal. See also Drive
colors and, 101
of emotions, 180, 436
scent and, 394
sexual, 104, 131
shopping and, 385–386, 394
state-dependent retrieval and, 157
viral marketing and, 436
Arrogance, 255
Art product, 519
Asian Americans
buying power of, 487
Generation Z, 498

 
Indexes 
609 
advertising for, 83, 122, 134, 321, 496
alternatives to, 36p, 342
dark side of, 78
image of, 206, 285, 290, 291p
motives for, 245t, 499
quitting, 417
regulations for, 67t
as social crutch, 207–208
Cinderella fantasy/myth, 209, 523, 528
Civil rights, consumerism and, 480
Class. See Social class
Classical conditioning, 131–140, 289
Classic fashion, 544, 545f
Cleanliness, 245t, 268
Clinical psychology, 45t, 46f
Cliques, 430
Closure principle, 119
Co-branding strategies, 262
Co-consumers, 384. See also Consumers
Co-creation, 189
Codes, 463–464
Coercive power, 416
Cognition
defined, 286
embodied, 210–211
emotional responses and, 289
need for, 252t
Cognitive-affective model, 289
Cognitive decision making, 336, 336f,  
339–352. See also Decision making
Cognitive development, 146–149
Cognitive dissonance reduction, 176, 291p
Cognitive element, 290
Cognitive learning principles, marketing  
applications of, 144
Cognitive learning theory, 131, 142–144
Cognitive matching, 206
Cognitive responses, 319, 322, 323f
Cohabitate/cohabitation, 493
Collaborative consumption, 395–396. See also 
Consumption
Collaborative filtering, 346
Collecting, 534
Collective decision making, 356–361. See also 
Decision making
Collective self, 201. See also Self
Collective unconscious, 246
Collective value creation, 421, 422f
Collectors, 499
Colleges, brand personalities of, 253
College wave premium, 452
Color forecasts, 103
Color palette, 103
Color(s)
gender and, 102
importance of, 28, 101, 102, 201
influence of, 97, 101, 102p, 258, 387, 391, 394
marketing application of, 103, 104t
mood suggestions, 100p
sex roles and, 215
shopping behavior and, 394
spectrum of, 103
of stimulus, 101, 115, 118, 151, 389
Commercialism, 67
Commercials. See also Advertising
advertising wear-out and, 134
confusion in, 311–312
corrective advertising and, 66
dadvertising, 366
effect on children, 147
emotional appeals in, 269
novel stimuli in, 191
persuasiveness of, 149
popular culture and, 35
Brand switching, 190
Brand tourists, 543
Breadwinner model, 217
Breastaurants, 215
Bribery, 57
BRIC nations, 462
Bridging function, 430
Broadcast medium, 304, 305
Bromance, 215
B2C e-commerce. See Business-to-consumer 
(B2C) e-commerce
Bulimia, 226, 227
Burning Man Festival, 465
Business ethics, 57–63
Business-to-business (B2B) decision making, 
357–360
Business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce, 42, 
360–361
Business-to-business (B2B) marketers, 357
Business-to-consumer (B2C)  
e-commerce, 42
Busters. See Generation X
Buyclass theory of purchasing, 358
Buyer, 357
Buyer behavior, 29, 300. See also Consumer 
behavior
Buying center, 358, 359p, 360
Buzz, 308, 424–425
Capital, 464. See also Money; Social capital
Capitalism, 62. See also Materialism
Casual Friday, 201, 286
Category exemplars, 349
Cause marketing, 70. See also Marketing
Caveat Emptor, 73
Celebrity endorsements, 191, 295, 296, 306, 
307, 309f
Central route to persuasion, 323
CEO pay ratio, 448–449
Ceremonies, cultural, 521
Chat rooms, 43
Chavs, 461, 461p
Cheap imitations, 133
Chief marketing officers, 66, 479,  
509, 562
Childless couples, 493
Child Protection Act (1966), 67t
Children
advertising toward, 44, 70, 110, 134, 147p, 
148–150, 395
caring for, 365, 366, 382
cognitive development, 143, 146–147
consumers-in-training, 495–496
consumer socialization of, 144–145, 146f, 
262, 308, 496
consumption constellations in, 262
as decision makers, 144, 148, 155
with disabilities, 72
electronic babysitters for, 146
family demographics, 32, 59, 364
intersex, 221
locational privacy and, 71
obesity and, 149–150, 226–227
quality-of-life issues for, 40, 41
research about, 68, 148, 149f
self-concept of, 206–207
sex-role socialization, 214
sexual abuse of, 81p
Children’s Television Act (1990), 149
Christmas rituals, 382, 424, 530, 548
Chronological age, 503. See also Age
Chunking, 152, 155, 312
Cigar Aficionado magazine, 504t
Cigarette smoking
ending relationships on social networks, 212
microfame, 201
opinions on, 227, 427, 436
persuasiveness of, 304, 373, 425
recommendations for, 114
role of, 43, 134, 224, 317
use of, 421
Blood donors, 81
Bobo doll experiment, 143
Body anxiety, 229
Body image. See also Beauty; Self-esteem
anorexia versus overweight, 227
body decoration and mutilation, 228–232, 
229p, 231p
body piercing, 36, 151, 231–232
cosmetic surgery (See Cosmetic surgery)
culture and, 484
defined, 221–222
fattism, 226
media’s influence on, 48
tattoos, 222p, 230–231, 231p
Body image distortions, 226
Body mass index, 225
Bogus ads, 160. See also Advertising
Bond conduction technology, 110
Boomerang kids, 493–494
Boredom, 313
Born-again consumers, 489–490. See also 
Consumers
Botnets, 71
Bottom of the pyramid, 453, 473–474
Bounded rationality, 354
Bourgeois consciousness, 460
Brand arrogance, 255
BrandAsset Archetypes model,  
246, 247f
Brand communities, 420–421, 423
Brand equity, 58, 134
Brandfests, 420
Brand identification, 155
Brand immigrants, 543
Brand loyalty
as attitude, 289, 292, 550
creating/building, 255
defined, 27, 190, 353
demographics and, 30
ethnic identification and, 481
gamification and, 142
importance of, 28p
leveraging/reinforcing, 58, 328,  
420–421, 527
organizational buying and, 358
Brand personality, 27, 118, 251,  
253–258, 254p, 256p, 257p
Brand prominence, 470
Brand(s)
communication about, 436
evaluating, 157
familiarity of, 356
family branding, 136
follower, 156
images of, 27, 40, 121, 123, 272
market beliefs, 355t
perception of, 123 (See also Perception)
philanthropy by, 68, 70
pioneering, 156
recognizing, 148
retro, 161, 422f
rituals and, 526, 526p
socializing with, 27
use of, 422f
vividness of, 152
Brand-specific memory, 154. See also Memory
Brand storytelling, 253

610 
Indexes
lifestyles, 242, 414–415, 446
reliving memories, 130
shopping, 56, 96, 334–335, 380
Consumer confidence, 448
Consumer confusion, 137
Consumer Culture Theory, 48
Consumer development, 144–145, 146f
Consumer fairy tales, 209, 523
Consumer groups, 260
Consumer hyperchoice, 335
Consumer identity renaissance, 503
Consumer involvement, 185–193. See also 
Involvement
Consumerism, 66–68
Consumer packaged goods, 502
Consumer Products Safety Act (1972), 67t
Consumer psychology, 148–149
Consumer research. See also Motivational 
research
focus of, 48
hedonic consumption and, 98
perspectives on, 46–48
trait theory and, 246, 250, 251–252, 252t
Consumer researchers, finding, 44
Consumers
activism by, 67–68
attitudes of, 286
born-again, 489–490
brand communities, 420–421, 423
classifying needs of, 177–179
co-consumers, 384
communication by, 436–437
consumed, 81–82
cosmopolitanism, 457
defined, 29
federal legislation for, 67t
focus groups, 385
global “always on,” 41
high-income, 452–453
identity of
extended self, 208–210
income and, 447–454
microcultures, 260, 272
renaissance, 503
social class and, 454–462
impact on marketing strategy, 30–33
learning to become, 144–145, 145f, 146f, 148
literacy of, 73
low-income, 453–454, 453f
low-literate, 73
market beliefs of, 354–356, 355t, 357
marketing’s impact on, 30, 35–44
multitasking by, 111–114
opinion leaders and, 426
perspectives of, 28, 29f
rights of
business ethics and, 57–63
product satisfaction and, 64–70
role-relaxed, 419
satiated, 191
shopping experience of, 385–399 
surrogate, 428
terrorism and, 78
theft/fraud of, 82–83
typical, 306
underprivileged, 459, 462
welfare of, 114
Consumer satisfaction/dissatisfaction, 64–70
Consumer socialization, 144
Consumerspace, 58
Consumer style, 550
Consumer-to-consumer (C2C) e-commerce, 42
Consumer tribe, 440
Consumption. See also Consumer behavior
Conscientiousness, 250, 250t
Conscious decisions, 353
Consensual purchase decision, 362
Consensus, 303
Consideration set, 153, 342
Consistency principle, 290, 303
Conspicuous consumption, 50, 469, 470, 542. 
See also Consumption
Conspicuous waste, 471
Constructive processing, 336
Consumed consumers, 81–82. See also 
 Consumers
Consumer addiction, 79–81
Consumer behavior
analyzing
activity project, 91–93, 280–281, 
409–411, 562–565
advertising/marketing and, 148, 153, 189, 
314, 436, 487
automated attention analysis, 114
brand loyalty, 423
celebrity endorsements, 295
color and, 101
compensatory consumption, 207
culture and, 487, 547
emotions and, 182
family influence, 365
globalization, 38
luxury goods and, 467
materialism, 69
political consumerization, 49–50
poverty and, 59
product design and, 344
self-control and, 338
sharing economy, 270
social class and, 458
store design/atmosphere and, 391, 394
case studies
avatars, 166
decision making, 328–329, 373–374
facial recognition, 53–54
IKEA fantasy, 556–557
income and social class, 473–474
same-sex marriage, 508–509
watches, 196
complexity of, 335
culture and, 515, 517f
dark side of, 78–83
data explosion and, 35
demographics, 27
destructive, 80
digital self and, 205, 211–212
extent of, 44
Freudian theory and, 244
herding behavior of, 427
illegal acquisition and product use, 82–83
interdisciplinary influences on, 45–46,  
45t, 46f
materialism, 59
policy issues relevant to, 70–77
process of, 29
referral behavior, 430
role theory, 37
segmenting by, 33–35
sensory inputs, 100–107
situational effects on, 379–385
studying, 44–46
values and, 27, 271–273
vignettes
beauty, 200
culture, 478
everyday events, 514
food, 172
information searching, 25, 284–285
Commercials (continued)
recalling, 156
sadadvertising, 181
skipping over, 305
slickly produced, 40
sponsorship of, 58
subliminal advertising and, 110
television watching and, 117
two-factor theory, 313
Commitment, conformity as, 419
Common interests, sharing, 388
Communal goals, 214
Communication
about brands, 436
elements of, 304–306
interactive, 304–306, 306f
new message formats, 315–317
online, 499
persuasiveness of, 302–303
source of, 304, 306–311
source versus message, 322–324
types of appeals in, 319–322
word-of-mouth, 421–424, 434–437
Communications model, 304, 304f
Communications subsystem, 518
Communism, fall of, 62
Communist Manifesto, The (Engels & Marx), 227
Community. See specific types of communities
Community engagement, 422f
Community level, 210, 210f
Comparative advertising, 298, 315. See also 
Advertising
Compatibility, in innovations, 539–540
Compelling advertising, 328. See also 
 Advertising
Compensatory consumption, 207. See also 
Consumption
Compensatory rule, 351
Competitive advantage, 65–66
Competitors
ad repetition and, 134
brand loyalty and, 27, 40, 156, 157
brand’s position and, 124
identifying, 349
stimulus generalization, 133
subliminal advertising, 111
trade dress and, 103
Complexity, 391, 540. See also Feature creep
Compliance, 246, 289
Compulsive consumption, 80–81. See also 
Consumption
Compulsive shopping disorder, 80. See also 
Shopping
Conceptual brand meanings, 148
Conditioned response, 131, 132
Conditioned stimulus, 131, 132, 143. See also 
Stimuli
Conditioned superstition, 521
Conditioner buying, 328–329
Conditioning
classical, 131–133
cognitive learning and, 142–143
instrumental (operant), 137–139
marketing applications, 133–140
product associations, 134
repetition, 132, 134
stimulus discrimination, 133
stimulus generalization, 133
Conflict, 175–177, 176f, 243
Conformity, 417, 419–420, 498, 499
Conjunctive rule, 352
Connectedness, degree of, 432–433
Connexity, 498
Conscientious consumerism, 74

 
Indexes 
611 
Customer reviews
finding, 72, 347, 357
for games, 308
Rate My Professors (website), 43, 213–214
Rent the Runway, 228
social shopping and, 367
value of, 44, 347, 416
writing, 43, 346, 435
Customer satisfaction/dissatisfaction, 397
Customs, 269, 270
Cyberbullying, 79, 80p
Cyberidentities, 508. See also Identity
Cybermediary, 346
Cyberspace. See World Wide Web
Cyberspace retail themes, 390
Cyberterrorism, 78
Dadvertising, 366. See also Advertising
Danish Modern, 541
Database marketing, 33–35. See also  
Marketing
Data privacy, 70–72
Da Vinci Code, The (Brown), 486
Day reconstruction method, 379–382
Decay, 157
Decision making. See also Organizational 
 decision making
affective, 182, 336f
bias in, 353, 354
case study, 373–374
children’s role in, 144, 148, 155
cognitive, 336, 336f, 339–352
collective, 356–361
evaluation in, 340f, 342, 343
family, 29, 357, 361–367
habitual, 336f, 352–356
heuristics, 354–356
hierarchies of effects, 286–289
importance of, 184p
information search, 340–342, 340f, 341f, 
346, 354
in-store, 334–335, 392–395
online, 346–347
problem recognition, 339–340, 340f, 341f
problem solving (See Problem solving)
process (steps) of, 335, 339–343, 349f
product choice and, 340f, 342–343
product placement and, 318
self-regulation and, 336–339
tactical communications options, 303–304
types of, 335–336, 336f
“Declaration of Consumer Rights, The” (1962), 67
Decoded (Jay-Z), 191
Decompression zone, 390
Deep processing, 152
Deethnicization, 482, 482p
Default bias, 354. See also Bias
Defendance, need for, 177
Deindividuation, 419
Delayed gratification, 174
Demographics, 27, 30–33, 71, 264, 493, 504
Demography, 45t, 46f
Depth interviews, 244
Desacralization, 536–537
Design
color palettes, 103
importance of, 99, 102
Kansei engineering, 105
of packaging, 136–137
personality of, 256p
of products, 98–99, 106p, 162p, 258, 288p, 344
store comparisons, 63t
store image and, 390–391
tattoos, 230–231
Crescive norms, 269
Crime, 35, 82
Cross-cultural values
diffusion of consumer culture, 547, 548–549
global marketing and, 551–552, 562–565
localized strategy, 549–551
relevancy to marketers, 268
standardized strategy, 549
Crowdsourcing, 361, 361p
Cryptocurrency, 388
C2C e-commerce. See Consumer-to-consumer 
(C2C) e-commerce
Cued developmental stage, 147
Cult products, 186
Cultural anthropology, 45t, 46f
Cultural capital, 463, 463p, 466
Cultural creatives, 77
Cultural formula, 520–521
Cultural gatekeepers, 517f, 519
Cultural meaning, 517f, 540
Cultural movement, 481, 516–519
Cultural myths, 522–523
Cultural selection, 518
Cultural stories and ceremonies, 521
Cultural systems, 515–516
Cultural values (meanings), 107, 309.  
See also Values
Culture. See also Cross-cultural values;  
Subcultures
archetypes in, 246
beauty and, 223, 224–225
body image and, 515
business ethics and, 57
characteristics of, 518
comparative advertising and, 315
conformity pressures, 419
defined, 515
diffusion of, 547, 548
diversity in, 479, 487
ethnicity and, 479–486
fattism and, 226–227
gender identity and, 212–213,  
214–217, 216p
global aspects of, 546–547
high and low, 479, 519–520
homosexuality and, 218, 221
lifestyle and, 260, 514
logos and, 121
marketing and, 270
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs and, 178–179
parental role in, 144
religion and, 486–492
sacred and profane consumption, 533, 
536–537
self and, 201
sensory perception and, 117
subjective norms and, 299, 300p, 301
symbolism in, 516
taste and, 107
tattoos and, 230
trend tracking, 260
values, 27, 268
voluntary actions and, 301
Culture jamming, 67
Culture of immigration, 481
Culture of origin, 481
Culture of participation, 44
Culture production process, 517f
Culture production system, 518–519
Culture shock, 515
Curation, 62
Curb appeal, 390
Currency. See Cryptocurrency; Virtual  
currency
access-based, 270
addictive, 79–81
aesthetic, 289, 314
of alcohol (See under Alcohol)
anticonsumption, 83
behaviors toward, 294
buy now mentality versus thriftiness, 450
collaborative, 395–396
compensatory, 207
compulsive, 80–81
cultural context of, 515
emotions and, 182
ethnicity and, 479
gender identity and, 215, 217
happiness and, 40, 182–183
hedonic, 98–99, 252t, 287f
microcultures of, 272
motives for, 245t
organized religion and, 489
patterns in, 259–260, 463, 481, 504, 504t
proportional spending, 447
psychological threat and, 207
sacred and profane, 533, 536–537
self and, 206–208
sharing economy and, 397
social identity and, 206
specific values of, 271
stages in, 29f
status-enhancing, 467
style/dimensions of, 260, 261f
Consumption communities, 27
Consumption constellations, 262
Consumption situation, 379
Contagious: Why Things Catch On (Berger), 436
Contamination, 183, 533, 534
Contemporary young mainstream female 
achievers, 216
Content, self-concept and, 201
Context effects, 98
Continuous innovation, 539
Contrast, 115–117
Contrast effect, 292
Conventions, 269–270
Conversations, sponsored, 307
Cooptation, 516
Copycat brands, 136
Core values, 268–270. See also Values
Corporate social responsibility, 70, 307
Corrective advertising, 66. See also Advertising
Cortege ritual, 532
Cosmetic surgery, 200, 209, 229–230, 230p, 547
Cosmological function of myths, 522
Cosmopolitanism, 457
Cosplay movement, 260, 260p
Cougars, 470
Counteractive construal, 336
Counterarguing, 320
Countercultures, 516. See also Movement(s)
Counterfeiting, 83
Counterfeit products, 83. See also Products
Counterscammers, 82
Country of origin, 355, 356p
Coupons
availability of, 185, 316, 317, 395, 466
mobile shopping apps, 393, 485
purpose of, 355t
using, 105, 153, 185, 499
Covariation, 355
Craft product, 519
Crash dieters, 227
Creative subsystem, 518, 519, 521
Credibility, 306–308, 315, 318
Credit score, 449
Creolization, 548–549

612 
Indexes
Ethnography, 480
Ethos, 516
Etic perspective, 549
Etiquette class, 271p
Evaluation, 180, 297
Evaluative criteria, 349–350
Evaluative processing, 155
Evaluative reactions, 155
Evangelical movement, 490
Evoked set, 342
Evolutionary innovation, 539
Exchange, 29
Exchange theory, 29, 395
Executive control center, 338
Exemplar products, creating, 349
Expectancy disconfirmation model, 397
Expectancy theory, 174
Experiencers, 266
Experiential hierarchy, 287, 287f, 289
Experimental psychology, 45t, 46f
Expert power, 416
Exposure, 108–111, 115
Extended family, 493, 516. See also Families
Extended self, 208–210, 208p, 260
External memory, 150, 161. See also Memory
Extinction, 132, 138, 139f
Extroversion, 250, 250t, 251, 251t, 252t
Exuberants, 499
Eyeball economy, 111
Eye tracking, 114, 115–116, 116p
Facial recognition, 345
Facial Recognition Technology,  
53–54, 70
Fads, 525–526, 544–545, 545t
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (1966), 67t
Fair Trade principles, 76
Famadihana ritual, 532
Familiar brand names, 356
Familiarity
mere exposure phenomenon, 312
product placement and, 318
recall and, 157–158, 160
sensory meaning, 151
two-factor theory, 313
Families. See also Children
behavior of, 494–495
core values of, 268–269, 273t
culture of, 478
decision making by, 29, 357, 361–367
dual-income, 364
extended self and, 210, 210f
food deserts and, 73
influence of, 365
lifestyle of, 259–260
priorities for, 479, 486p
structure of, 32, 258, 364, 492–495
theft and fraud effects on, 82
TV dinner and, 515
Family branding, 136
Family financial officer, 363
Family identity, 364
Family level, 210, 210f
Family life cycle, 494
Fan clubs, 346
Fantasy, 203, 556–557
Fantasy camps, 417, 418p
Fashion
adoption cycles, 544–546, 545f
approach-avoidance conflict and, 176–177
behavioral science perspectives on, 541–544
cultural impact of, 36, 67, 225, 426, 427, 
436, 516
defined, 540
Effects, hierarchies of, 286–289
Efficiency plan, 153
Ego, 243
Ego-defensive function, 285
80/20 rule, 30, 264, 432
Elaborated codes, 464, 465t
Elaboration Likelihood Model, 323, 323f, 324
Elaborative rehearsal, 150, 152
Election campaigns, Big Data and, 35
Electric babysitters, 146, 454
Electroencephalograms, 345
Electronic cigarettes, 36f, 498. See also Cigarette 
smoking
Electronic marketing, 42. See also Marketing
Electronic mouth, 106
Electronic recycling, 399p
Electronic wallets, 316
Elimination-by-aspects rule, 352
Embarrassment, 184–185
Embeds, 110–111
Embodied cognition, 210–211
Emergent event, 529
Emic perspective, 550
Emo, 289
Emotional appeals, 269, 319, 436
Emotional contagion, 287
Emotional instability. See Neuroticism
Emotional oracle effect, 181
Emotional rationality, 182
Emotional states, dimensions of, 386f
Emotional well-being, 447
Emotions. See also specific emotions
analyzing, 53, 70
atmosphere and, 394
bittersweet, 161
colors and, 101, 103
consumption and, 182
defined, 180
memory and, 155, 344
mixed, 158
odors and, 103–104
with products, 38, 98, 180, 337
scents and, 104
social media and, 134, 185, 212, 431, 436
unipolar, 158
Employee performance, 142
Empowerment, 456–457
Empty self, 205. See also Self
Enacted norms, 269
Enclothed cognition, 210. See also Cognition
Encoding, memory, 150
Enculturation, 268, 362
Endowed progress effect, 141
Endowment effect, 105
Environmental bottom line, 74
Environmental consequences, 29f
Environmental cues, 98, 108, 173, 204, 324, 
354, 382, 420
Environmentally friendly, 30, 75, 76, 268
Environmental stewardship/responsibility, 30, 
57, 73–77, 202, 268, 299, 398
Envy, 184
Episodic memories, 151, 161. See also  
Memory
Eroticism, 245t
Errogenous zones, 541
e-sports, 193, 193p, 258–259, 259p
Esteem needs, 178
Ethics
business ethics, 57–63
data privacy, 70–71
ethical boundaries, 185
Ethnicity, 39, 480–482, 484–485
Ethnic subcultures, 479–486. See also Culture
Design for the Environment (eco label), 56, 57
Dessert categories, levels of categorization in, 348f
Detachment, 246
Determinant attributes, 350–351. See also 
 Attributes
Developmental psychology, 46f
Deviance, fear of, 419
Differential fertility, 449
Differential threshold, 108
Diffusion of innovations, 537
Digital billboards. See Billboards
Digital Divide, 454
Digital Natives, 43–44, 111, 498
Digital opinion leaders, 437–438
Digital scrapbooks, 305
Digital self, 205, 211–212. See also Self
Digital video recorders, 111, 305
Digital virtual consumption, 434. See also 
Marketing
Digital wallets, 388
Digital word-of-mouth, 434–437. See also 
 Communication
DINKS (double income, no kids), 493
Direction, motivation and, 174–177
Directories, 346
Disabilities, market access and, 72
Disalienation, 245t
Disasters, materialism and, 69, 208
Disclaimers, 307
Discontinuous innovation, 539
Discretionary income, 260, 447, 503
Discretionary spending, 499, 501
Discrimination
adaptation and, 115
multiculturalism and, 487
stimulus discrimination, 133, 137
Disgust, 183–184
Disposable income, 260
Disposal, of products, 397–399, 399p, 400p
Dispreferred Marker Effect, 437
Dissatisfaction, expressing, 64–65
Dissonance theory, 176, 290
Distractions, 320
Diversity, in culture, 479, 487
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act (2010), 67t
Dominance-submission hierarchy, 455
Dopamine, 112
Doppelgänger brand image, 256
Downward mobility, 449
Drama, lecture versus, 322
Dramaturgical perspective, 203
Dress for success, 211. See also Impression 
management
Drive, 173
Drive theory, 173–174
Dwell (book), 504t
Dyadic encounters, 395
Dynamically continuous innovation, 539
Dynamic speed displays, 337–338, 337p
Early adopters, 538, 538f
Eating contests, 97, 97p
Eating disorders, 226
Echo Boomers, 498, 499
Eco-labeling, 57
Ecology, as cultural system, 515
E-commerce, 42, 360–361, 367, 388–389
Economic exchange, 528
Economic models of fashion, 541–542
Economic purgatory, 499
Economics of information, 60
E-consumers, 42. See also Consumers
Eco tourism, 77t

 
Indexes 
613 
Groups. See also specific kinds of communities
cohesion in, 432
conformity, 417, 419–420
cultures (See Culture)
identity of, 208, 260
importance of, 415
reference groups, 416–417
social power of, 415–416
Group shopping, 366–367. See also Shopping
Guerrilla marketing, 78, 317. See also Marketing
Guilt, 184
Gyges Effect, 419
Habitual decision making, 336f, 352–356. See 
also Decision making
Habituation, 312
Habitus, 465
Hair donors, 81
Halal, 491
Halloween rituals, 530, 531p
Halo effect, 133, 248t, 308
Happiness
analysis of, 382
consumption and, 40, 183, 268, 271, 451
defined, 181, 183p
material accumulation, 182
sharing economy and, 397
state of, 385–386
tweeting and, 431
Happiness economy, 185
Haptic (touch) sense, 105
Harmony, 290
Harpaxophobia, 447
Haul videos, 435
Haves versus have nots, 454, 455, 471f
Head banging, 526
Heading tags, 346
Head stage, 286
Heart stage, 286
Heavy users, 30
Hedonic adaptation, 451
Hedonic consumption, 98–99, 252t, 287f. See 
also Consumption
Hedonic needs, 173, 175, 175p, 186. See also Needs
Hedonic shopping motives, 387–388. See also 
Shopping
Hell Week, 531
Herding behavior, 427. See also Behavior
Hero consumers, 248t. See also Consumers
Hero tale, 535
Hesher, 259
Heterophilous, 426
Heuristics, 354–356, 364
Hierarchical value maps, 272
Hierarchies of effects, 286–289
Hierarchy of Needs (Maslow), 178–179,  
179p 
Hierogamy (marry up), 459
High-context culture, 479, 519–520. See also 
Culture
High-income consumers, 452–453. See also 
Consumers
High-involvement hierarchy of effects, 286, 287f
High-involvement medium, 191
Highlighting effect, 158
Hip-hop, 260, 516, 518, 521, 543, 549
Hispanic Americans, 33, 227, 478–479, 483p, 
484–485, 487, 549
buying power of, 487
Creolization, 549
health concerns of, 227
marketing toward, 483p, 484–485, 549
population of, 33
vignette, 478
Gambling, 80–81, 388
Game consoles, 434
Game platform, 434
Gamification, 140–142, 141p, 186, 209
Gatekeepers, 357, 519
Gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (GLBT) 
consumers, 220–221. See also LGBT
Gay Pride Month, 221
Gemba, 385, 386f
Gender
blurred roles of, 498, 551
color and, 102
culture and, 213
as demographic, 31–32
marketing and, 144
sex appeals and, 212–213
socialization and, 214
Gender-bending products, 220, 220p
Gender identity
sex-typed products, 212–213, 216p, 217p, 
218p
sexual identity versus, 214–215, 215p
Gender-neutral, 221, 221p
Gender socialization, 214
Generalized opinion leader, 427
General lifestyle segmentation study, 264
Generation X, 495, 500
Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture 
(Coupland), 500
Generation Y, 495, 498–500
Generation Z, 495, 498
Genre, 434
Geodemography, 504
Geography, as demographic, 33
Geospatial platforms, 209
Gestalt psychology, 119
Gestation stage, 529
Gift-giving rituals, 514, 515, 528–529, 
530–531
Glamping, 465
GLBT. See Gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
 transgender (GLBT) consumers
Global agnostics, 552. See also Consumers
Global citizens, 552. See also Consumers
Global consumer culture, 546–547
Global dreamers, 552. See also Consumers
Globalization, 38, 499
Global marketing, 551–552, 562–565. See also 
Marketing
Goals, 173, 338. See also Motivation
Golden triangle, 116, 116p
Gray market, 503
Great British Class Survey, 461
Great Depression, 450, 452, 496
Great Recession
age cohorts and, 495, 501
birth rates and, 484
frugality and, 249, 447, 451, 461
green movement and, 76
home ownership and, 459
market regulation and, 66
materialism and, 450–451
savings rate and, 448
Green building, 77t
Green marketing, 75–76, 109–110. See also 
Marketing
Green movement, 76
Green products, 202
Greenwashing, 76–77
Gripe sites, 63
Grooming rituals, 526, 528
Group dieting, 227
Group level, 210, 210f
fashion suicide, 29, 214
innovators in, 538–539
models of, 541–544
paradox of, 542
research issues, 45t
sites, 389
sociological images, 223, 399
study of, 560n114
trends in, 103, 218
Fashionistas, 103, 435, 451
Fashion system, 540–541
Fat Acceptance Movement, 227
Fatalism, 301
Fatshionistas, 227
Fattism, 226
Fear appeals, 320–321, 322p
Fear of missing out, 431
Feast of Ice and Fire, A (Game of Thrones), 122
Feature creep, 343, 343p
Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act 
(1967), 67t
Federal Meat Inspection Act (1907), 66
Feedback, 304, 337p, 427 
Feedback loop, 337–338
Feeling, 251t, 319
Female sex roles, 215–216. See also Sex roles
Female-to-male earnings ratio, 452
Femininity, 214–215, 223, 225, 245t
Femme fatale self, 203
Fertility rate, 492–493
Figure-ground principle, 119
Financial bottom line, 74
Financial literacy, 186, 187p
First impressions. See Impression management
First-person shooters, 434
Fishbein model, 297, 298, 300
Fixed-interval reinforcement, 139
Fixed-ratio reinforcement, 139
Flaming, 432
Flammable Fabrics Act (1953), 67t
Flashbulb memories, 151, 151p
Flavor houses, 105
Flea markets, 399, 401p
Flight, 468
Flows, 432
Focus groups, 385
Follower brands, 156
Food deserts, 73
Foodies, 499
Food industry, 75p, 76p, 107, 107p, 254p, 314
Food insecurity, 73
Foot-in-the-door technique, 292
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (1977), 57
Forgetting, 157–159
Forked-tail effect, 308
Fortress brands, 526
Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid, The  
(Prahalad), 473
Forums, 346
Framing, 353
Fraud, 82–83
Free recall tests, 160
Free Speech movement, 500
Frequency marketing, 140. See also Marketing
Freudian theory, 243–246
Frugalistas, 451
Frugality, 249–250, 447, 499
Functionally illiterate, 73
Functional magnetic resonance imaging, 99, 
205, 343, 345p
Functional risk, 190f. See also Risk
Functional theory of attitudes, 285
Funeral ceremonies, 532, 532p
Fusiform face area, 345

614 
Indexes
Interactive communications, 304–306, 306f. 
See also Communication
Interbellum Generation, 495
Interdependence, 38
Interference, 157
Internalization, 289–290
Internal memory, 150. See also Memory
Internet
access to, 454, 457, 502
addiction to, 79
advergaming, 319
advertising on, 71, 485 (See also  
Advertising)
anonymity of, 388, 419
buying services on, 379
buzz building, 425
consumption communities, 27
data privacy, 70–71
Digital Divide, 454
e-commerce, 362, 388–389
emotions and, 183
fraud on, 82
ice-bucket challenge, 315, 316p
impact of, 42, 205, 416
information exchange, 43, 485
locational privacy, 71
memes on, 544
microfame versus nanofame, 201
multitasking and, 112–113
net neutrality, 43
online decision making, 346
use of, 72, 105, 146, 381, 537
Internet Tax Freedom Act (1998), 67t
Internet trolls, 419
Interpersonal needs, 252t, 363, 419–420
Interpretants, 120, 121f, 122
Interpretation
biases, 119 (See also Bias)
of color, 103
culture and, 518, 548
defined, 117
hyperreality, 121–122, 123p
literal, 490
message delivery and, 311
in motivational research, 244–245
perceptual positioning, 108, 108f,  
117–124
semiotics, 119–121, 121f
stimulus organization, 118–119
symbolic interactionism, 204
Interpretivism, 46–47, 48, 48t
Intersex children, 221
Introversion, 251t
Intuition, 251, 251t
Invidious distinction, 469
Involvement
attitude and, 289
cognitive, 351
conceptualizing, 186f, 192p
in decision making, 360, 362t, 365
defined, 185
high versus low, 286–287, 287f, 290,  
312, 323, 323f
inertia, 186, 352–353
level of, 322, 375
measuring, 187t
online social capital, 466
parental influence in, 144
types of, 187–193
Islamic marketing, 490–492
Japander, 309
Jesters, 248t
patterns of, 58, 266, 382
perceived risk and, 190f
psychic, 466
shoplifting and, 82
social class and, 32–33, 449, 452, 457, 
473–474
social mobility and, 448–449
wealth and, 450p
Income inequality, 448–449, 449p
Independence hypothesis, 289
Index, 120–121
Index of Social Position, 457
Index of Status Characteristics, 457
Individualism, 50, 551
Individuality, 245t
Individual level, 209, 210f
Indulgence versus restraint, 551
Indulgent parents, 145. See also Parents
Inertia, 186, 352–353
Infancy, narcissism versus, 498
In fashion, concept of, 540–541
Influence impressions, 438
Influence network, 427
Influencers, 29, 357, 364, 427, 428, 429p. See 
also Opinion leaders/leadership
Information, encoding, 151–152
Information cascades, 427
Information power, 416
Information processing, 108, 114, 287f
Information-processing approach, 150. See also 
Memory
Information search, 60, 340–342, 340f, 341f, 
346, 354
Information seekers, 305p
Information society, 111
Initiator, 357
Innovations
adopting (adapting to), 155, 524p,  
538–539
by advertisers, 113
aesthetic, 99p
behavioral demands of, 539
characteristics of, 539–540
culture and, 517f, 518
defined, 537
diffusion of, 537, 539–540
in engineering, 454
fashion system, 540–541
globalization and, 552
high versus low, 267f
by manufacturers/retailers, 192p,  
353, 374 
reverse, 539
theme techniques, 389–390
types of, 539
Innovative communicators, 427
Innovators, 266, 427, 538
Innumeracy, 73
In-store decision making, 392–395
In-store slack, 392
Instrumental conditioning, 137–139,  
140, 289
Instrumental values, 272, 273t. See also  
Values
Intelligent agents, 346
Intensity
adaptation and, 115
novelty and, 117
recall and, 158
self-concept and, 201
Intentional families, 507. See also Families
Intentions, behavior versus, 298–300
Interaction styles, 395
History, 45t, 46f
Hoarding, 534
Hofstede Dimensions of National Culture, 
550–551
Holiday rituals, 529–531
Holograms, 99
Home, as sacred place, 534
Homeostasis, 173
Home shopping networks, 305–306. See also 
Shopping
Home shopping party, 366, 367p
Homogamy, 455
Homophily (homophilous), 426
Hooks, 346
Horizontal mobility, 449
Horizontal revolution, 43
Host culture, 481. See also Culture
Hot zones, crime, 35
Household, 493
Human ecology, 45t, 46f
Humor appeals, 320
Hunt, thrill of, 388
Hurricane Sandy, advertising and, 31
Husbands. See Men
Hybrid ads, 158. See also Advertising
Hybrid products, 347
Hype, 308
Hyperreality, 121–122, 123p
Icons, 120
Id, 243
Idealism versus pragmatism, 498
Ideal self, 202, 417. See also Self
Ideals of beauty, 222. See also Beauty
Ideals orientation, 266
Ideal state, 340, 341f
Identification, 189, 289
Identity. See also Gender identity; Social identity 
theory
of consumers (See under Consumers)
family identity, 364
of groups, 208, 260
social class and, 454–462
social identity, 285
Identity marketing, 201–202, 206. See also 
Marketing
Identity negotiation, 395. See also Negotiation
Identity theft, 70–72
Ideology, as cultural system, 516
Idle rich, 469
IKEA effect, 188
Illiteracy, 73
Imbibing idiot bias, 202. See also Bias
Implementation decisions, 336
Implicit personality theory, 344
Importance weights, 297
Impotent reactors, 457
Impression, of advertising, 438
Impression management, 202, 222, 422f
Impulse buying, 252t, 358, 393–394, 393f. See 
also Shopping
Impulse items, 393, 394
Incidental brand exposure, 173
Incidental learning, 131
Income. See also Money
case study, 473–474
consumer identity and, 447–454
as demographic, 27, 30, 45t, 250, 
 259, 265t
discretionary, 260, 447, 503
dual-income families, 364
food deserts and, 73
frugalism, 451
hedonic consumption and, 98

 
Indexes 
615 
chavs and, 461
co-creation with consumers, 189
cognitive learning and, 142
consistency principle and, 290
consumption analysis by, 379
cultural concerns for, 268, 479, 480, 483, 
485, 492, 504
decision making steps analysis by, 339
e-commerce and, 389
emotional appeals by, 181, 183–185
enhancing recall by, 157
everyday events and, 515
family concept and, 494
heuristic applications by, 355
hierarchy of effects, 287, 288p, 289
Holy Grail for, 190
identifying message characteristics, 312
instrumental conditioning by,  
137–139, 140
involvement decisions by, 188
language barriers, navigating, 549–550
learning theories and, 131
legal perspectives, 136–137
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs and, 178
memory elicitation by, 150
misleading consumers, 57–58
multiple selves and, 204
myths and, 522–523
need satisfaction by, 176
nostalgia campaigns by, 162–163
observational learning by, 143, 144
online photos and, 205
permission marketing by, 304
personality traits and, 250, 251–252
perspectives of, 29f
persuasion by, 302–303
product placement decisions by, 318, 348
psychographics for, 262–264, 266
reality engineering by, 317
relative advantage and, 297–298
religious concerns of, 489, 490, 492p
repetition and, 134
resolving consumer conflicts, 176–177
rituals and, 527, 530
segmentation by, 455
self-esteem and, 202
sensation, 97–98
sex-typed products and, 215–221
social power exploitation by, 416
sock puppeting by, 307
stimulus organization and, 118–119
surrogate consumers and, 428
techniques of, 191–193
using codes, 463–464, 465t
virtual worlds and, 166
Marketerspace, 58
Marketing. See also specific types of marketing
analyzing research in, 91–93
applications of
of classic conditioning principles, 133–139
of cognitive learning, 144
of instrumental conditioning principles, 140
of multiattribute model, 297–298
behavioral learning and, 133–134
at bottom of the pyramid, 453, 473–474
cultural concerns for, 516
demographics, 27, 31–33
detrimental effects of, 58
electronic, 42
of food, 314
frequency marketing, 140
Freudian theory and, 243, 244
frontiers of, 434
Lifestyles of health and sustainability.  
See LOHAS market sectors
Lifestyle statement, 27, 40
Liking, 303
Limbic system, 104
Liminality stage, 532
Limited developmental stage, 147
Linkbaiting, 346
List of Values scale, 272
Literary criticism, 45t, 46f
“Little Man” pattern, 48
Localized strategy, 549–551
Locational privacy, 71–72
Locavore, 516
Logos, 121, 122p, 134, 135–136, 135p
LOHAS market sectors, 77, 77t
Long tail, 347
Long-term memory, 150, 156. See also Memory
Long-term orientation, 551
Look-alike packaging, 136
Looking-glass self, 204. See also Self
Loss aversion, 353
Love, 38
Lovemark, 181
Lovers, 248t
Low-context culture, 479, 519–520. See also Culture
Low-income consumers, 453–454, 453f. See 
also Consumers
Low-involvement hierarchy of effects, 286–287, 
287f
Low-involvement medium, 191
Low-literate consumers, 73. See also Consumers
Loyalty programs, 467
Lurkers, 432
Luxury
attitudes toward, 452
brand recognition, 40, 99, 162, 175, 262, 
263p, 376, 437, 470, 538, 542, 547
influence of, 252t, 467, 468–469, 468p
marketing, 134, 136p, 395, 520
materialism, 62, 63t, 176, 177, 460, 462, 494
Macroeconomics, 45t, 46f
Magic, 521
Magicians, 248t
Magnetic points, 178
Magnetic resonance imaging. See Functional 
magnetic resonance imaging
Magnuson-Moss Warranty-Improvement Act 
(1975), 67t
Maintenance, of cultural traditions, 481
Makers, 267
Male sex roles, 216–217. See also Sex roles
Malicious envy, 184
Malware, 71
Managerial subsystem, 518, 519
Managing by walking around, 540
Man-of-action hero, 217
Market access, 72–73
Market beliefs, 355, 355t
Marketers
advergaming by, 319
age considerations by, 495, 498, 499, 500, 
502, 503
alternatives evaluation, 342, 351
appealing to dads, 366
art considerations by, 520
artificial needs, creation of, 58
birth rate analyses by, 492
body image and, 222, 223, 227, 228
brand communities and, 423
brand personalities and, 253
celebrity endorsements and, 295, 296
Judging, 251t
Juggling lifestyle, 366
Just-in-time inventory control, 540
Just noticeable difference, 108–109
Kansei engineering, 105
Kin-network system, 366
Knowledge, levels of, 155
Knowledge bias, 308. See also Bias
Knowledge function, 286
Knowledge structures, 153, 348
Kosher foods, 489, 491
Laddering, 272
Laggards, 538, 538f
Landscape retail themes, 389
Lanham Act, 137
Late adopters, 538
Latent motives, 244
Lateral cycling, 399
Latitudes of acceptance and rejection, 292
Leaderboards, 433
Leading edge boomers, 501
Learned associations, 102, 104, 136
Learning
attitude formation, 289
behavioral theories, 131–133
cognitive theory, 131, 142–144
conscious versus unconscious, 142–143
decision making and, 339, 357
defined, 130–131
enculturation, 268, 362
gamification, 140–142
highlighting effect, 158
incidental, 131, 503
instrumental, 137–139, 140
involvement and, 287f
observational, 143–144, 143f
prior versus new, 157
process of, 130–150, 312, 313f
progressive model, 481
reinforcement of, 139f
research into, 45t
vicarious, 144, 244, 270
Lecture, drama versus, 322
Legitimate power, 416
Leisure class, 469
Leisure time, 242–243
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender  
(LGBT). See LGBT
Leveling, 426
Lexicographic rule, 352
LGBT, 508–509. See also Gay, lesbian,  
bisexual, and transgender (GLBT)  
consumers
Library, 185
Licensing, 136
Lifestyle marketing perspective, 260, 262
Lifestyles. See also specific lifestyles
analyzing, 264
brand’s position and, 123
defined, 259–260
as demographic, 33
as group identities, 418p
juggling lifestyle, 366
materialistic society, 59–60, 62, 250, 268, 
398, 496
nonconformist, 417
nonmaterialistic society, 417
psychographics of, 264
study of, 273, 503
Lifestyle segmentation, 264
Lifestyle segmentation typology, 266

616 
Indexes
as innovative communicators, 427
mood of, 110
odor and, 104
as opinion leaders, 427
personality traits of, 252
product selections by, 364, 366
role of, in family, 366–367, 493
sex appeals and, 244, 245, 320
sex roles, 213, 216–217, 366–367
social class of, 459
time poverty and, 384
traditional males, 219–220
Mental accounting, 353, 354
Mental budget, 336, 392
Mental gymnastics, 155, 155p
Mere exposure phenomenon, 312
Message involvement, 191–193
Message(s)
appeals in, 319–322
art form of, 321–322
characteristics of, 312
comprehending, 149–150
contrast in, 115–117
credibility of, 307–308
good and bad, 311, 311t
making comparisons in, 315
new formats, 315–317
persuasiveness of, 189
pictures versus words, 312
recalling, 159
repetition of, 312–313
sending, 304
source versus, 311, 322–324
spacing effects in, 156
spreading activation, 154–155
structure of, 304, 313–315
Meta-Packaging, 394
Metaphors, 117, 321–322, 384
Metaphysical function of myths, 522
Meta tags, 346
Metro, 259
Metropolitan statistical areas, 220
Microcultures, 260, 272
Microeconomics, 45t, 46f
Microfame, 201
Micro-sized apartments, 451, 451p
Milieu, 434
Millennials, 498, 499, 509
Mindlessness, 142
Mindscape retail themes, 390
Minimal group paradigm, 415
Minipreneurs, 389
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality  
Inventory, 243
Misinformation, transmission of, 424p, 425f
Mixed emotions, 158
MMOGs. See Massive multiplayer online games 
(MMOGs)
MMORPGs. See Massive multiplayer online 
 role-playing games (MMORPGs)
Mnemonic qualities, 161
Mobile commerce. See M-commerce
Mobile shopping apps, 392
Mob mentality, 419
Mode, 434
Modeling, 143–144
Modernism. See Positivism
Modified rebuy, 359, 360t
Monetary risk, 190f. See also Risk
Money. See also Income; Wealth
desire for, 447–448
economics of, 447
old versus new, 470
Media. See also Social media
augmented reality, 99
beauty and, 223
body image and, 48
censoring, 145
depiction of reality by, 147
literacy and, 59, 73
marketing and, 37, 68t, 132, 266
message involvement, 191
multitasking and usage of, 111–112
personality trait analysis, 250
rich media, 113–114
as socialization agent, 144, 269
Media democratization, 537
Media literacy, 59, 73
Media multiplexity, 432
Media snacker, 111
Mediating figures, 522
Medical model of fashion, 543–544
Medical tourism, 229–230
Medication adherence, 298
Meerkating, 205
Megachurches, 489, 490p
Megacity, 41
Megaphone Effect, 436
Melanoma, 229
Membership reference groups, 417
Meme theory, 543–544
Memetics, 560n125
Memory. See also specific kinds of memory
activation models of, 152, 153, 154
associative networks, 153–154, 154f
attitude accessibility perspective, 301
childhood, 104
defined, 150
encoding information, 151–152
experimental psychology, 45t
forgetfulness, 157–159, 450
information encoding and, 151–152
information storage/retrieval, 147, 182, 289
interpretational biases, 119
lapses in, 160–161
measuring, 159–161
neuromarketing and, 345–347
nostalgia and, 161–163
observational learning, 143
organizational memory, 357
pictures and, 312, 534
positive/negative associations, 134
repetition and, 132
retrieving, 156
sharing memories, 154
stimulus organization, 118
storing information, 152–155
systems of, 152
types of, 150f
Men
advertising toward, 31–32, 44, 58, 124, 142, 
220, 265
androgynous lifestyles of, 218
attractiveness of, 36
body decoration by, 228, 229, 231, 293–294
body image of, 202
color and, 102
compulsiveness of, 80
cosmetic surgery for, 230
experience of, 499
financial management by, 363
gender identity versus sexual identity, 213, 
214–215
gift giving by, 529
ideals of beauty, 222, 223, 228–229
information search by, 340
impact on consumers, 30, 35–44
income-based, 451–454
lifestyle marketing, 260
motivational research and, 245
necessity of, 58–60
objectives of, 58
opportunities in, 30, 37, 74, 105, 131, 134, 
144, 152, 155, 186, 188, 206, 221, 
246, 260, 268, 294, 351, 361, 389, 
415, 417, 451, 495, 525
permission marketing, 304–305
pitfalls in, 31, 62, 66, 68, 108, 111, 202, 
204, 215, 229, 253, 258, 298, 309, 
320, 340, 420, 449, 460, 461, 462, 
468, 498, 542–543, 549–550
popular culture of, 35–37
positioning strategy, 123–124
principles in, 119
purpose of, 60, 62
recalling messages (See Recall)
relationships and, 69
religion and, 490
repetition and, 134
responding to, 343–345, 345p
sensory, 99–107
social class and, 459
strategies for, 549–551
Marketing managers. See Marketers
Market mavens, 428
Market mediation, 270
Marketplace ritual, 527
Marketplace sentiments, 65
Market regulation, 66
Marketscape themes, 389
Market segmentation strategies, 27,  
382, 383t
Marriage. See Weddings, rituals in
Marry up. See Hierogamy (marry up)
Martyrdom effect, 315
Masculinism, 217
Masculinity, 214–215, 217, 223,  
245t, 551
Masking effects, 143
Mass class, 462, 463, 468
Mass connectors, 438
Mass culture, 30. See also Culture
Mass customization, 189–190
Mass fashion, 543
Massive multiplayer online games (MMOGs), 
42–43, 212
Massive multiplayer online role-playing games 
(MMORPGs), 42–43, 212
Mass protests, 64p
Mastery over environment, 245t
Material accumulation, 182
Materialism, 59, 61–63, 69, 451. See also under 
Lifestyles
Material parenting, 496
Mature market, 500–503
Maximizing solution, 354
M-commerce, 316
Meaning. See also Interpretation; Semiotics
of color, 103, 258
culture and, 309
as level of knowledge, 155
memory and, 151, 152, 154–155
metaphors and, 321–322
perception of, 98
of products, 39–40, 148, 262
of stimuli, 108, 115, 117–119, 133–134, 151
types of, 154–155
Means–end chain model, 272
Means of production, 455

 
Indexes 
617 
Nudity, in advertising, 320
Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (1990), 67t
Obesity, 314, 462
Object-attribute linkages, 297
Objectification, 533
Objective risk, 189. See also Risk
Objects, 120, 121f, 122
Observability, in innovations, 540
Observational learning, 143–144, 143f. See also 
Learning
Occasions, brand’s position and, 124
Occult, 521
Occupational prestige, 456, 456p
Occupy Wall Street movement, 448
Odors, 103–104
Old money, 452–453
Omitting, 160
One Percenter, 448
Ongoing search, 340
Online advertising, 116. See also Advertising
Online communities, 430–431
Online decision making, 346–347. See also 
 Decision making
Online gambling, 81, 388
Online gated communities, 466
Online predators, 81p
Online shopping, 388–389. See also Shopping
Online social capital, 466
Openness to experience, 250, 250t
Open rates, 382
Operant conditioning. See Instrumental 
 conditioning
Opinion leaders/leadership, 252t, 426–430, 
437–438
Opinion mining, 185
Opinion seekers, 428
Opportunity cost, 153
Opportunity recognition, 340, 341f
Organ donors, 81
Organic foods, 76p
Organizational buyers, 357
Organizational climate, 357
Organizational decision making. See also 
 Decision making
B2B decision making, 357–360
B2B e-commerce, 42, 360–361
consumer versus, 358
dimensions of, 358
family, 29, 357, 361–367
strategies for, 359–360, 360t
Outcomes, 300, 340f. See also Postpurchase 
evaluation
Overprivileged consumers, 459. See also  
 Consumers
Package schematics, 118
Packaging
brand personality of, 258
look-alike, 136
market beliefs, 355t
novelty of, 116
schema of, 117
shrinkage of, 107
Paid influencer programs, 307
Panache, 462
Pandering, 309
Paparazzi, 535
Paradigm, 46
Paradigm shift, 46
Paradox of fashion, 542
Paradox of low involvement, 323
Parental yielding, 496
Mystery ads, 158
Myths, 522–523
Nag factor, 496
Nanofame, 201
Narcissism versus intimacy, 498
Narratives, 151–152, 548
Narrative transportation, 191
Narrowcast, 305
National character, 550
National Environmental Policy Act (1969), 67t
National Traffic and Safety Act (1958), 67t
Native advertising, 307. See also Advertising
Natural lifestyles, 77t
Natural user interface, 105, 106p
Near field communications, 388
Need for Touch scale, 105
Needs
for affiliation, 177, 388
artificial, 58
biological, 173
classifying, 177–179
defined, 40, 174
motivation and (See Motivation)
for power, 177
recognizing, 340, 341f
wants versus, 40–41, 58–63, 174–175
worldview and, 456
Negative affect, 183–185
Negative reference group, 417
Negative reinforcement, 137, 138, 139f, 175
Negative state relief, 181
Negative word-of-mouth, 425–426. See also 
Communication
Neglecting parents, 145
Negotiation
in families, 357, 364
power of, 378
in purchase decisions, 379
Neo-Freudian theories, 246
Neo-Personality Inventory, 250
Netizens, 43
Net neutrality, 43
Network effects, 433
Neuroendocrinological science, 214, 223
Neuromarketing, 343–345, 345f
Neuroticism, 250, 250t, 252t
New message formats, 315–317
New task, 359–360, 360t
New vintage, 317
Nodes, 432
Nonassertive people, 395
Noncompensatory rule, 351–352
Nonconscious procedural knowledge, 142
Nongovernmental organization, 75p, 474
Nonhuman endorsers, 309–311
Nonmaterialistic society, 417
Nonsense syllables, 134
Nontraditional males, 219–220. See also Men
Noor index, 492
Normative belief, 299
Normative influence, 299
Normcore, 540, 541p
Norms, 419
Nostalgia, 161–163
Nostalgia index, 161
Nostalgic attachment, 38
Nouveau riche, 453, 469
Novelty, of stimulus, 116–117, 191, 192p. See 
also Stimuli
Novice consumers, 342. See also Consumers
Nuclear family, 493, 515. See also Families
Nudge, 354
showcasing, 446
social class and, 457
spending, 447–451
Monomorphic, 427
Mood
altering, 110, 180–181
color and, 100
decision making and, 191, 379–382
defined, 180
expression of, 185
improving, 66, 387p
marketing and, 181, 287–288
shopping experience and, 385–387
state-dependent retrieval and, 157
Mood congruency, 181
Moral purity, 245t
Mores, 269, 270
Morning Morality Effect, 338
Motivation
activity engagement and, 179p
archetypes in, 246, 247f, 248t
case study, 196
conflicts in, 175–177, 176f
consumer involvement and, 186
consumer needs classification and, 177–179
defined, 173
degree of, 174
direction of, 174–177
episodic memory and, 151
Freudian theory and, 244
grassroots efforts in, 422
information search and, 341
needs versus wants, 40–41, 174–175
in observational learning, 143f
process of, 172–179
range of, 40
reference groups and, 417
for shopping, 387–388
strength of, 173–174
Motivational research, 244–246, 245t
Motivation to comply, 299
Movement(s)
beard movement, 227
civil rights, 480
cosplay movement, 260, 260p
cultural, 481, 516–519
culture jamming, 67
defined, 481
evangelical movement, 490
in fashion, 540 (See also Fashion)
Fat Acceptance Movement, 227
Free Speech movement, 500
green movement, 76
Occupy Wall Street movement, 448
Pro-ana movement, 227
social media revolution, 315 (See also  
Social media)
Surge Movement, 162
third gender movement, 221, 221p
Well-Being Movement, 61, 61p
Multiattribute attitude models, 296–298, 298t
Multiculturalism, 33, 487. See also Culture
Multiple-intelligence theory, 149
Multiple pathway anchoring and adjustment 
model, 302
Multiple selves, 203–204, 203p
Multiple-store perspective, 152
Multitasking (multitaskers), 111–114, 499
Music industry, cultural specialists in, 518, 519t
Muslims, 202, 270, 301, 489, 492p, 546, 550. 
See also Islamic marketing
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, 251, 251t
Mystery, consumption motives, 245t

618 
Indexes
Potent actors, 457
Potlatch ceremony, 470–471, 524
Power
of attitudes, 285–286
color and, 102, 102p, 115
consumption motives for, 245t
culture jamming and, 67
family decision making and, 363
need for, 177
of nostalgia, 161–163
social power of groups, 415–416, 426
star power, 308–309
Power distance, 551
Power posing, 210
Power users, 438
Pragmatism, idealism versus, 498
Precariat, 461
Prediction markets, 360–361
Preoperational stage of development, 147
Preparing for battle ritual, 526
Prepurchase search, 340
Presentation stage, 529
Prestige–exclusivity effect, 542
Pretailers, 389
Price leadership, 123
Price-quality relationship, 356
Priming, 142, 354
Principle of cognitive consistency, 290
Principle of Least Interest, 419
Priority plan, 153
Private response, 64
PRIZM system, 504, 504t
Proactive interference, 157
Pro-ana movement, 227
Problem recognition, 339–340, 340f, 341f
Problem solving
consumers and, 335, 339, 356–357
by families, 362
high involvement and, 286
organizations and, 359–360
product labels and, 340
Process Communication Model, 246
Product/attribute linkages, 298
Product authenticity, 351, 351p
Product category, 155
Product class, 124
Product complementarity, 262
Product disposal, 397–399
Product involvement, 188–191, 192p, 363
Production processes, 143f
Productivity orientation, 175
Product labels, 340
Product line extension, 136
Product personalization, 249
Product placement, 317–318
Products
advergaming and, 318–319
attitudes/relationships toward, 38, 285
attributes of, 266, 299p
brand personalities of, 253–258
categorizing, 155, 347–352, 348f
cheap imitations, 133
choosing, 340f, 342–343, 509, 517–518
consumer rights, 64–70
counterfeit, 83
cradle to cradle, 74
deethnicization of, 482
depth interviews for, 244
design of, 288p
environmentally friendly, 30
extension of self, 208–210
gender identity and, 213, 215p, 509
hybrid products, 347
id versus ego, 244
Personality traits, 249
Personal selection factors, 115
Personal selling, 358. See also Advertising
Person-segmentation matrix, 383t
Persuasion
in advertising, 149, 304
attitude changing, 302–304
in blogs, 304, 373, 425
case study, 328
central route to, 323
defined, 302
disgust and, 183
Elaboration Likelihood Model of, 323f
in message(s), 189
peripheral route to, 323–324
subliminal, 110
Petroleum-based plastic (PET), 404
Pets, 409–411, 495–496
Phablets, 388
Phallic symbols, 244
Phantom limb syndrome, 80
Phantom Vibration Syndrome, 80
Phishing, 71
Phonemes, 104
Physical environment, 108, 379, 382, 391, 
393. See also Environmental cues
Physical risk, 190f. See also Risk
Physical self, decoration of, 228. See also  
Body image
Physiological needs, 178
Pictorial cues, verbal cues versus, 158–159, 159p
Pictures, in messages/advertising, 152, 312, 354
Piercings. See under Body image
Piggybacking strategy, 133
Pioneering brands, 156
Place-based subcultures, 504. See also Culture
Planning orientation (dimension of time), 384
Plastic, recycling, 404–405
Plastic surgery. See Cosmetic surgery
Play, need for, 177
Pleasure levels, shopping and, 385
Pleasure principle, 243
Pledge of Allegiance, 535
Plinking, 319
Plus-size consumers, 226. See also  Consumers
Plutonomy, 448
Point-of-purchase (POP) stimuli, 287, 379f, 
394–395. See also Stimuli
Political consumerism, 49
Polychronic orientation (dimension of time), 384
Polymorphic, 427
Popular culture, 35–37
Pop-up stores, 389
Portals, 346
Poseurs, 470, 471f
Position, of stimulus, 115–116. See also Stimuli
Positioning
for advertising, 115
perceptual positioning, 123
of products, 93, 117–118, 266, 348, 349p
repositioning, 253–254
Positioning strategy, 123, 348
Positive affect, 181–183
Positive reference group, 417
Positive reinforcement, 137, 138p, 139f. See also 
Reward power
Positivism, 46, 47, 48t
Positivity. See Self-concept
Postdecision dissonance, 176, 290
Postmodernism. See Interpretivism
Postpurchase activities, 379f
Postpurchase evaluation, 343
Postpurchase satisfaction, 397
Post-traumatic stress disorder, 72
Parents
child care, 365
consumer socialization and, 144–145, 146f, 
268, 308
family structure, 32
fashion suicide and, 29
influence of, 144–145
locational privacy and, 71
parenting styles, 145
privacy concerns, 71, 150
as reference groups, 417
social media and, 154, 364, 430
subliminal messages and, 110
Parody display, 471, 541
Participatory action research (PAR), 68
Partners, in communication, 305. See also 
 Communication
Parvenus, 470, 471f
Pastiche, 47
Patricians, 470, 471f
Pay-per-view television, 305
Peak experiences, 178
Pecking order, 455
Peer-to-peer (P2P) commerce, 397
Peniaphobia, 447
Perceived age, 503
Perceived risk, 188, 189. See also Risk
Perceiving, 251t
Perception
attention, 111–117
defined, 98
exposure, 108–111
interpretation, 117–124
of messages, 304
overview of, 108f
sensation, 96–98
sensory systems, 98, 108–110
stages of, 108–124
subliminal, 110–111
vignette, 96
Perceptual defense, 115
Perceptual positioning, 123–124
Perceptual selection, 114
Perceptual vigilance, 115
Peripheral cues, 323, 324
Peripheral route to persuasion, 323–324
Perishable messages, 305
Permission marketing, 304–305. See also 
Marketing
Perseverance, 551
Personal accomplishment, 177
Personal Data Notification & Protection Act 
(2015), 70
Personal health, 77t
Personality
analyzing, 246
archetypes in, 246
Big Five dimensions, 250–251, 250t
of brands, 27, 40, 118, 206, 253–258, 254p, 
256p, 257p
cultural (See Culture)
defined, 243
Freudian theory, 243–246
implicit personality theory, 344
inferences about, 206
influence of, 252t
motivational research, 244–246, 245t
neo-Freudian theories, 246
psychogenic needs and, 177
self-concept and, 206
source attractiveness and, 308
store image and, 390, 391
thrifty versus stingy, 480
trait theory, 246, 249–250

 
Indexes 
619 
myth versus, 544
popular culture versus, 488p
trust in, 205
Religious Right, 58
Religious subcultures, 486–492. See also 
Culture
Reluctant Emigrants, 448
Repetition, 132, 134, 312–313
Repetitive exposure, 393
Reporting bias, 308, 314. See also Bias
Repositioning, 253–254
Reputational method, 459
Reputation economy, 466
Resistance to cultural change, 481
Resonance, 321–322
Resource scarcity of money, 153
Response bias, 160. See also Bias
Responsibility, family decision making  
and, 363
Restraint, indulgence versus, 551
Restricted codes, 464, 465t
Retailing, as theater, 389–392
Retail theming, 389
Retail therapy, 173
Retention, 143f. See also Learning; Memo
Retirement
consumers in, 502–503
income and, 494
in Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, 179f
rituals in, 524, 524p
saving for, 354, 456
wedding effects on, 471
Retrieval, memory, 150, 155, 156, 157. See also 
Recall
Retroactive interference, 157
Retro brand, 161
Reverse innovation, 539
Reviews. See Customer reviews
Revolutionary innovation, 539
Reward, consumption motives, 245t
Reward power, 416. See also Positive  
reinforcement
Rich media, 113–114
Ridicule, 498
Risk
decision making and, 358, 362t
to health, 49
kinds of, 189, 190f
perceived, 188
to privacy, 70
reducing, 306, 540
Risk capital, 189
Rites of passage, 531–532
Ritual artifacts, 524, 527
Rituals, 523–532, 536. See also specific rituals
Ritual script, 524, 527
Robots, 53, 525, 525p
Rokeach Value Survey, 272, 273t
Role identities, 203
Role-playing games, 434
Role-relaxed consumers, 419. See also  
Consumers
Role theory, 37
Romanticism, 252t
Roommates, decision making by, 363p
Sacralization, 533–534
Sacred consumption, 533, 534–535, 536–537, 
536p. See also Consumption
Sacred events, 535
Sacred people, 534–535
Sacred places, 534
Sadvertising, 181. See also Advertising
Safety needs, 178, 178p
demand for, 67–68, 399
hedonic consumption and, 98
importance of, 124, 133, 255, 397
look-alike packaging and, 136
perceptions of, 344
price and, 354, 355t, 356
rating, 347
successful products and, 39, 299p, 304
Quality management. See Total quality  
management
Quantitative surveys, 245
Queuing theory, 385
Quiet signals, 470, 471f
Race, as demographic, 33
Racial stereotypes, 223, 487. See also  
Stereotypes
Racial subcultures, 479–486. See also  
Culture
Radar, 337
Ramadan, 491, 492, 537
Rational appeals, 319
Rationalization, 176
Rational perspective, 339
Reactor, 246
Reader-response theory, 253
Reality engineering, 317–319
Reality principle, 243
Real self. See Self
Real-time bidding, 71
Rebellion versus conformity, 498, 499
Rebel model, 217
Recall. See also Memory
ability to, 155, 156
episodic memories and, 151
familiarity and, 157–158
measuring, 115, 159–161
pictorial versus verbal cues, 158–159
product recalls, 67, 67t, 157, 491
recognition versus, 159–160
repetition and, 134
salience and, 158
testing, 104
thinking versus feeling, 319, 320
Receivers, 304
Reciprocity, 303, 528
Reciprocity norm, 529
Reclamation, 468
Recognition, 159–160, 318
Recognition test, 160
Recommerce, 399
Recycling, 398–399, 399p
Red Bull Flugtag, 276
Red market, 81
Red Sneakers Effect, 419
Reference groups, 416, 417, 417p
Referent power, 416
Referral behavior, 430. See also Behavior
Reformulation stage, 529
Refutational arguments, 316
Regulatory agencies, 68t
Reinforcement, 139f. See also specific kinds of 
reinforcement
Relationship marketing, 33, 38. See also 
 Marketing
Relative advantage, 297–298, 540
Relative differences, 109
Relevance, adaptation and, 115
Religion
celebrity endorsements and, 296
consumption and, 489
desacralization of, 537
influence of, 479, 490, 492, 517, 548
marketing and, 486–487
knowledge of, 341
locating in store, 349
market beliefs, 355t
materialistic nature of, 62
meaning of, 39–40, 120
as memory markers, 161
neuromarketing of, 214
personalizing, 188, 249
place-based subcultures and, 504
placement of, 317–318
positioning, 93, 117–118, 266, 348, 349p
properties of, 61
purpose of, 60
recalls, 67, 157, 491
repositioning, 253–254
reviews of, 346, 347
satisfaction with, 62, 64–70
scarcity of, 303, 303p
self-image congruence models and, 205–206
as sexual symbols, 244
shelf-stable, 96–97
symbolic self-completion and, 207–208
visual design of, 258, 344
Product-specific profile, 264
Product-specific segmentation study, 264
Product-specific values, 271–272. See also 
Values
Product strategy, 266
Pro-environment, 252t
Profane consumption, 533, 536–537. See also 
Consumption
Progressive learning model, 481
Proletarians, 470, 471f
Prominent stimuli, 191. See also Stimuli
Proportional spending, 447
Proposition, 155
Prospect theory, 353
Prostitution, 81
Protests, 64f
Prototypical, 348
Provenance, 62
Psychic economy, 114
Psychic income, 466
Psychogenic needs, 177
Psychographics
addictive consumption, 79–81
AIOs, 264, 265t
compulsive consumption, 80–81
consumed consumers, 81
defined, 264
geodemography, 504
illegal activities, 82–83
marketing applications of, 262–267
segmentation typologies, 263p, 266
studies in, 264
value-expressive attitudes, 285
Psychological function of myths, 522
Psychological models of fashion, 541
Psychological risk, 190f. See also Risk
Psychological threat, 207
Psychological time, 384
Psychophysics, 108
P2P commerce. See Peer-to-peer (P2P) commerce
Public self-consciousness, 204–205
Punishment, 137, 138, 139f
Puns, 346
Purchase environment, 379f
Purchase momentum, 335
Purchasing power, 453, 462, 487
Pure Food and Drug Act (1906), 66
Quality
archetypes of, 248t
brand and, 124, 298

620 
Indexes
inducement to, 150, 228p
in-store decision making, 334–335, 392–395
motives for, 387–388
pleasure in, 80, 252t
retain storefronts and, 391
salesperson and, 395
spontaneous, 393–394
store image, 390, 391
as theater, 389–393
as therapy, 173
touch and, 105
Shopping orientation, 387
Short-term memory, 150f. See also Memory
Shotgun approach, 252
Showrooming, 389
Shrinkage, 82, 108
Signs, 120, 121f
Silent Generation, 495
Silent Spring (Carson), 68
Simile, 321
Similiarity principle, 119, 120p
Simple additive rule, 351
Simulation games, 434
Sincerity, 307
Single’s Day, 530
Situational effects, on consumer behavior, 
379–385
Situational factors, memory and, 156
Situational involvement, 193
Situational self-image, 382. See also  
Self-esteem
Size, of stimulus, 115. See also Stimuli
Skateboarding, 537
Skepticism, 189
Skin cancer, 229
Slackers. See Generation X
Slacktivism, 68
Sleeper effect, 307
Smart billboard. See Billboards
Smoking. See Cigarette smoking
Snail mail, 306
Snob effect, 542
Social acceptance, 143, 245t
Social attractiveness, 144
Social bottom line, 74
Social capital, 462–471
Social class
around the world, 459–462
case study, 473–474
codes, 463–464
consumer identity and, 454–462
defined, 455
as demographic, 32–33
exclusivity, 465
family unit and, 493
income and, 32–33, 449, 452, 457, 
473–474
living room clusters and, 464f
measuring, 457–459
recession and (See Great Recession)
segmentation by, 32p
status symbols and, 467–471
stratification of, 455–457, 462
structure of, 454–455, 460–462
taste culture, 463, 464
worldview and, 456
Social comparison, 202
Social contagion effect, 440
Social default, 143
Social dimension of time, 384
Social disapproval, 176
Social experiences, 387–388
Social games, 433–434
criticism and, 255
positivity and, 201, 202
product involvement and, 186
self-concept, 201, 202, 295
social risk and, 190f
in youth, 59, 86
Self-expression orientation, 266, 503
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 204
Self-fulfillment, 178
Selfie, 205, 315
Self-image congruence models, 205–206
Self-monitors (self-monitoring), 205
Self-perception theory, 291–292
Self-regulation, 336–339
Semantic meaning, 151
Semantic storage, 152
Semiotics, 45t, 46f, 119–121, 121f
Senior market, 503
Sensation, 96–107. See also Perception
Sensing, 251t
Sensory inputs, 98, 392
Sensory marketing
defined, 99
scents, 103–104
sound, 104–105, 109
taste, 105–107, 285, 290, 314
touch, 105
vision, 100–103
Sensory memory, 150f, 151, 152. See also 
Memory
Sensory overload, 111
Sensory systems
hedonic consumption, 98–99, 252t, 287f
sensory marketing, 99–107
Sensory threshold, 108–110
Sentiment analysis, 185
Sentiment relation, 292–293
Separation stage, 531
Serial reproduction, 425
Serial wardrobers, 83
Service scripts, 155
Sex appeals, 319–320
Sex roles. See also Gender
defined, 213
female, 215–216
GLBT consumers, 220–221
male, 216–217
socialization and, 213–214
Sexting, 205
Sex-typed products, 215–221, 216p, 217p, 
218p, 253
Sex-typed traits, 214–215. See also Androgyny
Sexual dimorphic markers, 225
Sexual identity, gender identity versus, 
214–215, 215p
Sexual symbols, products as, 244, 515
Shampoo buying, case study, 328–329
Shaping, 137
Shared endorsements, 308
Shariah (Islamic law), 492
Sharing common interests, 388
Sharing economy, 270, 395–397, 401p
Shelf-stable products, 96–97
Shopaholics, 340, 486. See also Compulsive 
consumption
Shoplifting, 82
Shopping
comparison shopping, 334–335, 379, 389
compulsive, 80
e-commerce, 42, 360–361, 367, 388–389
experience of, 385–399 
grocery, 391
home shopping networks, 305–306
Salespersons. See also Marketers
contact with children, 144
facial recognition and, 54
foot-in-the-door technique, 292
haggling with, 378
hard selling by, 57, 334, 336, 416
knowledge of, 392
market beliefs, 355t
organizational buyers and, 356
role of, 379, 388, 395
stereotypes, 215–216, 378
store image and, 390
Salience, 158
Salient beliefs, 297
Same-sex marriage, 221, 508–509
Sandwich Generation, 494
Satiated consumers, 191. See also Consumers
Satisfaction, postpurchase, 397
Satisficing solution, 354
Savings rate, 448
Scarcity, 303, 303p
Scare tactics, 321
Scents, 103–104
Schema, 117–118, 155
Script, 155
Search algorithms, 346
Search engine optimization, 346
Search engines, 346
Secret shoppers, 139. See also Shopping
Security, 245t
Segmentation matrix, 383t
Segregation, culture and, 481
Selective search, 342
Self
adventurous side of, 231
are we what we buy?, 205–208
consumption and, 206–208
digital, 205, 211–212
embodied cognition, 210–211
empty, 205
existence of, 201
extended, 208–210, 208p, 260
fantasy, 203
looking-glass, 204
multiple selves, 203–204, 203p
real versus ideal, 202, 222, 229
social class and, 458
symbolic interactionism, 204, 209
value and, 200–201
Self-actualization, 178
Self-concept. See also Self-esteem
as body image, 221, 229 (See also Body image)
bolstering, 468
of children, 206–207
defined, 201
embodied cognition and, 210
identity and, 201–202, 213 (See also Identity)
influences on, 209
life cycle of, 494
of people with disabilities, 72
product relationships and, 38, 207, 540
shaping, 206
value-expressive function, 285
Self concept attachment, 38
Self-consciousness, 204–205, 252t
Self-control, 338–339
Self-designation, 429–430, 429f
Self-esteem
beauty and, 202, 209, 223, 226
body image and, 226
bolstering, 209, 339
celebrity endorsements and, 295
compulsive shopping and, 80

 
Indexes 
621 
Style. See Culture
Subcultures. See also Culture
age (See under Age)
defined, 479
ethnic and racial, 479–486
microcultures, consumer identity and,  
260, 272
place-based, 504
religious, 486–492
role of, 260, 508–509
values of, 27
Subjective norm, 299, 300p, 301
Subjective risk, 189. See also Risk
Subliminal perception, 110–111
Subordinate category, 348, 348f
Sunk-cost fallacy, 353
Superego, 243
Superordinate category, 348, 348f, 349
Superstitions, 252t
Supportive arguments, 314
Surge Movement, The, 162
Surrogate consumers, 428. See also  
Consumers
Surrogate mothers, 81–82
Surveys
Great British Class Survey, 461
H(app)athon, 185
incentives for, 303
information searches, 340, 562
quantitative data collection, 245
Rokeach Value Survey, 272
syndicated, 272–273
Sustainability, 74, 268, 467
Sustainable business model, 73–74
Swatting, 259
Swishing, 399
Symbolic community, 260
Symbolic exchange, 528
Symbolic interactionism, 204, 209
Symbolic self-completion, 453
Symbolic self-completion theory, 207
Symbolism
animal, 244
celebrity endorsement, 295
enclothed cognition and, 210
phallic, 244
semantics, 151
semiotics, 119–120
significance of, 134, 209
sound symbolism, 104–105
Symbols, 121, 204
Synchronous interactions, 43
Syncretic decisions, 364
Syndicated surveys, 272–273
Synoptic ideal, 363–364
Taboos, 269, 270
Tactical communications options, 303–304
Tailgating, 525, 527p
Tanning, 229
Target marketing, 245, 265, 304, 394. See also 
Marketing
Task specialization, 364
Taste, 105–107, 285, 290, 314
Taste culture, 463, 464
Taste public, 260
Tattoos, 222p, 230–231, 231p
Teamwork, importance of, 499
Teaser ads, 114. See also Advertising
Technology Acceptance Model, 539
Teenagers, 496–498
Telecommuting, 539
Telescoping, 160–161
Star power, 308–309. See also Celebrity 
 endorsements
State-dependent retrieval, 157
Status, 245t, 304, 388
Status anxiety, 453
Status crystallization, 459
Status culture, 260
Status groups, 455
Status hierarchy, 456, 456p, 462
Status signaling, 470, 471f
Status symbols, 467–471
Stereotypes
age and, 498, 503
clothing and, 378
ethnic and racial, 223, 487
fattism and, 227
gender, 214, 215–216, 218, 219, 228 
priming and, 354
skin complexion and, 229
social class, 461–462
status seekers, 50
subcultural, 480
typical customers, 265
university, 253
Stimuli
anthropomorphization, 118
attention to, 111
biases in, 119
classical conditioning, 131–133
color as, 103
conditioned and unconditioned,  
131, 132, 143
exposure to, 108–109
interpreting, 117, 119, 123
marketing applications, 134–137, 186
memory and, 152, 161
mere exposure phenomenon, 312
multitasking and, 112
novelty of, 116–117, 158, 191, 192p
organizing, 118–119
patterns in, 118, 118p
perceptual selection, 114
point-of-purchase, 394–395
priming, 356
prominence of, 191
selection factors, 115–117
sensory thresholds for, 108–110
serial reproduction, 425
subliminal perception, 110–111
Stimulus discrimination, 133, 137
Stimulus generalization, 133, 134–137
Stimulus organization, 118–119
Stimulus response. See Behavioral learning 
theories
Stimulus selection factors, 115–117
Storage stage, memory, 150
Storefront architecture, 391
Store image, 390, 391
Store loyalty, 142
Stories, cultural, 521
Story of Mace Windu, The (Lucas), 543
Straight rebuy, 359, 360t
Strategic developmental stage, 147
Streaking, 525–526, 544–545
Street art, 520
Strength of motivation, 173–174
Strength of weak ties, 430
Stress triggers, 246
Strivers, 266
Structural event, 529
Strugglers, 267
Student Digital Privacy and Parental Rights  
Act (2015), 70
Social graphs, 432
Social identity, 285
Social identity theory, 415
Social isolates, 73
Socialization agents, 144, 268–269, 271p
Social judgment theory, 292
Social loafing, 420
Socially responsive behaviors, 299. See also 
Behavior
Social marketing, 70, 142. See also Marketing
Social media
adapting to situational changes, 379
body image and, 222
brand community and, 420–421
defined, 43
digital natives, 43–44, 498
emotions and, 134, 185
importance of, 41–43, 421, 499–500
innovation and, 537
Myers-Briggs dimensions and, 251
new message formats in, 315–317
retro is cool, 130
revelation in, 430–438
usage of, 316
Social media addiction, 79
Social Media and Humor, 441–442
Social mobility, 449
Social needs, 178
Social networking sites, 201, 485
Social networks
collective value creation, 422f
influence of, 437, 437p
popularity of, 44
structure of, 432–433, 433p
Social power, 415–416
Social psychology, 45t, 46f
Social risk, 190f. See also Risk
Social shopping, 367, 368t. See also Shopping
Social status, 467. See also Status symbols
Social stratification, 456–457
Social structure, as cultural system, 516
Social value, 308. See also Values
Sociological function of myths, 522
Sociological models of fashion, 542–543
Sociology, 45t, 46f
Sociometric methods, 430
Sock puppeting, 307
SoftCard initiative, 388
Sound, 104–105, 109
Sound symbolism, 104–105
Source, of communication, 304, 306–311
Source attractiveness, 308
Source credibility, 306
Source derogation, 315
Source effects, 306
Spacing effect, 156
Specific needs, buying behavior and, 177–178
Spectacles, 193
Spendthrifts, 252t, 447. See also Shopping
Spiritual-therapeutic model, 489
Spokescharacters, 36–37, 257, 310, 310p
Sponsored conversations, 307. See also 
 Marketing
Spontaneous recovery, 161–162
Spontaneous shopping, 393–394. See also 
Shopping
Spreading activation, 154–155
Spring Break, 37
Stability, self-concept and, 201
Stage of cognitive development, 146–149
Standardized marketing strategy, 549
Standard of comparison, 339

622 
Indexes
VCRs, 305
Veganism, 172–173
Vegetarianism, 172
Verbal cues, pictorial cues versus, 158–159
Vicarious learning, 143, 144, 244, 270. See also 
Learning
Video gaming, 318–319, 484
Video-on-demand, 305
Viewing context, 158
Viral marketing, 434–437. See also Marketing
Virility, 245t
Virtual brand communities, 42
Virtual currency, 388. See also Money
Virtual goods, 434
Virtual makeovers, 203, 212
Virtual reality, 99, 100p, 393
Virtual worlds, 43, 166, 211p, 212, 284. See 
also Avatars
Vision, 100–103
Voice response, 64
Voluntarily childless, 493
von Restorff Effect, 158
Waist-hip ratios, 223
Waiting time, 385 
Wallet stage, 286
Wants, needs versus, 40–41, 58–63,  
174–175
War Baby Generation, 495
Warming, 481
Wealth, 450p, 452–453, 470, 471f. See also 
Money
Wearable computing, 212, 213p, 337
Web. See Internet
Web 2.0, 43, 436. See also Internet
Weber’s Law, 109–110, 115
Weddings, rituals in, 524–525, 525p,  
526p, 532
Weighted additive rule, 351
Well-Being Movement, 61, 61p
Western beauty. See Beauty
Wine. See Alcohol
Wisdom of crowds, 361
Wives. See Women
Women
advertising toward, 31–32, 58, 215, 220, 
263, 265, 392
androgynous lifestyles of, 218
anxiety of, 229
attractiveness of, 36, 102, 143, 200,  
202, 308
body decoration by, 151, 228, 231
body image of, 202, 221 
color and, 102
compulsiveness of, 80
cosmetic surgery for, 230
experience of, 499
feminist movement, 235
financial management by, 363
fitness activities of, 415
gender identity versus sexual identity, 
212–213, 214
as gold diggers, 308
ideals of beauty, 222, 223, 224,  
225–227
information search by, 340
leftover woman, 460
mood of, 382
personality traits of, 243
product selections by, 364, 366
role of, in family, 365–366, 493, 496
security of, 229
Trickle-across effect, 543
Trickle-down theory, 543
Trickle-up effect, 543
Trickle-up innovation. See Reverse innovation
Trigger feature, 142
Triple bottom-line orientation, 74
Trophy wives, 469–470, 470p. See also  
Women
True-blue users, 190
Trustworthiness, 306
Truth-in-Lending Act (1968), 67t
TV set. See Television
Tweens, 498, 543. See also Youth market
Two-factor theory, 313, 313f
Two-sided messages, 314–315
Two-step flow model of influence, 427
Ultra-heat-treated milk, 96–97
Unboxing videos, 435
Uncertainty avoidance, 551
Unconditioned stimulus, 131, 132, 143. See also 
Stimuli
Underdog brand biography, 253
Underground economy, 399, 401p
Underprivileged consumers, 459, 462. See also 
Consumers
Unipolar emotions, 158
Uniqueness, need for, 178, 252t
Unit relation, 292, 293, 294, 296
Universal values, 268. See also Values
Unofficial Harry Potter Cookbook, The, 122
Unofficial Mad Men Cookbook, The, 122
Unofficial Narnia Cookbook, The, 122
Unplanned buying, 393. See also Shopping
Unsafe at Any Speed (Nader), 68
Upper funnel, 339
Upward mobility, 449
Urban Dictionary, The, 259
Urban legends/myths, 158, 440
User-generated content, 43, 44
User groups, 346
Users, 124, 357
Utilitarian function, 285
Utilitarian influence, 306
Utilitarian needs, 173, 175, 186.  
See also Needs
Valence, 175, 180
Valentine’s Day rituals, 530–531
Value, of self, 200–201
Value-expressive function, 285
Values
brand images and, 272
business ethics, 57
consumer behavior and, 27, 271–273
consumption and, 144
core, 268–270
cross-cultural (See Cross-cultural values)
cultural, 107, 309
defined, 267
evolution of, 268
instrumental, 272, 273t
materialism and (See Materialism)
role of, 267–268
terminal, 272, 273t
universal, 268
Value system, 268
Vanity sizing, 226
Vaping, 36p, 498
Variable-interval reinforcement, 139
Variable-ratio reinforcement, 139, 140p
Variety-seeking, 191
Television
advertising on, 132, 147p
Children’s Television Act (1990), 149
comparison shopping for, 334–335
as electric babysitter, 146, 147
hypothetical alternatives for, 349–352, 350t
importance of, 59
as low-involvement medium, 191
message vulnerability, 147
pay-per-view, 305
print versus television advertising, 132
regulation of, 68t
social acceptance and, 143
Temporal factors, 382–385
Temporal orientation (dimension of time), 384
Terminal values, 272, 273t. See also Values
Terrorism, consumers and, 78, 203
Thanksgiving rituals, 529
Theft, 82–83
Thematic Apperception Test, 177
Theory of cognitive dissonance, 176, 290
Theory of reasoned action, 298, 301, 539
Theory of trying, 302, 302f
Thinkers, 266
Thinking, 251, 251t, 252t, 319
Third gender movement, 221, 221p
Third-party response, 64
Thriftiness, 450, 551
Thrill of the hunt, 388
Throughput sector, 519
Thumb culture, 499. See also Communication
Tie strength, 430
Tightwads, 252t, 447
Time
children and, 146
constructive use of, 175
dimensions of, 384
economics of, 382–383
importance of, 196
needs analysis, 40
perspectives of, 29f, 45t, 48t, 252t, 384
Time frame, of attitude measure, 301
Time poverty, 384
Timestyle, 383–384
Tipping point, 544
Titles, 346
Title tags, 346
Tobacco. See Cigarette smoking
TOMS art of giving
bag collection, 85
eyewear, 86
free giving model, 86
safe water, 86
shoes, 85
Torn self, 203. See also Self
Total quality management, 385, 540
Touch, 105
Touchscreens, 105, 106p
Touch-to-speak technology, 72
Tourism, 535, 536p
Trade dress, 103
Traditional males, 219–220. See also Men
Trailing edge boomers, 501
Trait theory, 246, 249–250
Transformative consumer research, 68, 70
Transitional economies, 62
Translation, 481, 484
Transmedia storytelling, 317
Trend tracking, 260
Triads, 292–294, 294f
Trialability, in innovations, 540
Tribal marketing strategy, 440

 
Indexes 
623 
Yielding. See Parental yielding
You’re Only Human: A Guide to Life (Gecko), 122, 
123f
Youth market, 497, 503. See also Teenagers
ZIP Quality scale, 504
Word-phrase dictionary, 185
Workaholics, 246, 253, 383
Working memory, 152. See also Memory
Working wealthy, 453
Worldview, 456, 516. See also Cosmopolitanism
World Wide Web, 153. See also Internet
X Saves the World: How Generation X Got the Shaft 
But Can Still Keep Everything from Sucking 
(Gordinier), 500
sex appeals and, 244, 320
sex roles, 213, 215–216, 365–366
shoes for, 209
social class of, 459
time poverty and, 384
trophy wives, 469–470
Woodstock Generation, 500. See also Baby 
Boomers (Baby Boom Generation)
Word-of-mouth communication, 421–424, 
425–426, 434–437

This page intentionally left blank 

This page intentionally left blank 

This page intentionally left blank 

This page intentionally left blank 

This page intentionally left blank 

This page intentionally left blank 

This page intentionally left blank 

