www.controleng.com

1-800-633-0405  
www.AutomationDirect.com
R
At AutomationDirect.com we have the PLCs y
need at the prices you want.
Regardless of your project or system needs, AutomationDirect has 
a PLC to match your specs and your budget. So whether you’re 
building a simple process or a complex machine, you can count on 
us for affordable PLCs you can rely on.
CLICK PLCs  
Basic PLC Unit starting at $69
Free Programming Software & Tech Support for Life!
The CLICK PLC family offers extreme value for everyday 
applications. The compact size and easy programming make 
CLICK great for small applications and beginner projects. 
The Beginner’s
BesT Friend
MasTer your
conTrol challenge
wiTh The power oF
do-More!
Simple 
Control
Ethernet
Serial
Basic  
Analog 
Discrete
Research, price, buy at:
www.CLICKPLCs.com
Do-more PLCs st
Free Programming Softw
The Do-more PLC family is d
programming powerhouse h
instruction sets in the marke
allow it to stand strong agains
Research, 
www.Do-m
Analog 
Built-in 
High Speed
Embedded 
Help Videos
Discrete 
Ethernet
USB
Custom 
Comm Slot
Serial 
Adv
Co
(Fixed mem
input #22 at www.controleng.com/information

Productivity Series CPU starting at $169
Free Programming Software & Tech Support for Life!
you 
Are you still paying the price for your Allen-Bradley controller? Are 
you tired of the never-ending software and support expense? Has 
the unbearable cost of ownership taken you by surprise? Well now 
you can break FREE with Productivity. The Productivity Series PLCs 
are high-performance tag name based controllers with expansive 
built-in communication options and other features you’ll love at 
an awesome price. And with Productivity you’ll never get hit with 
extra fees since our software, manuals, tech support, and access to 
online resources are all completely FREE! 
Break Free
FroM a-B!
tarting at $199
ware & Tech Support for Life!
determined to get it done. This 
has one of the most advanced 
et and many other features that 
t any challenge. 
price, buy at:
morePLCs.com
Motion 
PWM 
Outputs 
PID
Data 
Logging 
PLC 
Simulator
Data File 
Management
Integrated 
Security
vanced 
ontrol
ory addressing)
Research, price, buy at:
www.ProductivityPLCs.com
Motion 
PID
Module 
Data 
Displays
Analog 
Discrete 
High Speed
Hot 
Swappable 
I/O
Data 
Logging 
Mobile 
Access
Web 
Server
50MB 
User 
Memory
Ethernet
Serial 
USB
Scalable 
PLC Line
Built-in 
Expansion 
Ports 
Advanced 
Control
(Tag name based)

3/&VZLWKDSXUSRVH
the #1 value in automation
Order Today, Ships Today!
* See our Web site for details and restrictions.  © Copyright 2017 AutomationDirect, Cumming, GA  USA.  All rights reserved.
1-800-633-0405
WRH[FHHG\RXUQHHGVZKLOHVDYLQJ\RXPRQH\
N
:HKDYHWKH3/&IRU\RX
Your industrial automation needs can vary from the smallest 
simplest machine to a complex plant-wide operation, and we 
want the opportunity to serve each and every one.
To meet the unique challenges of each application while at the 
same time guaranteeing the utmost satisfaction, we’ve partnered 
with three well-respected companies (Host Engineering, FACTS 
Engineering and Koyo Electronics) to develop three distinct, 
quality PLC product lines. Each PLC family comes with FREE 
software and life-long support, with new features added 
continually to not only meet ever-changing industry demands 
but also exceed your expectations.
So, if you’ve never considered AutomationDirect for your 
controller needs, let us show you how price and performance 
can work hand-in-hand for a better overall experience.
Do-more PLCs
starting at: 
$199.00
(BX-DM1-10AR-D)
CLICK PLC Units
starting at: 
$69.00
(C0-00DD1-D)
Productivity PLCs 
CPU
starting at: 
$169.00
(P1-540)
GET MORE THAN YOU PAID FOR...
R
input #1 at www.controleng.com/information

When things 
just work, 
work gets done.
Kepware’s industrial connectivity software provides 
secure and reliable data from the shop ﬂ oor to the top 
ﬂ oor, so you can focus on productivity. 
Learn more at kepware.com/CE
input #2 at www.controleng.com/information

Got remote devices out there that you want to monitor with your current 
SCADA system? Automation engineers have relied on Moxa’s technology 
to connect devices and equipment to control centers for over 30 years in 
different sectors including manufacturing, oil and gas, water/wastewater, 
and energy. We can help you connect to Modbus PLCs, CNCs and RTD 
sensors with high communications reliability and security.
Visit Moxa.com to learn more.
We help you connect remote devices to your existing SCADA system.
Bring Remote Devices to Your SCADA System



www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEERING     January 2018    •    3
CONTROL ENGINEERING (ISSN 0010-8049, Vol. 65, No. 1, GST #123397457) is published 12x per year, Monthly by CFE Media, LLC, 3010 Highland Parkway, Suite #325 Downers Grove, IL 60515. Jim Langhenry, Group 
Publisher/Co-Founder; Steve Rourke CEO/COO/Co-Founder. CONTROL ENGINEERING copyright 2018 by CFE Media, LLC. All rights reserved. CONTROL ENGINEERING is a registered trademark of CFE Media, LLC used under 
license. Periodicals postage paid at Downers Grove, IL 60515 and additional mailing offices. Circulation records are maintained at 3010 Highland Parkway, Suite #325 Downers Grove, IL 60515. Telephone: 630/571-4070. 
E-mail: customerservice@cfemedia.com. Postmaster: send address changes to CONTROL ENGINEERING, 3010 Highland Parkway, Suite #325 Downers Grove, IL 60515. Publications Mail Agreement No. 40685520. 
Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to:  3010 Highland Parkway, Suite #325 Downers Grove, IL 60515.  Email: customerservice@cfemedia.com. Rates for nonqualified subscriptions, including all issues: USA, 
$ 150/yr; Canada/Mexico, $180/yr (includes 7% GST, GST#123397457); International air delivery $325/yr. Except for special issues where price changes are indicated, single copies are available for $30 US and $35 foreign. 
Please address all subscription mail to CONTROL ENGINEERING, 3010 Highland Parkway, Suite #325 Downers Grove, IL 60515. Printed in the USA. CFE Media, LLC does not assume and hereby disclaims any liability to any 
person for any loss or damage caused by errors or omissions in the material contained herein, regardless of whether such errors result from negligence, accident or any other cause whatsoever.
05 | INSIGHTS 
17 | ANSWERS
40 | INNOVATIONS
INSIDE PROCESS
06 |  2017 VSD/VFD survey findings
08 |  Using software to provide IIoT value
16 |  Think Again: Hot topics in 2017
18 | Modular control system design approach
22 | How to select the correct factory 
automation controller for your application
24 | Selecting an automation controller
27 | CNCs and PLCs in the future factory 
29 | Make an interconnected enterprise 
31 | Understand Ethernet cabling 
32 | System integrators, customers, skills gap
33 | Drives get smarter 
35 | Four trends in VFD management
 
 PRODUCT EXCLUSIVE
 
 41 |  Multi-connectivity IoT gateway
 
 NEW PRODUCTS FOR ENGINEERS
 
 42-45 |  Sensors, HMI, data management, 
industrial computers, networking, 
electrical protection, and more
 
 BACK TO BASICS
64 |  Ten control system programming tips
12 |  Automation sales achieve highest 
levels of growth in 2017; Manufac-
turing index closes 2017 with strong 
surge
13 |  Digital technologies, connected 
enterprises at industry forum; 
Online articles
18
NEWS
®
Vol. 65
Number 1
P1 |  Bluetooth connectivity makes 
VFDs safer, easier to use
P3 |  Three Major VFD trends
JANUARY 2018
COVER IMAGE, TOP: A com-
pounding control center houses 
an extrusion system’s electri-
cal and control infrastructure, 
including a programmable logic 
controller (PLC), ac drives, and 
solid-state relays. Courtesy: 
Rockwell Automation 
Get credit for your learning
CFE Edu: https://cfeedu.cfemedia.com/catalog 
(PLCs, IIoT, arc flash and more)
Webcasts: www.controleng.com/webcasts 
(HMIs, sensors, IIoT, and more)
CFE
Edu
g CFE
Edu
CFE
d
CFE
TM
22
24
27
29
31
RIGHT: Controllers
may use tight integration and 
open IEC 61131 programming.
Courtesy: B&R Automation
24

To learn more about our Functional Safety Series, 
call (800) 999-2900, or go to:
y
,
www.miinet.com/safetyseries
Keep Your Instrument Processes 
Locked Down Tight.
Instrumentation that Keeps Danger at Bay
Put a fortress of protection around your process with 
FS Functional Safety Series instrumentation from 
Moore Industries. You can be conﬁ dent that it will 
safeguard your processes when you need it the most.  
Our STA, SSX, SST, SRM, STZ and the NEW SFY 
Functional Safety Frequency-to-DC Transmitter have 
been designed and built to strict IEC 61508 standards, 
ensuring safe and reliable function – particularly in 
environments where hazardous or emergency situations 
are likely to occur.
Demand Moore Reliability
SFY Functional Safety
Frequency-to-DC 
Transmitter
input #3 at www.controleng.com/information

INSIGHTS
TS
RESEARCH
Five VSD/VFD findings
Respondents to the Motor Drives study identified 
five key findings related to drives.
CONTROL ENGINEERING CHINA
Using software
to provide IIoT value 
Schneider Electric is expanding its industrial soft-
ware platform offerings to provide value for the 
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) to companies.
THINK AGAIN
Hot topics in Control 
Engineering for 2017 
Control Engineering readers choose hot topics 
of 2017 based on online traffic at the automation 
industry website. What can you learn from these 
top Control Engineering articles of 2017? Online, 
see the top three covers of 2017.
NEWS
Automation sales growth; 
Digital technologies, connected 
enterprises at forum; 
Manufacturing index closes 
2017 with surge; Online
6
8
16
12
More research details, other topics
www.controleng.com/ce-research
More
INSIGHTS
M
I
M
®
Weekly Top 5 articles recap the most-read 
articles at www.controleng.com posted 
during the prior two months.
Learn more at www.ccontrols.com/machine
Simplify Machine IP Integration
Maintain your factory-set IP  
addresses when integrating  
with the customer’s IP network  
by using the EIPR IP Router.
• Reduce installation time
• Eliminate IP conflicts
• Easily comply with your  
customer’s IP requirements
EIPR IP Router
input #4 at www.controleng.com/information

6    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
RESEARCH
INSIGHTS
RESE
IN
E
ighty-seven percent of respon-
dents to the Control Engineering
2017 Motor Drives Study buy, 
specify, use, or expect to use vari-
able-speed drives (VSDs) over the next 12 
months. Among those who do, below are 
five survey findings as they relate to VSDs 
and variable-frequency drives (VFDs) 
that control the speed and torque of ac or 
dc motors, among other functions:
1. Applications: VSDs are popu-
larly specified for new ac/dc motor 
applications (90%), along with some 
retrofit (76%) and replacement (73%) 
applications. 
2. Purchasing: Thirty-six percent 
of end users prefer to purchase motors 
and related VSDs, ac/dc controller prod-
ucts separately, while 24% order them 
as matched units and 40% have no 
preference.
3. Important factors: The top func-
tions evaluated when comparing VSDs 
are frequent start/stop tolerance (78%), 
ability to continuously operate at a low 
speed (76%), and low harmonics opera-
tion (70%).
4. Expenditures: End users estimated 
an average expenditure of $148,000 for 
VSDs over the past 12 months, with 45% 
reporting $50,000 or less and 12% spend-
ing more than $250,000.
5. Control types: Seventy-eight per-
cent of engineers are using a V/Hz con-
trol (open-loop) for their VSDs. One-fifth 
of users are planning to use encoderless, 
flux vector, or direct torque controls in the 
near future. ce
View more information at 
www.controleng.com/2017MotorDrives. 
Amanda Pelliccione is the research director 
at CFE Media, apelliccione@cfemedia.com.
Five VSD/VFD
survey ﬁ ndings
2017 MOTOR DRIVES STUDY
Sizes of VSDs currently in use
Under 1 hp (<0.75 kW)
1 to 5 hp (0.75 to 3.75 kW)
6 to 10 hp (3.75 to 7.5 kW)
11 to 50 hp (15 to 37.5 kW)
51 to 100 hp (37.5 to 75 kW)
101 to 200 hp (75 to 150 kW)
Over 200 hp (>150 kW) 31%
50%
71%
64%
62%
45%
37%
31%
The majority of engineers are currently using 1- to 50-hp (0.75- to 37.5-kW) 
VSDs; 31% are using drives with over 200-hp (150-kW) capacity. Source: 
Control Engineering
43% of companies award 
bonus compensation based on an 
employee’s personal performance 
for the year. Source: Control 
Engineering 2017 Career & Salary 
Survey
½ of end users’ HMI software 
is capable of displaying on multi-
ple desktop monitors at one time. 
Source: Control Engineering 2017 
HMI Software & Hardware Study
63% of end users specify 
servo and/or stepper drives for 
retrofit applications. Source: 
Control Engineering 2017 Motor 
Drives Study
More research
Control Engineering covers sev-
eral research topics each year. 
All reports are available at 
www.controleng.com/ce-research.
Only 12% of facilities have fully 
integrated their wireless tech-
nologies with their controls, 
automation, and instrumentation 
systems. Source: Control Engi-
neering 2016 Mobility, Ethernet, 
and Wireless Study
O l
2%
f f
l
h
f ll
Wireless technology
integration
Highly
integrated
Somewhat
integrated
Not very
integrated
Not integrated
12%
45%
29%
14%
Control Engineering covers several research 
topics each year.
All reports are available at
www.controleng.com/ce-research
More
RESEARCH
C
t
l E
M
R
M

Reliable, easy-to-install
products for both inside and
outside the cabinet.
Allied Delivers
 Innovative, and
Industry-Proven
Control Solutions
alliedelec.com
Find this and more at
1.800.433.5700
©  Allied Electronics & Automation, 2018
input #5 at www.controleng.com/information

8    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
Jingyi said Schneider Electric began to engage in 
mergers and acquisitions five or six years ago and 
continued to invest in its original software offerings. 
In 2014, Schneider Electric established a software 
department to integrate related assets, technologies, 
and personnel. The number of global software busi-
ness personnel numbers 3,000. 
In addition, Schneider Electric has 10 R&D cen-
ters and more than 1,000 R&D personnel. Schnei-
der Electric has 2 million software authorizations, 
serves more than 100,000 factories, and has 4,000 
partners globally. 
Core of the platform strategy
Facing an upsurge in global intelligent manu-
facturing, Schneider Electric released EcoStruxure 
IoT architecture at the beginning of 2017. However, 
EcoStruxure, as a three-layer architecture, is neither 
an IIoT platform nor an industrial cloud platform. 
The bottom layer includes various hardware prod-
ucts with interconnectivity capacity. The interme-
diate layer is edge point control. The uppermost 
layer comprises various applications, analytics, and 
services. These three layers are not mutually inde-
pendent. IIoT  only can be realized through inter-
communication of these three layers regarding 
S
oftware defines the future manufacturing 
industry. As hardware becomes increasing-
ly convergent, this assertion becomes more 
realistic. Schneider Electric, a global indus-
trial automation provider, began acquiring 
industrial software companies a few years ago to 
expand its software offerings. 
During the Schneider Electric industrial software 
user convention, Control Engineering China inter-
viewed Cui Jingyi, who is in charge of software busi-
ness of Schneider Electric China region, and Geok 
Kee Tay, chief technical officer of software busi-
ness in the Asia-Pacific Region to better understand 
Schneider Electric’s software strategy. 
Software, which is seen as the future core of com-
petitiveness for manufacturing, also provides value 
for the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). 
Lifecycle software foundation
Schneider Electric, while regarded as a hard-
ware provider, expanded its software offerings with 
the 2014 acquisition of Invensys. The company has 
become one of the few industrial software product 
and solution suppliers that cover process, hybrid, and 
discrete manufacturing. 
Stone Shi, Control Engineering China
INTERNATIONAL
Using software
to provide IIoT value
INSIGHTS
Stone Sh
INTE
IN
Schneider Electric is expanding its industrial software platform offerings to provide
value for the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) to companies.
Cui Jingyi is in charge of software business 
of Schneider Electric China Region. Cour-
tesy: Control Engineering China
‘
 EcoStruxure from Schneider Electric provides 
interconnected hardware, edge point control,  
and applications, analytics, and services.’
Jingyi said the existing software product lines of 
Schneider Electric includes six parts: process engi-
neering, operation control, information manage-
ment, asset management, operation management, 
and supply chain management. Each stage covers the 
full lifecycle including design, planning, operation, 
analysis, and optimization. 
At this point, software offerings already covered 
the breadth of the industrial supply chain and each 
market niche. 

Then, lean on us!  Our MOVIDRIVE® inverter 
requires zero programming. So, you don’t 
need an engineer who speaks IEC 61131, C#, 
or C++. Simply enter your parameters and 
go. MOVIDRIVE also substantially reduces 
the load from your main PLC and dramatically 
improves the PLC’s performance. Plus, you 
can even use your existing control system 
because MOVIDRIVE speaks your fieldbus 
language!  So, keep your bus and leave the 
driving to us.
seweurodrive.com / 864-439-7537
Running Lean?
input #6 at www.controleng.com/information

10    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
information, data, communications, and applica-
tions. In this case, a software platform at operating 
system level is needed to support and connect this 
three-layer architecture. 
At the convention, Schneider Electric released 
its Wonderware System Platform 2017 software to 
assume this responsibility.
Tay said System Platform 2017 was a respon-
sive, expandable, and open software platform 
designed for application development person-
nel in industrial fields. The platform serves as 
a connecting link between the second layer and 
the third layer and is capable of realizing integra-
tion between information technology (IT) and 
operations technology (OT). It is the core of the 
EcoStruxure and plays a decisive role. 
Three core values of System Platform 2017 are 
it is easy to build, easy to use, and easy to own. By 
using the platform, users may import functional 
models needed through component construction 
and application, such as monitoring, supervisory 
control and data acquisition (SCADA), manufactur-
ing execution system (MES), data analysis, and asset 
management applications. System Platform 2017 
can realize seamless connection with system plat-
form and realize data sharing and interaction. It also 
is backward compatible with Wonderware products. 
Openness also is important for a platform. Tay 
said the system platform was open even though it 
integrated basic functions like human-machine 
interface (HMI) monitoring and construction of 
data architecture. 
Users or third-party software partners may develop 
their own industrial applications in the system plat-
form, or ask Schneider Electric to develop application 
programs based on individual requirements. 
IIoT value through software
At the start of 2017, Schneider Electric released 
two key transformational strategies to become a 
digitalization leader and industrial application 
expert. To realize these two transformation strat-
egies, software business plays a crucial role by 
“reflecting the value of Industrial IoT by software,” 
a theme emphasized at the software convention. 
1. Data management: Jingyi said the three-
layer architecture of EcoStruxure corresponded to 
four stages (connection, collection, analysis, and 
operation) if analyzed from the perspective of IIoT. 
Data generation, transmission, collection, analysis, 
and decision-making could not be realized without 
application software in each stage. Jingyi said data 
acquisition was the only first step. 
Data alone cannot bring value. Enterprises must 
upgrade original data acquired to information, con-
duct knowledge mining from information, refine 
knowledge to wisdom, and feedback to decision-
making and execution layers to realize a closed 
loop of personnel, assets, and operations designed 
to bring value to enterprises. The powerful soft-
ware strength of Schneider Electric from operation 
control to operation management helps enterprises 
realize the IIoT’s potential. 
2. Software as a service (SaaS): Schneider 
Electric also has launched a cloud-based software 
consumption model for its software business, a 
subscription-based model. Users may purchase the 
software based on functional models and points 
needed. Software is upgraded free during the 
subscription. 
Jingyi said this authorization model can lower 
users’ costs and provide more flexible and con-
venient product portfolios and even bring more 
financial flexibility to users or partners to help real-
ize the IIoT’s business value. ce
Stone Shi is executive editor-in-chief, Control Engi-
neering China. Edited by Mark T. Hoske, con-
tent manager, Control Engineering, CFE Media, 
mhoske@cfemedia.com.
INTERNATIONAL
INSIGHTS
INTE
IN
Geok Kee Tay is CTO of software business 
of Schneider Electric in the Asia-Pacific 
Region. Courtesy: Control Engineering China
KEYWORDS
Automation software, IIoT
Schneider Electric expands, outlines software strategy
Industrial automation software lifecycle is considered
A subscription model includes updates.
CONSIDER THIS
When considering manufacturing software, is a 
platform view taken? If not, why not?
ONLINE
If reading from the digital edition, click on the headline 
for more resources.
See the IIoT webcast series at 
www.controleng.com/webcasts and international 
coverage at www.controleng.com/international.
More
INSIGHTS
M
I
M
‘
 Application 
software helps 
with data 
generation, 
transmission, 
collection, 
analysis, and 
decision-
making.’

©2017 Siemens Industry, Inc. 
usa.siemens.com/controllers-ce
Engineered with TIA Portal
SIMATIC Controllers
The intelligent choice for your  
automation tasks
Siemens offers the right standard and fail-safe controller for  
the full range of automation requirements – Basic, Advanced,  
Distributed, Software and Motion. Innovative features like scalability 
and integrated safety, security, simulation and diagnostics allow 
you to significantly reduce your engineering time. Combined with 
our single engineering framework TIA Portal, we offer exceptional 
value in a controller and position you for the future – today!
input #7 at www.controleng.com/information

12    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
NEWS
INSIGHTS
Automation sales achieve 
highest levels of growth in 2017
The North American automation 
market set new records through the first 
nine months of 2017, according to the 
Association for Advancing Automation 
(A3). Records were set in the areas of 
robotics, machine vision, motion con-
trol, and motor technology.
Robotics
For the first nine months of 2017, 
27,294 orders of robots valued at $1.47 bil-
lion were sold in North America, which is 
the highest level ever recorded in any other 
year during the same time period. These 
figures represent growth of 14% in units 
and 10% in dollars compared to the first 
nine months of 2016. Automotive-related 
M
anufacturing ended 2017 with a surge that matched the increase in
retail spending at Christmas. The monthly purchasing manufacturers’ 
index (PMI) from the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) jumped
1.5 percentage points to 59.7% in December, reversing a small decline in the
previous two months and tickling the 60.0% mark that would indicate growth
20% above the baseline average.
The New Orders Index jumped 5.4 percentage points in December to 
69.4%, leading a series of indicators that pointed toward continued strength
in the manufacturing sector.
“Comments from the panel reflect expanding business conditions, with
new orders and production leading gains; employment expanding at a slower 
rate; order backlogs expanding at a faster rate; and export orders and imports 
continuing to grow in December,” said Timothy Fiore, chairman of the ISM’s
Manufacturing Business Survey Committee. “Supplier deliveries continued to 
slow (improving) at a faster rate, and inventories continued to contract at a
slower rate during the period. Price increases continued at a faster rate.”
The comments from committee members reflected a general confidence
about the health of the sector, and pointed toward a strong start to 2018. 
Among the comments:
The PMI’s December reading what the 16th straight month the index fin-
ished above the 50% threshold for growth, and was the seventh straight
month the index topped 55%, indicating 10% growth for manufacturing. For 
the year, the PMI averaged more than 15% growth, with the average PMI 
coming in at 57.6%.
Bob Vavra is content manager, CFE Media, bvavra@cfemedia.com.
Manufacturing index closes 2017
with a strong surge
orders were up 11% in units and 10% in 
dollars, while non-automotive orders were 
up 20% in units and 11% in dollars.
For shipments, 25,936 robots valued 
at $1.49 billion were shipped in North 
America during the first nine months. 
These record high quantities represent 
growth of 18% in units and 13% in dol-
lars over what sold in 2016. Automo-
tive-related shipments also grew 12% in 
units and 9% in dollars during that time, 
with non-automotive shipments increas-
ing by 32% and 22% for units and dol-
lars, respectively. The industries with 
the highest levels of growth were metals 
(54%), automotive components (42%), 
and food and consumer goods (21%).
Motion control and motors
Total motion control shipments 
increased by 10% to $2.6 billion, mark-
ing the industry’s best nine month mark 
to date. The largest product category 
was motors (38% of shipments), fol-
lowed by actuators and mechanical sys-
tems (18% of shipments), and electronic 
drives (17% of shipments).
The fastest growing categories in the 
first nine months of 2017 were motion 
controllers (24% to $147 million), sen-
sors and feedback devices (20% to $116 
million), ac drives (15% to $295 mil-
lion), actuators and mechanical systems 
(13% to $479 million), and motors (11% 
to $1 billion).
The majority of suppliers believe 
that order and shipment volumes will 
increase in the next six months, with 
most distributors feeling that orders and 
shipments will be flat during the same 
time period.
Vision and imaging
The North American machine vision 
market recorded growth of 14% over-
all to $1.937 billion, 14% in systems to 
$1.657 billion, and 14% in components 
to $271 million. Each of those three cat-
egories set new records in the first nine 
months of 2017, and every individual 
product category experienced positive 
year-over-year growth for the same peri-
od in 2016.
Notable growth rates were smart 
cameras (21% to $295 million), light-
ing (20% to $54 million), software (16% 
to $15 million), and component camer-
as (14% to $143 million). It is project-
ed that lighting, optics, imaging boards, 
and software will trend up, while camera 
sales will remain flat.
Additionally, expectations are for 
application-specific machine vision sys-
tems to increase and smart cameras to 
remain flat over the same time period. 
The U.S. manufacturing sector expand-
ed in the second quarter of 2017 and is 
projected to remain strong in the future.
Edited from an A3 press release by CFE 
Media.

Digitally 
enabled 
technologies, 
approaches, and business processes are 
disrupting the way industry, infrastruc-
ture, and municipalities operate and 
serve their customers. These are topics of 
focus at the 22nd annual ARC Industry 
Forum in Orlando, Fla., Feb. 12-15. This 
digital transformation impacts every 
aspect of business, industry, and infra-
structure, organizers said.
“We’re seeing signs of positive dis-
ruption via digital transformation every-
where we look,” said Andy Chatha, 
president and founder of ARC Adviso-
ry Group. “Today’s smart, connected, 
information-driven industrial enterpris-
es are making better use of their assets 
and data to improve business and regula-
tory performance. We’re seeing a similar 
transformation across infrastructure and 
within municipalities.”
Chatha said, “Without robust cyber-
security, connected enterprises are more 
vulnerable to hackers and other cyber-
criminals. Also, today’s shortage of the 
skilled knowledge workers needed for suc-
cessful digital transformation will become 
an increasing constraint.” ARC has helped 
organize an end user-driven Digital Trans-
formation Council, which will convene for 
the first time at this year’s forum.
Experts are asked to explore these 
and related topics. Keynote speakers will 
include Kenny Warren, vice president of 
engineering at ExxonMobil Research & 
Engineering, who will speak on the busi-
ness goals of the company’s Open Process 
Automation initiative; and Jason Handley, 
director of smart grid emerging technol-
ogy and operations at Duke Energy, who 
will speak on new technologies that are 
impacting the emerging smart grid.
Edited from an ARC Advisory Group 
press release by CFE Media.
Digital technologies, connected 
enterprises are focus of industry forum
Digital edition? Click on headlines for more details. 
See news daily at www.controleng.com/news
Headlines
online
Learn more about the ARC Indus-
try Forum at: www.arcweb.com/events/
arc-industry-forum-orlando 
Top five Control Engineering articles
Dec. 18-24: The most visited articles includ-
ed Engineers’ Choice finalists, the 2018 Sys-
tem Integrators of the Year, robot implemen-
tation, data collection, and PLC software.
Engineering company acquisition
IMI Precision Engineering agreed to acquire 
Bimba and combine air-related products.
Report: Small business owners not con-
cerned about cybersecurity threats
Small business owners, said a Paychex 
report, fear cyber attacks less than do larger 
companies and have fewer protections. 
Industrial Internet, robotics liaison
The Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC) and 
the Robot Revolution Initiative (RRI) have 
agreed to a liaison to maximize interopera-
bility, portability, security, and privacy for the 
industrial internet.
Advantages of a Mobile App Based  
HART Communicator 
The HART Communicator has been around for many years, but until recently it has not  
been a true “hand held” HART communicator.  Existing HART Communicators are large, 
power hungry, and expensive.  The mobile device App revolution solves those problems.   
Now is a good time to see if a mobile App based HART Communicator is right for you.
The paper describes the advantages of a mobile App based HART Communicator over traditional HART Communicators.   
For example, a big advantage of a mobile App solution is that you can use the mobile device you already own.  Since mobile 
hardware is upgraded frequently, you are continuously getting more features and more processing power for very little cost.
The paper also examines key features you should look for when selecting a mobile App based HART Communicator.   
For example, a key feature is that it must be “DD based”.  This means the mobile App uses the HART Device’s DD binary file  
to present device menus, variables, and methods.  Unless you have full DD access  
to the HART device, you may be stuck in the field without the ability to change  
a necessary parameter or perform a calibration on the HART device.
Download the paper: http://bit.ly/2zaoYFA
sales@procomsol.com  •  www.procomsol.com
advertisement
input #8 at www.controleng.com/information

Physical Infrastructure for a Resilient  
Converged Plantwide Ethernet Architecture 
Learn how a successful deployment of CPwE logical architecture depends on a robust 
physical infrastructure network design that addresses environmental, performance,  
reliability, and security challenges with best practices from Operational Technology (OT) 
and Information Technology (IT).
Industrial Ethernet networking is advancing technology applications throughout the 
plant. These applications are rapidly being deployed from the plant floor to the  
enterprise. The integration of IT and Industrial Automation and Control System (IACS)  
Operational Technology (OT) introduces the need for increased  
security, ease of use, rapid deployment, and network management  
support. Panduit is collaborating with industry leaders, including 
Rockwell Automation and Cisco, to provide industry-leading solutions, 
architectures, and services that help companies reduce risk, enhance 
operational performance, improve reliability, and successfully  
implement EtherNet/IP™ solutions and architectures through: 
• Optimized physical network infrastructure solutions from Panduit®
 that have been developed to align with the Cisco and Rockwell 
 Automation “Deploying a Resilient Converged Plantwide Ethernet 
 Architecture” Cisco Validated Design (CVD) 
• Design guidance for aligning logical and physical industrial network architectures that utilize industry 
 best practices. Strategic design guidance facilitates effective collaboration between OT and IT 
• Integrated solutions, tools, and services to simplify design and implementation for better equipment 
 optimization and broader risk management 
Resilient plant-wide network architectures serve a crucial role in achieving overall plant uptime and productivity. The CPwE 
architecture provides standard network services to the applications, devices, and equipment in modern IACS applications,  
and integrates them into the wider enterprise network. It also provides design and implementation guidance to achieve the 
real-time communication and requirements of the IACS as well as the scalability, reliability and resiliency required by those 
IACS applications. The CPwE Resiliency Panduit solution can help provide manufacturers the guidance needed to meet the 
challenges of a fully integrated IACS and realize the business benefits offered by standard networking. 
This paper specifically focuses on the physical infrastructure deployment for CPwE using best practices and a building  
block approach from Panduit. The methodology is reflected in the physical infrastructure details that complement  
Deploying A Resilient Converged Plantwide Ethernet Architecture, white paper and  
Design and Implementation Guide, a collaboration between Panduit, Cisco and  
Rockwell Automation. 
Register to download the paper at: http://bit.ly/2kxMdRF
www.panduit.com 
advertisement
input #9 at www.controleng.com/information

advertisement
How to Modernize Your Factory  
on Your Terms
Jim Wilmot | Controls Product Manager, Siemens
Underperforming automation systems can  
compromise productivity and profits
Downtime is a plant’s #1 enemy. Thus, many  
manufacturers are contending with outdated or  
insufficient automation systems and components that 
are compromising productivity. The time to modernize is 
now! But manufacturers may still hesitate to invest in their 
automation systems because they fear downtime during 
changeover, the need for more staff training, having to 
convert existing code or taking a hit to their budgets.
To avoid these challenges, manufacturers should  
seek automation solutions that have integrated  
functionality and are engineered to migrate seamlessly 
into future technologies to lower their total cost of  
ownership. These solutions should be based on a single 
engineering framework that seamlessly integrates  
controllers, distributed I/O, HMI, drives, motion control 
and motor management using a common database as 
well as integrated security, safety and diagnostics.
Is staying with your current vendor the best choice?
While it may seem like the least painful route is to  
upgrade components from a current vendor, it may not 
be the best option for manufacturers. Many vendors  
have dead-ended or are phasing out legacy hardware,  
and no spare parts are available. 
Some vendors  
may offer more  
advanced versions  
of obsolete parts, 
but manufacturers 
may still need to  
convert their code to 
new programming  
software.
A total systems approach or individual  
component replacement?
Manufacturers have two options when deciding to 
modernize their production: a total systems approach 
or individual component replacement. A total systems 
approach is best for manufacturers that want the full 
benefits of totally integrated automation — a necessary 
step to integrating your entire value chain, from design 
and engineering, to sales, production and service. When 
total replacement is not feasible, manufacturers should 
seek advanced automation components that can easily 
integrate with existing systems while providing 
additional functionality. 
Doing nothing can compromise your competitiveness
When it comes to modernizing, manufacturers have  
installation options to match their production and  
budget requirements – enabling more informed  
decisions for greater flexibility and competitiveness. 
James.Wilmot@Siemens.com
www.usa.siemens.com/modernize
Register to download the paper at:
www.industry.usa.siemens.com/topics/us/en/modernization/resources/Pages/Modernize-White-Paper.aspx
input #10 at www.controleng.com/information

16    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
C
ontrol theory tutorials took three 
of the top 10 hot topics in Control 
Engineering for 2017, with articles 
on proportional-integral-deriv-
ative (PID) learning, salary and career sur-
vey, and automation project management, 
supervisory control and data acquisition 
(SCADA), motor selection, and industrial 
communications, among leading topics. 
Because measuring performance using 
the calendar year gives a numerical advan-
tage to articles posted earli-
er in the year, see this article 
online for links to top articles in 
August, October, and Decem-
ber, for better coverage of topics 
posted later in the year. 
Hottest 2017 topics
Below are the hot con-
trol engineering topics of 
2017, based on traffic at 
www.controleng.com, January 
through December. Traffic ranking based 
on website analytics from Chris Vavra, 
senior production coordinator/editor, 
Control Engineering.
1. The PID learning process, March 
6: Knowing how proportional-integral-
derivative (PID) components interact can 
help with learning proper tuning theory 
and methods.
2. Control Engineering 2017 Salary 
and Career Survey, May 16: Control Engi-
neering salary and career survey research 
shows an average salary of $96,045 in 
2017, up slightly from the 2016 results; 
job satisfaction continues among respon-
dents. Life-long learning remains critically 
important.
3. Hot topics in Control Engineer-
ing for 2016, 2017, Jan. 11: Think Again: 
Readers choose hot topics of 2016, and that 
online traffic points to key trends in Con-
trol Engineering in 2017.
4. Eight things to avoid in control 
system automation projects, 
June 14: Identify missteps to 
help ensure a control system 
automation project is successful.
5. What the oil and gas 
industry needs from SCADA, 
Feb. 11: Supervisory control 
systems aggregate data at key 
points in the supply chain. A list 
of industry suppliers is included.
6. How to select a motor for 
an industrial application, Feb. 
8: Understanding the main types of loads, 
motors, and applications can help simplify 
motor and accessory selection.
7. What does time-sensitive net-
working and real-time Ethernet data 
mean for the future of industrial sys-
tems? Jan. 14: Avnu Alliance members 
explain how real-time communications 
strengthen industrial systems.
8. Four aspects of good control 
panel design, Jan. 2: Good designs have 
strong layout and component placement, 
labeling, panel sizing and component 
spacing, and wireway design.
9. Exploring the basic concepts of 
multivariable control, Feb. 7: Multivari-
able controllers can balance competing 
objectives. 
10. To PID or not to PID, Sept. 1: 
The venerable proportional-integral-
derivative (PID) algorithm can solve a 
variety of feedback control problems, but 
not all. ce
Control Engineering readers choose hot topics of 2017 based on 
online trafﬁ c at the automation industry website. What can you 
learn from these top Control Engineering articles of 2017? 
Hot topics in Control
Engineering for 2017
3010 Highland Parkway, Suite 325, Downers Grove,
IL 60515. 630-571-4070, Fax 630-214-4504
®
Content Specialists/Editorial
Mark T. Hoske, Content Manager
847-830-3215, MHoske@CFEMedia.com
Jack Smith, Content Manager
630-907-1622, JSmith@CFEMedia.com
Kevin Parker, Senior Contributing Editor, IIoT, OGE
630-890-9682, KParker@CFEMedia.com
Emily Guenther, Associate Content Manager
EGuenther@CFEMedia.com
Amanda Pelliccione, Director of Research
978-302-3463, APelliccione@CFEMedia.com
Joy Chang, Digital Project Manager
Chris Vavra, Production Editor
CVavra@CFEMedia.com
Contributing Content Specialists
Suzanne Gill, Control Engineering Europe
suzanne.gill@imlgroup.co.uk
Ekaterina Kosareva, Control Engineering Russia
ekaterina.kosareva@fsmedia.ru
Wojciech Stasiak, Control Engineering Poland 
wojciech.stasiak@trademedia.us
Lukáš Smelík, Control Engineering Czech Republic
lukas.smelik@trademedia.us
Aileen Jin, Control Engineering China
aileenjin@cechina.cn
Editorial Advisory Board 
www.controleng.com/EAB
Doug Bell, president, InterConnecting Automation,
www.interconnectingautomation.com 
David Bishop, president and a founder
Matrix Technologies, www.matrixti.com
Daniel E. Capano, president, Diversified Technical Services Inc.
of Stamford, CT, www.linkedin.com/in/daniel-capano-7b886bb0
Frank Lamb, founder and owner
Automation Consulting LLC, www.automationllc.com
Joe Martin, president and founder
Martin Control Systems, www.martincsi.com
Rick Pierro, president and co-founder
Superior Controls, www.superiorcontrols.com
Mark Voigtmann, partner, automation practice lead
Faegre Baker Daniels, www.FaegreBD.com
INSIGHTS
IN
CFE Media Contributor 
Guidelines Overview
Content For Engineers. That’s what CFE Media 
stands for, and what CFE Media is all about – 
engineers sharing with their peers. We welcome 
content submissions for all interested parties in 
engineering. We will use those materials online, on
our website, in print and in newsletters to keep 
engineers informed about the products, solutions 
and industry trends.
www.controleng.com/contribute explains how 
to submit press releases, products, images and 
graphics, bylined feature articles, case studies, white 
papers, and other media.
* Content should focus on helping engineers solve 
problems. Articles that are commercial or are critical 
of other products or organizations will be rejected. 
(Technology discussions and comparative tables may 
be accepted if non-promotional and if contributor 
corroborates information with sources cited.)
* If the content meets criteria noted in guidelines, 
expect to see it first on our Websites. Content for our 
e-newsletters comes from content already available on 
our Websites. All content for print also will be online. 
All content that appears in our print magazines will 
appear as space permits, and we will indicate in print 
if more content from that article is available online.
* Deadlines for feature articles intended for the print 
magazines are at least two months in advance of the 
publication date. Again, it is best to discuss all feature 
articles with the appropriate content manager prior to 
submission.
Learn more at: www.controleng.com/contribute
Mark T. Hoske, 
Content Manager
THINK AGAIN
With the longer version of this online, see 
the 11th article, top 10 posted prior to 2017, 
and the top three 2017 covers as chosen by 
Mike Smith, Control Engineering art director. 
Top 10 Control Engineering topics for 2018 
are at www.controleng.com/magazine) under 
December 2017; help write future history at 
www.controleng.com/2018articles.
More
INSIGHTS
With the l
M
I
M

www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEERING     January 2018    •    17
ANSWERS
RS
®
COVER STORIES: FACTORY CONTROLLERS
The benefits of a modular 
control system design
Mitsubishi Chemical Performance Polymers (MCPP) 
used a modular controller design to reduce startup 
challenges and optimize plant operations for a new 
automotive production facility.
How to select factory automa-
tion controllers for an application
Picking the right hardware is critical, but users also need 
to make sure they include controller programming soft-
ware in the evaluation process.
Select an automation controller
Criteria help when selecting an automation con-
troller for motion, robotics, machines, and other 
applications.
Architecting an 
interconnected enterprise 
Automation, the conventional pinnacle of productiv-
ity, increasingly requires multi-platform connectivity to 
stakeholders across the enterprise. Learn how.
Understanding industrial
Ethernet cable requirements 
Ethernet users should be aware of the effects of 
conductor size, cable selection, and Power over 
Ethernet (PoE).
System integrators, customer 
relations, and the skills gap
CFE Media’s interviews of representatives from the 
2018 System Integrators of the Year share tips on 
customers and dealing with the skills gap.
Drives are getting smarter
in the Industrie 4.0 era 
Intelligent drive systems play a large role in opti-
mizing machine configuration and performance 
and aiding the adoption of Industrie 4.0.
Four trends in VFD 
management
Variable frequency drive (VFD) advances enable 
users to do more with less.
Role of CNCs and PLCs 
in the factory of the future 
As automation in manufacturing increases, indus-
trial controllers and control systems are changing 
the role of computer numerical controls (CNCs) 
and programmable logic controllers (PLCs).
INSIDE PROCESS
Bluetooth connectivity makes 
VFDs safer, easier to use
Variable frequency drive (VFD) product advances 
improve performance, simplify installation and 
operation, and increase safety. 
Three trends dominating
the VFD industry
Variable frequency drive (VFD) development is 
shifting focus away from general-purpose motor 
controls toward reduced installation costs.
18
22
24
29
31
32
33
35
27
P1
P3
FEATURE ARTICLES
Check out the PLC digital report and the
Control systems navigation bar at
www.controleng.com
Online learning on PLCs cfeedu.cfemedia.com
More
ANSWERS
M
A
M

18    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
A
utomation hardware and software 
was integrated into a new manufac-
turing plant in Brazil to add visibility 
and flexibility. A programmable logic 
controller (PLC), drives, and human-
machine interface (HMI) software were expected 
to help with the new plant’s operations and remote 
diagnostic capabilities to reduce potential downtime 
from days to hours. The overall design approach 
to this project enabled the plant to launch quickly 
so the company could help auto suppliers meet the 
impending airbag requirement. 
New mandate for Brazil’s auto industry
Consumers in places like the U.S., Japan, and 
most of Europe assume new vehicles will come 
equipped with an airbag. The safety feature became 
prevalent in vehicles in many developed countries 
during the 1990s. By the turn of the century, it was 
either required by law or considered an essential 
component for automakers to include in vehicles to 
achieve desired safety ratings.
In many developing and emerging countries 
around the world, airbags still either aren’t required 
or aren’t commonly found. In Brazil, a new law took 
effect in 2014 requiring airbags and other safety 
technologies be installed for all new vehicles sold 
in the country. 
Brazil’s new airbag requirement was the driving 
force that led Mitsubishi Chemical Performance 
Polymers (MCPP) – a group specializing in poly-
mer design and compounding production facili-
ties – to establish a greenfield production facility in 
Brazil, the world’s seventh-largest car market. The 
new facility would primarily support the automo-
tive market and supply resins to airbag manufactur-
ers for safety-critical airbag covers.
Prior to expanding to Brazil, MCPP had oper-
ations in 16 countries around the world and pro-
vided custom automotive solutions for fuel 
management, interior, exterior, wiring, and other 
automotive applications for more than 30 years. 
MCPP production facility in Sao Paulo
MCPP selected an industrial site north of Sao 
Paulo as the location for its new production facility 
in Brazil. The company wanted to get production 
up and running quickly to help local auto suppliers 
meet the airbag requirement.
“We wanted the start of production to coincide 
as closely as possible with the timing of the new air-
bag requirement,” said Lee Wilson, plant manager 
for MCPP. “The harsh rain season pushed our site 
work behind schedule somewhat. When that hap-
pened, it became all the more important to look for 
ways to be efficient in launching this new location.”
For the production infrastructure, the new facil-
ity required a feeder and extrusion system that could 
produce up to about 10 million pounds of resin per 
Mitsubishi Chemical Performance Polymers (MCPP) used a modular controller 
design to reduce startup challenges and optimize plant operations for a new 
automotive production facility.
John Hamilton, Rockwell Automation
COVER STORY | CONTROLLERS
The beneﬁ ts of a modular
control system design approach
ANSWERS
Figure 1: Rockwell Automation FactoryTalk Historian, FactoryTalk View 
and FactoryTalk VantagePoint EMI software provide access to manu-
facturing intelligence. All graphics courtesy: Rockwell Automation

www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEEERING     January 2018    •    19
year at maximum production capacity. Wilson and 
his team wanted the Brazilian plant to mimic what 
MCPP already did in other regions in terms of pro-
duction speed and quality management.
“Quality was our first priority,” said Wilson. “We 
needed to make sure we could maintain tolerances 
with the feed systems that were feeding the extrud-
er, as well as achieve proper distribution and disper-
sion of the various ingredients inside the extruder. 
Aesthetically, we needed to be able to maintain a 
consistent product look as material is compounded 
and pelletized.”
Accessing the system remotely would be essen-
tial to help operators monitor quality and quick-
ly take action in the event of potential production 
issues. This would allow U.S.-based MCPP employ-
ees and other outside experts to troubleshoot or 
diagnose technical challenges and help compensate 
for a lack of local technical support in Brazil.
A modular approach
MCPP chose Indiana-based Apex Engineer-
ing and its subsidiary, Apex Controls Specialists, a 
Rockwell Automation-recognized system integra-
tor, to develop the extrusion system for its Brazilian 
production facility. 
Apex Engineering proposed a solution based 
on its proprietary modular extrusion system. The 
material-handling system receives raw materials 
including various rubbers, oils, heat stabilizers, 
impact modifiers, and pigments. Those materials 
are then distributed through a feeder deck down 
to the extrusion system, where they are heat-
ed and blended. Then they are sent to an under-
water pelletizing system that produces the final 
bead-like product, which is packaged into large 
bags and boxes before being shipped to the airbag 
manufacturers. 
A compounding control center housed the 
extrusion system’s electrical and control infrastruc-
ture, which included a PLC, ac drives, and solid-
state relays. A separate utility control center housed 
the system’s utilities and information server.
The information-enabled system allowed work-
ers and outside experts to see the critical man-
ufacturing intelligence, temperatures, feed-rate 
pressures, and feeder motor speeds. Historian 
software collected thousands of these data points 
throughout the production process while HMI 
software and enterprise manufacturing intelligence 
(EMI) software allow workers to manage recipes, 
monitor processes, and identify and resolve pro-
duction issues. 
Communications over EtherNet/IP, an Eth-
ernet protocol by ODVA, allowed information to 
be shared throughout the plant and with outside 
experts via remote access. This also reduced the 
amount of wiring in the facility.
KEYWORDS:
PLC, HMI, Ethernet
How to save time with 
a modular system design 
approach
How remote support 
benefits facility operations
Optimizing plant 
operations with a modular 
system design.
CONSIDER THIS
Can your controllers 
accommodate new 
components within 10 
minutes?
The Global System 
Integrator Database 
helps sort system 
integrators by various 
engineering specialties, 
such as programmable logic 
controllers (PLCs) and/or 
human-machine interfaces 
(HMIs) and other parameters.
www.controleng.com/
Global-SI-Database
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M
Figure 2: A compounding control center houses the extrusion system’s electrical and control infrastructure, including an 
Allen-Bradley CompactLogix programmable logic controller (PLC), Allen-Bradley PowerFlex 755 ac drives, and solid-state 
relays from Rockwell Automation. A separate utility control center houses the system’s utilities and information server.

20    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
ANSWERS
AN
MCPP’s modular design
The extrusion system’s modular design helped 
MCPP speed up the launch of its new facility. Dur-
ing the construction of the plant in Brazil, Apex was 
simultaneously designing and building the system in 
Evansville, Ind. Wilson and his team at MCPP com-
municated weekly with Apex engineers throughout 
the process. Once the extrusion system was complete 
and operational, they were on-site with Apex person-
nel for a week of testing. 
“We crawled all over the equipment,” said Wilson. 
“It was great being able to see the equipment running 
and test it firsthand. We only made small changes, but 
it was nice being able to make them before shipping 
the equipment to Brazil. It helped us avoid production 
delays and saved us some long flights to Brazil.”
Once the equipment arrived in Brazil, an on-site 
contractor easily assembled the system. The sys-
tem’s power and electrical components, for example, 
were set up on connectors. Workers only needed 
to pull cables from cable trays and plug them in. 
The system’s mechanical components also had an 
accompanying drawing with easy-to-follow instruc-
tions to build the system.
The system took about one month to install at 
the new facility. This saved MCPP as much as four 
months in deployment time and allowed the com-
pany to finish the extrusion system right around the 
time it finished construction of the facility. 
The facility’s integrated control and information 
has been vital in helping workers optimize quality 
management and identify production issues.
“Operators can see trending information on the 
screen to make sure all the equipment and feeders 
are running right where they should be,” said Wil-
son. “Any processes that run outside their mini-
mum or maximum setpoints will generate alarms 
on the operator screen so they can quickly address 
the issue.”
MCPP and Apex team members can remotely 
access the system to monitor systems and help work-
ers without traveling on-site. This was especially 
valuable early on as workers were getting the sys-
tem up and running and had limited access to local 
technical support.
“I can look at any of the data points from right 
here in my office,” said Wilson. “We’ve looked at 
alarms and helped them diagnose issues, such 
as when they had trouble getting the proper feed 
rate or were encountering some initial mechanical 
issues with the feeder. It’s safe to say remote sup-
port helped us reduce some of those early down-
time incidents from days into hours.”
By using add-on instructions in the extrusion 
system’s development, Apex Control Specialists 
created plug-and-play functionality for any future 
changes or additions at the facility. For example, 
MCPP can add a new feeder to the system in as lit-
tle as 10 minutes.
Wilson said MCPP might seek to replicate some 
of the modular extrusion system’s benefits at other 
facilities.
“The next project we do, we’re going to consider 
replicating some of the benefits we’ve seen with the 
modular system,” said Wilson. “It made the project 
a lot more manageable than a conventional build. 
I could even foresee using the approach closer to 
home here in the U.S.” ce
John Hamilton is an account manager at Rockwell 
Automation. Edited by Emily Guenther, associate 
content manager, Control Engineering, CFE Media, 
eguenther@cfemedia.com.
COVER STORY | CONTROLLERS
Figure 3: The facility’s 
integrated approach 
has been vital to help-
ing workers optimize 
quality management 
and identify produc-
tion issues.
‘
 The facility’s integrated control and 
information has been vital in helping 
workers optimize quality management 
and identify production issues.’

input #11 at www.controleng.com/information
This study was conducted by Control Engineering to acquire information related to the 
buying and specifying habits of automation engineering professionals for programmable 
controller software and hardware. Respondents to the Control Engineering 2017 
Programmable Controller Software & Hardware Study unveiled several key findings 
regarding what end users expect and how they purchase or specify industrial  
controller software and hardware. 
 
According to the study, the top uses for programmable controller software 
or hardware are discrete and continuous manufacturing (22% primary, 22% 
secondary), and continuous manufacturing (22% primary, 17% secondary). In 
addition; in the past 12 months, respondents spent an average of $157,678 on 
industrial controller hardware and software—with 21% having spent $200,000 
or more. Eighty-two percent of respondents expect to buy industrial controller 
software or hardware in the next 12 months. On average, respondents plan to 
use nine controllers over this period.  
 
Access the 2017 Programmable Controller Software & Hardware report with additional 
findings and insights. www.controleng.com/2017ControllersReport 
Turning research into insights makes for better business decisions
2017 Programmable Controller  
  sponsored by:
Software & Hardware Study

22    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
W
hen selecting a controller for 
factory automation, it’s not just 
about if a programmable logic 
controller (PLC), programmable 
automation controller (PAC), 
or industrial personal computer (IPC) should be 
used. It’s also about defining application require-
ments including control basics and scalability for 
the future.
However, the programming software platform 
can be just as important as selecting the right hard-
ware and needs to play a big part in the decision-
making process.
Whether it’s machine or process control, typical 
families of controllers include PLCs, PACs, and IPCs. 
There are many differences among these controller 
types, but their features and functionality are merging. 
While the PLC was first to the game as a relay 
replacer, it remains the best choice for small- to medi-
um-sized applications. PLC capabilities are growing as 
new technologies are adapted. Many lower-end mod-
els use ladder logic programming, which is sufficient 
for most applications. More expensive PLCs are able to 
use function block and other IEC 61131-3 program-
ming languages. 
The PAC adds capabilities to the PLC including 
improved motion, safety, and vision capabilities. PLC-
based PACs also are available as a subset of this class of 
controllers, providing PAC power with easy function-
ality of a PLC. IPCs are ideal for more complex appli-
cations because of their more advanced features and 
the ability to work with additional languages, such as 
variants of C.
Regardless of which controller family is chosen, 
vendors offer a wide variety of controller form fac-
tors within each family, from small, medium, or large 
(see Figure).
Within each family of controllers, there are many 
configuration options and different combinations of 
built-in and remote input/output (I/O). There are also 
communication options from simple serial to Ether-
net. Hardware configurations also may include stand-
alone controllers with built-in I/O, often called bricks, 
which can be expanded with stackable I/O and rack-
based options. 
Controller selection considerations
While understanding and evaluating the con-
trollers’ specifications is critical—application 
requirements, plant personnel capabilities, and 
future connections are also important factors in the 
decision process. 
Key controller selection considerations include:
Picking the right hardware is critical, but users also need to make sure they
include controller programming software in the evaluation process.
Jeff Payne, AutomationDirect
CONTROLLERS | COVER STORY
How to select the correct
factory automation controller 
for your application
ANSWERS
AutomationDirect programmable controller products range from 
micro PLCs with fixed I/O (top), to mid-range PLCs (middle), to mod-
ular PLC systems capable of handling thousands of I/Os (bottom). 
Shown, top to bottom, are AutomationDirect Click, Do-more, and 
Productivity controllers. Courtesy: AutomationDirect

www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEEERING     January 2018    •    23
• Automation experience of plant personnel
• Number and type of I/O
•  Required control functions such as closed-loop 
proportional-integral-derivative (PID), motion, 
and speed
• Communication options
• Data collection requirements
• Special function requirements.
Some facilities are automation-savvy and can han-
dle a wide range of controllers and equipment while 
others have limited familiarity with newer technolo-
gies. PLCs are the primary automation tool for many 
industries and applications because they provide 
accurate, reliable, and modifiable control while being 
easy to work with due to their widespread use and 
familiarity.
If plant personnel are new to using PLCs, consider 
using a PLC that is small and simple. These controllers 
are designed for easy expansion while having many of 
the features present on larger PLCs. 
PLC selection, applications
The next step is examining application require-
ments. A good starting point is to estimate the 
number of discrete and analog I/Os. A list of major 
components—along with position and presence sen-
sors—will help determine an accurate count. 
In addition to discrete machine and analog pro-
cess functions, some PLCs have evolved to perform 
complex tasks, such as motion and PID control. This 
type of controller can handle complex applications 
such as a high-speed packaging line using registration 
alignment.
Servo and variable speed drives used for some 
motion control functions don’t always require coordi-
nation, but they still can be quite complex in terms of 
communication and other requirements. Many con-
trollers can communicate to multiple drives at one 
time to command position, speed, or torque. RS-232, 
RS-485, Ethernet, and other options are all valid 
choices to communicate to drives. Choosing a digital 
communication protocol is a better choice compared 
to a discrete I/O because they simplify wiring, allow 
more parameters to be monitored and commanded, 
and is more flexible when changes are needed. 
Data collection requirements should also be con-
sidered. Fortunately, many controllers, even the new 
small PLCs, have built-in communications, data log-
ging, web server access, and email capabilities. The 
ability to write data to micro SD cards is another fea-
ture worth having along with web server functionality 
and remote access.
Some applications require safety ratings to meet 
regulatory requirements. While the application 
may suggest using a safety-rated PLC, using a non-
safety rated PLC along with one or more programma-
ble safety relays can reduce costs while providing the 
functionality that is required.
Evaluating software programming
Software programming is about half the effort on 
a typical automation project, but the time required 
to program the controller and the required level of 
expertise can vary widely depending on the control-
ler programming software. Controller programming 
software considerations include: 
• Ease of programming
• Preferences and comfort zone
• Time and money investment
• Available training resources
• Data logging and remote access.
Simple—and sometimes free—software with lim-
ited programming instructions covers most applica-
tions suitable to use with these small controllers. As 
machine size and complexity increases, most midsize 
and larger PLCs provide software platforms, which 
take longer to learn than their simpler counterparts.
Controller programming software choices often 
relate to a user’s preferences and comfort zone. While 
the hardware required is driven and determined by the 
application requirements, software selection is usually 
a subjective decision. Most companies should enforce 
a standard controller programming software platform 
along with consistent programming methods. 
Users should consider training resources that 
are available when selecting programming software. 
There are huge libraries of technical information and 
user manuals exist online. 
Once the software program is developed, it needs 
to be tested. The programming software should 
include the ability to view a PID loop response and 
motion profiles and to simulate other software func-
tionality. Built-in project simulators can be a huge 
timesaver by allowing code to be tested without the 
hardware present or before being downloaded to an 
existing system. 
While there are many considerations for select-
ing the right hardware and programming software 
for a controller, it’s unlikely there’s a “one size fits all” 
approach to selecting a controller. It’s better to pick a 
family of controllers capable of handling a company’s 
range of requirements. ce
Jeff Payne is an automation controls group prod-
uct manager at AutomationDirect. Edited by Emily 
Guenther, associate content manager, Control Engi-
neering, CFE Media, eguenther@cfemedia.com.
KEYWORDS
Programmable logic 
controllers (PLC), 
programmable automation 
controllers (PAC),
industrial personal 
computer (IPC)
How to choose a controller 
for particular applications
Developing the controller’s 
software programming
Proper testing methods for 
software programs.
Research: see controller 
research results at www.
controleng.com/ce-research.
CONSIDER THIS: 
What is the most cost-
effective way to properly test 
and simulate the controller’s 
software program?
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M
‘
 In addition to 
discrete ma-
chine and analog 
process func-
tions, some PLCs 
have evolved to 
perform complex 
tasks, such as 
motion and PID 
control.’

24    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
A
n automation controller does more than 
replace relays as the programmable logic 
controller (PLC) was originally envi-
sioned. Now a controller is capable of 
integrating logic, motion, robotics, and 
communicating with other machines and manage-
ment systems. Performance can range from simple 
devices to multicore processors.
The distinctions between a traditional 
PLC, programmable automation control-
ler (PAC) and industrial personal com-
puter (IPC) are largely irrelevant–the 
processing power is still available. Due to 
the acceptance of the International Elec-
trotechnical Commission (IEC) 61131-3 
programming, control software has gained 
a degree of standardization. Robust real-
time operating systems running in the 
background obviate the need for Micro-
soft Windows-based operating systems, 
so the term “IPC-based control” would 
more accurately be termed “Intel-based” 
or “AMD-based” to reflect using power-
ful mainstream processors.
Since today’s automation controllers 
do more than logic, “PLC” is probably 
an obsolete term. Because all automation 
controllers are programmable, the “P” in 
PAC also seems to be redundant. Controllers are 
fundamentally computers, and may run multiple 
operating systems (real-time, Microsoft Windows, 
and Linux) on the same processor. An IPC may be 
used for control, data acquisition, and emerging 
tasks such as edge computing.
Controller functionalities
It’s become popular to coordinate all of the 
machine’s functionalities in the same software envi-
ronment, in the same program, running on the 
same processor. This allows the machine functions 
to be synchronized and the modular code structure 
makes for an organized, cohesive approach. Still, 
there is a place for less integrated control, such as 
straightforward applications, that are not intended 
to scale up.
The application’s complexity and performance 
requirements dictate the controller’s specifications. 
The following are criteria from platforms that may 
or may not need to be checked off depending on the 
application. 
     Logic
There is a fundamental need for logic control, 
which is why we continue to call automation con-
trollers “PLCs.” PLCopen is an organization that 
maintains and expands the scope of the IEC 61131-
3 programming standard and manages a large base 
of knowledge, training, and libraries. The group’s 
activities extend far beyond logic to include motion, 
safety, OPC Unified Architecture (UA), XML, and 
more.
     Multi-axis motion
Depending on the required complexity and syn-
chronization of the motions, dozens or even hun-
dreds of axes of motion can be controlled by an 
automation controller. A separate motion or robot 
controller with a dedicated motion network is no 
longer required due to Moore’s Law and industry 
standards.
     Network safety 
Hardwired network safety is still preferred in 
North America. Network safety running on the 
same network controlling the machine has become 
a proven and useful control functionality.
Network safety can be implemented from a 
redundant core on the control processor, to a sep-
arate safety controller, and then to a safe input/
output (I/O) in small systems. Network safety also 
extends to motion safety and robotics functional-
ities that allow machines to run in safe mode rather 
than shutting down—providing exceptional opera-
tional efficiencies.
Consider these criteria when selecting an automation controller for motion, 
robotics, machines, and other applications.
John Kowal, B&R Industrial Automation Corp.
COVER STORY | CONTROLLERS
Selecting an
 automation controller
ANSWERS
KEYWORD: programmable logic 
controller (PLC)
The three most common form 
factors for automation controllers
Possible application 
requirements for automation 
controllers
CONSIDER THIS: 
What boxes need to be checked 
off to meet your application’s 
automation controller 
requirements?
ONLINE: 
See the PLC Digital Report 
at www.controleng.com/
DigitalReports.
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M




www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEEERING     January 2018    •    25
     Multiple robots
It is possible for the same automation control-
ler to integrate multiple delta, selective compliance 
assembly robot arms, articulated and/or gan-
try robots along with all the other machine func-
tions. In addition, it’s also possible to perform the 
kinematics in an IEC 61131-3-compliant environ-
ment. Dedicated robot controllers continue to serve 
valuable functions because of what is built into the 
robot’s system–ranging from palletization algo-
rithms to assembly patterns.
     Machine monitoring
Monitoring a machine’s health is key to a pre-
dictive maintenance plan and reducing unplanned 
downtime. A controller can be combined with various 
off-the-shelf transducers such as temperature probes 
and accelerometers to monitor actual conditions. 
Machine monitoring can also help detect anomalies 
before catastrophic failures occur. Energy monitoring 
also can be applied to compressed air usage, fluctua-
tions, natural gas use in heaters and dryers, and water 
usage for process and cleaning.
     Data handling
An automation controller can be a web and OPC 
UA server and client. They have functions to col-
lect Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) data, and to 
receive instructions back from the cloud or edge to 
optimize the process. Automation controllers typi-
cally send data to the manufacturing execution sys-
tem (MES), enterprise resource planning (ERP), 
overall equipment effectiveness (OEE), trusted plat-
form module (TPM), and product lifecycle manage-
ment (PLM) software. In an IIoT environment, it’s 
equally important also to receive useful analytics.
     Automatic configuration
Before, when a new component (such as a drive) 
was replaced, it was necessary to manually deter-
mine and load the correct firmware version for the 
device. Today, automation controllers may automat-
ically read the device and alert a technician to make 
the necessary adjustments without intervention.  
     Communications capabilities
Today, even low-cost controllers have one or more 
Ethernet communications ports to communicate with 
human-machine interface (HMI) panels, management 
systems, programming, and other non-time-critical 
tasks. It also is common for controllers to support a 
type of industrial Ethernet for a deterministic machine 
network such as EtherNet/IP, EtherCAT, Power-
link, Profinet, and others. Unfortunately, there is still 
not one, universally recognized industrial Ethernet 
standard to provide the high-speed, deterministic 
communications suitable for machine control.
There is great anticipation, however, in the 
development of Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN), 
which along with OPC UA and OPC UA publish-
subscribe (Pub-Sub), will bring a certain level of 
determinism to the Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineering (IEEE) 802 family of Ether-
net standards. A testbed has been established in 
the Industrial Internet Consortium, with multiple 
industrial automation suppliers participating in 
“plugfests” demonstrating the viability of TSN in 
machine-to-machine communications.  
TSN is important because for IIoT to work, 
there will need to be communications interoper-
ability among different control platforms in use at 
a facility or enterprise-wide and the cloud. If serial 
interfaces are required, they should be specified due 
to the decrease in popularity.
     Form factors
The following are the three most common auto-
mation controller form factors.
‘
 The application’s complexity and
performance requirements dictate the
controller’s speciﬁ cations.’
Figure 1: With a 
conventional PLC I/O
communication response time depends
on network performance, number of nodes,
traffic, CPU performance, and CPU load; a design using
tighter integration and open IEC 61131 technology with centralized 
software management and decentralized program execution can 
improve performance. All graphics courtesy: B&R Automation







26    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
ANSWERS
AN
•  IP20, cabinet mounted: This is the traditional 
PLC form factor that has a separate HMI, and 
typically uses integral and/or backplane/rail 
mounted I/O, and/or remotely mounted I/O 
modules.
•  IP65/67/69K sealed, pedestal or panel-front 
mounted: This format integrates the HMI and 
controller and is increasingly popular with swing-
arm mounting for its ergonomic advantages.
This format can also incorporate PC functions to 
run various Microsoft Windows applications in addi-
tion to control, such as HMI, although there is an 
increasing trend for a web-based HMI.
There are sealing requirements that correspond to 
environmental conditions and cleaning practices. 
Pedestal mounting tends to be more expensive 
than panel mounting, stainless steel bezels, and higher 
levels of sealing protection for comparable controllers.
Some prefer separate panel-mounted PLCs and 
HMIs to avoid having to replace both components 
if one or the other is damaged. However, this is no 
longer a concern, as integrated units are available in 
which the controller is mounted to, but removable, 
from the HMI. This makes it easier to switch to a larg-
er screen, or swap in more powerful control hardware 
without changing the screen.
• IP20, cabinet-mounted industrial PC, with sep-
arate HMI: Just like the integrated form factor, this 
form is capable of serving as a controller with real-
time operating systems, various computer operating 
systems, and web services. The controller may be sep-
arate, and the industrial computer is dedicated to non-
control tasks such as edge, fog, or cloud computing. 
Historian, serialization, and vision inspection are also 
common applications.
     Scalability
While software development environments are 
often tied to hardware (nano, micro, mid-range, and 
large PLCs), it also is ossible to work in development 
environments that are independent from the hard-
ware. This means that a project is coded, and then 
the control hardware can be selected or changed. This 
flexibility extends to motor and drive types. A low-
end stepper or variable frequency drive (VFD)-based 
machine can share the same program as a high-end 
servo machine. The need for scalability is most valu-
able when a family of machines is being designed and 
allows key software elements to be reused.
     CPUs
There are a lot of choices from low-end to multi-
core processors, often with overlapping performance 
characteristics. Therefore, it is recommended to work 
with the technology provider’s technical support and 
sales engineering team to select the optimum price/
performance for the anticipated application’s require-
ments because of their product knowledge.
Ideally, the processors should be scalable so the 
control software is compatible across the control-
ler product line. Automation technology providers 
invest in significant stockpiles of critical components 
to ensure product availability, and migration for drop-
in replacements.
Also, determine whether fanless operation will 
be required, and the expected ambient temperatures 
where the controller will be mounted. Other heat dis-
sipation options include fans, air conditioning, heat 
sinks, and water cooling.
     Memory
Solid-state memory has become very popular in 
automation controllers, removable media like C-Fast 
cards, and permanently installed memory devices 
in the more cost-sensitive applications. The advan-
tages to removable memory are that it can easily be 
replaced, it is easy to make and store backups, and it is 
easy to expand memory capacity.
However, be careful using industrial memory cards 
and ensure that the media meets the necessary speci-
fications for the application. Different memory types 
have different service lives, which are dependent on 
read and write cycles. This is also a topic to discuss 
with an automation supplier. ce
John Kowal is the director of business development 
at B&R Industrial Automation Corp. Edited by Emily 
Guenther, associate content manager, Control Engi-
neering, CFE Media, eguenther@cfemedia.com.
COVER STORY | CONTROLLERS
Figure 2: Con-
troller, I/O, 
communication: 
B&R Automa-
tion X20 System 
provide remote 
I/O, control, and 
easy networking 
configuration and 
flexibility for each 
application.




www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEEERING     January 2018    •    27
T
he concept of automation is changing as 
Industrie 4.0 and the Industrial Internet 
of Things (IIoT) become more prevalent. 
Automation encompasses concepts such as 
zero downtime, increased precision, high 
speeds, efficiency, and proactive maintenance. This is 
powered by digital, programmable systems that have 
been developed and perfected over several decades. 
Computer numerical controls (CNCs), for 
example, facilitate the automation of machine tools 
through computers that execute pre-programmed 
sequences. “CNC was developed during the 1950s 
and ‘60s as a logical progression from computer-
aided manufacturing (CAM) and tracer-based auto-
mation,” said Ian Baird, CNC applications manager 
for Fanuc’s Factory Automation Division. “Estab-
lished alongside computer and servo system devel-
opments, it helped manufacturers to meet their 
increasing requirements for repeatable, high-pre-
cision production. Today, five main parts form the 
CNC—a sequencer, interpolator, servo controllers, 
logic controller, and operator control interface—
and it is synonymous with precision and control.”
Twenty years after the CNC was introduced, a 
cheaper and simpler form of computer-aided con-
trol was developed: the programmable logic control-
ler (PLC).
“The PLC was developed in the 1980s to supersede 
relay logic control systems, which were often less cost-
effective, flexible, and easy to use because they relied 
on hardware to perform their key functions. PLC 
has input and output functionality and can be pro-
grammed to perform sequential operations, data pro-
cessing, or simple axes control.”
However, the PLC was never intended to replace 
the CNC. “Both serve very different purposes and 
marketplaces, with their own advantages and disad-
vantages. Therefore, it would be limiting for anyone 
in industry to say, ‘I’ve invested in CNC—there’s no 
room for PLC here,’ because they are two entirely 
different controls,” continued Baird.
CNC is associated more with automation because 
its use extends beyond a simple input/output (I/O) 
algorithm. The modern CNC is a flexible, digitally 
controlled system designed to suit a manufacturer’s 
needs without having to reprogram the entire system.
“Most modern CNCs also include user interfaces 
with built-in operation, maintenance, and diagnostic 
screens. For this reason, CNC is popular with people 
who want full control over their machines, because its 
functionality does allow you to fly solo after a bit of 
training,” said Baird.
CNC flexibility lends it to complex, multi-axis 
machining in almost any industry. “A CNC’s applica-
tions are limited only by imagination. Any application 
that requires precision motion control needs CNC, 
whether that be the manufacture of watch parts and 
medical devices, or reactive atomic plasma etching.”
Simple control tasks
The PLC, Baird said, is useful for simple control 
tasks. “If you’ve got an application that doesn’t need a 
high level of accuracy or flexible motion control, such 
as an ac motor conveyor, then PLC is often the best 
choice. It is cheaper than CNC, which would arguably 
be better invested in more complex applications.”
As automation in manufacturing increases, industrial controllers and control 
systems are becoming more complex and efﬁ cient, which will change the role 
of computer numerical controls (CNCs) and programmable logic controllers 
(PLCs) in the factory of the future.
Suzanne Gill, Control Engineering Europe
CONTROLLERS | COVER STORY
Role of CNCs and PLCs
in the factory of the future
ANSWERS
Computer numerical 
controls (CNCs) and 
programmable logic 
controllers (PLCs) will 
have different roles 
to play in the factory 
of the future, which is 
becoming more auto-
mated and focused on 
minimizing downtime. 
Courtesy: Fanuc/
Control Engineering 
Europe

28    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
ANSWERS
AN
However, Baird said there are some disadvantages 
to the PLC’s simplicity. “PLC does not have the flex-
ibility of CNC. If you need to change the program 
even slightly, you have to reprogram it entirely. It 
also doesn’t offer the precision of CNC and is there-
fore best used as a low-cost solution for basic tasks.” 
According to Baird, despite the low cost of PLCs 
many manufacturers are choosing CNC, due in part 
to its lower total cost of ownership. “It is interesting 
to see many designers turning to CNC after invest-
ing in PLC, largely for reasons of flexibility, reliability, 
and cost. The initial cost of CNC is higher than that 
of PLC, but the return on investment can be higher in 
the long term because of the CNC’s higher reliability 
and control. It also gives system designers the flex-
ibility to dictate how much control they want users to 
have over their machines.”
The long-term cost-effectiveness of CNC can be 
attributed to its advanced user-programmable fea-
tures, which can minimize downtime and control the 
energy usage or output of the machine.
Many CNCs are equipped with arti-
ficial intelligence contour control. This 
means the machine can be controlled 
to operate within a certain workload, or 
adaptively control the machine for work-
ing overnight. For example, it can be pro-
grammed so it only works at 80% load, 
allowing the company to be more eco-
nomical with their energy usage. CNCs 
also come equipped with energy efficiency 
functions such as energy charge modules.
CNCs also have safety functions, 
which lend themselves well for collab-
orative operations with humans. “CNCs 
come equipped with a digital algorithm 
that looks after the motion control,” Baird 
said. “This digital system is formed of two 
parts—a real digital data system and an 
observer digital system. The observer acts 
like the ‘ideal’, providing the machine with 
the parameters in which it should be work-
ing. The real and the observer are both 
driven by the same command, so they 
should be working in exactly the same way.
“If the real system encounters a disrup-
tion, such as an unexpected load, then this 
causes the real data to deviate from the 
observer data. The machine will translate 
this as a collision and respond in one of two ways. If 
it’s moving slowly, it will stop, and if it’s moving quick-
ly, it will perform a ‘vectored back-off,’ where it will 
retract any moving machinery to avoid damage. For 
high-end machines, you can also incorporate 3-D 
technology, which stops five-axis machinery from 
moving outside of its pre-determined work envelope.”
Zero downtime also is an important consider-
ation for manufacturers looking to automate their 
processes. Unplanned downtime is expensive and can 
halt production for days, weeks, or even months. An 
undetected fault could cause irreversible damage to 
machinery and could even be hazardous to workers.
Minimizing downtime
“Although it’s unrealistic to expect factories to 
work seamlessly 24/7, we can aim to minimize down-
time caused by minor faults or errors,” Baird said. 
This is where the concept of predictive maintenance 
comes in, which, as Baird explained, is facilitated by 
CNC technology. “Predictive maintenance allows us 
to spot potential problems before they occur, and act 
accordingly before they become serious. We do this by 
employing the automation technology that controls 
the machine as a kind of watchman.”
Does this mean the CNC is destined to become 
the sole tool of the factory of the future? Baird doesn’t 
think so; the PLC still has a critical role to play. “The 
best example of this is a production line. CNC may 
be controlling the robot arms, the tooling, milling, 
and grinding, but PLC is powering the belt that takes 
a product or material from one part of the line to the 
next. The complexity of CNC does not lend it well to 
such tasks and would be wasted. As part of a factory 
floor, where simple and complex tasks are done simul-
taneously, CNC and PLC work perfectly together.”
With CNC and PLC both maintaining a place in 
manufacturing’s toolkit, it is now important to look 
at how they can be developed. “Industrial control 
systems (ICSs) will continue to evolve, and this will 
largely come in the form of specializations suited to 
specific industries,” Baird said. “Third-parties will 
also exploit the concept of an open interface to inte-
grate the factory with the Internet of Things (IoT). 
With this will come intelligent machines and data col-
lection and analysis on a vast scale, which will help us 
to identify further process improvements.”
While it isn’t clear what role CNCs and PLCs will 
play in the factory of the future, they will both form 
a part of it, even if they aren’t always working in col-
laboration. ce
Suzanne Gill, editor, Control Engineering Europe. 
Fanuc provided additional information for this article, 
which originally appeared in an Oct. 15 Control Engi-
neering Europe article online. Edited by Chris Vavra, 
production editor, Control Engineering, CFE Media, 
cvavra@cfemedia.com. 
CONTROLLERS | COVER STORY
KEYWORDS
PLC, CNC
Computer numerical controls 
(CNCs), which have been around 
since the 1950s, facilitate the 
automation of machine tools 
through computers.
Programmable logic 
controllers (PLCs) are designed 
for simpler control tasks than 
CNCs, are useful on the 
production line, and may provide 
less accuracy.
PLCs and CNCs will have 
different roles in the factory of the 
future and will remain useful.
GO ONLINE
Read this story online at 
www.controleng.com for more 
information about CNCs and 
PLCs and see a link for the PLC 
digital report.
CONSIDER THIS
What new roles will PLCs 
and CNCs play in the factory 
of the future and what new 
benefits might they provide to 
companies?
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M
‘
 A CNC’s advanced user-programmable 
features can minimize downtime and control 
the energy usage or output of the machine.’

www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEEERING     January 2018    •    29
Amit Chadha, L&T Technology Services Ltd. 
ETHERNET CONNECTIONS
ANSWERS
T
he pinnacle of productivity has conven-
tionally been touted as automation. With 
the advent of Industrie 4.0, it is becoming 
clearer that a fundamental building block 
for smart manufacturing is connectivity.
Some organizations are quick to jump on the 
trend bandwagon, and others adopt a wait-and-
watch approach. With trends like interconnected 
enterprises, the modus operandi might lie some-
where between these two extremes. For example, 
in a recent interaction with a beer manufacturer, 
the customer revealed interest in augmented reality 
(AR) smart glasses (Microsoft Hololens) that will 
help identify faulty, leaking valves in the facility.
Things are moving fast. In fact, the industry 
mindset itself has shifted a little. From connected 
devices, leaders are talking about connected enter-
prises with flipped architectures that are dynamic 
and integrated rather than siloed. Those with an 
interconnection-first strategy can connect their cus-
tomers, partners, and other key stakeholders to any-
thing, anywhere, on any platform.
In view of these benefits, Equinix’s Jeremy 
Deutsch said last year that the number of intercon-
nected enterprises would double from 38% to 84% 
by 2017. The prediction comes with the expecta-
tion of a booming digital universe, forecasted to 
reach 44 zettabytes by 2020.
The concept of connected enterprises questions 
the notion that organizational productivity peaks 
with automation. It offers new avenues to increase 
output, establish differentiation, and boost growth 
by releasing real-time information across depart-
ments. For instance, these enterprises can accelerate 
new product development, facilitate supply chain 
collaboration, streamline operations, and improve 
machine reliability, which currently averages 78.3%, 
much below the ideal 100%.
While real-time data typically emanates from 
operational technologies (OT), transactional infor-
mation on logistics, inventory, quality, and financial 
health come from information technologies (IT). In 
connected enterprises, IT and OT converge to form 
the basis of competitive advantage and productivity.
Digital infonomics (assigning economic value to 
digital information) is a crucial part of this process. 
It is slated to serve as the framework for data-driven 
decision making on a massive scale. Although the 
concept appeals to many enterprises, it has not been 
exploited fully yet due to the absence of a foolproof 
implementation plan, an enterprise-wide approach 
that rests on four operational pillars: platform, peo-
ple, process, and product.
Building connected enterprises
A good connected-enterprise starting point is 
to embrace digital engineering. This involves the 
use of advanced technologies that collect real-time 
intelligence related to product variations, defects, 
and overall productivity. While it supports safe, 
compliant, and dependable operations, digital engi-
neering also introduces new connection points. As 
a result, risk exposure for the manufacturing envi-
ronment increases, creating the need for secure net-
working infrastructure that leverages the Ethernet.
With the average consolidated cost of a data breach 
Automation, the conventional pinnacle of productivity, increasingly requires 
multi-platform connectivity to stakeholders across the enterprise to realize
the advantages of smart manufacturing in the Industrie 4.0 era. How? Look 
at platforms, people, processes, and products.
Architecting
an interconnected enterprise
‘ 
An interconnection-ﬁ rst strategy can 
connect customers, partners, and other 
key stakeholders to anything, anywhere, 
on any platform.’

30    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
ANSWERS
AN
standing at $4 million, security issues must be pre-
empted and addressed upfront. Blockchain and 
security-as-a-service are some options to protect 
connected enterprises at the people, process, device, 
and data levels. In public cloud environments, data 
security governance programs are another possibility, 
which approximately 20% of organizations are likely to 
resort to, in 2018.
Interconnections: 4 layers
Eventually, implementing an interconnection-ori-
ented architecture (IOA) approach will become the 
preferred path to building connected enterprises. Not 
only does this ensure the secure interconnection of 
employees, partners, clouds, locations, and devices, 
but also it lays the groundwork for data exchange and 
digital commerce.
To graduate to IOA, enterprises will have to create 
four layers: network, security, data, and application. 
Once the topology of the network is streamlined, it 
should be followed up with the development of secu-
rity guard rails. Finally, applications will need to be 
integrated with various touch points like supervisory 
control and data acquisition (SCADA) and manufac-
turing execution systems (MES).
Digital edge operations
IOA is all about preparing technology for the 
digital edge, where the virtual and physical worlds 
converge. Moreover, it calls for the adoption of the 
edge model by migrating applications, data and 
data centers to the edge with the support of coloca-
tion data centers. This model shortens the distance 
between enterprises, users, and partners, creating 
one marketplace.
With such a clear roadmap in place, 76% of com-
panies in Hong Kong are looking to pursue inter-
connection by 2017, while 84% will implement 
multi-cloud interconnection over the next few years. 
In Singapore, 84% of organizations will embark on the 
interconnection journey in 2017, partly because the 
strategy has yielded more than $10 million in revenues 
and cost savings.
But, nowhere has interconnection been better 
received than in the Americas. From less than 50% 
adoption in 2015, uptake in the U.S., Canada, and Bra-
zil is estimated to hit 92% this year. 
It is not all rosy, and the concerns around return on 
investment on interconnected ecosystems often crop 
up in technology summits and board meetings across 
the globe. What remains is a resonating hope that this 
wave of technology will take us a few steps ahead of 
where the last wave promised us. ce
Amit Chadha is president, sales and business devel-
opment, and member of the board, L&T Technology 
Services Ltd., a CFE Media content partner. Edited by 
Mark T. Hoske, content manager, Control Engineer-
ing, CFE Media, mhoske@cfemedia.com.
ETHERNET CONNECTIONS
KEYWORDS:
Industrie 4.0, smart manufacturing
Using an interconnection-oriented architecture (IOA) 
will build connected enterprises.
Connections increase output, establish differentiation, 
and boost growth by releasing real-time information 
across departments.
IOA will ensure the secure interconnection of 
employees, partners, clouds, locations, and devices, 
and lay the groundwork for data exchange and digital 
commerce.
ONLINE
References for statistics, more info, and links are 
included in the online version of this article.
CONSIDER THIS
Are you using these strategies to increase 
interconnections, information flow, and make smarter 
decisions?
BACK TO BASICS
A zettabyte (larger than a petabyte and exabyte, but 
smaller than a yottabyte) is the seventh power of 1,000, 
1021, one followed by 21 zeros, 1 sextillion bytes, or 1 
trillion gigabytes.
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M
The connected 
enterprise com-
bines Industrial 
Interent of Things 
networks with 
operational and 
information tech-
nology frameworks 
to increase out-
put, establish dif-
ferentiation, and 
boost growth by 
releasing real-time 
information across 
departments. Cour-
tesy: L&T Technol-
ogy Services Ltd.
‘ 
Interconnection-oriented
architecture requires attention 
to networks, security, data, and 
applications.’

www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEEERING     January 2018    •    31
Suzanne Gill, Control Engineering Europe
INDUSTRIAL ETHERNET
ANSWERS
E
thernet plays a major role in passing 
data through an automation system at 
high rates. The digital performance of a 
network is subject to active devices such 
as switches and controllers. However, 
passive devices such as cable and connectors ulti-
mately can determine a network’s performance.
A component’s frequency dictates its perfor-
mance. Cat 5 cables, for example, are specified for 
operating frequencies up to 100 MHz. This cable 
also is suitable for 100 Mbit applications using a 
two-pair cable and for gigabit (1,000Mbit) appli-
cations when using a four-pair cable with the cor-
rect connector.
It is easy to confuse MHz performance with the 
Mbit.
Cables of a higher category (class) meet all 
transmission characteristics of the lower classes 
and provide an additional performance margin in 
a given application.
Conductor size
A stranded Ethernet cable does not have the 
same performance characteristics as a solid con-
ductor. This is important to remember when 
distance is a factor. Ethernet conductors are typi-
cally 26 and 24AWG. It is always best to use the 
largest size when requiring high data rates over 
long distance. 
The Profinet standard introduced 22AWG 
cables, which provide significant transmission per-
formance advantage over 26 and 24AWG cables. 
A full 100 m segment length can be achieved with 
stranded or solid cable types.
Three types have been defined within the Pro-
finet standard—stationary, flexible, and special 
application. When using 22AWG cables, select-
ing the correct RJ45 connector should be done 
carefully as many are not compatible with the 
increased wire size and a Profinet cables’ larger 
outside diameter.
Power over Ethernet (PoE)
Spare conductors in an Ethernet cable can be 
used to provide power to Ethernet devices. Wire 
size is important in calculating voltage drop in 
PoE applications. It is also important to consider 
cable selection. 
Cable selection
The industrial environment requires suitable 
cables that have far more robust constructions 
than those used in office environments. Materials 
such as polyurethane (PUR) are often used to pro-
vide mineral oil resistance and high abrasion resis-
tance. They are also halogen-free. 
Ethernet cables are available with solid conduc-
tors, which only are suitable for static applications. 
Stranded conductors—typically seven strand—are 
suitable for flexible applications. Highly stranded 
connectors—typically 19 strands—are suitable for 
continuous movement applications. ce
Suzanne Gill, editor, Control Engineering Europe. 
Lutze Limited provided additional information for 
this article, which originally appeared in a Nov. 6 
Control Engineering Europe article online. Edited 
by Chris Vavra, production editor, Control Engi-
neering, CFE Media, cvavra@cfemedia.com.
Ethernet’s performance in passing data through an automation system 
at high rates is subject to active devices such as switches and controllers. 
Users should be aware of aspects such as conductor size, cable selection, 
and Power over Ethernet (PoE).
Understanding industrial
Ethernet cable requirements
KEYWORD: Ethernet
KEY CONCEPTS
Ethernet plays a major 
role in passing data 
through an automation 
system at high rates.
Passive devices such 
as cable and connectors 
can ultimately determine a 
network’s performance.
Selecting the correct 
RJ45 connector when 
using 22AWG cables 
should be done carefully; 
many are not compatible 
with Profinet cables’ larger 
outside diameter.
GO ONLINE
Read this story online 
at www.controleng.com 
for additional links and 
information.
CONSIDER THIS
What cable 
considerations are 
most critical for your 
industrial Ethernet cable 
application?
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M
Table: Industrial Ethernet cable, 
frequency requirements
Class
Frequency 
range
Data
rate
Capability
Cat 5/5e
100 MHz
2-Pair
4-Pair
Cat 6
350 MHz
Yes
Yes
Cat 6A
500 MHz
Yes
Yes

32    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
C
FE Media interviewed representatives from 
the 2018 System Integrators of the Year—
Burrow Global, Automation Plus, and ECN 
Automation.
What makes a good customer for a system inte-
grator? What should manufacturers do to prepare for 
an integration project for it to be more successful?
Grant Mitchell, CEO, Automation Plus: One 
that’s really strategic and is absolutely important so 
they’re really out there planning. And of course that’s 
really essential so really beginning with that in mind. 
So if we can actually paint that vision, boy, that’s really 
just a knockout customer and what we’re looking for.
Jason Savoie, EVP, automation, Burrow Global:
We are most successful when we’re able to fully col-
laborate and to fully integrate with a customer base so 
customers don’t look at automation as a commodity 
but understand there is a real value to what we do and 
invite us to the table. So when we can partici-
pate with them in the very beginning we can 
help them forecast their spend plan for five 
years and help them integrate projects into 
turnaround schedules and into everything 
else they’re doing.
Arturo Freydig, director general, ECN 
Automation: It’s very important to under-
stand what the customer’s needs are and what 
kind of technology they feel will fulfill all 
necessities. 
How do you recruit, train, and retain 
skilled engineers? Has the process changed?
Nigel James, president of automation, 
Burrow Global: We believe in hiring and 
developing young talent. Unfortunately, many 
young people do not find system integration 
as exciting as working in high tech. It is criti-
cal that we reach out to this population and 
get them excited about automation. Having 
a vibrant mentoring program is a key ele-
ment of this, and we are working to build 
processes that engage entry-level new hires 
and give them access to industry veterans.
Mitchell: There is a war on talent. We know that. 
So what we have really been doing and focusing on is 
employee engagement; it’s one of our strategic priori-
ties. We just went through strategic planning this past 
year and employee engagement is absolutely essen-
tial. We monitor training, we look at the dollars that 
we spend, and we get very specific and very strategic 
about that as well. We have co-op programs, and we’re 
bringing those folks in, and we have found that now 
employees are seeking us out.
Freydig: What is amazing in the last few years is 
that new engineers learn this job very fast. I remem-
ber years ago we needed more than one year to have a 
fully developed engineer, but now in six months they 
are ready for our process and are very enthusiastic.
What are your customers telling you they need?
John Glenski, president, Automation Plus: I 
think a lot of what we hear from our clients is they 
hear about Internet of Things (IoT), they hear about 
Industrie 4.0, and they’re really looking at how we can 
turn data into value. There’s a lot of data acquisition 
(DAQ), but how do they turn that into true business 
metrics? How can we use it to really improve our plant 
operations and processes?
Are you starting to see people being more comfort-
able with the idea of investing in manufacturing?
Freydig: We are focused on the process indus-
try such as food and beer, chemical, mining, and so 
on, and what I saw is with prices increasing, they have 
more money to invest in processes. Return on invest-
ment (ROI) is very important even more in manufac-
turing, and it is part of the process you are tasked with. 
It’s not just bringing in equipment anymore.
Savoie: Beyond integrating hardware, we’re pro-
viding an integrated team to the customer, bringing 
knowledge to the table to help fully forecast costs. ce
Representatives from the 2018 System Inte-
grators of the Year focus on what makes a 
good customer, how to address the skills gap, 
and what customers want.
Chris Vavra, Control Engineering
SYSTEM INTEGRATION
System integrators on 
customers, skills gap
ANSWERS
KEYWORDS: System 
integration, skills gap, IoT
Collaboration and a clear 
vision are priorities from 
system integrators as 
they start a project with a 
customer.
There is a demand for young 
engineers to narrow the skills 
gap, and integrators are 
making it a strategic priority.
Customers are becoming 
more comfortable with 
investing in manufacturing and 
processes and improving their 
return on investment (ROI).
GO ONLINE
Read more about each 
System Integrator of the Year. 
www.controleng.com/SIY 
CONSIDER THIS
How can your next project 
have a sharper focus?
The 2018 System Integrators of the Year met at the 
Digital Manufacturing and Design Institute (DMDII) in 
Chicago. From left: John Glenski of Automation Plus, 
Jason Savoie of Burrow Global, and Arturo Freydig of 
ECN Automation. Courtesy: Katie Spain, CFE Media
Chris Vav
SYST
AN
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M



www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEEERING     January 2018    •    35
Joel Kahn, Lenze Americas
VFDS
ANSWERS
T
he demand for efficient motor controls 
due to rising energy prices and a trend 
toward energy efficiency has resulted 
in a growing demand for variable fre-
quency drives (VFDs). The market for 
VFDs is expected to increase at a rate of 5.94% 
(CAGR) in the next three years, so it’s not surpris-
ing manufacturers are investing in state-of-the-art 
VFD technology. The latest advances in VFD soft-
ware and hardware tackle common problems original 
equipment manufacturers (OEMs), system integrators, 
and manufacturers have been wrestling with for years: 
enabling teams to do more—faster and easier—with 
fewer resources.
1. Wireless diagnostics
Wireless diagnostics represent the future of VFDs 
whether it’s Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or something else 
entirely. In a typical plant where access to a drive in a 
closed enclosure may be limited, engineers can con-
nect directly to the system from a distance using the 
wireless signal built into the drive.
Online software enables engineers to view and 
diagnose problems without touching the drive or its 
enclosure.
2. Flexible integration
VFDs with flexible integration allow engineers 
to solve for the application challenge once and then 
interface to an upper-level programmable logic con-
troller (PLC) of choice.
When an OEM is selling a given machine to cus-
tomers domestically and abroad, regional trends in 
PLC preference are not an obstacle for machine inte-
gration. The OEM can take a drive with multiple com-
munication options, solve the machine application 
once, and pick the option that matches the upper-level 
controller choice for each customer.
VFDs constructed specifically for flexible inte-
gration usually consist of a single basic inverter with 
control or networking modules that can be selected 
at will.
3. Modular memory
Gone are the days when technicians would have 
to go into the keypad to program a replacement 
VFD. Soon, having to use a PC or even just a USB 
stick to transfer the configuration to a replacement 
drive will be a thing of the past.
Today, drives with removable, modular, nonvola-
tile memory make maintenance quick and easy. They 
eliminate the need to connect additional hardware. If a 
piece goes bad, device replacement is as simple as tak-
ing the memory module out of the old drive and put-
ting it into a new one.
4. Predictive maintenance
Manufacturers are gathering massive amounts 
of data from their machinery and manipulating 
it into business intelligence that drives predictive 
maintenance.
The Internet of Things (IoT), a global trend in 
every industry, has had an impact on VFDs by speed-
ing and simplifying the flow of information from 
machine to technician and back again. As such, manu-
facturers are making changes to everything from their 
machines to their information technology (IT) depart-
ments to facilitate the collection, analysis, and applica-
tion of drive data.
From a hardware perspective, teams are moving 
away from serial and toward Ethernet as the network 
of choice. Basic IT departments are familiar with Eth-
ernet switches, hubs, and routers, resulting in a more 
seamless integration for data transfer.
Complex communication strategies are requiring 
modern VFDs to report lifetime counters, production 
rates, downtimes, power output, and more for better 
real-time decision making. ce
Joel Kahn is a product manager for inverters at Lenze 
Americas. Edited by Jack Smith, content manager, CFE 
Media, Control Engineering, jsmith@cfemedia.com. 
Variable frequency drives (VFDs) do more with less.
Four trends in VFD management
KEYWORD: Variable 
frequency drives (VFDs)
Engineers can connect 
directly to VFDs from a 
distance using the wireless 
signal built into the drive.
VFDs constructed 
specifically for flexible 
integration usually consist 
of a basic inverter with 
control or networking 
modules that can be 
selected at will.
For hardware integration, 
teams are moving toward 
Ethernet.
CONSIDER THIS
How advanced are the 
VFDs in your plant?
GO ONLINE
Link to additional online 
resources, variable 
frequency drives (VFDs) and 
related content at www.
controleng.com/archives, 
under January 2018.
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M
Scalable functionality and ease of use are design goals of Lenze’s i500 
inverter. Applications include pumps, fans, conveyors, formers, winders, trav-
eling drives, winders, and tool and hoist drives. Courtesy: Lenze Americas

P1    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
M
otors consume approxi-
mately 66% of the elec-
tricity in an industrial 
facility. With industrial 
electricity usage expect-
ed to grow substantially over the next 10 
years, facilities of all types are equipping 
motors with variable frequency drives 
(VFDs) to reduce consumption and gain 
other production efficiencies.
Though only 10 to 15% of industrial 
motors are controlled by a VFD, the num-
ber is increasing. Leading drives manufac-
turers are cultivating the growing market 
by introducing many product advances that 
improve performance, simplify installation and oper-
ation, and increase safety for those who operate the 
equipment.
Bluetooth connectivity 
The ability to connect a smartphone to one or 
more VFDs through Bluetooth is a recent develop-
ment that has made the operation of drives easier and 
safer (see Figure 1). With a smartphone app developed 
by the manufacturer—typically available for free from 
either Google Play or the Apple 
Store—it is possible to wirelessly 
connect to VFDs to execute any 
task an operator could accom-
plish by directly accessing the 
drive keypad. Depending on the 
layout and structure of the facility, 
Bluetooth is functional up to 250 
ft. from the drive.
With the VFD app, an oper-
ator can pair the smartphone to 
multiple drives through a sim-
ple set of initiation instructions. 
Each drive must have a Blue-
tooth-enabled keypad, which 
is standard or available as an 
option on the newest genera-
tion of drives from participating 
manufacturers (see Figure 2). Descrip-
tive names and passcodes dedicated to 
each drive assure parameters and loggers 
for each VFD are kept separate and are 
secure from unwanted access. 
Once installed, Bluetooth provides the 
means to commission, tune, and maintain a VFD, 
often keeping users from having to enter hazardous or 
difficult-to-reach work areas.
Operator safety, parameter functions
In many industrial facilities, the full array of drives 
is installed in a control room cabinet, isolated from 
the motors they control. With each VFD charged with 
480 V of power, the potential for an arc flash is high 
when an operator opens the door to access the drive 
keypads. Rather than requiring an operator to put 
on cumbersome arc flash personal protective equip-
ment (PPE), it is easier and more efficient to access the 
VFDs through a smartphone Bluetooth connection. 
The same convenience is applicable to drives 
mounted high on a wall, in a loud room, or behind 
a partition. Using a smartphone is safer and easier 
than climbing a ladder, entering a high decibel area, or 
walking to a distant location.
The Bluetooth interface from the most sophisti-
cated manufacturers provides full parameter access. 
All important functions can be analyzed, adjusted, 
and backed up with a smartphone and all event log-
gers are fully captured and easily available. ce
William Nyback is a product specialist for high per-
formance drives at ABB Inc. Edited by Jack Smith, 
content manager, CFE Media, Control Engineering,
jsmith@cfemedia.com.
Variable frequency drive (VFD) product advances improve performance, 
simplify installation and operation, and increase safety.
William Nyback, ABB Inc.
INSIDE PROCESS: VFDS
Bluetooth connectivity makes 
VFDs safer, easier to use
ANSWERS
KEYWORD: Variable frequency drives (VFDs)
The ability to connect a smartphone to one or 
more VFDs through Bluetooth is among drive 
advances.
In many industrial facilities, drives are 
installed in a control room cabinet, away from 
the motors they control.
CONSIDER THIS
Would Bluetooth connectivity make VFDs 
safer and easier to use in your plant?
GO ONLINE
Link to additional online resources, variable 
frequency drives (VFDs), Bluetooth, and related 
content at www.controleng.com/archives, 
under January 2018.
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M
William N
INSID
AN
Figure 1: The ability 
to connect a smart-
phone to one or more 
variable frequency 
drives (VFDs) through 
Bluetooth is one of 
the recent develop-
ments that have 
made the operation 
of drives easier and 
safer. All images cour-
tesy: ABB Inc.
Figure 2: Each drive must have a 
Bluetooth-enabled keypad, which is 
standard or available as an option 
on the newest generation of drives 
from participating manufacturers.

TAKING IT TO THE EXTREME
750 Series XTR:
r eXTReme Vibration: up to 5g acceleration
r eXTReme Temperature: from -40 ⁰C to +70 ⁰C
r eXTReme Isolation: upp
up to
to 5 kV
kV
kV impulse voltage
r eXTReme
R
T
X R
e
m
e
e
e
e
e
 Intrinsic
I
i
i
t
c
s
n
n r
i
i
 Safety:
S f t
e
a
:y
e
a
: signall
i
a
n
g
sig a  acquisition
i
q
c
a
siu
q
a
 and 
transmission in Zones 0 and 1
www.wago.us/xtr
THE WAGO-I/O-SYSTEM FOR EXTREME APPLICATIONS
Class 1, Div. 2
IIoT
READY
input #12 at www.controleng.com/information

M
ore than 40 years ago, transistor-based 
variable frequency drives (VFDs) quick-
ly demonstrated their ability to save 
energy and improve process control. 
Successive VFD generations improved motor-control 
performance, became smaller, and minimized instal-
lation time. VFD development is shifting focus away 
from general-purpose motor controls that are already 
meeting market demands toward one remaining con-
stant market driver: reduced installation costs.
1. Save time
To minimize commissioning time, VFDs are being 
designed and built for individual industries. Out-of-
the-box VFDs are programmed with industry-specific 
terminology, parameter defaults are customized, new 
functions created, and unneeded features are cut away. 
VFDs also are being programmed with industry-spe-
cific setup wizards to guide the installer through the 
typical steps needed to run a drive (see image).
These software features are designed to minimize 
the installer’s time in front of a drive at the job site to 
reduce commissioning costs. A second benefit of cre-
ating industry-specific drive features is to minimize 
the time required to train drive installers by making 
drive setup intuitive and easier.
2. Save space
Open-type and NEMA 1 VFD enclosures 
are still the staple of VFDs manufactured in the 
Variable frequency drive (VFD) development is shifting focus away from
general-purpose motor controls that are already meeting market demands
toward reduced installation costs.
Jason Wellnitz, Yaskawa America Inc.
INSIDE PROCESS: VFDS
Three major VFD trends
ANSWERS
WHY MONITOR POWER INSTEAD OF JUST AMPS?
NO LOAD
NO LOAD
Power is Linear-Equal Sensitivity 
at Both Low and High Loads
No Sensitivity 
For Low Loads
FULL LOAD
FULL LOAD
POWER
AMPS
WWW.LOADCONTROLS.COM
CALL NOW FOR YOUR FREE 30-DAY TRIAL 888-600-3247
PROTECT PUMPS
DRY RUNNING • CAVITATION • BEARING FAILURE • OVERLOAD
MONITOR PUMP POWER
• Best Sensitivity
• Digital Display
TWO ADJUSTABLE SET POINTS
• Relay Outputs
• Adjustable Delay Timers
4-20 MILLIAMP ANALOG OUTPUT
COMPACT EASY MOUNTING
Only 3.25" x 6.25" x 2"
• Starter Door  
• Panel 
• Raceway 
• Wall
UNIQUE RANGE FINDER SENSOR
• Works on Wide-range of Motors
• Simpliﬁ es Installation
PUMP POWER
PUMPING
VALVE CLOSING
VALVE OPENING
NO FLUID
input #13 at www.controleng.com/information

Americas. They are commonly mount-
ed to a machine, facility wall, or added 
to another enclosure with a higher 
environmental protection rating. How-
ever, NEMA 12 (IP54) and NEMA 
4/4X (IP66) VFDs are rapidly gain-
ing popularity, particularly in fan and 
pump applications where the applica-
tion controls now reside in the VFD’s 
software rather than external logic.
They are smaller and weigh less 
than VFDs mounted in another 
enclosure. They also minimize over-
all component count by minimizing wire, terminal 
blocks, and additional cooling. Engineered drive 
packages with branch circuit protection, power con-
ditioning devices, and control input/output (I/O) 
still have a firm place in the industry, but enclosures 
will continue to become more specialized and cost 
effective.
3. Mitigate harmonics
Meeting IEEE 519-2014: IEEE Recommended
Practice and Requirements for Harmonic Control in 
Electric Power Systems current harmonic require-
ments has become a focus in Pacific coast states and 
has been slowly moving eastward. Mitigating cur-
rent harmonics increases installation costs from the 
equipment owner’s perspective; the 
cost savings comes from the power 
utility’s side. Reducing current har-
monics has become so important to 
utilities that many offer rebates to help 
offset higher VFD costs. This is perhaps 
the area of greatest change in the VFD marketplace 
over the past five years. Conventional low-harmonic 
topologies, such as 18-pulse rectifiers and harmonic 
filters, are being displaced by a wide array of active 
switching topologies that are more efficient, consume 
less space, and easier to install.
VFD manufacturers are evolving their products 
and adding a multitude of features, but the primary 
purpose of a VFD is to save the owner money. VFDs 
that continue to reduce total cost of ownership (TCO) 
will continue to dominate the markets. ce
Jason Wellnitz is a product manager at Yaskawa Amer-
ica Inc. Edited by Jack Smith, content manager, CFE 
Media, Control Engineering, jsmith@cfemedia.com.
KEYWORD: Variable 
frequency drive (VFD)
To minimize commissioning 
time, VFDs are being 
designed and built for 
individual industries.
Open-type and NEMA 1 
VFD enclosures are still the 
staple VFD manufactured in 
the Americas.
Mitigating current 
harmonics increases 
installation costs from 
the equipment owner’s 
perspective; the cost 
savings comes from the 
power utility’s side.
CONSIDER THIS
Are reduced installation 
costs shifting your focus 
away from general-purpose 
motor controls in favor of 
VFDs?
GO ONLINE
Link to more online, and 
related content at www.
controleng.com/archives, 
under January 2018.
More
ANSWERS
KEYWORD
M
A
M
VFDs also are being programmed
with industry-specific setup 
wizards that guide the installer 
through the typical steps needed 
to run a drive. Courtesy: Yaskawa 
America Inc.
222 North Union Street •  Bryan, Ohio  43506
Ph: 800-722-2679 • Fx: 800-237-7269
© 2018 Allied Moulded Products, Inc.
w w w . a l l i e d m o u l d e d . c o m
w w w . a l l i e d m o u l d e d . c o m
• Fiberglass Reinforced Polyester (FRP) 
or Polycarbonate material
• Lightweight
• Non-corrosive
• Non-conductive
• UV resistant
• Custom modifications 
• Premium accessories
• 3D model library for  
easy download
NEMA 4X 
Vent Kit
HMI Cover Kits 
& Prop Arm
12" x 12"  
AM & AM-R 
Series
NEMA 4X
A 
A
Vent Kit
HMI Cover Kits
r
& Prop
&
 Arm
ULTRAPLUG®  
Hole
l
H
 Plugs
NEMA 4X / IP66 Nonmetallic Enclosures 
for your Toughest Applications
Scan to learn more about 
Allied Moulded and the latest in 
nonmetallic enclosures & accessories. 
 
Or connect with us online!
input #14 at www.controleng.com/information

INNOVATIONS
PRODUCT EXCLUSIVE
Multi-connectivity gateway 
for IoT applications
BACK TO BASICS
Ten control system
programming best practices 
Best practices for programmers include defining 
their structure, knowing the system resources and 
tools, consistency, and keeping track of changes 
during a project. 
41
64
Looking for new
products by category?
Check out the New Products for Engineers Database and search 
hundreds of products, with new innovations added every day.
Look for this logo on the Control Engineering home page. 
www.controleng.com/NP4E
NEW PRODUCTS
PE
®
Have a New Product for Engineers
to submit for consideration? 
Do so here: www.controleng.com/NP4E 
44
45
42
43
X2 extreme
Rugged HMIs for tough 
environments
7, 12 and 15 inches. Standard versions. High performance 
and fully sealed high-performance versions with high 
brightness display and optional integrated CODESYS PLC.
Operator panels
X2 extreme are certified by all major classification societies. 
Designed to perform in rugged environments with -30°C to +70°C, 
high vibrations and high-pressure wash-downs.
X2 series. Strong. Stylish. Smart. 
 Learn more at beijerelectronics.com/x2extreme
xtreme
HMIs for tough
r
ments
input #15 at www.controleng.com/information

control engineering     January 2018    •    41
PRODUCT eXCLUSIVe
INNOVATIONS
Multi-connectivity 
gateway for IoT use 
Advantech’s UTX-3117 fanless and extended- 
temperature embedded gateway is ideal for 
industrial automation and other Internet of Things 
(IoT) applications.
A
dvantech’s latest IoT gateway aimed at empow-
ering industrial IoT solutions, the UTX-3117, is 
a fanless and extended-temp embedded box. It 
is designed to provide real-time IoT computing, 
and to be a power-efficient, plug and play gateway ideal for 
industrial automation, smart metering, HVAC, smart city 
street lighting, smart parking, smart agriculture, healthcare, 
and other applications.
The UTX-3117 is compatible with Microsoft Windows 10 
IoT Enterprise, Yocto Linux, and Wind River Pulsar OS. The 
UTX-3117 also has Advantech intelligent software WISE-PaaS 
integrated and is certificated with AWS Greengrass IoT offer-
ings to bridge connectivity from edge sensors to the cloud.
The UTX-3117 integrates three radio frequency (RF) mod-
ules in palm-sized dimensions, including one M.2 slot for 
Wi-Fi, one half-size MiniPCIe slot, and one full-size MiniP-
CIe slot for 3G/LTE, Zigbee, or LoRa connection. It has a spe-
cial double-sided thermal solution and offers the independent 
RF modules to maintain maximum RF throughput in extended 
temperatures ranging from -20 to 60°C. The UTX-3117 offers 
five RF antennas. These antennas are designed in optimized 
locations to prevent RF signal conflicts. 
The UTX-3117 is ideal for transportation, logistics, and 
industrial automation with wide range power input from 12 
V to 24 V dc. It comes with rich connectivity and expansion 
options including two RS-232 and RS-422/RS-485 serial ports 
for device control and wire sensor data aggregation. It also 
offers two USB 3.0 ports, one audio jack, and dual gigabit LAN 
ports for general system control.
Advantech, www.advantech.com
Input #200 at www.controleng.com/information
HELUKABEL® offers an entire range of 
data, network and bus technology. Our 
HELUKAT® and HELUCOM® brands are 
well-positioned to serve the global 
market.
Cat 5e for use in cable carriers and 
automated equipment. PVC and FRNC 
versions available.
PROFINET Type B
E-NEWS
Data, Network and
Bus Technology
input #16 at www.controleng.com/information

42    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
     Rotary position
sensor for OEMs and
control systems
Curtiss-Wright’s NRH305DR is a no-
contact rotary position sensor for origi-
nal equipment manufacturers (OEMs) 
that design vehicles and control systems. 
The NRH305DR is designed to enhance 
system performance by incorporating 
two completely independent power sup-
plies and output channels for full elec-
trical redundancy, operating from a 5 V 
dc regulated supply. With a 8 mm low-
profile sensor body and small footprint, 
this fully-encapsulated, IP68/IP69K-rat-
ed sensor offers protection against water, 
dust, shock, vibration, and temperature. 
The separate magnet assembly that acti-
vates the sensor can have a permissible air 
gap between 1.5 and 8 mm (depending on 
magnet style) and can accommodate up 
to ±2 mm radial offset to ease setup and 
installation. 
Curtiss-Wright, www.curtisswright.com
Input #201 at www.controleng.com/information
     Data management software suite
National Instruments’ (NI) Data Management Software Suite 
provides a complete workflow to standardize measurement data 
across teams, mine that data for useful information, transform 
the data through automated analysis, and deliver reports. The 
Data Management Software Suite aims to simplify this work-
flow by introducing new server-based software features and the 
Analysis Server product, which helps engineers and scientists 
automate the search, standardization, analysis, and reporting 
of large amounts of measurement data. The full suite is flexible 
enough to integrate with customers’ existing data formats and 
information technology (IT) infrastructures. Manage data using 
this, a Microsoft Windows machine, and a network. 
National Instruments, www.ni.com
Input #204 at www.controleng.com/information
Chemical injection control 
and diagnostic module
DCiii’s Mirador chemical injection control and diagnostic mod-
ule is designed to provide greater remote control and diagnos-
tic monitoring capabilities over the chemical injection process 
for reduced waste and production costs. Operating on an open-
based platform with Modbus RTU communication protocol, the 
Mirador is designed to integrate with sensors, communications, 
and software to provide full operational visibility, tracking, con-
trol, and analysis over chemical injection processes from a remote 
control station. Through a simple retrofit to existing “tank and 
pump” only systems, this value-added subsystem addresses 95% 
of chemical injection systems that work by on/off control capac-
ity to deliver chemical to the point of injection. 
DCiii LLC, www.dc3control.com   Input #202 at www.controleng.com/information
Linear drive motor with electric cylinder
The Spindasyn SEZ electric 
cylinder from AMK Auto-
mation is a ready-to-install 
linear drive motor system 
in which the rotor is pressed 
directly onto the screw. Fea-
turing high and constant 
force, high precision, position accuracy, and high energy efficien-
cy, closed-loop positioning and force control make it ideal for lin-
ear technologies such as pneumatic or hydraulic cylinders, rack 
and belt drives, and linear motors. With several options available 
for screw and strength length, motor type and acceleration, the 
SEZ provides high rigidity without additional wearing parts. With 
the ability to set multiple travel profiles, it easily can be integrat-
ed into machine automation processes and applications such as 
packaging, carton forming, palletizing, pick and place, cross-cut-
ting, labeling, wrapping, strapping, filming, insertion, order pick-
ing, sealing plastics, printing, paper processing, textiles, food and 
beverage, machine tooling, and more. 
AMK Automation, www.amk-group.com
Input #205 at www.controleng.com/information
    HMI/SCADA solution with 
contextual mobility
PcVue Inc.’s Contextual Mobility HMI/SCADA solu-
tion is designed to proactively and securely present the 
right contextual information, to the right person, at the 
right location, and at the right time. PcVue has devel-
oped a mobility infrastructure that takes advantage of 
an indoor position system (IPS) and a global position-
ing system (GPS) to provide proximity and location services. The mobile worker now 
is able to automatically get relevant information on his/her mobile device depend-
ing on location and role within the organization without the need to navigate. The 
United States Patent Office has granted a patent for Contextual Mobility to use PcVue 
HMI/SCADA solutions in location-based applications. Via a mobile device, location 
information of a user in or near a facility is detected using a position sensor.
PcVue Inc., www.pcvueinc.com   Input #203 at www.controleng.com/information
NEW PRODUCTS FOR ENGINEERS
INNOVATIONS

January 2018    •    43
Miniature circuit breaker with surface mount
Noark Electric’s UL 489 B1NQ miniature circuit breaker (MCB) is designed as a 
direct replacement for the common MCB when paired with the optional surface 
mount. This quick-connect breaker is available in three curves (B, C, and D), ranges from 
0.5 to 63 A, and is compliant with UL/CSA/IEC standards for branch circuit protection 
in commercial and residential applications. This MCB is suitable industrial applications 
and other component sub-assembly designs. The current-limiting B1NQ is ther-
mal-magnetic and protects against short circuit and overload conditions. The 1- and 
2-pole breaker, offered at 120/240 Vac, provides optimum and efficient protection for 
branch and control circuits. 
Noark Electric, www.noark-electric.com
Input #206 at www.controleng.com/information
     Industrial networking
and Ethernet solutions
Mencom’s range of industrial Ether-
net switches include managed switches, 
unmanaged switches, gigabit switch-
es, harsh environment switches, and 
EN50155-certified switches. They also 
include secure routers, media con-
verters, serial device servers, Modbus 
gateways, and power supplies. The net-
working solutions provide prolonged 
mean time between failure (MTBF) so 
in an event of link or device failure, 
smart-redundancy features will detect 
the failure, relay the cause of the failure 
back to the control center, and recover 
to provide continuous operation. They 
also are designed with embedded iso-
lation to withstand the harshest indus-
trial-grade electromagnetic interference 
and susceptibility without suffering fatal 
damage or generating noise. In addi-
tion, Ethernet ring protection switching 
(ERPS), rapid spanning tree protocol 
(RSTP), or media redundancy proto-
col (MRP) ring settings can resume the 
operation and network connectivity 
immediately if a network switch fails or 
a communication link is broken. 
Mencom Corp., www.mencom.com 
Input #207 at www.controleng.com/information
See more New Products for Engineers. 
www.controleng.com/NP4E
PE
input #17 at www.controleng.com/information

NEW PRODUCTS FOR ENGINEERS
INNOVATIONS
44    •    January 2018
Rackmount series for medical and industrial applications
Kontron’s ZINC19 rackmount series is designed for industrial and medical applications and can be 
used for complex control and computing tasks. Demanding graphics and image processing appli-
cations are made possible by a number of optional high-performance graphic cards. The system is 
designed specifically for continuous operation in rough industrial environments and can withstand 
exposure to extended shock, vibration, and temperature levels. Available in 2U and 4U rackmount form 
factors, the ZINC19 series can be customized to meet individual customer needs thanks to their modu-
lar structure and numerous expansion slots. Up to five PCIe and two PCI slots allow for a wide variety of 
options, including a 10 GBit/s expansion card and a set of high-performing graphic cards. The ZINC19 rackmount series has an 
extended temperature range of 0 to 50°C and can be used for harsh environments. Its optimized thermal design allows for quiet 
operation in noise-sensitive areas where operators are present.
Kontron, www.kontron.com   Input #208 at www.controleng.com/information
Power and 
feedback 
cables for 
abrasive 
environments
Helukabel’s Topserv 
and Topgeber prod-
uct portfolio of ser-
vomotor power and feedback cables are 
receiving a heat-resistance upgrade from 
80° to 90°C. Higher heat resistance has 
its advantages because conductor tem-
peratures in motor applications and 
the surrounding environments, such as 
motor terminal boxes, often exceed 80°C. 
The polypropylene (PP) materials for the 
conductor insulation can withstand tem-
peratures up to 110°C. For the servo and 
feedback cable jackets, polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) and polyurethane (PUR) cables 
are used. PUR, in particular, has advan-
tages in dynamic drag chain applications 
where continuous flexing and high abra-
sion resistance are paramount.
Helukabel, www.helukabel.com 
Input #210 at www.controleng.com/information
Modular terminal block series
Weidmuller’s Klippon Connect A-Series Universal modular terminal blocks includes 
feed-through, multi-tier distribution, PE, fuse, test disconnect, and neutral conductor 
disconnect terminal blocks. They are designed specifically for use in recurring control 
panel applications that include voltage/current transformer wiring, control voltage distri-
bution, motor wiring, signal wiring, and initiator/actuator wiring. Features include inte-
grated push-button clamp actuator for safer wiring and simple handling. They also have 
a spring-loaded mounting foot to compensate for rail size fluctuations and have two inte-
grated jumpering channels. The A-Series application range offers users custom-fit con-
trol panel solutions to help increase productivity for recurring applications. 
Weidmuller, www.weidmuller.com   Input #209 at www.controleng.com/information
Reliable. Available. Now.  
www.tracopower.com
Medical open frame power supplies. 
Very compact and efﬁ cient 15 and 30 Watt models 
certiﬁ ed to ES 60601-1 3rd edition for 2 × MOPP.
TPP15 & TPP30 Series
• Low leakage current (<100 µA) within the limits for BF applications
• EMC compliance according IEC 60601-1-2 4rd edition
• Risk management process to ISO 14971 incl. risk management ﬁ le
• Acceptability of electronic assemblies according IPC-A-610 Level 3
• Design and manufacturing according ISO 13485 
management system
• 5-year product warranty
input #18 at www.controleng.com/information

January 2018    •    45
Embedded PC has
many cores
Beckhoff’s CX20x2 Embedded PC devic-
es integrate Intel Xeon D processors, each 
with 4, 8, or 12 CPU cores of the fifth gen-
eration Intel Core microarchitecture, and 
are manufactured using 14 nm process 
technology. The processor core options 
provide ample processing power and par-
allelism, even for extremely demanding 
automation tasks. Optimal multi-core sup-
port via TwinCAT 3 automation software 
makes it possible to distribute the indi-
vidual tasks of a control process across the 
many available CPU cores. This means that 
the computing load can be planned in fine 
detail to achieve the best-possible proces-
sor efficiency. A cable-free plug-in con-
nection facilitates easy fan replacement if 
required, and the regulated fan speed can 
be queried in the programmable logic con-
troller (PLC) software.
Beckhoff Automation
www.beckhoffautomation.com 
Input #212 at www.controleng.com/information
Discrete PLC I/O modules
AutomationDirect’s Productivity2000 pro-
grammable logic controller (PLC) system 
has 50 discrete and analog input/output 
(I/O) modules providing over 400 local 
I/O points. With remote expansion, over 
4,000 total I/O points are available. DC 
discrete I/O modules include 8-, 16-, and 
32-point, 12-24 V dc, sink/source mod-
ules with additional isolated commons. 
There are two isolated commons for the 
8- and 16-point modules and four iso-
lated commons for the 32-point mod-
ule. The Productivity2000 is a modular, 
rack-based system with a full lineup of 
discrete, analog, and specialty I/O mod-
ules. The high-performance CPU has 50 
MB memory, fast scan times, and five 
communication ports. Two 10/100 Mbps 
Ethernet ports allow programming, 
expansion, and client/server connections 
such as Modbus TCP, EtherNet/IP scan-
ner, and adapters.
AutomationDirect
www.automationdirect.com
Input #211 at www.controleng.com/information
See more New Products for Engineers. 
www.controleng.com/NP4E
PE
| PC11-48USA |
40 mm
82 mm
Meet the smallest Industrial PC 
from Beckhoff.
The ultra-compact C6015 IPC for automation and IoT.
www.beckhoff.us/C6015
With the ultra-compact C6015 Industrial PC, Beckhoff has again expanded the 
application possibilities of PC-based control. Wherever space or cost limita-
tions previously prevented the use of a PC-based control solution, this new IPC 
generation offers an excellent price-to-performance ratio in an extremely compact 
housing. With up to 4 CPU cores, low weight and unprecedented installation 
flexibility, the C6015 is universally applicable in automation, visualization and 
communication tasks. It is also ideal for use as an IoT gateway.
 Processor: Intel® Atom™, 1, 2 or 4 cores
 Interfaces: 2 Ethernet, 1 DisplayPort, 2 USB
 Main memory: up to 4 GB DDR3L RAM
 Housing: Die-cast aluminum-zinc alloy
 Dimensions (W x H x D): 82 x 82 x 40 mm
input #19 at www.controleng.com/information

The voice of the engineering community speaks loud and clear
in the following pages featuring corporate profiles of  
those companies participating in the Executive Voice program 
presented by Control Engineering magazine.
 
Our thanks to the following participants:
ABB Drives and Controls
Allied Moulded Products
AutomationDirect
B&R Industrial Automation
Balluff
Beckhoff Automation
Beijer Electronics
Digi-Key Corporation
Emerson Automation Solutions
EZ Automation/AVG Automation 
Kepware Technologies
Moxa Americas
Panduit
SEW Eurodrive
YRG Inc.

A
pproximately 40% of the world’s
  electricity is consumed by 
industrial applications. As overall 
consumption is expected to rise by 
33% in the next 12 years, facilities of 
all types and sizes have the responsibil-
ity to reduce the correlation between 
economic growth and energy usage.
With motors consuming an average 
of two-thirds of the electricity in an 
industrial facility, equipping them with 
variable frequency drives to regulate 
their speed is an emerging part of 
the solution. T ough only 10-15% of 
industrial motors are currently 
controlled by a drive, the number is 
rapidly increasing.  ABB, the market 
leader in drives, is at the forefront of 
this energy eﬃ  ciency trend.
By continually matching the speed 
of a motor to the actual demand of a 
process load in real time, ABB drives 
can reduce energy consumption and 
the subsequent CO2 emissions by 30% 
to 50% in many applications. ABB 
drives also bring about improvements 
in product quality through fast and 
accurate process control, while also 
boosting productivity and lowering 
motor maintenance costs.
ABB drives are installed in a variety 
of industries, including HVAC, food 
and beverage, water and wastewater, 
COG, energy, mining, material
 handling, plastics, metals and many 
more.  T e majority of the ABB 
drives installed in North America 
are manufactured at an ABB plant in 
New Berlin, Wisconsin.  
ABB has introduced several new 
“all-compatible” drive models in the 
last several years, with all essential 
features built-in, greatly simplifying 
drive selection, commissioning, 
operation and maintenance. 
Once users have learned one drive, 
they will be able to quickly integrate 
others, including larger drives, sav-
ing eﬀ ort, training costs, energy and 
money with each installation.  
Another recent development is 
Bluetooth connectivity, which makes 
it possible to connect wirelessly to an 
ABB drive with a smartphone, allowing 
users to set-up, tune and troubleshoot 
a drive without having to enter a 
potentially hazardous or diﬃ  cult-to-
reach work area
ABB also has a vast network of 
technical experts that support end-
users throughout the 
product lifecycle, helping 
to develop cost-eﬀ ective 
and easy-to-maintain 
systems to meet speciﬁ c 
project application 
requirements.
With a very short 
payback period based 
on the energy savings 
alone, ABB drives are a 
highly economical and eﬀ ective means 
to increase industrial productivity and 
lower the stress on utilities and the 
environment in a sustainable way.
Pedro 
Mendieta
Vice President and
General Manager,
ABB Drives 
and Controls, 
United States
ABB manufacturing plant in 
New Berlin, Wisconsin.  
www.abb.us/drives  •  800-752-0696
abb.mail@us.abb.com  
 “ABB drives can reduce 
energy consumption and 
the subsequent CO2 
emissions by 30% to 50% 
in many applications”
ADVERTISEMENT

A
llied Moulded Products, Inc. is a
 leading manufacturer of nonme-
tallic electrical boxes and enclosures 
in today’s residential, commercial and 
industrial markets. Leveraging more 
than half-a-century of experience, 
Allied Moulded has grown to become 
the benchmark of quality within the 
electrical industry. Its full-service 
molding operation includes expertise 
in compression and injection molding, 
using thermoset and thermoplastic 
materials, as well as a unique resin 
transfer molding process.  
 
Utilizing a modern, automated assem-
bly process, Allied Moulded provides 
customer with a superior product at a 
competitive price. Unrelenting focus 
on service, delivery, value, innovation 
and technology in everything Allied 
Moulded makes and does, has made it 
what it is today.  
 
Allied Moulded’s industrial enclosures 
can be found all over the world in 
many different control applications 
such as industrial & manufacturing  
 
plants, waste water treatment, wind 
turbines, security, SCADA, solar, 
marinas, data & telecommunications, 
mining, and more.  
 
The extensive line of NEMA type  
4X/IP66 fiberglass reinforced polyes-
ter (FRP) enclosures, made with its  
proprietary ULTRAGUARD® resin 
formulation, outperforms competi-
tors in the areas of yellowing, gloss 
retention, discoloration and change 
in texture. With a wide range of sizes, 
accessories and customizations  
available, Allied Moulded offers a 
complete solution to your industrial 
enclosure needs.  
 
In addition to fiberglass, Allied 
Moulded also offers the POLYLINE®  
series, a line of polycarbonate, 
injection-molded enclosures.
 
According to Matt  
McIntosh, Vice President 
of Global Sales and  
Marketing, “Allied 
Moulded’s nonmetallic 
enclosures are found in 
many diverse industries 
around the world. The 
design features combined 
with their resistance to 
corrosion provide a  
solution to many  
application problems, 
such as exposure to UV 
rays and extreme weather conditions.  
Allied Moulded’s enclosures are easy 
to customize and have a large variety 
of accessories available to suit any 
application need.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allied Moulded’s products are  
marketed in the U.S. primarily  
through an extensive network of 
professional manufacturer’s reps, all 
specialists and experts in electrical  
enclosures. Allied Moulded has 
expanded its global reach, with the 
addition of Allied Moulded Enclosure 
Products (India) Pvt Ltd., serving 
India and the Middle East markets. 
Allied Moulded manufacturing plant in Bryan, Ohio
800-722-2679 
sales@alliedmoulded.com
www.alliedmoulded.com
“Allied Moulded’s  
enclosures are easy to  
customize and have  
a large variety of  
accessories available  
to suit any 
application need.”
ADVERTISEMENT
Matt McIntosh 
 Vice President of Global Sales  
and Marketing

ADVERTISEMENT
A 
utomationDirect takes the best ideas from the consumer world to serve 
the industrial market. As a direct seller of industrial automation prod-
ucts for more than 20 years, AutomationDirect is a leader in the industry 
that offers many customer services not typical with traditional distributors. 
The company created a print catalog, and later an online store that provides 
complete product information and pricing so customers can make informed 
decisions on their automation purchases quickly and independently.
AutomationDirect’ s products are practical, easy to use and offer a low cost 
of ownership. The company offers quality products at prices up to 50 percent 
lower than those of more traditional distributors. Most product program-
ming software is free, requiring no initial or upgrade costs and no software 
maintenance contracts. Product offerings include programmable logic  
controllers (PLCs), alternating-current (AC) drives/motors, operator inter- 
face panels/human machine interface (HMI), power supplies, direct-current 
(DC) motors, sensors, push buttons, National Electrical Manufacturers  
Association (NEMA) enclosures, pneumatic supplies and more.
Award-Winning Services Satisfy Customers
AutomationDirect has always maintained a huge inventory, allowing them to 
ship 99.7 percent of orders complete the same day. They were among the first 
to offer free two-day shipping, available for any order over $49. Shipment 
confirmations and any backorder status and estimated delivery information 
are communicated electronically to keep you informed.
Their online store is one of the most exhaustive in the industry – all technical  
documentation can be downloaded free of charge, as well as software and 
firmware updates. Hundreds of instructional videos are available without 
registration. Online access to your account allows viewing and changing  
account information, viewing order history and making payments. 
 
AutomationDirect’s corporate headquarters near Atlanta, Georgia
sales@automationdirect.com
1-800-633-0405 • www.automationdirect.com
Customers can also obtain return  
authorizations online for quick and easy  
product returns or exchanges.  
 
AutomationDirect’s phone technical support  
staff has garnered top honors in service from 
industry magazine readers 15 years in a row.  
And, with tens of thousands of active customers, 
the company’s online technical forum taps into 
that knowledge base by encouraging peers to help 
each other with applications and other questions. 
Other online help includes frequently asked 
questions, application examples and product 
selection guides.
They Guarantee It
AutomationDirect wants you to be pleased with 
every order. That is why they offer 30-day money-
back guarantee on almost every product they sell, 
including software (see Terms and Conditions for 
certain exclusions).
See videos on AutomationDirect’s YouTube channel:   
https://www.youtube.com/user/automationdirect

A
re you ready for batch size one? 
 The new generation of ‘digital 
native’ consumers expects no less.
 
The concept is for the consumer to 
order on line, to produce and package 
customized products inline, and ship 
direct from your smart factory to 
the consumer.
 
B&R Industrial Automation is  
singularly capable of providing the 
adaptive machine technologies to  
enable your mass customization 
strategy.   
 
Dedicated machine designs are  
giving way to base machine modules 
that are configured to production 
requirements, reconfigured as needed 
and support ‘batch of one’ operations. 
 
The result is a new category of  
machinery, the adaptive machine.
Download B&R’s white page on this 
topic at http://bit.ly/2EOdPLu. 
 
 
At its core is track technology, with  
each product transported and  
processed on an independently 
controlled shuttle for unprecedented 
flexibility.
 
With the adaptive machine,  
‘changeover’ is obsolete, as changes 
can take place with every cycle. 
Dedicated machine designs are giving 
way to the adaptive machine, enabling 
batch size one to compete for  
consumers who are ‘digital natives.’
 
Along the way, tasks are performed 
with speed and precision by  
synchronized robot arms and devices. 
This performance is made possible 
by an advanced automation platform, 
characterized by a single controller,  
running a single integrated software 
application on a single powerful  
processor. It’s definitely not your  
average PLC — but it has the same  
familiar look and feel to technicians 
and operators.
 
Adaptive machinery 
is now entering the 
market and will have 
a profound impact on 
e-commerce, consumer 
goods processing and 
packaging, assembly, 
medical device and kit  
production, and  
much more.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B&R Industrial Automation is leading 
the trend, combining track technology  
with scores of complementary  
automation software functionalities.
 
The world is changing,  
and it is an exciting time  
to be in automation.   
Won’t you join with us?
 
 
Learn more by requesting  
our white paper, The Adaptive  
Machine: Design Strategies  
& Attributes, by emailing us at  
marketing.us@br-automation.com.
 
Stay informed with the latest automa-
tion trends and news by subscribing 
to our digital magazine, Automation 
Strategies at http://bit.ly/2EOmaif.
Marc Ostertag
President, B&R Industrial Automation 
North America
Batch size one gives manufacturers a direct-to-consumer 
e-commerce strategy
770-772-0400 • office.us@br-automation.com
www.br-automation.com
ADVERTISEMENT

B
eckhoff Automation is a 
 global provider of open  
automation systems based on  
advanced PC Control technology.  
The “New Automation Technology” 
philosophy at Beckhoff represents  
universal and open automation  
solutions used in a wide spectrum  
of high-tech applications around  
the world. These applications  
range from control of machines  
and robots used in manufacturing, 
to Internet of Things (IoT) systems, 
intelligent building automation  
and much more.  
 
The world headquarters of Beckhoff 
Automation is in Verl, Germany while 
the US headquarters is in Savage, 
Minn. (Minneapolis area). 
 
 
System-Integrated Solutions for  
Automation and IoT
 
The comprehensive Beckhoff system 
architecture for machine and plant  
automation promotes control  
hardware consolidation by advancing  
powerful PC-based control technol-
ogy. This approach takes the best from 
automation technology (AT) and 
IT, making the most powerful tools 
available to engineering teams in one 
universal environment.  
 
All the benefits from the early days  
of this effort remain from the inte-
gration of PLC, motion control and 
HMI, while adding other high-value 
functions for robotics, safety, high-end 
measurement, condition monitoring, 
and of course, cloud connectivity  
and IoT.
 
Beckhoff has 
machine builders 
and manufacturers 
covered whether 
they need to gather 
and store process 
data in the cloud, 
integrate condition  
monitoring or 
 
implement track-and-trace functions 
in machinery. With TwinCAT IoT  
and TwinCAT Analytics software,  
machines directly benefit from  
Industrie 4.0 and IoT functionality.  
 
Engineering efficiency is greatly  
increased because the software  
packages share the same universal 
platform as all other machine  
programming tools from Beckhoff.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Another significant innovation from 
Beckhoff is EtherCAT P technology. 
With EtherCAT P, Beckhoff unites 
EtherCAT communication and  
power supply in a standard, 4-wire 
Ethernet cable. Innovative, space- 
saving One Cable Automation  
technology integrates the 24 V DC 
supply of the EtherCAT P slaves with 
the signals and data from connected 
sensors and actuators.
 
For more information: 
www.beckhoffautomation.com
Aurelio 
Banda  
CEO and  
President,  
Beckhoff  
Automation
US headquarters  in Savage, Minnesota
ADVERTISEMENT
 
The “New Automation  
Technology” philosophy  
at Beckhoff represents  
universal and open  
automation solutions used  
in a wide spectrum of  
high-tech applications  
around the world.

E
merson is, at heart, an engineering
 and technology company.  
We are innovators, problem-solvers,  
and industry leaders working to ensure 
human comfort and health, protect  
food quality and sustainability, advance  
energy efficiency and create sustainable 
infrastructure.
 
Our industry offerings in heating, venti-
lation, air conditioning and refrigeration 
(HVACR) and building automation bring 
quality, reliability and efficiency to build-
ing systems, making us a key partner to 
many leading OEMs. 
 
Leading in Human Comfort
Emerson has decades of experience in 
residential and commercial HVAC. We 
pioneered the Copeland Scroll compres-
sor technology that today powers home 
and commercial AC systems around the 
world, efficiently and reliably.  We have 
been at the forefront of enabling environ-
mentally friendly refrigerant changes to 
protect our environment.
 
Today, we offer a broad portfolio of 
modulating compressors, including  
two-stage, variable speed and tandem/
trio compressor configurations that 
enable the industry’s most efficient and 
reliable systems. 
 
Our focus on comfort extends to auto-
mated and remotely-monitored control  
 
systems for commercial buildings,  
including the new Sensi Multiple  
Thermostat Manager, our latest  
innovation to leverage Internet of  
Things technology to help ensure  
human comfort and health. 
 
Protecting Food Quality
At Emerson, we are a leader when it 
comes to managing the Cold Chain.   
We help safeguard food, reduce energy 
consumption, protect the environment 
and optimize business results for  
supermarkets, convenience stores,  
restaurants, retailers and transportation 
using compression technology,  
integrated controls, connectivity, 
monitoring, services and  
insight solutions.
 
Emerson’s ProAct Services  
portfolio, includes technology, 
data, services, software and  
expertise that assures quality  
and integrity of conditions management 
wherever commercial goods are moved, 
stored or sold. Systematic measurement 
of cost drivers provides a powerful basis 
for everyday decision-making by allow-
ing key participants in the cold chain to  
quickly identify opportunities for  
operational improvement. 
 
Emerson’s newest facility control 
platform, Site Supervisor, allows large 
and small format retailers to quickly 
and economically support monitoring, 
optimization and control over key store 
systems. Site Supervisor controls manage 
refrigeration systems, HVAC, lighting 
and more.
 
Advancing Energy Efficiency
Efficiency and energy savings are key 
design elements to many of our  
solutions to the HVACR industry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In addition to our compression and  
control solutions, our relationship  
with Transformative Wave allows us to  
provide innovative HVAC retrofit tech-
nology with the CATALYST. More than 
a controller and more than a variable 
frequency drive (VFD), this offering 
is a complete HVAC energy efficiency 
upgrade that radically lowers energy use 
and improves the overall performance  
of constant volume HVAC systems.
 
Driven by Innovation
Emerson is where technology and  
engineering come together to create  
solutions for the benefit of our custom-
ers. Our network of Helix Innovation 
Centers has hosted thousands of our 
partners and customers and we are  
working daily to address the biggest  
challenges our industry sees now and  
in the future.
Brent 
Schroeder 
Group President 
of Heating and
Air Conditioning
The Helix Innovation Center on the campus 
of the University of Dayton
www.emerson.com
Emerson is where  
technology and engineering  
come together to create  
solutions for the benefit  
of our customers.
ADVERTISEMENT

L
ately, every article or webinar we see with reference to consumer 
 electronics or industrial automation, talk about IoT or IIoT. So what  
exactly is all the hype about? According to TechTarget, The Internet of Things 
(IoT) is a system of interrelated computing devices, mechanical and digital  
machines, objects, animals or people that are provided with unique identifiers  
and the ability to transfer data over a network without requiring human-to- 
human or human-to-computer interaction1. In short, it is a means of having 
two or more devices sharing information without any human interaction. 
 
Specific to the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), it focuses on the interconn- 
ectivity and utilization of powerful data in a manufacturing environment. IIoT  
enables the acquisition and accessibility of important plant data at far greater  
speeds, security and reliability. IIoT incorporates machine learning and big data technology, harnessing the sensor data, 
machine-to-machine communication and automation technologies that have existed in industrial settings for years.  
The driving philosophy behind the IIoT is that smart machines are better than humans at accurately, consistently  
capturing and communicating data. The driving force behind IIoT’s data communication is the industry accepted  
Messaging Queuing Telemetry Transport protocol or MQTT.
Manufacturing outfits around the world both small and large are quickly adopting the concept of IIoT to monitor produc-
tivity of their machines and furthermore perform preventative or predictive maintenance to reduce machine downtime 
and increase their revenues! By having machine data readily available at your fingertips, it allows plant personnel to act 
pro-actively on increasing productivity or conducting predictive maintenance. Equipment performance is monitored 
permanently to anticipate failure. Maintenance is initiated, if certain values are exceeded or if certain (wear-out) patterns 
are recognized. I have had the pleasure of working with Arlen Nipper, co-inventor of MQTT, and learning first-hand the 
benefits and power of MQTT sharing real-time data within the manufacturing environment. Hence, it only makes sense 
why EZAutomation is extremely proud to have the very first American Manufactured PLC that Meets IIoT!
The EZRackPLC with built-in MQTT Protocol, can be used to control a machine and/or act as a “bridge” between  
existing operational technologies within a plant, for example factory machines, and plant database networks, so  
valuable data can be shared reliably and securely. With built-in communication protocols such as Allen-Bradley’s  
Ethernet I/P, Modbus RTU & TCP/IP, Ignition’s Sparkplug B, and ASCII In/Out protocols, the CPU for just $149,  
can not only act as a PLC, but also as an edge-gateway device to existing PLCs.  
It’s because of this technology companies like Ford Motor Company, which  
uses primarily Rockwell Automation PLCs, is using our devices as  
“machine health monitoring systems.”
Vikram 
Kumar 
President 
and CEO,
EZAutomation
sales@ezautomation.net | 1-877-774-EASY
www. ezautomation.net
ADVERTISEMENT
Reference 1: http://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/definition/Internet-of-Things-IoT
“ Program a PLC and then data just ‘appears’ in your  
HMI / MES / OEE / Cloud/Historian…  How cool is that? ”

K
epware, a software development 
 business of PTC, provides 
software solutions to overcome the 
connectivity gaps between diverse 
industrial automation devices and 
applications. Kepware’s market-leading 
solutions are used by thousands of 
customers worldwide—from plant 
floor to wellsite to windfarm, Kepware 
provides a portfolio of software solu-
tions that connect diverse automation 
devices and software applications and 
enable the industrial Internet 
of Things (IoT) for customers 
in Manufacturing, Oil & Gas, 
Building Automation, Power & 
Utilities, and more.  
 
PTC and Kepware are at the 
forefront of the connected, 
digital transformation that is re-
defining how companies create, 
operate, and service products. 
With support for both legacy 
and IoT-ready manufacturing 
technology, Kepware solutions 
are key components of any 
smart, connected factory.
 
KEPServerEX—Kepware’s 
flagship connectivity platform— 
is the industry’s leading OPC and 
IT-centric data connectivity platform. 
KEPServerEX enables users to con-
nect, manage, monitor, and control di-
verse automation devices and software 
applications through one intuitive user 
interface—providing a single source 
of real-time industrial data to power 
decisions across the enterprise. 
 
 
 
 
In addition to KEPServerEX,  
Kepware offers more than 150  
drivers and advanced plug-ins.  
Each is designed to extend the  
capabilities of KEPServerEX to better 
suit your needs. Kepware advanced 
plug-ins fit the data connectivity 
requirements unique to your industrial 
control system. They extend the  
capabilities of KEPServerEX and 
increase the usefulness of raw data by 
transforming it into accessible and  
actionable information. Kepware 
drivers are software components that 
enable KEPServerEX to meet the  
connectivity requirements of a specific 
device, system, or other data source.  
 
Drivers handle all proprietary  
communications to the data source 
for KEPServerEX. Kepware offers the 
broadest range of drivers available,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supporting a variety of current 
and legacy devices and wired 
and wireless networks.  
 
With IoT-ready features and 
seamless connectivity to 
legacy devices, KEPServerEX 
enables real-time data  
visibility for increased 
productivity, and pro-active 
maintenance. KEPServerEX 
provides the global connectiv-
ity, usability, and performance 
required by the enterprise—
enabling improved decision-
making from the shop floor to 
the top floor. 
PTC’s Portland, Maine Office
sales@kepware.com • +1 888.KEPWARE
kepware.com
KEPServerEX— 
Kepware’s flagship  
connectivity platform—  
is the industry’s leading 
OPC and IT-centric data 
connectivity platform.
ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT
M
oxa is a leading manufacturer 
 of industrial networking, 
computing, and automation solutions.
With over 30 years of industry experi-
ence, Moxa has connected more than 
50 million devices worldwide and has 
a distribution and service network that 
reaches customers in more than 70 
countries. Moxa offers a full spectrum 
of innovative, high-quality solutions 
that have been deployed in a wide 
variety of industries, including factory 
automation, smart rail, smart grid, 
intelligent transportation, oil and gas, 
marine, and mining.  
 
Moxa’s expertise gives industry  
partners the tools they need to harness 
the power of automation network 
convergence and make their opera-
tions smarter, safer, and more efficient. 
Moxa delivers lasting business value 
by empowering industry with reliable 
networks and sincere service for  
automation systems.
 
 
 
Industrial Ethernet Solutions
 
Moxa offers a wide array of Industrial 
Ethernet products that feature  
open Ethernet infrastructure,  
industry-proven standards,  
extended temperature tolerance,  
environmental protection, and  
network redundancy to ensure  
network availability and reliability. 
 
Product lines include Industrial 
Ethernet switches, industrial wireless 
devices, serial cards, serial device  
servers, embedded device servers, and 
USB and fieldbus components.  
 
 
all products are designed to stand up 
to harsh environments and are ideal 
for deployment in mission-critical 
applications in fields such as maritime, 
oil and gas, power and utilities, rail, 
and factory automation.
 
Industrial Computing Solutions
 
Moxa’s industrial embedded  
solutions are used to construct  
powerful front-end controllers that  
can execute on-site data collection  
and control at widely distributed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remote sites through Industrial  
Ethernet or wireless backbones.  
We offer computers with rugged 
construction, fanless operation, and 
an operating temperature range from 
-40 to 85°C, as well as a user-friendly 
environment that makes application 
development easy. Customization  
service is also available.
 
Remote Automation Solutions
 
Moxa has an extensive selection of  
intelligent and reliable RTU and  
remote I/o products, including 
modular RTU controllers, cellular RTU 
controllers, Ethernet RTU controllers, 
modular remote I/os, and compact 
remote I/os. With innovative features 
such as Click&Go™, a built-in control 
logic that simplifies programming, 
and active oPC Server™ for seamless 
communication with SCaDa systems, 
Moxa’s RTU and remote I/o products  
are the ideal choice for your data 
acquisition, remote monitoring and 
alarm application.
Moxa Sales and Marketing Headquarters in Brea, California
714.528.6777 • usa@moxa.com
www.moxa.com
Moxa’s reliability-focused  
solution portfolio

T
he Internet of Things brings 
together people, process, data  
and things to make networked  
connections more relevant and valuable 
than ever before – turning information 
into actions that create new capabilities, 
richer experiences and unprecedented 
economic opportunity for businesses, 
individuals, and cities.
 
Industrial plants are on the forefront of 
this connected world. Networks with 
intelligent devices break open silos 
and connect people, processes and 
machines from the plant floor to the 
executive office. 
 
Industrial Ethernet has become the new 
standard by which systems, networks, 
machines, and a variety of other devices 
get connected. It builds the critical link 
between the Manufacturing Systems 
and Business Systems.
 
With a variety of new connected  
devices to manage in industrial  
environments, it can be challenging  
to identify and visualize where each  
device and system is connected. 
Glitches in the network, under- 
 
 
performing applications, device  
errors or compatibility issues tend  
to slow down the network and  
eventually, generates downtime for  
the production process.
 
Each connected device can increase  
the level of complexity of the  
underlying network. Which element 
eats up the network? Why? Are there 
interoperability issues that threaten to 
bring the system down? Etc.
 
As interconnection issues become a 
threat to production efficiency, a larger 
focus will need to be placed on detec-
tion, diagnosis, and problem 
resolution in an increasingly 
complex environment. This 
focus leads to connected 
processes, correlated data and 
faster root causes that provide 
insights for making higher 
value business decisions.      
 
Taking a more proactive  
approach to monitor, predict 
and fix issues before they 
interrupt processes can help improve 
both uptime and efficiency in real time. 
Many of our customers who are cur-
rently enhancing their manufacturing 
systems face challenges: 
• Monitor performance across 
 Ethernet endpoints in real-time
• Document and act on critical data
• Diagnose act and validate  
 
 efficiencies from anywhere
• Troubleshoot with advanced 
 analytic tools to maximize  
 operational efficiencies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Industrial system visualization,  
environmental and condition  
monitoring and predictive analytics  
address these challenges in very  
specific and unique industrial, retail,  
office and warehouse applications. 
These tools need to be simple to deploy 
and use, to enable higher value  
business decisions.
Steve 
Timian 
Vice President, 
Internet of 
Things Business 
Development, 
Panduit Corp.
Panduit World Headquarters in Tinley Park, IL
info@panduit.com
800.777.3300
www.panduit.com
By 2020, more than  
half of major  
New Business Processes 
and Systems will  
incorporate some  
element of the  
Internet of Things.
ADVERTISEMENT

A
s a world leader in drive 
 technology and a pioneer  
in drive-based automation,  
SEW-EURODRIVE has established 
a reputation for quickly solving the 
most difficult power transmission  
and motion control challenges. We  
introduced the gearmotor in 1931. 
Since then, we have been bringing 
the best in drive technology to our 
customers worldwide. 
 
Quickly solving problems so that our 
customers can be more productive 
and profitable continues to be our 
priority. We offer the broadest product 
line in the industry – from gearmo-
tors and heavy industrial gear units to 
drive electronics, software and com-
plete drive-based automation systems.
 
Flexibility
Our products are based on a unique 
system of modular components that 
can be assembled in literally millions 
of different configurations so every 
drive solution is custom built to our 
customer’s exact specifications. Our 
five regional assembly centers in the 
U.S. stock millions of dollars of our 
modular inventory for quick delivery 
of drive solutions and spare parts.  
 
 
 
 
Reliability
At SEW-EURODRIVE our exper-
tise doesn’t stop with the sale of our 
products. We offer one of the most 
accessible customer support systems 
in the industry. Our trained product 
specialists are readily available for 
on-site start up assistance, application 
support, and maintenance services.
 
 
Innovation
In addition to engineering excellence, 
SEW-EURODRIVE is also known  
for innovative new products.  
MOVIGEAR® is an all-in-one 
mechatronic drive solution for  
horizontal material handling.  
 
It combines the gear unit, motor, and 
electronics in one highly efficient  
and hygienically designed unit.  
MOVIGEAR® also eliminates excess 
inventory since it allows the use of a 
single ratio to replace several different 
ratios. MOVIGEAR has been proven 
to reduce total start-up costs and  
annual operating costs in your  
material handling system by 20-30%! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Support
Our PT Pilot® online drive 
selection tool quickly selects 
the perfect drive for your  
specific needs. PT Pilot  
simplifies the choices and 
identifies a custom solution 
for each application within 
minutes. This powerful program 
includes technical documentation, net 
pricing, CAD files, and an application 
calculator. Visit ptpilot.com. 
 
Our customer service personnel,  
engineers, product specialists, and 
service technicians are available to 
answer questions and troubleshoot 
problems. SEW-EURODRIVE also  
offers on-call technical support 
around the clock for emergency 
breakdown situations.
 
SEW-Eurodrive…Driving the World 
PT Pilot simplifies the choices and identifies 
a custom solution for each application 
ADVERTISEMENT
864-439-7537 
www.seweurodrive.com
Our products are based on 
a unique system of modular 
components that can be  
assembled in literally millions 
of different configurations
MOVIGEAR®  
is an all-in-one  
mechatronic  
drive solution 
that combines  
the gear unit,  
motor and  
electronics into  
one unit.

I
n 1984, the master distribution  
 sales channel for YAMAHA robot-
ics was launched in North America, 
located in Fort Wayne, Indiana, which 
is now known as YRG, Inc. 
 
YRG, Inc. is comprised of a team of 
engineers and sales professionals.  
Our mission is to provide service and 
support for YAMAHA brand robots  
in North America. Many of YRG’s  
employees have background  
experience in machine design and  
offer expertise in application design 
and controls integration to other 
peripheral devices that interface to 
YAMAHA controllers. 
 
   A Culture of Caring 
 
YRG’s culture is about taking care of 
our customers and end users who trust 
our team to help them solve their  
automation problems. We know how 
important it is for those who use our 
products to be able to pick up the 
phone and talk to someone who can 
provide solutions. We are passionate  
about doing the right thing and believe 
 
 
 
 
 
in providing timely answers and expert 
solutions to everyday challenges.  
 
 Four Decades of Experience 
 
Since 1976, YAMAHA has provided 
assembly robots to the industrial 
marketplace that are unsurpassed for 
payload, speed, and dependability.  
The current robot line-up is the  
culmination of over four decades’  
experience in YAMAHA’s own plants 
and thousands of others around  
the world. 
 
YAMAHA robots’ extraordinary 
lifespan gives a return on investment 
unequalled by any other robot  
manufacturer. Comprised 
of three motor technologies, 
stepper-motor, AC servo 
and linear motors that offer 
economical solutions to high 
speed, high payload and high 
precision of linear motors. As 
a standard, reliable resolver- 
based feedback is included  
in all YAMAHA robots which are   
immune to dirt and vibrations. 
 
YAMAHA offers the largest SCARA 
selection in the world from the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
smallest to the largest sizes handling  
1 KG to 50 KG payloads, spanning  
120 mm to 1200 mm in reach. 
 
In the AC servo and linear motor  
family, YAMAHA offers a wide  
selection for all types of single and 
multi-axis robots.  
 
Cartesian systems are pre-engineered, 
fully assembled and ready to install. 
These robots are superior in  
performance for servo dispensing,  
nut running, and screw driving  
applications where either precision 
velocity control is required or high 
rigidity is needed. 
 
Let us know how we can help you solve 
your automation problems. 
Phil 
Friend
 
General  
Manager, 
YRG, Inc.
Intelligent Machinery Division of  
YAMAHA Motor Corporation 
We know how important it is for those who use 
our products to be able to pick up the phone  
and talk to someone who can provide solutions.
ADVERTISEMENT
R O B O T I C S
YRG
™
Tel: 260-747-3482 
sales.support@yrginc.com 
www.yrginc.com  

Tony Canonaco 
President and CEO
balluff@balluff.com  •  1-800-543-8390
www.balluff.us
B
alluff is one of the leading 
providers of high-quality 
sensor, identification and network 
solutions for your automation 
requirements. We live our motto 
“innovating automation”; we are 
automation pacesetters, developers 
and technological pioneers, and we 
always keep sustainability in mind.  
 
We give our all to provide top 
services for innovative solutions 
that increase your competitive 
edge and lead you to a successful 
future through the competence of 
a manufacturer, production skills 
and high personal motivation.  
 
Family-run for more than 90 years, 
the company now employs around 
3,600 employees worldwide, all 
working towards the highest  
quality standards. You can always  
 
count on our people and our  
products, as well as our scheduling 
and delivery reliability.  
 
Founded in Neuhausen auf den 
Fildern in 1921, Balluff stands for 
progress, quality and worldwide 
cross-industry experience in  
industrial automation.  
 
As a leading sensor and automation 
specialist, this 4th generation  
family company offers a compre-
hensive portfolio of innovative 
sensor, identification and network 
solutions. In 2016, the Balluff 
Group reported a turnover of 
around 378 million euros.  
 
In addition to the company  
headquarters in Neuhausen auf den 
Fildern, Balluff has production and 
development facilities all around  
 
the globe, and is represented by 68 
branches and sales offices.  
 
This global presence guarantees  
excellent availability for the 
customer, as well as high-quality 
advice and service on site, all 
around the world. 
 
With an award winning  
culture, our office in  
Florence, Kentucky  
supports sales,  
marketing, production  
and warehousing 
for all of our North  
American customers.
 
ADVERTISEMENT
North American headquarters in Florence, KY
Doug Stubbs
Vice President – Americas
Phone: 1.801.466.8770
www.beijerelectronics.com
www.beijerinc.com
D
oug Stubbs has nearly 30 years of technical and 
commercial experience in the industrial arena. 
Doug has broad-based experience in multiple tech-
nologies, including adhesive and fluid management, 
fluid power, position sensing, networking and factory 
automation, covering several large-scale industries, 
including consumer goods, nonwovens, pulp and paper, 
and automotive.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since arriving at Beijer Electronics, Doug has seen the 
broadening of the product line and solution set. He 
leads the Americas sales and marketing efforts as a 
member of the global management team. His focus is 
on innovation of its flexible solutions which are  
designed to control, connect and present data for  
business critical applications. Beijer’s open software, 
hardware and IIoT solutions help customers optimize 
processes and create reliable secure communication, 
complete with leading-edge user experiences.  
Doug’s goals are to make the complex simple while 
working with its customers to capture the opportunities 
of tomorrow.
 
Leading this offering is the X2 series of human machine 
interfaces (HMIs) and open PLC products for industrial 
OEMs, machines builders, and systems integrators. 
With over 50 models and configurations, there is an 
X2 product for most applications, from food/beverage, 
packaging, pharmaceutical, and traditional manufac-
turing to pulp & paper, water/wastewater, maritime and 
oil/gas.
 
All X2 operator panels are programmed by its iX 
Developer software. iX Runtime is included in all of its 
HMIs, as well as sold separately for PC applications. All 
configurations can be coupled with Beijer Electronics’ 
WARP Engineering Studio and its remote IO modules 
to create integrated control and visualization solutions.
 
Beijer Electronics’ global HQ  
is based in Malmo, Sweden 
and is directly present in over 
twenty-two countries; twice 
that with its distribution 
partners. It is listed on the 
NASDAQ OMX Nordic  
Exchange Stockholm’s Small 
Cap list under the ticker BELE.
ADVERTISEMENT
Beijer Electronics’ Americas operations based in Salt Lake City, UT 

Dave Doherty
President and COO
sales@digikey.com
1-800-344-4539
www.digikey.com
D
igi-Key Electronics, a 
global Internet-based  
distributor of electronic compo-
nents, is an authorized distributor 
of more than 6 million compo-
nents, including over 1.3 million 
in stock, from more than 650 
trusted suppliers. The company’s 
reputation extends worldwide 
through the continuous choice 
of Digi-Key’s customers as the 
provider of the widest range of 
electronic components in the 
industry, ready for immediate 
delivery. With this wide range 
of products available in both 
design and production quantities, 
Digi-Key is the best resource for 
designers and buyers alike. 
 
Product availability is one of 
the distinguishing features of 
Digi-Key from other electronic 
component distributors. They 
stock over 1 million products at 
its distribution center in Thief 
River Falls, MN. New products are 
added every day, in a continuous 
effort to offer the full range of 
electronic components required 
by the customer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whether semiconductor, passive, 
interconnect, electromechanical, 
wireless or lighting components, 
Digi-Key will carry the parts you 
need when you need them. 
The company offers a vast  
selection of online resources 
including a range of EDA and 
design tools, reference design 
library, on-demand multimedia 
library, a comprehensive article 
library, and community forums, 
among others. Digi-Key also offers 
numerous Supply Chain solutions 
such as bonded inventory and 
just-in-time shipping, as well as a 
newly updated BOM manager. 
 
Digi-Key prides itself on the  
ability to provide the best  
possible service to customers.  
A customer can request electronic 
components or reach the talented 
team of technicians and applica-
tion engineers 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week, 365 days a year, 
either by phone, fax, e-mail or 
through the website.  
 
From prototype to  
production, Digi-Key  
has the resources and 
products to take your 
design to the next level! 
Find out more at  
www.digikey.com.
ADVERTISEMENT
Headquarters in Thief River Falls, MN
DIGITAL REPORTS
HMI
IIoT: Machines, Equipment & Asset Management
Machine Vision
Motion Control
PLC
www.controleng.com/DigitalReports

MEDIA SHOWCASE FOR ENGINEERS
Your place for new products, literature, Apps, Videos, Case Studies and White Papers.
Input #100 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Input #101 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Input #102 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Input #103 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Input #104 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Input #105 at controlengineering.hotims.com
X2 series
Strong. Stylish. Smart.
The X2 series is the next generation of 
HMIs from Beijer Electronics. Six product 
families combine great design with strong 
performance to power your HMI solutions. 
 Learn more at beijerelectronics.com/x2
Strong. Stylish. Smart.
meltric.com 
800.433.7642
With Silver-Nickel Butt-Style Contacts
for Maximum Performance & Durability
connectors 
FEATURES AVAILABLE
7 to 37 contacts
4mA to 150A per contact
Easy-to-wire contact terminals
MULTI-CONTACT
Want to receive your 
Control Engineering 
magazine as a  
 
digital publication? 
Update your subscription, 
and get our digital edition,  
on a more interactive and 
user-friendly platform, 
in your email in-box.
Update now at:
www.controleng.com
POWER + CONTROL
In    Connection
   1
Provide electrical power 
and control motor drives, 
communicate alarms 
or monitor process 
parameters with 
only 
connection.
Ratings up to 
250A, 600V, 
Type 4X
1
Auxiliary
Contact
Power 
Contact
Up to 5 contacts 
for POWER 
+ 
6 contacts for
CONTROL
meltric.com 
800.433.7642
Bring Remote Devices to 
Your SCADA System
Visit Moxa.com to learn more.
www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEERING     January 2018    •    61

MEDIA SHOWCASE FOR ENGINEERS
Input #106 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Input #107 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Input #108 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Input #110 at controlengineering.hotims.com
Reliable. Available. Now. 
www.tracopower.com
TMPS Series
Miniaturized AC/DC  power 
supply modules 3 to 5 Watt 
for PCB mount. For highest 
efﬁ ciency in low power 
operation or standby mode.
stay
informed
Stay current  
with technology and  
trends in electrical, 
mechanical, 
instrumentation 
and automation.
To subscribe, visit 
www.controleng.com/subscribe
eNewsletters 
Subscribe today by visiting: www.controleng.com/newsletters
Input #109 at controlengineering.hotims.com
PRODUCT & LITERATURE SHOWCASE
62    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com
Want to receive your 
Control Engineering 
magazine as a  
 
digital publication? 
Update your subscription, 
and get our digital edition,  
on a more interactive and 
user-friendly platform, 
in your email in-box.
Update now at:
www.controleng.com

www.controleng.com 
CONTROL ENGINEERING     January 2018    •    63
Publication Services
Jim Langhenry, Co-Founder/Publisher, CFE Media
JLanghenry@CFEMedia.com
Steve Rourke, Co-Founder, CFE Media
SRourke@CFEMedia.com
Trudy Kelly, Executive Assistant,
630-571-4070, x2205, TKelly@CFEMedia.com
Elena Moeller-Younger, Marketing Manager
773-815-3795, EMYounger@CFEMedia.com
Kristen Nimmo, Marketing Manager
KNimmo@CFEMedia.com
Brian Gross, Marketing Consultant, Global SI Database
630-571-4070, x2217, BGross@CFEMedia.com
Michael Smith, Creative Director
630-779-8910, MSmith@CFEMedia.com
Paul Brouch, Director of Operations
PBrouch@CFEMedia.com
Michael Rotz, Print Production Manager
717-766-0211 x4207, Fax: 717-506-7238
mike.rotz@frycomm.com
Maria Bartell, Account Director, Infogroup Targeting Solutions
847-378-2275, maria.bartell@infogroup.com
Rick Ellis, Audience Management Director
303-246-1250, REllis@CFEMedia.com
Letters to the editor: Please e-mail us your opinions to
MHoske@CFEMedia.com or fax 630-214-4504. Letters should
include name, company, and address, and may be edited. 
Information: For a Media Kit or Editorial Calendar,
email Trudy Kelly at TKelly@CFEMedia.com.
Marketing consultants: See ad index.
Custom reprints, electronic: Brett Petillo
Wright’s Media, 281-419-5725, bpetillo@wrightsmedia.com
Advertising Sales Offices
ContentStream
Patrick Lynch,
Director of Content Marketing Solutions
630-571-4070 x2210
PLynch@CFEMedia.com
AL, FL, GA, MI, TN
Aaron Maassen,
Classified, Product Mart, 
Media Showcase
630-571-4070 x2216
AMaassen@CFEMedia.com
AR, IL, IN, IA, KS, KY, LA, MN, MO, 
MS, NE, ND, OK, OH, SD, TX, WI,
Central Canada 
Bailey Rice
(630) 571-4070 x2206
BRice@CFEMedia.com
AK, AZ, CA, CO, HI, ID, MT, 
NV, NM, OR, UT, WA, WY,
Western Canada 
Iris Seibert
(858) 270-3753
ISeibert@CFEMedia.com
CT, DE, MD, ME, MA, NC, 
NH, NY, NJ, PA, RI, SC, VA, 
VT, WV, DC, Eastern Canada
Julie Timbol
(978) 929-9495
JTimbol@CFEMedia.com
Internation (outside U.S., Candada)
Stuart Smith
+44 208 464 5577
stuart.smith@ssm.co.uk
2017 Programmable Controller 
Software & Hardware Study  . . . . .21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .www.controleng.com/2017ControllersReport
ABB Drives and Controls . . . . . . . .43 . . . . . . . . 17  . . . . . . .www.new.abb.com/drives/us/acs580-campaign
Allied Electronics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7 . . . . . . . . . . 5. . . . . . . .www.alliedelec.com
AutomationDirect . . . . . . . . . . . . . .C2, IFG, OFG 1, 22  . . . . .www.automationdirect.com
BALLUFF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21 . . . . . . . . .11  . . . . . . .www.balluff.com
Beckhoff Automation LLC. . . . . . . .45 . . . . . . . . 19  . . . . . . .www.beckhoff.com
Beijer ELECTRONICS . . . . . . . . . . .40 . . . . . . . . 15  . . . . . . .www.beijerelectronics.com/x2extreme
CONTEMPORARY CONTROLS. . . .5 . . . . . . . . . . 4. . . . . . . .www.ccontrols.com/machine
Control Engineering 
Digital Reports. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .60 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .www.controleng.com/DigitalReports
EZAutomation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Bellyband  . . . . . . . . . . .www.EZAutomation.net
HELUKABEL USA, Inc.  . . . . . . . . . .41 . . . . . . . . 16  . . . . . . .www.helukabel.com
Kepware Technologies  . . . . . . . . . .1 . . . . . . . . . . 2. . . . . . . .www.kepware.com/CE
Moore Industries - Intl. Inc. . . . . . .4 . . . . . . . . . . 3. . . . . . . .www.miinet.com
Moxa Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .www.moxa.com
Panduit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14  . . . . . . . . . 9. . . . . . . .www.panduit.com
ProComSol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13 . . . . . . . . . 8. . . . . . . .www.procomsol.com
SEW-EURODRIVE, Inc. . . . . . . . . . .9, C4. . . . . 6, 21  . . . . . .www.seweurodrive.com
Siemens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11, 15  . . . . .7, 10  . . . . . .www.usa.siemens.com/controllers-ce
TRACO POWER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .44 . . . . . . . . 18  . . . . . . .www.tracopower.com
Yaskawa America, Inc. . . . . . . . . . .C3. . . . . . . . 20  . . . . . . .www.yaskawa.com
Inside Process
Allied Moulded Products, Inc. . . . .P4 . . . . . . . . 14  . . . . . . .www.alliedmoulded.com
Load Controls Inc.. . . . . . . . . . . . . .P3 . . . . . . . . 13  . . . . . . .WWW.LOADCONTROLS.COM
WAGO Corp. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .P2 . . . . . . . . 12  . . . . . . .www.wago.us
REQUEST MORE INFORMATION about products and advertisers in this issue by using 
the http://controleng.com/information link and reader service number located near each.
If you’re reading the digital edition, the link will be live. When you contact a company 
directly, please let them know you read about them in Control Engineering.
 Company 
Page# 
RSN 
Web
®
ad index

BACK TO BASICS
INNOVATIONS
C
ontrol system programming is an art and 
a science. The use of multiple tools, lan-
guages, and functions allows engineers to 
produce creative solutions. With multiple 
methods and tools available, the road to 
success can vary. Programming standards are methods 
of coding that have been declared acceptable and are 
defined and supported typically by control system ven-
dors. Ten best practices can help provide a baseline to 
help ensure consistent success for programmers.
1. Define the structure: When developing a 
program from scratch or augmenting an existing pro-
gram, programmers must step back from the details 
and define a structure. This provides a clear plan of 
how to divide up the functions, variables, and provide 
a logical arrangement. Segmentation of functions 
allows for a design that easily can be expanded and 
followed by other programmers. Start by developing a 
visual diagram of how the code will be structured.
2. Provide documentation: Supporting doc-
umentation of functional requirements and/or spec-
ifications is essential to allow developing functions. 
Just as important are supporting documentation 
of the programming standards that will be used to 
achieve the objectives defined in the specifications.
3. Plan for change: When 
developing a system, it is important 
to plan for future expansion, chang-
es, and reductions.
4. Know system resources:
System resources are a vital part 
of what makes software run effi-
ciently. The last thing programmers 
want to do is overburden the system’s 
capabilities, which could cause laten-
cy or even crash the system. 
5. Reuse code: The easy part 
of control systems is that the same 
functions can be reused to achieve 
the logic task at hand. Program-
mers do not want to hard-code the 
same functions, which would incur 
additional costs and extra time to 
make changes to an application 
that is programmed not using 
function calls.
6. Be consistent: Consistency is a common 
element to success on many levels. Programming is 
no different. Reverse engineering a control system 
to follow a design concept and find inconsistent 
practices is frustrating. This shows immaturity in a 
design and can cause multiple issues over the con-
trol system life cycle.
7. Know your tools: Good programmers 
should have a good understanding of all accessible 
tools. If programmers don’t stay abreast of what’s 
currently available, they are cheating themselves 
and potentially losing work efficiency. Take the 
time to test the programming tools to ensure pro-
gramming and deployment use the most efficient 
methods.
8. Practice good housekeeping: Good 
housekeeping within a program is always a good 
practice. In some cases, programmers have to build 
functions or things to help manage the data and keep 
the work area clean to avoid confusion. Being orga-
nized promotes efficiency and professionalism.
9. Comment on code: Commenting should 
be performed at each level. Meaning, each function 
itself should have a brief comment, but each section 
of code should include a header comment to explain 
the breakdown. Then, the application as a whole 
should be commented on to help the subsequent 
programmer to follow a consistent train of thought. 
Comments should be concise, consistent, and writ-
ten during programming.
10. Track changes: Keeping track of changes 
within an application is essential to maintaining 
it over the lifecycle. Change logs should be incor-
porated into the application and preferably in the 
header section for overall changes. If changes are 
needed at the function layer, they should be reflected 
in the overall header and at the comment layer in the 
function.
Projects with solid solutions enable businesses to 
thrive in the manufacturing environment. ce
Robbie Peoples is an integration manager at Cross 
Co. Integrated Systems Group. This article originally 
appeared on Cross Company’s Innovative Controls blog. 
Edited by Chris Vavra, production editor, Control Engi-
neering, CFE Media, cvavra@cfemedia.com.
Best practices for programmers include deﬁ ning their structure, knowing the
system resources and tools, consistency, and keeping track of changes during a project.
Robbie Peoples, Cross Co.
Ten control system
programming best practices
KEYWORD: Control system 
programming
Control system programming best 
practices should provide a baseline for a 
project so a new programmer easily can 
step in if needed.
Programmers should be consistent and 
knowledgeable about tools.
Following best practices in control 
system programming provide usability, 
flexibility, and maintainability for 
developers and end users.
GO ONLINE
For more programming advice, read 
this article at www.controleng.com.
CONSIDER THIS
What other best practices should 
programmers consider for control 
systems?
More
INNOVATIONS
O
M
I
M
64    •    January 2018     CONTROL ENGINEERING 
www.controleng.com

Yaskawa America, Inc.     Drives & Motion Division     1-800-YASKAWA     yaskawa.com
Iconic Since 1967
Delivering the Future in 
America for 50 Years
Building on our 50-year reputation for 
delivering revolutionary innovation, 
Yaskawa America promises to maintain 
the culture that provides the products, 
processes and people that enable our 
customers to do what they do – better.
Leading Innovation • Quality Products • Industry Knowledge • Personal Service • Custom Solutions
For more info:  http://go.yaskawa-america.com/yai1128
input #20 at www.controleng.com/information

seweurodrive.com / 864-439-7537
Go ahead...talk nerdy to us. We’ll byte 
back. That’s because our fieldbus cards 
and gateways can speak your language. 
We can also eliminate all of your C++ or 
C# programming. That’s right...no special 
language needed! Finally, you can easily 
and dramatically reduce the startup time 
on conveyors, hoists, turntables and many 
other applications. So, keep your bus and 
leave the driving to us. 
Byte Me!
input #21 at www.controleng.com/information

