
Praise for Content is Currency
“Jon Wuebben has done it again. Yes, we are all publishers today, but most organiza-
tions are unclear how to use content marketing within their organization to truly make 
an impact to both attract AND retain customers. If you want the answers to why . . . 
and then how exactly to operationalize content marketing within your business, read 
this book!”
—Joe Pulizzi, Executive Director, Content Marketing Institute, and  
Co-Author, Managing Content Marketing
“Who cares about great content? Your customers do! The more relevant, quality con-
tent your business can provide, the greater your opportunity to attract, engage and 
convert visitors to buyers. Jon covers all the bases in Content is Currency from perso-
nas to SEO to mobile. This book is full of practical tips that you’ll be able to “cash in” 
for better online marketing results.”
—Lee Odden, CEO TopRank Online Marketing, and Author, Optimize
“Great content is one of the most important parts of inbound marketing, and in Con-
tent is Currency Jon does a great job of giving you the foundation to transform your 
company using content to drive your inbound marketing strategy.”
—Mike Volpe, CMO, HubSpot
“Social media and content are connected at the hip. If you do nothing but implement 
Wuebben’s chapters on social media optimization and blogging, you’ll be light years 
ahead of your competitors.”
—Michael A. Stelzner, Founder, SocialMediaExaminer.com, and Author, Launch
“If you can’t create a successful, multi-faceted content program for your company 
after reading Content is Currency, you’re just not trying hard enough. It’s a definitive, 
detailed guide on the realities of making content drive business results. Bravo, Jon 
Wuebben!”
—Jay Baer, Co-Author, The NOW Revolution: 7 Shifts to  
Make Your Business Faster, Smarter, and More Social
“Content rules the web. Producing content is easy. Producing effective content is not. 
In Content is Currency Jon Wuebben leads the reader through the what, why, and how 
of creating effective content in an engaging way. Large businesses, medium business, 

all businesses should read this book. This is not a volume that is going to gather dust 
on your shelf; this is a resource you will return to again and again.”
—Simon Salt, CEO, IncSlingers
“Content is a critical component of your marketing success. The trick is to make your 
content more about the value it provides and less about the marketing and sales of your 
products and services. It’s not easy to do and most brands are failing at it (miserably). 
What does that mean? There is a huge opportunity to understand how content makes 
your business grow. There is a huge opportunity in figuring out how to create valu-
able content instead of content that is thinly veiled marketing blather. Jon Wuebben’s 
Content Is Currency is your roadmap. Do what he says and your content will turn into 
money in the bank.”
—Mitch Joel, President, Twist Image, and Author, Six Pixels of Separation
“Read Content is Currency to learn the profitable content strategies you need to make 
more money online today. It’s full of valuable details and real-world examples that can 
help you upgrade your marketing. I learned a lot reading it and you will, too.”
—Scott Fox, Founder, ClickMillionaires.com
“There’s a ton of marketing gurus saying to market with content, but they are not explain-
ing how to do it. That’s the void Content is Currency fills. Highly recommended.”
—Bob Bly, Copywriter
“Content is Currency should be required reading for small business owners and online 
marketing staff. It gives a step by step guide to business success through an integrated 
content marketing strategy.”
—Anita Campbell, Publisher of Small Business Trends, 
and Co-Author, Visual Marketing

Content 
is
Currency
Developing Powerful Content 
for Web and Mobile
Developing Powerful Content 
for Web and Mobile
Jon Wuebben

This edition first published by Nicholas Brealey Publishing, in 2011.
20 Park Plaza, Suite 1115A	
3-5 Spafield Street, 
Boston, MA 02116 USA	
Clerkenwell, London 
Tel: + 617-523-3801	
EC1R4QB, UK 
Fax: + 617-523-3708	
Tel: +44-(0)-207-239-0360 
	
Fax: +44-(0)-207-239-0370
www.nicholasbrealey.com
© 2011 Jon Wuebben
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever 
without written permission from the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embod-
ied in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made to contact the copyright holders of the included screenshots.
Printed in the United States of America
15  14  13  12  11      1  2  3  4  5
ISBN: 978-1-85788-573-6
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Wuebben, Jon. 
Content is currency : developing powerful content for web and mobile / Jon Wuebben. 
      p. cm. 
ISBN 978-1-85788-573-6 
  1. Internet marketing.  2. Web sites—Design.  3. Electronic commerce.  I. Title. 
HF5415.1265.W84 2011 
658.8’72—dc23
 	
2011 020201

iii
Contents
INTRODUCTION 
xi
Optimized Content Works Harder	
xii
What Will You Learn in Content Is Currency?	
xiii
Who Is This Book For?	
xvii
The Purpose of Content	
xviii
The Structure of Each Chapter	
xxii
Why Am I Qualified to Teach Content?	
xxii
A Few Extra Bonuses for Your Investment	
xxiv
Part I
Content: It’s the Currency	
1
Chapter 1
What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do  
You Maximize Its Effectiveness? 
3
Marketing in the Pre-Internet Days	
4
Why Do You Need Great Content?	
6
Maximizing Its Effectiveness—The Content Marketing Machine	
6
We All Hunger to Connect	
12
Your Content Marketing Goals	
14
Places to Find Content Ideas	
17
The Undeniable Power of Web Content	
19
Current Trends in Content Marketing	
19
Current Research on B2B Content Marketing	
23
Summing It Up	
24

iv	
Content is Currency
Chapter 2
Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence 
27
There’s a Lot of Bad Content Out There	
28
How to Approach Your Web Content Analysis	
29
Overall Quality of the Copy	
29
Putting It All Together—Harmonizing Your Content	
37
Formatting and Usability	
38
How Content Relates to Design	
40
Usability Analysis	
41
Chapter 3
Performing Keyword and Competitive Research 
45
The Essential Practice of Keyword Research	
45
What Words Are Potential Customers Using to Search for You?	
46
Keyword Strategizing and Brainstorming	
51
Look for Emerging Keyword Phrases	
54
Optimize for Long Tail Keyword Phrases	
54
Establish New Phrases That No One Is Using Yet	
55
Keyword Nuances—Some Other Important Considerations	
56
Keyword Relevant Content for e-Commerce	
57
Competitive Research	
58
Chapter 4
Optimizing Your Web Content 
63
Search Engine Ranking Factors—SEOmoz Study	
65
Writing for the Search Engines and for People	
67
Factors That Help Your Page Rank Well	
69
The Query Ranking Factor	
70
The Process for Page Optimization	
71
Metadata	
75
Snippet Content	
77
Alt Text and Text Hidden in Images	
78
Does the Content Work? Analyzing the Results	
79
SEO Best Practices: A Review	
79

	
 Contents
v
PART II
Content for the Web	
81
Chapter 5
Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and 
Articles 
83
Think of Your Website in Terms of Content Modules	
85
The Philosophy Behind Great Website Content	
86
Important Site Pages	
87
Places to Expand Content	
94
Customer (Service) Friendly Content	
95
Other Considerations	
97
E-Commerce Website Content	
98
Landing Pages—Getting That Magic Conversion	
100
User-Generated and Crowdsourced Content	
103
Microsites	
104
Lead-Generation Content for Your Site	
104
Other Types of Website Content That May Help SEO	
108
Build Content Through Licensing	
108
Chapter 6
Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms 
111
Getting the Word Out	
111
Become the News	
112
The Numbers Don’t Lie	
112
A Little Bit of History	
113
Your Game Plan—Putting Together a Press Release SEO Strategy	
113
Writing a Release	
114
Press Release Distribution	
118
What Can Happen If You Do Releases Right	
120
Pitching Your Release to Writers in Your Industry	
120
Track the Page Views and Pickups	
120
The Social Media News Release	
121
A Forward-Thinking Wire Service: PitchEngine	
123
The Social Media “Newsroom”	
124
Summary	
125

vi	
Content is Currency
Part III
Content for Community and Mobile	
127
Chapter 7
Content for Social Media 
129
Social Media Optimization	
130
Why Social Media Optimization Matters	
132
Social Media Is Expanding Like Crazy	
132
Gathering in Groups	
133
How Your Company Benefits from Social Media Content	
134
Types of Social Media Content	
134
Making an Impact with Social Media Content	
135
Profiles of Important Social Media Sites	
141
Using Incentives for Influence	
145
Finding Time for Social Media Content	
146
Mine Social Media for Keyword Research	
146
Social Aggregators	
148
Creating Social Media Content for Specific Company Needs	
150
Final Notes	
150
Summary	
151
Chapter 8
Blogging to Connect with Prospects and Customers 
153
Blog Titles—It All Starts Here	
154
Start with a Great Opening	
155
Blogging Content—Best Practices	
156
Finding Your Own Voice	
159
Managing a Large Blog with Multiple Contributors	
159
Creating Link-Friendly Blog Content	
160
Link-Building Experts Speak . . .	
161
Blog Link Bait	
162
Guest Writing on Other Blogs	
162
Seth Godin Might Have Said It Best . . .	
164

	
 Contents
vii
Chapter 9
The Relationship-Building Power of E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, 
Newsletters, and More 
165
E-Mail As a Content Marketing Medium	
167
Define Your Goals/Audience	
168
The Benefits of Using E-Mail to Connect	
168
Establishing Your Voice	
169
The Subject Line	
170
Best Practices in E-Mail Content Development	
171
Event-Triggered and Behaviorally Targeted E-Mail (Autoresponders)	
172
Integrating Social Media	
175
E-Mail Newsletters—A Few More Important Details	
175
Different Customer Groups Need Different E-Mails	
176
Choosing an E-Mail Service Provider	
177
Common Mistakes with E-Mails	
177
Getting Inside Their Head	
178
Chapter 10
Video Content 
181
Powerful Statistics	
182
Trends in the Web Video Space	
184
Getting Your “Studio” Set Up—The Basics	
185
Putting Together a Video Content Plan Strategy	
187
Capturing Your Story in Moving Images	
188
Storyboarding and Scripting	
189
Production: Shooting the Video Content	
191
Postproduction: Editing the Video Content	
192
Optimizing Video for the Web and Mobile	
193
Distributing Video Content and Maximizing the Marketing Effort	
195
Creating a Mass of Video Content	
196
Using an Outside Vendor for Video Production	
198
A Final Word on Web Videos	
200

viii	
Content is Currency
Chapter 11
Audio Content—Podcasts, Webinars, and More 
201
Podcasting	
202
Creating a Simple Podcast	
203
The Importance of Metadata	
204
Best Practices for Podcasting	
204
Developing a Strong Bond with Your Audience	
206
Webinars	
207
Best Practices for Webinars	
208
Webinar Platform: GoToMeeting (Citrix) or WebEx (Cisco)?	
210
Summary	
211
Chapter 12
Content for Mobile 
213
The Third Screen	
215
Additional Benefits of Mobile Content	
215
Mobile Content Features Are Just as Compelling	
216
Who Is Your Mobile Audience?	
217
A Mobile Content Strategy	
217
Making Your Website Content Mobile Friendly	
220
Writing Content for Mobile	
221
Mobile Applications	
224
Mobile Advertising Content	
225
Location-Based Mobile Marketing Content	
228
Mobile SEO	
229
Integrating Mobile with Your Total Content Marketing Program	
230
Next Steps	
231
Chapter 13
Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine 
233
The Content Life Cycle	
234
Your Stage with the Content Curriculum	
234
The Content Marketing Machine	
236
Content Planning and Strategy	
237
Content Creation	
239

	
 Contents
ix
Develop a Content Publishing Schedule	
240
Need Content Ideas?	
242
Content Marketing and Distribution	
245
Content Management	
246
Content Curation	
247
Current Trends in Content Marketing	
247
Content Marketing Best Practices	
248
Some Final Thoughts	
250
That’s a Wrap!	
251
Index 
253
Part I
Part II
Part III

This page intentionally left blank 

Introduction
C
ontent. It’s become a very powerful word in the Internet age, empowering people every-
where to have a voice. Through words, video, audio, and all its other forms, content tells 
the story of your product or service and propels your brand into the hearts and minds 
of your prospects, customers, and others. Without content, the web would simply be an 
empty shell of graphics, meaningless navigational menus, and links that go to empty 
pages. Good content is critical. Great content has truly become a powerful weapon in the 
web and mobile marketing arsenal of successful businesses around the globe.
What are we referring to when we say “content”? Here is just a small sample of the 
types of web and mobile content you can produce:
Blog posts
7
7
Website pages
7
7
YouTube videos
7
7
E-books
7
7
Case studies
7
7
Podcasts
7
7
Webinars
7
7
E-newsletters
7
7
Digital magazines
7
7
Press releases
7
7
Articles
7
7
White papers
7
7
Content widgets
7
7
E-mails
7
7
Autoresponders (a type of e-mail)
7
7
Of course, your content serves no purpose if it’s not being effectively marketed 
to your target audience, so a few years ago, content marketing was born. Part art, part 
science, and all focus, content marketing is the lynchpin of all successful online busi-
ness endeavors. Its pursuit is what many preach, but few practice well.
In my first book, Content Rich: Writing Your Way to Wealth on the Web, I taught 
thousands of businesses, large and small, how to write powerful copy that would get 
their sites noticed by search engines and motivate their visitors to buy. Since that time 
(fall of 2008), content marketing has taken this notion into far-reaching places and 
truly become a strategic play in business, a true phenomenon in commerce and culture. 
But, it’s not just a passing fad or marketing trend, it is clearly here to stay. Through 
content, you connect. Content is the currency that powers the connection. It speaks to 
us, makes us want to share it, and motivates people to buy. Web and mobile content 
xi

xii	
Content is Currency
has a value that can and should be exchanged. Like the tenets of social networking, 
the effective use of content is not only helping to define the age, but is taking its place 
in the pantheon of great online business strategies.
In this sequel to Content Rich, I build on the lessons I taught then and greatly 
expand upon them to show you how to capitalize on all types of web and mobile 
content—not just copy—and leverage them all the way to the bank and back, many 
times over. I also include the latest research, ideas, and case studies, so you can put 
web and mobile content to work for your company—today.
When it comes to the web, content has been king for a long time, and it’s not step-
ping down from the throne any time soon. With mobile, new content opportunities 
are expanding like crazy. The sad truth, however, is that most content is poorly written 
or produced and doesn’t help companies get the results they are hoping for. In fact, 
most business owners spend all their energy and money thinking about the appear-
ance and the architecture of their sites and invest very little time thinking about the 
content. Failing to look at content from a strategic point of view, they see their web 
pages and other content channels as something they need to fill quickly. Content Is 
Currency alerts you to the dangers of this “design myopia” and shows the importance 
of content from every angle.
In the coming pages, you will learn the important elements of content and con-
tent marketing, not the least of which is how to develop content using search engine 
optimization (SEO), social media optimization (SMO), and call to action techniques 
that will improve website and mobile performance, search engine rankings, and, most 
important, connection and sales conversion. Plus, I’ll show you how you can achieve 
these benefits for a fraction of the cost of using an SEO consultant, search marketing 
firm, or high-priced ad agency.
Optimized Content Works Harder
So, what is content development that emphasizes SEO? It is the art and science of pro-
ducing web content that the search engines (and your site visitors) deem important. 
If a certain web page doesn’t “tell” Google what its topic is, the search engine is left to 
try to figure it out. Certain things need to be done in order to optimize the content of a 
web page as much as possible. For any reasonably competitive keyword (the words that 
people use to find a website), there will be around thirty million to fifty million results. 
Getting your site into the top ten listings is the goal. If your content is optimized in 
each important area, you have a good chance of being in this high-ranking group.
Seventy percent of companies that have a website do not know how to accomplish 
this goal; those that do usually fall victim to that high-priced SEO consultant, search 
marketing firm, or ad agency I mentioned earlier. This is not to say there aren’t some 
very respected firms out there doing great work, because there are. But there are also 
many other firms and so called “experts” who make big promises but don’t deliver.

	
 Introduction
xiii
As the complete guide to SEO content development, Content Is Currency shows 
you exactly how to optimize the content on your website and how, in the end, to get 
people to buy. But that’s just the beginning. I’ll also show you how to produce and 
optimize content for every conceivable format: blog posts, YouTube videos, e-books, 
case studies, podcasts, webinars, mobile apps, e-newsletters, digital magazines, press 
releases, articles, and more. But I don’t expect you to be convinced of that quite yet. 
Just read on, and the lessons will manifest.
What Will You Learn in Content Is Currency?
This book is written to help you connect better with your potential online and mobile 
customers, increase your site’s search engine rankings, and/or help you learn the skills 
of search engine optimized (SEO) web content and content marketing.
Don’t understand web content? Aren’t good at writing, blogging, or video produc-
tion? Don’t have time to be active in social media? No worries. By reading this book, 
you’ll gain an understanding of the power that the right content can have for your 
business, and then you can simply hire a qualified service provider to do it for you. 
Who produces it is less important than what the content is and how it connects you 
to your target market.
Content marketing is an investment. Planned, developed, distributed, and main-
tained correctly, your content will give you a return on investment in as little as a 
month or two. That’s not bad. Plus, once you achieve higher search engine rankings, 
social media influence, and increased sales, you will simply need to maintain that level 
of success—or increase it if you’d like to generate an even higher level of influence. But 
I don’t mean to discount the time required. It is an investment. And it takes a while 
to get up and running. But once you commit to quality web and mobile content, your 
business will never be the same.
The Real World
Content Is Currency is full of specific examples, practical advice, and step-by-step 
instructions that will help those doing business online and in the mobile space to 
achieve the results they have dreamed about. This book covers the development of all 
types of online and mobile content, including video, audio, and podcasts, as well as 
social media content. You will learn:
What types of content you need for your specific business, target market, and 
7
7
industry, together with the best type of website
How certain content tricks can influence search engine rankings and sales 
7
7
conversion
How search engines rank content and why
7
7

xiv	
Content is Currency
How to develop, distribute, and leverage social media content to connect with 
7
7
your target market and grow market share
How to integrate the unique elements of your web presence: website, landing 
7
7
page, blog, article, e-mail, newsletter, autoresponder, pay-per-click (PPC) ad, 
and press release copy, as well as online video and audio content
How content development has affected the online and mobile presence of many 
7
7
companies, using case studies featuring businesses in a variety of industries
Content development and management strategies for Twitter, Facebook,  
7
7
LinkedIn, YouTube, Flickr, StumbleUpon, and other social networking sites
Everything you need to know about mobile content in this rapidly developing 
7
7
and promising marketing channel
Strategies for automating content creation, distribution, and management
7
7
How other businesses have benefited from having a solid content strategy in 
7
7
place
The book is broken up into three distinct sections:
Part I. Content: It’s the Currency
7
7
Part II. Content for the Web
7
7
Part III. Content for Community and Mobile
7
7
In Part I, I’ll cover what web and mobile content is and why you need it for your 
business. I’ll introduce the various types of web and mobile content and explain how 
you can generate more traffic and sales through its effective use. I’ll discuss how content 
serves two primary functions: It helps search engines find your pages and it speaks 
to your customers in a compelling way. I’ll review the importance of web and mobile 
analytics and their role in the content development process.
Next, I’ll explain why content works. As you’ll see, effective web and mobile content 
capitalizes on “pull” marketing techniques and the power of “being where people are 
searching.” If you do this right, you can revolutionize your business. Why is effective 
content so powerful? One reason is that it is one of the most important elements of 
Google’s search algorithm (as well as Bing’s and Yahoo!’s); if you produce content that 
the search engines deem important, they will reward you for it. The other reason, of 
course, is that your target market wants—and needs—to connect with you.
Analyzing your current content is next. The best web and mobile content in the 
world is useless if the user can’t understand, connect, or access it. I’ll walk you through 
the important elements of your web and mobile presence, key areas that you’ll want to 
check to ensure a positive experience for all visitors. Of course, we’ll review important 
format elements of content such as calls to action, headings and subheadings, and the 
importance of balancing quality content with quality design.

	
 Introduction
xv
Content Is Currency then goes into keyword, competitive, and industry research. It 
is important to conduct these steps correctly in order to make your content as effective 
and as search engine optimal and socially friendly as possible. In addition, by figuring 
out what keywords people are searching for and which keywords your competitors are 
using, you can choose the best keywords for your web and mobile content and ensure 
you get the exposure you need.
I’ll round out Part I by showing you how to optimize your web and mobile content 
for search engines. Once you have a complete list of keywords and phrases for your site, 
I’ll show you how to place them in the content and meta tags for maximum search engine 
ranking and effectiveness. I’ll also show you how to produce content that simultaneously 
pleases site visitors and the search engines, a feat many companies find difficult to do.
In Part II, we’ll get into all the types of online content you can use to connect with 
your prospects. At the top of the list is website copywriting, which I deem to be the 
most important type of online content. Your website serves as the hub of your online 
marketing efforts, with all other content built around it. For your website, I’ll describe 
the types of pages you must have, based on the type of business you run, and tell you 
how to produce content that connects with your visitors. This includes specifics for your 
home page, the company information page, product and services pages, and thank you 
pages, as well as secondary pages like FAQs, “Why Us,” and contact pages.
We’ll then get into case studies, e-books, white papers, and articles. This type of 
content helps establish you as a trustworthy expert in the eyes of others. You can also 
use this content as a free offer in exchange for visitor contact information. You will 
learn how to produce case studies, white papers, e-books, and articles that will resonate 
with your target market and get prospects to contact you.
Next comes the press release. Online press releases serve two purposes: Getting 
additional first-page rankings in search engines and communicating your company 
news to the media. In this chapter, you will learn how to write press releases and how 
to distribute them effectively. This chapter also discusses the importance of a media/
press room page on your site to give the media easy access to company information 
and news.
Building Community
In Part III, we’ll cover what I call relationship-building content and content for web and 
mobile applications. This includes e-mail, autoresponder, or newsletter content. These 
content vehicles should offer free advice and tools that help improve your customers’ 
lives, build trust, and foster viral activity. I’ll show how to take a customer-centric view 
in the development and distribution of community-focused content in order to build 
long-term relationships, and we’ll examine why autoresponder e-mails are one of the 
most important tools for building a new relationship with a prospect.

xvi	
Content is Currency
And how about content for social media? Most people realize the importance of 
Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and YouTube but do not understand how to populate 
their profiles with substantive content that will increase their influence and authority. 
We’ll get into the major areas of social media optimization (SMO) and show how you 
can make it work for your brand. Content Is Currency highlights the differences in 
producing content for social networking sites, shows how to automate the process for 
maximum efficiency, and explains how you can ensure a solid return on investment 
(ROI). Yes, you can see a return on the time and dollars invested in social media.
Of course, your content marketing efforts will be dead in the water if you don’t 
blog regularly. So, we’ll dive into blogging to help you connect with prospects and 
customers. I’ll show you how to write compelling blog posts, get other bloggers to 
link to you, and build your online community. The interactive and real-time nature 
of blogs means that you can capitalize on near-instant interaction with prospects and 
customers on your blog. I’ll show you how to use blogs to become an industry expert, 
launch products, conduct interviews, and perform surveys.
Been on YouTube lately? Yes, and so has everyone else. Video content has only 
grown in importance over the past few years, and it has become essential for anyone 
who wants to succeed online. Video is powerful online content that engages the eyes 
and ears and educates your audience on some important topic. It also motivates people 
to take action like nothing else, no matter what product or service you sell. Because of 
YouTube, we are inundated with video content. Content Is Currency shows you how 
to produce, edit, optimize, and launch video content that will get noticed and lead to 
new relationships—and new sales.
One of the least-used types of content is one that’s the least understood: audio 
content. This includes podcasts, webinars, and teleseminars. Of course, this type of 
content has also exploded in popularity on the web, although it’s dwarfed by video. 
I’ll show you how to produce, edit, optimize, and launch audio content easily and 
affordably for your business.
We then dive headfirst into mobile content. As you’ll see, this quickly growing 
and very compelling type of content is changing everything. And although we are right 
in the middle of its development and things are changing every day, we’ll get into the 
basics of producing connection-friendly, high-conversion mobile content for your busi-
ness, whether it’s a new app or text message campaign, or simply making your website 
content “mobile friendly.” The key with mobile is finding a way to distinguish yourself 
from the competition and looking at your efforts holistically with other content chan-
nels so you can achieve a consistent ROI. With mobile, your content doesn’t always 
work the first time, but when it does, the conversion numbers can be huge.
Real-World Application
My goal? To be able to effectively provide you with a road map for online marketing 
success by capitalizing on your content marketing efforts. From content development 

	
 Introduction
xvii
to content leveraging, content management and curation to content archiving, you’ll 
see how real companies are winning in the content age with compelling, industry-
leading web and mobile content. And I’ll show you how to make it happen for your 
own business.
Whether you are a start-up, a growing firm, or a large multinational corpora-
tion, I’ll provide you with the quickest, most effective ways to develop and distribute 
content. I’ll also show the shortcuts and the automation you can bring to the content 
development process. I’ll review the specific content tactics and strategies you need to 
employ and I’ll discuss the power of local search marketing for geographically based 
businesses that serve a specific community or region.
We’ll wrap up the book by setting you on your content development and market-
ing path. Engaging the content life cycle and your users’ specific needs, I’ll show how 
to bring simplicity and quality to all the content you produce. Search engines, social 
networking, and mobile: How is the content development process tied to these three 
dynamic areas of the online marketing world? I’ll uncover the answers.
Who Is This Book For?
If you have a new business or an existing small business, it’s definitely for you. Making 
sure your web presence connects with your prospects is critical—every lead is impor-
tant. You never know where your next big customer is going to come from. If you’re 
running a small business, you either:
Don’t have a website
7
7
Have a website but need some improvements in search rankings and social 
7
7
media influence
Have a website but need help converting prospective customers into sales
7
7
Have a website but need help with search rankings, social media influence, 
7
7
and sales conversion
Are in good shape in all of the above areas, but want to get involved in mobile 
7
7
marketing and need to create powerful content
Whatever your specific content needs, I think you’ll find this book very helpful in 
your pursuit of influence, connection, and sales.
If your small business operates exclusively on the web, then this book is even more 
important for you. It doesn’t matter whether you sell a product or a service, are business 
to business (B2B) or business to consumer (B2C)—web and mobile content and the 
effective marketing of that content can help raise your game across the board.
Who else is this book for? Growing midsized companies and large corporations. 
If you’re a growing business, you need to know how you can stand out among your 
competitors and how you can grow market share by using the power of content market-
ing. You need to be able to take what you have and build upon your strong foundation. 
Content Is Currency will lead you down the right path.

xviii	
Content is Currency
What if you’re part of a large corporation, struggling with content creation and 
curation? You need to know how content marketing can strengthen your existing posi-
tion and reduce your marketing costs. Lead acquisition and retention can be expensive. 
Content Is Currency shows you how to leverage the power of content to reduce costs 
and connect with thousands more potential customers, quickly.
The Purpose of Content
It’s important to understand that each type of content you produce serves a specific 
purpose. The goal of all your content is to connect with those who are interested in 
what you do (and to be ranked high in search engine results and popular on social 
sites). But, each individual content type serves important roles in the overall content 
marketing arsenal. Some companies use only two or three kinds of content and are 
incredibly effective. Others use many different types, but still miss the mark. Depending 
on your business and your goals, there are important things you need to know about 
content before you start creating it.
Let’s cover the content on your website first. The goal there is to initiate a connec-
tion, to inform prospects about what you do and how you can help them. The content 
on your site should get visitors to take action—to sign up, enroll, or download some-
thing. You want to do business with these people, and at the very least, continue the 
“conversation” so you can start building a relationship.
Next comes your blog content. The goal of your blog is to inform or educate readers 
about topics that they deem to be important. If you sell hammocks, you could write a 
series of blog posts on the best places in the world to enjoy the comforts of and views 
from a hammock. Or you could write a few posts on the types of hammocks available 
and the differences between them. Or you could post product reviews. Whatever the 
nature of your business, I’ll cover everything you need to know about blog content in 
this book.
Case studies, e-books, white papers, and articles also help inform and educate your 
audience about things they want to know, all without selling your services. Of course, as 
you’ll see, you can softly sell your company, but only at the very end and with a simple 
call to action. (You would not sell your company directly in a blog post however.)
A case study is exactly what you think it is: a review of a successful client engage-
ment for your business. The difference between an e-book and a white paper? An e-book 
is more informal, casual, conversational, and brief. A white paper is more researched, 
authoritative, and professional in tone. White papers are typically longer, too. Articles 
are simply four hundred- to eight hundred–word how-to or explanatory pieces for 
quick consumption and easy education. We’ll get into all the details for these types 
of content vehicles.
As I mentioned earlier, online press releases serve two purposes: getting additional 
first-page rankings in the search engines and communicating your company news to 

	
 Introduction
xix
the media. But, in addition to these functions, they help you brand your company and 
build a following. A series of effective press releases, optimized and distributed the 
right way for your audience, is something that very few companies do. We’ll show you 
how to knock this easy content vehicle out of the park every time, and in so doing, 
distance yourself from your competition. Like any other powerful branding exercise, 
press releases can give you tremendous leverage and create the impression that you 
are a clear authority. Wouldn’t you like the media to contact you for your opinion on 
industry developments instead of you pitching them? It can and will happen when you 
unleash the power of the press release.
When it comes to content, the easiest to understand is probably the online ad. 
Obviously, your goal with advertising is to generate interest among new audiences. But 
are you writing compelling copy? Is it balanced with stellar design? Are you offering 
something for free? These are all elements of the best online ads. It’s shocking to see 
how much money companies spend on web ads because they simply don’t know what 
they are doing. Hint: The goal is not to make Google and other ad networks rich! Okay, 
I guess it’s too late for that, but the bottom line is that you want to use your resources 
efficiently and get the most bang for your buck. Great ad content will deliver on these 
objectives, whether it’s a PPC ad, banner ad, text link, or video ad.
Your social media content is used to build rapport and grow your community. Like 
your blog, it is there to share interesting topics, industry research, interviews, product 
reviews, and more. It also inspires your prospects and customers to talk to each other 
and to provide you with feedback regarding their thoughts, opinions, and advice.
On Twitter, it’s entirely possible that you will hear complaints and frustrations 
about your company or products. Because you’ll have an established presence with 
some fantastic social media content and will be monitoring it regularly, you’ll have 
the ability to address this criticism quickly to make it go away, which could actually 
make your customer more loyal. That’s powerful content marketing in action, and I’ll 
show you how to capitalize on it.
E-mails, newsletters, and autoresponders keep you in a prospect’s or customer’s 
inbox on a regular basis. And marketing is all about frequency and recency, right? 
E-mail content is also about adding value along the way. In other words, as with the 
other types of content, you will be publishing high-quality content that educates and 
inspires. Let’s face it: There is a lot coming at us all the time. Staying in front of your 
audience and giving them stuff they want can be a very powerful combination.
As you’ll see, with video content you are harnessing the power of television and 
combining it with the power of personal choice. You put spoken words and visual action 
together, and allow your audience to turn you on or off at their convenience. Through this 
medium, you are able to show emotion and attitude and motivation; essentially, you have 
all the benefits of nonverbal communication, something that the printed word simply 
cannot deliver. We are knee-deep into the online video era, and those who take advantage 
of the burgeoning medium now will benefit immensely in the years to come.

xx	
Content is Currency
And what about audio content? You can connect with your target market practi-
cally anywhere using this medium—in the car, on the treadmill, or on the subway. The 
other benefit to audio content—especially webinars and teleseminars—is that it offers a 
golden ticket to Fortune 500 business. Both in study and practice, corporate America 
considers webinars and teleseminars to have significant advantages over other types 
of online learning. Maybe it’s the fact that this type of content is usually delivered by 
an authority. Or maybe it’s because this type of content assists in making partnering 
and buying decisions. Whatever the case, audio content resonates.
Finally, there is mobile content. What are the objectives in the mobile marketplace? 
Well, plain and simple, you need to be everywhere people are. And mobile is where your 
target market is all the time. We live with our smartphones! If you can always access 
your audience, then you have achieved something that few companies ever do: almost 
total access and attention. Plus, mobile is the great frontier. New developments are 
happening every day, right before our very eyes, in this exciting content medium. And 
your company has a chance to help shape the future road with your mobile content.
Throughout the book I’ll also let you know about complementary books that I 
think are outstanding and could help further the cause. One I’ll share with you right 
now is The Yahoo! Style Guide; it’s essential reading if you want to understand the 
mechanics of writing and producing online content. It explains sentence structure, 
shows before and after examples of HTML code, and much more.
Figure I-1 
The Yahoo! Style Guide

	
 Introduction
xxi
And you know what else? I believe in the power of content . . . so I’m giving you a 
big, fat dose of it right here in this book! I really want your company to succeed, so, if 
you like, call this book a passionate desire to help in any way I can. I love marketing, 
I love the web, I love my iPhone and my iPad, and I can’t get enough! Perhaps you are 
the same way.
The Content Life Cycle
Part of what I’ll discuss in this book is the ecosystem of online and mobile content, or 
what I call the “content life cycle.” It’s critically important to understand that—unlike 
traditional marketing pieces such as direct mail and brochures—online content is a 
living, breathing thing. It’s truly evergreen and, in many cases, stays online forever. 
In other words, your content carries your reputation and your brand with it, in per-
petuity. This can be a great thing or a bad thing, depending on what that content is. 
But the main thing to understand is that this dynamic exists. When you understand 
that, you can take advantage of content’s lasting benefits and get a big leg up on your 
competitors.
We’ll discuss the content life cycle more in coming chapters, but essentially it is 
this: content planning and strategy, content creation, content marketing/distribution, 
and content management/curation. This cycle continues forever, and as time goes by, 
you raise the quantity and the quality of your content with the expectation of reach-
ing more and more qualified prospects and building a relationship with them along 
the way.
Strategy and
Planning
Creaon
Markeng and 
Distribuon
Management
and Curaon
Figure I-2 
The Content Life Cycle

xxii	
Content is Currency
The Structure of Each Chapter
In the pages that follow, you’ll find a standard pattern of information:
An overview of the specific content type
7
7
Industry trends
7
7
Best practices (and benchmarks)
7
7
How-to advice
7
7
Case studies that detail content put into action
7
7
The key to learning is to hit on the most important points and communicate them in a 
way that’s easily understood so that everyone learns, as learning styles are different from 
person to person. Some chapters will be long, others a bit shorter, but I can promise 
you this: there will be no fluff or excess information.
I don’t know about you, but I really don’t like it when I’m given ten different 
ways to do something. I want to know the best way to do something and move on to 
the next thing. In business, our time is limited; we have so much coming at us, every 
minute, every hour, every day. Content marketing is best accomplished when it’s done 
efficiently. Add in the powerful concepts of automation and leverage, and you’ll be well 
on your way.
Why Am I Qualified to Teach Content?
That’s a great question. Allow me the chance to tell you why I believe I can help. As I 
mentioned earlier, I have passion. Lots of it. As a born writer and communicator, I live 
to connect with others in meaningful ways. Extend that desire to the online marketing 
world, pair it with enthusiasm and curiosity, and you have lightning in a bottle, right? 
My goal, like yours, is connection, and I don’t stop until I’ve achieved my objective. 
You might be able to relate.
I am also well known in the industry as a web content strategist, copywriter, 
speaker, entrepreneur, and online marketing leader. I love what I do. Although I don’t 
write much web content anymore (thankfully, I have a team of the very best content 
writers and video editors on earth), I have personally written for more than three hun-
dred web content projects in the past few years. And I feel rewarded, knowing that I 
helped dramatically improve my clients’ business by providing them with compelling, 
search engine optimized content. It’s what fires me up and makes me come back for 
more: helping businesses take it to the next level in an online environment.
I founded my first business, Custom Copywriting, in 2003. Rising quickly as one 
of the fastest-growing content providers in the industry, Custom Copywriting sup-
plied web copy for the Fortune 500, small start-ups, many midsized organizations, 
nonprofits, and individuals. I then wrote Content Rich: Writing Your Way to Wealth 

	
 Introduction
xxiii
on the Web in 2008. The reaction to that book was mind-blowing. Everywhere I went, 
every place I spoke, businesspeople told me how much they had needed a book like 
this, a detailed, easy to read, how-to manual on writing copy for conversion and for 
search engine domination. I was humbled and blessed by the book’s impact. Almost 
every day, I received e-mails from people all over the world expressing how much they 
enjoyed the book. But what really blew me away was what so many of them said:
“Jon, you motivated me to finally start my business.”
“I can’t tell you how inspiring this book was to me. I am so excited to get out there 
and start connecting.”
“This is the first time I understood what SEO copywriting was. Every other book 
was too complicated. Thanks Jon . . . so much. You changed my life.”
I was truly touched. And I knew that I had found something special. I also discov-
ered something in myself I didn’t know I had: the ability to motivate and inspire. My 
goal when I wrote the book was simply to teach others how to write online content. 
I came out of the experience with a new passion: to start as many great businesses as 
possible! I thought, “Let’s fire people up!” One of the outcomes of this was the start of 
my nonprofit, Urban Entrepreneurs, a group that helps the less fortunate in our inner 
cities start businesses, at no cost to them.
And something else happened after I wrote Content Rich: dozens of companies 
and individuals contacted my company, wanting us to write content for their websites 
and blogs. With my team of great writers, we were able to do just that. So my company 
grew considerably.
ContentLaunch.com, the next evolution of my business, began in early 2011. 
Content Launch is a worldwide provider of online copy, video, and audio content. 
Eventually, we’ll be producing content in eight major languages around the world. I 
can’t wait to see the outstanding content we’ll create for these new audiences!
Why else am I qualified to teach this stuff? I speak regularly to business groups 
across the country on the topics of social media, online content strategy, entrepreneur-
ship, SEO copywriting, and online marketing. In the past few years I have been invited 
to speak at The Online Marketing Summit, Shop.org Merchandising Conference, Media 
Relations Summit, New Media Expo, and many other industry events. There is nothing 
quite like a live performance. For me, it’s a thrill to be in front of any audience talking 
about my passion, whether it’s thirty people or three thousand.
I also teach Entrepreneurship and Business 101 at MiraCosta and Miramar colleges 
in San Diego. So, I’m always out there teaching, helping, and advancing the cause, one 
on one, face to face, in any way I can. And you can bet that I weave in all the important 
tenets of content creation, content marketing, and content strategy.
I truly value education, as I’m sure many of you do. After all, you decided to pick 
up this book, hoping to learn a few things. In terms of my educational background, 

xxiv	
Content is Currency
I have an MBA in international marketing from the Thunderbird School of Global 
Management and a BS in management from California State University, Chico. The 
lessons I learned at Thunderbird (ranked the number one international business school 
for many years) were absolutely incredible. Going to school with students from fifty dif-
ferent countries around the world is something everyone should experience, especially 
considering the global business world we live in today. I attended Thunderbird at the 
dawn of the Internet age—1997 to 1998—so the timing was perfect.
My greatest satisfaction? Helping other businesses improve their online marketing 
efforts. It’s a total thrill. And I continue to have a strong passion for it.
A Few Extra Bonuses for Your Investment
Content Is Currency has been a labor of love, a true extension of my passion for writing, 
teaching, and helping other businesses succeed. So, like I did with my first book, I’m 
doing something that few business book authors do: I’m giving you lots of free stuff!
In addition to the contents of this book, and in the true spirit of content market-
ing, you also get the following free items:
An audio program that discusses key topics from this book by profiling certain 
7
7
content marketing business case studies
An online video of a recent performance of the live version of 
7
7
Content Is 
Currency
Complimentary web content inspection where we review your pages, links, 
7
7
meta tags, and more to uncover areas of opportunity
Twenty percent discount on any marketing consulting and/or seminar pro-
7
7
grams when you contact us for a content project
So, there you have it, a few freebies that will further help you with all your content 
marketing endeavors. Access to our audio program, live Content Is Currency video, 
and other free online bonus items are included in your book order. Simply go to www.
contentiscurrency.com and register your name and e-mail address. 
I’m excited to have this opportunity with you! I think you’re going to really enjoy 
the topics covered in the book. I can honestly say I’ve enjoyed researching, writing, and 
editing it. Like my first book, it has been a lot of work, but a lot of fun, too.
After you finish the book, feel free to send me an e-mail at jon@contentlaunch.
com and tell me what you thought, or feel free to review it on Amazon. I always like to 
know what made the biggest impact on people and what could use some improvement. 
It’s the only way we get better.
A couple of other things: Connecting with content is mostly about being consis-
tent and getting the basics right. Of course, you want to produce great content and be 
as original, authentic, and thought-provoking as you can, but it really comes down to 
making a commitment. So, I’ll show you how to best integrate content and content 

	
 Introduction
xxv
marketing into your existing routine so you can get it done efficiently and make it a 
lifelong habit.
The other thing I want to be sure I do? Fire you up and get you content-inspired! 
I want to enable you to extend your passion for your products or services into the 
hearts and minds of people everywhere. . . . And I want to show you how you can turn 
the power of content into a rich database of loyal customers and a fistful of recurring 
revenue.
So, let’s get started. . . . Why is content the “currency” of the web and mobile?

This page intentionally left blank 

P a r t  I
Content: It’s the Currency

This page intentionally left blank 

C h a p t e r  1
What Is Content Marketing, Why 
Do You Need It, and How Do You 
Maximize Its Effectiveness?
N
ow you know what to expect from Content Is Currency, but how will the lessons 
apply to your company? How can you capitalize on the information? It all starts 
right here, with the fundamentals of content marketing.
Readers of this book will no doubt reflect a wide range of online marketing 
capabilities, from the rookies who are starting their very first business to the more 
experienced marketers who are seeking a few new strategies or insights into the latest 
techniques. We’ll assume that most people reading this book are at the novice level, 
so as to not miss anyone. From what I’ve seen out there in the business world, gleaned 
from speaking, consulting, and working on websites, 80 percent of businesses know 
only a limited amount about web and mobile content and how it affects them, no mat-
ter what they may think they know. The good news is that there is an upside to being 
in this situation. Your biggest online success is in front of you!
In the past seven years, I have had Fortune 100 companies as clients, and even 
they have made mistakes with web content. Yes, it’s true. Just because you are large and 
well established doesn’t mean you have your finger on the pulse of content marketing. 
Number one on the list of challenges for these large companies? Not using metadata 
and keyword research correctly. Number two? Not believing in the power of social 
media. More to come on these points.
One of the first things we learn about website development is that simply building 
a website or establishing your social media presence does not ensure that people will 
come. You have to register your website with the search engines. You may need to open 
an account on Google Places. You’ll want to build inbound and outbound links. For 
your social networking activities, you’ll need to reach out to others in your community, 
provide value to the group, and stay involved. And yes, you have to create compelling, 
value-added content and get it distributed—smartly.
3

4	
Content is Currency
So, we’ve established what web and mobile content are and that you need them, but 
what is content marketing? Content marketing is the act of sharing tips, advice, and 
other value-added information as a means of converting prospects into customers and 
customers into loyal, lifelong, repeat buyers. Utilizing the power of opt-in permission 
to deliver content via e-mail, RSS feeds, social media channels, and other methods, 
your goal is to become a valued resource for hundreds and thousands of people who, 
in time, will want to buy what you sell. Over a period of weeks, months, and years, 
you’ll build a solid relationship with them and earn their trust. You don’t want to sell 
them once and never see them again. You want to make a friend—a friend who enjoys 
buying from you—for life.
So, there you go, plain and simple. That is content marketing in a nutshell. But, 
how do you make it work for you? Stay tuned . . . it’s all here.
Marketing in the Pre-Internet Days
It’s been said many times before in practically all the important online marketing books 
out there, but we need to mention it here as well: the historical context of this medium 
called marketing. What did companies use in the years before the Internet? Most com-
mon were “interruption” marketing techniques such as television commercials, radio 
ads, or direct mail pieces, which tended to annoy many people and were difficult to 
measure. Today, these traditional media vehicles, including print advertising, are in 
decline. And the reasons are self-evident: it costs too much and doesn’t connect with 
prospects as well as it once did.
Back in the day, the large corporations that owned popular magazines and news-
papers were essentially database companies that collected detailed information about 
their subscribers; as a result of this power, they could get top dollar from companies 
that wanted to advertise. The best web and mobile companies are now doing the same 
thing, but with much more customer data—right down to the things they like to do in 
their spare time. It’s a marketer’s dream!
As you’ll see, content marketing is very different from the interruption techniques 
of the past, and involves delivering requested information with independent value 
that creates trust, credibility, and authority—and, in the end, more sales and more 
satisfied customers.
Content marketing is about doing lots of things right: having a blog and establish-
ing a platform. Check. Having a social media presence on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, 
and other sites. Check. Providing free content in exchange for contact information. 
Check. Getting people on your autoresponder list and regularly sending them infor-
mative tips and advice about things that are important to them. Check that, too. In 
essence, you want to leave no stone unturned, showing up everywhere and anywhere 
your prospects may be hanging out online (and on their mobile devices, too). Wherever 
they go, there you will be as well, with their permission, of course. They won’t be able to 
miss you. And you won’t be able to miss them. Casting a big net that covers every area 

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
5
of your target sea will help you find all types of fish you’ve never seen or even thought 
you’d see. And that’s the key.
If you start to feel like a publisher with all this content marketing stuff, well, then 
you’ll know that you’re doing things right. Like it or not, everyone is a publisher in 
today’s business world. You business veterans out there, just take a look at all the mar-
keting activities you have done up to this point—it feels a lot like publishing, doesn’t 
it? Like a magazine or television station, you need to produce content—all types of 
content—for your consuming prospects. Before, you were just a provider of products 
and services. Now, you are a trusted expert resource for your customers!
How do you create compelling content? By focusing on delivering relevant, valued 
information that people will notice. When you do this, you’ll generate trust, credibility, 
and expert status in your particular industry, and people will come to you when they 
are ready to buy. That’s it. Some people will be attracted to your content immediately. 
Some will only want the free stuff. Others will be “just looking.” And some will have 
the big bucks and want to spend it with you (hopefully).
And what about this thing called SEO, or search engine optimization? You may 
have heard it mentioned, but how does it fit into the content marketing world?
The words and phrases you choose in your copy, the clips you choose for your 
videos, and the way you sound in a podcast all contribute to the overall picture of your 
web success. But you have to tag and optimize them so they don’t go unnoticed.
And what about SMO, or social media optimization? It’s equally important. Below 
is Wikipedia’s definition, which I think is solid1:
1 Wikipedia. “Social Media Optimization.” Accessed 2/18/11. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Social_media_optimization.

6	
Content is Currency
It all starts with setting up your profiles on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, LinkedIn, 
and other social media sites. SEO and SMO will be a big part of the content you develop. 
They are tools in your online marketing tool chest, and you’ll want to use them consis-
tently so search engines and social media networks pick up your content. If you produce 
great content, but the search engines can’t “see” it or those in your social networks aren’t 
spreading it, well, that would just be a big ugly shame, wouldn’t it? Yep.
Why Do You Need Great Content?
Well, besides what we’ve already mentioned, great content ensures your long-term suc-
cess and helps build your brand. What is brand building? It’s the notion of establishing 
a familiar presence, having a standard way of doing things, and establishing a certain 
level of confidence in the minds of your customers. They’ll always know what they’re 
going to get with you, and in return for that peace of mind they’ll spend their money 
with you. You need great content because great brands always communicate very well. 
They don’t just keep pace, they set the pace. And really well-produced web and mobile 
content can do that for your business. Think Starbucks. Think Apple. These companies 
are leaders for a reason. Through their powerful brands, they are champions of content 
and content marketing.
Effective web and mobile content also capitalizes on “pull” marketing techniques 
and the power of being where people are searching, which can clearly revolutionize 
your business, especially for those who are still operating from a “push,” or pre-web, 
strategy. Effective content is powerful because it’s one of the most important elements 
of Google’s search algorithm (as well as Bing’s and Yahoo!’s); if you produce content 
that the search engines deem important, they will reward you for it. And let’s not forget 
the social media networks and mobile devices. The same goes for them.
Content also makes you really interesting. It puts you in the driver’s seat. You set 
the pace for your industry. People come to you for editorials and feedback, and your 
content establishes you as an authority. The media will want you. Your clients will want 
you. People will retweet your tweets, “Like” you on Facebook, and give you a thumbs-
up on StumbleUpon. They will want to come to your party. Doing content right is a 
no-holds-barred, one-way ticket to industry dominance.
And guess what? You usually get to name your price when it comes to selling your 
goods and services to these satisfied content consumers.
Maximizing Its Effectiveness—The Content Marketing Machine
In my seminars and talks, I frequently mention the “three pillars” of web content 
success: content, design, and usability. Essentially, these pillars are what your content 
says, how it looks, and its ease of use. This is a good place to start with what I call your 
content marketing machine, otherwise known as your total content marketing effort. 

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
7
It relies on certain inputs and steps that build upon each other and slowly but surely 
create a perpetual, automated lead-generation and business-growth machine.
Using the three pillars as your foundation, you need to consider three things:
What types of content you produce
7
7
How you put your content in front of your prospects and customers
7
7
How you are supporting your content
7
7
In terms of the content you produce, think of it divided into three channels. The first 
is the content that makes up your site: your home page, your services pages, your 
case studies, your blog. Next, is the content you use for lead generation. This could be 
content that’s on your site or off your site, but it includes materials like white papers, 
webinars, and free e-books. This is the type of content that most companies have yet 
to discover. Finally, there is your off-site content. This would be your tweets on Twitter, 
your PowerPoint presentations on SlideShare, your status updates on Facebook, your 
videos on YouTube, your mobile apps, and more.
It is really the careful practice of producing content in all three of these areas that 
will grow your influence and your brand. And, as we have mentioned, you need to 
produce all types of content: hard-hitting copy, powerful audio, and visually appeal-
ing video. The secret is in automating your process and leveraging it with tools like 
HootSuite and others. More to come on that!
Next is how you get your content in front of your target audience. One of the best 
ways is through a blog. Like a must-read newspaper—think of The New York Times or 
The Wall Street Journal—your blog is a perfect way to build a strong base of support for 
your mission, capturing those all important eyeballs and building a solid relationship 
with your target market. The search engines love blogs because of the fresh content. 
Your audience will love you because you are making their lives more interesting, their 
brains smarter, and their pocketbooks a little heavier with your great ideas. And here’s 
where it gets really good: They sign up for your RSS feed, your newsletter, and/or your 
autoresponder series. That’s when you have them!
It’s also where you use content marketing fundamentals to start creating a relation-
ship. Obviously, you still deliver terrific quality. You teach and entertain more than 
you sell. You use metaphors and stories to make your writing conversational and easy 
to read. But you also use subtle techniques to create an audience of buyers, not just 
loyal readers. You begin to call on your content bag of tricks, adding more persuasive 
elements to your writing, your videos, and your other content. All the while, you’re 
getting more and more information about your audience, their likes, their dislikes, 
where they live, how they buy, and more.
Essentially, you’re building your case, establishing trust, and making your target 
market fall in love with you. On that magical day when they’re ready to buy (and it 
will come), send your loyal reader to a well-crafted landing page on your website. As 
I’ll explain later, a landing page is a very specific page that gets visitors to do just one 

8	
Content is Currency
thing. Of all the web pages you have, your landing page does the most explicit selling, 
with a great offer and a clear, direct call to action.
Once customers buy the first time, chances are very good that they’ll buy again and 
again and again, especially if they are happy with your product or service. They’ll tell 
people about you. They’ll follow you wherever you go. And voila! The content market-
ing machine has done its job. But you can’t rest on your laurels. . . .
The Seven-Prong Approach
To get the most out of your web and mobile content, and to support it in the best way 
possible, you’ll use a seven-prong approach. Once you are performing and staying 
active with all the important content marketing activities—your blog, your videos, 
your Facebook fan page, and so on—it’s time to back up your efforts to give it a boost. 
How do you do it?
First, you want to leverage your client testimonials or positive reviews. If you 
provide a service, perhaps offer a portfolio of sample work or several case studies. For 
companies that sell products, include product reviews. What’s that? You don’t have any? 
Okay, well, you know where you need to start. Pick up the phone, send some e-mail 
surveys, and ask happy customers for a few reviews of your work or your products. If 
you can include the reviewers’ full names, the companies they work for, and a photo, 
even better. Every website that sells a product or service should include client testi-
monials. It’s a no-brainer. And it’s a solid way to support all your great content. By the 
way, testimonials and reviews themselves are great content, one of the best kind: user 
generated. With regard to displaying your client work or product reviews, it’s just a 
matter of putting up a new page on your site that includes this material. If you need to 
get your web designers to do it, work closely with them to make sure they do it right.
Of course, you’ll use all the great rules of SEO to guarantee top placement in the 
search engines. Nothing can support your content marketing activities more than 
this. You’ll be sure to do your keyword research (see chapter 3) and use the important 
keyword phrases in your meta tags and page content. You’ll ensure you tag your videos 
and construct the right URLs for your blog posts. And you’ll do many, many other 
things to ensure total SEO across the board. Optimized content is smart content. And 
smart content means lower costs per lead. More about SEO in Chapter 4.
Next, you further support your content building process by enticing prospects 
with a free trial service or small product sample to start things off (pitch this when 
you think they are ready to buy). If they like what you offer, you’ll complete the rest 
of the project, deliver the rest of the product, or get them on a full subscription and 
get paid for it.
You want to guarantee your products and services, and if something goes wrong 
you need to make it right. This will further strengthen the trust your customers have 

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
9
in you and get them to refer you to others. Let’s face it: Issues will come up; it’s part of 
being in business. The question is how you deal with them. If you provide customers 
with a total guarantee, you create a strong sense of confidence and further empower 
your content marketing.
You’ll also want to monitor the competition. What types of content are your 
competitors producing? There are always a few great competitors out there that are 
leading the charge, no matter what industry we are talking about. Are you the follower 
or the leader? See what everyone else is doing and become the leader. You can do it. 
And your content will thank you for it.
To further support your content marketing machine, you’ll want to actively pitch 
the media. Send out press releases and develop relationships with members of the 
media who cover your industry. Find them with great resources like Help a Reporter 
Out (HARO), Pitchrate, and Profnet. Become active on all the important blogs in your 
industry. Be sure they know about you, all the time, every time. If you get the media on 
your side, they will do the promotion work for you! That’s user- (or partner-) generated 
content at its finest!
Figure 1-1 
Help a Reporter Out (HARO)

10	
Content is Currency
Finally, you’ll want to build partnerships with others in your industry to further 
support your efforts, your growth, and, yes, to share your content. This is probably the 
number one problem I see with most small businesses today: They are afraid to reach 
out to others. Some of them hide behind their online personas or brands and never get 
out to do any good old-fashioned networking. In a Web 2.0, social media world, face-to-
face meetings and handwritten letters can work wonders. And these more traditional 
efforts can really support the online and mobile content marketing you do.
So, there you go; you have all the support pieces of the content marketing machine. 
Whether because of oversight or ignorance, other books on the subject of content 
marketing don’t describe these ideas, but it really is a very important distinction that 
shows what separates the best companies from the mediocre ones. Content and content 
marketing is only a part of a very big business picture. It does not exist independently 
or, as they say, in a vacuum.
Another easy way to view what you do with content is to see it in three distinct 
phases: what you are doing, how you are doing it, and how you support it. For example, 
what you are doing is creating content for lead generation, you are doing it by writing 
a series of autoresponders and e-books, and you are supporting it and backing it up 
with your case studies, client testimonials, and service guarantee.
How does your company size up?
Eight Steps to Content Success
There are many ways to look at online and mobile content and many strategies that 
can be employed. With any new learning, I like simple lists and sequential steps that 
communicate the concepts in a quick, easy-to-understand way. With that in mind, let’s 
review what I call the eight steps to content success. These are:
You learn who your customer is and where the pain points are.
1. 
You develop consistent, relevant content in multiple channels.
2. 
You let go of all control, and let your ideas spread.
3. 
People share your ideas and link to your content.
4. 
People find your content through social media and search engines.
5. 
Prospects and customers start relying on your expertise—the relationship 
6. 
begins.
You become the trusted solutions provider in your industry.
7. 
Your customers tell others about you.
8. 
By embracing these steps and following a certain order, you can make a big impact 
very quickly. The difficult thing for some companies is step three, letting go of control. 
But here is the reality: In the content age, consumers are in a position of great influ-
ence. On the web, they have the chance to say anything they like about you; whether it’s 
true or false is only part of the issue. If they can get people to rally behind them, they 

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
11
can become a real force—either a positive force that helps your company or a nega-
tive force that could potentially destroy your company. It’s important to understand 
this dynamic, and we’ll discuss this topic in greater detail later. Of course, step two, 
developing the content, is also a challenge for many companies, but after reading this 
book you’ll have a much easier time ensuring that you have solid content development 
and that you are connecting on every level.
Content Strategy
Content strategy is the disciplined practice, used by many forward-thinking online 
marketers, of planning the development, delivery, and management of web and 
mobile content. It’s a process-driven activity, one that is made up of scheduling, cre-
ating, distributing, and following up on all the content that is published. It includes 
strategizing for all the content types we’ve brought up so far: website copy, e-books, 
social media content, web videos, technical sales sheets, and more.
Your tactical activities, of course, make up the strategy. If you’re like many com-
panies, you’ll have your main website, a blog, your social media profiles, and maybe 
a digital newsletter. Perhaps you’ll have much more than this, but if you have these 
basic building blocks, you can start constructing a unified and directed content strategy 
around them. In other words, you are going to tie certain goals and results to these 
content tactics. Here are some examples:
Grow our Twitter followers to three thousand in the next three months
7
7
Publish one web video every week for the next six months
7
7
Blog three times a week from now on
7
7
Fully optimize our website for our keyword phrases
7
7
Development
What types of content will you create? What will it look like? Where will it be found 
online? Who will put it together?
Delivery
How will the content get populated online? Who will upload it? How will users, visitors, 
subscribers, and customers see it? How will you ensure they see it?
Management
What happens after the content is launched? Who will follow up on inquiries, com-
ments, replies, and requests for service? How will the content get revised or updated 
when the time comes? Who will be in charge of curating and archiving content?
Make sure, as you put together a content strategy, that you follow through with 
all of these important steps. It is a commitment and a process that involves a group 

12	
Content is Currency
of dedicated team members. You’ll need time for planning and management of your 
strategy.
We All Hunger to Connect
Humans are pack animals. We need each other—some of us a little more than oth-
ers, some of us a little less. And whether we live in the backwoods of Georgia or the 
middle of Manhattan, we all connect and interact and desire the attention of others. 
It’s the plain and simple truth. And its ramifications are highly relevant in the content 
marketing space.
I know some of you are saying to yourselves, “Yeah, so what does this have to do 
with content?” Well, I think it’s important to take a step back and see the bigger picture 
of how we humans are wired. The fact is that your content is going to connect you with 
others for a number of different reasons. What are the great motivators?
To be liked, appreciated, right, secure
7
7
To be attractive, sexy, comfortable
7
7
To be distinct, respected, happy, and healthy
7
7
To feel important or gain knowledge
7
7
To make money or save money or save time
7
7
To make work easier
7
7
To have fun or gratify curiosity
7
7
To make things convenient
7
7
To eliminate or reduce fear, greed, or guilt
7
7
As you create and market your content, ask yourself, Which human motivation am I 
connecting with? Am I fulfilling a few of these, or just one?
Be careful: If your content is too self-serving, you may not be connecting with any 
of them. Perhaps you are trying to make yourself feel important or communicate how 
great your company is. Oops! Time to start over.
Just look at how people everywhere, especially the younger generation, took to 
text messaging. Some teenagers send two hundred texts a day! It’s crazy. But you know 
what? They love doing it. Some of the behavior might be excessive, but the fact is, they 
need to connect. Through their connections, they better understand the world around 
them and they better understand themselves.
The importance of content and the idea of connection can best be understood by 
looking at what’s really happening in the world. A New York Times article from Novem-
ber 2010, titled “Growing Up Digital, Wired for Distraction,” expressed it well:
Technology has created on high school campuses a new set of social types—
not the thespian and the jock but the texter and gamer, Facebook addict and 
YouTube potato. The technology amplifies whoever you are.

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
13
For some, the amplification is intense. Allison Miller, 14, sends and receives 
27,000 texts in a month, her fingers clicking at a blistering pace as she carries 
on as many as seven text conversations at a time. She texts between classes, at 
the moment soccer practice ends, while being driven to and from school and, 
often, while studying.2
So, our challenge as marketers is really twofold: to meaningfully, authentically 
connect and to stand above all the other content “noise” out there.
The growing importance of web and mobile content parallels an interesting change 
in culture: We used to primarily be consumers of products and services; we are now 
consumers and communicators. Think about it: The big corporations used to tell us 
how things were going to be and we accepted it. Now, we all tell each other about ideas, 
concepts, and available choices, and we all consume only the best stuff. The democra-
tization of commerce has finally taken over! The culture is changing right before our 
very eyes, and companies like Facebook, Apple, and Google are leading the way.
Another way of looking at the content age is to see the current environment as 
made up of two groups: creators and consumers. If you want to see the consumers 
up close, just go to your local Walmart or shopping mall. If you want to witness the 
creators in action, you might have to look a little harder; they congregate in areas 
populated by software and other technology companies, in places like Silicon Valley; 
Austin, Texas; Seattle; Raleigh-Durham; and other hotbeds of new commerce. Creators 
are also found among the thousands of small, home-based businesses throughout the 
country, the individuals who built empires from blogging, eBay stores, e-commerce 
sites, and the like.
If your company has always simply “sold stuff,” then you will have an immediate 
challenge. Being a creator (of content) requires a new mindset. How do you blog about 
something cool when a blank page is staring back at you and you’ve always had a “me” 
mindset? How do you engage a video camera when you have nothing to say? Content 
Is Currency will help you get over the hump.
Meanwhile, many of the big, old-school corporations are stuck in the traditional 
marketing paradigm, still spending millions of dollars on high-priced ad agencies, 
creating self-indulgent corporate content.
Yes, content is “the currency.” In the online world, content is the preferred method 
of exchange and it has significant value. The actual definition of currency is “something 
that is used as a medium of exchange.” Because the winners of the online world are well 
versed in the ways of quality content, they are the ones who are truly rich. Through 
leverage and thought leadership, they gain compound interest and increase their 
“holdings.” The online rich are truly getting richer. The good news is that the playing 
field is open to all. You can become one of the new “content rich” rich as well! And if 
2 Richtel, Matt. 2010. “Growing Up Digital, Wired for Distraction,” The New York Times, November 
21. Accessed 2/19/11. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/21/technology/21brain.html.

14	
Content is Currency
you are a small company or a start-up, no worries. Six years ago, the online industry 
powerhouse, HubSpot, didn’t even exist. Now it has thousands of clients, all over the 
world. Why? HubSpot tapped into a real need—inbound marketing software—and 
delivered valuable content and great service to satisfy that need.
The lesson? If you are a small company, you can compete with the big guys. And 
you can become the industry leader. Just ask Zappos.com, the billion-dollar online 
shoe company. Or Groupon, the exciting new online juggernaut that is revolution-
izing the way we buy local products and services in the communities where we live 
and work.
Your Content Marketing Goals
Every company has a unique set of goals when it comes to content creation and content 
marketing. Some of the more sophisticated marketers out there, the ones who already 
have a basic understanding of the concepts I’ve discussed so far, may be looking for 
the latest statistics, research, and real-world content case studies. I’ll definitely deliver 
on these goals, so stay tuned!
Others of you may need to be convinced of the potential these strategies hold. 
You may have tried blogging, but got discouraged after a couple months because you 
felt like you were blogging for no one. You may have tried some e-mail marketing, 
but couldn’t find the time to get it done every month. Whatever your challenges, they 
can be surmounted with the tactics and strategies I discuss in the upcoming chapters. 
What I ask you to do at this point is to list your top ten goals for your content market-
ing program.
Let’s take a closer look: What are some possible content goals? How about, “Estab-
lishing a presence on Facebook, growing it to three thousand fans in the next six 
months, and updating my status every day with one piece of valued-added, substan-
tial content.” Another goal might be “Developing a user-friendly Drupal website that 
includes separate pages for each of my services, is totally optimized for search, and 
includes my social media links and a free e-book that discusses the benefits of software 
outsourcing.” If this is one of your goals, you’ll be producing lots of quality content 
to get it done.
Whatever your content goals might be, the key is to write them down, and then 
to relentlessly pursue them like never before.
Other Important Considerations . . .
The areas we covered in the previous section are the most important to focus on, 
but there are other things you’ll want to consider as well. Let’s get into a few of those 
now.

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
15
Content Serves Two Masters
With web and mobile content, it’s important to know that you are serving two masters. 
The two masters we are referring to, of course, are the search engines and the potential 
customer who has found your site. Each has unique needs. The search engines are ask-
ing you to use certain keyword phrases a few times, in a few specific places, and on a 
few different pages.
The customer is asking for benefits—What is this country club going to offer me if 
I join? How is the video game Rock Band going to enhance my life if I buy it? Custom-
ers couldn’t care less whether you’ve used a certain set of keywords five times. Make 
sure your content is always serving both masters at the same time. With practice, it 
will become second nature.
Some would argue that a third master exists in the form of social media networks, 
but I would say that it’s really your fans, followers, and friends who are helping to shape 
this channel for you (with your help, of course).
Aligning Your Content with Your Business
If your business is a law firm, do you need a shopping cart web page? Probably not. 
Likewise, if you are operating a business that manufactures guitars and you have a 
network of retailers, do you need to write web copy that discusses pricing of certain 
models? Not really. Let the retailers do that. If you are running a Japanese restaurant, 
do you need to use SEO articles and press release copy? Probably not. The fact is that 
every company has unique needs with regard to its content. There’s no “one size fits 
all.” Be careful, though, that you don’t disregard a new type of content just because at 
first glance it looks like it’s not applicable to you. Most of the content I describe in this 
book can find a way into your online marketing activities.
Remember How We Interact with Online Content
The way information is processed on the web is unique. If you look at the studies (and 
examine your own behavior), you’ll see that we “scan” content on the web and on our 
mobile devices, unlike the way we read a newspaper, a magazine, or a book, where we 
are reading for more detail. People are busy and don’t have the time to read every word. 
And there’s no need to read the whole page if you can get the meaning by scanning it 
in a quarter of the time. So, make sure the content you produce is simple to scan for 
information.
In addition, online shopping is not a true browsing experience. Yes, we look around 
and surf from site to site, but the experience is unlike shopping in brick-and-mortar 
stores, where we can window shop, go in, and pick up an item and touch it. Online 
shoppers really are “directed.” People go to a site and use the navigational menu or 
search box to find specific products. Knowing this, we want to make our content 

16	
Content is Currency
succinct, segmented, and specific so we can help the customer to buy quickly and eas-
ily. It’s a little tough to employ this concept at first, but it’s helpful because we need to 
be reminded to tailor the content we produce to the way people behave and interact 
with the technology.
Measure—Survey and Make Necessary Changes
Through the content marketing process, you’ll want to be sure you measure the 
consumer’s response to the content you distribute. How many “Likes” did your new 
e-book get on Facebook? How many responses did you get to a particular blog post? 
How many views did your recent YouTube video receive? All of these things can be 
measured, and it’s important that you do this. It’s the only way we understand what 
our prospects think about the content we publish.
You can also use simple tools like Survey Monkey, Wufoo, or SurveyGizmo to 
get the opinions of your customers and prospects. All you need to do is come up with 
some good questions to ask and then send a survey out to your database. The insights 
you receive could be very helpful, and they may give you the specifics you need to 
make improvements to your content. Of course, these folks aren’t always right about 
everything and no one knows your business like you do, but they can definitely inform 
the process.
Let’s face it, most businesses never survey their customers. Just the act of putting 
the questions together and showing interest in your customers’ opinions could spark a 
fire and get some quality interaction going. The bottom line is this: Measuring response 
will bring efficiency to the process and make your content creation job a whole lot easier. 
Think about it. If you have a list of the top fifty topics your customers most want to 
know about, you’ve already completed the first step in the content life cycle.
For your website or blog, you can use Google Analytics to get a detailed view of how 
visitors are interacting with your website and mobile content. More on this later.
The Ultimate Goal: Viral Spread of Your Content
“Viral” used to have a pretty negative connotation. It almost always referred to sick-
ness and disease. Now, it is usually heard in the context of the web. When something 
“goes viral,” it spreads across the web like wildfire, getting the attention of millions of 
people everywhere. When it comes to the viral spread of content, 95 percent of the time 
it happens by accident. You really never know when a YouTube video or a free e-book 
is going to catch fire. But when it does, you better hold on to your hats and glasses and 
enjoy the ride! Yes, going viral is a bonanza for online or mobile content, but a more 
realistic goal is to simply create high-value content across multiple channels (search 
engines, social media, and mobile) that connects you with a few thousand interested 
people or companies. If you can do that, you’ll be in great shape.

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
17
If you can empower yourself to use the fine arts of leverage, automation, and out-
sourcing to gain further efficiencies, even better! The key with your content is to stay 
consistent, be authentic, provide valuable information, and find a way to give back. If 
you do this, people all over the world will beat a path to your door for as long as you 
want them.
Places to Find Content Ideas
Here are some fantastic sources of relevant, timely topics, whatever your company’s 
content needs might be:
Google Trends
7
7
Google Insights for Search
7
7
Twitter Search
7
7
Technorati Charts
7
7
BlogPulse Trend Search
7
7
Industry association sites
7
7
Competitive blogs
7
7
Compete.com
7
7
Quantcast
7
7
comScore
7
7
Your customers
7
7
Stuck for content ideas? Check out a few of these resources to power up the inspi-
ration! Then brainstorm your way to content development.
Figure 1-2 
Google Trends

18	
Content is Currency
Figure 1-3 
Compete.com
Think Like an Artist, Execute Like a Samurai
Artists will tell you that inspiration can strike at any time. They never know when or 
where, they simply need to make sure they are ready to capture the magic when it does 
eventually come. Of course, you won’t be painting the Mona Lisa or sculpting David, 
but you will need to come from a creative place if you really want to stand out with 
your content. Consider a simple and popular content type: a blog post. The title that 
you give your post will determine whether a paltry 10 percent or a robust 70 percent 
see it and comment on it. The title has to be unique and compelling. It needs to act as 
an entryway to the rest of the post.
In addition to being creative, you also need to be two other things: a great syn-
thesizer and an original thinker. Synthesizing will come into play when you look at 
the ten other blog posts or articles that you may draw from to create your new post. 
The original thinking will display itself when you add your own ideas, opinions, and 
forward-thinking comments to your piece.
Unlike some artists, who fail to act on their inspirations and create their art for 
public consumption, you will need to execute like a samurai, putting together your 
copy, adding your keywords, logging on to your blogging platform, and getting your 

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
19
work out there. Of course, you’ll also need to monitor reader comments and reply as 
soon as possible. Yes, there is a lot to do to generate just one blog post, but the rewards 
can be immense. Done right, your blog post will come together in beautiful synergy 
to the great satisfaction of your many subscribers. And you will be happy. Later on, 
maybe you’ll sell some stuff, too.
One thing none of us can deny, however, is the lack of time we have to create great 
content. In “Why Brands Are Becoming Media,” respected marketing mind Brian 
Solis said, “One of the greatest challenges I encounter today is not the willingness of 
a brand to engage, but its ability to create. When blueprinting a social media strategy, 
enthusiasm and support typically derails when examining the resources and commit-
ment required to produce regular content.”3
Solis stressed the importance of publishing calendars, editorial oversight, content 
performance analysis, and cross-discipline collaboration: “New media necessitates a 
collaboration between all teams involved in creating and distributing content, includ-
ing advertising, interactive, communications, brand, and marketing—with an editorial 
role connecting the dots.” I couldn’t agree more.
The Undeniable Power of Web Content
Consider this statistic: Search marketing was a $19.3 billion business in 2011. Wow. The 
number just grows and grows. (It was up from $14.6 billion in 2009.) If this doesn’t tell 
you that you should be focused on search engine and social media optimized content 
and content marketing, I’m not sure what will. What’s the number going to be next 
year or the year after? This train has left the station and I don’t care what’s going on 
in the economy, if you are online and performing all the great techniques of content 
marketing, there is no downturn in your economy!
Current Trends in Content Marketing
So, what’s hot right now in the content marketing space? Let’s take a look . . .
1. Social media marketing gets huge. In corporate America, it has taken a long 
time for social media to get any respect. Conditioned to the idea that sales and profit-
ability are the be all and end all, the entire justification for a company’s existence, busi-
nesspeople have found it difficult to break out of this mindset. Companies everywhere 
are now migrating to social media, some because they are faced with no choice. Their 
prospects are there and they must be a part of the exchange. As part of this evolu-
tion, social media is extending throughout organizations, including customer service 
3 Solis, Brian. 2010. “Why Brands Are Becoming Media.” Mashable, February 11. http://mashable 
.com/2010/02/11/social-objects/.

20	
Content is Currency
departments, to address customer issues head on. Social media advertising is also 
becoming more sophisticated and providing stronger results as this new advertising 
platform starts to take shape. Now, metrics are becoming more important than ever, 
and companies like Radian6 are helping us get there.
Figure 1-5 
Radian6.com
2. Mobile marketing becomes the real deal. The mobile interactive extension 
continues to boom because people’s time has never been more constrained and con-
venience has never been more valued. Forrester Research forecasts that 75 percent of 
marketers plan to include mobile in their marketing mix.4 This is not surprising, as 
smartphone adoption is happening at a lightning-fast rate. Recent data shows that 30 
percent of cell phones are smartphones.5 Along with ease of use, e-mail and texting is 
possible with a smartphone. The average user has twenty-seven apps on his phone. The 
ability for your site to be found and optimized on mobile search is also very important. 
Currently, mobile queries make up 10 percent of all queries made on Google, and this 
number is growing. Quick Response (QR) codes—two-dimensional barcodes readable 
by smartphones—and mobile payment capability are growing quickly as well. And 
apps for these functions are available or soon will be for all platforms.
4 VanBoskirk, Shar. 2010. “Internet Marketing Channels to Watch in 2010.” Forrester Research, 
October 5. Accessed 2/11/11. http://www.forrester.com/rb/Research/interactive_marketing_ 
channels_to_watch_in_2010/q/id/57594/t/2.
5 Kellogg, Don. 2010. “iPhone vs. Android.” Nielsen Wire, June 4. Accessed 2/12/11. http://blog.
nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/iphone-vs-android/.

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
21
3. Content marketing expands into new venues. Content and the practice of con-
tent marketing is everywhere now. It’s not just downloaded, accessed, read, and stored 
on your PC anymore. It’s on your laptop, your smartphone, your social media networks, 
and of course, your iPad (the tablet has sold more than twenty-five million units since 
its introduction (as of August, 2011). And Amazon has sold more than eleven million 
Kindle e-readers, further ensuring that content is a part of our hour-by-hour activity. 
One of the benefits for companies this development brings is the ability to sell content 
to a targeted audience, a goal that requires an analysis of content consumption habits. 
Roughly two-thirds of consumers have paid for some form of online content, includ-
ing digital music, software, cell phone and tablet apps, digital games, news articles or 
reports, and videos, movies, or television shows.
4. Online retail continues to take market share from other channels. Consumers 
want easy shopping. With more and more people trusting online purchasing and enjoy-
ing the fact that they can buy from the comfort of their own homes, brick-and-mortar 
retail continues to slide. J.P. Morgan forecasts that U.S. online retail will continue to 
grow at a 12 percent annual growth rate from an estimated $166 billion in 2010 to $235 
billion in 2013.6 Also, group buying using Groupon is growing and will continue to 
expand as long as marketers see a decent return.
5. Integrated marketing comes of age. Integration across marketing platforms 
is an important part of any advertising and branding program, as evidence by the big 
social media campaigns of 2011, including Dos Equis Beer’s “Most Interesting Man” 
and Conan O’Brien’s “Team CoCo.” Social media marketing works hand in hand with 
mobile marketing, while mobile marketing works with off-line marketing like televi-
sion. Executed well, these channels can work together seamlessly, providing a strong 
synergy and an even stronger connection with target markets.
6. Location-based services are growing. As the company’s website states, Four-
square is a “location-based mobile platform that makes cities easier to use and more 
interesting to explore.” It’s also become one of the hottest things in the online space. 
Essentially, users “check in” via a smartphone app or SMS, sharing their location with 
friends while collecting rewards points and virtual badges from the store, restaurant, 
theater, or other venue. Users can bookmark information about venues they want to 
visit. Companies are using Foursquare and other location-based services to attract new 
customers as well as to reward loyal ones.
As of April 2011, Foursquare had signed its ten millionth user, and the location-
based network has grown by more than 3,400 percent over the previous year. Despite 
those impressive numbers, the service still has some distance to go before it can claim 
to be mainstream. But it’s on the move and will affect content marketing in big ways.
6 Cohen, Heidi. 2011. “7 Top Online Marketing Trends for 2011.” ClickZ, January 10. Accessed 2/14/11. 
http://www.clickz.com/clickz/column/1935424/online-marketing-trends-2011-included.

22	
Content is Currency
7. Target market segmentation and targeting are driving more dollars to con-
tent marketing. Online marketing is getting more sophisticated. Going after the exact 
market you want to reach is easier than ever. An eMarketer survey, “Factors Driving the 
Move to Digital Marketing,”7 showed that “better audience segmentation, customiza-
tion and reach” is a key factor in allowing companies to touch the audiences they’re 
targeting (30 percent indicated it as such). Also high on the list was “more targeted, 
behaviorally driven, niche media channels.” If you can reach the people you need to 
reach online and do it for less money, it’s not surprising that the web and mobile are 
the places to be. They deliver more content and better content to more people.
8. Quality content is more important than quantity—it really makes a differ-
ence now. I remember seven years ago, when article marketing was so hot. The idea 
was simple: Put out as many articles as you can with links back to your site to improve 
SEO. In many ways, it worked pretty well. But those articles were typically of marginal 
quality, and some of them were just plain bad. Fast-forward to 2012, and you have a very 
different scene. It’s the great content—the long, research-based blog posts; the fifty-page, 
value-added e-books; and other types of super-high-quality content—that are getting 
all the attention. And that’s not surprising. People gravitate toward the good stuff. They 
don’t want to waste their time. In the content age, it’s all about quality content.
9. User experience is becoming more important than ever. Whether through 
live chat, live events, virtual sales characters, or virtual environments, the human side 
of the user experience is very important right now and it is growing in use with each 
passing week. Users have high expectations and they want to have a truly interactive 
experience with your company. Look for more developments in this area over the 
coming two to three years.
10. Content marketing is super hot. After reading the last nine trends, this one 
is a forgone conclusion, right? It’s all about content right now. And maybe that’s why 
you’re reading this book. The how and why and when of content are everything. If you 
don’t connect, you don’t sell, and that’s the bottom line. Companies need to give before 
they get, and right now, they need to give a lot. Done strategically, methodically, and 
intelligently, content marketing can provide the greatest return on investment ever. 
Just keep reading, and you’ll see why.
After you finish Content Is Currency and you are ready to begin planning your 
content marketing, use these trends to light your way. Using the strategies in this book, 
take a comprehensive approach and always look at the analytics (including social media 
and mobile metrics). If you do it right, you’ll certainly be able to compete effectively 
in the content age.
7 Nicole Perrin. December, 2010. “11 Trends for 2011,” E-Marketer.

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
23
Current Research on B2B Content Marketing
As a devoted marketer, I read everything I can to stay abreast of the ever-changing web 
and mobile marketing space. It’s a challenge, for sure, but over the years, I have found 
the best resources for staying up to date. One of them is MarketingProfs.com. Another 
is my friend Joe Pulizzi’s Junta42 group. Last year, MarketingProfs.com and Junta 42 
came together to publish a great report, “B2B Content Marketing: 2010 Benchmarks, 
Budgets and Trends.”8 I want to share the best of the report with you now:
They found that nine in ten organizations market with content, regardless of 
1. 
size or industry. Most popular tactics:
a.	 Social media (excluding blogs)—19 percent
b.	 Articles—78 percent
c.	 In-person events—62 percent
d.	 E-newsletters—61 percent
B2B marketers employ many different online tactics to achieve their marketing 
2. 
goals. The top eight in rank order:
a.	 Social media (excluding blogs)
b.	 Articles
c.	 E-newsletters
d.	 Case studies
e.	 Blogs
f.	 White papers
g.	 Webinars
h.	 Videos
Fifty-one percent reported that they plan to increase their spend in content 
3. 
marketing in 2011
Marketers, on average, spend more than a quarter of their marketing budget 
4. 
on content marketing
Marketers report that content marketing supports multiple business goals, 
5. 
led by:
a.	 Brand awareness—78 percent
b.	 Customer retention/loyalty—69 percent
c.	 Lead generation—63 percent
Web traffic is the mostly widely used success metric (56 percent), followed by 
6. 
direct sales (49 percent)
The challenges they face:
7. 
8 Pulizzi, Joe. 2010. “B2B Content Marketing: 2010 Benchmarks, Budgets and Trends.” Content Mar-
keting Institute, September 15. Accessed 2/5/11. http://www.contentmarketinginstitute.com/2010/09/
b2b-content-marketing/.

24	
Content is Currency
a.	 Producing the kind of content that engages prospects and customers (36 
percent of respondents)
b.	 Producing enough content (21 percent)
c.	 Budget to produce content (19 percent)
Practices of best in class
8. 
a.	 They allocate more of the marketing budget to content marketing than others 
(30 percent versus 18 percent)
b.	 They consider the “stage in the buying cycle” when developing content
c.	 They get lots of buy-in from the company’s executive team
I emphasized with boldface type the best practice that I think is hugely important. 
Targeting and strategizing with your content appears to be a significant differentiator 
between those who succeed with content marketing and those who don’t. As you read 
the rest of this book, keep this point in the back of your mind. Ponder your various 
customer groups, think about how they flow through the sales and qualification fun-
nel, and determine which types of content they need to see to help them make the 
decision to use your company. This, I think, will be most beneficial to your overall 
content plan.
Another thing that was clear from the study: Marketers are not as confident as 
they should be regarding the effectiveness of content marketing tactics. There is a lot 
of hoping and guessing going on. Understandably, many marketers are reporting to a 
higher-up, and their reputation is on the line. To that I would say: It’s the companies 
that allow their employees to fail that will ultimately be the most successful, especially 
in the online marketing area. We are charting a new course here, and mistakes are 
going to happen. But so are unprecedented surprises and incredibly great things, like 
new customers, lower marketing expenses, higher sales, and company expansion. It’s 
the bold marketers, the ones who are piggybacking off best practices, applying the 
tactics to their own challenges, and never relenting in their quest to build connection, 
who will blaze a new trail and win in the end.
Summing It Up
So, what is content marketing? It’s a means of communicating confidence and integrity 
on behalf of an online business. It’s fully utilizing the immense power of the web and 
mobile to unleash a fury of connection and conversion. It’s doing everything right 
online and through the mobile channel, when most of your competitors are doing 
everything wrong.
All of the important factors can be addressed through the content development 
process. The articles and e-books you write, the videos you produce, and the mobile 
apps you develop hold a great deal of power. What’s the best way to communicate a 
positive image of your company in your prospective customers’ minds? You’ll find out. 

	
 What Is Content Marketing, Why Do You Need It, and How Do You Maximize Its Effectiveness?
25
An incredible connection with your target market is up for grabs. And it’s yours for 
the taking. You can start today.
Content marketing means a lot of different things to a lot of people. Those in the 
know understand how powerful it can really be. Whatever the success story, there are 
thousands being told. Good content has meaning. Great content can help you connect 
and convert.
The next step is analyzing your current content.

This page intentionally left blank 

C h a p t e r  2
Analyzing Your Current Web 
Content and Mobile Presence
A
nalyzing your current web content and mobile presence is an important first step in 
your epic quest to maximize the effectiveness of your content and put the content 
marketing machine to work for your business. For some, it will be a fairly simple exer-
cise because the only thing they have that could be considered “content” is the copy on 
their five-page website that was developed ten years ago. For others, especially larger 
corporations, the analysis could take weeks or even months to perform.
The process is pretty straightforward:
Take inventory of the content you currently have in place
1. 
Review the content for quality (writing/production)
2. 
Review it for search engine optimization
3. 
Analyze its social marketing potential
4. 
Rewrite or rework it to correct any mistakes
5. 
Brainstorm a list of additional content items you may need
6. 
Remember, the strategies you learn in this book will go a long way toward helping 
you complete these tasks. What could you do right now? Step one, the inventory piece. 
Put together a simple spreadsheet that lists the content type, the title of the page or 
piece, the date it was created, and a column for notes. That will get you started.
What most of you will find during this process is that there is a lot of work to do. 
The majority of companies will find they have about 5 to10 percent of the total job done 
with their current content. The tasks that will take the most time? Creating new copy, 
videos, and other content, but that comes later. For now, you just need to get a handle 
on what you have and how it could be used moving forward. Remember, your content 
is supposed to serve a purpose; actually, it should serve a few purposes, in most cases. 
You don’t want your content to be something that just fills up the home page or that 
site visitors glance at real quick and that’s it. You want your content to be compelling 
27

28	
Content is Currency
to readers, visible to search engines, linkable to partners, shareable through social 
media, and transferable to mobile devices.
The areas where most of the holes will be? Blogging content, social media content 
(and profile setup), and, of course, mobile content, which very few companies have in 
place at this point. Others may not have any lead-generation content—e-books, webi-
nars, white papers, etc. And don’t be surprised if you are missing practically all of the 
major forms of content. You are in the majority!
Don’t forget to inventory all of your printed materials and company marketing 
collateral, including brochures, sell sheets, hard copy presentations, old VHS tapes 
(and company DVDs), and any other marketing material. Some, if not most, of these 
items could be turned into digital materials. There could be lots of value in those 
fifteen-year-old videos.
There’s a Lot of Bad Content Out There
To illustrate just how big the opportunity is for content improvement, consider the 
websites you visit every day. You randomly search the web, check out a friend’s site, or 
review a potential partner’s blog. After reviewing the content, analyzing the context, 
and looking at the design of a few sites, what is it that you notice? Lots of bad websites, 
right?
The fact is that there are thousands, perhaps millions, of websites that look just 
plain awful. Add confusing navigation and stilted, corporate copy, and it’s clear that 
we have a major problem on our hands. As someone who has worked in web develop-
ment for more than eight years and has a large team of copywriters and video editors 
working on content, I see it every day. Actually, many times a day.
So, we’ve established the problem: The majority of companies out there do not 
have the basics down when it comes to producing content that is compelling to read-
ers, visible to search engines, linkable to partners, shareable through social media, and 
transferable to mobile devices.
By the way, website design is a whole other story—that’s even worse! I don’t know 
about you, but I’m in favor of establishing official content and design standards that 
all websites would need to meet before being allowed on the web. That would solve a 
lot of problems—and make for a better searching experience for all of us!
The bottom line is that bad content means fewer conversions and fewer sales. That’s 
how important it is. Don’t discount it. It’s critical that this piece gets done right. One 
other point: An impressive site design can never rescue poorly written copy, sloppy 
videos, or boring webinar recordings. There are lots of beautiful websites out there 
that have unreadable content. They usually end up being just a “nice to look at” site 
that serves no real purpose. And forget about being found in the search rankings. It’s 
not going to happen unless you understand how to write metadata and optimize your 
pages, which I’ll discuss later in detail.

	
 Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence
29
And why is there so much bad content out there? For one, generating fresh, inter-
esting content is not easy. It takes a lot of work. It takes a lot of time. Second, content is 
seen as a commodity. Companies don’t realize what they have. They don’t understand 
the power that their web and mobile content can generate. After all, if you’ve never 
gotten any leads from natural search, how do you know what it feels like? I’ll tell you 
what, it feels pretty darn good! (And it’s so inexpensive, too.)
In addition, our standards are really low. Bottom of the barrel. We don’t know 
what “good” looks like! And we certainly don’t know what great content looks like. 
Content Is Currency will help you with all of this.
The final reason that there is so much bad content out there? Because no one takes 
ownership of it. Every business process needs a champion, and, chances are, there is 
nobody is your organization who is responsible for the arena of web and mobile con-
tent. Even marketing departments fall on their faces here. What do they do? They like 
to outsource this step, hiring a cheap freelancer on Elance.com, one who has no clue 
about SEO or social media. Or, worse yet, the marketing department may hire writers 
from India, where English is a second language, to put together their all-important 
web content. That’s just craziness! Running a one-person show? Well, then, it looks 
like you’re the champion!
How to Approach Your Web Content Analysis
In this chapter, we’ll look at what I believe is the most important type of web and 
mobile content: copy. I’ll show you the most important elements to look for, how to 
produce the highest quality copy, and examples of the good and the bad. (Note: All of 
the other types of content, including social media content,videos, photos, audio, and 
mobile content will be covered in their respective chapters.)
So, how do you look at your site or lead-generation content with a new set of eyes? 
What’s the process a copywriter goes through when she is rewriting a site? Good ques-
tions. There are lots of different methods and approaches, but when you’re trying to fix 
those broken sentences and phrases you should look at three areas separately:
Quality of the copy
7
7
Formatting and usability
7
7
How the content relates to the design
7
7
Overall Quality of the Copy
The first thing to look at when you’re analyzing a web page is the copy itself, naturally. 
So, how does it look? Really. Take a step back and seriously think to yourself, What 
would the average person think of this content? Does it make sense? Would I under-
stand what the site is all about if I was visiting for the first time? Remember, when 
considering your site’s web copy, that people scan the text; they don’t take in every 

30	
Content is Currency
word. And second, the meaning is better understood when the copy is written the way 
people speak. Things have changed a lot for the written word over the last fifty years 
or so. There used to be much more structure and formality to writing. It was expected. 
There was also a stricter adherence to grammatical “rules,” like you can’t end a sentence 
with a preposition or start one with the word and.
But you know what? That type of formal language is horrible to read! It’s boring and 
uninteresting. It takes all the creativity away when you have to follow a set of strict rules. 
Did you know that some of the greatest composers of popular music couldn’t actually 
read music? Paul McCartney is among them. He and his buddy John Lennon violated 
many “rules” of music composition on their way to writing the most beloved songs of 
all time. But that’s what made their music distinctive. They figured if it sounded good, 
then why not? For those music folks out there, you know that many of their songs have 
chords that are not even in the key of the song, but they work for all the right reasons. 
Well, it’s the same thing with writing. Rules can get in the way.
Don’t get me wrong. There are guidelines for the basic structure of content on the 
web and in the mobile channel—that’s what we’re discussing in this chapter, after all, 
but they shouldn’t handicap the expression of thought. They are merely the frame of the 
house; the words you write make up the rooms and truly make it a home.
So why not write the way people speak? It just makes more sense. It connects 
you with regular, everyday people, some of whom didn’t do that well in their high 
school English classes anyway! It doesn’t mean you’re less intelligent when you write 
this way—far from it. The very fact that you have a functioning website has already 
addressed that point.
Check out the way this book is written. If you take a look, you’ll see many rules 
of grammar broken. And I started as a copywriter! Other professional writers say that 
same thing.
Voice, Tone, Personality, and Style
We’ve all heard the expression, “its not what you say, it’s how you say it.” Well, in the 
web world, voice and tone are how you express your thoughts. And just like every 
individual has his own tone of voice, so too will you have a certain way of delivering 
your words, videos, and other web content. If you read Stephen King or Tom Clancy 
or any other fiction author, you know that each has his own writing style. This is a 
pretty good analogy of what you should be after with your web content: your own way 
of getting points across. Good first questions to ask when writing content for your site 
are, “Who are we?” and “What makes us special?” Your individuality as a company 
will naturally flow out of this exercise.
Consistently delivered across all of your content vehicles, your voice and tone can 
dramatically improve your branding effort as well. In fact, some companies use the 
voice and tone of their communications as a clear competitive advantage. The goal of 

	
 Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence
31
any company with a web presence should be to develop its own distinct voice. As I’ve 
mentioned before, so much of the content on the web sounds exactly the same: that 
bland, boring, long sentence after long sentence “corporate speak” that no one wants to 
read. This is not an example of voice and tone. It’s an example of pure crap. Just think 
about all the other elements that make you unique as a company: your logo, your tag 
line, your website design, your merchandising—shouldn’t your content be thought of 
in the same way? Absolutely.
Whatever you do, be sure you don’t sound like your competitors. And do not, I 
repeat do not, lift content from your competitors’ sites and place it on yours. This is a 
big no-no, but I think most people understand that. And you know what? It’s about 
time that your words, videos, and other content get the respect they deserve. After all, 
don’t they take up the most real estate on your website? Your web presence is totally 
driven by words.
What’s the difference between voice and tone? Voice expresses your site’s general 
personality, which could be cool, professional, trendy, authoritative, practical, etc. Tone 
expresses the mood or feeling of the voice: friendly, appealing, upset, enthusiastic. 
As far as content style and content personality are concerned, these are pretty much 
the same as voice, but I wanted to use them here to help you understand what we are 
talking about. Your personality is different than your best friend’s personality. Make 
sure your content is, too.
Reflection of Your Brand
I’m going to say a few more words on branding for those folks who may be a little 
rusty . . . a brand is the image that you project and that your customers know you for 
in the market place. It’s what makes you stand alone and gives you your uniqueness. 
It’s also a promise that you make to your customers, an expectation that they have of 
you. There’s a comfort level and a certain degree of standardization, wrapped up in 
personality and devoted loyalty, that gives you a strong brand.
For example, at Starbucks you know you will get a high-quality cup of coffee every 
time you visit, no matter where you are in the world. The store and its merchandising 
will look the same from place to place, and even what the barista says to you when your 
coffee is ready is very similar at every store. (This observation hit me just recently!) So, 
yes, Starbucks is a strong brand.
And this carries over to the company’s website content. Here is how Starbucks 
expresses its brand9:
We love coffee and everything that goes with it. Good books. Great music. And 
what’s more, we love sharing our favorites with you. What makes a Starbucks 
coffeehouse such a vibrant and inviting space? A philosophy of community and 
9 Starbucks Coffeehouse. Accessed 2/7/11. http://www.starbucks.com/coffeehouse?sms_ss=blogger.

32	
Content is Currency
environmental responsibility. Community means we’re better together. In our 
stores and the world at large. Chat, connect and get involved.
Notice that it does not say:
Starbucks is an international coffee roaster and retailer that specializes in the 
finest coffees around the world. Our team is dedicated to providing you with a 
quality experience and providing you with a great place to meet with friends 
or work on your laptop.
UGH! That, my friends, is corporate speak.
The Power of Storytelling
Most of us still recall a few good childhood stories. Whether our teachers or our parents 
told us the stories, one thing was clear: They fired up our imaginations and provided 
great satisfaction. I know it was true with me. From Charlie and the Chocolate Factory 
to Peter Pan and Where the Wild Things Are to The Giving Tree, these indelible stories 
will be with me forever.
Like a good song, stories are mesmerizing because they touch us in lasting ways. 
In business, and specifically content marketing, the power of storytelling is underused. 
There are huge, undiscovered opportunities to weave stories in and around your brand 
to build rock-solid identification and loyalty in your customers.
And you know what? People never outgrow their love of good stories. The key is 
finding a way to tell a story with your products, services, and company as a whole. What 
are the values that drive your business? How can you connect to your target market in 
emotionally enriching, mutually beneficial ways?
With all the “noise” and interruption, you need a way to break through the clutter, 
a way that will impact people and help them understand where you are coming from. 
You need a way to help customers appreciate the authentic space that you live in within 
your industry, to present your content in a way that will absorb them and get them to 
want more. In the business environment, and specifically with content marketing, you 
should embrace and nurture storytelling. When you do, your audience will feel like 
they are a part of your story. And because you took the time to connect with them in a 
unique and sincere way, the way that they remember from stories of long ago, they will 
find ways to connect with you in meaningful, long-lasting ways.
Why are executives like Steve Jobs and Walt Disney so legendary? In large part 
because they were able to engage people’s emotions. Within the confines of your online 
and mobile content, you can do the same thing. Creating scenarios of possible future 
events, using personal anecdotes, and talking about experiences can truly get people—
your potential customers—to stand up and take notice. So those products and services 

	
 Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence
33
you offer? They will be much more interesting and engaging when presented within 
the context of a story.
Accuracy of the Content
Once in a while, I’ll get an e-mail from someone telling me to check some copy on one 
of my web pages. It could be a misspelling, a fact that is actually wrong, or something 
else. Although we’d like to think we are perfect, we know that this type of thing hap-
pens. After all, if you are managing hundreds or thousands of pages or have dozens of 
different types of content out there, all with a few dozen samples, then the errors will 
happen every now and then. The important thing is to correct them as soon as possible 
and reupload whatever changes are necessary.
Why? You could mislead or confuse visitors. You could expose your company to 
embarrassment or ridicule on the blogs. You could also have a potential legal issue on 
your hands. Not good. Get those mistakes fixed ASAP.
The biggest problem with content accuracy? Dead links. Get those links cor-
rected and then be sure to check all your links every few months to ensure they always 
work.
Is the Content Interesting?
Does the copy grab you? Is it interesting and informative? Does it address your needs? 
And does the content have a certain rhythm to it? It should. Is there variety in the 
writing? Are all the sentences long, with multiple adjectives and adverbs? The goal is 
to combine short sentences with a few long ones. The trick is to make the copy flow. 
Using fragments is not a bad thing, quite the contrary, actually. The occasional frag-
ment or sentence that starts with “But” or “And” can capture reader interest and keep 
the writing lively. Try it out. You’ll like it. And your customers will, too! (See how 
effective it is?)
Do this: Go to a few of your favorite websites and try to remember what it was that 
you liked about them the first time you visited. You may be part of their online com-
munity. Maybe you post comments to their blog. Do you like buying from them? Or is it 
the way the copy reads that first captured you? Even though you may not have realized 
it, the copy probably was something that made you decide you liked the company.
Strong Word Choice and Sentence Structure
An easy-to-read, compelling, and strong communication style can give you a huge 
advantage over your competitors. Most of us know it when we see it. In literature, it’s 
called a “page-turner.” On the web, it’s the home page that explains what you do simply 
and effectively. After twenty seconds, your visitors know who you are and what you 

34	
Content is Currency
can do for them. It’s the e-book that explains the benefits of outsourcing or how to 
make great-tasting smoothies using captivating words and compelling pictures. It’s 
the e-mail that not only gets read but that gets a response. That’s powerful words and 
sentences in action, my friends.
And remember, more than 40 percent of U.S. adults have low literacy skills. You 
don’t want to leave all those wealthy, “reading challenged” prospects out of the picture! 
Also, in this ever-diverse society, many people speak English as a second language. 
You don’t want to leave them out either.
If you don’t know how to write an effective sentence, or if you struggle to put 
together a compelling and grammar-balanced paragraph, you may want to leave the 
copywriting to someone who has a natural way with writing. Don’t get me wrong, 
you can learn to write stronger sentences, but it could be a struggle for some people. 
Entire books have been dedicated to this topic. For our purposes, let’s review the most 
important points for crafting good sentences.
First, keep your sentences simple. If they are running five lines and have multiple 
prepositions and conjunctions, cut them up into digestible pieces. Again, many people 
out there are slow readers with remedial-level comprehension. You need to commu-
nicate at a sixth-grade level so all potential prospects clearly understand. One thing 
about those slow readers, though: There are probably a few millionaires among them. 
And they may want to buy your product or service.
Next is the word you. Get used to using it! Your content should be all about “you”: 
“We want to help YOU find a better way to get from point A to point B, and we want 
YOU to help us understand future product needs better.” I think YOU get the idea!
Keep your paragraphs short. This helps people digest the information. Think of all 
the junk mail we get. You see how these letters are structured? They usually have two- to 
three-sentence paragraphs. This helps break up the message and get unique points across. 
Same goes for your web content. Long paragraphs scare people away. They don’t have the 
time or inclination to read the whole thing. And they never will. Think simple.
Make your action in the verbs, not the nouns. If you are trying to get a point 
across, why not communicate it in the clearest, most direct way possible? You don’t 
want to make prospects reread your content because they don’t understand what you 
are trying to express. You want them to reread it because they are thinking about buy-
ing from you! Here is an example of what I’m referring to:
Good verb
The judge directly explained the verdict.
Bad verb (noun hiding verb)
The judge’s explanations for the verdict were direct.
Also, clear out the words that are unneeded. If you look at practically any sentence, 
you’ll find words that serve no purpose, other than making the sentence longer.

	
 Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence
35
Example:
Before:
If you previously selected a movie, then you are ready to watch it.
After:
If you selected a movie, then you are ready to watch it.
Get Rid of the Clichés and Cheese
Almost everybody uses clichés, jargon, and cheesy sayings in their normal, everyday 
speaking. Some of us probably don’t even know what they are, but we rattle them off 
all the time. Expressions like “think outside the box,” “tried and true,” “off the shelf,” 
“raise the bar,” etc. These are all overused, trite, generally bad ways of communicating. 
Essentially, they are poor phrase choices, whether they are spoken or written. So what 
do you do to make the change? Substitute a simple, direct word.
Example:
Before:
The new software has all the bells and whistles, including off-the-shelf plug-ins that 
make a big difference in usability.
After:
The new software has all the features you need, including plug-ins that make a big 
difference in usability.
Are You Asking for the Sale?
The call to action is an important part of any content that is trying to sell. Now, not all 
content will serve this purpose, but eventually you’ll be using it. You’ll use it on your 
landing pages; you’ll use it in a sales presentation. You’ll use it at the end of some of 
your webinars, perhaps.
So, what types of call to action are you using? Are you simply presenting infor-
mation or are you trying to build a relationship with a customer? If your website is a 
“brochure” type of site where you aren’t trying to sell anything, then it’s probably all 
right if you aren’t asking for the sale. But, the majority of sites out there do want the 
user to take some type of action.
What do you have in the language that will prompt visitors to do something? On 
your website’s home page, you should have content that motivates the visitor to go 
deeper into the site, for example, “Find out all the details of the special fall sale on the 
women’s clothing page!” And then hyperlink “women’s clothing” to that page.
Your product descriptions should have more than just a list of features and an 
“Order Now” button. Get the benefits in there, up front. Let customers know what else 

36	
Content is Currency
they receive if they buy right now, for example, “Get your choice of a free belt or handbag 
when you buy a dress today!” Compel them to take that next step! If you are trying to 
sign people up for your newsletter, do you just have the obligatory “Sign Up for Our 
Newsletter” and a place for them to type in their e-mail address? Or do you have some 
copy there that tells them why they should sign up and encourages them to do it?
Figure 2-1 
Newsletter Sign-Up Box
AIDA
When you take a look at your site’s copy, are you using AIDA? AIDA stands for atten-
tion, interest, desire, and action. Some have heard this before, maybe in a high school 
or college English class, but many people have not. Essentially, it’s a style of writing that 
helps grab readers’ attention, build interest, and create a desire so they will take action, 
in that order. It reflects the way people like to be sold. If you’re selling something over 
the phone, the same steps apply.
You really need to ask yourself, “Am I writing this content for me and the way I 
like to write, or am I doing it for readers, reflecting the way they respond to written 
words?” Ask yourself: Am I closing the deal with my customer? This is the ultimate 
goal of lots of content (definitely not all of it, though). Make the reader do something: 
fill out a survey, submit a request, sign up for a service, or buy the product.
Think of it like this: People buy more frequently when they are asked to buy.
Ensure That Your Content Is Readable
Not sure how readable your content is? Put it to the test, the Flesch Reading Ease test. 
You can find this test using Microsoft Office Word 2010. To use the test in Word:

	
 Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence
37
Click the File tab, and then click Options.
1. 
Click Proofing.
2. 
Under “When correcting spelling and grammar in Word,” make sure “Check 
3. 
grammar with spelling” is selected.
Select “Show readability statistics.”
4. 
After you enable this feature, open a file that you want to check, and check the spell-
ing. When Word finishes checking the spelling and grammar, it displays information 
about the reading level of the document. The test checks syllables per word and words 
per sentence, scoring on a one hundred-point scale. The higher your score, the easier 
the copy is to understand.
Putting It All Together—Harmonizing Your Content
When you finish writing your content, how do you ensure everything looks good, 
sounds good, and generally “works”? Performing all the separate pieces—making sure 
you write about product or service benefits, including a good headline, and implement-
ing keywords—is one thing, but how do they all fit together? As I’ve mentioned, you’ll 
want to have others read your work and provide their opinions.
So, what are some simple little rules to remember as you write, so you can har-
monize the content while you are writing it? First, use variety in the language. Use 
a simple sentence followed by a more complex one, followed by a fragment, or some 
other unique combination. What you are trying to get away from is boring, uniform 
copy. Using contrast is a good idea; it makes things stand out. By making the sentence 
structure varied, you make it interesting. By making it interesting, you provide good 
contrast. By giving your copy a good dose of contrast, you motivate people to buy. See 
how I did that? Look at the last three sentences I wrote and you’ll get an idea of how 
to implement style, contrast, and interest!
You also want a unified thought process, so the entire section of content has a 
good rhythm and flow to it. If you feel like you are rambling with the content, you 
probably are. Make every sentence count. All the while, be looking for link opportuni-
ties; you want to use linking on some of your keyword phrases—both internal and 
external linking. More on that in a bit.
If you are a retailer and do most of your business in the community where you 
are located, you’ll also want to think local for the language you choose and keywords 
you use. Place the most important information, the feature/benefit story, near the top. 
Wherever people start reading is the perfect spot for the information you want them 
to remember.
One other technique that can really make a difference in your content: Showing instead 
of telling. Using this little nugget of content gold can be difficult for a lot of people, 
because so many spend their lives doing more talking or writing in a “telling” kind of 

38	
Content is Currency
way. So, how would you show instead of tell in your content writing? The Starbucks 
example we used earlier is perfect.
Telling:
Starbucks is an international coffee roaster and retailer that specializes in the finest 
coffees around the world. Our team is dedicated to providing you with a quality 
experience and providing you with a great place to meet with friends or work on 
your laptop.
Showing:
The second you walk through the door you can smell it—the rich, unmistakable 
aroma of java, the air so thick with it you can almost taste it. At Starbucks, we love 
coffee and everything that goes with it. Good books. Great music. And what’s more, 
we love sharing our favorites with you. What makes a Starbucks coffeehouse such a 
vibrant and inviting space? It’s the people that come here—they smile, they laugh, 
they do business, they relax. And they appreciate our philosophy of community and 
environmental responsibility.
See the difference?
Formatting and Usability
The words you use on your site are important, but what it looks like and the way visitors 
get around is also critical. This is also an area of huge opportunity for most companies, 
especially those that have a website that’s outdated or not as effective as it once was.
Using Headings and Subheadings
Headings and subheadings help break up the page and give the eye something to focus 
on. As you scan web content, your eyes need brief moments of rest. They also need to take 
in specific information. Using headings and subheadings helps make this process easier. 
The major purpose, from a purely functional view, is that they tell the reader what the 
page is about, and more specifically, what that section of the page is about. This is great 
for quick reviewing. If you are going from page to page on a site, seeking only informa-
tion about a company’s services, the headers can provide that information. Break up the 
page into digestible parts. Your customers will thank you for it with more sales.
Using Bulleted Lists
One of the other important things to consider is the use of what’s called white space 
on your web pages. This is the area of the screen that is blank, that has nothing popu-
lated in it. It’s the white area all around your content. Be sure you have some. A long, 
uninterrupted string of sentences that make up a massively long paragraph is the direct 
opposite of what we are looking for, but you see it on the web all the time.

	
 Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence
39
So, how can you break up your copy and get people’s eyes to focus? Use bulleted 
lists. The copy shouldn’t be in standard block paragraphs like you see in books and 
magazines. Remember, you’re competing for your visitor’s time. If they don’t get the 
information they need quickly, they’ll jump to the next website.
How should you use this formatting technique? In the middle of the page is a good 
spot. It looks more balanced in this position and the list can be used to communicate 
some of the most important information on the page, maybe the benefits your cus-
tomers will receive if they buy your product. Numbered lists are great, too, like “Top 
five uses for our product” or “Top ten services we can assist you with.” People’s eyes 
are naturally drawn to these types of copy techniques. Using bulleted lists may be the 
most underappreciated and underutilized formatting technique, but it can really help 
communicate the content. As you’ll see, it’s also good for your SEO effort.
Using Blocks of Content
Is the copy broken up into readable/scannable sections? Or is it copied and pasted on 
the page haphazardly, without regard to the visitor’s perception? You need to ensure 
your content can be scanned in thirty seconds or less. Remember, we’re dealing with 
short attention spans. In addition, studies have shown that it can be 20 to 30 percent 
more difficult to read from a screen than to read print, so you need to account for that 
difference.
Contrast Between Text and Background
Although this seems like an obvious usability point, you’d be surprised how many 
companies are still not doing this step right. Have you ever see a website that had a 
black background and purple text? I have. How did a site like this get published? What 
were they thinking? Bottom line, if you can’t see the copy clearly or have to squint to 
see it—it’s not working. A safe alternative? White background and black text. That’s 
how most of the best sites are set up anyway. Your text and background choices are 
not the place to be creative; save that for your company logo or tag line.
Proofreading and Testing
There is nothing worse than good web content that misses the proofreading or testing 
stage. I’ve seen it happen many times: the copy starts off great, the first paragraph is 
sounding perfect, I understand exactly what they are talking about, and then—boom—
a big misspelling or a missing word. It looks so bad. And it’s really unfortunate because 
it came so close to being perfect.
The problem is that some people get so turned off by bad grammar that they decide 
they won’t do business with you, based on this reason alone. Very unfortunate. They 
probably assume that if you can’t get little things like your content right, maybe you’ll 
make mistakes with their service. So, you want to be sure this step gets done right. 

40	
Content is Currency
Although it’s a simple step, it usually gets missed or glossed over because it’s the very 
last one in the process. Note: Using the spell-checker in Microsoft Word is not enough. 
It can’t tell whether words are used correctly in their context (like your versus you’re). 
It also won’t tell you whether a word or part of a word is missing.
The bottom line is that you want to inspect your content three times, every time. 
And have someone else look at it too. If you can find a third person, even better. A good 
way of accomplishing this is by printing the copy out and reading it that way. It gives 
you a little different perspective. Reading out loud helps, too. So does giving yourself 
some time after you write it. Let it breathe and then come back to it thirty minutes 
later, ready to check it.
Error-free content is tough, but if you can get this step right, you’ll appear profes-
sional, reliable, and credible to everyone.
Grammar, Spelling, and the Rest
The best advice I can give you is to take a look at The Yahoo! Style Guide. It is a fantastic 
resource for this topic.
How Content Relates to Design
All web content, just like all print content, is made up of words and pictures. On the 
web it’s called content and design. These two work hand in hand, and cannot be sepa-
rated from each other. Every once in a while, you’ll see a site that is all words and has 
no graphics or design treatment, but it’s very rare. And I would say “UGLY” if I were 
to judge it. Of course, you also see websites that are all images, especially sites in the 
fashion industry. But these sites have different goals when it comes to online market-
ing. These companies don’t use their sites for lead generation, but rather to brand and 
to communicate an image. For our purposes, we are using content to do it all: provide 
lead generation, brand, and communicate an image.
Copy does not exist in a vacuum. And neither does design. They are forever 
linked, and really should be. But how do they balance each other? How do they work 
together?
Recently, my company was working on a website content editing project for a 
financial services company. The firm was having a conversion problem. They had no 
issue getting traffic to the site—they just couldn’t make people buy once they got there. 
After taking one look at their site, we knew the problem was obvious. The copy was 
just thrown on the page with no variation in font sizes, font types, or eye-appealing 
contrast. There was no customization to the site and nothing to focus on. I think there 
was only one paragraph break in the twelve hundred–word home page “manifesto.” 
And other pages on the site were the same. It also looked like they had used a website 
design template, which is another bad idea.

	
 Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence
41
Their competitors’ sites were very different. They all employed easy-to-read charts, 
testimonials, and other interesting design elements. My client had none of these. Obvi-
ously, something had to change, or his conversion rate would continue to suffer. Here 
are some of the things you want to look for when you consider your website copy and 
how it relates to the design:
Is there contrast in the style of fonts, the size of fonts, and the colors used? Some 
7
7
of the most eye-catching websites use a few contrasting fonts; different-sized 
fonts for the headings, subheadings, and body copy; and a complementary color 
palette. This approach wraps the content up into a great-looking package and 
truly brings it to life.
Are the areas of the page that you want your customers’ attention drawn to 
7
7
clearly visible? If you’re using a “Learn More,” “Buy Now,” or other clickable 
button, is it obvious? Make sure it stands out on the page and can’t be mistaken 
for something else (by the way, don’t use “Click Here”—it’s overused and looks 
amateurish).
Is the design simple and easy to navigate or is it cluttered? Some of the best 
7
7
websites are really very simple in appearance, even if they have lots of content. 
The rule here is to spread the copy out, creating a unique page for every topic. 
Besides the obvious aesthetic reasons, it’s also great for SEO purposes. Don’t 
“drown” your copy in a complex design structure or have a million different 
web pages on your menu. Remember, white space is important. Let the content 
breathe!
Usability Analysis
Much of what we have learned regarding website usability comes from researcher 
and writer Jakob Nielsen. Called “the best-known design and usability guru on the 
Internet,” Nielsen holds a Ph.D. in human-computer interaction, and the insights that 
the Internet community has gained through his studies have vastly improved the user 
experience. Almost all of the findings have a correlation to content, so it’s important 
that we look at some of the key takeaways.
Probably the most fascinating of Nielsen’s findings has to do with how people read 
on the web. In Nielsen’s groundbreaking eye-tracking study from 2006,10 he recorded the 
reading behavior of 232 users. The users viewed thousands of web pages, and Nielsen 
found that their reading behavior was pretty consistent. It didn’t matter what the site 
or task was, there was a definite outcome. What did Nielsen find? That the dominant 
reading pattern looks somewhat like a large letter “F” on the page. His findings:
10 Nielsen, Jakob. 2006. “F-Shaped Pattern for Reading Web Content.” Useit.com, April 17. Accessed 
2/2/11. http://www.useit.com/alertbox/reading_pattern.html.

42	
Content is Currency
Users first read in a horizontal movement, usually across the upper part of the 
7
7
content area, which forms the F’s top bar.
Next, users move down the page a bit and then read across in a second horizon-
7
7
tal movement that typically covers a shorter area than the previous movement. 
This forms the F’s lower bar.
Finally, users scan the content’s left side in a vertical movement. This last ele-
7
7
ment forms the F’s stem.
It should be noted that sometimes users read across a third part of the page, making 
the pattern look more like an E than an F. Other times, the reading pattern looked like 
an inverted L. What are the implications for your content? Place the most important 
copy in the areas where the eyes scan.
Writing in the Style of Inverted Pyramids
We know that people are scanning your content. So given these findings, how do we 
ensure that they get the information you want to communicate? We do this by writ-
ing in the style of an “inverted pyramid.” What this means is simply putting the most 
important information, your major points, first. Follow with supporting information 
and end with the least important details—background, maybe answers to a couple of 
popular customer questions, etc.
You also want to place the most important content in the upper left area of your 
pages. Make sure you emphasize the most important information with prominent 
headings and boldface type. And, as you’ll find out in a bit, placing your important 
keyword phrases in these locations is also critical.
Easy Navigation—Make the Content Simple to Follow
How many clicks does it take, on average, for your customers or prospects to find 
what they need on your site? Have you ever looked? Check out your website analyt-
ics program and see what the numbers are telling you. Follow their path from start 
to finish. This data is invaluable—and it can help you redesign and/or rewrite your 
pages if necessary. How many clicks should it take for visitors to get to what they 
are looking for? Probably fewer than five, but it’s less about the number of clicks 
and more about providing an intuitive, easy-to-follow path, no matter what they 
are trying to find.
Talk to your customers about this. See what they are telling you. Ask them point 
blank if they think your website and other types of content are confusing. Is the copy 
and navigation holding them by the hand or backing them into a corner? Get a handle 
on this, and you are on your way toward improving the overall content experience.

	
 Analyzing Your Current Web Content and Mobile Presence
43
Patterns, Alignment, and Consistency
Whether it’s your e-book series, your autoresponders, or your website, you want to 
take a look at your pages, individually and collectively. Do they have a consistent look 
and feel? Does the content have the same voice and tone? They absolutely need to. If 
you see major differences from page to page, your content will not only look bad, it 
will throw your readers off and sometimes make them stop reading altogether. I know 
I have done it many times.
Other things you want to check? The location of graphics, the site search box, your 
menus, etc. There shouldn’t be any variability with these site design elements. If you see 
problems here, you should seriously consider redesigning. If you notice that your copy 
needs a complete refresh as well, then this is a good time to do both. A total facelift is 
much easier than making design changes one year and copy changes the next!

This page intentionally left blank 

C h a p t e r  3
Performing Keyword and 
Competitive Research
K
eyword strategy is part art and part science, and is probably the least understood 
and most overlooked part of companies’ web and mobile strategies. Of all the things 
I have witnessed in the past seven years, the lack of knowledge in this area has been 
by far the most surprising.
Most companies simply don’t appreciate the importance of this critically important 
task. Begin by asking yourself what search phrases people could be using to find your 
website. You’ll want to really brainstorm this one, coming up with general phrases, 
specific phrases, and “long tail” phrases (three- to six-word phrases).
If you are a pet groomer in Monterey, California, then you’ll probably want to use 
“pet groomer in Monterey, California” as a keyword phrase. If you are a .net develop-
ment services firm, you’ll want to use “.net development services,” but you’ll also want 
to use “.net development company,” “.net development provider,” and others. Of course, 
there is a lot more to the keyword research process, so let’s get into it.
The Essential Practice of Keyword Research
Did you know that more than half of the people out there think that the companies 
listed at the top of the search engine rankings are the top companies in their field? It’s 
true. I start off with this startling statistic because it has dramatic implications. It also 
talks to the power of keyword phrases and search engine optimized content.
Lots of consumers use the web to investigate before they buy, but at the same time, 
there are many people who are ready to buy when they log on. If you are on the first 
page of the search results for the keyword phrase they are using, and they click on your 
listing, they are definitely aware of you. More than likely, they will believe you are a 
company that they should consider purchasing from.
45

46	
Content is Currency
So, being on that first page of Google results for your important keyword phrases 
could be a gold mine for your business. Google, like all the other search engines, looks 
for keywords when it is “crawling” the web to determine search engine rankings. If 
you use your keywords in certain strategic places, Google will usually notice it. So will 
people who are searching for your products and services, end up on your site, and com-
plete a contact form. And you know what? These leads are prequalified. That’s incredibly 
powerful. And for some of them, the odds are very good that they will purchase soon. 
So, the lesson here is if you do your SEO content correctly and get your site optimized, 
you will go a long way toward building your brand awareness.
The first step is determining who your audience is. How do they behave? What’s 
important to them? Are they all pretty much the same or are they made up of several 
distinct groups? Chances are, they are probably a diverse group of people. Remember, 
if you are serving a global audience, the web pulls from all over the place. So think 
broadly. If you are a local company, serving only your community, then this wouldn’t 
be the case, of course. Your keywords will be geographically based.
Once you know your customers, you can start understanding how they search 
for you online.
What Words Are Potential Customers Using to Search for You?
Here’s a key question: Do you know which keyword phrases your customers are using 
to find you? You’ll probably be able to guess at a few. But most of them, you won’t know 
right away. The reason is that there are probably a hundred (sometimes hundreds or a 
few thousand) phrases that people could use to search for you. There are always more 
keyword phrases than you think. Even if you are a small company and only sell one 
product, there will still be dozens of potential phrases that you can optimize for.
What’s one way of learning these phrases? Ask customers. Some may not remember 
the words they used, but many will, especially if you ask them on a web form or talk 
to them on the phone right after they visited your site. This is valuable information. 
Be sure you keep an ongoing log of what they tell you. As the first step in gathering 
keyword intelligence, it’s easy and it doesn’t cost you a thing.
Be aware, too, that keywords people use do change and evolve over time. They may 
be searching for “power boats” now, but when a new technology comes out, let’s say a 
new thirty-two-valve turbo engine, they may start using “turbo engine power boats” 
too. Just be aware of what those keyword changes may be.
How can you get help in determining appropriate keyword phrases? I thought 
you’d never ask. This is the other important step that you want to take. Let’s face it, the 
key to doing anything on the web—whether it’s getting help with design, determining 

	
 Performing Keyword and Competitive Research
47
the databases you want to use, or learning about SEO content development—is finding 
the right information so you can do it yourself, or locating the right organization so 
you can partner with or outsource to them. I say, focus on your core competencies and 
find quality partners for the rest. Well, for the most part, you don’t have to do that with 
SEO content—you can do it yourself. But you can also send the work out. So, back to 
the topic at hand: getting help with your keyword research.
Measuring Demand and Competition
Most of the information in this chapter refers to measuring the demand of your key-
word phrases. But let’s not forget the level of competition either. Essentially, this is the 
number of sites that are using a particular keyword phrase on their pages. The best way 
to find out is to simply search for the phrase in a Google search and see how many pages 
are using it. The number will be in the top right corner of the search results page.
You’ll also want to click on a few of the listings on the first page to see how the top 
sites are optimizing for the phrase. This will give you some insight into why they are 
ranked as high as they are. If you find a phrase that is really popular—and you will—
don’t think you can’t rank for it, too. It will probably be very difficult, but you don’t want 
to simply cede to the competition. Get out there and beat them at their own game!
Keyword Discovery
For a subject as sophisticated and dynamic as Internet keywords, we need all the help 
we can get. This is an art and a science, after all. Anything that combines those two 
disciplines is bound to be complex. The good news is that there are some great resources 
that deliver on their promise of comprehensive keyword analysis.
Keyword Discovery, a great keyword research tool, has been on the scene since 
2004. It’s been adopted as the best keyword phrase analysis tool by many of the top 
search marketing industry gurus. At $69.95 per month, it’s well worth the investment. 
And it’s available as a free trial. Make sure you do it! The tool uses historical data from 
36 billion searches conducted via two hundred search engines and uses search logs 
from the engines as well. It also offers a year’s worth of data, so you can spot seasonal 
variations in keyword use. This can be valuable information, especially if you are a 
clothing retailer or have a cyclical type of online business.
If you are looking for a super-robust tool, be sure to check out Keyword Discovery. 
Remember, uncovering only ten to twenty important keyword phrases can alter the 
landscape of your business very quickly. This is as good as gold when it comes to your 
SEO content effort. Harness the power.

48	
Content is Currency
Figure 3-1 
Keyword Discovery
Wordtracker
Wordtracker been around since 1997 and is recommended by many leading search 
marketing firms. As the “first mover” in the keyword analysis space, this tool pioneered 
a unique way of looking at the words we all use to find things on the Internet. Although 
it’s been fourteen years since Wordtracker first came on the scene, it is still highly 
regarded and does a very good job for thousands of companies across the globe.
It uses what the company calls a “keyword effectiveness index” (KEI) analysis. 
KEI is a formula that compares the popularity of a keyword phrase (the number of 
searches that contain the keyword phrase) to its usage popularity (the number of actual 
web pages it is found on). Although a little confusing at first, it does tell an interesting 
story. When you go to the site, you’ll see that it offers a free trial. Do this. It’s a great 
first exercise for any business looking to get a leg up on its online competitors. Or if 
you just want to know more about how to optimize your website.
When you try Wordtracker out, it asks you a few questions and goes through a 
simple process of coming up with a target list of keywords. You’ll see the “count” of 

	
 Performing Keyword and Competitive Research
49
each keyword. This is simply the number of searches performed for the keyword. You’ll 
also see a KEI for each keyword phrase. Be sure to take some time analyzing what this 
is telling you. But don’t put all of your faith in it. Wordtracker’s KEI analysis will tell 
you that certain keyword phrases are too competitive or popular and steer you away 
from using them. This isn’t always the best advice.
As I mentioned earlier, you want to be found for those wildly popular phrases. 
Sometimes it will take a while, but you need to face your competitors head on. As we 
know, there are a lot of things you can do to further optimize your content so that you 
can own that popular keyword phrase! Don’t just give up and let your competitors 
beat you out.
Wordtracker can help determine how many competing sites are using the keywords 
you’re looking at and can identify the phrases that have the greatest traffic potential. 
Some other things that Wordtracker can help you determine are keyword variations, 
word variants (example: dog tags versus dog tag), and managing keyword lists. The cost 
to use the service is $69 per month or $379 per year, as of November 2011.
How does the tool get its information? Wordtracker periodically compiles a 
database of over 330 million search terms, which is updated on a weekly basis. All 
search terms are collected from the major metacrawlers—Dogpile and MetaCrawler. 
Why do they use these two and not Google? It’s because many people use Google to 
check their rank for a keyword phrase, so it’s not a totally accurate measurement of 
the keyword’s popularity.
Figure 3-2 
Wordtracker

50	
Content is Currency
Free Keyword Research Tools
There are a few adequate keyword research tools that are free. These include Google 
AdWords Keyword Tool, Google Insights for Search, and Aaron Wall’s Free Keyword 
List Generator (Located at www.seobook.com). You may also want to check out Aaron 
Wall’s Advanced Keyword Research Tool. Note that with the AdWords tool, you don’t 
get keyword demand. Rather, the tool shows you an estimate of the number of clicks you 
may receive with an average bid. It does, however, support languages around the world, 
which appeals to an international audience, especially those interested in paid search.
The others mentioned above are all really cool and worth checking out—you can 
never have too much information on your keywords.
Figure 3-3 
SEO Book Keyword Tool
Figure 3-4 
Google AdWords Keyword Tool

	
 Performing Keyword and Competitive Research
51
Your Site Search Box
Companies that have that little search box on their sites—the one where you can type a 
word or two to find things that match those words on the site—have an ulterior motive. 
Yes, they want to help you find relevant information on the site. But, guess what? They 
also look at which words people type in that box for keyword research purposes. Know-
ing what and how visitors query can pay big dividends. I highly recommend you use 
this strategy on your own site.
Figure 3-5 
Site Search Box Example
Checking Web Server Log Files
Are you using Google Analytics, WebTrends, ClickTracks, or some other log file analy-
sis software? Mine it! This is great stuff to know. If you are new to this type of software, 
you should be aware that it can tell you which key phrases users typed into the search 
engines to find you. No guessing here, no asking users what phrase they searched to find 
you. Right there in the files will be all the search terms they used. And this is just the 
tip of the iceberg with these types of software products. If you don’t have one installed, 
seriously consider it. It’s another item that’s well worth the investment.
Keyword Strategizing and Brainstorming
Talking to your management team about their keyword ideas is a great idea. Get every-
one in a room and make a list of potential keywords. Have a lively discussion. One 
thing is for sure: The list will be longer than the one you wrote out. There are always 
hidden or forgotten keyword phrases that may be relevant.

52	
Content is Currency
Next, you want to get into the strategizing part of the exercise. The first step here 
is to come up with a complete list of all the keyword nouns. Be sure to remember the 
basic breakdown: product category, segment of the market, brand names, and indi-
vidual model names. An example of this would be “truck” (product category), “full 
size light duty” (segment of the market), “Ford” (brand name), and “F-150” (individual 
model name). Now, look at the corresponding adjectives for these nouns. And be sure 
to look at the full spectrum of adjectives, including comparison adjectives (tough light 
duty truck), qualifier adjectives (heaviest light duty truck), function adjectives (fast-
est light duty truck), attribute adjectives (2 ton light duty truck) and action adjectives 
(buy light duty truck).
Finally, think from a creative place. Try to get inside your customer’s head; maybe 
it’s someone who has never bought a truck before and is totally new to the truck buy-
ing experience. What’s going through his mind when he is getting ready to go online 
and perform a search? What problem is he trying to solve? What does he really want? 
What will he use in his search? Does the industry use certain jargon or clichés? If 
you call your product one thing and your customers call it something else, you need 
to be aware of this. This dynamic is a very common issue. Don’t let it happen to you. 
Uncover the unknown.
Semantically Related Phrases
This is one step many companies miss altogether. Think about other words and phrases 
that are similar to your main keyword phrases. Words have relationships to other words, 
so when you think in terms of semantics, you might come up with something like the 
following: auto, car, vehicle, motor vehicle, automobile. These are all semantically related. 
You could even take the process a step further and look for words and phrases that 
appear totally different but are very much related. For example, for the main keyword 
“SEO,” you might come up with: search engine optimization, website promotion, online 
marketing, search, submission, high ranking. To see what related terms might be relevant 
for your products or services, use the Google AdWords Keyword Tool.
How Popular Are Your Keyword Phrases?
Using Google once again, I search for “cars,” a very generic one-word keyword phrase. 
At the top right of the search results page, it says there are 811 million results for “cars.” 
Wow—it would be tough to get ranked well for that keyword phrase, right? Yep. Really 
tough. Fairly impossible. And how many times was “cars” searched last month world-
wide? Millions of times. Another humbling number.
Next, I searched for “family camping tents.” I found 618,000 results, which would be 
much easier to rank for. If you sell tents and need to get a website up, there is hope! Last 
month this term was searched 6,500 times. Finally, for a full picture of the popularity or 
lack of popularity of keyword phrases, I typed in “Chesnik Kaleidoscopes.” The results 
there were a whole lot lower: only 530. Super easy to rank for that keyword phrase, but, 

	
 Performing Keyword and Competitive Research
53
of course, you wouldn’t choose a phrase like that for your optimization efforts because 
it’s the name of a business and its product. But I think you get the idea.
How does this concept apply to your company and your keyword phrases?
Align Keywords with the Customer Buying Cycle 
and Role-Based Keyword Searches
This is a step that few companies ever take. Of course, we all know that not everyone 
who jumps on the web or a mobile device is going to buy the very first time. Consumers 
are really doing one of four things:
Gathering general information
7
7
Trying to learn about a specific product/service
7
7
Shopping
7
7
Buying
7
7
The key thing to know is that for each point in the buying cycle, consumers have a 
likelihood of using a unique type of keyword phrase. For example, if we are talking about 
buying a car, a keyword phrase prospective customers may use in the education step would 
be “2012 best cars.” At the shopping stage, they may use “car dealerships in Atlanta.” At 
the buying stage, they may use still another unique keyword phrase, like “Toyota Camry 
in Atlanta,” or they may go back to the dealership’s site and buy a car right off the website. 
Be aware of the customer buying process when you optimize your site’s content.
Role-based keyword searching behavior is another interesting SEO dynamic. 
Basically, it breaks down to this: Who is searching—the president of the company, 
the market research guy, or the salesperson? For example, what does each use as her 
keyword phrase and why? You need to align your keyword phrases with the type of 
people who are seeking you out. Some websites even categorize their product pages by 
customer role; it just depends on your specific customer set. This concept is worthy of 
mentioning because it may be a great opportunity for you to write more targeted and 
specific pages tailored for a particular type of customer.
Figure 3-6 
Mapping Keywords to Buy Cycle

54	
Content is Currency
Keyword Density
This represents the percentage of your keyword phrases in your web content. The goal 
is to make keywords 2 to 4 percent of the total words on the page. This is what Google 
likes to see. Less than 2 percent, and you probably don’t have enough density; above 4 
percent, and you could trigger the spam filter. Stay away from that!
Stemming
This is an important concept in keyword research—and also one of the least used and 
most misunderstood Why? Because Google values sites that use different forms of a 
certain keyword. And most people are unaware that this is part of the ranking algo-
rithm. What does stemming look like? For walk, the forms would be walked, walking, 
walks, and so on.
The other reason to use stemming is that the same phrase repeated three or four 
times in the body copy tends to look bad. It’s also boring. So, spice up your content 
with a little stemming.
Look for Emerging Keyword Phrases
We live in a super-fast, turbocharged world. Things are changing all the time. Your 
competitors are moving, some of them very quickly, to dominate your business. 
Online, they are going to be coming after you fast on the SEO front. So, ask yourself 
this question: What are my customers searching for today to try to find me? That’s the 
million-dollar question. You’ll find that keyword searching evolves over time and new 
trends can influence the process. What your prospects typed in the Google search box 
one day might be different the next.
So, what are the emerging keyword phrases for your industry? Stay on top of your 
competitors’ source code and site copy to see what they are using, and then use your 
due diligence on Keyword Discovery and Wordtracker to see what the latest trend 
is. Another good idea is to use Google Insights or Google Trends. These are fantastic 
resources for finding out about the very latest developments.
Keyword use is a moving target. You’ll need to optimize your copy based on 
emerging keyword phrases. Don’t let your competitors do it first!
Optimize for Long Tail Keyword Phrases
The “long tail,” as popularized by Wired magazine editor Chris Anderson in 2004, is 
defined as this: the idea that companies sell small numbers of hard-to-find items to 
diverse customers. So, it’s selling less of more. What’s a long tail keyword phrase? A 
phrase that is made up of three to six words. Here are a couple of examples: “large inex-
pensive oil painting” or “grain fed beef from America.” There are probably a few dozen 

	
 Performing Keyword and Competitive Research
55
or more that would apply to your business. Find 
out what they are by using the keyword research 
tools listed in this chapter.
The really great thing about optimizing for 
long tail keyword phrases is the high conversion 
rate. Because they are so targeted, and people who 
use them are usually making a buying decision 
soon, long tail keywords can literally translate 
to a 30 percent or higher conversion machine for 
your site. That’s the power. Long tail keywords 
are matching consumers with exactly what you 
are selling. Plus, they are both descriptive and 
specific, two key attributes of keyword phrases. 
And by using long tail keywords, you’ll give your 
site that added variety that Google likes to see.
Camera
Digital Camera
Long Tail Keywords
Sony
Digital Camera
Sony Cybershot
Digital Camera
Sony Digital Camera
7.1MP with 3x
Op"cal Zoom
Figure 3-8 
Long Tail Keywords
Establish New Phrases That No One Is Using Yet
You also want to try to establish new keyword phrases that you can build content 
around. This could be a phrase that isn’t yet used by searchers. Your goal is to build a 
following around the phrase, so that when it is eventually searched, all the searches 
will lead right to your site and nowhere else.
The well-regarded online marketing software company HubSpot did this very 
well with a keyword phrase they coined: “inbound marketing software.” Within a few 
months of launching their site, people were searching for that phrase and HubSpot 
came up every time, all the time. Pretty cool.
Figure 3-7 
The Long Tail by Chris 
Anderson

56	
Content is Currency
Which keyword phrases lead to conversions? Great question. Check your site 
analytics program (Google Analytics is great) and logs, and ask your customers. 
Information is power.
Figure 3-9 
MarketingSherpa’s Tactics for Keyword Research
Keyword Nuances—Some Other Important Considerations
Be aware of these often overlooked keyword research issues:
Multiple audiences: a certain keyword phrase may apply to two totally different 
7
7
industries or purposes (“policing” could mean “policing the community” or 
“policing the Internet”)
Related meanings: avoid a broader term (“warranties”) when a more specific 
7
7
one is accurate (“home warranties”)
Acronyms: beware of double meanings in your keywords; spell them out as 
7
7
often as possible (use “Internet Service Provider” not ISP)
Use synonyms and other related words
7
7
Plural/singular issues: “trucks” and “truck”—there are differences; when in doubt, 
7
7
optimize for the plural form and that will capture the singular form too
Multiple intents: “hotel” and “lodging”—they may mean the same thing to you, 
7
7
but according to some studies, the term “hotel” will have a higher conversion 
rate
Boldface type: helps visitors see the phrases they searched for and may be rec-
7
7
ognized by Google, too; don’t overuse it though, just a few times is enough

	
 Performing Keyword and Competitive Research
57
Finally, in your goal to harmonize your content, you want to always be thinking 
“keywords.” Look for those general nouns like “balloons,” “cars,” and “rings,” and 
think, Is there a more descriptive way to describe these things, maybe a way that incor-
porates a keyword or two? How about “hot air balloons,” “formula one race cars,” and 
“diamond solitaire engagement rings”? Presto, you’ve just used your keyword phrases. 
Now do it again and again.
One additional note: Keyword research is an ongoing process that never ends. It’s 
always evolving. And if you start offering a new product or service, be sure to do new 
research to account for this.
Keyword Relevant Content for e-Commerce
If you run an e-commerce site, you have probably struggled with search engine optimi-
zation (SEO). With all your content-light navigational pages and product pages, which 
are prone to content duplication, it’s challenging to give Google the relevant, unique 
content it wants. Throw in the fact that many of your affiliates or partners are using 
the same content on their sites, and you start to have a real problem. There are things 
you can do, however, to develop content that connects with both your prospects and 
the search engines. What are they?
1. Write category descriptions. Let me guess: Your category pages have little or no 
content, right? If you are like most e-commerce sites, these pages are populated with 
lots of images and links but limited copy.
How do you correct this? Write descriptions or introductory copy for each cat-
egory. Whether this shows up above or below the product listings doesn’t really matter. 
Google needs to see solid keyword-influenced content on these pages. And be sure to 
use your primary or more general keyword phrases here. Make this happen, and you 
are well on your way to fixing the issue.
2. Rewrite product descriptions. Remember our earlier discussion of “long tail” 
keywords? These are phrases like “large dog bones for great danes” or “safe toys for young 
children.” Your product pages are a great spot for these types of keyword phrases. You 
want to eliminate the manufacturer-provided descriptions that so many e-commerce 
sites use. This is duplicate content in the search engines’ eyes, and they don’t like it.
So, take some time, rewrite your most important product pages with unique prod-
uct descriptions, and optimize them for those extended keyword phrases. You could 
see some huge SEO improvements in short order.
3. Write buyer guides. Your customers want to know everything about your prod-
ucts before they buy. If they get that information from your site, chances are, they’ll 
buy from you. How can you best accomplish this? Write a bunch of buyer guides for 
your most popular products. What do your customers need to know? How can they 

58	
Content is Currency
use the product in their lives? Answer these types of questions in your buyer guides 
and then be sure to optimize them for primary or secondary keywords.
4. Include expert product reviews. Product reviews drive solid rankings in the 
search engines. Why? People are looking for reviews. They get a great deal of informa-
tion from them, especially when they are researching a product. If you can have your 
best customers write keyword-targeted content for your site, you could get dozens of 
new pages ranked fairly quickly.
Competitive Research
There is lots of stuff that you’ll need to do to monitor your competition, much more 
than this book covers. But from a content perspective, there are things you’ll want to 
stay tuned into and be aware of so you can respond or make changes to your site, blog, 
or social media profiles as well. After all, you don’t want to be late to the party if there 
is a new industry development.
Having said this, I want to reiterate something: Focus more on developing what 
you are as a business, stay on task with your content plan, and move forward assertively 
to stake your claim. Focusing too much on the competition can become an obsessive 
practice and can take your eye off the ball.
The factors you’ll want to be dialed into, however, are the following:
How your competitors rank in the search engines
7
7
What types of free (and paid) content they use
7
7
Webinars and other lead-generation content they use
7
7
Their social media presence
7
7
Their blog
7
7
All of this can help you in your quest to dominate the space!
Analyzing Your Competitors’ Keyword Phrases
This is something we have done ever since we opened our doors. If you want to increase 
your sales and improve your business, you’ve got to know what your competitors are 
doing with keywords, right? As you make changes to your offerings, so do they. Things 
are always moving, positions are always being jockeyed for, new markets are always in 
play. At the same time, your competitors may make some mistakes, as you could too. 
The nice thing about the web is that it lends itself very well to checking your competi-
tors’ keyword phrases (and other important items)!
How do you do this? Just jump on a competitor’s site, right click on the home 
page, and click on “View source code.” Near the top of the code that pops up, you’ll see 
“Meta tags.” You’ll want to look at these, especially the title, description, and keyword 
tags. This is where you’ll see the keyword phrases your competition is optimizing for 
on the page. Check all their pages. If they are using the same meta tag phrases on all 

	
 Performing Keyword and Competitive Research
59
their pages, then you have an advantage, because that’s a big mistake (and one we see 
a lot).
If it’s your first time checking a competitive site, you’ll be surprised how easy it 
is to acquire this information. You couldn’t do this with your competitors in the pre-
Internet days. In addition to checking their HTML code behind the scenes, you also 
want to be diligent in checking their inclusion of keyword phrases on their site. See 
where keywords appear and how often they’re used.
A couple of things to keep in mind: Your competitors don’t always know what 
they are doing. They could be making the same mistakes you are. Or, they could know 
exactly what they are doing. Are they checking you out? Assume they are, because it 
probably is the case. The other word of caution is to check more than just a couple 
of competitors. I would check nearly everyone on the first three pages for your most 
popular keyword phrases. It just makes sense to do a comprehensive job in this area. 
What you find out could be very interesting and could help you compete more effec-
tively in the content age!
Figure 3-10 
View Source Code Pop-Up Window
Figure 3-11 
Source HTML Code for a Web Page

60	
Content is Currency
Keyword Density and Prominence Analyzer
Ranks.nl is a fantastic tool for these important keyword research activities. Essentially, 
you can use this tool to “spy” on your competition and find out which phrases they 
are best optimized for. When using the tool, you want a keyword prominence of 80 
percent or more to help determine the appropriate topic for your page.
Ranks.nl has had one of the best page analyzers on the web since 2001, and is rec-
ommended by many in the search marketing industry. For more experienced search 
engine optimizers, it’s great for verifying the work you have done. For beginners, it’s a 
great tool that helps show the reasons that a page is ranking well—or not.
Figure 3-12 
Ranks.nl

	
 Performing Keyword and Competitive Research
61
(continued)
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7

62	
Content is Currency
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
So, what’s stopping you from attaining higher keyword rankings? Well, nothing is 
stopping you now. You have the bible of online content right here in your hands. But, 
hang on, there are a few more important steps. Now you know which keywords you 
want to use, but how do you place them in your website content? Good question . . . 
let’s get right into that. Time to optimize!

C h a p t e r  4
Optimizing Your Web Content
T
here’s no doubt about it: the search engines, especially Google, have revolutionized 
global commerce in the short fifteen or so years they have been around. Everything—
absolutely everything—about business has changed in their wake. From starting a new 
business to marketing your business to growing your business, it all is much easier 
than it ever was before. And we have Google to thank for that. Its rise has been the stuff 
of business folklore. Like Apple and Microsoft before it, and Facebook and Twitter in 
recent years, Google came out of nowhere. It was fueled by little more than great ideas, 
a revolutionary approach, and two very smart guys from Stanford.
But understanding how rankings work is challenging, even for the most experi-
enced search engine marketers. And with mobile coming on strong, it’s even tougher 
to get a handle on all this stuff. Producing the content is one thing. Optimizing it so it 
shows up in search engines is something altogether different.
Here’s the deal: When you put a piece of content together, it doesn’t do any good 
unless people see it and act on it. This is what the search engines do—they get content 
to the people. They are the distributors of your content!
What can be ranked in search engines? Well, remember that list we started the 
book with?
Blog posts
7
7
Website pages
7
7
YouTube videos
7
7
E-books
7
7
Case studies
7
7
Podcasts
7
7
Webinars
7
7
E-newsletters
7
7
Digital magazines
7
7
Press releases
7
7
Articles
7
7
White papers
7
7
Content widgets
7
7
E-mails
7
7
Autoresponders
7
7
Newsletters
7
7
Practically all of these can be optimized for search! Note: The only ones that aren’t 
subject to optimization are the last three: autoresponders, e-mails, and newsletters. 
These are sent out through your e-mail marketing program or CRM system.
63

64	
Content is Currency
It’s true that not everyone will find your site or other web content through search 
engines. Some prospects will find out about you through an event or from traditional 
advertising like a TV commercial or a magazine ad. Many people will find your content 
through social networking sites. This channel of “first discovery” is growing rapidly, 
of course. And some have even predicted the demise of the search engines because of 
the time and attention that people devote to Facebook, Twitter, and the like. I say NO 
WAY. There is absolutely no indication that Google will be stepping aside any time 
soon. In fact, it is finding ways to take market share away from Facebook, though alas, 
that’s a topic for another book! There’s never a dull moment in the digital marketing 
space. So let’s get into the heart of SEO. We covered it early on, but for our purposes 
here: What exactly is search engine optimization, or SEO, and what are we talking 
about when we say “optimizing” web content?
In this book, I cover all of the details of the web content piece of SEO, which I 
believe is the most important. Why? Because it all starts with content, it will always 
be about content, and content is truly the way we connect with other people. We don’t 
connect with them through HTML code (at least directly).
And here is the link missing from other books in this genre: you cannot, I repeat 
cannot, have a discussion about content, content marketing, content strategy, social 
media marketing, or mobile marketing without talking about SEO. It’s just that simple. 
The problem is that almost all other books simply gloss over the topic. Some actually 
leave it out, which is a big mistake. In Content Is Currency, you’ll find everything you 
need to know so you can compete more effectively with your content!
The goal for your website? To rank on the first page of Google (and the other search 
engines) for fifty of your top keyword phrases. In fact, this goal is so important that I 
want you to write it down and pin it up on a bulletin board so you can see it every day. 
This means that if, for example, you sell dog and cat toys, you’re going to be on that 
coveted first page of Google’s search results for “dog and cat toys,” “fun toys for dogs,” 
“soft toys for dogs,” “toys for pets,” “puppy toys,” and forty-five other phrases.
The mission has been assigned. And you won’t stop until you get there, right? Okay, 
good. I’m happy. (Note that the primary focus in this chapter will be the optimization 
of your website content. For all other content types, we discuss specific SEO (and SMO) 
strategies in their respective chapters.)

	
 Optimizing Your Web Content
65
Search Engine Ranking Factors—SEOmoz Study
When it comes to content optimization, a good place to start is with a study11 that 
SEOmoz did in 2011. It has been widely used, quoted, and talked about, just like it was 
in 2009 when they published their first version. SEOmoz, led by industry veteran Rand 
Fishkin, is one of the leading SEO software providers, and Rand is a true thought leader 
in the space. Essentially, the study looked at all the potential search engine ranking 
factors. Here are the five most important ones:
Page level link metrics
1. 
Domain level link authority features
2. 
Page level keyword usage
3. 
Domain level keyword usage
4. 
Page level social metrics
5. 
This simple, five-point list should be nailed to your wall somewhere; it’s that impor-
tant. Like others, I’ve done the research, too. I have used these tactics with our clients. 
And the bottom line is that it’s the current gold standard for content optimization. I 
recommend visiting www.seomoz.org to review it in detail.
11 SEOmoz. “Search Engine 2011 Ranking Factors.” Accessed 6/14/11. http://www.seomoz.org/article/
search-ranking-factors.
Figure 4-1 
SEOmoz Search Ranking Factors

66	
Content is Currency
When you look at the list, what you see right away is the word link. It’s the top two 
points on the list. Clearly, it’s really important. When other sites post links to your 
site, they are, in effect, casting a vote for your site. But what is a high-quality external 
link?
And how about “keyword-focused anchor text”? What’s that? Essentially, it means 
using a keyword phrase that’s important to you as the hyperlink itself instead of using 
your URL or other text. If “content management software” is the most important key-
word phrase for you, then this is what you would want an external site to use when they 
link to you. When someone is on that site and is intrigued by “content management 
software,” she would simply click on the link and within two seconds be delivered to 
your site. Isn’t the web great?
Figure 4-2 shows an example of an anchor text link that takes the reader to a 
specific page when she clicks on it.
Figure 4-2 
Anchor Text Link Example
The challenge, of course, is that getting links like this can be really tough. It is, in fact, 
the most difficult part of the online marketing game. But here is the secret: Great 
content will bring the high-quality links to you! So, that’s exactly what you are going 

	
 Optimizing Your Web Content
67
to do: After reading this book, you’re going to produce some incredible, link-friendly 
content.
Writing for the Search Engines and for People
Keep in mind, you are still doing two things at once with your content: writing for the 
search engines and writing for people. Google is looking for certain things on your 
site that humans are not—that’s just the plain and simple truth.
But how are people’s and search engines’ needs different? How do you write for 
both at the same time? Why do we have to be concerned? These are all questions that 
we will answer. Know that if you are looking for one golden rule of content development 
on the web, it is this: Develop for people first, search engines second.
Let’s take a minute to understand how search engines work, exactly.
The ABCs of SEO
How do search engines work? I’ll put it to you plainly first, and then we’ll get into some 
technical detail. I think it’s pretty important to understand this stuff, inside and out. 
And again, I’ll say it once, and I’ll say it again: I am shocked to see how few businesses 
know these details about search engine optimization. Whether I’m at a Chamber of 
Commerce event or a trade show, or am interacting with prospective clients online, I 
see a huge “knowledge gap” when it comes to SEO. So let’s settle that right now.
The basic process:
Search engines analyze words on web pages
1. 
The engines record these words
2. 
When people type words into a search field, the engines try to match the words 
3. 
typed with the words they recorded, delivering a list of relevant sites
The engines provide a list of what they believe are the very best matches for the 
4. 
search based on certain criteria
Your goal? To be one of those sites the engines provide. You can ensure this by tak-
ing the steps I outline in this book (among many other things, such as link building). 
Remember, people usually don’t go past page three in the search results. So if your 
site is listed on page four (or page ten), you probably won’t get much traffic. That’s why 
we are going to teach you how to get on page one. Your two best content strategies to 
accomplish this are:
To have valuable, interesting content that people like and want to link to
1. 
To understand which words (keywords) people use in their searches to find you, 
2. 
and then to use those words in the content and in the metadata.

68	
Content is Currency
Because we know that links are really important for your SEO effort, it’s helpful to 
understand where you could do some easy linking research. The best thing you can do 
is use Yahoo! Site Explorer (http://siteexplorer.search.yahoo.com) to find the sources 
of your competitor’s links. Reviewing this will show you where you should get links, 
too. It will shorten the process and get you started quickly.
Figure 4-3 
Yahoo! Site Explorer
Filtering and Ranking
The search engines—Google, Yahoo!, and Bing—are huge players in the overall Internet 
industry. Everything they do (especially Google) impacts the web in big ways. Fifteen 
years ago, they were practically nonexistent. Today, they are not only the key movers 
and shakers on the web, they are giant multinational companies that wield great power. 
So what do you need to know to understand how to work with the search engines? How 
do they set the rules of the game?
Your first priority, of course, is to get your site ranked. This can be a challenge 
if you’re just starting out. I remember when I launched my first site way back when, 
not really understanding SEO at the time. My site designer didn’t know much about 
the optimization process either. So my site wasn’t optimized, and because I didn’t use 
keyword phrases in my copy, it didn’t rank. At all. I would search over and over again, 
week after week, and wonder why my site wouldn’t come up. I finally woke up one day, 
discovered search engine optimization, and changed my entire strategy. I rewrote my 
site copy, changed designers, and came out with a totally new site. Within a few weeks, 
I was ranking for “seo copywriting,” “website copywriter,” and others.
Once you finish your site and it gets indexed by Google, Yahoo!, and Bing, you are 
in the game. Then it’s all about making it better, improving your rankings as much as 
possible. So, what are the criteria the search engines use to make decisions about which 
sites get placed where? They do this by using filtering and ranking.
With filtering, search engines decide which pages are in the search results and 
which are not. If you meet their criteria, you will be filtered into the results. Essentially, 
the search engines filter by language, character, and country. They also filter by picture, 
image, presentation, and so on. If you are writing English content for your website, 
you don’t have to be too concerned with filtering.

	
 Optimizing Your Web Content
69
With ranking, search engines order results by relevance to decide which pages get 
to be at the top of the list. Because ranking issues are so important when it comes to 
content, this is the area we’ll discuss the most.
The Ranking Algorithm
Without getting into too much detail, a search engine algorithm is a complex math-
ematical formula that determines how web pages are ranked. So if you have a site that 
sells handbags, and “handbags” is the keyword, how does Google’s ranking algorithm 
deal with it? Well, it will look at all the indexed pages for the word “handbags” and 
determine which pages are the most relevant or “important” for that word. The ones 
that are the most relevant will end up on the first page of the search results. What fac-
tors go into the algorithm? That’s a closely guarded secret within the hallowed halls of 
Google’s corporate headquarters. And it changes all the time.
There are probably more than a hundred factors that go into the final equation. 
Most of them, you don’t have to worry about—you wouldn’t know what they are any-
way. But, there are many well-known factors that you can influence directly through 
the power of optimized content. The list from the SEOmoz study at the beginning of 
this chapter summarized it, but let’s take a deeper dive.
Factors That Help Your Page Rank Well
Yes, the search engines can be a mystery, but there are many helpful guidelines to keep 
in mind as you seek to rank well with them. What are the important factors?
PageRank
Google’s “PageRank” is the most well known page factor. If you aren’t aware of it, it’s 
the little horizontal bar on the Google Toolbar that displays a web page’s importance, 
shown by a strength indicator in the bar that ranks from one to ten. A score of ten would 
be assigned to a very important site, a score of zero to a totally unimportant one. A page 
that has good PageRank would have a score of five or six. A site like Yahoo! or Amazon 
would have a score of ten. By definition, “page” factors consider anything the search 
engine knows about the page, the site, and the other sites that link to that page.
PageRank is not as popular as it used to be, and even Google downplays it, but I 
believe it is still a helpful tool to look at when you are wondering if a certain site is a 
“fly by night” company or one that is truly the “real deal.” Here is what Google says 
about it:
PageRank relies on the uniquely democratic nature of the web by using its 
vast link structure as an indicator of an individual page’s value. In essence, 
Google interprets a link from page A to page B as a vote, by page A for page 
B. But, Google looks at more than the sheer volume of votes, or links, a page 

70	
Content is Currency
receives; it also analyzes the page that casts the vote. Votes cast by pages that 
are themselves “important” weigh more heavily and help to make other pages 
important.
Now that you know this, let’s get into the specific content-related factors that will 
help you.
The Query Ranking Factor
Why is it called the query ranking factor? Because the search or “query” that someone 
types into Google determines what pages come up. You, in turn, can do certain things 
on your page with your content to make sure your page is ranked high. The most 
important and most basic thing to understand? The keyword phrase has to be used in 
certain places on your page in order for the page to rank.
So what are all the other query factors that play an important part in your site 
content?
Keyword Frequency
Keyword frequency refers to the number of times your keyword phrase occurs on the 
page. Typically, you are looking for the keyword phrase to be used at least three times 
throughout the page (assuming 250 to 400 words per page). You’ll probably have a 
couple more keyword phrases that you’ll want to use, too, so if you have a total of 
three keyword phrases, that makes nine places that you’ll be using your phrases on a 
certain page.
On the other side of the equation, don’t use your keyword too frequently—that’s 
called keyword spamming. Not only is it a bad idea, but people reading the content will 
be turned off; worse yet, it could get you banned from the search engine.
One little secret, and this is something you don’t hear about often: You don’t want 
to repeat the exact keyword phrase time after time throughout the content. Rather, you 
want to use some variations on the phrase. What do I mean? If your keyword phrase 
is “portable poker tables,” you want to also use “poker tables that are portable” and 
maybe “poker table portability.” One caveat, however: Your first priority should be to 
use the complete original phrase, but you can work in the variations as well and still 
get search engine ranking benefits.
Keyword Density
Taking the idea of keyword use a step further, let’s consider keyword density. The 
density is the percentage of the total words on the page divided by the number of times 
the keyword phrase appears. What do the search engines look for on keyword density? 
Between 2 and 4 percent. So, if you have three hundred words on the page, you’ll want 

	
 Optimizing Your Web Content
71
the keyword phrases to occur two or three times. When working with your keywords 
in the copy, make sure all those keyword phrases are spaced out well. You don’t want 
it to look forced.
Remember, you want your copy to read as if the prospective customer is having a 
conversation with you. If the keyword phrase is “Christmas wreaths,” you definitely 
wouldn’t write this on your site:
We sell decorative Christmas wreaths that are guaranteed to last thirty years 
or more; our Christmas wreaths are made from the finest materials and our 
Christmas wreaths are shipped to your door within two days. Would you like 
to buy one of our Christmas wreaths?
I think you get the point.
Aligning with the Searcher’s Intent
If you search for “iPod product guide,” you’ll probably get a PDF document in your 
search results. This is Google trying to match the results with what you intended to 
find. People search for a variety of reasons, but if you were to break it down to the most 
essential reasons, they would be:
For information
7
7
To purchase or perform a transaction
7
7
To navigate, looking for the home page of a certain site
7
7
You want to try to match your intention for a particular page with the searcher’s inten-
tion. This can be done very easily if you write the content with the searcher in mind. 
As time goes on, there will be more and more emphasis on this type of personalization 
and customization with the search engines.
The Process for Page Optimization
The basic process for page optimization is this: Choose your page, write the content, 
analyze the page’s performance, and then improve the page if necessary. If you con-
tinue to be unsatisfied with how it is doing, just keep tweaking it until you have what 
you want.
Of course, you’ll need to put it in perspective. If you are going up against some 
tough competition with a popular keyword phrase, you may never get to the first page 
of the search engine results. You need to be realistic. It can be a frustrating process, but 
one that could provide great rewards. With my first site, it took a long time to get to 
the top spot on Google for “website copywriting,” but once I did, it was a great feeling. 
Once we got there, we stayed in the top spot for more than five years, which brought 
in lots of new business—for free!

72	
Content is Currency
Optimizing a Web Page
So, how do you start? First, look at your keyword phrases. You probably have a list of 
at least a hundred. If you are a large company with many products or services, you 
could have several hundred. You’ll have general keyword phrases and more specific 
phrases. You’ll see phrases that seem like they would go together, and some that are 
more popular than others.
If you are a watch retailer and you’re working on your home page, you’ll optimize 
for “watches,” “watch accessories,” and “watches for sale.” If you are writing the products 
page, you might optimize for 
more specific types of watches 
like “Rolex watches,” “Tag 
Heuer watches” and “Bre-
itling watches,” for example. 
Some keywords will appear on 
multiple pages. If you are an 
exclusive Rolex watch retailer, 
“Rolex watches” could appear 
on the home page and on the 
products page.
There will always be 
a phrase or two that won’t 
seem to fit on any page—just 
because the phrase came up 
as a potentially good one dur-
ing the keyword research pro-
cess does not mean you have 
to use it. One thing you can 
do is search for that phrase 
on Google and see how other 
sites are using it; this may help 
get the ideas flowing. If you 
can’t find a way to make it fit, 
don’t force it. If you can create 
a new page, however, and find 
enough to write about around 
that phrase, then definitely 
do it. You could generate new 
traffic to your website in a very 
short amount of time using 
that keyword phrase.
Figure 4-4 
Web Page Showing Important Placement of Keywords

	
 Optimizing Your Web Content
73
One of the goals is to match a set of keyword phrases to what that page is specifi-
cally about. If you are a fish market and you have a product page on shellfish, you want 
to use the same shellfish-themed keyword phrases like “fresh lobster,” “soft shell crab,” 
and “fresh ocean shellfish” all on that page. The more general keyword phrase “San 
Diego fish market,” for contrast purposes, would go on the home page.
Keyword Extensions/Building Out More Pages
If you want to really give your keywords power and you have lots of one type of item, 
be sure to build out additional pages to support all the variants of a keyword group.
Example: If you are a retailer of all types of beauty products, here is a sample 
list of keywords you could use to build out new pages:
�	 Facial cosmetics
�	 Cosmetics for teens
�	 Women’s cosmetics
�	 Men’s cosmetics
�	 Organic cosmetics
�	 Hypoallergenic cosmetics
All you need to do is build a unique page for each and then on the facial cosmetics 
page, for example, use even more specific keyword phrases within that phrase, such as 
“facial cleansing cosmetics,” “facial exfoliating cosmetics,” etc.
It’s all about starting from the very general keyword phrases (reserved for your 
doorway or entry pages like home and products pages), and then getting more and 
more specific with the keyword phrases as you work your way down the site naviga-
tion layers.
Headings and Subheadings
Besides making headings and subheadings short, snappy, and memorable, as we learned 
in an earlier chapter, you’ll also want to use keyword phrases here and bring up a benefit 
if possible. If you can do all that, you are doing well.
For blog posts, heading tags (tags act just like keywords) help you to structure the 
content of your blog post. The main benefits of using these tags are to inform search 
engines about the topics you covered in your post. Your reader will also have a nice, 
scannable title to see. Bottom line: If you use keywords in your heading, whether it’s a 
blog post or web page, you will definitely attract visitors as well as search engines.
Example:
Blog Title Example: How to Use Keywords Effectively in Your Blog Posts
“Use Keywords in Blog Posts” is the keyword phrase.

74	
Content is Currency
Bold and Italicized Keywords
Have you been on a site and observed that some of the words are boldfaced and/or 
italicized? These actions help a little bit because the words stand out to visitors, which 
in turn motivate the search engines to give them more consideration, too.
So what’s the strategy here? Try it out. Boldface a few of your keyword phrases or 
other important words. Don’t go overboard, though. You don’t want to highlight too 
many words, or they won’t stand out.
Figure 4-5 
Web Page Showing Use of Internal Linking, Boldface, and Italics
Internal Linking
Internal links are links that lead from one page on your site to a different page on 
your site. They are commonly used in main navigation. These types of links are useful 
because they:
Help users navigate your website
7
7
Establish information hierarchy for the given website
7
7
Improve your SEO efforts by providing “link juice”
7
7
The reason internal links help with SEO is because they help the spiders do their 
job of crawling through the site. Search engines need to see content in order to list pages 
in their index. With a crawlable link structure, using internal links, they can find all 

	
 Optimizing Your Web Content
75
of the pages on a website. So, if you are a paint retailer, you want to provide internal 
links on your home page to “residential home painting” and “commercial home paint-
ing” in the body text of the page. These could be important keyword phrases for your 
retail products and for the services that you provide. Doing this will help the search 
engines to “see” the pages.
In terms of the first point—internal links are useful because they help users 
navigate your website—you’ll want to consider your linking strategy. You could use 
internal links to:
Drive users to tasks that support fulfillment of business objectives
7
7
Steer users toward additional, related information that may support their 
7
7
decision-making processes
Offer relevant pieces of information that will further engage the user in your 
7
7
brand experience
Encourage users to join an online community, participate in a social media 
7
7
channel, or comment on a blog12
We discussed writing good call to action content in Chapter 2, but it’s worth mention-
ing here because, typically, your call to action will come toward the end of the page, 
which is a great place for keyword phrases.
Metadata
Meta tags are one of the most misunderstood parts of the optimization process. For the 
sake of clear understanding, we’re going to make it very simple. First, what are they?
There are two important meta tags: the title tag and the description tag. The title 
tag uses two to three keyword phrases and/or benefits to tell the searcher what the page 
is about. It can read almost like a headline—this will motivate people to click on it. If 
you are thinking about using your company name in the title, you should reconsider; 
this is valuable real estate. Are people searching under your company name? Most 
likely not.
The description tag goes one step further and explains in a little more detail 
about that page and what the company is offering. Two important points on meta tags: 
Every page should have unique tags, with unique keyword phrases, and you want to 
write them with the idea that you are trying to “sell” that person on clicking to find 
out more. Basically, it’s a little ad that is out there on the web, bringing your clients 
12 Halvorson, Kristina. 2009. Content Strategy for the Web. New Riders Press, Berkeley, CA.

76	
Content is Currency
in. Often, it’s the first thing people see about your site, so you want to make sure your 
tags are right.
Want to see something interesting? Jump on to Google and type in “site:www.
yourdomain.com”—fill in “yourdomain” with your site’s URL. What pops up are all 
your titles and descriptions for pages indexed by Google. Are they all the same? That 
needs to change! Every page needs unique titles and descriptions.
To illustrate the use of meta tags further, here are the home page meta tags for my 
company, along with what actually displays in Google and Yahoo! for that page:
Home page:
META TAGS
<title>Web Content Development | Web Copywriting | Content Marketing 
Services</title>
<meta name=”description” content=”Content Launch is the leading web 
content development firm worldwide. Offering web copywriting, blog posts, 
articles, press releases, web content marketing & strategy services, online 
videos and more, our high quality, search engine optimized content converts 
prospects into customers. Get your free content marketing kit and website 
analysis today.”>
Google:
Web Content Development | Web Copywriting | Content Marketing Services
Content Launch is the leading web content development firm worldwide. 
Offering web copywriting, blog posts, articles, press releases, web content 
marketing . . .
www.contentlaunch.com/—Cached
Yahoo!:
Web Content Development | Web Copywriting | Content Marketing . . .
Content Launch is the leading web content development firm worldwide. 
Offering web copywriting, blog posts, articles, press releases, web content 
marketing & strategy . . .
contentlaunch.com—Cached
Experiment with your tags, and don’t stop until they are working well for you. Getting 
these right is going to make a big long-term impact on your site—and on your online 
profits! And remember, make your keyword phrases very specific. If you currently 
say “our vacation packages,” use “our Bahamas island vacation packages” instead. If 
you are selling “day spa services,” use that as your keyword phrase instead of simply 
“services.”

	
 Optimizing Your Web Content
77
Snippet Content
The “snippet” is the text that appears underneath the title on the search engine results 
page. Some people read snippets, others scan them, and some don’t look at them at all. 
But you know what? If it’s written well, this little group of words can get people to click on 
the link to your web page/site. Google and Yahoo! usually just take a small chunk of text 
from your page and use that as the snippet. Google’s are usually shorter than Yahoo!’s, 
and Yahoo! will often use the description tag. Bing’s snippets work like Google’s.
One way you can influence snippets is by writing solid content on the page: 
benefits-oriented, keyword-rich content that can convert as well as be great description 
tag copy. Influencing the snippet copy is one of those things people usually miss when 
they are thinking about improving their website.
How else can you influence your snippet? For Yahoo!, place your keyword phrases 
together near the beginning of the description. For Google, do the same thing, but 
in the body text, or main copy section of the page. How long are snippets, usually? 
Around 150 characters.
One last secret: Place a benefit statement next to your keyword phrase in the snip-
pet. Here’s an example for the keyword phrase “art supplies”:
The most extensive art supplies online
. . . Stop searching. All your paintbrushes, oil paints, and other art supplies are 
available in one place. Free shipping! www.NelsonBrothersArtSupplies.com/ 
35K—Cached
“Free shipping” is, of course, your benefit statement/call to action. Try this technique 
out!
Figure 4-6 
Snippet Example

78	
Content is Currency
Alt Text and Text Hidden in Images
You know those big, beautiful images you see on the fashion or department store 
websites? Did you know that they are almost always invisible to the search engine 
spiders? It’s true, and most people don’t realize the impact. They may even be using 
their keyword phrases on the site. But it’s not going to do them any good with the 
search engine spiders.
How can they change this? The web designer or webmaster, whoever that 
might be, needs to code these keywords as headings, not images. That will solve the 
problem.
Alt text is descriptive text for images on the page. This is another one of those areas 
that people forget about. Many images don’t have any text to describe them. This can 
be fixed by simply writing some copy, using a keyword phrase, of course, and giving it 
to your designer to place into the code. You’ll know if you have it in place if it’s there 
when you place the cursor over the image.
Example:
You are posting photos from a recent search engine marketing conference. A 
good keyword phrase may be “search engine professionals.”
Before:
Alt text: 00589-yter.jog
After:
Alt text: “Group of Search Engine Professionals at SEM Event”
A Word or Two About Dynamic Content
Dynamic pages are generated by a software program whenever someone requests your 
page URL. Search engines also call them up. Dynamic pages work by using template 
and database information. The IT department, site developer, or database team in your 
company usually controls them. These developers usually don’t understand that there 
are SEO considerations for these dynamic pages. Basically, you’ll need to influence and 
manage this process to ensure that three things get done:
The pages have title tags
7
7
All the titles are different on each of the dynamic pages
7
7
The titles are written using the rules I have outlined in this chapter
7
7
Your IT or database person may need to create a new title field in the database, 
and it’s very important that this is done. Working closely with your tech person will 
usually ensure a positive outcome. That’s essentially it for dynamic content.

	
 Optimizing Your Web Content
79
Does the Content Work? Analyzing the Results
Now that you have optimized your content, how will you know if it’s working? This will 
take time to determine, of course, but within two to three months (sometimes much 
sooner), you should be seeing an impact—if it’s working that is.
Check your keyword phrases in the search engines and see if you come up. Be sure 
to look in multiple search engines: I check Google, Yahoo!, and Bing monthly. Look at 
your link popularity. Your links should be increasing steadily.
How about your search traffic? Are you getting more leads/referrals from the 
web? Check your log files; look at your traffic through your analytics provider (Google 
Analytics). Finally, how many people who end up on your site are being converted to a 
sale? That’s the most important statistic, of course. If the results aren’t what you want, 
keep working to improve your site. Look at the suggestions in this chapter again, and 
reread other important chapters on keyword research and writing content. Talk to 
others and see what they think.
One way or another, with enough hard work, you’ll get the rankings—and the 
conversions—that you want!
SEO Best Practices: A Review
Just for good measure, let’s go through the most important areas you’ll need to focus 
on to ensure you are optimizing correctly. Remember, your top competitors are doing 
the same things on their sites, so it won’t be easy, but you can get your share.
Provide unbelievably great content that people love
7
7
Use your important keyword phrases in your content, keywords that describe 
7
7
exactly what the content is about and that line up with what people search for
Place keywords in the important places: in titles, headings, links, metadata
7
7
Write for people first, search engines second
7
7
Don’t forget to use your keywords in image and video tags (more on video in 
7
7
Chapter 10)
Make every page count and make every page specific—unique, custom content, 
7
7
with its own meta title and page-specific keywords
Try, try, try to get others to link to your content (your blog posts are the best 
7
7
way)
Good luck!

This page intentionally left blank 

P A R T  I I
Content for the Web

This page intentionally left blank 

C h a p t e r  5
Website Content—Including Case Studies, 
E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
T
he web has been in the public consciousness for more than fifteen years now. And 
websites have been around just as long. But when the web started out, no one knew 
what a website was or what it should look like. Just imagine yourself sitting around in 
1996 or thereabouts hearing about “the web” for the first time. For most of us, it was 
a slow introduction. At first, we were intrigued, but probably a little hesitant. I know I 
was. I mean, the idea of having your own “property” or “space” on the web where you 
could have a business, talk about your opinions, or sell things was totally new. How 
would people find you? How could you make money, exactly? What if no one showed 
up? How did the whole thing work? Well, those same questions are being asked today, 
so that part hasn’t changed.
In 1996, I remember thinking, “Oh, that web thing would be good for doing a 
little research before I go to the library. It might be cool for looking at photos from 
friends.” I definitely discounted the whole thing. Looking back, I think the reason for 
that was my lack of technical ability. I don’t know about you, but as a marketer, I’m 
not a technically inclined person. And so I naturally thought, “A new thing for the 
computer . . . OK. Maybe I’ll check it out sometime.”
My, how things change! Fast-forward to 2012, and I have a much different opinion. 
I not only make my living off the web, but have been fortunate enough to contribute 
thought leadership within the web content space over the past few years. What was 
missing from my thinking back in the ’90s was the idea that the web would be so influ-
enced by writing and words and content. That was what clicked for me. Like many of 
you, I was a marketer (and writer) to the core, so when that “aha” moment happened, 
it was electric. I saw my future in two seconds.
So, I look back with fondness. But, of course, will always regret that I didn’t get into 
it just a bit sooner. The good news for the rookies out there in today’s world is that the 
web can be a truly democratic place. If you have an idea or topic that you want to share 
83

84	
Content is Currency
with others, you can get it online very quickly, putting together a simple WordPress or 
Joomla site that will have you on your way to building a community and market for 
your product or service, all in the same day.
When we refer to “website content,” what exactly are we taking about? This can be 
a pretty broad category and may be interpreted many ways. In the interest of keeping 
things simple, website content in this chapter refers to the pages that make up your 
website. From the all-important home page to the less-used why us or resources pages, 
and everything in between, we’ll spend the first half of the chapter on this area. We’ll 
also cover landing pages, a specific type of web page. The second half of the chapter will 
focus on content that you use on your site for lead generation: e-books, white papers, 
case studies, and articles.
Which pages are most important from an SEO perspective? It really depends 
on the type of company you have—e-commerce, service provider, local company, or 
something else. Each type of site has unique requirements when it comes to optimiza-
tion and the types of content you want to use. But, there are also “cornerstone” content 
items that practically all sites should use, and we’ll get to those.
For SEO purposes, all your top-level pages are critical:
Home page
7
7
Products and services pages
7
7
Solutions pages
7
7
Company page
7
7
Contact us
7
7
Order page
7
7
“How we work” page (or something to that effect)
7
7
Also important are pages where prospects can find quick information:
Comparison to the competition
7
7
Frequently asked questions
7
7
Location page
7
7
Pricing page
7
7
Site map
7
7
Search page/box
7
7
With the exception of the site map and search pages, these are the pages that you’ll 
want to be sure to optimize for high-impact search rankings. But, in reality, practically 
all of your pages are important for SEO. Think about the long tail keyword strategy 
we discussed earlier. Pages you want to target for these could be article pages, which 
typically wouldn’t be deemed that important. But, hey, if you generate some long tail 
leads from them, then they can be pretty important.

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
85
As I mentioned earlier, why not get fifty pages of your site ranked on page one of 
Google? That’s a great goal to have. And it makes it important to have strong second-
ary pages, like your resource center, subpages for your products and services, maybe 
a community involvement page, pages about your corporate team or executives, etc. 
These are all important to consider.
Of course, you’ll have landing pages, too. As some of the most important pages 
on your site, these need to appeal to your potential customers from a sales conversion 
point of view. They need to really speak to the customer. More on that later.
Think of Your Website in Terms of Content Modules
A really good way of seeing your website content is in terms of modules. These are 
individual areas on your site that are consistent from page to page and serve specific 
purposes, areas that address certain user needs. What you want to do is get away from 
the idea that your site is made up of only two things: copy and graphics. It’s actually 
much, much more than that.
After all, you have many types of people coming to your site, all of whom have 
their own agendas about what they want to accomplish. You have folks who are just 
looking, you have the information seekers, you have companies that need to make a 
decision quickly. So, how do you address all of these needs within the confines of your 
website? By modulizing the content.
Remember how we said that you are in the publishing business now? That is an 
absolute truth. Those who embrace the role—really embrace it—are coming out way 
ahead. So, how would a magazine think about its content each month? How would it 
approach setting up each magazine issue? Well, we are all familiar with how a typi-
cal magazine is organized: you have your editorials, your reader commentaries, your 
feature stories, some advertising, and maybe news or industry updates. Take that same 
idea and apply it to your website, and you have something like this:
Information module—main body copy
7
7
Lead-generation module—e-book, white paper, or free trial offer
7
7
News module—scrolling news section on the home page
7
7
Opinion module—a preview of your blog on the home page
7
7
Impulse buy module—perhaps a graphic banner that advertises your new 
7
7
product
Human interaction module—live help/assistance feature
7
7
Think about the types of modules you will need. Every business and each type of 
industry has unique needs when it comes to its site modules.

86	
Content is Currency
Content Modules
Informaon
Opinion
Human
Interacon
Lead
Generaon
Impulse
Buy
News
Figure 5-1 
Website Content Modules
The Philosophy Behind Great Website Content
Great website copy acts as a virtual salesperson for your business. This principle is so 
true online that, in fact, there are thousands of successful companies all over the world 
that have no salespeople whatsoever. Many of them fired the sales team years ago and 
saved a lot of money in the process! Now, I am not recommending you do that, but it 
is a fact that warrants mentioning.
Web content is critical for any business that wants to succeed online. If you want 
to engage prospects, attain high search rankings, and grow your business, there is no 
better way. But what is the best philosophy to take? Why is web content so important? 
How do the best website owners out there perceive their online presence? Well, num-
ber one, the best website content folks out there work on their sites almost every day. 
They are constantly tweaking, optimizing, adding to, and improving their content. It 
becomes an extension of themselves.
Second, they make changing their sites easy by choosing user-friendly WordPress, 
Joomla, or Drupal CMS systems. If you’re worried about this, don’t stress out. You do 
not need to be a technical person or an HTML coder to be a great steward of website 
content.
In addition, successful website owners know that:
Great website content engages like nothing else—it helps people and companies 
7
7
solve problems
Great websites provide a comprehensive place for all your knowledge—your 
7
7
site should transfer everything from your employees’ heads, put it on the web, 
and make it readily available to your prospects
Great website content gets the search engines to take notice—see the discussion 
7
7
in the previous chapter
Content positively influences social media efforts—people link to content 
7
7
they’ve found on the web on Facebook and Twitter

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
87
And you know what else? Your website content is a workhorse! Content you produced 
ten years ago can still bring people to your site. That’s powerful communication. For 
now, let’s get into a discussion on your website content and review the important 
individual pages.
Important Site Pages
The home page. It’s where everything starts. The home page is like the foundation of 
your house: Without it, your house just isn’t built quite right. If it’s built wrong, the 
house could collapse in a storm and you would face an uncertain future. With it, your 
home is stable, secure, and strong. The same thing goes for your site. The best home 
pages I’ve ever seen do everything right: They look good, they have just enough con-
tent (200 to 350 words), they use a nice balance of design to content, and they make 
everything super easy.
The main products or services page would be next in line. If prospects don’t 
know what you’re selling, how are they going to buy? Be as detailed and specific as 
you can be on these pages. And for the purposes of SEO, this is a best practice: If you 
have twenty products, you should have twenty separate pages, along with a main 
products page.
Also important is a page about the people who run your business (usually called 
“About Us” or “Our Team”). This type of page is underrated and underutilized, for 
sure, but it’s essential. Why? It puts a human face on your business. It gives it warmth 
and personality. Be sure to have some photos of real people there, the actual folks in 
your organization, not the popular stock photos of the happy corporate team! I think 
these stock photos really devalue a site. Of course, it’s better than having no imagery 
at all, but see what you can do about getting professional photos taken.
It almost goes without saying, but your contact page is super important. I need to 
bring this up because of the opportunities businesses miss on this page. It still surprises 
me how many companies use just a web form on their contact page and nothing else. 
Remember, some of your prospects want to call you! You need to provide your phone 
number. Also important to include are all the other channels where they can reach 
you—Twitter, Facebook, Skype, etc. And think about providing mobile numbers, too. 
Make it easy for them!
And how about a “How We Work” page? This can be a great place to show your 
unique value proposition, a direct comparison to the competition, or what a client can 
expect when they do business with you. It helps visitors become more familiar with 
what it is that makes your company so interesting, and it sets expectations.
If you are an e-commerce site or are selling something directly on your site, then 
an ordering or payment page, integrated with a shopping cart, is also critical. We’ll 
talk more about content for e-commerce at a later point.

88	
Content is Currency
Your Home Page
The number one problem we see with new clients’ sites at my company? An abso-
lutely beautiful home page with nice images, a good look and feel, contact informa-
tion, social media profiles, and . . . only three sentences of copy (and an unoptimized 
title tag). They ask us, “Why can’t I get ranked on the search engines?” My answer 
is: because you don’t have enough content. The solution is easy—build out more 
pages. Optimize. Make your site content rich. What’s interesting is that some of 
these clients have great off-line businesses, selling hundreds of thousands—or even 
millions—of dollars’-worth of products to customers around the world. Whether they 
just recently put up a website and aren’t sure what they are doing or have always had 
a site and never saw a potential for online sales, these companies come in all shapes 
and sizes.
One of the clients that comes to mind is a manufacturer of piping equipment. The 
company has been around for more than fifty years and is number two or three in the 
industry. But having a website was just never that important. They had one, but the 
home page was exactly as I explained above: slapped together with a template and a few 
awkwardly constructed sentences. By revising the home page and the rest of the site, we 
were able to help the company expand into new online markets, much to our client’s 
delight.
I think you get the point, and most of you know this: The home page represents a 
big opportunity. But are you really setting up the content correctly? Are you maximiz-
ing the space? And what type of free content are you offering? Are your newsletter, 
blog, and social media icons visible?
When we think about the content that should appear on the home page, we need 
to keep some basics in mind. First, the home page should be the most general or broad 
of all of your site pages, in terms of scope. You also should use your most important 
and broad keyword phrases here. You want your home page to be the highest-ranked 
page on the search engines. In terms of headings and subheadings, you want them 
to read almost like headlines—make them stand out, create interesting and thought-
provoking sentences. I’m a big fan of creating two to three content sections or para-
graphs on the page with two to three main headers, each of them using important 
keyword phrases.
And, as I’ve said before, make it easy to scan the content. Balance the page design 
with the page copy, another strategy that I always preach. And think about tone and 
voice—get those right, for sure.
I mentioned “free” content. What is this? It’s anything you can offer to visitors 
that will get them to give you some contact information (of course, you can also 
offer it without having them submit their information). It’s the cool e-book you’re 

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
89
offering, Top 10 Ways a Landscaper Can Add Value to Your Home or The Best Ideas 
in Leasing Office Space. It’s the free one-week trial of your software. Put it up in the 
top right corner on every page, and you’ll convert like crazy. The same goes for your 
newsletter, blog, and social media icons. First rule: Have this type of content. Second 
rule: Make it easy to click on. Third rule: Give them something cool for subscribing.
Some of this seems pretty common sense, but you know what? Sixty to seventy 
percent of sites out there are missing these features. More to come on lead-generation 
content.
Finally, be sure you communicate what you do, front and center. There are still 
a lot of sites out there that use that hard-to-decipher corporate speak that confuses 
more than it communicates. You may be in the “enterprise-wide software as a service 
market” and you help companies “solve their most pressing IT problems,” but you need 
to tell me more than that. What type of enterprise software? Which types of problems? 
And please tell me how you are different from the other dozen firms out there that 
provide the same thing.
Do this, and you will be hitting your home page content out of the park, every 
time, with every prospect.
Company Page
So who the heck are you anyway? Who is running the show? Your “Company” or 
“About Us” page is really important content to have. But why? In looking at websites 
all day long, like I do, it’s startling to see how many people forget that. Though the web 
is just words and images, customers still like to know that there are real people behind 
the business. They want to know about how you got into business, what drives you, 
and that you care about your business and your customers. Perhaps you might put a 
picture of the management team on the page? As I’ve mentioned, you’ll want to use 
this page to put a face on your business.
As with your other pages, make the copy on your company page familiar and 
warm; put a little heart, soul, and passion behind the words you use; and try to really 
connect with people on a human level. And remember, from Chapter 2, that tone and 
voice are important.
One other thing about this page—it can mean the difference between someone 
choosing you or choosing one of your competitors. Why? Well, if it comes down to 
two sites offering the same exact service for the same fee, some will naturally go with 
a company whose people they know a little bit about. This brings up another good 
point—a service business, like a law firm, accounting practice, or doctor’s office, defi-
nitely needs to have one of these company pages. If you’re in a “people business,” make 
sure your website prospects know it.

90	
Content is Currency
Figure 5-2 
Sample About Us Page
Products Pages
So, what are you selling? Do your customers know? Even more than what you are sell-
ing, what are your customers going to get from buying? What are the benefits of your 
specific products?
From a copy point of view, there are a few things you should focus on. First, you’ll 
want to do a quick analysis of what you are selling and then categorize it so your cus-
tomers aren’t confused. If you are new to this, you might find it helpful to draw a tree 
diagram, and then for each limb coming off the “tree,” create a separate page for the 
product or product group.
The product page is where you want to use good keyword phrases and specific lan-
guage, so you can answer your customers’ questions before they ask. Assume your custom-
ers don’t know anything at all about your products and you need to teach them. Who, what, 
where, when, and how. Give them all the necessary information they need to help them 
make a buying decision, or at least a decision on narrowing down the competition.
You’ll also want to use some good call to action copy on the page, asking (or 
recommending) that they take some action right now! Whether it’s “Ready to order?” 
or “Call us now for more information!” or “Take a look at what our customers have to 
say!” Get them to do something.

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
91
Home Page
About Us
Services
Web
Design
Technical
Wring
Documents
Document 1
Document 2
Document 3
Contact
Tips
Figure 5-3 
XML Site Tree Diagram
This is also a page where you need to have good balance between the images of 
your products and the copy that explains them. In scanning the web, you have prob-
ably seen more than a few sites that have great-looking images of their products, but 
absolutely no feature/benefit content to speak of. A picture of the product and a “click 
here to order” command just doesn’t cut it anymore. Not with such intense competi-
tion online. You need to assume that your prospects don’t know anything about your 
products and you need to educate them.
Product features: Copy about your products’ features is not nearly as important as 
copy about your products’ benefits, but features still need to be mentioned. Make sure 
you write copy that focuses on what your product does and looks like. Some technical 
specs may be good, too, but don’t go overboard.
What many companies do, especially those that know very little about good 
copywriting, is write only about features. Although this is better than having no copy 
at all, it’s still a long way from optimal. And here’s the other thing about writing about 
features and benefits: People seem to have a hard time knowing the difference. They 
confuse them all the time or simply can’t put into words how their product impacts a 
customer’s life. So, how can you make it easier on yourself? Ask your customers how 
they use your products. They will tell you. When they do, turn their answers into some 
great, hard-hitting, conversion-friendly product content.

92	
Content is Currency
Services Pages
Most of the points mentioned earlier regarding the products page will also apply to a 
services page. But writing about your company’s services is different in some important 
ways. The first thing to consider before you write is whether your service is highly com-
modified (think attorneys, staffing services, or florists). If it is, you’ll typically want to have 
less specific copy on the page; your goal is to get prospects to contact you instead, either 
by e-mail or phone, so you can “sell them” in a more personal and persuasive way.
If your service is less commodified (think a dog-walking service or a saltwater 
aquarium building service), then you’ll probably want to be more detailed in your copy-
writing, so people who may not understand what it is you do will get their questions 
answered upfront. It also helps to sell them or qualify them a little upfront. Of course, 
you’ll also want copy that tells them how to contact you for inquiries, but if they found 
you, they are probably pretty well qualified already. Also, a noncommodified service 
has a better chance of being a relatively new type of service, so there may not be many 
competitors. Getting prospects to contact you right away won’t be quite as important.
Local search. It’s been all the rage in the past few years. For a service like a bar-
bershop or pet groomer, you’ll want to definitely use geographically specific keyword 
phrases like “Springville barber shops” or “Missoula pet grooming” in your service page 
copy. This is where most, if not all, your customers will be coming from, so you want 
to be sure you are popping up in search engines based on your location.
Order/Payment Page
What type of content do you think an order or payment page should have? Probably a 
very detailed explanation of how customers order or pay. Make the process clear and 
specific. Maybe list the steps they’ll need to take. Include copy that makes them feel 
safe and secure. Many sites make the mistake of leaving customers feeling adrift here. 
Think about going online to make a purchase. You want to know, beyond a shadow of 
a doubt, that it’s a secure transaction, and that this is a reputable company that won’t 
cheat you.
You’ll also want to write some content that speaks to your return or exchange 
policy. Again, answer the question before it is asked. If you don’t have a return or 
exchange policy, think about establishing one. Most of all, make your order/payment 
page copy simple and easy to follow.
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) Page
It’s great to see so many websites with a frequently asked questions page. This is always 
a good idea. One of the great benefits to having a website and an online business is 
that you can automate many parts of your business and eliminate overall costs. Think 
about it—if you have a very good, comprehensive FAQ section, do you need to spend 

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
93
money on a customer support function? Maybe not. Couple your FAQ page with a 
robust forum tool, and perhaps your users can help answer each other’s questions. 
Not sure what questions to feature on this page? Again, ask your customers; they will 
tell you. Send a short survey to them or check out the competition. What type of FAQ 
section do they have?
In terms of the copywriting, you’ll want to make it very specific and keyword rich. 
When people are surfing online, they usually have a question or two about what they 
are looking for. They may even put their search words in the form of a question. If you 
have that particular question on your FAQ page, worded the same way (or close), your 
site may come up on the first page for that query.
Finally, I would make the question and answer copy short and to the point. 
Remember, people are scanning. They want super-quick information.
Contact Us
You do have a way for prospects and customers to contact you, right? Hope so. The 
biggest problem I see with contact us pages is making the page too content-heavy or 
too content-light. Or it’s too confusing. All you really need is a short, one-paragraph 
section on this page that shows your genuine interest in your customers’ needs and 
then provides your detailed contact information: e-mail addresses and phone numbers, 
street address, city, state, zip. Maybe a map.
A word about phone numbers: Give your customers a way to call you! There are 
so many sites out there that don’t give their customers this opportunity. Also, provide 
a street address. People want to know that there’s some level of permanency to your 
company. A street address provides credibility.
Figure 5-4 
Sample Contact Us Page

94	
Content is Currency
Places to Expand Content
Now that you’ve learned a few things about search engine optimization (SEO), you 
know that adding more relevant content to your site is a really good thing to do. But 
how do you do that exactly? Which pages are the easy targets for expansion? How can 
you make it simple?
Let’s cut to the chase: If you have the same exact site up, with the same pages 
and same content that you did a year or two ago, then you’re in dire need of a content 
update. So, let’s discuss it.
Products/Services
This is an easy area to expand. Many sites are a little light in this area to start with, so 
it can be a fairly straightforward fix. Again, think specific products/services and think 
product/service groupings. You could easily turn a simple and general products page 
into ten specific new pages in short order. Google will take notice of this and hopefully 
reward you with some higher rankings.
If your business is a day spa, for example, and your current services page has a 
quick general blurb about your massage therapy, facials, and mud baths, make each of 
these a separate subpage under the larger services page, and then write more specifically 
about each service, both in the language that entices your potential customer and in 
the keywords that you are using. You could go from ranking well for “spas in Concord, 
CA” to maintaining your ranking for that phrase and also adding new rankings for 
“massage therapy in the Bay Area,” “facials in the Bay Area” and “mud baths in the Bay 
Area.” And that equals one thing: POTENTIAL NEW CUSTOMERS!
Resources Section
There’s lots of opportunity with a resources page. Acting as the ultimate information 
source for your prospects and customers, take a step back and ask yourself, “What 
could I provide to them that will help build the relationship?”
On our site (www.contentlaunch.com/resource-center), we have webinars (both 
recorded past events and upcoming ones), articles, PowerPoint decks from past event 
presentations I’ve done, an online marketing kit, an online content grader, a link to 
our blog, whitepapers, and videos—essentially, the keys to the content kingdom! What 
could you provide?
Note: Some sites include links of interest on their resources page, too, which 
is a great way of showing your commitment to partnering with other firms in your 
industry.

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
95
Figure 5-5 
Sample Resource Center Page
Customer (Service) Friendly Content
As I’ve said before, one of the big missing elements on many websites is the human 
touch. Most people like dealing with other people, whether it’s the chance to talk to 
someone on the phone, get a quick answer via instant message, or watch a video of 
your CEO on your site. And when your customers have issues, you want to give them 
a way to deal with the problem, right away. Don’t wait until you hear about it on Twit-
ter or in the news.
I like what Tim Frick said in his great book Return on Engagement:
People like interacting with people. Build your strategy around customers being 
able to get in touch with an actual person as quickly as possible . . . how does 
one build effective communication into one’s web-based support system? 
Here are a few ideas:
Make support content searchable both within your site and via the web
7
7
Create a searchable FAQ page for each product or service
7
7
Implement live chat support features
7
7
Include phone numbers on every support page
7
7
Create easy to use forms
7
7
When devising a customer service and support strategy, consider the fol-
lowing questions:

96	
Content is Currency
What information will site visitor’s need?
7
7
How can you get it in front of them as quickly as possible?
7
7
Will search functions help them find the information they need?
7
7
How much will it cost to offer support via phone or e-mail?
7
7
13
Great advice, Tim! I have to agree with this customer-focused approach. It will 
help you take care of customers in the short term and keep them for the long term.
Figure 5-6 
Return on Engagement by Tim Frick
Widgets
These “miniapps,” little pieces of content magic, are shareable, and they can easily 
be embedded on your website and other places (blogs, social media profiles). You’ve 
probably seen them but didn’t know what they were called. These are the local weather 
apps, news tickers, stock reports, blog feeds, and other small apps that you see on a 
lot of websites. They are a great way of building sponsored content on a smaller scale, 
for relatively low fees.
Although they do involve software development, there are widget engines that 
can help you build one from scratch. These include Widgetbox, Widsets, and Akami. 
Widgets are a great way to connect with a wider audience. If you have an idea for a cool 
widget that people would really respond to, consider it. It’s just another type of content 
that can make a difference in your ability to compete effectively.
13 Frick, Tim. 2010. Return on Engagement. Burlington, MA: Focal Press.

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
97
Figure 5-7 
Widgetbox
Forums
A forum is a place where users, customers, or others can start conversations with each 
other and with you to get answers to their questions. This is usually managed by an 
outside service or set up with a plug-in, an added module that comes ready built and 
customizable for your site.
With this section, your customers write the content for you! You’ll want to review 
all the postings and threads before they go up, but this is a great place to build out 
content and improve usability for your customers. It also does one other very important 
thing from a copywriting point of view: It keeps your visitors on the site much longer 
and increases your chances of having them jump to other pages on your site. The longer 
you can keep them on the site, the better.
Other Considerations
Consider the above recommendations as the most important areas to address first. 
Doing so will put you in good position to make additional changes to your site content. 
Let’s discuss these other considerations now.
Adding to Short Existing Pages
If you want to add content fast and easily, look to your existing pages, as well. Adding a 
paragraph or two to your home page or about us page is a quick and relatively painless 

98	
Content is Currency
activity. Why? It’s always easier to add to existing content than to create it from scratch. 
So, take a look at your site. Which pages could use a little beefing up? Write those first. 
That will at least get the ball rolling for developing other content for the site.
Segment Your Pages As Needed
On many large sites, especially those that have been around a long time, there is a need 
to categorize or group certain sections. For example, on the company or about us page, 
instead of putting all the information about the company on the same page, split it up. 
Create “Company Profile” as one page, “Latest News” as another, “Board of Directors,” 
as still another, and “History” as the last.
You should also do this for other sections on your site that have lots of 
subcategories.
Don’t Forget These Pages!
For some reason, many companies forget to populate a privacy policy and/or terms and 
conditions page. This is important to write from a legal perspective. It’s also good to 
write one for your customers’ peace of mind. It helps you build credibility with them. 
If you don’t know the first thing about writing one, take a look at your competitors’ 
websites. Don’t steal theirs, but use it as a template for what you should do. Be sure to 
include copy that outlines what you will do with the information you are collecting, 
explains the customer’s rights, notes that the site will be updated on a regular basis, 
and includes some language about how they can contact you if they have a question 
about their privacy rights. “Terms and conditions” explains what customers can expect 
if they buy from you.
E-Commerce Website Content
There are many types of websites that require unique content based on differences 
in the user experience. One of these is the e-commerce website. This type of site sells 
products directly on the site and usually includes hundreds, if not thousands, of dif-
ferent types of products. E-commerce sites heavily emphasize product images, videos, 
and descriptive text in order to motivate customers to buy. By engaging visitors and 
addressing their needs—no matter what they are—they can compete effectively and 
grow market share.
If you plan on operating an e-commerce site, how should you be thinking about 
your content?
Provide choices and create a user-friendly experience
7
7
Lead prospects through the sales process, one step at a time
7
7
Focus on building a long-term relationship with the customer
7
7

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
99
Use benefits-rich product descriptions
7
7
Include “trigger” words and emotional appeal
7
7
Write strong call to action statements that improve conversions
7
7
Use zooming, multiple images, 360 views, and visual detail tools with 
7
7
products
Think video—it sells the products like nothing else
7
7
Know that third-party verification by TRUSTe or other certification provider 
7
7
is key
Have products listed in several categories
7
7
Include “top” products or “what’s new” listings
7
7
Figure 5-8 
Amazon
E-Commerce Product Descriptions
Product descriptions are critically important with e-commerce sites. In them, you want 
to fully explain what customers will get out of the product. Communicate how it will 
save them money or time or bring new efficiencies to their life or business. Describe 
in detail what the product can do, what it looks like, and how it works.
Remember, people want to read about it (through text) and see it (with photos/
video). Use language that appeals to the senses and to people’s aspirations. Be sure 
to use descriptive adjectives and the word you as much as possible; personalize the 
experience.

100	
Content is Currency
The Power of Customer Reviews
Like anything else in life, third-party validation plays a big role in e-commerce sales 
success. People naturally gravitate toward products that others enjoyed. As long as 
there have been businesses, word of mouth has been a proven way of driving sales. 
Customer endorsements carry powerful credibility that retailers can’t duplicate in 
product descriptions. Reviews can be leveraged everywhere: in e-mail, catalogs, and 
newsletters, not only on the website.
Top vendors for seamless customer review applications include Bazaarvoice and 
PowerReviews. If you run an e-commerce store, be sure to see how these two resources 
can help you capture the power of customer reviews.
Other Important Content Elements for E-Commerce Sites
Sell up and sell down: Increase margins with upselling and clear out inventory 
7
7
with downselling
Cross-sell: Don’t leave money on the table
7
7
Don’t keep your great deals a secret: Promote free shipping, sales, and other 
7
7
special offers with strategically placed banners
Make it easy for customers to buy: Create a more targeted shopping experience 
7
7
with dynamic landing pages
Provide secure transactions: How? Preferably with SSL/SET
7
7
Disclose policies for customer privacy, returns, exchanges, and other customer 
7
7
concerns: Prominently display them on every page on the right or left side as 
well as in a link at the bottom of the page
Offer many types of the product being sought, relevant brands, and/or an 
7
7
appropriate range of products
Offer customer service by phone, preferably twenty-four hours a day: Whether 
7
7
your customer service is done offshore or domestically, the important thing is 
to have a resource displayed on your site prominently
Let visitors know your site is widely reputable and credible: Apply for TRUSTe, 
7
7
PriceGrabber, Better Business Bureau Online programs
Landing Pages—Getting That Magic Conversion
Regardless of the tool you use to drive traffic to your site, landing page optimization 
should be an important step in your process. It all comes down to providing the content 
that searchers are looking for.
People get to your site in many different ways, and they can “land” on many different 
pages. In order to bring some control over this process and drive high rates of conversion, 
you can use a specific type of page: a “landing” page. These pages are set up in a unique 

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
101
way in order to drive a specific and directed action. Don’t use your home page as a landing 
page; your home page’s function is to act as a general overview of your company, not to 
provide specific offers like a software trial download or a free fifteen-page e-book.
The three key attributes of a landing page are: having a strong offer, limiting the 
page navigation, and including a persuasive call to action with a simple contact form. 
But how do you set these up to get the intended action? How do you improve your 
landing pages and test for best results?
Let’s review a few tips on improving landing page performance and methods for 
analysis:
Keep in mind that the entry path to the landing page is almost always an ad 
1. 
(banner, text, or pay per click), e-mail, or a search listing.
Ensure that your landing page delivers on the promise your ads make. The 
2. 
content needs to deliver on expectations.
Review page titles, heading, and page copy to ensure you use keywords that 
3. 
align with user intent.
Make the action you want them to take obvious. Whether you want them to 
4. 
buy something, download a file, or get in touch with you, make sure you spell 
it out. Lead them by the hand.
Beware of too much information on the page; too much information means too 
5. 
many choices, and this usually equals confusion and low conversions.
Use 
6. 
simple contact forms. Collect only the information that’s absolutely neces-
sary: name, e-mail address, and phone number, perhaps. Once they convert, 
you will have the opportunity to gather more information.
Figure 5-9 
Sample Landing Page

102	
Content is Currency
You also want to show your concern for your customers’ privacy, include customer 
testimonials (videos are great) and ratings, and show awards that your products or 
services have received. If you are selling something through the landing page, provide 
a secure checkout.
Landing Pages: A/B and Multivariate Testing
With A/B testing, you set up two separate landing pages with identical content except 
for one variable. Then you attempt to drive an equal amount of traffic to each landing 
page and check the results. One by one, you can test different variables, including copy, 
type of offer, graphics, and form details; reviewing the results, you will be able to see 
which one performs better. Go with the version that yields the better performance.
Google Website Optimizer is a great way to do multivariate testing, a more 
advanced testing method. Sort of like performing multiple A/B tests on a single land-
ing page, it tests several variables at the same time and helps you to determine the 
variation that works best.
The Page That Everyone Forgets About—The Thank You Page
Has there ever been a page more neglected, underappreciated, and underused than the 
thank you page? The answer is absolutely not; the thank you page gets no respect at 
all, and it’s a real shame. Remember, if somebody bought something on your site, you 
just turned a prospect into a customer—you still have her attention, even though the 
transaction is complete. Almost all companies make this mistake, so if you are guilty 
of it, no worries—you’re in the majority!
But, what type of content should you place on the thank you page? Hint: you need 
more than “Thank you for your order. We’ll be in touch soon.” What you want to do 
is think about how you can further the relationship with your new customer. How can 
you strengthen it, take it to the next level? You’ll never have a better opportunity to do 
this, so you need to take advantage of it!
You can use this opportunity to educate new customers about your brand, share a 
free e-book with them, invite them to check out your blog or Facebook page, showcase 
upcoming events and promotions, share their friends’ contact information, or get them 
to join your club and buy more stuff! Yeah, now that’s the ticket!
Virgin Wines does a great job of this on its website. After someone has purchased 
a few bottles of wine, the company essentially asks, “Would you like half your money 
back right now?” If you join the “Discovery Club,” you get eighty dollars back in your 
account, which you can use to buy more wine any time. You simply agree to have a 
case of fine wines come to your door every month. It’s a great idea, and right on the 
thank you page is a great place to offer the program. Conversions for these types of 
offers can be through the roof.

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
103
Can you incorporate something like this on your product or service thank you 
page? The same idea goes for registration confirmation pages: Beef up the content 
and make them count!
Figure 5-10 
Sample Thank You Page
User-Generated and Crowdsourced Content
If you have customers’ product reviews or testimonials on your website, you already 
have some user-generated content. The web is becoming ever more participative, and 
whether it’s your customers, subscribers, prospects, or partners, many of the people 
who are interested in what you do like to be a part of the process.
What has driven the user-generated content (UGC) movement? A demographic shift 
to younger age groups with higher technological skills, greater willingness to engage 
online, and less hesitation to reveal personal information online, together with the 
development of communities and collaborative projects. UGC can take the form of text, 
photo, video, or audio content. Two of the most popular types of UGC are comments 
on blogs and videos on YouTube. Wikipedia also represents a mass of user-generated 
content, and is probably the most successful and far-reaching user of UGC.
Why is it great for your purposes? Your users, communicating and sharing their 
ideas, help to keep your content fresh and interesting. User-generated content is unique 
and valuable to your overall site footprint, which helps the SEO effort and provides 
third-party viewpoint, which your new site visitors will typically trust more than the 
content you wrote. The one issue with UGC, however, is the occasional lack of accuracy 

104	
Content is Currency
and accountability that goes with it. Of course, you get to decide what ultimately goes 
up on your site, but sometimes the bad stuff sneaks through.
With crowdsourced content, you are outsourcing your content production to 
a group of people through an open call. Whether you lack the time, expertise, or 
resources to develop the content yourself, you’ll find that there are many benefits to 
getting content from the outside. You can also use crowdsourcing to get customers to 
discuss ideas, provide feedback, and vote on things. In 2010, Starbucks launched My 
Starbucks Idea for this exact purpose. See how they use crowd sourced content at http://
mystarbucksidea.force.com/. 
Microsites
Some of you may have heard the term “microsite.” A microsite is a website that is devel-
oped to meet a set of objectives that are different from your standard site’s goals. For 
example, if you have one product that makes up 80 percent of your business and has 
great branding, you may want to spin this product off and give it more dedicated web 
real estate with its own site. This gives the product more influence and more power, 
and you’ll end up with more web traffic. Your microsite would have its own unique 
web address (URL), but share the visual design of your corporate site.
The microsite strategy is very popular with large, well-known product brands, 
most notably automotive manufacturers: BMW, Ford, Honda, Toyota, and others. 
Because they have so many vehicle lines and niche markets, they can use microsites 
to appeal to the specific vehicle aficionados, connecting with many more people than 
they would using just the corporate site.
Whether you want to generate more leads, improve your SEO, or just test out a 
microsite strategy, it’s worth looking into.
Lead-Generation Content for Your Site
People love free stuff. When they can learn from the free stuff, that’s even better. This, 
essentially, is what you are doing with lead generation content on your site. Whether 
it’s a free e-book, white paper or something else, you will separate yourself from 
competitors very quickly if you have these items in place and visitors to your site find 
them valuable.
E-Books
One of the most popular types of content that my firm has developed over the years 
has been e-books. People everywhere simply love these easy-to-read yet substantive 
juggernauts of online publishing. And there may be nothing better for successful lead 
generation than a free e-book with high perceived value. Your company gives pros-
pects a complimentary digital book on a subject that interests them, and they give you 

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
105
their e-mail address so you can keep in contact with them: it’s one of the fundamental 
exchanges of information in the content age.
First distributed on websites, e-books can now be offered via any online content 
vehicle: through social media, blogs, via mobile marketing or e-mail marketing, what-
ever. Writing and marketing an e-book that is relevant to your business also does one 
other very powerful thing: It establishes you as an expert. And isn’t that great, because 
even though an e-book may be made up of your ideas (which is the important part), 
you don’t necessarily have to be the one who writes it. You can hire other people to do 
that for you.
Your website basically acts as a way to advertise your e-book. What’s the difference 
between an e-book and a white paper? E-books are more basic, informal, conversa-
tional, and interesting enough so that people who may not be familiar with what you 
do understand it after they read the book.
What else should you know about writing effective e-books for lead generation?
Know your objectives: What is your goal in writing your e-book?
1. 
Keep it short and simple: Ten to fifteen pages works
2. 
Come up with a great title for your e-book
3. 
Write quality content or get someone else to do it for you
4. 
Wrap it up in a nice design: It’s almost as important as the copy
5. 
Use it for B2B and B2C, though it’s best for B2B firms
6. 
Last, but most important, promote the heck out of your e-book. Blog about it, 
tweet about it, post it on Facebook, share it with your LinkedIn groups. Send it out to 
your established network. Leave no stone unturned. We’ll talk a lot more about social 
media in the chapters ahead.
Figure 5-11 
Fearless Software Outsourcing, E-Book by Steve Mezak

106	
Content is Currency
White Papers
So, we have a handle on the powerful online content known as an e-book. But what’s 
a white paper, and how can it be used effectively on a website? Research shows that 
white papers are among the best ways to get new leads. White papers are similar to 
e-books in their customer-outreach goals; if you are in the B2B area, you need to use 
white papers. Providing up-to-date research, offering value-added tips and advice, 
and assisting companies in making purchase decisions, white papers provide a high 
return on engagement for almost any company. Prospects who are in the early stages 
of the sales cycle are the ones who frequently register in order to download white 
papers. In fact, it’s been shown that white papers can offer higher interest and bet-
ter conversion than free trials, analyst reports, and even webinars. That’s powerful 
content marketing in action. Plus, white papers show another interesting behavior 
pattern in corporate America: They are frequently passed around to many people 
in an organization.
What are some of the important things to remember as you develop white paper 
content?
Feature well-researched, substantive content that stays away from selling.
1. 
Begin with a discussion on the major issues or problems, and line them up with 
2. 
a need faced by the reader.
Provide some solid learning; try to teach prospects something they may not 
3. 
have known and show benefits that they may not have been aware of.
Place the white paper on your website in exchange for prospect contact informa-
4. 
tion as a good first step, but make sure you leverage your white paper and get it 
in front of as many targeted prospects as possible. Try giving it away without 
collecting contact information.
Promote your white paper 
5. 
via syndication networks, which will distribute 
your white paper through a network of specialty, vertically oriented websites 
that are targeted based on your ideal lead.
Seek a vendor that can target both your industry and your perfect prospect.
6. 
Good luck! White papers are a key type of content for your company. Be sure you 
produce content you can be proud of.
Case Studies
Case studies or client success stories are always good to feature. An effective promo-
tional tool and a way to showcase your company’s talents, they are second only to white 
papers in promoting the benefits of a product or service. A case study is fairly simple 
and easy to put together. The most difficult part of the whole process may be securing 

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
107
client permission. The good thing here is that many of your clients enjoy the attention 
and awareness they generate as a result of being showcased, so there are definitely 
some fringe benefits for them. Essentially, a case study demonstrates how a specific 
challenge or issue was first identified, which solution you offered to resolve the issue, 
and how your client benefited. It also includes a summary of the final results. As far 
as length, think brief and succinct. A case study can be as short as three hundred to 
five hundred words.
There are three sections to a case study:
Problem—tie it into something the prospect can identify with
7
7
Implementation—focus on how the solution addresses a very specific issue
7
7
Results—what happened? How was the problem resolved?
7
7
Be sure to support your case study with key stats and charts that illustrate the 
benefits of your product or service. Remember, decision makers will use case studies 
as a source of reference and may even ask you for an example of your success with a 
similar type of company before they agree to do business with you. Most companies 
will assume that if you can successfully handle a major challenge similar to what they 
are facing, you’ll be just as successful with their problem.
Case studies work. Put them to work for your website’s lead-generating machine. 
It’s a type of content that many companies undervalue.
“Themed” Pages or Article Content
If you want to make your site more robust, more content rich, and more respected, 
then writing a series of substantive, keyword-rich articles is a no-brainer. In fact, 
creating themed pages, optimized for target keywords, is a core part of SEO. These 
article pages don’t have to be long—three hundred fifty to five hundred words should 
do it. The main thing you need to ask yourself is this: What are the topics I should 
write about?
If you are an alternative health therapist, perhaps you write about “holistic heal-
ing,” “the benefits of juicing fruits and vegetables,” “massage therapy for relaxation,” 
and others. The cool thing with these examples is that you are using the exact keyword 
phrase for the title of your article, so you simply link them off the home page. This way, 
you also get some interior anchor text linking benefit!
Think about it: You could have instant website copywriting and SEO breadth with 
a simple series of ten articles a month for six months. And to break a commonly held 
myth—people do read these! In fact, they sometimes read them word for word, print 
them out, refer back to them over and over, and share them with friends. Talk about 
powerful! If you write your themed content pages from a place of conviction, passion, 

108	
Content is Currency
and knowledge, all the better. Be sure to have a separate section on your site dedicated 
to articles and include links to them from the home page. Either the bottom footer or 
the left or right side can be good places for this.
Other Types of Website Content That May Help SEO
There are three other areas of content that you should think about including on your 
site for further optimization benefit. I saw this mentioned on the EConsultancy website 
as well as on web expert Dave Chaffey’s site, and thought it was a nice addition to the 
chapter:
Archived e-newsletters:
7
7
 Often newsletters are broadcast, but the content is 
not placed on the site. As well as the content in the newsletter, internal links 
to other places on the site can be helpful for optimization. Be sure to remove 
content with really old dates, though.
Glossary:
7
7
 A glossary of terms will often appear in Google searches using the 
“define” syntax. This is particularly useful for informational or B2B sites.
Technical guides or briefings:
7
7
 Sometimes content that is used to explain vari-
ous concepts to customers in printed form, perhaps as PDFs, may be useful 
for generating visitors, particularly for exploiting the long tail of less common 
search terms. Of course, there are issues of maintaining this content.14
Build Content Through Licensing
To get some great links, you can take those cool e-books and white papers you’ve devel-
oped and license them to other sites. Essentially, this is building content that can be 
shared through a citation-based licensing agreement. How do you do it? Use a Creative 
Commons Attribution, which you can find at www.creativecommons.org. Each time 
someone uses your material, you get a link back to your site. You can also do this for 
photos, videos, graphics, charts, and raw data.
14 Chaffey, Dave. “E-Marketing Essentials Briefing.” DaveChaffey.com. Accessed 2/9/11. http://www.
davechaffey.com/E-marketing-Essentials.

	
 Website Content—Including Case Studies, E-Books, White Papers, and Articles
109
(continued)

110	
Content is Currency
Case Study: Continued

111
C h a p t e r  6
Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms
O
ne of the challenges of being in business today is getting the word out about what 
you do. It can be expensive, time consuming, and lots of hard work, right? Add in 
all the competitive pressure and deadlines you need to hit with your own clients, and 
it is left on the backburner, just about every time.
But one fact is most certainly true: Those who can master the public relations game 
have the future growth of their business assured. You can “write your own check,” as 
they say. And things are changing fast in the public relations game. In Clay Shirky’s 
great book Here Comes Everybody, he points out that we are going through a com-
munications revolution. No one really knows how it will turn out or what’s going to 
happen, but it’s going to be a good ride.
One of the great things about today’s world is that we now have lots of places to tell 
our company stories. But we need to perform our due diligence; we need to approach 
it right. It’s all about listening, developing relationships with influencers, speaking 
authentically, and communicating in plain English.
Getting the Word Out
Imagine for a second that everyone in the world knows about you. That’s a lot of people, 
right? Probably about seven billion. Now imagine that just your target market knows 
about you. Still a lot of people. Let’s say it’s a million or so. Now, imagine that just 5 
percent of that number knows about you. At fifty thousand people, it’s still an incred-
ibly high number!
And you know what? There are probably people everywhere, all over the place, 
around the globe that can use what you have to sell. You just need a way to get to them! 
Online press releases help you do just that. And in addition, they help you get search 
engine rankings and offers for other business and promotional opportunities.
What is a press release? A press release is a statement written and distributed with 
the purpose of initiating media coverage of a topic that your company wants to share 
with the world. News directors, editors, and reporters decide whether the story is 

112	
Content is Currency
interesting and newsworthy for their audience. Whether they cover the story or use the 
press release exactly as it’s printed, you win. A story is newsworthy when the story has 
relevance for a large group of people, stands out, contains human interest, and comes 
from a trustworthy and well-known source. You may think that your company doesn’t 
fall into this category, but the reality is that you don’t need to have groundbreaking 
news to make it into the newspaper, radio, or television. You just need to have interest-
ing news. And anything could be interesting to many people. 
A press release gets the promotion and publicity ball rolling and a captivated, influ-
ential reader takes it from there. Think about it: You could be the next host of a local pro-
gram featuring the subject of your passion, and you could be just one press release away 
from that happening. All you need to do is connect your content with the right person. 
The more exposure you get, the greater the likelihood that your content will connect.
Your news can be groundbreaking for the community in which you work and 
therefore might be covered in many small (or large) media outlets. Plus, all media 
outlets need “filler” stories to complement the big stories. Why is being a filler story a 
good thing? Because it’s free publicity!
Become the News
Did you know that up to 75 percent of news stories come from press releases? It’s true. 
Reporters and news outlets are always looking for a new story. Important or interesting 
press releases are like gold to these hungry media professionals.
Many news items are actually planted by companies themselves. If you’re savvy and 
smart, you’ll do the same thing, right? How can you exert some control and author-
ity over the process? The first step is coming up with good stories or good tie-ins to 
what’s already happening in the news. Most small businesses (and some larger ones) 
don’t take full advantage of this powerful online content tool. And they really should, 
because press releases are an easy and inexpensive way to generate media coverage 
and help the SEO effort.
The Numbers Don’t Lie
Almost thirty million people a month use Google and Yahoo! News to find relevant 
and local news content. Consider these statistics from PR Web and PEW research:
Research has shown that editors take approximately seven seconds to read your 
7
7
headlines and first paragraph
98 percent of journalists go online daily
7
7
92 percent of journalists use the web for article research
7
7
81 percent go online to do searching
7
7
76 percent go online to find new sources, experts
7
7
73 percent use the web to find press releases
7
7
On an average day, sixty-eight million American adults go online
7
7

	
 Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms
113
30 percent of adults use a search engine to find information
7
7
27 percent use the web to get news
7
7
Use these numbers to your advantage and get your news out there!
A Little Bit of History
Press releases have long been used to get media exposure, but before the web, a press 
release was used solely for a newsworthy announcement. In fact, press releases are one 
of the holdover marketing tactics of the pre-Internet days that experienced a new lease 
on life in the world of the web. A standard tool in the public relations arsenal, they 
have been around for decades. (You can’t say that about e-mail, blogs, pay-per-click 
ads, and some of the other new online communication tools.) What’s interesting is that 
PR professionals weren’t the first to see new potential of press releases in the digital 
age—the search engine and content marketing professionals were.
Yes, the web came along and changed what a press release could be. In fact, the 
whole process was turned upside down and expanded. Big time. With the web, a press 
release can be seen by people everywhere, not just journalists. In fact, it doesn’t even 
need to be seen by media people to be successful. You could have a thousand prospects 
see it and get five hundred external links to your site from just one release!
Sites like Google News are always updating their search results with new press 
releases from sites like Marketwire, PR Newswire, and PRWeb. What does that mean 
for your company? It means you can reach thousands of new prospects and partners 
within just a few days.
Your Game Plan—Putting Together a Press Release SEO Strategy
If you have been writing press releases for a while, you may not need to read everything 
in this chapter. Writing them is half the battle. You may already know that press releases 
have incredible value and can be a great way to get some instant exposure. Press releases 
have always had a sort of panache, and are a great way to legitimize your business.
But let’s assume you don’t know much about press releases. How do you start? Well, 
the first thing to ask yourself is this: Do you have a newsworthy item to talk about? 
There are lots of things that can fall into this category:
New business announcement
7
7
A partnership
7
7
New suite of products
7
7
New service offering
7
7
Winning an award
7
7
Hiring a new executive
7
7
These are all great things to communicate. If you’re not sure that your topic is a 
good one, put yourself in someone else’s shoes and ask yourself whether they would 

114	
Content is Currency
want to read about this topic. If you can’t come up with anything to write about, go out 
and make some news happen! Apply for that award, hire some people, develop a new 
product. Put yourself in a place where you can write about the good news.
What should your strategy be? Look at your content marketing plan for the year 
and set up a calendar for your press releases. I would plan to write one every month for 
a year. See how that goes. If you can’t come up with twelve newsworthy items, then, like 
I indicated, maybe you need to start making some things happen in your business. If 
you’re doing a lot of things right, you’ll have thirty or more newsworthy topics for the 
year, and your challenge will be narrowing them down to the best ones.
Writing a Release
Copywriting for a search engine optimized press release is different from writing any 
other type of online content. As I mentioned earlier, there are certain traditions that 
press release writing holds and specific ways to write them that are very standard. The 
great thing about this is that it follows a formula. Once you write one, you can write 
dozens. If you’ve never written one before, the first one will take some time—and 
maybe a few revisions.
Here is the process:
1. The first thing, of course, is the headline. As you would think, this is very 
important. It’s what pulls your reader in. It should have a little flash to it, maybe an 
eye-grabbing statistic or benefit. It should be fewer than eighty characters, if possible 
(you could use as many as 170 if you need to).
Some great press release before and after headlines15:
Original Headline:
Students Compete in Prestigious Scholarship Competition with Unlimited 
Award Potential, Renewable Energy Benefits
Rewritten Headline:
Unlimited Renewable Energy Industry Scholarship Offered
———
Original Headline:
Champions of Champions Elite Begins Coverage of Sportaccord Combat 
Games in Beijing
Rewritten Headline:
Beijing Olympics of Martial Arts Championship Broadcast Starts Aug 27
———
15 SEO Press Releases. “Headline Examples and Rewrites.” Accessed 2/14/11. http://www.seopressre-
leases.com/recent-searches/headline-power-online-press-releases/headline-examples-rewrites/.

	
 Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms
115
Original Headline:
iPreserve Opens its First International Franchise in Mexico
Rewritten Headline:
Digitization and Imaging Franchise System Archives Mexican Documents
See the benefits of being succinct and direct?
2. Next is the summary paragraph. This is a small blurb, usually one to four 
sentences, that comes right after the headline and says a little bit more about what the 
release will cover (see Figure 6-1).
3. Now comes the lead sentence. Use this key spot to tell the most important 
information in thirty words or less.
4. Use the first paragraph to tell the “who, what, when, and where.” Use the 
paragraph after this to discuss the how and the why. Expand upon the first paragraph 
and give additional information and quotes. Be sure to focus on making the release 
interesting to the reader.
5. Remember the journalistic inverted pyramid style of writing we talked about 
in Chapter 2. Use that.
6. Use the end of the press release to summarize. The summary could be as short 
as a sentence, but it needs to wrap up the story well and give the reader something to 
remember.
7. In the last paragraph, known as the “boilerplate,” provide brief but substan-
tive information about your company.
8. Press releases should be 350 to 600 words, with most falling in the 400 to 450 
word range. Make the release brief and to the point. Think “lots of facts.”
9. Come up with two or three good quotes from executives, customers, or other 
important people and use them in the press release, spaced out so they fall in the third 
and the fifth paragraphs, for example.
10. Here is an important point: The tone should be objective and neutral. This 
isn’t a place to advertise or get too creative. Remember, there is a standard process that 
all press releases use.
11. Don’t use pronouns. There should be no “you,” “we,” or “I” (unless it’s a 
quote).
12. Use two to three important keyword phrases two to three times, spread out 
in the release; put important ones in the headline and first paragraph (be sure to do 
some keyword research for this). For the keyword phrases in the body of the release, 
you’ll want to link the anchor text to pages on your site that are relevant and that use 
the same keyword phrases.

116	
Content is Currency
13. Finally, include company contact information for questions regarding the 
release.
Figure 6-1 
Sample Press Release
Other Tips and Suggestions
Try to piggyback your press release topic off something that’s already going on 
7
7
in the news. If your part of the country is having record heat and you happen 
to sell outdoor lotions, this may be a good opportunity to promote your new 
tanning spray. Pay attention to the news to see what’s going on out there, and 
capitalize on it.

	
 Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms
117
If you are going to use a quote, statistic, or other fact that needs validation, be 
7
7
sure to get approval or permission. I have personally seen what happens when 
a source objects to the use of its material, and it always causes a major problem 
for the company.
Be honest. This isn’t the time to stretch the truth. If you do, you may have just 
7
7
told a lie to ten thousand people. If they catch you in a lie, it can’t be good for 
your business. Credibility and integrity are way too important to risk.
Don’t use the passive voice in your release—make it active instead. Active voice 
7
7
brings people in and emphasizes the subject. People don’t feel as close to a pas-
sive communication. What does this mean?
Example:
Passive: The house was purchased last month.
Active: Mark purchased the house last month.
Passive: The boxes were being stored in the attic by the movers.
Active: The movers stored the boxes in the attic.
Don’t use verbose, flowery, or unnecessary adjectives. Keep the language simple 
7
7
and concise. Also, don’t ever use exclamation marks.
Keep the press release short. Remember, you want the people reading it to 
7
7
click on a link within the release to visit your site. Don’t put more information 
in the release than is needed. It’s meant to pique their interest and leave them 
wanting more.
Make your press release one or two pages, printed on standard letter-size paper, 
7
7
and double-spaced.
Don’t forget to review local radio and television shows. Talk radio and local 
7
7
morning programs could be perfect for your company.
Also, start thinking about which charities in your local community you might 
7
7
get involved with. Find a way to be a part of their story; of course, you must do 
this in a sincere and genuine way.
Find out which magazines, blogs, and other sources of news your customers 
7
7
read. Over time, you’ll develop a customized database of media outlets that has 
relevance to your business. Every time you have a news story, press release, or 
pitch ready to go, you do two things: Send it out through an online wire service 
like PRWeb, and then do the off-line thing and let the media list know about 
it via e-mail, fax, or phone call. The two strategies working together will be 
your best bet.
For the big papers, get your press release to the newsroom and, if possible, to 
7
7
the reporter who covers your field.

118	
Content is Currency
For the smaller media outlets, get your press release to the one news editor 
7
7
that they probably have on staff. Note: It is definitely worth it to cultivate this 
relationship!
Follow up; sometimes a follow-up phone call is a good idea, but don’t be too 
7
7
pushy. Editors and reporters appreciate it if you are mindful of a potential 
deadline, so be sure to ask about that.
Monitor your release by subscribing to a clipping service or by using www.
7
7
google.com/alerts.
Figure 6-2 
Google Alerts
Make Sure Your Press Release Copy Is Perfect—
Avoid These Common Mistakes
What type of mistakes should you look out for in your press releases?
Improper grammar
7
7
Bad formatting, including strange characters that may show up in the release 
7
7
after it’s distributed
E-mail address issues (i.e., instead of using “john@accme.com,” using “pr@
7
7
accme.com”)
Don’t use all capitalized letters in your releases
7
7
Press Release Distribution
Now that you have your press release written, what’s next? Two things: distributing it 
across the web through a wire service and pitching your story to a hand-selected group 
of journalists and other media folks. What’s a wire service? A wire service is an agency 
that supplies news reports to news organizations: online media, blogs, newspapers, 
magazines, and radio and television broadcasters.

	
 Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms
119
And what’s a pitch? Unlike a full-blown press release, which assumes news­
worthiness, a pitch is a suggested story idea that’s submitted to individual jour-
nalists via phone or e-mail or in person. A pitch gives a reporter an idea for a story 
that he could write. If the journalist likes the idea, he writes a story for his media 
outlet and puts your name in lights. How is a pitch different than a press release? 
Pitches tend to be shorter and more informal. And most media people like them 
a whole lot more. The more personalized you make it the better—this shows the 
reporter that you’ve taken enough interest in him to get his name right, mention a 
past article, etc.
The key for you at this point is to know what you are pitching, what you have to 
offer, and who you are pitching it to.
Online Wire Services and Press Release Sites
Who are the major players in press release distribution? PRWeb, PR Newswire, Busi-
ness Wire, and Marketwire in the United States. There are others in the international 
space. On an average day, thousands of press releases are sent out by these organiza-
tions. Personally, I have used PRWeb the most. They are affordable, efficient, and send 
your release to hundreds, if not thousands, of media sources. In addition, when you 
distribute your release through PRWeb, hundreds of other sites will republish your 
release via their RSS feed service, which means it will appear in more places and more 
people will read your news. It also means more links back to your site, which we know 
is great for SEO. PRWeb charges eighty-nine dollars for its basic-level service, and it 
goes up from there, depending on what your needs are.
Most of the other wire services also have a syndicated news feed through XML/
RSS. In addition, they will regularly send out e-mail listings of press releases to thou-
sands of media people, bloggers, writers, and others who have asked for certain releases 
in the industries they cover. 
Both of these features can 
dramatically increase expo-
sure for your press release, 
placing more eyes on your 
newsworthy story and more 
mouse clicks on your site.
To find out more about 
the wire services and to see 
which one you may want to 
use, I suggest checking out 
their sites. You could use 
one or several, depending 
on your preferences.
Figure 6-3 
PRWeb

120	
Content is Currency
What Can Happen If You Do Releases Right
If you are able to put together a killer release that has great buzz and newsworthy flair, you 
could have a linking juggernaut on your hands. I’ve heard of a single release bringing in 
a dozen or more new clients for certain businesses. In addition, news organizations may 
read your release and decide to use it in a larger feature story. I once had a big business 
radio show call me to see if I wanted to be interviewed on the subject of content market-
ing after they read one of my releases. All kinds of unexpected things can happen.
The other cool thing is this: A release that you write and submit today could still 
be bringing in traffic two, three, or five years from now! Now that’s some phenomenal 
free advertising.
Pitching Your Release to Writers in Your Industry
Many public relations and marketing firms provide an added service for press release 
distribution by sending your releases to key writers in your particular industry. This 
can give your releases added fire power, because the marketing firms will put their name 
behind your story and get it to other important people who may blog about it, contact 
you for more information, or just find creative ways to increase overall exposure. Of 
course, you can send releases out to the media yourself, but it takes some homework 
on your part. And not having a personal relationship with the writers and journalists 
could make it tough.
Remember, journalists are always looking for good things to write about. Their 
goal is to come up with an angle that they can use to create an entire series of news 
stories. The more interest they can generate, the brighter their star shines. Plus, it’s 
super competitive out there in the news business. There are lots of reporters looking to 
outreport others. If you can feed this need, then it means more exposure—and more 
subsequent sales for your company.
Track the Page Views and Pickups
After you send your release through the wire service of your choice, be sure to keep 
track of how it’s doing out there. Search for your headline on Google and Yahoo! See 
where it’s being picked up. View your stats on the press release site and follow them 
closely. You’ll probably see the most action right after the release is sent. Whatever 
ends up happening, there are always nice surprises that occur.
So, how many people end up seeing your release once it’s sent out? Well, it changes 
all the time, but if you are B2B (business to business), you could get ten thousand to 
forty thousand page views in the first month. If your company focuses on B2C (busi-
ness to consumer), it’s more like seventy thousand to ninety thousand! Those are 
impressive numbers, right?

	
 Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms
121
Handling the Attention After a Release Goes Out
Don’t be surprised if you get some attention from your release or story. People are 
curious creatures. If you are doing something at your company that is interesting, 
your phone may start ringing off the hook. This is a very good thing! Make sure your 
release includes multiple ways to contact you. Watch your e-mail and be available by 
phone. Say yes to any and all interviews.
Here’s the other thing: Prepare a longer statement (or more information) for when 
the media contact you. If someone wants to do a story, then it’s time to take this thing 
to the next level, storyboarding it, coming up with all the other interesting facets of 
the story. Like a resume, a press release gets you the interview. The feature story gets 
you the massive exposure you are after.
The Social Media News Release
A social media release is a newer type of release that is designed to enable the content 
to be removed and used on blogs, wikis, and other social channels. These types of 
releases feature multiple embedded links (a YouTube video, Flickr slideshow, SlideShare 
presentation, etc.) and blocks of text similar to those found in traditional releases, 
including spokesperson quotes, boilerplate, and contact information. Social media 
releases also aim to replace the “corporate speak” and stilted writing that is found on 
many traditional press releases with more interesting, usable content.
A social media release also:
Incorporates social media tools into the press release
7
7
Includes rich media content such as videos, photos, and the release tagged 
7
7
with keywords
Includes an audio link such as podcast or product announcement (connected 
7
7
to an RSS feed)
Encourages visitor to share the release through Facebook, Technorati, Stumble-
7
7
Upon, Delicious
Includes a “keyword cloud”
7
7
Integrates Technorati tags and links to Delicious.
7
7
Provides the reader with more options to get the word out
7
7
How did this type of release get started? Influential Silicon Valley journalist and 
blogger Tom Foremski’s now-famous blog post16 was the spark that led to the creation of 
the social media release. He suggested a reconstruction of the press release that would 
16 Foremski, Tom. 2006. “Die! Press Release! Die! Die!” Silicon Valley Watcher, February 27. Accessed 
2/4/11. http://www.siliconvalleywatcher.com/mt/archives/2006/02/die_press_relea.php.

122	
Content is Currency
address the more social web. Todd Defren, of famed PR firm Shift Communications, 
created the template for the social media release shortly thereafter.
The social media press release has been around for more than four years now, and 
is still evolving as social media changes right before our eyes. Some PR folks stick with 
the classic news release as I’ve described it in this chapter, but many forward-thinking 
content marketers favor a direct or social way of distributing news, like the social media 
press release. Although this type of release is not the new standard in public relations, 
it is an option to look at for your company.
Here is a template for a social media release:
Figure 6-4 
Social Media Press Release Template

	
 Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms
123
Definitely look into trying out one of these types of releases with an upcoming 
press release for your company. It’s worth a test!
A Forward-Thinking Wire Service: PitchEngine
In addition to the wire services mentioned earlier, you should also consider sending 
your release through PitchEngine. This firm represents a new type of media format 
and is very popular with bloggers and those on the cutting edge of the modern pub-
lishing platform.
PitchEngine enables users to create:
social and search optimized content that is consumer-facing—like digital flyers, 
press releases, real estate listings, and more. Last year, more than 100,000 pitches 
were shared by 30,000 organizations looking to get the word out to not just journal-
ists, but to bloggers, consumers and other influencers. PitchEngine’s “Co-op SEO” 
concept enables brands big and small to experience exceptional indexing in major 
search engines, while their social integration tools like Newsroom for Facebook, 
continue to push the boundaries of industry norms.”17
I personally recommend PitchEngine. I have used it for my company, and think 
its service is outstanding.
Figure 6-5 
PitchEngine
17 PitchEngine. “About Pitch.” Accessed 2/11/11. http://www.pitchengine.com/about.php.

124	
Content is Currency
The Social Media “Newsroom”
Many companies are now developing social media “newsrooms” on their websites, with 
all their company information, visuals, videos, background materials, story ideas, and 
contact information easily accessible and searchable. Within a social media newsroom, 
you can place all of your multimedia assets in one online location. Placing this content 
on third-party sites means the potential conversation that your release generates could 
be happening there rather than on your corporate site. You want to be a part of the 
conversation as much as possible.
A newsroom like this allows you to host all of your social media releases, contact 
information, and links to social channels in one place. You also get to leverage the 
search engine optimization value of the news you release. Other important benefits of 
an online social media newsroom are that it:
Offers a more modern version of the press kit
7
7
Is cost effective
7
7
Puts you in charge of your own PR
7
7
Makes it easier for journalists and reporters to get quick information on your 
7
7
company
Includes all press releases, high-resolution artwork, contact info, background, 
7
7
etc.
Gives the media and others the ability to search for items
7
7
Includes social media pages for your company
7
7
Makes your releases and related items part of your site, not separate
7
7
Offers subscription opportunity for updates
7
7
Here is great social media newsroom template:
Figure 6-6 
Shift Communications Social Media Newsroom Template

	
 Press Releases and Media/Press Rooms
125
Summary
A press release is a type of content that can really work hard for your company. Done 
correctly, its positive influence can be multiplied many times over the course of just a 
few weeks. Unfortunately, many traditional and smaller companies out there still think 
the press release is something they submit to newspapers and that’s it. They sit back 
and hope that their announcement will get press. Well, this mindset is at least twenty 
years old. In the new content age, the press release holds significant power.
What company news can you announce on a regular basis? How can you take 
your message and create a viral press event? Think about how you can maximize this 
content vehicle. It will pay off big time.
And don’t forget to optimize your releases. Even some of the big companies miss 
this step. You want to be sure to get the search engine exposure you deserve.
Good Luck!

This page intentionally left blank 

P a r t  I I I
Content for Community and Mobile

This page intentionally left blank 

129
C h a p t e r  7
Content for Social Media
S
ocial media. It’s all around us, moving, shaping, and influencing everything we do—
Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, YouTube, and all the rest of the social media platforms. 
It’s pretty breathtaking to see what has happened in this space recently. In a few short 
years, social media has gone from “zero to a hundred” in rapid fashion, into a whole 
new paradigm of personal connection and communication.
There is no doubt that social networking or social “business,” as it is now quickly 
moving into, has been the biggest thing to hit the business world since the Internet 
itself. It has been that massive of a change, plain and simple. Whether you are a busi-
ness with a fan page on Facebook, a Twitter page, and a YouTube channel, or are simply 
reconnecting with old friends through social media, the phenomenon has affected 
practically all of us.
So, what is social media? Wikipedia says this:
Social Media is media designed to be disseminated through social interaction, 
created using highly accessible and scalable publishing techniques. Social 
media uses Internet and web-based technologies to transform broadcast media 
monologues (one to many) into social media dialogues (many to many). It sup-
ports the democratization of knowledge and information, transforming people 
from content consumers into content producers.18
Andreas Kaplan and Michael Haenlein, two well-known social media gurus, define 
social media as “a group of Internet-based applications that build on the ideological 
and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and that allow the creation and exchange 
of user-generated content.”19
18 Wikipedia. “Social Media.” Accessed 2/15/11. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_media.
19 Hermida. Alfred. 2010. “How to Teach Social Media in Journalism Schools.” PBS MediaShift, 
August 30. Accessed 2/20/11. http://www.pbs.org/mediashift/2010/08/how-to-teach-social-media-
in-journalism-schools242.html.

130	
Content is Currency
Social Media Optimization
I brought the concept of social media optimization up earlier in the book, but let’s take 
a deeper dive. Again, for the sake of definition and understanding, let’s start with the 
basics. What is it? Also from Wikipedia (and a pretty good definition):
Social Media Optimization (SMO) or Social SEO is the methodization of social 
media activity with the intent of attracting unique visitors to website content. 
SMO is one of two online methods of website optimization; the other method 
is search engine optimization or SEO.
There are two categories of SMO/Social SEO methods:
(a) Social media features added to the content itself, including: RSS feeds, 
social news and sharing buttons, user rating and polling tools, and incor-
porating third-party community functionalities like images and videos
(b) Promotional activities in social media aside from the content being 
promoted, including: blogging, commenting on other blogs, participating 
in discussion groups, and posting status updates on social networking 
profiles20
It basically comes down to putting your social media presence to work for your 
company, spending quality time with it every day, leveraging like crazy, and generally 
getting out there to gain maximum benefit. In many ways, your efforts start paying 
off exponentially when you do so. Why? People love to be a part of something big (and 
something social). With SMO, users are rewarded for both consuming and distributing 
content.
But let’s take each of the important tenets of SMO individually. There are a few 
solid rules to live by with social media optimization:
1. Create sharable content. To optimize a site for social media, you need to make 
your content shareable and increase the linkability of the content. So, you get a blog set 
up, you start producing some great content, and you want people to link to it. And you 
also want them to “Like” it on Facebook and tweet about it on Twitter. You can also 
write e-books, white papers, and the like, all of which will encourage sharing.
2. Make sharing and tagging easy. Add buttons to your posts like “Tweet this” 
and “Add to Delicious.” Make sure your posts include a list of relevant tags, suggest 
linking to your blog, and tag your pages on popular social bookmarking sites. Your 
people can post a short link to their profiles, embed a video, send out a tweet, or create 
a hashtag for a conversation. Whats a hashtag? It’s a special tag embedded in a tweet 
that helps you search for tweets that have a common topic. For example, if you search 
on #CONTENTISCURRENCY, you’ll get a list of tweets related to this book.
20 Wikipedia. “Social Media Optimization.” Accessed 2/20/11. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Social_media_optimization.

	
 Content for Social Media
131
3. Proactively share content. With this rule, you want to proactively share content 
in many different ways. Creating slides to post on SlideShare or documents to share on 
Scribd, tweeting about your content or offering embeddable versions of it, and using 
RSS feeds to syndicate it are all great ideas. Proactively sharing even includes posting 
your content to social networking profiles or creating profiles on video-sharing sites.
4. Encourage the “mashup.” A “mashup” is material combined from multiple 
sources to create a new work. You need to let others use and share your content. Syn-
dicating your content through RSS makes it easy for others to create mashups that can 
drive traffic or augment your content.
5. Be a resource for others, whether or not you benefit directly. It’s the old “give 
what you get” thing. Paying it forward. Being cool toward one another. Not always 
thinking of only yourself or your company. Essentially, you want to add value to users, 
including links to sites that you think would be helpful for them. People will notice 
your efforts, especially in the social space.
6. Build relationships with those who help the most. If certain individuals are 
rising to a level of influence in your community and helping you (without asking for 
anything in return), you should promote their content or develop a rating system. 
E-mail or call them and build a true friendship. Chances are, they will be surprised or 
even shocked. And both of you will benefit, a whole lot.
7. Participate and get involved—genuinely. This could be the most important 
tenet of them all. Join the conversation. Be active. Show your concern. Social media 
is a two-way street. By getting involved, you create awareness. Your message spreads 
and your influence grows.
8. Create compelling content. Yes, content is king in social media too. No mat-
ter what your business is, whether it’s sexy or boring, there is always content you can 
develop that will get people interested. Create a widget, write an award-winning white 
paper, have a webinar with three of your best clients, whatever it is, it’s important to 
embrace the “publisher” part of the process with SMO.
9. Develop an SMO strategy and make it a part of your business life. You don’t 
want to get into social media without a good plan. Define your objectives and set goals. 
Your outcome depends on it. Find ways to incorporate SMO tactics when you first start 
developing your content. Be consistent, get involved, and stick to your plan.21
In essence, SMO is the process by which you make your content easily shareable 
across the social web. It’s helping people view your content through widgets, apps, and 
other social media entry points. The more transportable you can make your content, 
the better.
21 Singer, Adam. “16 Rules for Social Media Optimization Revisited.” TopRank Online Marketing Blog. 
Accessed 2/9/11. http://www.toprankblog.com/2009/08/social-media-optimization-redux/.

132	
Content is Currency
Why Social Media Optimization Matters
There’s one big reason that social media optimization matters: social networks are 
driving an increasing amount of traffic to an increasing number of websites. In 
fact, many companies are seeing more traffic from social networks than they see from 
Google. If your content is interesting and easily shareable, you have social media power 
captured in a bottle. But SMO isn’t just about growing your social media presence, it’s 
tying into and leveraging the social networks of others. Therein lies the true beauty of 
it, in building a web of influence.
How do you make changes to optimize your website so it is more easily linked to 
within social media?
Engaging in general SEO for your website, adding content, rewriting meta tags, 
7
7
etc. (See Chapter 4)
Adding a blog and using the plug-in “Share This” to get people to distribute 
7
7
it for you
Adding your social media icons to the top of every content piece
7
7
Using the Facebook “Like” button on your content
7
7
Using Google’s +1 (their answer to Facebook’s Like button and something that 
7
7
can also help with Google search rankings)
And what are we talking about when we say “social media content”? Writing for 
social media could take the form of blog posts, tweets on Twitter, videos that you share 
on Facebook or YouTube, and sites that you give a thumbs-up to on social bookmark-
ing sites like StumbleUpon.
But knowing how to write and publish content for a social media world can be a 
challenge—and can be very time consuming. How do you do it and why is it important? 
We’ll get to that very soon . . .
Social Media Is Expanding Like Crazy
It seems like with every blog I frequent, the topics covered have morphed into a social 
media cornucopia of delights. The topic used to just be “social media,” but now it’s 
divided and multiplied into a number of subtopics within the larger umbrella. From 
video marketing and distribution to social media tools, and from social media training 
and advertising to integrating social media and traditional media, the list is endless. 
Despite all of this activity and buzz, there are many thousands of companies out there, 
large and small, that are still resisting it—or confused about it.
Why? Because resisting an idea, for many, is human nature 101. Even for some 
of those who like to be out in front. And I surmise it’s more of an issue in the United 
States, where it seems we are always wondering, “How can we turn this great idea into 
quick cash?” Oh yeah, that ROI thing. Well, maybe social media will finally help place 
“building a community” and “establishing a brand” above ROI (where they should 
be), once and for all. Whether we are talking about Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, your 

	
 Content for Social Media
133
blog—they’re all excellent ways of connecting with your customers and offering them 
something useful. Embrace these platforms now and they will love you back. With 
each passing week, this notion seems to be more and more clear.
And you know what? There are companies—many of them—that are even making 
money from their involvement in social media. We’ll get to that in a bit.
What can you get out of your social media involvement? How about a speaking slot 
at a big industry event? How about an important introduction to an industry partner in 
Europe? How about a book deal? There are a thousand or more great things that can hap-
pen as a result of your involvement. Think about it more as a return on engagement.
And consider this: If you aren’t convinced of social media’s ability to capture 
“eyeballs” and cold hard cash, you’ll be interested to know that Dell Computers 
generated $3 million in sales in 2010 with links from its various Twitter accounts.22 
Wow. I think that’s really impressive. There are a thousand or more similar stories of 
ROI with social media. So, to all the B2B naysayers out there—stop already! You’re 
wrong. Get on board.
Gathering in Groups
One thing is clear: All social media sites have a “groups” feature that helps gather like 
minds together. This can help you cut to the chase and find out who your people are, 
right away. On Facebook, this feature is naturally called “Groups.” On Twitter, it’s 
called “Lists.” Of course, as with any social interaction, you can’t just join the group 
and expect things to happen, you have to actively participate.
You also have the ability to create “Events” on the social media sites. This can be 
a powerful feature as well. Why? It’s fundamental to the human experience: Everyone 
loves being invited to an event. Whether it’s web seminars, live in-person events, or 
another type of gathering, creating a series of popular events through social media is 
a great strategy to employ.
So, lets focus on three major areas:
How your company benefits from social media content
1. 
Types of social media content
2. 
Finding time to create social media content
3. 
By reviewing these three areas and understanding how the information can apply 
to your business, you can make the very most of social media and stay out in front of 
your competitors. In terms of getting your feet wet, you may want to contribute first 
by joining existing social discussions about other content. See what people are talking 
about and what types of content are the most popular.
So, let’s get right into it . . .
22 Miller, Claire Cain. 2009. “Dell Says It Has Earned $3 Million from Twitter.” The New York Times 
blog, June 12. http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/06/12/dell-has-earned-3-million-from-twitter/.

134	
Content is Currency
How Your Company Benefits from Social Media Content
How exactly does your company benefit by using social media? With Facebook, Twitter, 
YouTube, your blog, and other venues, you can:
Build new relationships
7
7
Provide thought leadership
7
7
Respond to customers
7
7
Improve search engine rankings
7
7
Drive and augment media exposure
7
7
Implement promotions and contests
7
7
Impact sales, ultimately
7
7
But let’s be fair, it isn’t just the ROI issue that stops companies from jumping in with 
social media. In fact, there are a number of other issues that various surveys cite, 
including lack of knowledge, executive resistance, not having the time to do it, etc. 
The bottom line: Social media is about influence, connection, and brand. When 
considering getting into the social media space, it’s important to ask a few key ques-
tions: Who is your audience? Who will you connect with? What’s your strategy? These 
are all things that you want to think about and plan for. If you haven’t done it yet, get 
yourself a calendar and start mapping out what you want to do.
The great thing about social media is that we are able to do things that we’ve 
never done before, more efficiently, at a higher level. Through these platforms we can 
facilitate new relationships, new conversations, positive influence, and close customer 
interaction . . . all at a faster rate than ever before. Why? One big reason lies in that 
definition I started off with: Social media uses technologies to transform broadcast media 
monologues (one to many) into social media dialogues (many to many).
It’s the “many to many” dynamic that really changes the game. When your con-
tent is shared, it has tremendous power. Unbelievable power. If you’re old enough to 
remember what life was like before the Internet, you’ll recall that all of this social 
connection stuff used to happen at conferences, in the workplace, or through a 
social service group or association. Whew, that was a lot of work! Although it’s still 
important to attend live events, thankfully, we have the super-efficient web to help 
out now.
How times have changed, and for the better! Social media is taking us to exciting 
places.
Types of Social Media Content
So, we know now that social media is any online media that allows users to interact with 
one another. We also know that there are many different types of social media. But what 

	
 Content for Social Media
135
are they? What does the landscape look like? Here is a list of the unique forms of social 
media and the sites that are the most important for getting your content out there.
Social networking—Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google +1
7
7
	  
Social networking sites allow users to add clients, prospects, and partners and 
to send messages and share content using either the “one-to-many” or “many-
to-many” format. Typically, people on social networking sites get together in 
communities of like-minded interest.
Video Sharing—YouTube, Vimeo, TubeMogul
7
7
	
 
Sites like YouTube have revolutionized online video, allowing users to share video 
content either privately or publicly. More on video content in Chapter 11.
Blogging platforms—WordPress, TypePad, Blogger, etc.
7
7
	
 
Most people have interacted with blogs for many years now, and we’ll get into 
blog content in the next chapter. But for definition purposes, blogs are online 
journals where companies or individuals discuss anything they want to—
reviews of products, opinions on industry news, interviews, etc., and can share 
this with their blog subscribers. There are many easy-to-use blogging platforms, 
including WordPress, TypePad, and Blogger, that host blogs for free.
Wikis—Wikipedia
7
7
	
 
A wiki refers to content created online by multiple users working on the same 
content, but at different times and from different places.
Photo sharing—Flickr, Photobucket
7
7
	
 
Photo-sharing sites allow people to upload photos to share with anyone they 
like.
Presentation sharing—SlideShare, Scribd
7
7
	
 
Have a PowerPoint deck that you want to share with lots of people? No problem. 
Using a site like SlideShare, you can upload as many presentations as you like 
and even get some SEO benefit by doing so. Have a manuscript you want people 
to review? Check out Scribd.
Social bookmarking—StumbleUpon, Digg, Delicious
7
7
	
 
Social bookmarking applications allow users to share their favorite online 
content with one another while creating online bookmarks. The bookmarks are 
on a website, so other people can see your bookmarks and ideally be exposed 
to sites they wouldn’t otherwise encounter. Some social bookmarking sites, 
like StumbleUpon, use a voting system that allows users to indicate which 
bookmarks they found interesting.
Making an Impact with Social Media Content
Obviously, in this time of social media growth, there are hundreds of sites to choose 
from when you ponder where you want to focus your efforts. Selecting the right social 

136	
Content is Currency
media channels for your company or individual tastes is based on your specific prefer-
ences, goals, and long-term content strategy. If you are a business, you naturally want 
to go where your target market, customers, and partners are.
A good place to start is by setting up profiles and learning the basics of these 
sites:
Facebook
7
7
Twitter
7
7
LinkedIn
7
7
YouTube
7
7
SlideShare
7
7
Flickr
7
7
These sites are, in my opinion, where you can get the most traction and they are, 
as you will see, the most popular of all the social sites. There is a learning curve, but 
hopefully the information in this chapter will fast-track your process.
Using Link Bait in Social Media
“Link bait” is a term used to describe viral, linkable content designed to attract thou-
sands of links; it is recognized as one of the most effective ways to build links—and 
relevance for a site. Essentially, it means putting together really good content that has 
solid, value-added information in it. So, link baiting is really building link-friendly 
content. It’s also a great way to approach social media content, because it gets people 
interested and gets them engaged.
The traditional way of getting links, circa 2003, involved contacting other relevant 
websites, e-mailing the webmasters and asking for a link. You’d contact people you 
know—vendors, partners, customers, and suppliers and you would “reciprocate” links. 
You would carefully explain in your e-mails that linking to you would be worthwhile 
for their visitors and beneficial to them as well . . . and you’d spend hundreds of hours 
doing it. This process was all fine and dandy, but the companies that really made an 
impact were the ones that were producing solid content that others naturally wanted to 
link to. How did they do it? They would put together a thirty-page e-book on a popular 
topic in their industry and publish it on their blog. Others would see it, want to link 
to it immediately, and just like that . . . they were off to the races.
There is no doubt about it: Developing high-quality, very popular, link-friendly 
content is the way to go in the social media world. With “link bait,” you can do this. 
First, as all the experts will tell you, you need a good “hook” for your blog posts, 
tweets or Facebook status updates. A hook is the angle, or the way of grabbing the 
reader’s attention. You do it by capitalizing on something that’s really important to 
most people—new information, security, money, respect, gossip, new ideas, a secret, 
etc. . . . and give it a little sizzle.

	
 Content for Social Media
137
Types of Hooks
Providing something important—The Resource Hook
7
7
Tying in to what’s relevant—The News Hook
7
7
Going against the grain—The Contrary Hook
7
7
Taking the offensive position—The Attack Hook
7
7
Making people laugh—The Humor Hook
7
7
23
Providing Something Important—The Resource Hook
Develop a comprehensive list of blogs in your niche; link to them, and chances 
7
7
are they will link to you.
Create a useful tool related to your niche that people like.
7
7
Write how-to posts: How to do _______. Make it substantive and link-
7
7
friendly!
Create a compilation of news stories on a theme that you analyze and create 
7
7
a post for.
List related resources. For example, if you run a hotel, discuss all the places to 
7
7
visit in the surrounding area.
Tying in to What’s Relevant—The News Hook
Find out who reports the news to the news reporting agencies—and then jump 
7
7
on it.
Call someone or something out—if you can expose a fraud or flaw in a news 
7
7
story and report on it, the content could be very link-friendly. You could have 
thousands of links very quickly.
Give your opinion on a popular news story.
7
7
Don’t rehash what someone else already reported—give any reporting your 
7
7
own slant.
Going Against the Grain—The Contrary Hook
Put any contrarian tendencies to use! Be the one guy who finds something to 
7
7
not like about a story, a product, or a service, and then defend your position.
Write posts that explain “Why <insert prominent blogger or company name 
7
7
here> is WRONG about . . .”
Find something that’s really popular and then tear it apart—but do it the right 
7
7
way, not with vindictiveness. People will notice.
Taking the Offensive Position—The Attack Hook
Point out why a particular product or service is doing more harm than good.
7
7
23 Performancing. 2008. “The Art of Linkbaiting.” Accessed 2/25/11. http://performancing.com/
the_art_of_linkbaiting/.

138	
Content is Currency
Go after the government (regarding almost anything—it is a great target).
7
7
Stand up for an underrepresented or disadvantaged group.
7
7
Choose a topic that has a fair degree of truth on both sides, and then write 
7
7
away!
Make your content informed, smart, and very controversial.
7
7
You have to be careful with this one—you don’t want to write the wrong thing 
about the wrong person. It’s a good idea to go after a company or product rather than 
an individual. However, if you’re gutsy, have some proof for what you are claiming, and 
really want to gain some instant traffic, using this hook can give you instant credibility 
and build your reputation like wildfire. Most people love controversy, and when you 
use an attack hook, you stir it up.
Making People Laugh—The Humor Hook
Photoshop a funny picture or cartoon for the subject you are writing about 
7
7
and post it.
Post a list that takes a humorous slant: “Top 20 Ways I’m Going to Work from 
7
7
Bed This Week.”
Post an idea: “You know you’re a ______ when .
7
7
 . .”
Play off another funny bit that you came across: jokes, funny stories, etc. People 
7
7
love to laugh.
On that last point, we all could use some comic relief from the craziness of life 
on the web, right? Or life in general. If you have a natural way of lightening things up 
through your personality, you may be able to write that way too. Give it a shot with 
your next blog post. You’ll create some link-friendly content in the process.
Other Ways to Link Bait
Of course, there are so many other ways to get visitors engaged by your content. Think 
of the ways you respond positively to something you see online. Sometimes it’s a cool 
contest with a great prize, other times it’s an interesting interview with an industry 
guru. Let’s discuss these other methods of link baiting.
Contests
Another thing you can do to build link-friendly social media content is to run a contest 
or sweepstakes on your Twitter or Facebook page. It doesnít have to be expensiveóyou 
could give away your services, actually. This way, it will only cost you in labor. And if 
this labor is your labor, then it doesnít really cost a thing for you financially (dollars out 
of your pocket). In the past, my company has given away ten free pages of web content 
to a group of new prospects, which proved to be very effective, every time. This has 
been an especially good tactic at trade shows as a giveaway at our booth, a book signing 

	
 Content for Social Media
139
and yes, as a special online social media event. People absolutely love contests ñ and 
the prospect of winning something. If you can tap into a magical marketing technique 
and grow your business at the same time, well then thatís a pretty good idea, right? 
What could your company give away? If youíre an Accountant, perhaps a free tax 
return preparation service? If youíre a Management Consultant, maybe you could give 
away three hours of consulting time. Whatever it is, make it something of value that 
people will want. Of course, you could make it fun and easy too. For example, if you run 
a winery, you could hold a contest to name the new Cabernet vintage for your vineyard. 
Run a restaurant? Have your customers submit names for a new award-winning dish. 
People love this type of contest. They may not get a big financial benefit, but when they 
see the name they submitted end up on the wine bottle or on the restaurant menu, itís 
a pretty cool feeling to know you were the one to name it! 
Once you decide what your contest is, promote it and blog about it like crazy . . . 
on every social media channel at your disposal.
Interviews
To build some high-quality link bait, you could interview prominent people in your 
industry. How about that for an idea? You know that the people you interview will link 
to you, right? Absolutely they will. I have interviewed business book authors, CEOís 
from web development firms, some of my partners, and a few others. In fact, Iíve never 
had anyone turn down an interview request. Most people love to be asked and they 
also love to share their wisdom and insights. 
Think about it: Most of the prominent people in any field have fairly large egos. 
Play off that and get some great traffic as a result! They will blog about it and promote 
it through their social media profiles. And if they have 50,000 followers on Twitter, 
this could be massive exposure for your Twitter profile. Try this on your YouTube 
channel next week.
Product or Service Reviews
There are a thousand products or services that your target market would love to read 
about. What are they? Think about what your customers like. What do they use in their 
lives? You may even want to survey them to find out. The great thing about reviews 
is that they are easy to write and give you instant content. Plus, youíll get people who 
want to link to them, especially if itís a review for a popular product or service.
The secret, of course, with all of these link bait approaches is that you need to 
have peopleóyour clients and prospectsósee what you write. Itís all useless unless itís 
seen and acted upon. And if you are brand new on the scene, that can be a challenge. 
So, how do you do it? For starters, link to your clients and prospects in your post, 
send e-mails to them, call them, etc. Add them as friends on Facebook, follow them 
on Twitter . . . whatever it takes! If you can get at least one prominent blogger in your 
niche to take notice, the rest will most likely follow. Remember, the offers, specials, and 

140	
Content is Currency
rewards content can be one of the most powerful types of content. For example, the 
1-800-FLOWERS.com Facebook page24 shows a discount code only when you click 
the ìLikeî button. More to come on incentivized content in just a few pages. . . .
Sharing Knowledge
What about gracing others with your supreme intellect by giving away your own busi-
ness knowledge? Your personal experience with clients and your expertise in your 
field will definitely be of interest to others in your social community. From “how to” 
or review videos to writing cornerstone content for your blog, providing your knowl-
edge to others establishes you as a clear authority, motivating people to get in on the 
conversation and be a part of your online social media world.
Getting involved with social media is fantastic for developing an audience of new 
customers, partners, and others—including the media!
Using Lists
And then there are lists. Top ten whatever. Top hundred whatever—think David 
Letterman here, but even better. Not just funny, but interesting and thought provoking. 
There is something about lists that people love. Maybe it mimics the way we think. Our 
brains are probably wired like that. Maybe it’s because we are drawn to order and like 
categorizing things. Whatever it is, lists encourage debate and give people solid hooks 
to remember the points you are making.
Figure 7-1 
Using Lists

	
 Content for Social Media
141
Debate a Popular Figure
For you adventurous types, you can light the social media world on fire by debating 
another popular member of your community or taking the contrarian view on a 
particular topic. Think about it: Some of the best arguments and debates of all time 
got massive exposure. From the marketing campaign driven “Coke versus Pepsi” ads 
from the 1980’s to the more serious ongoing global warming issue, disagreeing with 
conventional wisdom can become very powerful social media content.
Whatever type of social media content you decide to produce, be sure to make it 
about your audience in one way or another.
Profiles of Important Social Media Sites
If there is one thing we all know it’s that online social networking takes time. It takes 
us away from other business activities and can easily turn into an obsessive pursuit. 
So, how do we make it work for us? Which sites should we focus on first? Let’s dive 
right in.
Facebook: As Powerful as Google
Facebook has probably changed the game more than any other social media giant. 
Everything I mentioned in the first couple pages of this chapter applies to Facebook 
more than any other social media site. As a force in both commerce and culture, it 
will be around for a long, long time. As a business, if you’re not already involved, you 
want to get engaged with Facebook immediately. It could very likely be one of the best 
things you ever did.
Although this book is not a comprehensive social media guide, it is a social media 
content guide and there are basics that all companies should follow if they want to 
maximize their efforts with Facebook. The first thing, of course, is to set up a company 
page (not profile) through Facebook Pages.
But where do you take it from there? Well, you’ll want to populate your page with 
information about your company. Be sure to use your important keywords while you 
do this, because the search engines do crawl these pages. Then you want to focus on 
Applications. You can create as many as ten additional tabs, which can contain lots 
of cool content. A few you definitely want are:
NetworkedBlogs
7
7
—allows you to post your RSS feeds directly to your wall
Twitter Tab
7
7
—posts your Twitter updates to its own tab
Extended Info
7
7
—adds an additional box that supports HTML/FBML, images, 
video, and music to the left sidebar of your page
Fan Appz and Promotions
7
7
—helps you with contests, sweepstakes, and give-
aways, an absolute must for building your following

142	
Content is Currency
Figure 7-2 
Facebook Company Page Example
Offers, specials, and rewards content can be one of the most powerful types of 
content. For example, the 1-800-FLOWERS.com Facebook page24 shows a discount 
code only when you click the “Like” button. More to come on incentivized content 
in just a few pages. . . .
The Power Behind the Facebook “Like” Button
As you’ll learn with your Facebook fan page, you have access to what’s called a “Like” 
button. Essentially, it is a way to show your affirmative belief in something, whether it’s 
a brand, event, video, or whatever. And the “Like” feature taps into the magic power of 
popularity and the influence of groups. There’s a lot of power behind the Like button, 
and Facebook knows it.
How will the Like button help with your advertising and promotions? Facebook 
allows advertisers to retransmit users Likes as sponsored messages. For example, if you 
24 1-800-FLOWERS.com Facebook page. Accessed 2/19/11. http://www.facebook.com/1800flowers?
v=app_4949752878.

	
 Content for Social Media
143
see the movie “The Social Network” (which I loved), and decide to Like it, Columbia 
Pictures can republish your Like as an ad on your friends’ pages.
Think about how much an endorsement from a friend means to you. Whether it’s 
the Hawaiian hotel your best friend recommended last summer or the restaurant your 
sister thought you would like last weekend, our friends’ opinions are very meaning-
ful. And you know what? Every time someone in your Facebook network passes your 
content on to someone else, the person who shared it is giving it an implicit seal of 
approval. Not only is this supremely effective, it gives you the best chance of converting 
that person into a new business relationship when the time is right. It really doesn’t 
matter where your content is published, it’s who endorses it that makes all the differ-
ence. And this has been true since the dawn of human relationships.
So why is the Like button so effective? Because we like to give approval. It’s part of 
having a meaningful connection. We also use it because it fosters a social experience; 
it’s shared. Let’s face it: You’re more likely to remain on a site if you see that ten of your 
friends have “Liked” it. The Like button works well because it’s easy. We know that there 
is no commitment to clicking it. We’re in, we’re out, and no one gets hurt. It sends the 
positive energy out and the positive energy comes back to us. Good stuff.
Recently, Levi’s implemented Facebook Likes across its site and saw a great deal 
of success with it.25 In fact, after doing so, Levi’s determined that Facebook became its 
number one site for referring traffic. Wow, that’s significant, especially when you’ve 
been through SEO, blogging, and all the other online marketing tactics and strategies 
like that brand has.
Other tools are the “Like Box,” which allows you to become a Facebook fan with-
out leaving the web page and “Live Stream,” which is often used while broadcasting 
events. Facebook Ads can also serve you well, driving people to your page. Be sure to 
check them out.
Figure 7-3 
Facebook Like Button
Twitter: The Rise of a New Type of Web Content
What is Twitter? It is the ultimate in microblogging. It is one of the fastest-growing 
web phenomena in the history of the web itself. Twitter is a web service that lets users 
send short messages up to 140 characters in length to a group of people. Launched in 
25 Owyang, Jeremiah. 2010. “Social Commerce Breakdown: How Levi’s and Facebook Prompt Your 
Friends to Improve Your Buying Experience.” Web Strategy, April 30. http://www.web-strategist.
com/blog/2010/04/30/social-commerce-.

144	
Content is Currency
2006, Twitter was designed to keep friends and colleagues informed about each other’s 
daily activities.
Twitter is increasingly used by businesses to tell customers and prospects what’s 
new. In addition, politicians and celebrities use it to keep constituents and fans 
informed. Twitter messages are not sent indiscriminately; they are distributed only to 
those who have elected to become your followers. Messages can also be sent via instant 
messaging, the Twitter website, or a third-party Twitter application. A Twitter message 
is called a “tweet,” and an ongoing stream of Twitter messages is a “Twitter feed.”
So, how is Twitter inspiring a whole new type of content and communication 
style? One way to approach this question is by considering body language. Research-
ers say it makes up 70 percent of communication. The way people say things, their 
facial expressions, their gestures, all are critical to the communication, and need to be 
understood for the exchange to be meaningful. Of course, in the online world—with 
e-mail, instant messaging, social media sites, and the like, where we don’t see people 
in front of us—there is no way we can duplicate this body language information, right? 
Not true. Think about it: Because we have the opportunity to so “expose” ourselves 
online, in many different formats and unique ways, including—here is the kicker—via 
online video, we are able to communicate very similarly to the way we communicate in 
person. It’s true that we can’t precisely replicate the back-and-forth, interactive nature 
of being in the same room with another person, though with two-way video coming 
on strong, maybe even that will be impacted.
In this day and age, we all have less time. We all need to do more with less. But we 
all still have a deep need to communicate with each other. Could the Twitter dynamic—
that of short, substantive, real-time interaction, paired with the burgeoning two-way 
video technology—be the template for future content and future communication? Well, 
Figure 7-4 
Twitter

	
 Content for Social Media
145
it’s happening now. Despite some occasional bandwidth issues, it works well. It’s simple. 
It’s cheap. And it aligns with our need for quick, meaningful communication. True, 
not all tweets are substantive. But we are getting really good at filtering this stuff out. 
So, what is Twitter? It’s a great way to communicate and market using content. How 
do we use Twitter? Often, and with purpose.
Here is the deal: Future content, quite a bit of it anyway, will be “micro” in nature; 
it’ll be tailored to a specific little group, will address their needs or wants, and will 
be delivered in short bursts. More and more content will be customized, clear, and 
with a call to action, a call to action that addresses something you want or need right 
now. The reason it will have more impact? Because the quicker you can address what 
someone wants right now, the quicker he will respond, and this is especially critical 
for you when there are competitors offering the same thing.
Case in point: If there is a Starbucks and a Peet’s Coffee location, and both are 
nearby when you suddenly want a Carmel Machiatto, the one that delivers the virtual 
coupon first will get your business, right? Yep. (They have your geolocation because 
you’ve opted in.)
Using Incentives for Influence
People love free stuff. So, as I mentioned briefly a few pages back, it’s no surprise that 
social media content such as giveaways, contests, and sweepstakes are really effective at 
building your Twitter followers and Facebook friends list. How do you do it? Invite people 
to follow or friend you. They provide their name and e-mail address in exchange for a 
chance to win something of value. Whether you are giving away a free service or free 
product, a sweepstakes is an easy way to increase your fan base. Selecting the Like button 
on Facebook requires a very low level of commitment, and when people see that they can 
win something cool if they Like you, the chances are high that they will participate.
A contest is a good way to both increase and engage your fan base. Requiring 
thought or skill, a contest is more than simply a giveaway like a sweepstakes. For 
example, entrants may compete to come up with the new name for your clothing line 
or protein bar. A contest gives them a voice and shows that you care about them. 
You could engage your fans by hosting a “Fan of the Week” contest. Fans simply 
post a picture of themselves using your product, and winners get to see their photos on 
your Facebook page. It’s so simple, and can be very effective. You could give your fans 
an opportunity to compete with others to name your new product or service. You could 
have them put together a video advertisement for your company. Whoever comes up 
with the best video ad wins the contest. There are all types of things you could do.
Thousands of companies use Facebook this way. With Twitter, you can also reward 
fans for retweeting events and specials.
What could your company give away or do to grow and engage your fans? Try a 
sweepstakes or a contest and see what happens.

146	
Content is Currency
Finding Time for Social Media Content
So, all this social media content stuff is great, but how do you start it and how do you 
get it all done? Well, you are not alone in wondering that. In fact, this is the number 
one question I’m asked when I go out and speak about social media. Well, you’ll be 
happy to know that your social media content development process is all taken care 
of—or at least a plan to set up your own process, that is . . . 
First, understand who your audience is. Who are the stakeholders? And what 
1. 
do they want to know about?
What are the top industry issues? What type of content is popular? You’ll want 
2. 
to see what other companies are involved with in the social media space for 
your industry.
Who are the important bloggers in your industry, and what are they saying 
3. 
about these issues? This is important to know. These are folks that you will 
either partner with, compete with, debate with, or all of the above. Research 
this by going to Technorati, Delicious, and Google Blogsearch.
Where are the top bloggers and influencers in the social media space? Which 
4. 
groups do they belong to on Facebook? Who are the guys in your industry with 
five thousand or more followers on Twitter? And what about LinkedIn? You 
want to analyze what they are discussing and find out how you can fit in.
Join the conversation in these places. Comment on blogs and social networks 
5. 
in a nonpromotional way. Become part of the community. Make your thoughts 
known!
Determine who will create the content. If you are more than a one-person show, 
6. 
get more than one person involved. Assign a schedule and make the person 
(or team) responsible.
Put together a content strategy/schedule and then start creating content!
7. 
Creating great content for your social network starts with a good plan. Get to 
know the community and the types of content they like before spending your time 
and energy on content development. Once you know the important personalities and 
what content “plays” well, you can do anything you want—create a great list, get an 
informative interview, tell a client success story. None of this, of course, comes easy. 
As with any type of content marketing, you have to come from an authentic place and 
keep at it.
Mine Social Media for Keyword Research
Another thing you can do with social media is get information on what people are 
talking about. What’s hot? What’s trending? How can you find an angle or a way into 
the conversation? What you’ll want to do is research how social media authors in your 

	
 Content for Social Media
147
space are tagging their content. You can use tools like Omgili, Boardreader, IceRocket, 
and others as well.
Figure 7-5 
IceRocket
With StumbleUpon, you can search by criteria and review the “filter by tag” list. 
All of this gives you great ammunition for developing a video or e-book or other piece 
of content that incorporates the keywords and is tagged in the same way. This is one 
great way to shorten your path to social media success. If you write about something 
that you think is important, but no one else does, then you could have done a lot of 
work for nothing. If you use these social media tools, that won’t happen. You get a 
handle on what’s popular using these very simple tools.
But how do you organize all the research? I think the advice provided in a great 
book called Audience, Relevance, and Search says it best: “Using an economical social 
media analysis tool such as Alterian SM2, you can export data about social media 
posts to excel and use any text analyzer tool, such as testSTAT, to see the relation-
ships between words and keywords that are associated with a keyword phrase that 
you entered. This will help you craft your long-tail keywords. Think of SM2 as a social 
media warehouse.”26 This is a phenomenal idea.
26 Mathewson, James. 2010. Audience, Relevance, and Search. Upper Saddle River, NJ: IBM Press.

148	
Content is Currency
Figure 7-6 
Alterian SM2
Social Aggregators
Your time is precious. With social media, you need to find shortcuts. The key here 
is leverage—you publish your blog post, and it automatically gets published on your 
Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn pages at the same time. You can do this very easily 
with HootSuite (http://hootsuite.com/).
Why is Hootsuite so great? It helps save you time and spares you the frustration 
that so many companies complain about with social media. Essentially, it enables you 
to manage multiple social networks through one venue. And if you have more than 
one content contributor, you can easily manage multiple users. You can also track 
statistics.

	
 Content for Social Media
149
Figure 7-7 
HootSuite
You can also gain some leverage by checking out other tools like TweetDeck. Use 
KnowEm to set up social profiles, rather than doing so manually. And then be sure to 
check out cool account management tools like Facebook Connect, OpenID, and Google 
Friend Connect. You can use a single login for all your social sites, so you don’t need 
to stress about all of those user IDs and passwords!
Figure 7-8 
TweetDeck

150	
Content is Currency
Creating Social Media Content for Specific  
Company Needs
The social media content you create for your company can help serve more than just 
the marketing department and to gain the attention of new audiences and garner new 
sales. Content can also be developed to serve:
Human resources
7
7
—you can recruit and prescreen candidates, improving new 
hire quality while reducing recruitment time and cost
Customer service
7
7
—resolve customer service issues in real time and reduce 
costs; Best Buy and Dell use it for this purpose, and so can you
Sales
7
7
—the buying cycle has forever changed with social media: prospects are 
researching like crazy, putting together lists of possible vendors; generate leads 
and build credibility with social media content for sales purposes
Product development
7
7
—your customers and prospects want to tell you what 
they think; with high value and low cost of use, social media can serve as the 
new focus group
Final Notes
Do your research. No matter what type of content you are developing, the first step to 
crafting it is to get a feel for the background. And don’t just look at two or three sources 
for your content project; review ten or more. It’s good to get perspective.
Write an attention-getting headline. Your headline is probably the most important 
factor for determining how popular your social media content becomes. Look at the 
concept of status updates on Facebook. Make your headlines, updates, tweets, or other 
content enticing enough for people to want to know more.
Follow with a great opening. The hardest part of anything is starting it, right? Well, 
the most important part of social media content (right in line with the headline) is how 
you begin the blog post, article, video, or whatever. You’ve got to keep them interested! 
If not, they will click away from you within three seconds.
Be conversational. The key word in social media is social. You need to interact!  
Boring, tired content will not bring you or your readers into the conversation. If they 
were there right in front of you, how would you talk to them? Develop content like 
that.
Never give up. Social media marketing requires a long-term commitment. Pro-
duce great content, learn from your mistakes, and tweak your approach until it starts 
working. Remember, social media is not about making money; it’s about relationships 
and building community.

	
 Content for Social Media
151
Summary
Social media content can make a big difference for your company. I know not everyone 
out there is convinced of its importance, but I suggest you give it a shot.
Remember, the best way to start integrating social media with existing web content 
is to audit your use of text, audio, images, and video. What are you currently doing? 

152	
Content is Currency
How can you transition it to the social media space? Analyze your clients’ communi-
cations, and figure out ways that social media could help continue and improve upon 
those conversations.
Social media is amazing for so many reasons, but what it really comes down to 
is improved communication. With social media content, you are addressing three 
issues simultaneously: shifting conversations to a different medium, allowing for 
easier updating of content, and reaching a wider audience. And what a phenomenal 
opportunity to do it!
When you know your customers, understand what’s important to them, and give 
them the content that addresses the things they care about, you will not only enjoy a 
beneficial social media presence, but you will dominate your space and be well posi-
tioned to take advantage of future online marketing developments.

C h a p t e r  8
Blogging to Connect with 
Prospects and Customers
W
eblogs, more commonly known as “blogs,” have been with us for well over twelve 
years now. In that time, millions of blogs have populated the web, providing a new 
means of communication, a connection that can truly be interactive and enriching. In 
fact, before blogging came around, there was nothing quite like it.
So blogging has truly been revolutionary, impacting both business and culture in 
unbelievable ways. Through its influence, regular, everyday consumers and citizens 
have been given a voice and a new way to interact. Many blogs are company or orga-
nization blogs, and these are the types of blogs we’ll focus on in this chapter.
Used to communicate and interact with clients, customers, and the general pub-
lic, the blogs of corporations, nonprofits, governments, and small businesses provide 
a channel of open dialogue with stakeholders and help to break down the walls that 
have traditionally been in place between those who produce the goods and services 
and those who consume them or are interested in them.
Consider that Technorati, a search engine for searching blogs, has indexed 133 
million blogs since 2002, yet only around seventy-six thousand blogs are considered 
“important.” This means that less than .06% of the blogs out there are really making 
an impact and being read.27 If you want your company to be a part of this esteemed 
group, you have to consistently develop great blog content—that’s the bottom line. So, 
I’m going to teach you how to do that.
This is not a “Blogging 101” guide. But it is a blog content guide, and focuses on 
optimizing, writing, and marketing the content on your blog, for maximum influence. 
How can you develop a blog that resonates with your audience and becomes the “go 
to” blog in your industry? How do you become an important resource for your read-
ers? Let’s find out.
27 Singer, Adam. “16 Rules for Social Media Optimization Revisited.” TopRank Online Marketing Blog. 
Accessed 2/9/11. http://www.toprankblog.com/2009/08/social-media-optimization-redux/.
153

154	
Content is Currency
Blog Titles—It All Starts Here
The title is everything, right? A great start to your posts ensures you’ve captured people’s 
attention and have truly engaged them. But it’s not easy. It’s much simpler to be a “me 
too” blogger and copy someone else than to come from a totally creative place. And 
let’s face it: Not everyone can do it. But I believe that good blogging can be learned.
Before we consider titles for your blog posts, let’s back up a bit. The first step is 
to come up with a solid topic. You then use your subject idea to naturally lead into a 
good title. Need help? Look at the best blogs out there to see what they do. Check out 
newspapers or magazines to see how they do it.
Brian Clark from Copyblogger had some great examples of blog headline ideas 
from a post he wrote a few years ago:
1. Who Else Wants [blank]? Starting a headline with “Who Else Wants . . .” is a 
classic social proof strategy that implies an already existing consensus desire. While 
overused in the Internet marketing arena, it still works like gangbusters for other 
subject matter.
Who Else Wants a Great WordPress Theme?
7
7
Who Else Wants a Higher-Paying Job?
7
7
Who Else Wants More Fun and Less Stress When on Vacation?
7
7
2. The Secret of [blank]. This one is used quite a bit, but that’s because it works. 
Share insider knowledge and translate it into a benefit for the reader.
The Secret of Successful Podcasting
7
7
The Secret of Protecting Your Assets in Litigation
7
7
The Secret of Getting Your Home Loan Approved
7
7
3. Here Is a Method That Is Helping [blank] to [blank]. Simply identify your 
target audience and the benefit you can provide them, and fill in the blanks.
Here Is a Method That Is Helping Homeowners Save Hundreds on Insurance
7
7
Here Is a Method That Is Helping Children Learn to Read Sooner
7
7
Here Is a Method That Is Helping Bloggers Write Better Post Titles
7
7
4. Little Known Ways to [blank]. A more intriguing (and less common) way of 
accomplishing the same thing as “The Secret of . . .” headline.
Little Known Ways to Save on Your Heating Bill
7
7
Little Known Ways to Hack Google’s Gmail
7
7
Little Known Ways to Lose Weight Quickly and Safely
7
7
5. Get Rid of [problem] Once and for All. A classic formula that identifies either 
a painful problem or an unfulfilled desire that the reader wants to remedy.
Get Rid of Your Unproductive Work Habits Once and for All
7
7
Get Rid of That Carpet Stain Once and for All
7
7
Get Rid of That Lame Mullet Hairdo Once and for All
7
7

	
 Blogging to Connect with Prospects and Customers
155
6. Here’s a Quick Way to [solve a problem]. People love quick and easy when it 
comes to solving a nagging problem.
Here’s a Quick Way to Get Over a Cold
7
7
Here’s a Quick Way to Potty Train Junior
7
7
Here’s a Quick Way to Backup Your Hard Drive
7
7
7. Now You Can Have [something desirable] [great circumstance]. The is the 
classic “have your cake and eat it too” headline—and who doesn’t like that?
Now You Can Quit Your Job and Make Even More Money
7
7
Now You Can Meet Sexy Singles Online Without Spending a Dime
7
7
Now You Can Own a Cool Mac and Still Run Windows
7
7
8. [Do something] like [world-class example]. Gatorade milked this one fully 
with the “Be Like Mike” campaign featuring Michael Jordan in the early 1990s.
Speak Spanish Like a Diplomat
7
7
Party Like Paris Hilton
7
7
Blog Like an A-Lister
7
7
9. Have a [or] Build a [blank] You Can Be Proud Of. Appeal to vanity, dissatis-
faction, or shame. Enough said.
Build a Body You Can Be Proud Of
7
7
Have a Smile You Can Be Proud Of
7
7
Build a Blog Network You Can Be Proud Of
7
7
10. What Everybody Ought to Know About [blank]. Big curiosity draw with this 
type of headline, and it acts almost as a challenge to the reader to go ahead and see if 
they are missing something.
What Everybody Ought to Know About ASP
7
7
What Everybody Ought to Know About Adjustable Rate Mortgages
7
7
What Everybody Ought to Know About Writing Great Headlines
7
7
28
Start with a Great Opening
Master copywriters through the years have preached that there is nothing more critical 
to printed communication than the headline and the opening paragraph. There’s got 
to be substance. There needs to be steak to go along with that sizzle. You have to stand 
out, it’s just that simple. So, how do you capture your blog readers’ imagination and 
pull them into your content?
28 Clark, Brian. “10 Sure-Fire Headline Formulas That Work.” Copyblogger. Accessed 2/5/11. http://
www.copyblogger.com/10-sure-fire-headline-formulas-that-work/.

156	
Content is Currency
1. Be inquisitive by asking a thought-provoking-question. There is something I 
do with my Jack Russell terrier, Barney, that will get him to tilt his cute little head in 
wonder every single time. What is it? I ask him a question. It doesn’t matter what type 
of question it is, as long as I have that questioning tone as I say it. People are the same 
way. They get curious. They want to answer you. Opening your post with a question 
gets the reader thinking, right away. Also keep in mind the “who, what, why, when, 
and where” so you can target the right audience with the right message.
2. Share a really good story. As I mentioned earlier in the book, everybody loves 
a good story. Whether you make people think, laugh, or remember the past, your little 
story will make it seem like the beginning of a really good piece of fiction. And it will 
get them to read the rest of the post.
3. Engage the imagination, fire up the soul. Finding a way to get into your readers’ 
subconscious right from the get-go can be very powerful. As children, we are easily led 
into our imaginations, conjuring up all types of inventive images, ideas, and make-
believe places. Engaging the imagination is a powerful opening technique. You could 
say, “Imagine if . . .” or “Do you recall, way back when . . .”
4. Use an analogy or metaphor. Used in popular songs by the greatest composers 
of our times, including Paul McCartney, John Lennon, Paul Simon, Brian Wilson, and 
others, analogies and metaphors are some of the most powerful language tools we have 
for communicating a thought in a single sentence. These techniques can conjure up 
mental imagery, allowing readers to see themselves in the story and, for your blogging 
purposes, engage them so they’re drawn to post a comment.
5. Mention something “hot” from the news. Starting off with an interesting fact 
from the news media is also a great idea. The best public relations firms in the world 
will tell you that finding a way to tie into current news is almost always a winning 
strategy. People want to know what your opinion is or how your product or service 
could be involved.
Blogging Content—Best Practices
So, now that we know how to start the content production, what are the tried and true 
“rules” of blog content, in general? How can you really start building a mass following 
with your blog? Remember, the hardest part of the entire blog development process 
is the first six to twelve months. Getting established can be very tough. But once you 
have three to four thousand subscribers or more, it gets a whole lot easier. So, here we 
go . . . best practices:
1. Have a conversational tone. Think of the blogs you like to read. They are all 
really easy to digest, yet are substantive, have a set format, and are informal. The most 

	
 Blogging to Connect with Prospects and Customers
157
engaging blogs communicate in a casual and conversational tone. By being personal 
and candid, you will make readers feel almost like they are sitting down with you for 
a chat. And if you do it right, you will keep them coming back for more. That should 
interest a few advertisers, if your goal is monetizing your blog, right?
If you are the straightlaced corporate type and find it hard to be casual in your 
writing, do what you can to write in a relaxed voice. We all have it. The best advice is 
to simply be yourself. Share your interests and opinions, and it will be much easier to 
be conversational.
2. Be personal; write about what you know. Whatever business you are in, you are 
probably an expert. So, write about this expertise! Telling your audience the backstory 
of your business or a behind-the-scenes story will really generate interest. Revealing 
setbacks, successes, or anything else in this vein can involve readers. If you want to 
discuss new products and services, make these topics more appealing by sharing 
personal insights like the funny things that happened along the way or a story of a 
customer and how she used your product. A more personal story like that will be read 
and commented on every time.
3. Blog three to four times a week, at minimum. This is the one that separates 
the great bloggers from all the rest. They never stop. They embrace the fact that they 
are publishers of information. They take their blogging practice seriously. Once you 
have established a couple thousand subscribers, offer new insights regularly to keep 
them coming back, day in, day out.
4. Use common sense; don’t just shoot off your mouth. Remember, you are still 
running a business here. You can’t just shoot off at the mouth about whatever you 
want to on your blog. Respect the confidentiality of your organization and employees. 
Though you may express disagreements or concerns, do not make personal attacks or 
be too negative. Although the actual blogging process can be very therapeutic for some 
business bloggers, you don’t want to cross the line and reveal proprietary information. 
Use common sense and don’t offend or incriminate anyone.
5. Make sure the spelling and grammar is correct. In the casual blogging culture, 
sometimes we can get too casual and actually lazy. Remember, what you blog about 
and how you write your posts reflects on your company. Maintain professionalism 
and shape the impression you want others to have of you. In the blogging world, your 
readers may actually comment about your careless spelling. It has been known to 
happen. Don’t let it!
6. Keep your posts short and sweet. As I mentioned earlier in the book, we scan 
on the web rather than reading word for word. You need to be respectful of people’s 
time. Tell your story or make your case quickly. Remember, some of your readers just 
want to get to the end so they can post a comment! Help them in that effort. Publishing 

158	
Content is Currency
short posts more frequently is better than writing long, essay-length posts every couple 
of weeks.
And why are marketers like Seth Godin so respected in the blogosphere? Number 
one, because he is smart, a real thought leader. But, right up there is the fact that he is 
succinct with his blog posts. However, just because it’s brief doesn’t mean it shouldn’t 
be substantive. It needs to be quality, absolutely.
7. Link often and use keywords. Think SEO. Always think SEO. It’s like online 
oxygen, baby! The best bloggers of all time build credibility by linking out. Likewise, 
many others will link in to your blog. Linking to other blogs in your space is just a great 
idea. It helps you build community and relationships, if nothing else.
Also, do your keyword research and use them in your posts. Doing this well will 
get the search engines to love your blog. Your rankings will increase, more people will 
come, and you’ll have more subscribers in no time. Perfect!
8. Balance your content with great imagery and formatting. A photo tells a 
thousand words, right? Any blog post without an image simply looks stale. Spice it up 
and add some contrast to your posts. How do you do it? Simply go to Creative Com-
mons or get a photo from Flickr. It works for the most revered bloggers, so it can work 
for you too.
In terms of formatting, make your piece look nice on the page. Check it three times 
before you hit “publish.” Also, think about breaking up the copy with bulleted lists. It 
provides a nice structure for the post.
9. Show your passion for your subject. Do you have passion for your business or 
subject matter? If so, you have a rare gift that should be shared. It can make a huge 
difference, just ask Gary Vaynerchuk from Wine Library TV. He is very wealthy and 
probably very happy because of his passion, plain and simple. Passion and enthusiasm 
are attractive to everybody, but few people truly have and are willing to share them.
10. Use research in your posts. Using some research, even if it’s just one small 
thing, can give added credibility and a nice sense of balance to your posts. And this is 
an easy step because there is research everywhere. What are the industry associations 
that you belong to? They’ll have some solid research you can use. Or, you can just 
search for it online. I think the best bloggers out there are the ones who incorporate 
some data or others’ researched opinions into their posts.
11. End your post with a question, an invitation to have your readers respond. 
Yep, this is the best way to end it. Initiate and encourage some interaction. You’ll find 
your responses will go up quite a bit when you ask, “So what do you think?” or “Was 
there anything I missed?”

	
 Blogging to Connect with Prospects and Customers
159
Finding Your Own Voice
As I said before, copying others is the path of least resistance. It’s so easy, and it’s so 
boring. And it’s sort of a waste of time, if you think about it. And coming up with an 
original message for your business is the essence of branding. Did Starbucks just come 
into the market copying Folgers? Not quite. They changed the game forever. Talk about 
great branding—and amazing originality.
Look, I realize it’s really hard to be unique and stand alone, especially when there 
are so many blogs out there, but it’s important to try. Think of it like this: Everyone has 
a unique personality and almost everyone has opinions. Whatever yours are, make sure 
your distinctive voice translates to your blog. In blogging, originality should be the rule 
you live by. Though companies do it all the time, blogging is not about finding stuff 
online, copying the information, editing it a bit, and then posting it to your blog.
What have you learned from your experiences? How do you think things should 
really be done? Shake up the establishment and be a leader with your blog. Thinking of 
something new and coming from a creative place is a skill that takes time to develop, 
but once you have it, it becomes easy. A blog is the place online where you express 
yourself after all. You may not do it on your brochures. You certainly won’t do it on a 
client proposal, but on your blog, you are journaling about whatever you want.
Managing a Large Blog with Multiple Contributors
Are you with a large company that has multiple blog authors contributing to the success 
of the blog? If so, you know how cumbersome it can be to manage it on an ongoing 
basis. Because there are lots of moving parts, the process can be really slow. But not if 
you are efficient. Not if all the pieces are working together in synergy. What you want 
is an “assembly line” or “group think” mentality with your company blog. You need 
to embrace the idea of shared responsibility to get the job done well.
So, what are some guidelines to make this process easier?
1. Set your objectives for the blog. Just like a magazine, every good blog needs 
a production schedule. But before you create one, you need to set your goals for your 
blog. Do you want to provide opinion-based articles? Updates on company news? 
Educational content? Whatever you plan on doing, get it all established up front. It’s a 
key part of the planning process and, ultimately, the success of your blog.
2. Do your keyword research—use important phrases for blog posts. A good 
keyword strategy is key to successful SEO. Think about your potential readers. How 
can you target and segment them?
Target different types of readers: Unique groups tend to use different phrases 
7
7
when describing their needs. Ensure your keyword list is reflective of this.

160	
Content is Currency
Target key industry sectors and types of services—also include phrases 
7
7
relevant to your company’s product and service offerings.
Target gaps in your website SEO strategy—don’t use the same keyword 
7
7
phrases that your site ranks for.
3. Create an editorial calendar. Again, you are a publisher now. You need to fully 
think like one, too. So, once your keyword lists are set, develop a full-year editorial 
calendar so you have good variety, a schedule that you can follow, and a plan for how 
you will use the keywords.
Whether you cover a unique customer group or a different market sector with 
each post, it doesn’t really matter, as long as you are speaking to all your blog readers 
at some point. You don’t want to bore your readers. The need to stay fresh is important. 
And if there is a hot topic or breaking news in your industry, definitely hop on that 
and get some publicity out of it.
4. Recruit key team members as your featured bloggers. Get out there and recruit 
the best writers and thought leaders in your company. Hint: It isn’t always the CEO. 
Sharing the workload is essential with a big company blog. You don’t want burnout. 
Changing up the writers also creates good variety in the writing from post to post, 
week to week.
5. Assign someone the final editing task. The assigned editor will need to 
check:
The content for clarity, voice, relevance, and interest
7
7
Keyword use and placement for optimization
7
7
Title tags and meta descriptions to ensure they use keywords
7
7
That the post has an image and is using the alt meta tag that includes 
7
7
keywords
That there are links that connect to other content
7
7
6. Analyze and share metrics, review comments. You need to know that your 
blog is working, that all the time you are investing is paying off. So, take a look at the 
metrics and let the team know what’s going on. Be sure to respond to reader comments, 
as well. It’s best to be very timely with this step.
Creating Link-Friendly Blog Content
If blog content is “king,” then linked blog content is the empire. Writing posts for your 
blogs—even if it’s easy to scan, benefits-rich, and coming from an original place—can 
only get you so far. Over the years, as my company has written blog posts for a myriad 
of businesses, we’ve really seen it all: poor design, great design; bad content, great 
content; poor attempts at conversion, and conversion machines; nonlinked content 
and, yes, link-friendly blog content.

	
 Blogging to Connect with Prospects and Customers
161
At the end of the day, you have to do a lot of things right in order to have your 
blog content found on the web and popular with visitors. For SEO, blog posts that have 
link-friendly content, or content that naturally attracts links, are the most important 
blogs by far. How do we know? Because Google tells us it is: Google’s Webmaster 
Guidelines says:
Give visitors the information they’re looking for—Provide high-quality content 
on your pages. This is the single most important thing to do. If your pages 
contain useful information, their content will attract many visitors and entice 
webmasters to link to your site. In creating a helpful, information-rich site, write 
pages that clearly and accurately describe your topic. Think about the words 
users would type to find your pages and include those words on your site.
. . . Make sure that other sites link to yours—Links help our crawlers find 
your site and can give your site greater visibility in our search results. When 
returning results for a search, Google combines PageRank (our view of a page’s 
importance) with sophisticated text-matching techniques to display pages that 
are both important and relevant to each search.29
Link-Building Experts Speak . . .
It’s important to also know what the most noted link experts in the search marketing 
space have said with regard to link-friendly blog content. Eric Ward, one of the guys 
who practically invented the concept of link building and who promoted the impor-
tance of links as early as 1995, says, “The visible text within the link (aka anchor text) 
can help the search engines make a forecast as to what content lies at the end of that 
link if clicked. If that happens often enough, and if the originating sites are of high 
quality, then the engine can use that signal as part of the ranking process.”30
And Jim Boykin, one of the most successful link operators on the web, says, “The 
best backlinks in the world (and often easiest to get) are those that came because of 
great content.”31
These guys live links—they eat, sleep, and dream in links, and what they say is 
always relevant to the discussion. Lee Odden, of Top Rank Online Marketing blog, said, 
“Whether you drive traffic to the site from offline marketing programs, paid search 
29 Google. “Webmaster Guidelines.” Accessed 2/1/11. http://www.google.com/support/webmasters/
bin/answer.py?answer=35769.
30 Estrin, Michael. 2008. “5 Experts Demystify SEO Link Building” at IMedia Connection, September 
5. http://www.imediaconnection.com/content/20448.asp.
31 Boykin, Jim. 2008. “The Achilles Heel of Free and Natural Links” Jim Boykin’s Blog, May 23. http://
www.webuildpages.com/jim/the-achilles-heel-of-free-and-natural-links/.

162	
Content is Currency
advertising, or social media promotions, you still have to deliver the goods once visitors 
get to the website.”32 What are the “goods” that Lee is referring to? CONTENT.
Blog Link Bait
In the previous chapter on social media content, I brought up the concept of link bait-
ing. Again, link bait is viral, linkable content designed to attract thousands of links 
and is recognized as one of the most effective ways to build links and relevance for a 
blog.
The best way of doing this is actually writing solid blog posts with great content. 
The links will come. Of course, you have to promote your blog, too.
Earlier we discussed the types of “hooks” you could use with your content:
Tying in to what’s relevant—The News Hook
7
7
Going against the grain—The Contrary Hook
7
7
Taking the offensive position—The Attack Hook
7
7
Providing something important—The Resource Hook
7
7
Making people laugh—The Humor Hook
7
7
I also brought up other ways to get others to link to you with contests, interviews, and 
product or service reviews. All of these will provide you with lots of great, linkable blog 
content. One thing to keep in mind is that you want to vary your anchor text every now 
and then. Target your keyword phrase, but then use it in your anchor text in different 
ways. If the phrase is “steel oil drum,” use it in this way a couple of times, but also use 
it as “steel oil drums” and “oil drums made of steel.” The reason for this is that people 
search for many different variations of your keyword phrase—it isn’t always what you 
think it will be—and also because Google’s algorithm looks at this factor.
Guest Writing on Other Blogs
What’s another great way to build link-friendly content that most people forget about? 
Write for another complementary blog as a guest. Others in your industry are always 
looking for blog writers. With the demand for fresh, exciting, link-friendly content 
always out there, you will be welcomed with open arms when you ask to write for 
another blog. What you want to be sure to do is provide a keyword-rich, anchor text 
link to your site in your guest blog post.
Chances are you will get your link benefit in the bylined section of the post, but 
occasionally it may be appropriate to link to something on your site in the main post 
itself. When you put your link in the byline, make sure you consider the needs of the 
32 Odden, Lee. “Tips on Content Centered Link Building.” TopRank Online Marketing Blog. Accessed 
2/12/11. http://www.toprankblog.com/2008/05/tips-on-content-centered-link-building/.

	
 Blogging to Connect with Prospects and Customers
163
readers and link to something on your site that they will find valuable, not just your 
blog’s main URL. Do you have some important content that always stays on your blog 
home page and acts as a “101” or cornerstone content? Link to this page.

164	
Content is Currency
Seth Godin Might Have Said It Best . . .
How to write a blog post. Do it like this: JoelonSoftware.com.
An appropriate illustration,	
 
A useful topic, easily broadened to be useful to a large number of readers,	
 
Simple language with no useless jargon,	 
Not too long,	 
Focusing on something that people have previously taken for granted,	
 
That initially creates emotional resistance,	
 
Then causes a light bulb to go off	
 
and finally,	
 
Causes the reader to look at the world differently all day long.33
33 Godin, Seth. 2006. “How to Write a Blog Post.” Seth’s Blog, November 21. http://sethgodin.typepad.
com/seths_blog/2006/11/how_to_write_a_.html.

C h a p t e r  9
The Relationship-Building Power of 
E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, 
Newsletters, and More
“E-mail is the most used lead-generation tactic by businesses today, with 88 
percent of marketers using it regularly—more than PR, trade shows, direct mail, 
print, search marketing, sponsorships, and other forms of media.”
—Forrester Research
F
orrester also says that e-mail is the single most trusted information source online 
and it’s expected to grow to a $2 billion industry by 2014. Exact Target, a well-known 
e-mail marketing service provider, chimed in with this: Fifty percent of consumers 
make purchases as a direct result of e-mail, which also drives more conversions than any 
other channel. So, e-mail is one of the most important activities you can engage in.34
When you are in business, connecting with people is the first step. You do that 
through your website, a blog post, a well written e-book or white paper, perhaps your 
social media profiles. The next step, naturally, is to build the relationship. You do that 
best, in the digital realm, through personalized e-mails: autoresponders at first, per-
haps, and then your regular newsletter for the long term. Of course, your blog and your 
social media content will help build relationships, too, but e-mail communication is 
the most personal, the most customizable, and the most intimate. E-mail has certainly 
been around a long time and even now, it is a very important part—some say in the 
top three—of the content marketing mix. The other reasons, of course, are that they 
are cheap to send and easy to measure.
34 Stewart, Morgan. 2009. “Is Email Marketing Endangered?” Exact Target, http://www.exacttarget.
com/uploadedFiles/Resources/Whitepapers/ExactTarget_EmailUtilization.pdf.
165

166	
Content is Currency
Whether you are e-mailing a newsletter, a sales promotion, a survey, an event invi-
tation, or just a note to say hello, your connection through e-mail is special because you 
have secured a place in a coveted spot: the e-mail inbox of your prospects and custom-
ers. Staying in front of them is key. After all, every one of us gets inundated with ads, 
announcements, stuff—lots of stuff coming at us at all times. It’s information overload. 
But if you can get that recency and frequency working for you, your prospects and cus-
tomers will never forget about you. And when it comes time to make a decision and buy, 
they’ll go to you instead of your competitors. It’s an absolute truth in business: E-mail 
subscribers and social media followers are among your company’s best assets.
Like your website, your e-mail communication is a job that’s never done. Because 
you are nurturing relationships over time, you need to write e-mails on a regular basis. 
Unlike your website, though, your e-mails will involve customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM) needs, database maintenance, and customer life cycle considerations.
And as with your blog, you want your e-mails to become an information resource 
for your subscribers. You want them to anticipate and look forward to receiving 
your messages each time. Think about it: The best e-mail marketers and brands out 
there have created this environment with their subscribers. Consider Starbucks. 
Personally, I look forward to getting the e-mails I receive from them because I’m in 
the Starbucks loyal customer club. Sometimes I even get a coupon for a free drink! 
And I, for one, think that is pretty cool. See how this whole powerful e-mail content 
thing works?
The personalization aspect is huge, of course. Unlike with traditional media, or 
even your website, it’s a heck of a lot easier to customize with e-mail. It’s a best practice 
to use what’s called “dynamic insertion” in your e-mails to personalize for the sub-
scriber’s name as well as specific interests, location, and more. We all like to see our 
name in print and we all like that people consider what we like. It’s that simple.
As I’ve mentioned in other chapters, what follows in the coming pages is not a 
comprehensive guide to e-mail marketing. It is, however, the best advice you’ll find 
on e-mail copywriting and content generation and using e-mail in the greater content 
marketing game.
As you read the rest of the chapter, consider these key points:
E-mail content is very dependent on 
7
7
impressions
Readers begin forming their opinions 
7
7
from the subject line
Every step along the way can either cement that impression or change it
7
7
You want your subscribers to connect with your e-mail in a positive way every 
7
7
time
The individual elements of your e-mail can artfully combine to create a sig-
7
7
nificant impression
Writing conversationally makes e-mails easier to read and creates more 
7
7
conversions

	
 The Relationship-Building Power of E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, Newsletters, and More
167
What are the four items that will claim the biggest portion of your content marketing 
budget? Search (SEO), social networking, blogging, and, yes, e-mail marketing.35
So, let’s get into it.
E-Mail As a Content Marketing Medium
I’ll take this moment to ask you to reflect for a minute. What are the challenges you 
face with e-mail marketing? Here are some of the most common ones we see:
1. Establishing your company/brand. The fact that someone signed up for your 
newsletter or for e-mail updates is great, but it’s just the first step. Your move is the next 
one. So, what will you do? It’s like the old adage, Be careful what you wish for. Now that 
you have subscribers’ contact information and they have said, “Yes, I want to know 
more; I want to be connected with your company,” you have some company awareness 
and brand building to do. The real work—and there is a lot of it—is just beginning.
2. Being relevant. This is a big one. The reason, of course, is that everyone is 
unique. No matter how many “buckets” you put your subscribers into, they still have 
individual needs and expectations. Your messages need to stay relevant. Otherwise, 
subscribers will unsubscribe or tune out. Segmentation and targeting can get you pretty 
far, but keeping a place of importance in the minds of your subscribers will remain a 
constant challenge.
3. Determining the right number of e-mails to send. Should you send weekly? 
(Probably not.) Should you send quarterly? (Probably not.) Should you send monthly? 
(Bing, bing, bing, bing!) In many studies and in my experience, sending something 
monthly is probably the best course of action. And to this I would add “at a minimum.” 
Of course, there are those event-triggered and behaviorally targeted e-mails to consider, 
and these are different. If a customer or prospect is requesting something in addition 
to your newsletter, then you need to fulfill that request. We’ll get into that in a bit.
4. Dealing with a declining subscriber base. Your subscribers are most engaged in 
the beginning, when they first subscribe. But like anything else, interest levels decline 
with time. This is something that all e-mail content marketers deal with. We could all 
use ideas on how to keep subscribers interested. So, we’ll get into that.
Simply put, e-mail is one of the most brilliant ways of communicating that human-
kind has ever devised. As we’ve said, it’s fast, efficient, cheap, and fairly easy once you 
get the hang of it. And that’s all beautiful. But how do we best use e-mail content? 
What’s the process?
35 Odden, Lee. “SEO Tops Digital Marketing Tactics for 2011.” TopRank Online Marketing Blog. 
Accessed 2/4/11. http://www.toprankblog.com/2010/07/seo-tops-digital-marketing-2011/.

168	
Content is Currency
Define Your Goals/Audience
Ask yourself: What do I want to accomplish with my e-mails? What do I want the people 
receiving my e-mails to do, exactly? Are you selling something? Are you notifying people of 
upcoming events? Do you want to share your recent blog posts? Are you building a relation-
ship? Yes. Most definitely. And that’s what I want to stress more than anything else.
If you’re old enough, you remember receiving handwritten letters, pre-1997 or so. 
Whether you wrote a letter to a friend or family member, what was your objective in 
writing a letter to someone you knew? Well, one of the goals was to nurture the rela-
tionship, right? Think of your e-mail content in the same way. Your very first e-mail 
should maybe sound like this: “Hi, my name is Dave from XYZ Company! Here is what 
we do, how we can help you, and a few bits of great advice I think you’ll appreciate,” 
and every e-mail after that is further developing that initial message and growing 
that relationship over time. So, you’ll want to produce e-mail content that reflects this 
approach. Remember, you’ll be communicating with people over and over again, for 
many months and many years hopefully, even after they buy something from you.
Then you want to consider your goals for the various e-mails you’ll send out. 
Maybe you are sending a monthly newsletter to your database. Perhaps you are send-
ing a totally customized e-mail to your top twenty customers. You could be soliciting a 
donation, announcing a sale, getting new leads to visit your site—there are a thousand 
different goals with e-mail content. What are yours?
There’s also your audience to consider. Keep in mind who you are sending these 
e-mails to as you write the content. Many companies don’t actively do that. The people 
on the list are usually an afterthought. It’s easy to think this way when so many e-mail 
campaigns are sent out to the entire “house” list, and everyone receives the same 
e-mail. Doing this can serve you well, but more and more, it’s best to think about your 
customers in groups and in different stages in the relationship or “life cycle” you have 
with them. Many are just finding out about you. Some are ready to make a decision on 
something. Others just want to keep up with you and get the latest news. Segmenting 
your e-mails to each of their specific needs can be very powerful.
Start thinking about these important elements of your e-mail content:
What types of e-mails will you send (promotional, newsletters, transactional, 
7
7
etc.), and what specific content will you provide?
How frequently will you send your e-mails?
7
7
How can you provide real value to your e-mail subscribers?
7
7
Will you partner with an e-mail service provider to help with your campaigns, 
7
7
or will you keep it in-house?
The Benefits of Using E-Mail to Connect
We’ve mentioned some of the most obvious benefits already. But I understand that 
return on investment and ensuring you are engaging in worthwhile business activities are 

	
 The Relationship-Building Power of E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, Newsletters, and More
169
important. Whether you are running your own small business or are the head of mar-
keting for a Fortune 100 company, you need to always be prepared to make the business 
case for future investment and identify potential benefits that you may not be taking 
advantage of. Here are some excellent reasons to invest in solid e-mail content:
1. The cost to run an e-mail marketing program is low. We’ve covered this one, 
but it’s important enough to list here as one of the top benefits. Before e-mail existed, 
companies spent thousands and even millions of dollars on phone campaigns and in 
traditional mail lead-generation programs. E-mail changed all of that.
2. E-mail encourages impulse activity and immediate action. Think about it: 
Why do we check e-mail so many times throughout the day? Because we perceive it 
as important. We need to take action. Right now. When we get e-mails, we tend to 
click on the included links to other places in your online content empire—your blog, 
website, or social media profiles, for example. So, no doubt about it: E-mail increases 
the chances of a quick, spur-of-the-moment response. It’s like direct-response mail, 
but even more powerful.
3. It’s great for relationship development. There is simply nothing like it: Sending 
e-mail content, over a period of many weeks and months, is a great way to connect 
with people. Using it wisely, you can systematically, authentically educate people on 
the way you want them to perceive your company. And you won’t do this simply by 
sending out a rehash of your blog posts each month. You’ll truly engage them, asking 
them questions through polls and surveys, offering them coupons for great discounts, 
and more. You’ll get them to love your company—one e-mail at a time. And they will 
feel like the relationship they have with you is indispensable.
4. It is easily integrated into your total content marketing program. This may be 
the most powerful benefit of them all. E-mail is very “sticky” and acts as a great connec-
tor for other types of content your company is offering. You can combine e-mail with 
social messaging, mobile marketing, your webinar offerings, or anything else, really—to 
impact open and response rates and improve engagement levels across the board.
So, with that, I think we have a good basis for getting into the heart of this e-mail 
content activity. Let’s take it step by step . . .
Establishing Your Voice
It all starts right here, with the “voice” of your e-mail content. Ask yourself: How do 
I want my e-mail content to sound when read? Quirky and fun? Upbeat and positive? 
Serious and professional? Whatever it is, it should be a reflection of your brand, not 
some made-up character. The voice of your e-mails is the persona of your brand. Who 
exactly is “talking” to your subscribers through those printed words? Have a product or 
service that is essentially a commodity or a little on the boring side? Then your e-mail 
copy voice is even more important.

170	
Content is Currency
Of course, if you don’t have a memorable, interesting brand, then go back to the 
drawing board of Marketing 101 and establish a strong brand identity before you send 
even one e-mail to anyone. Your e-mail voice can set you apart from the competition 
and do something else that is critical: help separate you from all the other “noise” in 
your subscribers’ e-mail inbox.
The Subject Line
This is where the content rubber hits the content road. And this is where most of the 
mistakes happen—right at the beginning. I think we all know what bad subject lines 
look like; we’ve seen enough junk e-mail to last ten lifetimes. They have the worst 
subject lines every devised.
But how do you write your subject line so it will have maximum impact and won’t 
be labeled as a “spam” e-mail? The first thing to consider is including your company 
name or brand. This provides instant credibility and the spam filters will look kindly 
on this, especially if you use this type of format in all your e-mail campaigns. Next, use 
a title describing the content, perhaps “September Newsletter” or “Invitation to Next 
Meeting.” You can also make use of a benefit or call to action. That’s right; you want to 
include something that will trigger interest immediately, especially if it’s an offer.
Also, don’t make the subject line too long. Forty to fifty characters should do it. You 
want people to get what the e-mail is about very quickly, at a glance. Note: The first two 
or three words of the subject line are the most important, so be sure to get that right.
Here are some good examples of good and not so good subject lines:
Figure 9-1 
Mail 
Chimp E-Mail Subject 
Line Survey Results 
© MailChimp, http://
mailchimp.com/

	
 The Relationship-Building Power of E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, Newsletters, and More
171
How do you get your subscribers’ attention? Try one of these approaches:
Teaser: “Find out what your fellow club members thought .
7
7
 . .”
Question: “What are the Top 10 Nonverbal Communication Techniques?”
7
7
Announcing an event: “If everyone is going to be there, maybe you should be, 
7
7
too”
Direct approach, communicating an offer or benefit: “Act now or you will miss 
7
7
out!”
Personalization: Using your subscriber’s name in the subject line can some-
7
7
times pay off
Best Practices in E-Mail Content Development
Next is the e-mail body. If you have written business letters before, this may come 
easily to you. If you haven’t, there will be a learning curve. It may take multiple 
attempts.
How to write the actual e-mail copy? It depends on what specifically you are 
e-mailing about, but there are certain elements that all e-mails have in common. At a 
basic level, make sure the message has a beginning, a middle, and an end. Like we dis-
cussed in an earlier chapter, use the “AIDA” format—awareness, interest, desire, action. 
Making the message about the recipient and keeping it interactive are important. 
Many companies are even experimenting with sending video through their e-mails. 
We’ll talk about that more in a later chapter. Bottom line: Be sure to give the content 
some sense of urgency. Whatever you are communicating, you want the recipient to 
take some type of action: e-mail you back, click on an embedded link, check out your 
Facebook page and “Like” your company, etc.
Finally, make sure it’s clear, concise, and not too “salesy,” unless, of course, you 
are offering a sale, discount, or something else. You can and should send e-mails like 
this; just keep them to less than 15 percent of the total e-mails you send. Be sure to 
make the copy personalized, too, as we’ve mentioned: use the subscriber’s name. So 
what else?
1. Keep it conversational. I’ll keep beating the drum on this one: An informal 
style is always best. Why? Because it’s easier to read, for one. And second, it breeds a 
sense of friendship and familiarity. So, get very used to using the word you.
2. Create a flow. The “From” address leads to the subject line, which leads to 
your main headline, and then into the rest of the e-mail. You may repeat the main 
messages and have a call to action toward the end. Keeping your recipients reading, 
and leading naturally into the next part of the e-mail, is part art, part formula. Just 
make sure you remember to practice this. Other things you can use to help your 
e-mails flow well:

172	
Content is Currency
Headings within the e-mail: develop scan-friendly, punchy, and persuasive 
7
7
headings
Communicate one idea/article per paragraph
7
7
Use the inverted pyramid style, with a short summary of the entire message 
7
7
at the start of the copy
Use bulleted lists to summarize features or benefits
7
7
3. Never forget about the benefit story. Set it in your mind now: Your mission 
is to improve your subscriber’s lives. It could be in a small way or a big way, but it has 
to be there. If you are Apple, you are helping them connect to other people through 
music, phones, and computers. If you are a local deli, you are feeding people delicious 
sandwiches and inviting them to experience a pleasurable dining environment. Con-
nect, connect, connect. And stay relevant.
4. Keep your e-mails short and to the point. Like everything else on the web and 
on our mobile devices, we want “brief.” Paragraphs should be shorter than they would 
be in print: three to four short sentences, at the most. The one exception to keeping 
e-mails short is the monthly newsletter you’ll send. I think those can (and should) be 
longer.
5. Use the power of third-party validation. Back up your message with facts and 
numbers. Build testimonial elements into your e-mails, including customer quotes, 
number of customers, client names, and independent reviews and awards.
6. Consider the copy–design balance. Like I’ve said before, lean on format and 
imagery to emphasize your offer and key messages. How to do it with e-mails? Use 
boldface and italics with copy. Include appropriate, easy-to-load images that help com-
municate. Leave some white space. Mimic the style you have on your website, blog, and 
social media profiles. Give all your online venues a consistent look and feel.
One other important note: E-mail messages come in two ways: HTML and plain text. 
The HTML types can contain images, while the text ones cannot. Give your recipients 
a choice of which type they want to receive.
Event-Triggered and Behaviorally Targeted 
E-Mail (Autoresponders)
These types of e-mails are automated, and are sent to prospects or subscribers when 
they do something specific or request something on your site, blog, or social media 
profile. These are separate from your main “campaign” e-mails, like newsletters, blasts, 
and sale announcements, because they are initiated by your prospects and subscribers. 
So, you need to set up a system to handle these requests.

	
 The Relationship-Building Power of E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, Newsletters, and More
173
Sometimes, the requests are very high priority. If the prospect is ready to buy right 
now, for example, you need to fulfill that request with precision and total efficiency. So 
if the person wants to buy, or has proven through his comments or actions (requesting 
information) that he has the potential for buying something soon, a sequence of two 
or three e-mails over a couple weeks may be the best idea. Staying in front of him will 
potentially encourage him to buy sooner.
Many of the e-mails that reply to specific user requests are autoresponders. This 
is how many people in the marketing community identify them, and the automated 
nature of the message is one of the best parts of the whole process. You set them up, 
load them in your software program, and let them do their work.
In addition, the prospect’s inquiry gives you permission to follow up with her. And 
because you can prewrite and preprogram autoresponders, your job is much easier. You 
decide how many e-mails to send, what you will say, and how often you will send the 
messages. Smart autoresponder e-mails are like automated salespeople working for you, 
in the background, all the time. So, it’s easy to see why this activity can increase your 
connections—and your sales. In fact, in my experience, sending multiple follow-up e-mail 
messages to prospects over time can impact the sales numbers up to 300 percent.
At our company, we use industry leader AWeber for this function. There are many 
other e-mail service providers that offer this function as well. AWeber is great, but I 
recommend you look at a few.
Figure 9-2 
AWeber
What are the various types of autoresponder e-mails triggered by prospect 
requests? These include:
Customer acquisition
1. 
Welcome e-mail when prospect first registers
7
7
Series of autoresponder e-mails to establish awareness and start relation-
7
7
ship building
Potential purchase offer following subscription to newsletter
7
7

174	
Content is Currency
Customer conversion
2. 
Abandoned shopping cart e-mails
7
7
Message when prospect registered, but did not purchase after set interval
7
7
E-mail when prospect clicked e-mail link on specific product or category, 
7
7
but didn’t buy
Autoresponse when registered customer browsed category on site, but did 
7
7
not buy
Autoresponse when registered customer searched for product on site, but 
7
7
did not buy
Customer retention and growth
3. 
Anniversary e-mails—of registration or first purchase
7
7
Customer-birthday e-mails
7
7
Reactivation e-mails (either with indication of predicted inactivity or when 
7
7
inactive)
Prerenewal e-mails for annual subscription services
7
7
36
What are your options for targeted messages? By their nature, behavioral e-mails are 
targeted according to context, but you may want to add relevant targeting if it will 
increase response rates. For example:
Specific product or category the prospect expressed interest in
7
7
Male or female
7
7
Value of previous purchases
7
7
Essentially, you are writing different messages for each target group and setting up 
autoresponses depending on the type of group it is. When you find ways to group 
them, you can communicate a similar message and be more effective and efficient in 
the process.
You then want to test and refine your event-triggered e-mail program. Important 
elements of tests to check include:
Timing—the interval after an event
7
7
Subject line and main headline testing
7
7
Offer and proposition testing, including number of offers and simplicity of 
7
7
offers
Copy, especially the presence or absence of recognition of previous activity
7
7
Creative layout
7
7
36 Chaffey, Dave. 2010. “E-mail Marketing Best Practice Guide.” Econsultancy, http://econsultancy.
com/us/reports/email-marketing-best-practice-guide.

	
 The Relationship-Building Power of E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, Newsletters, and More
175
Integrating Social Media
There are hundreds of millions of active users on social networks like Facebook, includ-
ing many of your prospects and customers. So, how can you leverage this passion for 
online social and community interaction with your e-mail content? You do it by using 
“share to social” features, available with many of the outside e-mail service providers. 
This gives you the ability to include social links in your e-mails, so recipients can easily 
post your e-mails to their social network profile page, where friends can see the mes-
sage, make comments, and even post the e-mail on their own profile pages.
Figure 9-3 
Share to Social Sample Page
The really important key here is that share to social features allow your e-mail mes-
sages to move beyond your own e-mail list and your subscriber base. It essentially sends 
it out to the masses without you doing a thing! If your e-mails are used this way, your 
content is transformed from “push” marketing into a powerful “pull” campaign.
If you haven’t used “share to social” features in your e-mails yet, try it out in your 
next campaign. It could be one of the most effective things you’ve ever done.
E-Mail Newsletters—A Few More Important Details
We know that e-mail newsletters are popular communication vehicles that you send to 
your subscribers on a regular basis. They feature valuable, timely information that can 
improve people’s lives in small and big ways. And we know that you can easily draw 
people back to your website, social media profiles, or blog through your newsletter.
But maybe you didn’t know this: Researchers at Nielsen Norman Group say that 
“newsletters can create much more of a bond between users and a company than a 
website can.”37 In fact, as many as 69 percent of the participants in the study said they 
37 Nielsen Norman Group. 2006. “E-Mail Newsletter Usability.” http://www.nngroup.com/reports/
newsletters/.

176	
Content is Currency
looked forward to receiving at least one newsletter. I think that’s a pretty amazing 
statistic. If you don’t have a newsletter program started yet, with a newsletter sign-up 
on your website, you have to get one set up. Today! Think about it: You have a golden 
opportunity to “throw a personalized paper” right on the doorstep of every prospect 
and customer you have in your database, whenever you want. More than that, you 
have the ability to place that morning “paper” right on people’s office desks.
So, what are some of the special points about writing newsletter copy?
You want to include 
7
7
many different types of content in the body of the newslet-
ter: articles, surveys, promotions, research findings, simple case studies, and, 
of course, links to multiple landing pages on your site.
The way your newsletter 
7
7
looks is really important. Work closely with your 
graphic designer or e-mail service provider/vendor to ensure it looks perfect 
before it goes out. You don’t want to look amateurish.
Make it easy for your newsletter subscribers to forward to a friend or share on 
7
7
their social media profiles. Leverage the viral aspect of e-mail.
Different Customer Groups Need Different E-Mails
If you run a car dealership, do you think a guy who just bought a car from you 
should get the same e-mail as the woman who is simply curious about the models 
you offer? What about the lifelong department store customer who has been shop-
ping at the same place for thirty years: Should you write the same e-mail to this 
person that you would to someone who just filled out the catalog request form? The 
answers here are obvious, and I think you get the point. The problem is that very 
few companies think about their e-mail content in this way. Tailor your messages 
to specific customer groups. The loyal customer should get more offers (and better 
offers) than the infrequent one.
Another good idea is to ask a few simple questions to those who are signing up 
to receive your e-mail newsletter for the first time. When you do this, you’ll get a 
good understanding of some basic psychographics. Allow them to select their areas 
of interest. Subscribers could indicate their job titles or functions. They could check 
what types of e-mail communications they want, whether it’s upcoming sales, newslet-
ters, or other. They could also tell you what products or services they are interested in 
ahead of time. Once you know this information, you are set to write a specific e-mail 
customized especially for them. And if you don’t want to ask for this information in 
the first contact form they fill out, ask for it in the second or third e-mail you send. 
This can sometimes work more effectively. Test it and see.

	
 The Relationship-Building Power of E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, Newsletters, and More
177
Choosing an E-Mail Service Provider
If you are an e-mail content marketing rookie, this may be new for you. Whatever you 
do, don’t send e-mails out through Outlook or another type of e-mail account. There 
is way too much you’d have to do to manage that process to make it worthwhile. And 
you’ll be missing the automation and analytics piece. An e-mail service provider or 
vendor will automate the entire process for you, providing sample templates, list selec-
tion functionality, the time you send the e-mails out, and, maybe most important, 
providing you with the detailed analytics of who opened the e-mail, when, and what 
they did when they read it. Did they click on a certain link? You’ll know.
There are many reputable e-mail service providers in the industry. The names you 
hear most often are Constant Contact, Vertical Response, and Exact Target. They all 
have their pluses and minuses, and certain ones will appeal to certain types of market-
ers. If you are just getting into e-mail content marketing, take a few for a spin, and see 
what you like. Sign up for free trials and evaluate them.
Common Mistakes with E-Mails
There are quite a few mistakes you can make when it comes to e-mail content. Many 
of them we have mentioned already, but let’s take a minute to point out a few of the 
more common ones, so we ensure e-mail marketing success:
Bad e-mail addresses, unmaintained database, or sending to the wrong people. 
7
7
This is probably the number one most common problem. The wrong group gets 
the wrong message.
Forgetting the call to action. Your recipients must have a way to get in touch 
7
7
with you. Make it obvious: use a button or a link—or use both.
Not including your phone number and, if you are a local business, your physical 
7
7
address, so people who want to contact you in other ways can do so. Remember, 
not everyone likes using e-mail.
Making people fill out a long contact form on your landing pages. Remember, 
7
7
you only have their attention for a few seconds. Make it easy.
Not placing the most important content of the e-mail “above the fold”—in other 
7
7
words, in the section of the computer screen they can read without scrolling.
Making it difficult to unsubscribe. This is one of my personal pet peeves. What’s 
7
7
up with the maze of instructions to stop getting the e-mail? One click, and 
you’re done: That’s how it needs to be.
Not asking your recipients to add your company to their contact list or list of 
7
7
safe vendors. Be sure your e-mail can get to them.

178	
Content is Currency
Figure 9-4 
E-Mail Life Cycle Chart
Getting Inside Their Head
In closing, I’d like to reference a great book that I read many years ago: “Influence: The 
Psychology of Persuasion” by Robert Cialdini.38 In the book, he identifies six powerful 
elements that I think we can all use to ensure a greater impact and return on invest-
ment with our e-mail content:
Reciprocity.
7
7
 Provide valuable, exclusive content, and your subscribers will feel 
the need to “pay you back” at some point in the future.
Commitment and consistency.
7
7
 You’ll get their commitment when they click 
on a link in your e-mail. If they have made the commitment, they’ll be more 
likely to behave consistently and remain loyal to your brand. Get them to 
commit further by developing messages that are consistent with their values, 
priorities and interests.
Consensus.
7
7
 We all know that people trust the opinions of their friends and 
family over the things you are saying. Use reviews, case studies and testimoni-
als to get them to believe—and buy. Use recommendations or endorsements 
from others who are like your customers and who like your company, the true 
brand evangelists to get more of these types of converts.
Liking.
7
7
 If they like your company, they will be more likely to buy from your 
company. And, they are more likely to buy if they know that you like them. 
Find a genuine compliment and/or commonality, and tell them!
Authority.
7
7
 As an expert or trusted brand, you are a known authority, so lever-
age it with your e-mails. If you have expertise in a certain area, don’t say you’re 
an expert, show it, using case studies, award mentions and special industry 
38 Cialdini, Robert. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. William Morrow & Company, 1993.

	
 The Relationship-Building Power of E-Mail Content, Auto-Responders, Newsletters, and More
179
designations in your signature block. To build a relationship with prospects 
and remind them of your authority, send them articles, blog posts and white 
papers that you have authored.
Scarcity.
7
7
 People don’t want to miss out. They don’t want to see an opportunity 
pass them by or lose what they already have. So show them what they could 
miss if they don’t get in on the offer. Tell them about a dwindling amount of 
product or time for an offer, if it honestly exists.
Figure 9-5 
Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion, by Robert Cialdini
So, let’s switch gears now and jump into one of the most dynamic, fastest-growing 
content types: video.

This page intentionally left blank 

C h a p t e r  1 0
Video Content
E
verywhere we go, everything we do, we are surrounded by it. It’s there when we 
surf the Internet; it’s there when we socialize. It’s there when we are logging into 
our e-mail accounts and when we are paying bills. It waits for us and wants to show us 
something, teach us something, give us an opportunity to comment. It’s online video 
content, and its day in the Internet sun has finally come.
Yes, web video is taking over the digital experience, and I don’t think any of us 
are surprised by it. In fact, I think we’re quite delighted. After all, we had television 
to guide the way. We all have a love affair with that medium. Why not with the web 
equivalent?
Video makes the web experience more enriching, more substantive, more enter-
taining, and yes, a more compelling proposition for companies everywhere that are 
building lots of brand awareness and selling lots of goods and services using its power. 
And you know what else? Video is indexed by search engines. In fact, a Forrester 
Research report indicated that your video content is fifty times more likely to appear 
on the first page of the search results than your website is! The reasons for this?
Not many companies use optimized video content, so there isn’t as much 
1. 
competition.
People are drawn to video, so if they find what they are looking for on Google, 
2. 
they will keep serving it up.
Google owns YouTube. Enough said.
3. 
39
Studies show that online video improves e-mail click-through rates, sales conver-
sions, and search engine rankings, so it’s easy to see why companies everywhere are 
budgeting more ad dollars into this content channel.
1 Elliott, Nate. 2009. “The Easiest Way to a First-Page Ranking on Google.” Nate Elliott’s Blog on 
Forrester Blogs, January 8. http://blogs.forrester.com/interactive_marketing/2009/01/the-easiest-
way.html.
181

182	
Content is Currency
Powerful Statistics
So the mother of all online video is YouTube of course. It was the site that put web video 
into the mainstream and started an explosion of video uploads around the world. It 
engaged the creative mind and attracted marketers around the globe. So, how powerful 
of a force are we talking about?
YouTube data:40
More than 13 million hours of video were uploaded during 2010 and 48 hours 
7
7
of video are uploaded every minute, resulting in nearly 8 years of content 
uploaded every day
Over 3 billion videos are viewed a day
7
7
Users upload the equivalent of 240,000 full-length films every week
7
7
More video is uploaded to YouTube in one month than the 3 major US networks 
7
7
created in 60 years
70% of YouTube traffic comes from outside the US
7
7
YouTube is localized in 25 countries across 43 languages
7
7
YouTube’s demographic is broad: 18–54 years old
7
7
YouTube mobile gets over 320M views a day (up 3
7
7
¥ year/year), representing 
10% of our daily views
Nearly 17 million people have connected their YouTube account to at least one 
7
7
social service (Facebook, Twitter, Orkut, etc)
150 years of YouTube video are watched every day on Facebook and every 
7
7
minute more than 500 tweets contrain YouTube links
Two other key stats:41
Sixty-seven per-
7
7
cent of Internet 
usage is video 
based
Seventy percent 
7
7
of Internet users 
go online to 
watch videos
40 YouTube Statistics. Accessed 8/8/11. http://www.youtube.com/t/press_statistics
41 Beale, Ryan. “Why B2B Marketers Should Consider Adding Video Content on YouTube.” RBeale.
com Accessed 2/10/11. http://rbeale.com/internet-marketing/why-b2b-marketers-should-consider-
adding-video-content-on-youtube/
Figure 10-1 
YouTube

	
 Video Content
183
The way I’d like you to think about your businesses video content is this: You now 
have the chance to have your own online television “station” or “show.” That’s right, 
you now have the opportunity on the web to have your very own branded, fully func-
tioning, around-the-clock, information-providing video network. YouTube, Vimeo, 
TubeMogul, and others have given us this rare opportunity.
So, how will you use video to connect with your target market? What will you 
say? Will you fill it up with a bunch of commercials for your products and services? 
Absolutely not. Just like you wouldn’t fill up your traditional television channel with 
commercials. Will you produce amateur-crafted, poorly edited material? No, not even 
close. It’s fairly simple to shoot and edit quality web video now.
What you should do is put together a robust schedule of programming: “how-to” 
videos, opinion pieces, shoots from industry events and happenings, interviews with 
important industry figures, etc. Think about it: there is so much you can do with 
video that your prospects and clients would find interesting. You could even go the 
entertainment route and put together some comic pieces. It’s worked for companies 
like Blendtec. Plus, online videos stay online forever. Produce a really good video, and 
it could still be getting views five years from now.
For my company’s YouTube channel and website, I host a series called “Web 
Content Weekly,” where I update companies everywhere on the latest and greatest in 
the web and mobile content and content marketing arenas. It’s pretty cool, and I love 
doing it. Of course, I’ve been known to be quite the ham when a camera is around, so 
this doesn’t hurt! Note that I’m not pitching our services in the series. If my viewers 
want to e-mail us or talk, they know how to get a hold of me.
So, there are two things you need to do as soon as possible: Go purchase a Kodak 
Zi8 video camera and then start carrying it around with you at all times. You never 
know when you’ll need to video something for your business.
In a digital world, words are simply not enough anymore. You have to be doing 
everything you can to grow your brand and your business. Content marketing is about 
doing lots of things right: your website, blog, mobile presence, social media activities, 
and yes, video as well.
Before YouTube came along, video was a mess. There was no standardization, it 
was expensive to produce, and it was difficult to distribute effectively. But everything 
has changed now. And bandwidth continues to improve, so no worries there.
By showing your prospects the value of your content—using video as a “gateway” 
for this experience—you’ll build rapport and influence way before you ever do busi-
ness with them. If you aren’t using video, and feel that it can fit with your content, you 
should get in the game as soon as you can. Video opens up a new marketing channel for 
your business, targeting those in your market who are engaged first by video content. 
Whether it’s the more visually inclined, the younger generation, or folks with smart 
phones, people are watching videos, and some of them prefer it as the method to get to 

184	
Content is Currency
know you. In fact, people everywhere are watching more and more web videos with 
each passing day!
Let’s face it: TV commercials are a shrinking medium. Talk about a waste of 
money! As a marketer for almost twenty years, I’m shocked that so many companies 
still spend their precious marketing dollars this way. It’s crazy. Like television, web 
video provides the magic of moving images, the hypnotic quality that we all have 
experienced. But unlike television, online video content engages viewers and allows 
them to comment on it. Your potential customers are asking you for one thing and 
one thing only: Show me the value. When you’ve done that, they will consider doing 
business with you. You show value by building a relationship, not by splashing images 
of your products all over the screen. There’s a very good reason that Google purchased 
YouTube in 2006. Google saw the future, and the future, my friends, is right now.
It’s show time!
Trends in the Web Video Space
Continuing with my effort to help you maximize your time with online marketing 
activities, I thought it would be important to share the top trends in the web video 
space. If you are looking for guidelines on what you should be doing with web video, 
use this list as a starting point.
1. Interactive video will become the standard for advertising. The march of 
technology continues and, as a result, interactivity is coming to web video campaigns. 
Interactive video advertising gives viewers the opportunity to click and engage within 
the video player itself; they can get more information, download coupons, and more. 
Companies like Innovid provide a great platform for creating interactive online video 
campaigns, and YouTube annotations give brands the opportunity to create their own 
branded interactive experience
Figure 10-2 
Innovid

	
 Video Content
185
2. Augmented reality and 3D will let consumers explore products from home. 
We all love to touch and feel the products we buy. On the web, that is pretty difficult. 
But, with new 3D manipulation of images and augmented reality, companies can now 
let users see their products from all angles.
Earlier this year, Olympus launched an augmented reality campaign42 to showcase 
its PEN camera, using a paper marker that could be downloaded and printed out. When 
held up to a webcam, the marker was turned into a 3D camera. Pretty cool.
3. Video analytics and targeting continue to improve. If you’re using video, 
you want to know how many viewers you have, where they are located, how old they 
are, whether they are male or female, what websites they like, which videos they are 
watching, and more. These analytic capabilities are now available and will continue 
to improve.
You’ll also be able to target your ads with much more precision. On YouTube, you 
can target campaigns to specific viewer demographics, specific tags or categories, and 
even to specific videos.
4. Ad formats will become standardized. Although it’s high-tech video “mumbo 
jumbo” to most of us, there are big changes coming in terms of video standardization 
through what’s called VAST (Video Ad Serving Template) and VPAID (Video Player-Ad 
API definition). This standardization of formats and technologies enables advertisers 
to easily reach larger audiences across multiple sites. Video demand and ad budgets 
will thereby increase. With these standards in place, you’ll be able to get your video 
ads out to more places.
5. Mobile video advertising will get huge. Like everything else, video is going 
mobile in a big way, and video advertising in this channel will be highly interactive 
and scalable. The infrastructure to support video advertising at scale, including proper 
third-party ad serving, measurement, and yield optimization will finally become the 
real deal.
Getting Your “Studio” Set Up—The Basics
If you are like most people out there and are totally new to the “video thing,” it’s 
important to understand the basics. Within the video production environment, there 
are five important, sequential steps: planning and storyboarding, shooting the video, 
editing the video, distributing the video, and marketing the video. All are important 
steps, and all of them need to be done well in order to be successful with this content 
channel.
42 Boches, Edward. 2010. “A Demonstration of Olympus PEN Augmented Reality Camera on Vimeo.” 
Edward Boches’s Posterous blog, July 21. http://edwardboches.posterous.com/a-demonstation-of-
olympus-pen-augmented-reali.

186	
Content is Currency
Got a mobile phone or webcam? If so, you have the makings of a video studio 
already. How about five hundred dollars and a little bit of time? Well, then you, my 
friend, could be a total pro in web video business. What will that small investment 
purchase? A video camera and Final Cut Pro video editing software. Both of these can 
be purchased for less than five hundred dollars out the door and, together, they will 
become the basis for your web video empire. Note: There is a learning curve with Final 
Cut, but it will be well worth the time you invest to master it. We’ve been using an older 
“Flip” video camera (no longer available) and Final Cut for my business videos for the 
past few years, and it’s what I always recommend to others. Be aware, you could also 
use Mac’s iMovie software for your video editing, which comes standard on most Apple 
computers. It’s super easy to use, but doesn’t have as many features as Final Cut. Final 
Cut Pro works only on the Mac, which is really the platform you should use to do any 
video or other creative work. If you are operating in a PC environment, you want to 
use Windows Movie Maker (free on most PCs) or Adobe Premiere Express.
	
Figure 10-3 
[Kodak Zi8]
Figure 10-4 
Final Cut Pro

	
 Video Content
187
Some other things you’ll want to get are a tripod, for shooting stabilization, and 
an external hard drive, for your large video files. I got a great, portable, collapsible 
tripod at Target for fifteen dollars. And you can get a nice 500GB hard drive for these 
large video files (recommended) for less than a hundred dollars.
For shooting those informational or web show videos at home or at your office, 
make sure you have a basic set configured or a decent background. Lighting needs to 
be right, as well. Find out more about video set and production ideas on www.reelseo.
com.
Figure 10-5 
ReelSEO
If you are shooting on location, you won’t need anything extra. Just make sure you 
are recording where this isn’t too much background noise and the lighting is decent.
Putting Together a Video Content Plan—Strategy
Video is a cornerstone of content marketing, because your prospects and customers 
can both see and hear your message and they can be moved and called to action in ways 
that other forms of online content can’t achieve. With sight, sound, and emotion all 
rolled into one, the medium is incredibly engaging.
Your video content strategy should include:
Your objectives
7
7
—Are you supplementing your other online content? Going 
after a new audience? Giving your sales team some material to use? Will this 
be an ongoing video series or a trial video ad campaign? Make your goals 
measurable.
Your message
7
7
—This includes the information and value you will provide, the 
feeling you want to convey, and your communication style
The “talent”
7
7
—This is probably you—or someone in your company who will 
be the official spokesperson. Don’t worry, you don’t have to be the best-looking 
person in the world. The key here is coming across genuinely. Being real and 

188	
Content is Currency
having an air of approachability is a must. Don’t worry about not being pol-
ished. That can actually work in your favor.
Consideration for the editing process
7
7
—This is one step you may want to 
outsource. It can be tough to get it right. Video editing is part art, part science. 
You want to deliver your message the way you are seeing it in your head, with 
a professional look and feel.
Distribution/marketing
7
7
—How will you get your videos to your target market? 
Will you set up your own free YouTube channel or get involved with paid video 
advertising? Perhaps you’ll do both.
Archiving and curation
7
7
—How long should your videos be in circulation? Are 
they time sensitive, with a certain “shelf life”? You’ll want to have a central 
repository where you store your archive of videos, both for ongoing marketing 
campaigns and for your own purposes.
Capturing Your Story in Moving Images
What is a story? It is a way of telling a tale. Every good story has a beginning, a middle, 
and an end. In Hollywood, the sequence would be defined like this: the story is set 
up, the characters are introduced, some drama commences, it builds to a climax, and 
then, finally, a resolution comes. Every good story has a plot, a setting, and a good cast 
of characters.
You, of course, don’t have to be this elaborate with your web videos. It can be this 
simple: Your company faced a problem or challenge and you overcame it. How you 
did it becomes the story. Likewise, you could tell a story about your product or service 
and how it was used effectively; your customer faced a challenge and, with your help, 
overcame it. There are a thousand stories you could tell.
Think about how you want your company to be perceived on your web videos. 
How do you want to come across? What’s your story? Do you have something to say 
that no one else is saying? Who will be the video host or spokesperson? These are all 
important questions.
Here is what it comes down to: Your company has a story to tell. Every company 
has a story to tell. I don’t care if it’s a hundred-year-old family-operated Fortune 100 
company or a small, hometown accounting firm. What are your values? What do you 
believe in? What’s the human side of your business? Think about this: If you never had 
to worry about making money, why would you be doing this activity? Hopefully, it’s 
because you have a strong passion and love for it. If so, this can easily translate to the 
screen. People swarm to this like blue sky to sun.
In business, people deal with other people. We are all curious. We all want to 
be treated well. It’s basic. Video can communicate and deliver on these elements like 
nothing else. Whatever your story is, I bet there are people out there who want to hear 
it. If you have a natural warmth and likeable personality, that can only help. Including 

	
 Video Content
189
others in your company story can also work really well. Customers, vendors, partners, 
and employees: They can all serve as your supporting actors.
Your goal? To be memorable.
Storyboarding and Scripting
So you have an idea. But what are you going to say? The first thing to keep in mind is 
this: Scripting what you will say is not a requirement. In fact, speaking naturally in 
front of the camera is always best. This is not easy for everyone to do, of course, but 
with practice, it becomes much easier. What worked well for me in past videos was to 
simply act like the camera wasn’t even on. Pretending like I’m telling a story at a dinner 
table with friends can really help when I’m shooting a new video episode. What you do 
want to do is have an outline of points you want to cover in the video. Whether you’re 
shooting a thirty-minute program or a quick five-minute industry update, an outline 
really helps organize your thoughts.
Take the process one step further, and storyboarding and scripting come into 
play. So what is a storyboard? It is a graphic organizer (like a series of illustrations or 
images) displayed in sequence for the purpose of visualizing how your video will play 
when complete. Scripting is the act of writing out your lines.
Figure 10-6 
Storyboard Sample

190	
Content is Currency
There are content writing techniques that are great for video—stories and anec-
dotes, metaphors and analogies, mirroring, and mind eye’s projection. All of these 
techniques can be used to tap into the emotional connection and the power of the 
subconscious, the same way that a good movie or television show does.
For shorter form videos (five minutes or less), a certain “structure” or approach also 
works well: attention, empathy, solution, and action. It’s more challenging to engage 
viewers with longer-form video, so you may want to consider borrowing a three-act 
structure, where you give the audience three separate chunks of easily digestible con-
tent. These structures are used in movies and infomercials to great effect.
Keep in mind; you don’t have to be in the video every time. You could simply nar-
rate or do a voiceover. These are called presentation-style videos, and for these, you 
are off camera on purpose. The visual is what’s important. This allows you to use your 
script directly and still present with a conversational tone of voice. The key here is to 
not sound like you’re reading. That’s really important.
You can also use a simple, free teleprompter software (www.cueprompter.com), 
and turn your laptop into a homemade teleprompter! With this cool tool, your web 
browser works like a teleprompter and no extra software is needed. I have done this 
to great effect in past videos. And I didn’t have to learn any of my lines ahead of time. 
Hey, if President Obama can do it, so can we!
Figure 10-7 
CuePrompter

	
 Video Content
191
Production: Shooting the Video Content
To start with, let’s keep in mind the appropriate length for your videos. Think three to 
six minutes. Remember, attention spans online are short. You want to get in, get out, 
and let your viewer move on to other things. Of course, there are some exceptions, but 
as a general rule, you want to think simple. It will make it easier on you, too, from an 
editing, storing, and distributing point of view.
When it comes to production you need to know that people—your viewers—want 
to see what you look like. So video can be an easy way to get closer to your audience 
and help them experience your brand in a personal way. Plus, your facial expressions, 
mannerisms, and body language can communicate a great deal and support your mes-
sage. Here is the other thing: Don’t worry about being perfect. You don’t need to get it 
all in a single take. It’s usually better to string together a series of clips than to use one 
stream of unedited video footage.
Bring the visuals and charts, too! Remember, you’ll have better viewer impact if 
you present concepts as pictures rather than words. The key is to identify the main 
concept in every sentence of your script and pair it with a relevant and engaging visual 
element. This also helps keep the viewer’s mind engaged. Being boring may be the 
worst sin of all in video.
Just remember the importance of changing visual perspective often, whether you 
are in the video or not. Switching around what appears on the screen, using transitions, 
and/or using new camera angles can really pay off with increased viewership.
Here are some other important production tips:
Get familiar with your equipment and do some tests.
7
7
Use a tripod for camera stabilization.
7
7
Frame the shot correctly—close-ups get zoomed in, surrounding area shots 
7
7
get zoomed out.
Don’t forget lighting—make sure you have enough of it. If you can’t seem to get 
7
7
it right, just ensure the light source is in front of the subject.
Be aware of shadows—they can 
7
7
kill your video. Don’t stand with the sun at 
your back for outside shots and don’t shoot in front of a sunlit window for 
inside shots.
Remove as much noise as possible. Perfect quiet is what you are after.
7
7
Make sure the audio sounds good—after you shoot, be sure to watch it on 
7
7
playback to see if it turned out the way you wanted, both in how it sounds and 
how it looks.
Use a lavalier or shotgun mic, depending on your audio needs (check battery 
7
7
levels).
To get the absolute best-quality video, use a “light kit” with at least two lights, 
7
7
and three if you can afford them: a key light, a fill light, and a back light. If you 

192	
Content is Currency
are shooting outside, use a graduated neutral density filter, which is used to 
bring a bright part of a scene into the dynamic range of film or sensor.
Postproduction: Editing the Video Content
After you’re done shooting the video, you’re only halfway there. Now comes the edit-
ing. Hopefully, you were able to get some of the video done in one or two takes, so you 
don’t need to edit out a bunch of stuff. Essentially, what you are doing with the editing 
process is putting the video together, each scene and each frame, piece by piece, to tell 
your story in the most effective way possible. This is the time when you’ll break out 
your iMovie, Final Cut, or Adobe Premiere software and put it to work for you.
As I mentioned before, it takes time to learn video editing, but luckily for you, 
it’s gotten much easier in recent years, especially with Apple’s iMovie. But, of course, 
because it’s a free tool, you don’t have all the bells and whistles that you get with 
higher-end software like Final Cut or Adobe Premiere Express. Whichever software 
you use, your script and storyboards will serve as a solid structure for building your 
rough cut of the video.
Of course, you’ll also be able to add in appropriate graphics, music (royalty-free 
only), sound effects, and other cool elements that will give your video that extra 
special touch. For music, you may be better off creating your own “loop” on Apple’s 
GarageBand program or talking to a local independent musician in your area who 
wants a little exposure. If you want to really dive into audio editing, be sure to check 
out Audacity, a free cross-platform tool that is used by many companies. For photo 
editing, you can learn Photoshop, but it has a steep learning curve. Try using Image 
Tricks, iZoom, or iPhoto (Mac program) instead. Picasa from Google is also good for 
simple photo editing.
The editing step will take longer than you think, so be sure to budget the appro-
priate time for your project.
Compression
An important step in the editing process is applying compression to your videos, 
otherwise known as “outputting” your video into the appropriate format. Compression 
is done to make your files the right size so they will play back the right way and look 
good. This is a trial and error type of thing, and will take practice to get right. Final 
Cut, iMovie, and Adobe Premiere all perform compression functions for you, and have 
an “automatic upload to YouTube” function, which is nice.
The key with the compression step is to understand the size and format require-
ments for the site(s) where your video will be played or watched online. For example, 
these are YouTube’s recommended upload specs: smaller than 2GB in size, in an accept-
able file format, and less than fifteen minutes in length.

	
 Video Content
193
Here’s a list of some well-known formats that YouTube supports:
WebM files—Vp8 video codec and Vorbis audio codecs
7
7
.MPEG4, 3GPP, and MOV files—typically supporting h264, mpeg4 video 
7
7
codecs, and AAC audio codec
.AVI—many cameras output this format; typically the video codec is MJPEG 
7
7
and audio is PCM
.MPEGPS—typically supporting MPEG2 video codec and MP2 audio
7
7
.WMV
7
7
.FLV—Adobe-FLV1 video codec, MP3 audio
7
7
43
A good general rule: It’s best to keep the original source video file size, codec, 
and format.
Optimizing Video for the Web and Mobile
Here is the step that most companies miss with their online video content. It seems 
they get so excited about their cool new videos that they forget that, in order for people 
to search and find them, SEO needs to be considered as well. Not to worry, we have 
you covered.
Like your text content, video must be search engine optimized to include a search-
able title, keyword-rich description, and appropriate tags. Sharing optimization is 
important too: You’ll want to use annotations to tell viewers how to share your videos 
and place share options next to embedded video, including options for sharing on 
Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and other sites. YouTube captioning is important too.
Here are the important SEO items to consider for your videos:
1. Create a relevant, keyword-rich title and description for your video. This is the 
most important step, by far. Video titles can produce lots of great traffic. Be sure to use 
the appropriate keywords in your title, too, so it shows up on the search engines when 
people are searching for your topic. Include as many accurate “tags” as you can. For 
example, if you are loading a video on designing a website, you would tag it with “how 
to design a website,” “designing sites for the web,” “website design 101,” and so on.
Here is the other thing: It needs to be a compelling, enticing title. Your video title 
functions in the same way that a headline for a blog post does: It gets people to check 
it out.
43 YouTube. “Supported YouTube File Formats.” Accessed 2/17/11. http://www.google.com/support/
youtube/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=55744.

194	
Content is Currency
2. Include your URL in your video. During the editing process, you can add a 
text box to your video. It’s a good idea to use your website address here, so viewers 
know how to find you.
3. Provide a transcript of the video. Speech recognition by the search engines is 
not a reality yet. In the meantime, we can use video transcripts to get us where we need 
to be. Using YouTube, you can place captions on your videos, which acts as the video 
transcript (getting attached to the video’s timeline). This allows people to find specific 
portions of your videos by phrase, and the captions can be searched and indexed by 
the engines, meaning your video content itself counts toward ranking. YouTube does 
captions automatically, but be sure to review it to correct any mistakes in the text.
You can also check out a company called SpeakerText, which provides video tran-
scripts as well, but maximizes SEO potential with a service they call “QuoteLinks.”
Figure 10-8 
SpeakerText
4. Be sure to brand your video. Include your company logo prominently some-
where on the screen or on the set in the background, so viewers can see it.
5. Always provide an HTML link for your videos. When you post the video to 
your YouTube channel, you should write a short description of your video. Be sure to 
start with the link you want to drive your viewers to.
6. Place your video on all of your content channels. Your video will be populated 
on your YouTube channel, for sure, but don’t forget all the other places: your website or 
blog, your social media profiles, etc. Embed the video wherever it seems appropriate. 
And here’s the other important thing: allow others to embed and share your videos 
on their own sites!

	
 Video Content
195
Distributing Video Content and Maximizing the  
Marketing Effort
1. Create a YouTube channel. This is where it all starts. YouTube is the nine-
hundred-pound gorilla of online video. So, be sure to create a branded URL (i.e., www.
youtube.com/yourcompanyname). Creating a channel is easy; just be sure that it reflects 
your corporate branding and messaging. And, be sure to add a link back to your site 
or blog at the beginning of the channel description.
Here is a good example of a customized YouTube channel:
Figure 10-9 
NASA YouTube Channel
Note: Also check out Vimeo, Blip.tv, Viddler, and Metacafe. The bottom line is that 
there’s no need to host your own video player on your site. You don’t want the heavy 
bandwidth on your own server.
2. Add your video to your blog or website. Once you’ve uploaded your videos 
to YouTube, it’s simple to add them to your blog or web pages. All you do is copy and 
paste the YouTube “embed” code from your videos. To get people to follow you on your 
YouTube channel, add the YouTube icon to your website and link it to your channel 
URL. Post links to your social media platforms as well.
3. Use mass syndication service TubeMogul. TubeMogul provides a free service 
that assists in distributing your videos to the top video and social networking sites. You 
can also distribute to custom sites and encode and create RSS feeds to syndicate your 
video anywhere you like. TubeMogul includes a cool analytics tool, too, which helps 
you see real-time viewership, audience engagement, geographic tracking, and stream 
quality. Using TubeMogul will help you compete more effectively for sure!

196	
Content is Currency
Figure 10-10 
TubeMogul
4. Add videos to industry publication websites. Some industry publications let 
advertisers upload videos and then include them in their RSS feeds. If you are advertis-
ing, this is a great idea to exploit.
5. Consider all your options. You can also send your video out with a press release, 
link back to your video blog posts when leaving comments on other blogs, add video 
URLs to e-newsletters and other marketing collateral, and encourage people who fol-
low you to add your videos to their blog posts.
Creating a Mass of Video Content
I know what you are thinking: Oh my, what am I possibly going to talk about in my 
videos? What type of content can I put together with my limited time? Never fear, there 
is no need to stress, there are plenty of things you can do with video that will prove 
to be very compelling for your viewers. And some of them are surprisingly simple to 
execute. Here are a few:
1. Repurpose content you already have. Now that you’ve made it this far through 
the book, you know that you already have (or will have soon) lots of content you can 
leverage for video. Simply take this content, update it, and release it in video format. 
For example, take the key points from a white paper you wrote last year, add the latest 
industry stats, and create a short video.

	
 Video Content
197
You could also use your blog posts to create visual slides that discuss important 
points about a certain topic. Narrate them with a slick voiceover, and your video is 
ready for prime time
2. Create video versions of testimonials and case studies. There’s only one thing 
better than getting client testimonials and case studies: client video testimonials and 
case studies. Whether you capture the interview on audio or video, the personally 
delivered testimonial can be incredibly powerful. My company asked a handful of 
clients if they would create a testimonial video for us. And you know what? Eight of 
them did so—on their own, without our help! All you have to do is ask, right?
3. Edit and repurpose webinars and podcasts. Ever done a webinar or podcast? 
An hour-long webinar or podcast can be broken up into several shorter videos that 
cover specific topics. To create some additional value, you can provide an update or 
answer common customer questions.
4. Interview partners and industry leaders at tradeshows/events. Don’t miss this 
easy opportunity. Easily done with a small video camera, you can make these videos 
low budget “reports from the field,” so there’s no need for heavy editing. Simply record 
video conversations with customers, partners, and industry leaders. Doing this suc-
cessfully provides rock solid video content that others will surely want to watch.
5. Make how-to videos. Teaching will always be an in-demand skill. By educating 
prospects and customers about a certain topic, you get them truly engaged. And if your 
product or service can help solve the issue at hand, even better!
6. Do product or service demos. Online videos that demonstrate the value of your 
product or service are a no-brainer. Of course, you don’t want to lead with these types 
of videos, but they are clearly important ones to have in your video library. They’re 
especially valuable to those customers who have already purchased something from 
you and want to learn more about how to use it.
7. Solicit user-generated videos. Get others to create videos for you! How? Have 
them do product or service review videos for your company. Promise them you’ll put 
them up on your YouTube channel. You can also hold a viral video contest. How would 
this work? Simple. You tell people that you want to put together a video ad for your 
business. The customer who puts together the best video ad wins and gets to see his 
video used for your business. The caveat? The video needs to showcase how the customer 
uses your product or service. This one is a real winner. Just be sure to have some type of 
prize that will entice prospects to get involved, perhaps an Amazon gift card.
8. Answer your customers’ questions. Do the classic Q & A session. Ask your 
viewers some key questions that will spark conversation about the things they are 
looking for when it comes to your products and services. Use the video to answer their 
most important questions.

198	
Content is Currency
Using an Outside Vendor for Video Production
You’ve read every word in this chapter and you are thinking one thing: “Great, this all 
sounds wonderful, but there is absolutely no way that I have the time or desire to do 
this stuff.” I understand. The time crunch and information overload are among the 
problems we all face in business today. I get it. We all need to stick to our strengths. 
Some of us are simply not cut out for video. Clearly, it’s important that you have some 
role in your video content, especially if you are the CEO of your company. Despite 
what you may think, people do want to hear from you. And you can help sell your 
company—you really can.
The solution? You can easily outsource all the production, editing, distribution, 
marketing, and management functions. The important thing is that you appear in the 
videos. As I mentioned earlier, you don’t even have to “learn your lines.” You can use 
teleprompter software for that one. So, yes, you can use a vendor. Which companies 
are the most reputable? Well, it really depends on what part of the country you live 
in, but there are some great video services out there. Send me an email and we can get 
you taken care of.

	
 Video Content
199
(continued)

200	
Content is Currency
A Final Word on Web Videos
Here’s my challenge to you: If you are new at video, make the commitment that you will 
record a video in the next month. Don’t postpone it. Just dive in and get started. The 
longer you wait, the more you’ll regret it, trust me.
Your web videos should function like any other online content you develop. Make 
it high-quality. Maximize the social context of your videos. You want to grow an 
audience of devoted fans who will tune in for every video, every episode—and then 
pass it on to other companies or their friends to check out. Your web videos need to 
be interesting, relevant, and “sticky” if you want to achieve any type of viral activity. 
And be sure to use video to connect in a genuine, meaningful way that follows your 
larger content strategy.
Good luck!
Case Study: Continued

C h a p t e r  1 1
Audio Content—Podcasts, 
Webinars, and More
S
o far, we have covered a wide range of online content—website copy, lead-generation 
content, press releases, social media, blogging, e-mails, and videos. There is only 
one other type of content that has been with us since close to the “beginning” that we 
have yet to cover—audio content.
First, it was web seminars, known as webinars, in the late 1990s, and then pod-
casting shortly thereafter. Podcasts exploded on to the scene in the early 2000s, when 
Apple’s iPod came on the market. In recent years, the podcast has fallen a bit in popu-
larity, but is still used to great success by thousands of companies. Of course, audio 
content has a great deal in common with video content. Although video content is much 
more powerful and popular, there are many advantages to using audio content, both 
from a branding and a lead-generation standpoint. Plus, audio content is something 
people can consume while they are doing other things, like driving, working out, or 
multitasking at the office. Video requires more of our attention.
Ever since Thomas Edison shocked the world with the first phonograph, we have 
been spellbound by recorded sound. For decades, through radio and records, audio 
was one of the key technologies of the modern world. But then television entered the 
picture. Next came the computer age. Audio technology took a backseat. Then along 
came the web, and the recorded word gained a new lease on life. Why? It was inex-
pensive and easy to deliver. One thing has remained true from the very beginning: 
Captured sound has always been a powerful medium for connecting with others. Like 
video, it has a bit of magic to it. A popular podcast series can, in fact, turn your typical, 
“bland,” corporate CEO into a mini-celebrity in short order.
So, with audio content on the web, we are talking about two things: podcasts and 
webinars.
201

202	
Content is Currency
Webinars are popular in the B2B space because they are very helpful for companies 
that are in the research phase of vendor selection. The more information companies 
have to make a decision, the better. A content-rich webinar on a specific topic that 
is relevant to the needed product or service can go a long way in finding the right 
partner.
Podcasting
So, you want to be the next web radio star? A well-produced podcast series may get 
you there. The most successful business podcasts have literally hundreds of thousands 
of regular listeners. Can you say potential new customers?
Podcasting, of course, takes its name from Apple’s popular “iPod” merged with 
the word “broadcasting.” What distinguishes a podcast is that people can subscribe, 
and when new podcasts are released, the audio file is automatically delivered, or fed, 
to a subscriber’s computer or mobile device. Usually, the podcast features an audio 
show with new episodes that come daily or weekly. Most people listen to their pod-
casts through iTunes or on their iPod. From advice on business accounting to website 
design to offshore outsourcing, podcasts are used by companies to spread the word 
about their brands and showcase the passion they have for their subject. Similar to a 
talk radio show, a podcast can also take the format of an interview. A typical podcast 
will run anywhere from ten to thirty minutes.
For small business people out there, know that your voice can be a very effective 
marketing tool. Essentially, your listeners are hearing the voice of your business, so you 
have a great opportunity to build trust and awareness. Think about it: You’re telling 
your audience what you want them to hear. That’s huge.
And here’s the other thing: Some people dislike reading, but will gladly listen to 
an audio clip. Capitalize on this with your podcast. For certain people, comprehen-
sion levels can increase if information is spoken by someone else, rather than read by 
themselves.

	
 Audio Content—Podcasts, Webinars, and More
203
Podcasting is a simple, inexpensive method of syndicating your audio files online. 
And because you have the warmth and intimacy of a talk radio program, a podcast 
seems more personal. It’s a great way to build a connection with new audiences.
Creating a Simple Podcast
How do you create a podcast? Well, you can do it all yourself or you can use a service 
provider like PodOmatic, Hipcast, or Palegroove Studios. Blog Talk Radio and Podbean 
are also good solutions. If you want to save some money and you have the time, doing 
it yourself it pretty straightforward.
Figure 11-1 
PodOmatic
1. First, you’ll need to use software to record your own audio file. Apple’s Garage-
Band program is a great resource for this. Another good free option is Audacity, which 
you can download at http://audacity.sourceforge.net/. If you use Audacity, you’ll also 
want to download the MP3 Encoder, which allows MP3 exportation.
Figure 11-2 
GarageBand

204	
Content is Currency
Note: For recording, you can use your computer’s microphone or buy a better one 
at Radio Shack for about thirty dollars. If you are using more than one mic, you’ll need 
a four-channel mixer, which you can purchase for around fifty dollars.
2. Record the audio, capturing it to GarageBand or Audacity. Don’t worry about 
mistakes; you can edit those out.
3. Edit the audio. Remove the bad stuff and bring all the usable footage 
together.
4. Add an opening and closing with a show jingle. GarageBand comes with some 
cool jingles and effects you can use for your podcast. Choose “Control » Show Loop 
Browser,” and you can find a variety of sounds. All you need to do is drag and drop 
them into your track mixer.
5. Once your audio is recorded, create an RSS feed. The best way to do this is 
through FeedBurner.
6. When your audio and RSS files are completed, upload both to your blog.
7. Submit your podcast feed URL to the iTunes Store. Your podcast will be 
reviewed by iTunes staff before it goes live in the iTunes Store. Note: If you are an Apple 
user and have an iWeb site, you’re all set. In GarageBand, just hit “Share » Export,” 
and the podcast will be sent to your iWeb site ready to be published.
The Importance of Metadata
As with so many other types of web and mobile content, you need to include accurate 
and findable metadata with your podcast in order for it to be found. People can’t 
subscribe to it if they can’t find it. A high percentage of people look for podcasts by 
searching for them, so make sure you get this step right.
Your podcast’s metadata should include all of the information that describes your 
podcast for the potential subscriber, as well as for iTunes searching. The podcast’s 
category and subcategory determine where the podcast will appear. The title, author, 
description, and up to twelve keywords can be used to determine relevance.
Best Practices for Podcasting
Podcasting can really help online marketing efforts for your business. In some cases, 
a podcast series may become a new business altogether, as some of the most successful 
podcast hosts have discovered.
So, what are the best practices when it comes to podcast content creation, market-
ing, distribution, and monetization? Well, first, know that developing podcast content, 
building an audience, and attracting advertisers will take serious effort. And it may 

	
 Audio Content—Podcasts, Webinars, and More
205
never happen quite like you hope; it may simply be a great extension of your current 
marketing efforts. If that’s what happens with your podcast, you should still call it a 
success, no doubt about it.
How well are your podcast shows presented? Is it easy for your audience to interact 
with the show? What’s the online viewing experience like? These are all important 
questions. If you decide to use audio content like podcasting for your business, you 
want to get a nice return on your investment—and a nice return on the time you 
dedicate to the activity.
Here are a few of the practices that separate average podcasts from the really great 
ones:
1. Preparing with notes and questions. Make an outline of what you want to talk 
about before you start recording. If you are interviewing someone, have your questions 
in advance. Whatever you do, don’t script the entire program; no one wants to hear 
you reading. It’s incredibly boring.
2. Keeping podcast length short. Ten to thirty minutes seems to be an appropriate 
length for a business podcast. Some are sixty minutes long.
3. Optimizing the podcast. This is a critical step, as I mentioned earlier. Use the 
appropriate title, description, and tags, and make sure that you use your keywords in 
the RSS description.
4. Having high production values. We’re talking about maximizing sound quality 
and reducing background noise here. Poor sound quality will turn people off. Remem-
ber, you are competing with thousands of podcasts.
5. Keeping podcasts informative rather than sales-driven. Don’t pitch your 
products or services. This is pretty much understood by most people, but it needs to 
be mentioned. Introducing who you are and what your company does is perfectly fine, 
but again, no one wants to hear a commercial.
6. Looking for opportunities to send listeners to your website and/or social 
media profiles. Although you don’t want to actively sell your products and services 
through your podcast, you should refer listeners to your other online content, such as 
white papers, e-books, special reports, etc. This is the way you build the relationship, 
so when people are ready to buy, they come to you; this is the same pattern we’ve been 
discussing throughout the book.
7. Providing show notes. Describing what you will discuss brings in more listeners 
and helps the search engines find your podcast content.
8. Syndicating your podcast. There are many quality podcast directories, like 
iTunes and AudioFarm (as well as many others). These directories help get your podcast 
content out there so it can be found.

206	
Content is Currency
9. Exporting audio from your video content. Going back to the content-leveraging 
principle, you probably have a few hours of video that you could pull the audio from 
and use for a podcast, right? If not, always think in this two-prong approach with 
your audio and video content. You create it once and use it twice, sometimes for two 
different audiences entirely. Bonus!
10. Using cover art for your podcast. Attractive cover art gets new subscribers for 
your podcast, plain and simple. Plus, for your podcast to be featured on the podcast 
main page of the iTunes Store, it’s required. Most nice-looking podcast images include 
an image as well as a title, brand, or source name. A 300x300-pixel JPG is the recom-
mended size and format. Find that quality designer and go to work!
Developing a Strong Bond with Your Audience
The best talk radio hosts are able to create a very strong bond with their audiences 
because they do certain important things with their voices and the content they produce 
in order to build instant loyalty. The first thing, of course, is the sound of their voices. 
If you’ve been told you have a “voice for radio,” then maybe podcasting is something 
you should take seriously. But more important than the actual timbre of your voice is 
the friendliness of your voice. Sounding like a nice, approachable, helpful person will 
take you far in the podcasting arena.
Your inflection and tone, and your ability to laugh or find humor, are all important 
too. Your voice can communicate passion and sincerity in a way that your cool e-book 
never will. We can even “hear” people smile as they speak, and that’s very powerful. 
And if you can throw in the timing and wittiness of a David Letterman or Conan 
O’Brien, you could have podcasting magic.
So, what’s the strategy for developing this unbreakable bond with your online or 
mobile audience? By using attention, empathy, storytelling, and mirroring. You get 
attention by having a compelling opening to your podcast, by providing substantive, 
quality content, and by reminding listeners what they will continue to receive in future 
episodes if they stick with you. Attention is difficult to get in this noisy world, but once 
you have it, especially in podcasting, chances are you will keep it.
Empathy helps you develop that sense of intimacy with your listeners that forms a 
strong connection. It’s communicating that you understand their challenges or prob-
lems. It’s presenting your content in a compelling, emotionally and psychologically 
enriching manner. Reach out to your audience, answer their specific questions, and 
show you truly care about them.
Next is storytelling. Engaging and well used by all the best talk radio hosts, stories 
are the most effective way for people to see themselves in the situation you are talk-
ing about. It also addresses the natural curiosity in people. The right story is always 

	
 Audio Content—Podcasts, Webinars, and More
207
about the listeners, or ties the listeners in somehow. Do this right and you’ll become 
a persuasive podcast storyteller.
Mirroring is a technique in which you demonstrate that you are a kindred spirit 
to the listener, that you and she are the same, that you’re “all in this together.” David 
Ogilvy said it best, I think: “If you’re trying to persuade people to do something, or buy 
something, it seems to me you should use their language, the language they use every 
day, the language in which they think.” Agreed, Master Ogilvy, agreed.
Webinars
Webinars are growing in popularity. Because of technology advancements and lower 
production costs, companies all over are using webinars to fire up the lead-generation 
engine. It seems that everywhere you look online there are ads for new web seminar 
offerings. And some of them are really well done. I know that if I attended all the 
webinars that looked enticing, I’d have my whole week planned, every week!
As I mentioned earlier, webinars are very popular in the B2B space because they 
aid in the research phase of vendor selection. The more information companies have 
before they make a decision, the better. Think about it: Your prospects perhaps don’t 
want to talk to your sales team quite yet, but they are more than willing to hear what 
you are all about in a no-pressure webinar in which they are among many other pros-
pects. Bottom line: Webinars are a great marketing tool and an effective way to reach 
your prospects or buyers.
A study by Business.com found that 67 percent of business leaders who rely on 
social media for business information seek out relevant podcasts or webinars. And 
RainToday, marketer of tools and information to help grow service businesses, says 
that “event or conference presentations rate second to referrals and personal aware-
ness as the top method for how professional services companies initially identify the 
firms they work with.”44
According to a Forrester Research report, “B2B Marketers’ 2010 Budget Trends,” 
webinars are one of the best and most popular ways to generate leads. Forrester 
found that webinars received more budget than online display ads and even e-mail 
marketing.45
Plus, with a webinar you can target hundreds of people at once. This broad-­reaching 
capability puts webinars in a class all their own. Instead of inviting a few prospects to an 
in-person event, you can invite hundreds to a virtual one. This is one reason that many 
44 Business.com. 2009. “Business Social Media Benchmarking Study—Small Business Decision Mak-
ers.” http://www.business.com/info/business-social-media-benchmark-study.
45 Ramos, Laura, with Peter Burris and Zachary Reiss-Davis. 2010. “B2B Marketers’ 2010 Budget 
Trends.” Forrester Research, March 23, updated March 29. http://www.forrester.com/rb/Research/
b2b_marketers_2010_budget_trends/q/id/56717/t/2?cm_mmc=Forrester-_-Blogs-_-Related%20
Research-_-3994.

208	
Content is Currency
companies have cut the number of trade shows they attend and exhibit at. There may be 
no need, when they can simply hold a low-cost, efficiently delivered webinar.
Webinars also provide a great way to reach out to prospects by phone or e-mail, 
both before and after an event. This is a natural relationship builder. After all the phone 
calls, e-mails, and the actual webinar, you practically know your prospects!
So, web seminars are educational, social, affordable, and give participants the 
ability to ask questions, but how can your company really excel at them?
Best Practices for Webinars
So, how can you be among the best of the best in the webinar world? As I mentioned, 
there are thousands of webinars held every year. You want to become a leading voice 
in your industry using this online medium. In order to do that, you simply need to 
follow these best practices.
1. Deliver solid, high-quality information. Your audience is looking for valuable 
content. Too often, webinar attendees are disappointed because they leave feeling like 
they were sold to rather than educated. So, use case studies, client stories, and real-
world applications to express the content.
Don’t just focus on the number of leads you’ll generate. If your products or services 
are good enough, they should practically sell themselves in a webinar environment.
2. You need to market your webinar effectively. Market the webinar everywhere. 
Use your in-house e-mail list, and consider renting lists from reputable publishers and 
industry groups. You should put your event on calendars, and market it via Facebook 
and LinkedIn (use their event sections). Create an Event Page on Facebook and an 
Event Invitation in LinkedIn. Activate social-media tools within the virtual-platform 
environment, allowing attendees to promote your event while it’s happening.
Use Twitter. Develop a hashtag to help promote the event, and use it on the day of 
the webinar to get last-minute sign-ups and post-event downloads. People will retweet 
what they are hearing, and you can follow the hashtag yourself to take questions from 
the audience.
All promotions and collateral produced for the event should reflect the pain 
points of the audience, not how your company sells its products and services. You can 
also combine your registration with an industry poll or survey, and offer a prize as an 
incentive. Consider advertising with display ads on industry and partner sites. If you 
have enough time, ask your audience for input on the agenda.
3. You need to compensate for not being there live. Nothing beats a live sales 
meeting or performance. We all get something intangibly enriching from a face-to-
face event. So, with a virtual event, you need to compensate. Be sure to rehearse and 
run through procedures. Ensure that the speaker and moderator are comfortable with 

	
 Audio Content—Podcasts, Webinars, and More
209
the platform and controls, test all Internet connections and hardware, and review 
the speaker’s slides. Again, presenting online is different from being in front of a live 
audience. It’s more difficult because you can’t feed off of the energy of the people; you 
can’t compensate for bad slides or a boring delivery.
4. Have a backup plan ready in case of technical problems. In all the webinars 
I have attended over the years, I would say that 15 percent of them have had a serious 
technical issue come up. Whether it was the slides not advancing when they should 
have, a bad phone or Internet connection, or even a speaker who forgets to call in, it 
can happen. The key is to have a contingency plan in place. Be sure to have your speak-
ers’ cell phone numbers; also, have their slides printed out so they can present from 
a hard copy if need be. Have the phone number and e-mail address for your webinar 
vendor support staff on hand.
Prior to the webinar, have someone on your team dial in to make sure the number 
is working for participants. 
5. Select the right time and day for your webinar. Avoid holding your webinar on 
Mondays or Fridays. The best time of day is 1 pm EST, as this accommodates attend-
ees on the West Coast; but webcasts are typically hosted any time between 11 am and  
3 pm EST.
6. Require speakers to practice. Have presenters, whether they are in-house 
experts or third-party speakers, do a live run-through to make sure they sound good 
and the timing is right. You’ll also want to approve the slides to make sure the presen-
tation is not repetitive or boring.
7. Remind invitees about the event. As registrations start coming in, follow-up is 
critical. Send the first reminder one week ahead of time and a second reminder the day 
before the webcast. And don’t forget to send the audio recording to those who registered 
but forgot to show up. About half of the people who sign up for a free webinar won’t 
attend. Offering a post-conference download via e-mail is key here.
For your PowerPoint presentation, put up a slide that indicates, “The webinar 
will begin in 10 minutes,” so those who log in will know that everything is working 
correctly. Have the webinar host make an announcement to let attendees know it will 
start soon and that their audio is working. Also, start two minutes past the hour; this 
allows the inevitable latecomers to catch the whole event.
8. Recruit known, respected guest speakers. Your CEO or CMO might be the 
obvious choice, but may not be the right pick. Outside speakers can help expand reach 
and promotion, as they will probably be talking about the event. It also builds credibility 
and awareness for your products and services without “selling” them directly. Some of 
your attendees will be impressed that a respected authority in your industry—a third 
party—is endorsing your company.

210	
Content is Currency
9. Give your attendees something for free. Don’t let your attendees leave empty-
handed. Give them the ability to download slides. If this isn’t possible, send them the 
slides. You could also use case studies or a white paper as a giveaway item.
10. Make registration easy. Having a nice event-registration site will get attention. 
Limit the copy to a hundred words or less and use graphics and video to attract atten-
tion. Your registration page should be clean and informative, yet inviting. And here 
is the other key: Minimize the number of fields you require the registrant to complete 
on the registration form.
Webinar Platform: GoToMeeting (Citrix) or WebEx (Cisco)?
In order to hold an online web seminar event, you need to partner with a vendor 
that has the software to do it right. There are many platforms to choose from: On24, 
LiveMeeting, GoToMeeting, WebEx, and more. Personally, I think the two best are 
GoToMeeting and WebEx. I have used On24 extensively, but found it to be on the 
pricier side.
According to PC Magazine, GoToMeeting (through their GoToWebinar service) 
is “by far the most polished of all the applications we evaluated.”46 I tend to agree with 
this assessment. The system has a simple interface, uses an easy registration process, is 
offered at a very reasonable price, and records events so you can review them later.
Figure 11-3 
GoToWebinar
46 HubPages. 2011. “GoToMeeting vs WebEx—Which Is Better?” Accessed 2.15.11. http://hubpages.
com/hub/GoToMeeting-or-WebEx.

	
 Audio Content—Podcasts, Webinars, and More
211
WebEx is also a solid choice. Its conferencing tool is an effective web conferencing 
solution, but lacks in a few areas. It enables sharing of documentation, presentations, 
drawings, and applications, just like GoToWebinar. It also can be used through your 
Wi-Fi supported smartphone browser. But, it’s not as user friendly as GoToWebinar. 
Nontechnical users tend to prefer GoToWebinar to the other meeting solutions.
My advice is to try both and see which one you prefer.
Summary
Audio content is the most underappreciated type of content—by far. With all the 
emphasis on social media and blogging over the last few years, it seems that audio 
content, whether it’s a web seminar or podcast, has become a lesser priority. But remem-
ber, B2B decision makers place a big emphasis on this type of content. They regularly 
tune in when they are attempting to short list potential vendors for RFP’s. And that’s 
important for any company that wants to grow.
Producing a web seminar, in particular, can be much simplier than you may think. 
You don’t have to hold them every week or even every month—four–five times a year is 
fine. Holding an event every two to four months will still payoff big for your company 
because of one very important distinction: As long as the information is still up to date, 
you can use the recorded audio over and over again in your lead generation efforts.
So, what topics could you brainstorm for a web seminar or podcast series? Are 
there opportunities that your competitors have missed? Explore the possibilities and 
give it a shot. Your prospects are waiting to listen!

This page intentionally left blank 

C h a p t e r  1 2
Content for Mobile
M
obility—the ability to go anywhere, do anything, but still be connected to the 
rest of the world. It is an idea as simple as a flower’s bloom but as far-reaching 
as the cosmos. It supports and nurtures efficient human connection and puts us in 
the best position to have the greatest impact on our businesses, our communities, and 
ourselves. Smart mobility truly fosters the best in us.
I saved the best for last for good reason—“mobile” is the future. And it is already 
here. But how do we harness the power of mobility? How do we connect in the best, 
most inspired way?
From the very beginning, the computer revolution was about freedom and empow-
erment. When Steve Jobs talked about revolution, he was serious. And this is the 
promise that mobile computing and mobile content gives us. Like nothing else before 
it, it is the power that will enable us to finally reach every place we ever wanted to go 
in business—and in the social world as well.
Of course, the proliferation of mobile phones, especially smartphones, is driving 
the revolution and giving us the chance to connect in powerful interactions that line 
up with our customers’ preferences and location, in real time. Because we can connect 
with them wherever they are, the connection is super efficient and actionable. Content 
that is mobilized becomes turbocharged and highly relevant.
Your mobile phone is very personal. Unlike your regular phone or desktop com-
puter, it is rarely shared. Mobile phones have cameras, play videos, and capture voice 
recordings. Like the web itself, mobile is a transformative technology; it can create 
meaningful one-on-one opportunities to truly engage new audiences. A multichannel 
mobile strategy will be important now and forever more. And what’s the latest data tell-
ing us? According to the Nielsen Company, smartphone users are projected to account 
for more than 50 percent of U.S. wireless subscribers by the end of the year.47 Gartner 
predicts that worldwide mobile application sales will increase to 21.6 billion by 2013, 
47 Entner, Roger. 2010. “Smartphones to Overtake Feature Phones in U.S. by 2011.” Nielsen Wire, 
March 26. http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/consumer/smartphones-to-overtake-feature-phones-
in-u-s-by-2011/.
213

214	
Content is Currency
up from 4.5 billion in 2010.48 And according to Kelsey Group, U.S. mobile advertis-
ing revenue will be $3.1 billion by 2013, up from $160 million in 2008.49 Personalized 
coupons delivered through mobile phones have achieved redemption rates between 15 
and 50 percent, which is higher than in other channels.50 And here is the real kicker: 
Gartner estimates that by 2013 more people will be accessing the Internet via mobile 
phones than on personal computers.51 That’s pretty incredible.
Mobile content also gives your company the ability to collect powerful analyt-
ics data unavailable anywhere else. It is the most personal, targeted, and actionable 
marketing available today, but of course, there are issues that need to be addressed. As 
with any other new technology, mobile is evolving right before our eyes. Right now, 
mobile technology does not have a fully accepted standard in place, a standard by which 
creators can distribute their content easily. There are dozens of platforms on which 
mobile devices run, each with its own operating system and application requirements, 
which makes content development a bit complex. The answer, at least for now, seems 
to be to design for the most common denominator. But, if you have the budget and 
truly want a universally innovative and engaging presence, you can develop for all the 
major platforms: iPhone, Android, BlackBerry, and others.
Why is mobile content so important? Because our mobile phones are always with 
us, they make any message we receive immediately available. And because we use our 
smart phones to stay connected with the rest of the world, we check them often. This 
immediacy makes mobile marketing an extraordinary option for last-minute or time-
sensitive calls to action. The mobile nature of the delivery increases the odds that the 
recipient is already “out and about” and available to act immediately on information. 
Mobile content simplifies the interaction between company and customer, making it 
easy for us to interact with the brands we love.
Mobile marketing is the new direct marketing. Why? Because our target market 
can receive and understand our marketing message directly. Nothing gets in the way. 
Mobile content is more direct because it is cost effective, scalable, targeted, personal, 
shareable, and portable. Mobile content can also convert traditional marketing efforts 
into direct-response campaigns. TV or radio commercials can be made interactive and 
measurable when combined with a mobile call to action. Plus, the time between the 
marketer sending the message and recipients acting on it is the shortest of any market-
ing channel ever conceived. And the effectiveness has been proven. In every study and 
in every bit of research done so far, the results are conclusive: We are seeing dramatic 
48 Smartface Developer Zone. 2010. “Monetizing Mobile Applications.” Last modified December 14. 
http://developer.smartface.biz/monetizing-mobile-applications-n86.html.
49 Schonfeld, Erick. 2009. “Mobile Advertising Is Shaping Up to Be All Search.” TechCrunch, October 
6. http://techcrunch.com/2009/10/06/mobile-advertising-is-shaping-up-to-be-all-search/.
50 Loyalty360. 2010. “Chip-Enabled Mobile Marketing.” Accessed 2/5/11. http://www.loyalty360.org/
white_papers/chip-enabled_mobile_marketing/.
51 Gartner. 2010. “Gartner Highlights Key Predictions for IT Organizations and Users in 2010 and 
Beyond.” Accessed 2/5/11. http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1278413.

	
 Content for Mobile
215
improvements in the effectiveness of marketing campaigns. Through improved target-
ing, better offers, and the latest technology, the conversion numbers are proving that 
mobile is real, very real.
And the future? Mobile marketing and advertising is projected to nearly triple 
in the next three years. So, get ready, strap yourself in, and hop on board. The train is 
leaving. . . .
Mobile is mainstream, and it will be at the forefront of everything that happens 
in the future.
The Third Screen
In his book, The Third Screen, best-selling author and digital pioneer Chuck Martin 
explains how the age of the smartphone is redefining the role of the consumer, clarify-
ing that marketers must do more than send out a mass ad and hope for the best. They 
must interact on the customers’ terms. Martin does a great job of explaining the role 
of m-commerce (mobile-powered commerce), mobile video, SMS messaging, location-
based marketing, advertising and media, and the new laws of inbound marketing. He 
links the technological developments of m-commerce to the behavioral changes that 
accompany them, and reveals how key mobile innovators are becoming the mobile 
platform providers of the future. If you haven’t picked up The Third Screen yet, I highly 
recommend it; it’s a great read and a nice complement to the information presented 
in this chapter.
Figure 12-1 
The Third Screen, by Chuck Martin
Additional Benefits of Mobile Content
Mobile marketing can reduce costs for content aggregators, brands, and mobile mar-
keting companies. In addition, the improved targeting effectiveness and data offered 

216	
Content is Currency
by mobile marketing programs can help establish your company as an innovator and 
technology leader. So what are the other benefits?
Reduced costs: Mobile marketing reduces distribution costs through lower 
7
7
printing, delivery, and reconciliation costs, achieved through increased opera-
tional efficiencies.
More effective customer targeting: Mobile campaigns can be targeted efficiently 
7
7
to gain new customers, increase customer loyalty, and cross-sell products. More 
efficient targeting typically leads to improved conversion.
Improved analytical data: Mobile marketing allows companies to predict and 
7
7
measure responses to a campaign more accurately. Mobile provides superior 
authentication, so it can be helpful in checking the rapid proliferation of dis-
count offers.
Consumer engagement: Mobile marketing connects you with prospects in 
7
7
many cutting-edge ways, including mobile direct marketing, location-based 
mobile triggers, and mobile-enabled digital free-standing inserts (DFSI) cou-
pon portals.
Mobile Content Features Are Just as Compelling
Modern mobile devices have many important features that have never been available 
in one single unit before:
Voice channel
7
7
Data channel
7
7
Larger mobile screen (user interface)
7
7
Mobile speaker (for point-of-sale reader communication)
7
7
Mobile camera to capture visual information (e.g., barcode coupons, images, 
7
7
and text)
Global positioning system (GPS)/location-based service (LBS) capability
7
7
Accelerometer technology, allowing the device to be orientation-aware
7
7
Bluetooth capability, allowing data exchange with other Bluetooth-capable 
7
7
devices (e.g., to push marketing during the channel scan)
Wi-Fi capability, allowing the device to recognize local area networks (e.g., to 
7
7
push marketing during the channel scan)
Mobile web capability (e.g., to download coupons, ads, and offers during web-
7
7
based sessions)
Mobile app store access, which allows downloading of value-added apps (e.g., 
7
7
to embed marketing inside a mobile application, usually in return for a dis-
counted app)

	
 Content for Mobile
217
Near field communication (NFC) capability that allows the device to exchange 
7
7
data with other NFC-capable devices (e.g., to enable direct communication with 
a POS device, a smart poster, or a public transportation kiosk)
Who Is Your Mobile Audience?
Although we are all using mobile devices to improve our day-to-day productivity and 
efficiency, the progressive mobile user can be a bit different than the average user. 
Younger and more technologically savvy, these consumers are clearly leading the way 
and helping all of us improve our ability to connect with quality content. And some of 
these people could be new to your brand experience. So, who are these mobile users? 
What motivates them to take action? Some of the points to consider include:
How many visitors are coming to my site or app from a mobile device?
7
7
What is the mobile device of choice for these users?
7
7
What pages of my site do they most frequently visit?
7
7
Which content resonates the most with them?
7
7
How can a conversion take place in the mobile environment?
7
7
What are the hard facts of mobile content? For one, you have limited “real estate” 
or space for your content. Buttons are also more difficult to click. Attention spans may 
be even shorter. Zooming in to better view certain site areas will definitely occur. If a 
user is entering text for a form or something else, much of the screen will be covered 
by the keyboard. How will you deal with this issue? No matter what mobile content 
you develop, these important realities need to be considered.
If you are developing an app or a mobile site, these questions and their answers will 
be important. Again, your analytics program, whether it’s Google Analytics, AdMob, 
Bango, or some other program, can help determine where you place your energies. 
More to come on that.
A Mobile Content Strategy
Mobile content development takes time and money. It’s a commitment and a strategic 
move. As we know, there are differences in the types of mobile devices on which your 
content can potentially run and there are differences in those you can potentially reach. 
So, you want to start with a carefully thought out strategy before all else. Having a solid 
plan in place with a realistic timeline will serve your company well in the still evolving 
mobile environment. Be sure to address basic questions, such as:
Who are you trying to reach?
7
7
How will they access your content?
7
7
How will they use your content?
7
7

218	
Content is Currency
Which of their needs does your content address?
7
7
Will this be a free or paid content service?
7
7
Will you create mobile apps for a specific platform?
7
7
What are your competitors doing?
7
7
What value will mobile bring to your customers?
7
7
How will you make your mobile content sticky and engaging?
7
7
Performing a Mobile Content Audit
As for all other types of content, you want to see what’s already happening out there and 
where the potential opportunities lie for your mobile future. By simply checking your 
website’s analytics you may find mobile visitors are already accessing your site. In fact, 
up to 30 percent of existing websites are getting hit by smartphone searches today.
Be sure to check your site on all types of major mobile platforms, including an 
iPhone, Android, BlackBerry, etc. You can also use some of the current online tools to 
see how your website would actually appear on any mobile device.
Figure 12-2 
iPhone
Both Firefox and Safari offer easy ways to change your user agent and see what your site 
would look like through other browsers. For Firefox, download Chris Pederick’s User 
Agent Switcher (http://chrispederick.com/work/user-agent-switcher/). For Safari, just 
enable Developer Mode (go to Preferences, Advanced, and check the “Show Developer” 
box) and select your user agent from the Develop menu. Be sure to shrink your browser 
window to the size of your mobile device.
How does your site look? Is there too much there? Is it easy to get around? What 
about navigation—are your site pages easy to get to? Are buttons clickable? Don’t be 
too surprised if your page is not totally optimized for the mobile environment. This 
is typical.
As with other types of content, you need to consider your budget. On the low side, 
you could simply add a call to action to your print and web advertising that instructs 
prospects to send you an SMS text message or visit your mobile site. On the high side, 

	
 Content for Mobile
219
you could develop a mobile application or dedicated site. Regardless, the best course 
of action is probably a stepped, integrated one.
What Should Your Company Be Thinking About with Mobile Content?
Starting with a strong mobile web presence is a good entry into the space. As the 
cornerstone of any mobile strategy, it is clearly imperative if you want to connect with 
mobile users. Your prospects and customers will be searching for you. It’s important 
that you are there and that your site looks good, whether it’s a simple presence or a full 
mobile site. And if you are sending SMS text messages, these messages should include 
a link to a page where mobile users can discover what you’re all about.
What might your mobile content look like? There are a few ways to get there:
1. Mobile version of your existing site. If you’ve been on the mobile version of 
Facebook or Amazon, you know what a mobile site needs to look like. The key here is 
to offer features that are similar to those on your Internet website, but adapt them to 
a handheld format. Think simple and intuitive.
2. Plug-in-based mobile site. This may be the easiest way to go with your web 
content. Blogs and websites based on WordPress, Drupal, or similar open-source plat-
forms can use free plug-ins that format sites for mobile audiences. Practically plug and 
play, you can be up and running and looking good in the mobile environment very 
quickly with this option.
3. Mobile landing pages. Like any other landing page, these single-page web 
properties can be created quickly to establish your mobile web presence. Whether you 
are doing an SMS text campaign, a social media blast, or any other type of campaign, 
a landing page may be your best bet.
4. Dedicated mobile site. A popular option, especially with larger companies 
that have bigger budgets and longer-range plans in place, these are standalone sites 
that mimic much of the layout and content of your traditional website, but are mobile 
friendly. They, of course, look similar to your traditional site but are configured in a 
way that simplifies the navigation and user experience.
But there should be more to mobile content and your overall mobile content strategy 
than just your website.
A Good Way to Get Started
Sometimes, the best idea is to simply do some quick tests and judge the reaction. A 
good way of doing this is by putting together a mock-up mobile page that connects with 
user needs. By looking at your analytics, you’ll see the most highly viewed content in 
the site. It may be your main services page. It may be an e-book offering. Whatever it 

220	
Content is Currency
is, this represents solid insight into how users will interact and engage with potential 
mobile content. Where are visitors on the site right before they respond to a call to 
action? This will be your most relevant content. And in the mobile space, it’s where 
you’ll want to focus first.
There are elements you want to be sure you don’t miss, including an easy-to-find 
button where users can switch to the desktop version of the site. The mobile version of 
your website should not have too much information. Just say “no” to clutter or verbose 
copy. The most relevant content from your desktop website will be front and center. 
People want to get in and out quickly. Whether they are looking for local movie times, 
a hotel, or a restaurant; checking the weather; or performing some other task, they 
want quick results.
Based on what you are seeing, should you make a mobile version of your website? 
Budget and business strategy play a key role, of course. But my proposition is this: Even 
if you aren’t seeing a business case or the data isn’t telling you anything conclusive, 
you should definitely consider moving forward with some type of mobile presence. 
It’s that important.
Making Your Website Content Mobile Friendly
If you want to get a jump on your competitors in this space, make your website content 
mobile friendly. So many companies are nowhere near taking this step, so if you can 
be a first mover, there is a lot of upside. Keep these following things in mind:
1. Keep your pages short and compact. Mobile pages and downloadable content 
take longer to load. Like web visitors, mobile users don’t have time to wait. Giving them 
just the facts—in brief, consumable chunks—is the best idea here.
2. Make navigation easy. Typing on a tiny mobile device keypad is challenging. By 
making improvements through navigation, you’ll ensure a mobile-friendly experience. 
Ensure that users can get to all the important parts of your website.
3. Create content that’s “touch friendly.” With the iPod, iPad and other mobile 
devices, the touch screen is a key component. Users will be interacting with your content 
by using their fingers. Content and links need to be prominent: large, clear, and intui-
tively placed. Making the user interface as app-like as possible is a good practice.
4. Go easy on the images. In the mobile environment, images are big and clumsy 
and, for the most part, not needed. Strip the images from your mobile site, and you’ll 
find a higher conversion factor and improved user experience. Also, eliminate the flash 
content and check your form fields—ask for only what is absolutely necessary, perhaps 
just name and e-mail address.

	
 Content for Mobile
221
For those companies that sell thousands of products or have a wide range of 
important content pages, it’s important to drive mobile traffic back to your fully fea-
tured website, because that’s where all the details and highly specific content will stay. 
Use your mobile site to whet people’s appetites, and then when they get to the desktop 
version of your site, you can fully deliver the goods.
Other Options:XML and RSS Mobile Websites
Do you have a blog or a news website that is mostly text based? If so, one of the quickest 
ways to create a mobile version of your website is to use the RSS, ATOM, or XML feeds 
that might already be in place. Feeds for each page can be ported directly to pages on 
a mobile subdomain or subdirectory. Give it a shot.
Writing Content for Mobile
We all know that the space we have on our mobile devices is tiny. It’s one of the draw-
backs of mobile text communication, but it’s a reality of the medium. If your traditional 
site comes up in a mobile search, there is no way people can read it. If it shows up at all, 
it will be microscopic. So, how do we write for that tiny screen? How do we change the 
way we say things in order for people to understand what we are saying? With brevity 
and concise language. Give just the facts, only the facts, and that’s it. Use headings, 
bulleted lists, and commands instead of complete sentences—when writing your mobile 
content, this is the only way to go.
Mobile means “mini”—it’s a miniaturized version of the extended sentence or 
thought. So, what are the rules of the mobile content writing game?
The most important information goes at the top of the screen.
7
7
Break up copy into small sections.
7
7
Keep sentences brief.
7
7
Use short words (fewer syllables).
7
7
Don’t force users to scroll too much.
7
7
Focus on these elements, and you’ll get your point across perfectly on a mobile 
device.
Mobile Represents a Universe of Content Possibilities
One of the great things about mobile is the ability to reach your target market in so 
many different ways. It’s not just about making your site mobile friendly. Utilizing 
text, voice- and e-mail, video, and more, you have a new opportunity to connect in 
compelling, practically revolutionary ways through the mobile channel. Incorporating 

222	
Content is Currency
mobile into your online marketing program has big potential impact. Your choices 
are many.
Short Message Service (SMS) Content
Using SMS, you can send short, text-based messages to your audience, which can 
include links to your website, social media profile, and more. Whether prospects 
text you back, or even call you, SMS content has proven very effective for companies 
everywhere.
Multimedia Message Service (MMS) Content
MMS is similar to SMS technology, but can also send content, including images, video, 
and audio files such as ringtones. If you want to be a forward thinking mobile marketer, 
lead with this type of content.
Voice
This is one element of a mobile strategy that many companies forget about. I think 
one of the keys of mobile marketing, along with all web content strategies, is to never 
forget the power of weaving in traditional tactics, like phone and print. Mobile phones 
have click-to-call functionality that enables audiences to reach you directly, or to click 
to request a call from your team.
Applications
Downloaded an app to your iPhone, iPad, or Android lately? Chances are good that you 
have—probably a few. As one of the hottest trends of the past few years, apps represent a 
huge opportunity for companies everywhere, and it’s not just for B2C. Some marketers 
have directly integrated campaigns into their audiences’ phones by designing and offer-
ing a branded mobile app. I’ll show you how you can take advantage of this trend.
Figure 12-3 
iPhone Apps

	
 Content for Mobile
223
Location-Based (Proximity) Mobile Marketing
There is lots of new activity in the location-based (proximity) mobile marketing area. 
With Foursquare, Gowalla, Facebook Places, and other services leading the way, we are 
the forefront of something very exciting here. Smartphones, which have GPS capability, 
enable others to know our physical location, if we allow them that access. Progressive 
companies with retail locations now have the chance to deliver ads to mobile users 
when they are near their stores, capitalizing on impulse buys and leveraging the power 
of social gathering, especially in densely populated urban locations.
Content
Let’s not forget about the power of branding. Whether you’re Starbucks, Jamba Juice, 
J.Crew, or any other powerful brand, you want to leverage your already powerful con-
nection into the mobile space. This could include e-books, white papers, ringtones, 
images, videos, and more, all branded and all available in a mobile format.
E-Mail Content
Although it may seem like a no-brainer, e-mail absolutely needs to be considered 
in the larger mobile environment. As the most popular activity in the mobile space 
(sometimes taking more time than even the calls we make) e-mail is clearly a mobile 
channel. How can your company maximize and leverage your position with mobile 
e-mail content?
Mobile Integrates with Everything Else
Whatever your perceptions may be of the mobile space, it’s important to start think-
ing of it in a holistic, comprehensive way. Mobile content, and the marketing that goes 
along with it, does not succeed in a vacuum. It works best when integrated with other 
channels and tactics to form a cross-platform strategy.
Mobile applications, websites, SMS promotions, apps—everything you do with 
mobile—should somehow tie into social media and your other marketing efforts. 
These are logical connections and are indicative of successful content marketing as a 
whole.
How are the mobile market leaders doing it? They are integrating mobile apps with 
television, targeting mobile ads with specific social media campaigns, using barcode 
calls to action in traditional advertising, and more. They are testing, refining, and most 
important connecting with the market, some of whom may never have been exposed 
to the brand before.
Mobile content should be promoted on your website, your blog, your YouTube 
channel—everywhere you have a presence. As you will see, mobile content is the bond 
that connects all other media. Why? For all the reasons we’ve covered already, but the 
clear winner bears repeating: Our mobile devices are always with us. Our mobile 

224	
Content is Currency
devices are very personal; they’re true extensions and expressions of ourselves. Our 
phones are with us during the day, at night, and sometimes even while we sleep. Good 
or bad, they have a permanent place in our lives and are ready for action during all 
stages of the buying process and at all times of the day.
So, when it comes to your total content marketing strategy, there are important 
factors that need to be considered in the mobile realm. What goals do you want to 
achieve with your mobile content? How will you achieve those goals and minimize 
potential negative impact?
Mobile Applications
So, your site is mobile friendly. You have put together a mobile strategy. Developing 
an “app” seems pretty interesting. One thing that cannot be denied is that apps are 
hot—super hot. But what is an app?
An app, short for an “application,” is a software program that runs on a smartphone 
or tablet. Apps allow companies to engage their prospects and customers at any time 
and from any place; they offer a location-specific, targeted approach that satisfies an 
immediate need for information and provides total integration with social media and 
feedback tools.
B2C apps are a given. This is where app development started and has already proven 
very successful. But B2B apps aren’t far behind. There are lots of exciting developments 
in the B2B mobile app space. Plus, you can have apps for all your audiences: for clients 
and prospects, certainly, but you can also have separate apps for employees, sales 
teams, vendors, and more.
Games remain the most popular type of application, but mobile shopping, social 
networking, utilities, and productivity tool apps continue to grow. Chris Foresman, 
of Ars Technica, in an article on mobile applications, says that “Predictions for 2013 
are 21.6 billion apps sold for a total of $29.5 billion revenue.”52 That’s a seriously large 
market, especially when it didn’t exist five years ago.
What’s going on in the B2B app space? A consulting business might use an app to 
allow clients to access the firm’s e-books and consultant directory; a recruiting firm 
can build apps to more easily present candidates to clients and solicit resumes. There 
are all types of things you could do to reach your target market with a mobile app.
Mobile Applications for B2B
Mobile applications in the B2B space need to engage prospects and help solve customer 
problems. People use mobile applications much differently than they use websites. 
52 Foresman, Chris. 2010 “Apple Responsible for 99.4% of Mobile App Sales in 2009,” Ars Technica, 
http://arstechnica.com/apple/news/2010/01/apple-responsible-for-994-of-mobile-app-sales-in-2009 
.ars.

	
 Content for Mobile
225
They are looking for action, movement, results, and, as we’ve seen with the explosion 
of mobile games, entertainment. In the mobile B2B space, applications serve to provide 
quick information or solve problems that your traditional website cannot.
Mobile Advertising Content
Whether users are surfing the mobile web, are using mobile applications, or are playing 
mobile games, ads are a natural part of the experience. Of course, you have choices with 
your ad content: You can drive people to your website, to a mobile-specific landing page, or 
to a download page. A click by a prospect might also place a call through their phone.
As with traditional ad banners, mobile banners are graphics placed on a web page. 
A conversion occurs when a visitor clicks through to a linked offer. Mobile site owners 
agree to show the advertisement on their sites in return for payment from the mobile ad 
network. Mobile display ads can also be included in games and downloadable mobile 
applications for additional targeted exposure.
If you are developing banner content, it is important to focus the graphic on your 
call to action. Mobile advertising is still new enough that many viewers could be eas-
ily confused by seeing a brand message from a company when they are on a different 
brand’s website, so clarity is key to generating a good click-through rate (CTR).
There are important elements to creating effective mobile advertising content. Your 
mobile advertisement content can entice people to click through to visit your mobile 
website and download your mobile application or sign up for your alerts. The creative 
content can be text or display advertising, video, or animation.
As with all things mobile, you have a limited amount of space in which to convey 
your marketing message. Because your ad is displayed on a very small screen, leave 
out complex graphics. If you are writing copy for a text-only ad, use common SMS and 
web abbreviations, otherwise know as “txt spk,” to convey your message. This form of 
shorthand includes words such as “DK” for “don’t know,” “Gr8” for “great,” and “<3” 
for “love,” and will help you get across more in less space.
QR Codes
QR codes (quick response codes) are being used in mobile advertising campaigns 
all over the world, especially in Asia. Their use in the U.S. market is just picking up 
now, and will continue to expand in the next couple of years. What are they exactly? 
QR codes are small square dot matrices, sometimes called 2D bar codes, which can 
be placed on billboards, packaging, print media, or even on computer screens. Users 
with QR-enabled phones can capture the bar code by taking a picture of it with their 
phone’s camera. The QR code can open up a whole new world of promotional oppor-
tunity: It can load a web page, display a branded message, or add a contact to your 
address book.

226	
Content is Currency
iPhones don’t currently come with a QR code reader, but the next-generation 
iPhone more than likely will. One way around this, however, is by using a QR code app. 
The best one is QR Reader for the iPhone. It has a large range of usability and sharing 
options, it looks good, and it’s easy to use. For Android, download the Barcode Scanner 
app for QR Code functionality—it’s been rated highly by users.
Figure 12-4 
QR Code
SMS Text Message Content
Text messaging as we know it, or SMS (for short message service), is one of the best 
methods of mobile advertising in practice today. With billions of text messages sent 
and received every day and over 90 percent of them opened, it is the “certified mail” 
of digital communications. Chalk it up to the magic of mobile, but SMS messages are 
very effective.
In both B2B and B2C, text messages hold a special opportunity because so many 
companies have yet to use this marketing medium. And here is the other thing: Includ-
ing a text offer in an ad is becoming as important as including a phone number and 
website URL.
But how do you get started? The “bargain basement” approach is offered by com-
panies like MobiQponsis, which automatically sends people text coupons when they 
are shopping in the vicinity of participating businesses. This method is popular with 
small retailers, restaurants, and other local businesses, but it does not allow you to 
capture recipients’ cell numbers, which is one of the most important features of suc-
cessful text-message marketing campaigns.
The next step up is a method used by service providers like Distributive Networks, 
which ran the Obama text messaging campaign in 2008. The main component of this 
mobile advertising program is registering for your own proprietary “short code,” which 
is a five- or six-digit phone number that dialers use to access a text marketing campaign. 
It’s great for branding because you can select a vanity short code like APPLE (27753), 
and you can collect information such as zip codes and birthdates from callers. But these 
types of campaigns are expensive, and the budget can easily run into the thousands 
for licensing, activation, and hosting fees.

	
 Content for Mobile
227
There is a more popular way: Sharing a short code. Many small businesses use firms 
like Mobile Commons or HipCricket to advertise their SMS messages in this manner. 
Going this route can cost as little as a thousand dollars per month.
One of the keys is how you let people know about your texting campaign. That’s 
where your website, social media profiles, blog, and all your off-line advertising vehicles 
come in. Everywhere you have access to your market is a place to let people know about 
your texting campaign.
But what types of content resonate in a mobile SMS campaign? How can you get 
people to take notice and actually want to text you? Here are the most popular ways:
Providing exclusive access
7
7
—This approach promotes the fact that those who 
text in will get something that no one else will. Those who participate will be 
“part of the club” that most people will be left out of.
Giving a free item
7
7
—This is a classic promotion that advertises “the first 100 
people to text in get a free item valued at X.”
The ask campaign
7
7
—Make a straightforward request, for example: “Join Our 
Text Club. Text ABC to 95780.” Advertise it on your website, in print ads, direct 
mail, and on TV or radio.
The incentive
7
7
—Whether it’s a discount or an upsell, an incentive can work 
really well. Popular discounts are a percentage off today’s purchase. An upgrade 
would be “buy such and such and we’ll give you something free.”
Holding a contest
7
7
—This is a great way to engage customers and to get them 
thinking about your product: “Win $50 Gift Card. Text ABC to 24570.”
Showing you value their opinion
7
7
—Ask for their vote or provide a survey. If 
you’re running a restaurant, ask customers, “What should our special be?” and 
tell them to “Text ABC to 24570.”
The bottom line? You want to gain trust 
by offering something of value and then work 
toward building a relationship. When people 
are given something valuable—an exclusive 
VIP pass or privileged information—they 
respond. And your company wins.
Then you take it one step farther to 
secure long-term loyalty—you provide a 
sale, discount, or other promotion only to 
your text-message customers. And because 
you have access to your customers’ mobile 
phones, a device that is with them all the 
time and that they respond to more readily 
than anything else, you have an incredibly 
strong bond with them. Plus, you can send 
Figure 12-5 
SMS Texts Are Powerful

228	
Content is Currency
them customized offers based on their preferences. Don’t forget to cross-promote with 
your website, social media, and all of your off-line and print advertising.
Location-Based Mobile Marketing Content
Stores, restaurants, clubs, and other businesses that rely on local visitors can now 
leverage mobile marketing because of their ability to target local foot traffic. They can 
set up location-based Bluetooth broadcasts that send marketing messages directly to 
consumers when they are in the area. These companies can also develop strategies that 
incorporate outdoor advertising, to allow users to text in for specials, menus, show 
times, directions, or other information.
What works? Making your mobile content messaging as specific and actionable 
as possible. If you are a retailer, provide a cool deal that expires in just a few hours. If 
you are a restaurant, send out information on your lunch specials. There are lots of 
things you can do in this channel.
Location-based mobile content is great for real-time events, like baseball games, 
concerts, and also conferences that are scheduled in the area on the day the message 
goes out. The best mobile marketers can reach the right consumers when they are in 
the area and, hopefully, when they want the message. Foursquare is leading the way 
with location based mobile marketing.
Figure 12-6 
Foursquare
Key Considerations for Location-Based Mobile Marketing Content
If you want to capitalize on the power of location based mobile marketing, there are 
some important things to keep in mind when you put together a campaign. Here are 
the important considerations:

	
 Content for Mobile
229
A captured target.
7
7
 Your prospect or customer is already in or near your place 
of business. This is the true power of the medium.
Increased impulse buying.
7
7
 Real-time delivery of advertising can get people to 
take action now—for example a message that reads, “Come in within the next 
15 minutes and receive 30% off your dinner.”
Relationship and historical marketing.
7
7
 You can review past purchasing his-
tory to tailor and fine-tune future marketing messages.
Psychological nurturing.
7
7
 Consumers feel like they are part of something that’s 
happening now, that they’re wanted for something popular, which inspires 
brand recognition and loyalty.
Increased return on investment (ROI).
7
7
 Repeat or additional consumer pur-
chases during a visit. Time-based incentives or promotions can be sent to 
increase the total value of the sale.
Figure 12-7 
Example of Location-Based Mobile Ad
Mobile SEO
How do mobile search engines work? Traditional search engines and mobile search 
engines have many of the same qualities. As with Google’s normal search engine 
functionality, its mobile “spiders” are doing the same thing: reading and categorizing 
the information available on the web.
Currently, the biggest difference between Google’s traditional search engine bots 
and its mobile search engine bots is that the mobile bots evaluate your site as if it was 

230	
Content is Currency
being displayed on a mobile device. If the bots determine that your site will perform 
well on mobile devices, it will be ranked high in mobile search results. Developing your 
site or app for specific devices like the iPhone or Android? Mobile search engines can 
also detect what type of mobile device you are searching from and, in some cases, rank 
sites according to how well those sites will perform on that specific device.
A critical point to know is that mobile search engines frequently pull their results 
from both the traditional and the mobile search engine indexes. The mobile search 
engines provide mobile results whenever they can, but mobile pages must still compete 
against their traditional counterparts to rank well in most mobile searches. Most people 
assume that when they are searching from a mobile search engine, they will be given 
only mobile results, but that is not the case. If you want to get “mobile only” search 
results, you need to click on the mobile link from the search page.
In large part, mobile SEO is very similar to traditional SEO. If you need a refresher, 
be sure to see Chapter 4. However, to achieve high mobile rankings, it is important to 
use conventional mobile designations in your file structure. If the mobile aspect of 
your website is on a mobile subdomain, it should be called m. or mobile. If the mobile 
aspect of your website is on a subdirectory, it should be called /m or /mobile. These are 
the most common designations, and the search engines understand them as mobile 
designations.
Mobile Keyword Research
There are differences in keyword strategy for the mobile environment. Whether mobile 
searchers are running to the grocery store, going out for a night on the town, or trav-
eling to the mountains on vacation, they use keywords that are more action oriented 
and they are more likely to include verbs, for example “find post office” or “download 
ringtone.” And because they are typically trying to find a specific store, location, or 
other geographic destination, they also are location specific in their searching behavior, 
using city names, neighborhoods, or zip codes. So be sure to use these keywords near 
your other major keywords to improve your visibility in mobile search engines.
Sometimes, branded searches are more common with mobile devices, such as 
“find Jamba Juice Seattle” or “locate 24 Hour Fitness Las Vegas.” Very few people use 
mobile to research or investigate a product or service. They want to fulfill an immedi-
ate request or action.
Integrating Mobile with Your Total Content Marketing Program
The key activity that separates average marketers from the ones who are setting the 
pace is campaign integration. Remember the idea of leverage and sharing within the 
content marketing activity? You can get a lot more out of your mobile content when 

	
 Content for Mobile
231
you leverage it against everything else you are doing with your site, blog, and other 
content channels.
The great thing is that integrating a mobile marketing campaign with an online 
marketing campaign is actually very easy. In most cases, it simply means promoting 
your mobile content on your traditional site, your social media profiles, your e-mails, 
and your blog. It’s first about creating awareness that you do, in fact, have a mobile 
presence. Second, it’s a way to incentivize user behavior, especially with location-based 
mobile marketing. If you want to get more of these types of users, you simply direct 
them to your mobile site and offer them some great deals through that channel.
Also, those who visit your traditional website are a targeted group. Because they 
showed interest in your products or services by going to your site in the first place, 
chances are they will be drawn to your mobile content as well, especially if they are 
frequent visitors or are a part of your customer loyalty club. And, of course, some people 
will go to the web to find out more about your mobile offerings.
If you have both a mobile and a traditional website, it is important to let viewers 
move between the two sites easily. Put a button or link at the top of all your web-
site pages and allow viewers to specify the type of device they are using to view the 
website.
Next Steps
Mobile content is super hot. The biggest and most well-known brands around the world 
are embracing it in large numbers. The proliferation of mobile phones, especially smart-
phones, is driving the evolution of an exciting new capability that benefits everyone: 
the ability, in real-time, to market specifically to a consumer’s preferences and location. 
Research everywhere is showing dramatic improvements in the effectiveness of offer 
redemption rates and overall conversion. As a result, mobile marketing and advertising 
is projected to nearly triple in the next three years.
Mobile is here, it is now, and it is going to be a great ride for any company that 
embraces its potential content marketing opportunity.

This page intentionally left blank 

C h a p t e r  1 3
Putting It All Together: Unleashing 
Your Content Marketing Machine
Y
ou made it! Nice work. By getting to this point in the book, you have concluded 
your first comprehensive lesson in web and mobile content development and content 
marketing. Content case studies, content best practices, specific how-tos, things to 
avoid, recommended service vendors, and more—we’ve covered a lot in the past twelve 
chapters. You’ve gotten a taste of all the types of online and mobile content you can 
develop and the benefits of each. And you’ve been invited to put all the information 
through the lens of your own experience, so you can determine how you will use the 
information in this book, based on the type of business you have, your location, and 
your available resources.
Some of you may have benefited from every chapter in the book. Perhaps you are 
new to this stuff. That’s great; as I mentioned in the book’s introduction, you represent 
the majority of readers. Others of you may have enjoyed most the information from 
one or two chapters. Perhaps it was the video and mobile content chapters—those two 
were very popular with some of my manuscript readers! Whatever you happened to 
pick up, I’m happy to have been a part of the education. I don’t know about you, but I 
learn new things every day from people everywhere. Learning is an important part of 
my life; I hope that’s true for you, too. We can never learn too much. And to that, let’s 
make a “content toast” right now.
As you’ve seen through this educational experience, content is absolutely red hot. 
There’s no denying that. And it’s a big part of what’s happening in the web and mobile 
world. Whether you are a restaurant owner in Denver, a software entrepreneur in Aus-
tin, the CMO of a Fortune 100 company in New York, or any other forward-thinking 
marketer, it is my hope that you have benefited from this education. But here’s the 
thing . . . we aren’t quite done yet!
Let’s take the next few pages to review the important points we discussed, bring 
it all together, and put you on a path for total content marketing success.
233

234	
Content is Currency
The Content Life Cycle
Earlier in the book, I talked about the ecosystem of online and mobile content, or what 
I called the content “life cycle.” I mentioned that online content is a living, breathing 
thing. It’s truly evergreen and, in many cases, stays online forever. I indicated that your 
content carries your reputation and your brand with it, in perpetuity.
As you recall, the content life cycle includes:
Content planning and strategy
7
7
Content creation
7
7
Content marketing/distribution
7
7
Content management/curation
7
7
Armed with your newfound knowledge, you can now determine how you will put 
the content life cycle to use in your organization. But before we go there, let’s consider 
where your company stands with all of this “content stuff.”
One thing that troubles me about the current books available on content marketing 
or content strategy is that most are talking way above most people’s heads; the concepts 
and ideas are presented with too much complexity. After all, thousands of you out there 
are just seeing the ideas of content marketing for the first time. I know, because I see 
it when I’m out and about, speaking at business meetings. And I’m not talking about 
the high-profile industry events, I’m talking about the local business meetings on Main 
Street, USA—Bob’s Hardware, that maybe wants to compete more effectively against the 
local Home Depot. I’m also talking about all the family-owned and multigenerational 
companies I’ve interfaced with, where managers are so busy running their companies 
that they’ve missed the content marketing “train.” And I’m also referring to companies 
that are newer, and are staffed with sharp, gifted entrepreneurs who simply have an 
expertise in another area—engineering, IT, maybe a creative discipline. The fact of the 
matter is that there are many companies out there that want to understand content 
marketing, but need to be taught in a way they can grasp easily and then move forward 
with, without having to spend six months or more getting up to speed. These are the 
companies that need the education the most. And, as I stated in the beginning, this 
was one of my objectives with the book—to make it manageable for all.
So, with that in mind, let’s discuss your ability and readiness to implement the 
lessons in the book.
Your Stage with the Content Curriculum
Every company is at a different place when it comes to content marketing. A few 
companies out there are total pros. Some have been at it a long time, but need some 

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
235
brushing up. Others are totally new to it and can’t wait to get started. Wherever you are 
in the process, there are things you need to be doing right now to ensure success.
Novice.
7
7
 At this level, you undoubtedly feel overwhelmed by online marketing 
and all the content topics we covered, but your commitment to making changes 
and starting a content marketing program are strong. It may take a couple 
reads of the book for you to understand and internalize the information; that’s 
to be expected. I recommend you use this book as a handy reference manual 
and simply pull it out when you need it. For example, when you start blogging 
for the first time, reread Chapter 8 carefully and take the process step by step. 
If you are just getting your feet wet with setting up your Facebook page, read 
Chapter 7 again, and also refer to the blogging chapter. Then, don’t forget to 
check out your competitors to see what they are doing. The rest of the informa-
tion in this final chapter is very important for you, because careful execution 
will ensure you start off right.
Intermediate.
7
7
 This stage is where most companies fall. You have a website, per-
haps a blog, and maybe a few social media profiles, but you aren’t doing much 
with any of them. You were too busy, didn’t see the potential, or have never 
been inspired to do more with your content. After reading this book, I hope 
you see that you no longer have an option—you must embrace web and mobile 
content if you want to succeed against your competitors. It’s that simple. And 
you will! You have all the tools you need now to plan and execute. My advice to 
you is twofold: Talk to your existing customers and really seek to understand 
their needs. What are they asking for? Next, carefully study your competitors to 
see what they have done with content. Once you have accomplished these two 
tasks, you can prioritize what you need to do to compete more effectively and 
find opportunities that they may have missed. The reason for these two tasks? 
It cuts down your time for development and implementation. And I realize that 
time may be your most precious resource. The rest of the information in this 
final chapter is, most certainly, for you as well.
Advanced.
7
7
 Then there are the companies that are out there, developing content 
and doing it pretty well, but that need to improve some element of their total 
program. Perhaps you are looking for the latest content strategies used by the 
most forward-thinking companies, Hopefully, you’ve learned this from the case 
studies and research I shared in this book. For the advanced learners, perhaps 
the ideas and techniques about content leverage and automation proved to be 
the most valuable for you. I encourage you advanced content marketers to go to 
my blog, become a subscriber, and continue your education. I handle many of 
the more advanced and cutting-edge content marketing ideas there. There are 
many other fantastic blogs and industry news sources that I recommend you 
check out on a regular basis; two of which are the SEOmoz blog and ClickZ. 

236	
Content is Currency
Both are absolutely fantastic for any content marketer who is truly committed 
to the discipline.
With your current level in mind, let’s bring back three of the key concepts I dis-
cussed in the first chapter: the content marketing machine, the seven-prong content 
approach, and the eight steps to content success. Now that you have learned all the 
various content types and have seen how they are being used by other companies, it’s 
time to determine how you will apply these concepts to your current and ongoing 
marketing program.
The Content Marketing Machine
As you’ll recall, the three pillars of web content success are content, design, and usabil-
ity. Essentially, these are what your content says, how it looks, and its ease of use. All 
three are important and all three need to be carried out effectively. Taken together, 
considered thoughtfully, and done right, these three pillars will turn your company 
into a content marketing machine. And that’s what we want. We need to develop a 
perpetual, totally leveraged, fully automated content connection, lead-generation, and 
business-growth machine for your company. The rest of the information in this final 
chapter will give you what you need to make it a reality.
Using the three pillars as the foundation for every piece of content you develop, 
you’ll recall that you need to consider four things:
Planning the content that you need (strategy)
7
7
What types of content you produce (development)
7
7
Ensuring your prospects and customers see it (marketing)
7
7
Supporting it (management)
7
7
As you see, you are now standing face to face with the content life cycle. It’s time 
to make some decisions. But each one you make will be informed by the needs of your 
customers and prospects and by your commitment to the process.
We learned earlier from the Junta 42/Marketing Profs Study that the top content 
challenges companies face are producing the kind of content that engages prospects 
and customers, producing enough content, and having the budget to produce content. 
For the first two, you should now have a clear picture of how to proceed. By reading 
this book, absorbing the concepts, and understanding the best practices, you are 
armed and ready to tackle these obstacles and truly make them opportunities. The last 
one—budget—will hopefully be addressed by all the new prospects you’ll attract with 
your content and who will eventually become your customers. The new income you 
produce from these paying customers can support your content marketing program 
ands help grow your company.

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
237
Another thing that bears repeating at this point are the content practices of the best 
in class companies. The reason these companies are successful is that they are careful to 
consider the “stage in the buying cycle” when developing content, they allocate more 
budget to content marketing than others, and they get lots of support from the owners 
or upper management of the company. If this sounds like your company, great! Along 
with your commitment to content development and content marketing, you have much 
of what you need to be very successful.
For those companies that may not have budget and company support, you can 
easily get these by developing great content that connects with your target audience. 
Trust me: If you do content marketing right, you will impact the bottom line. And 
if what you are able to do brings in more income for the company, you’ll have pretty 
good evidence when you suggest content marketing expansion.
Let’s get back to the content life cycle: content planning and strategy, content 
creation, content marketing/distribution, and content management/curation. It’s 
time to put it to work for your company.
Content Planning and Strategy
As you recall, content strategy is the practice of planning the development, delivery, 
and management of your web and mobile content. It’s a process-driven activity, one 
that is made up of laying out, masterminding, and scheduling all the content that will 
be published. It includes strategizing for all the content types we discussed in the book: 
website copy, e-books, social media content, web videos, blog posts, and all the rest.
Your tactical activities, of course, make up the strategy. If you’re like many compa-
nies, you’ll start with your main website, a blog, your social media profiles, and maybe 
a digital newsletter. Perhaps you’ll have much more than this, but if you have these 
basic building blocks or cornerstone types of content, you can start building a unified 
and directed content strategy around them. And to ensure they are working, you’ll tie 
certain goals and results to these content tactics and measure them.
Content strategy is all about setting up a road map for the creation, delivery, and 
governance of content that your website users and social network will find valuable. 
You want to create content strategies that are in line with your business objectives and 
user goals. You also need to take into consideration your current content assets and 
your available resources to assemble a content plan that fits them. In addition, you’ll 
plan to make all content for your company:
Relevant—your content needs to be managed throughout its entire life cycle
7
7
Optimized and sharable—the search engines and social networks are a key 
7
7
channel for your content
Leverageable—the content needs to serve multiple roles and be used to inform 
7
7
other pieces of the content universe

238	
Content is Currency
Profitable—the success of the content should be partially measured by its impact 
7
7
on your organization’s bottom line
Here are the key stages of your content strategy and planning work:
1. Audit and assessment. Take a look at everything you have—your site, your blog, 
old company brochures, everything. Is your current content not in line with user needs 
or out-of-date? Most companies could make this claim; it’s just a fact of business life 
with today’s busy schedules. And you know what? Content marketing is a lot like our 
personal relationships: We can always do better and improve. With this step, you’ll 
want to review your current content assets and total ecosystem, including:
Existing content performance (web, social media, SEO, print, etc.)—Where 
7
7
are the areas of opportunity?
Internal roles and processes—Who is in charge and how does content get 
7
7
produced and distributed?
Content strategy readiness—Do you have a compelling value proposition 
7
7
and products and services that people want?
User expectations—What do your prospects and customers want to see from 
7
7
you? What types of content resonate?
Competitors and influencers—How does the external environment look, 
7
7
with regard to content that others are developing?
Content supply chain—Where will all the content come from and how will 
7
7
it get to those who can benefit from it?
When your audit is completed, you’ll have a new window into the quality of the 
content you have (or don’t have) and into the environmental or organizational impact 
on its creation, delivery, and governance.
2. Strategy and integration. All content needs to serve a purpose. All content 
should be proactive. Most of all, you need content that supports business objectives and 
meets your user goals. A quality content strategy exercise will perform this role. In this 
stage, you need to set up and design content solutions that are specific and measurable. 
Your content strategy will include detailed recommendations for:
Messaging—What will the content say and how will it communicate your 
7
7
brand?
Structure—How will the content be set up? What will it look like?
7
7
Work flow—How will the content get produced and distributed?
7
7
Governance—How will the content be managed on an ongoing basis?
7
7
If you’re engaged with multiple, ongoing content initiatives, you need to ensure 
that these are well integrated into your content requirements, schedules, and desired 
outcomes.

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
239
Content Creation
Next is the content development piece, the part that many companies find the most 
challenging. But you can rest a bit easier: All of the chapters in this book now serve as 
your guides for the content creation process. Of course, developing something from 
nothing can be stressful. If you’re like 70 percent of the companies out there, you have 
at least some content already developed. And this existing content will serve as a nice 
springboard for the rest of your content creation activities.
So, what exactly will your new content be? What will it look like? And who in your 
organization will put it together? How will they develop it? These are the important 
questions at this stage of the content life cycle. You’ll be considering all of the following 
types of content (I’ve put in boldface the ones that are most critical to your success):
Website content
7
7
Website pages
7
7
Landing pages
7
7
Lead-generation content
7
7
E-books
7
7
Articles
7
7
White papers
7
7
Case studies
7
7
Digital magazines
7
7
Press releases/media room content
7
7
Online ad content
7
7
Social media content
7
7
Blog content
7
7
Relationship building content
7
7
E-newsletter
7
7
Autoresponders
7
7
Other e-mails
7
7
Video content
7
7
Audio content
7
7
Podcasts
7
7
Webinars
7
7
Mobile content
7
7
This extensive list looks daunting, I know. The best course of action, in order to 
attack it head on, is to determine which areas you can focus on first. These are the ones 
that offer the most potential to connect you with your target market, as determined 
by your content strategy exercise. Again, every company is unique and every industry 
is different. Your prospects and customers can be very different from those of even 
your closest competitors. So, there is no clear-cut way to say which five content types, 

240	
Content is Currency
for example, are the best ones for your company. You will naturally find out as you get 
involved with the process.
One thing I will recommend is this: Ensure that your website comes first, followed 
closely by your lead-generation content and relationship-building content. Next is 
your blogging. These are your primary content types and the ones that everything 
else can feed.
Your social media content can be populated by your blog posts, at a bare minimum, 
so even if you just set your profiles up (which doesn’t take long) and only occasionally 
publish to them in the first few months, you’ll be all right. Having said that, your social 
media content is very important, so it is next in line.
After you’ve got a solid plan to develop these areas of content, I would recommend 
developing your press releases and video content. These are “extra” types of content 
that can support your mission, get the word out, and help bring more prospects into 
your tent. And they can also feed your blog, newsletter, and social media content. Next 
comes your online ad content and audio content. Like exhibiting at trade shows, these 
are definitely not required to be effective in the content marketing arena, but can help 
support the overall cause. Last is your mobile content. But let me clarify this point: 
Making sure your site is mobile friendly is definitely a top-tier priority. But all the other 
mobile content activities—mobile apps, mobile advertising, and the rest—can wait if 
you lack the budget, people, or time. Mobile is extremely important and, without a 
doubt, a big part of the future picture of content marketing, but it needs to be done 
right the first time and it needs to be carefully monitored.
After you’ve decided which content arenas to develop, you need to put together 
an editorial and publishing schedule. How do you “calendarize” the content produc-
tion in order to make sure you allocate the right time and produce it in the correct 
intervals? Keep reading.
Develop a Content Publishing Schedule
Frequency and recency are two important elements of advertising. They are also impor-
tant tools in your content marketing aresenal. Increasing how often people see your 
content and sticking to a publishing schedule will help your efforts considerably.
Every day	
7
7
 
Content activities:
Post Twitter updates
7
7
Post industry news items to Facebook/Twitter/LinkedIn pages
7
7
Read top twenty-five blogs in your industry and comment
7
7
Add a chapter or section for one large content project: white paper, e-book, 
7
7
slide presentation, or newsletter

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
241
  Content support activities
Check your site and blog analytics, make adjustments
7
7
Check your keyword research
7
7
Refer to your content strategy/plan, if needed
7
7
Start thinking about next month’s press release
7
7
Every week	
 
7
7
Content activities
Record your weekly update video and/or podcast
7
7
Complete three to four new blog posts (write them all at once and stagger 
7
7
publishing them or write one every other day)
Write one guest blog post on a large, complementary blog
7
7
If you have time, write one article that you can distribute (such as a how-to 
7
7
article or a product/service review)
Add a new web page or section to your site
7
7
Focus on optimizing an existing page that needs help
7
7
Participate in LinkedIn discussion group comments
7
7
Add two to three status updates on Facebook (spread throughout the 
7
7
week)
      Content support activities
Check your site and blog analytics, make adjustments
7
7
Check your keyword research
7
7
Refer to your content strategy/plan, if needed
7
7
Check on the competition
7
7
Every month	
 
7
7
Content activities
Publish monthly newsletter
7
7
Shoot and produce three videos—one from an event, one of an executive 
7
7
providing an industry opinion, and one interviewing someone important 
in the industry or a customer about their success (do them all in a week or 
space them out over the month)
Upload your latest PowerPoint presentations to SlideShare
7
7
Request and assemble client testimonials or customer product reviews for 
7
7
the month (every client or customer)
Write one to two customer case studies
7
7
Produce a webinar
7
7
  Content support activities
Check your site and blog analytics, make adjustments
7
7
Check your keyword research
7
7
Refer to your content strategy/plan, if needed
7
7
Check on the competition
7
7

242	
Content is Currency
Every quarter	
 
7
7
Content activities
Write an e-book or white paper (at least ten pages of research-based, qual-
7
7
ity content)
Hold a Facebook or Twitter contest and give away something of value
7
7
Work on a joint content project with someone of importance in your indus-
7
7
try (partnerships)
Produce a quarterly update of your industry
7
7
Consider doing a live video from your office and promote it as such (make 
7
7
the topic compelling)
Work on something big and important like a mobile app, microsite, Face-
7
7
book app, widget or . . . a book (yes, that’s right, a book is the ultimate in 
content development!)
  Content support activities
Check your site and blog analytics, make adjustments
7
7
Check your keyword research
7
7
Refer to your content strategy/plan, if needed
7
7
Check on the competition
7
7
Need Content Ideas?
Stuck for content topics or tactics you can implement? Need some ideas for the content 
creation step? Hopefully, you’ve gathered enough content-starters from the chapters 
of this book, but I thought it would be a good idea to add just a few more, for good 
measure. After all, you can never have too many good ideas in the fine art of content 
marketing.
Whether you are a rookie and need some inspiration or have “done it all” with 
content and are seeking some fresh ideas or consider yourself a great content developer 
but not the best brainstormer, I understand. We all need some help in this area once 
in a while. Here you go:
Take your most popular e-book or your best blog posts, add a few images, put 
1. 
it into PowerPoint, and then record it with Camtasia for a YouTube video.
Use a blog post to discuss a challenge that your company faced and how you 
2. 
overcame it. People love true stories.
Take a webinar or series of podcasts, get them transcribed, and offer it as an 
3. 
e-book or white paper.
Comment on other blogs from your industry. Be original and interesting (think 
4. 
one or two solid paragraphs, not just a line or two). And then keep a copy of all 
of them so you can compile and repackage them as an e-book.

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
243
Develop some content that showcases the genius of industry figures you respect 
5. 
and admire. And then use it as a springboard to partner with them.
Develop a buyer’s guide for your products and services based on the feedback 
6. 
you get from your customers.
Write an industry report on a hot topic that is backed up by solid research from 
7. 
respected industry associations. Post it on your blog and your social media 
profiles and put it in your newsletter.
Do you have some strong opinions and something interesting to say? Feel like 
8. 
things need to change in your industry? Write a twenty-page manifesto that 
reflects your best rants.
Review topics and items relevant to your industry, and make your reviews 
9. 
thoughtful, fair, and informative. Surprise people by using three to four long 
paragraphs to review every facet of the subject of your review: a product or 
service, a book, a webinar, a podcast, a video, an event you attended.
Use your video camera to record something that reflects your best self and 
10. 
then apply that to your products and services, a business issue, or a customer 
request. If you’re funny, use your humor. If you’re the serious type, make your 
presentation authoritative. If you’re a “ham,” then do something totally differ-
ent or a little bit crazy (within reason). Then put the video up on your YouTube 
channel.
Turn your digital newsletter into a paper version and send it out through 
11. 
regular mail.
Write a white paper that attempts to tackle the most controversial or challeng-
12. 
ing issue in your industry.
Create a free “course” delivered by e-mail autoresponder.
13. 
Offer a free teleclass to build interest in your business (record it so you will have 
14. 
another type of content to offer).
Compile your top thirty blog posts into an e-book.
15. 
Start with One Big Idea, Then Develop It in Chunks
If you want to come up with more than a hundred solid content topics in short order, 
do this: As a leading authority in your industry, behave as if you are going to write 
a book. Whether it’s the industry “bible,” a how-to book, a review of the best service 
providers, a collection of opinions from other industry leaders, or something else, this 
book would be a definitive guide for prospects, customers, and partners.
How do you do it? Simply sit down with a piece of paper and brainstorm all the 
chapters and subchapters that would make up the book. If you need help with this step, 
start at the very top with the title. Then break it down to the three most important 
sections of the book, followed by the twelve chapters that will make up the book, fol-
lowed by the ten headings that make up each chapter. Add all this together, and you 

244	
Content is Currency
will have 120 new content ideas for blog posts, videos, newsletter articles, or any other 
type of content you wish to develop. This recipe for web or mobile content has been 
used countless times by thousands of content marketers. It works for many reasons, 
but most interestingly because it reflects Newton’s First Law of Motion, which essen-
tially states that: An object in motion will remain in motion unless acted upon by an 
external force.
How does Newton’s Law apply to content creation? Your book idea is the object 
in motion. An idea generates other ideas because it represents motion, and the energy, 
inspiration, and discovery that takes place keeps you on the task of generating more 
ideas. The great thing about this approach, if you stay with it, is that you will not only 
get a book out of it, but a potential webinar series, a video program, enough blog posts 
to last six months, and more. Add in industry news and updates that you could offer, 
customer case studies, and other book ideas down the road, and you have content that 
will last you a lifetime.
Repurposing Content—Maximize the Leverage
Don’t forget the leverage aspect of your content! Every white paper, webinar, case study, 
video, podcast, or other piece of content you create can work for other campaigns. The 
process is actually simple. Record your webinars, then use the links in a lead-generation 
effort. Compile your website articles into a cool, new e-book. Repurpose and reuse 
what you already have in place. This will save you tremendous time and will put your 
content in new channels, which could attract new prospects.
Need some more specific, tried-and-true ideas?
1. Use testimonials and case studies for banner ads. Despite what you might 
think, you have clients who are willing to share their testimonials or offer a case 
study. All you have to do is ask! Once you get a few, make them really work for you by 
incorporating them into a banner advertisement for your company. Let’s face it, there 
is nothing more effective than our best customers’ words of praise. You can also use 
these treasured testimonials or case studies as material for traditional ads in magazines 
or newspapers, or as television commercials or radio spots.
2. Transform product datasheets or user guides into videos. Close the deal once 
and for all with your buyers in the later stages of the buying cycle by turning your 
product datasheets, technical spec docs, or user guides into video content. You can 
take this visual and auditory magic and put it on your site, your blog, your YouTube 
channel, and your Facebook page. Do it right, and your conversion numbers will 
improve. I guarantee it!
3. Create videos from speaking engagements. Again, there’s power in video. Peo-
ple love to hear you and see you. It’s an easy way for them to consume the information 

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
245
without working too hard. So, the next time you are speaking anywhere—whether it’s 
a big industry event or at your local Rotary club—be sure to bring your video camera 
and tripod and get your presentation recorded. Your video will be seen by many more 
people than those who saw it live.
4. Use past media attention or blog interviews as content for e-mails or tweets. 
Make your outreach to new prospects easy by sending them stuff they want. If you did 
a recent interview with a well-known blog or received some media attention from your 
local paper, radio station, or a television news program, make it work twice as hard for 
you: Build lead-nurturing e-mails or tweets simply by sharing a link to this coverage. 
It works. I’ve done it myself many times in the past.
Content Marketing and Distribution
So, you have a content strategy and multiple types of content ready to deliver—now 
it comes down to getting it to the people. Well, one thing I need to reiterate right now: 
Optimizing content for search and for social media will go a long way toward achiev-
ing your content distribution and marketing objectives. Why? Because if people 
can find it on their own, your distribution job will be complete! That’s right, this stage 
is the best part of the entire content life cycle because, unlike marketers of old, you 
don’t need to push it to your audience and make them consume it. When they find it, 
they will choose to consume it on their own; then, if they like what they read, viewed, 
or heard, they will contact you. Your job with this stage? Number one, to ensure that 
the content is optimized and shareable. And number two, to have your distribution 
infrastructure set up for maximum effectiveness. The first, we have covered in depth. 
But the infrastructure piece we have only covered in pieces. So, let’s discuss that now. 
The content we will use as an example is your brand spanking new white paper titled, 
“Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Content Distribution.” How’s that for 
relevant and appropriate? The finished PDF file is sitting there on your desktop and in 
hard copy on your desk staring at you. And it is a work of genius. Lots of great content 
filled with solid research and smart editorial. But no one, absolutely no one, except 
your internal team, knows about it yet. It’s time to get it out there. How do you do that? 
Here is my ten-step recommendation:
You post it on your website with no strings attached. It’s free and you require 
1. 
no personal information from prospects (you’ll use your second white paper 
or an expanded version of this one to do that).
You blog about it.
2. 
You e-mail your in-house database.
3. 
You post it on your social media profiles.
4. 
You publish a press release (pitch it to the media too).
5. 

246	
Content is Currency
You create an ad campaign using banner and text ads.
6. 
You reach out to popular and respected bloggers in your industry and get them 
7. 
to blog about it.
You mention it in your next monthly newsletter.
8. 
You use it as a basis for a webinar or podcast episode.
9. 
You produce a video about it.
10. 
Get the idea? By performing each of these steps, in no particular order, you are unleash-
ing your content into the online and mobile universe for all to see. And again, like 
Newton’s First Law of Motion, putting the content in motion so that it will not only 
stay in motion, but pick up steam and go viral across these many content channels, 
which actually reflects Newton’s Second Law of Motion, which says, roughly, that: 
Acceleration is produced when a force acts on a mass. Your “mass” is the white paper. 
The “force” is the positive reaction and sharing of your white paper. And the accelera-
tion is the viral spread. It’s really that simple: Quality content, distributed correctly, 
connects every time.
The one thing to remember is this: The competition for attention has never been 
greater. Is your content really that good? It absolutely needs to be. There will almost 
always be other types of content available that will be similar or even identical to your 
content. There are few barriers to entry in the online medium, but there are compa-
nies that do content better than others. What you need to do is make your content 
the best and distribute it more effectively than anyone else. And, of course, as with 
anything, pray for a little luck to come your way. You never really know what will go 
viral anymore.
One way around the competitive aspect is to stay on top of your keyword research. 
See what’s trending or popular right now in your industry and then search these phrases 
to see what types of reports, white papers, e-books, or other content items are out there 
that may be using the popular keywords in their title. If you see an opportunity, jump 
on it! It could be your eureka moment.
Content Management
Auditing, planning, developing, and then distributing content is one thing. Managing 
it is quite another. Depending on how much content you have, what it communicates, 
and where it is “housed,” there are important decisions that need to be made. How 
and why new content is being created are important questions to address in this stage. 
Content always needs to be working for your company, serving an important role with 
prospects, customers, and other users.
For content to remain accurate, relevant, and valuable, it’s important to develop 
specific governance policies, standards, and guidelines. These can inform and even 
define your:

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
247
Content-related roles and responsibilities
7
7
Decision-making processes around content
7
7
Content governance tools
7
7
What happens after the content is launched? Who will follow up on inquiries, com-
ments, replies, and requests for service? How will the content get revised or updated 
when the time comes? Who will be in charge of archiving content? Make sure, when 
putting together your content strategy, that you follow through with all of these impor-
tant steps. It is a commitment and a process that involves a group of dedicated team 
members. You’ll need time for planning and management of the strategy.
The two important ways of managing content to see whether it is still relevant are : 
by measuring the content using your analytics program and by staying on top of the 
latest industry news to see if your content reflects the current technology and tastes.
Content Curation
You may have heard the word curation in recent months in reference to online content 
and wondered, “What could this possibly mean?” Content curation is the process of 
finding and categorizing content from multiple sources and making it available to your 
audience. As a complementary piece to the content creation process, it can help make 
you a valued resource in the minds of your prospects and customers. Curate important, 
substantive content well, and you can build trust with your audience. The key is to focus 
on unique topic areas and to become the most trusted source with these subjects.
Google and other search engines have done this for years through content aggrega-
tion, but this process is done by computers that find the best links to make the content 
experience more fulfilling. Search can only get you so far, though. Humans curate 
content. You can hand select the content out there that you think is the best, just as 
if you were a curator for the Museum of Modern Art in New York, finding the best 
paintings to present to visitors.
My opinion is that content curation is secondary to content creation. But find-
ing great content from a range of sources is a natural by-product of your involvement 
in your industry, and sharing that content with your audience could help you build 
relationships—and, in the end, it may help you sell more goods and services. Your 
prospects need help sorting through the content that is exploding all around them. 
Do that job for them, and it will pay off. Information is power, and if you give that to 
your customers, they will more than likely pay you back for it.
Current Trends in Content Marketing
What are the current trends in content marketing? Which strategies will provide you 
with the biggest benefit for the time invested?

248	
Content is Currency
Social media marketing is getting huge.
1. 
Mobile marketing becomes the real deal.
2. 
Content marketing expands into new venues.
3. 
Online retail continues to take market share from other channels.
4. 
Integrated marketing comes of age.
5. 
Location-based services are growing.
6. 
Target market segmentation and targeting are driving more dollars to content 
7. 
marketing.
Quality
8. 
 of content is taking precedence over quantity—it really makes a dif-
ference now.
User experience is becoming more important than ever.
9. 
Content marketing is super hot.
10. 
How will your company embrace each of these trends? Will you focus a bit of 
energy on each of them or go full bore with just a couple? Much of this depends on the 
type of company you have, your specific content needs, and your current resources.
Content Marketing Best Practices
I’m going to end the book with an important section that I think will provide a lasting 
takeaway for you and your future content-building empire: content marketing’s best 
practices.
1. Source content from everywhere within your company. You never know who 
in your company will rise to become an expert. Great content can come from anywhere 
in your organization and by actively seeking it out, you’ll get unique viewpoints on the 
same issue. Whether it’s your product development team, your director of IT, or even 
the customer service reps, your company’s employees are a natural source of compel-
ling blog posts, video interviews, or white papers. Tap them.
2. Align the “pain points” of your prospects with content “cures.” Relevance is 
everything. And so is addressing your prospects’ pain. Remember the list of human 
motivations: the need to feel secure, loved, respected? If you can tap into these needs 
and solve a troubling issue, you will turn into a trusted provider. This idea can be dif-
ficult when we are all in love with our products and services, but we all know by now 
that people are really turned off by self-important promotion or opinion. If people 
think you can address their needs, you’ll get their business.
3. Develop content that appeals to different types of decision makers. In the 
B2B space, purchase decisions are usually made by a group of people. Content that 
connects with the VP of Information Technology may not connect with the chief 
marketing officer, yet both are involved with making the buying decision. So, perhaps 

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
249
you provide a technical spec sheet with considerations for IT needs and show that to 
the VP, then put together a marketing plan that incorporates a social media strategy 
for the CMO.
You can also build out a specific type of content, a technique used on many websites 
today: “buyer persona” modules, which use a “character” that matches the personality 
of your target audience to help them understand the value proposition in their terms, 
from a point of view that they understand.
4. Develop content for all stages in the buying cycle. There is the researching 
stage, the gathering information stage and the ready to buy stage.
Researching: thought leadership is important: blog posts, white papers, and 
e-books help here. You can also align your company with someone respected in 
your industry for a webinar offering.
Gathering information: prospects want to know the ways that you will meet 
specific challenges they have. Data sheets, case studies, and comparisons to the 
competition are all great for this stage.
Ready to buy: these folks will be reviewing multiple proposals for companies on 
their short list. Make sure your proposal is solid. A long list of testimonial content 
also works great here.
Figure 13-1 
Source: Google/TechTarget Media Consumption Report, 2009.
5. Develop great content in all the different formats and channels. This is a repeat 
from previous mentions in the book, but it definitely belongs on this list. Some of your 
prospects like reading about you through a white paper or your blog posts, others like 

250	
Content is Currency
to see and hear you through video, and some may want to “get to know you” on an 
informal basis through your Facebook page. Appeal to all of them, all the time.
6. Use social media to build, connect, and grow relationships. Your prospects and 
customers on Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn want you to engage them in dialogue 
and conversation. They may want to do some small talk before they even consider buy-
ing from you. Make sure you make it a compelling, two-way conversation.
7. Seek to educate your prospects with compelling content. People like to learn. 
When they learn something of value without having to pay anything for it, they feel 
connected and are typically loyal to the one who educated them. And they almost 
always go back for more. Be that teacher for your prospects. Be the information provider 
they trust. Remember, buyers today conduct massive amounts of research on the web 
before they buy. Seek to educate your customers, and your company will serve as their 
lifelong teacher—and as the place where they ultimately buy stuff.
8. Measure your content marketing progress! Measure, measure, measure. It’s 
what separates the best content marketers from the rest of the pack. Each content goal 
should be tied to a success metric. But be careful; this isn’t always easy. Your ultimate 
measure is demand generation, or conversion. Measuring this can be tricky. Was it 
a white paper that closed the deal or was it a combination of your prospect’s exposure 
to five different content types? Or was it a phone call from your top salesperson? For 
content marketing to demonstrate ROI, the metrics you use to evaluate strategy and 
your content campaigns need to be meaningfully related to demand generation. Doing 
this will ensure accurate analytics and provide great data for future content marketing 
campaigns.
Some Final Thoughts
As we come to a close, I want to leave you with this thought. It’s a simple idea that I feel 
will work really well for your company, no matter what types of content marketing you 
engage in. In fact, it’s the same way I closed my first book, Content Rich. And it is this: 
Make your prospective customers feel like they are buying from a friend.
Your goal with your content is to build relationships and attain greater influence. 
But you also want to reduce your customer acquisition costs, improve your customer 
loyalty rate, and, overall, increase each customer’s lifetime value. In addition, you want 
to learn something from your customers. You want this to be a true give-and-take 
relationship, a genuine partnership. This is an important distinction between successful 
content marketers and unsuccessful content marketers.
With social networking expanding at an incredible rate and with a more personal 
approach becoming popular in business, I think the relationships we have with our 
customers will continue to grow and become more important with time. As you know 

	
 Putting It All Together: Unleashing Your Content Marketing Machine
251
by now, the goal of your business should not be solely to get the sale, but to develop 
a relationship with each and every customer—a mutually beneficial relationship that 
will lead to more sales, testimonials, and referrals over the years.
By seeing your customers as friends, as part of the family, you will be exposed to 
wonderfully new and unexpected surprises that will provide lasting value and per-
sonal satisfaction. As I mentioned in the beginning of the book, content can empower 
people everywhere to have a voice. And content tells the story of your product or 
service and propels it into the hearts and minds of your prospects, customers, and 
others.
When you propel your content into their hearts you have just made a friend and 
quite possibly, a customer for life.
Friends Communicate with Each Other
The hallmark of a solid friendship is effective, two-way communication, not just talk-
ing or hearing, but listening. You can’t build a friendship by e-mailing your list every 
other month and pitching them with your latest products or services. To make friends 
with your customers, you need to communicate on a personal level.
So, commit to communicating with them at least once a week via your blog and 
social media channels. Heck, pick up the phone and give them a good old-fashioned 
call! This will keep the conversation going and connect you on a deeper level. It will 
also make them feel valued, like they are on the inside of something very cool.
Friends Are There Through Thick and Thin
Isn’t it true that our best friends give us the benefit of the doubt? No matter what hap-
pens, they let us slide sometimes, it’s just part of the deal. In fact, the best of friends 
will never leave your side. By developing friendships with your customers, you have a 
relationship based on honesty and trust.
Customers will not suddenly jump to a competitor of yours if they feel a true 
connection with your company. Being available and personable and truly caring for 
them will go a very long way. You only get what you give, right? So, ask them to be in 
your advisory groups. Seek their opinions on anything and everything. Hold an event 
for all of your customers. Building a community with your customers will give you 
their loyalty.
That’s a Wrap!
You’ve completed the book, and, hopefully, have come away from the experience with 
some great information, but the real work is just beginning. Now is the time to put 
these content development and content marketing ideas into practice. So, sit down 

252	
Content is Currency
with your team and start coming up with some ideas. Plan a robust and comprehensive 
content strategy. Grow your web and mobile presence through powerful, persuasive 
content. Ensure that your content is search engine optimized and shareable through 
social media. Differentiate your content from your competitors’ so you stand out. Con-
nect with your prospects. Ask yourself: What content can I develop today to make a 
big impact tomorrow?
As I bid you a fond written farewell, please know that I really appreciate you pick-
ing up this book. I treasure the relationships I have with all of my readers. And if the 
opportunity comes up, I would love to meet you in person, or at least via e-mail or my 
blog, or perhaps Twitter or Facebook.
Be on the lookout for me . . . the Content Is Currency book tour may be coming 
to a town near you! In addition, I may be speaking on the topic in a hotel lobby or 
corporate boardroom in your city. I’d love to have you join us; there’s nothing quite 
like face-to-face learning. Plus, we have a lot of fun at our events.
May your websites, blogs, social media presence, newsletters, videos, and more 
serve you well, and may your businesses be successful. May the rich content you build 
truly become currency and put you well on your way to industry dominance!
Thanks for reading!

Index
A
Aaron Wall’s Advanced Keyword Research 
tool, 50
Aaron Wall’s Free Keyword List Generator, 
50
A/B testing, of landing pages, 102
“About Us” page, of website, 87, 89–90
Acronyms, 56
Actively pitching the media, 9
Adobe Premiere Express, 186, 192
Advertising
description of, xix
mobile. See Mobile advertising
print, 4
social media, 20
web video, 185
AIDA, 36, 171
Alt text, 78
Alterian SM2, 147–148
Analogies, 156
Anchor text link, 66
Android, 222
Apps, 216, 222–223
Archived e-newsletters, 108
Ars Technica, 224
Articles
purpose of, xviii
“themed” content, 107–108
Attack hook, 137–138, 162
Attention taking, 206
Audience
audio content bonding of, 206–207
evaluation of, 46
mobile content, 217
Audience, Relevance, and Search, 147
Audio content
benefit of, xx
exporting of, from video content, 206
overview of, 201–202
podcasts. See Podcasts/podcasting
summary of, 211
webinars. See Webinars
Audit, of content, 218–219, 238
Augmented reality, 185
Autoresponders, 4, 165, 172–174
AWeber, 173
B
Banner ads, 244
B2B content marketing, 23–24
B2B mobile applications, 224–225
Behaviorally targeted e-mails, 167,  
172–174
BizChair.com, 199–200
Blog(s). See also Blogging
benefits of, 7
common sense used on, 157
content marketing use of, 7–8
content of, 156–158, 160–161, 164
conversational tone of, 156–157
creation of, 18
editing of, 160
editorial calendar for, 160
guest writing on, 162–163
guidelines for, 164
heading tags of, 73
hooks used with, 162
keyword phrases used in, 158–160
length of, 157–158
links, 158, 161–162
multiple contributors, 159–160
objectives for, 159
opening paragraphs of, 155–156
proofreading of, 157
purpose of, xviii
research used in, 158

254	
Content is Currency
Blog(s) (cont.)
title of, 154–155
uses of, 153
video added to, 195
voice of, 159
Blogger, 135
Blogging. See also Blog(s)
case study of, 163
frequency of, 157
platforms for, 135
popularity of, 153
Boldface, 56, 74
Born to Sell, 163
Boykin, Jim, 161
Brand
building of, 6
definition of, 31
mobile content for promoting, 223
video content inclusion of, 194
web content as reflection of, 31–32
Briefings, 108
Bulleted lists, 38–39
Business, content alignment with, 15
Buyer guides, 57–58
“Buyer persona” modules, 249
Buying cycle of customers, 53, 237, 249
C
Call to action, 35–36
Case studies
banner ad use of, 244
lead-generation use of, 106–107
purpose of, xviii
video versions of, 197
Cialdini, Robert, 178–179
Citation-based licensing agreement, 108
Clark, Brian, 154
Clichés, 35
Client testimonials, 8
Communication
in friendships, 251
social media for, 152
Company page, of website, 89–90
Competition
keyword phrases used by, 58–60
monitoring of, 9
researching of, 58–60
Compression, of video, 192–193
Connerty, Joanne, 60–62
Consumers, 13
Contact Us page, of website, 87, 93
Content
aggregation of, 247
appealability to multiple decision makers, 
248–249
audio. See Audio content
audit of, 238
authority developed through, 6
challenges in creating, 236
creation of, 239–240, 244
curation of, 247
delivery of, 11
development of, 11, 24, 239–240, 243–244, 
248–250
distribution of, 245–246
eight steps to success with, 10–11
harmonizing of, 37–38
human need for, 12–14
ideas for, 17–19, 242–245
importance of, 6, 233
life cycle of, xxi, 234
management of, 11–12, 246–247
measuring responses to, 16
mobile. See Mobile content
optimizing of, 245
phases of, 10
publishing schedule for, 240–242
purpose of, xviii–xxi, 27, 238
quality of, 22
repurposing of, 196–197, 244–245
requirements for, 27–28
social media. See Social media content
sources for, 248
video. See Video content
viral spread of, 16–17
web. See Web content
Content marketing
advanced stage of, 235–236
B2B, 23–24
best practices for, 248–250
blog for, 7–8
company differences in, 234–236
definition of, 4, 24
e-mail used for, 167
focus of, 4–5, 183
goals for, 14–17

	
 Index
255
intermediate stage of, 235
mistakes in, 24
mobile marketing integration with, 
230–231
new venues for, 21
novice stage of, 235
power of, 25
progress measurement for, 250
recommendations for, 245–246
trends in, 19–22, 247–248
Content marketing machine, 6–12,  
236–237
Content modules, 85–86
Content strategies, 11–12, 67, 237–238
Contests, 138–139, 145
Contrary hook, 137, 162
Creative Commons Attribution, 108
Creators, 13
Crowdsourced content, 103–104
CuePrompter, 190
Culture changes, 13
Currency, 13
Customer(s)
buying cycle of, 53, 237, 249
content development for, 15
e-mails specific to, 176
as friends, 250–251
keyword phrases, 46
loyalty building with, 251
surveys of, 16
video used to answer questions of, 197
Customer relationship management, 166
Customer reviews, 100
Customer service
social media content for, 150
website content focusing on, 95–97
D
Debates, 141
Defren, Todd, 122
Delicious, 135
Demonstrations, 197
Digg, 135
Distribution
content, 245–246
press release, 118–119
video content, 195–196
Distributive Networks, 226
Dynamic content, 78
Dynamic pages, 78
E
e-books
lead-generation use of, 104–105
purpose of, xviii
E-commerce websites
content for, 98–100
customer reviews of, 100
keyword phrases for, 57–58
product descriptions on, 99
Editing, 192–193
E-mail(s)
audience of, 168
autoresponders, 4, 165, 172–174
behaviorally targeted, 167, 172–174
benefits of, 168–169
content marketing medium use of, 167
content of, 171–172, 178–179
customer group considerations, 176
description of, xix, 165
dynamic insertion in, 166
e-books used to obtain, 104–105
event-triggered, 167, 172–174
flow of, 171–172
goals for, 168
information overload of, 166
length of, 172
life cycle of, 178
mistakes with, 177–178
mobile content integration with, 223
newsletters, 175–176
personalization of, 166
relationship development through,  
169
social media integrated into, 175
subject line of, 170–171
targeted, 174
tips for creating, 178–179
voice of, 169–170
E-mail service providers, 177
Empathy, 206
e-newsletters, 108, 175–176
Ethical Markets Media, 109–110
Event-triggered e-mails, 167, 172–174
Exact Target, 165
Expert product reviews, 58

256	
Content is Currency
Expertise, 178
External links, 66
F
Facebook, 135, 139, 141–142, 151
Fearless Software Outsourcing, 105
Final Cut Express, 186
Firefox, 218
Fishkin, Rand, 65
Flesch Reading Ease test, 36
Flickr, 135
Foremski, Tom, 121–122
Foresman, Chris, 224
Forums, 97
Foursquare, 21
“Free” content, 88–89
Free trial service, 8
Frequently asked questions page, of website, 
92–93
Frick, Tim, 95–96
Friends, customers as, 250–251
G
GarageBand, 203–204
Giveaways, 145
Glossary, 108
Godin, Seth, 158, 164
Google, 63–64, 161
Google AdWords Keyword Tool, 50
Google Insights for Search, 50
Google News, 113
Google Trends, 17
GoToMeeting, 210–211
Group buying, 21
Groups, social media, 133
Guarantees, 8–9
Guest writing on blogs, 162–163
Guides, 108
H
Haenlein, Michael, 129
Heading tags, of blog posts, 73
Headings, 38, 73
Headline, for press release, 114–115, 150
Help a Reporter Out, 9
HipCricket, 227
Home page, of website, 87–89
Hooks
blog, 162
social media, 137–138
HootSuite, 148–149
“How We Work” page, of website, 87
HTML code, 59
HTML link, 194
HubSpot, 14, 55
Human resources social media content, 150
Humor hook, 138, 162
Hyperlinks, 35
I
IceRocket, 147
Images. See also Video content
on mobile website pages, 220
on products page, 91
text hidden in, 78
Incentives, 142, 145
“Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion,” 
178–179
Innovid, 184
Integrated marketing, 21
Interactive video, 184
Internal linking, 74–75
Interruption marketing, 4
Interviews, 139, 197, 245
Inverted pyramid writing style, 42
Invodo, 199
iPhone, 222
Italics, 74
J
Junta 42, 23, 236
K
Kaplan, Andreas, 129
Keyword Discovery, 47–48
Keyword effectiveness index, 48–49
Keyword phrases
alignment with customer buying cycle, 
53, 237
asking customers about, 46
in blogs, 158–160
boldfaced, 74
brainstorming of, 51–54
competition for, 47

	
 Index
257
competitors, 58–60
considerations for, 56–57
demand for, 47
density of, 54, 60, 70–71
descriptive, 57
for e-commerce, 57–58
emerging types of, 54
frequency of, 70
in headings, 73
identification of, 46–51
italicizing of, 74
long tail, 54–55
new, 55–56
nuances of, 56–57
popularity of, 52–53
in press release, 115
prominence analyzer for, 60
role-based searches, 53
semantically related, 52
site search box, 51
spamming of, 70
stemming used in, 54
strategizing to identify, 51–54
in subheadings, 73
“themed” pages used to target, 107
variations on, 70, 73
web page placement of, 72
web server log files for identifying, 51
Keyword research
case study of, 60–62
description of, 45–46
mobile devices, 230
tools for, 47–50
Wordtracker, 48–49
Keyword-focused anchor text, 66
Khosla, Ashok, 110
Knowledge sharing, 140
Kore Access, 109
L
Landing pages, 8, 101–102, 219
Lead-generation content
case studies, 106–107
description of, 7, 104
e-books, 104–105
“themed” pages, 107–108
white papers, 106
Licensing, 108
Lighting, for web video, 187, 191–192
“Like” button, 142–143
Link(s)
anchor text, 66
blog, 158, 161–162
external, 66
internal, 74–75
research sites for, 68
Link bait
blog, 162
social media, 136, 138–140
LinkedIn, 135
Lists, 38–39, 140
Lloyd-Martin, Heather, 61
Location-based mobile marketing, 223, 
228–229
Location-based services, 21
Long tail keyword phrases, 54–55
M
Marketing. See also Content marketing
integrated, 21
pre-Internet, 4–6
video content, 195–196
webinar, 208
MarketingProfs.com, 23, 236
Martin, Chuck, 215
Mashup, 131
Meadows, Dennis, 110
Meta tags, 75–76
Metadata, 75–76, 204
Metaphors, 156
Mezak, Steve, 105
Microsites, 104
“Miniapps,” 96
Mirroring, 207
Mobile advertising
content, 225–228
description of, 185, 214–215
QR codes, 225–226
SMS text message content used for, 
226–228
Mobile applications
B2B, 224–225
B2C, 224
description of, 216, 222–224

258	
Content is Currency
Mobile Commons, 227
Mobile content
audience for, 217
audit of, 218–219
benefits of, 215–216
branding use of, 223
budget for, 218–219
content marketing program integration 
of, 230–231
customer targeting benefits of, 216
description of, xx
design considerations for, 219
development of, 217–220
e-mail, 223
features of, 216–217
importance of, 13, 214
integration with other media, 223–224
keyword strategies for, 230
landing pages, 219
location-based mobile marketing, 223, 
228–229
multimedia message service, 222
navigation considerations, 220
optimizing of, 63–79
options for, 221–224
overview of, 213–214
search engine optimization of, 229–230
seven-prong approach to, 8
short message service, 222, 226–228
strategy for, 217–220
“touch friendly,” 220
voice options, 222
web pages, 220
writing of, 221–224
Mobile devices
popularity of, 223–224
smartphones, 20, 213
website content designed for, 220–221
Mobile marketing
analytical benefits of, 216
consumer engagement benefits of, 216
future of, 215
growth of, 20, 214
immediacy of, 214
location-based, 223, 228–229
social media marketing and, 21
Mobile searches, 20
Mobile shopping, 224
Mobile website
dedicated, 219
plug-in-based, 219
search engine optimization 
considerations, 229–230
MobiQponis, 226
Modulizing, of website content, 85–86
Monitoring the competition, 9
Multimedia message service content, 222
Multivariate testing, of landing pages, 102
N
News hook, 137, 162
News release, social media, 121–123
News stories
online searches for, 112–113
from press releases, 112
Newsletters, 108, 175–176
Newsworthy story, 112
Nielsen, Jakob, 41
NOLA Photo Fun, 151
Nouns
keyword, 52
verbs versus, for web content, 34–35
Numbered lists, 39
O
Odden, Lee, 161
Off-site content, 7
Online content, interaction with, 15–16
Online marketing. See also Content 
marketing; Marketing
mobile marketing integration with, 231
sophistication of, 22
Online shopping and retail
description of, 15–16
growth of, 21
Online video. See Video content
Online wire services, 119
Ordering page, of website, 87, 91–92
“Our Team” page, of website, 87
P
PageRank, 69–70
Paragraphs, 34, 115
Partnership building, 10
Passive voice, 117
Payment page, of website, 92

	
 Index
259
Photo sharing, 135
Photobucket, 135
Pitch
definition of, 119
of press release, 120
PitchEngine, 123
Podcasts/podcasting
cover art for, 206
creation of, 203–204
definition of, 202
history of, 201
overview of, 202–203
practices for, 204–206
syndicating of, 205
video versions of, 197
PodOmatic, 203
Presentation sharing, 135
Presentation-style videos, 190
Press relations, 111
Press release
definition of, 111
distribution of, 118–119
headline of, 114–115, 150
history of, 113
keyword phrases used in, 115
length of, 117
mistakes in, 118
news stories from, 112
opening line of, 150
paragraphs of, 115
PitchEngine, 123
pitching of, 120
purpose of, xviii–xix, 112
search engine optimization strategy, 
113–114
social media, 122
summary of, 125
tracking the views of, 120–121
websites for, 119
Print advertising, 4
Privacy policy page, of website, 98
Product demonstrations, 197
Product descriptions
description of, 57
on e-commerce websites, 99
Product development social media content, 
150
Product reviews, 58, 139–140
Product sample, 8
Products page, of website, 90–91, 94
Prominence analyzer, 60
Proofreading, 39–40, 157
PRWeb, 119
Publishing schedule, for content, 240–242
“Pull” marketing, 6
Q
QR codes, 225–226
Quality of content, 22
Query ranking factor, 70–71
Quick Response codes, 20
R
Ranks.nl, 60
Readability of content, 36–37
ReelSEO, 187
Relationship development
e-mail for, 169
social media for, 250
Repurposing of content, 196–197, 244–245
Resource hook, 137, 162
Resources page, of website, 94–95
Return on Engagement, 95–96
Return on investment, 132, 134, 168, 229
Role-based keyword searches, 53
RSS feeds, 196, 204, 221
S
Safari, 218
Sales social media content, 150
Scribd, 135
Scripting, 189–190
Search engine(s)
content development for, 15
description of, 63
filtering by, 68–69
items ranked on, 63
mobile, 229–230
operating principles of, 67
reasons for using, 71
snippet content, 77
video content indexed by, 181
writing content for, 67–69
Search engine optimization (SEO)
alt text, 78
analyzing the results of, 79

260	
Content is Currency
Search engine optimization (SEO) (cont.)
definition of, 5, 64
description of, 67–68
guidelines for, 79
internal links for, 74–75
long tail keyword phrases, 55
metadata, 75–76
mobile content, 229–230
press release, 113–114
snippet content, 77
text hidden in images, 78
video content considerations, 193–194
web pages for, 84
website content for, 104–108
Search engine ranking(s)
algorithm for, 69
description of, 63, 68–69
external links, 66
factors that determine, 65–67, 69–70
query ranking factor, 70–71
Self-serving content, 12
Semantically related keyword phrases, 52
Sentence structure, 33–35
SEOmoz, 65
Service demonstrations, 197
Service reviews, 139–140
Services page, of website, 87, 92, 94
Seven-prong approach, 7
Shareable content, 130–131
Shirky, Clay, 111
Short message service, 222, 226–228
Showing versus telling, 37–38
SlideShare, 135
Smartphones
popularity of, 20, 213
searches on, 20
SMO. See Social media optimization
Snippet content, 77
Social aggregators, 148–149
Social bookmarking, 135
Social media
benefits of using, 133
communication benefits of, 152
definition of, 129, 134
e-mail integration of, 175
groups, 133
growth of, 132–133
hooks used in, 137–138
interactions in, 150
keyword research use of, 146–148
knowledge sharing use of, 140
link bait used in, 136, 138–140
lists, 140
overview of, 151–152
relationship building using, 250
resistance to, 132
return on investment issues, 132, 134
Social media advertising, 20
Social media content
benefits of, 134
contests, 138–139, 145
definition of, 132
development of, 146, 240
focused-type of, 150
giveaways, 145
importance of, 240
incentives, 145
integration with existing web content, 
151–152
interviews, 139
product reviews, 139–140
purpose of, xix
service reviews, 139–140
types of, 134–135
use of, 135–141
Social media marketing
commitment to, 150
growth of, 19–20
mobile marketing and, 20
Social media networks, 15
Social media news release, 121–123
Social media newsroom, 124
Social media optimization
categories of, 130
definition of, 5, 130
importance of, 132
shareable content, 130–131
strategy for, 131
Social media websites
Facebook, 135, 139, 141–142, 151
Twitter, 135, 139, 143–145
Social networks/social networking, 132, 135, 
250
Solis, Brian, 19
Spamming, 70, 170
SpeakerText, 194

	
 Index
261
Speaking engagements, 244–245
Starbucks, 166
Stemming, 54
Story. See also News stories
moving images used to capture,  
188–189
newsworthy, 112
Storyboarding, 189–190
Storytelling, 32–33, 206–207
Studio Blue, 60–62
StumbleUpon, 6, 135, 147
Subheadings, 38, 73
SuccessWorks, 61
Surveys, 16
Synchronization, 18
Syndicated news feed, 119
Syndication networks, 106
T
Tags
heading, 73
meta, 75–76
social media, 130
video content, 193
Tapscott, Don, 110
Target market segmentation, 22
Targeted e-mails, 174
Technical guides or briefings, 108
Technorati, 153
Teleprompter, 190
Telling versus showing, 37–38
Terms and conditions page, of website, 98
Testimonials, 8, 197, 244
testSTAT, 147
Text messaging, 12, 226–228
Thank you page, of website, 102–103
“Themed” pages, 107–108
Third Screen, The, 215
Title
of blog, 154–155
of web video, 193
Tone, 30–31, 115, 156–157
Transcript, 194
Transformative technologies, 213
Tripod, 187
TubeMogul, 195–196
TweetDeck, 149
Twitter, 135, 139, 143–145, 208
2D bar codes, 225
TypePad, 135
U
Usability analysis, for website, 41–43
User experience, 22
User guides, 244
User-generated content
description of, 8
videos, 197
website use of, 103–104
V
VAST, 185
Vendor-created video, 198
Verbs, 34–35
Video analytics, 185
Video content
audio exported from, 206
on blog, 195
branding of, 194
case study of, 198–200
compression of, 192–193
creating of, 196–197
distribution of, 195–196
editing of, 192–193
equipment for creating, 185–187
existing content repurposed for, 196–197
length of, 191
lighting considerations, 187, 191–192
marketing of, 195–196
objectives of, 187
optimizing of, 193–194
outside vendor used to create, 198
production of, 191–192
scripting of, 189–190
search engine indexing of, 181
search engine optimization considerations 
for, 193–194
shooting of, 191–192
statistics about, 182–184
storyboarding, 189–190
strategy for, 187–188
summary of, 200
tags included in, 193
titles, 193
transcript of, 194
trends in, 184–185

262	
Content is Currency
Video content (cont.)
types of, 183
user-generated, 197
value of, 183
on website, 195
writing techniques for, 190
YouTube, 135, 182–183
Video sharing, 135
Voice
of blog, 159
of e-mail, 169–170
of web content, 30–31
VPAID, 185
W
Walton, Dan, 60–62
Ward, Eric, 161
Web content
accuracy of, 33
AIDA writing style for, 36
backgrounds, 39
bad, 28–29
blocks of, 39
brand reflection through, 31–32
bulleted lists, 38–39
call to action included in, 35–36
clichés, 35
consistency in, 43
current, analyzing of. See Web content 
analysis
design and, relationship between, 40–41
designers of, 28
dynamic, 78
formatting of, 38–40
harmonizing of, 37–38
headings, 38
importance of, 13, 86
interesting, 33
inventorying of, 27–28
lead generation, 7–10
navigation through, 42
optimizing of, 63–79
personality of, 30–31
pillars of, 6, 236
power of, 19
proofreading of, 39–40
quality evaluations, 29–37
readability of, 36–37
selling purpose of, 35–36
sentence structure used in, 33–35
seven-prong approach to, 8
showing versus telling approach to, 37–38
storytelling through, 32–33
style of, 30–31
subheadings, 38
testing of, 39–40
text and background contrast, 39
type of, 7
unified thought process used to create, 37
usability of, 38–40
voice and tone of writer included in, 30–31
words used in, 33–35
Web content analysis
inventorying of content, 27–28
quality of content evaluations, 29–37
steps involved in, 27
Web pages
aligning with searcher’s intent, 71
company page, 89–90
contact page, 87, 93
frequently asked questions page, 92–93
home page, 87–89
important types of, 87–93
internal linking on, 74–75
keyword phrase placement on, 72
landing pages, 8, 101–102
language used on, 89
mobile, 220
optimization of, 71–75
ordering page, 87, 91–92
payment page, 92
privacy policy page, 98
products pages, 90–91, 94
resources page, 94–95
search engine optimization, 84
search engine ranking of, 69–70
segmenting of, 98
services page, 87, 92, 94
short, adding content to, 97–98
terms and conditions page, 98
thank you page, 102–103
Web server log files, 51
Web video. See also Video content
advertising on, 185

	
 Index
263
analytics regarding, 185
on blog, 195
branding of, 194
case study of, 198–200
compression of, 192–193
editing of, 192–193
equipment for creating, 185–187
HTML link for, 194
interactive, 184
length of, 191
lighting for, 187, 191–192
outside vendor used to create, 198
presentation-style, 190
product datasheets transformed into, 244
production of, 191–192
scripting of, 189–190
search engine optimization considerations 
for, 193–194
shooting of, 191–192
speaking engagements used to create, 
244–245
story created using, 188–189
storyboarding of, 189–190
summary of, 200
trends in, 184–185
user guides transformed into, 244
user-generated, 197
Webcast, 202
WebEx, 210–211
Webinars
best practices for, 208–210
definition of, 202
description of, 207–208
frequency of, 211
guest speakers at, 209
history of, 201
marketing of, 208
platforms for, 210–211
reminders about, 209
technical problems during, 209
video versions of, 197
Website. See also E-commerce websites; 
Social media websites; specific website
buyer guides on, 57–58
category descriptions on, 57
design of. See Website design
goals of, 64
mobile version of, 219–220, 229–230
press release, 119
product descriptions on, 57
ranking of, 68–70
search box on, 51
video added to, 195
Website content
adding to short existing pages, 97–98
case study of, 109–110
crowdsourced, 103–104
customer (service) friendly, 95–97
definition of, 84
e-commerce, 98–100
expanding of, 94
forums, 97
“free,” 88–89
lead-generation. See Lead-generation 
content
licensing used to build, 108
“miniapps,” 96
mobile-friendly, 220–221
modulizing of, 85–86
philosophy of, 86–87
purpose of, xviii
user-generated, 103–104
widgets, 96–97
Website copy
importance of, 86
for products page, 90–91
Website design
content and, relationship between,  
40–41
customer feedback solicitation about,  
42
inverted pyramid writing style, 42
navigation, 42, 75
problems with, 28
usability analysis, 41–43
White papers, xviii, 106
White space, 38
Widgets, 96–97
Wikipedia, 135
Wikis, 135
Windows Movie Maker, 186
Wire service
definition of, 118
online, 119

264	
Index
WordPress, 135
Words, in web content, 33–35
Wordtracker, 48–49
X
XML feeds, 221
Y
Yahoo! Site Explorer, 68
Yahoo! Style Guide, The, xx
YouTube, 135, 182–183, 193

