
Contemporary Housing Issues in a 
Globalized World

Law, Property and Society
Series Editor:
Robin Paul Malloy
The Law, Property and Society series examines property in terms of its ability 
to foster democratic forms of governance and to advance social justice. The 
series explores the legal infrastructure of property in broad terms, encompassing 
concerns for real, personal, intangible, intellectual and cultural property, as well as 
looking at property-related financial markets. The series is edited by Robin Paul 
Malloy, and book proposals are welcome from all interested authors.
Robin Paul Malloy is E.I. White Chair and Distinguished Professor of Law, and 
the Kauffman Professor of Entrepreneurship and Innovation at Syracuse University 
College of Law, USA. He is Director of the Center on Property, Citizenship, 
and Social Entrepreneurism. He is also Professor of Economics (by courtesy 
appointment) in the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, Syracuse 
University. Professor Malloy writes extensively on law and market theory and on 
real estate transactions and development. He has authored eight books (one now in 
its third edition and another in its second edition) and has edited seven additional 
books. He has also written more than 30 scholarly articles, and has contributed 
to 12 other books. His recent books include: Law and Market Economy (2000, in 
English and translated into Spanish and Chinese); Law in a Market Context (2004); 
and Real Estate Transactions 4th Edition (with James Charles Smith, 2013).

Contemporary Housing Issues in 
a Globalized World
Edited by
Padraic Kenna
NUI Galway, Ireland

V
Printed in the United Kingdom by Henry Ling Limited, 
at the Dorset Press, Dorchester, DT1 1HD
© Padraic Kenna 2014
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
Padraic Kenna has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, 
to be identified as the editor of this work.
Published by	
	
	
	
	
Ashgate Publishing Limited	 	
	
Ashgate Publishing Company
Wey Court East	
	
	
	
110 Cherry Street
Union Road	
	
	
	
Suite 3-1
Farnham	 	
	
	
	
Burlington, VT 05401-3818
Surrey, GU9 7PT	
	
	
	
USA
England
www.ashgate.com
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:
Kenna, Padraic.
  Contemporary housing issues in a globalized world / by Padraic Kenna.
       pages cm. –  (Law, property and society)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-4724-1537-0 (hardback) – ISBN 978-1-4724-1538-7 (ebook) –  
ISBN 978-1-4724-1539-4 (epub)  1.  Right to housing. 2.  Housing–Law and legislation. 
3.  Squatters–Legal status, laws, etc. 4.  Land tenure–Law and legislation. 5.  Right to 
housing–Europe.  I. Title. 
  K3550.K46 2014
  344'.063635–dc23
                                                            2013023977
ISBN	
9781472415370 (hbk)
ISBN	
9781472415387 (ebk-PDF)
ISBN	
9781472415394 (ebk-ePUB)

Contents
List of Figures and Tables    
vii
Notes on Contributors    
ix
1	
Introduction    
1
	
Padraic Kenna
2	
A Legal Perspective of the Origin and the Globalization  
of the Current Financial Crisis and the Resulting Reforms in Spain    37
	
Sergio Nasarre-Aznar
3	
Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain    
73
	
Karen Lynch-Shally
4	
Mortgage Foreclosure and Housing Rights in Spain:  
Crisis or General Deception?    
101
	
Vanesa Valiño
5	
Housing Rights in Europe: The Council of Europe Leads  
the Way    
115
	
Padraic Kenna and Mark Jordan
6	
Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation:  
A Conceptual Classification    
141
	
Michelle Oren, Rachelle Alterman and Yaffa Zilbershats
7	
Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya:  
Charting the Way Forward    
159
	
Elizabeth Kamundia
8	
Public Interest Law and Regeneration: The Case of  
Ballymun Community Law Centre – Connecting the Dots  
through Community Economic Development    
179
	
Maria Antonieta Nestor
9	
From Individual to Collective Squat: Economic Theory and  
the Regulation of Squatting in England and France    
227
	
Jane Ball

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
vi
10	
Housing Ladders and Snakes: An Examination of Changing  
Residential Tenure Trajectories in the Republic of Ireland    
251
	
Joe Finnerty and Cathal O’Connell
Index    
267

List of Figures and Tables
Figures 
2.1	
Standard US mortgage securitization     
38
2.2	
Recourse (dark grey) and non-recourse (light grey) states     
50
2.3	
Number of dwellings by type of tenure in Europe, 2009    
53
2.4	
‘Useful’ life of an immovable versus indebtedness    
58
2.5	
The insolvency process against consumers in Europe     
60
2.6.	
Minimum advertising of an auction in order to facilitate  
maximum publicity    
61
Tables
1.1	
House price increases across the world: 1980 (or earliest year  
available) –2008    
10
2.1	
Regulated versus non-regulated mortgage markets    
42
2.2	
Goals to achieve the Catalan intermediate tenures    
69
6.1 
Conceptual classification of constitutional housing rights    
144
10.1	
Sources of social housing provision 2006–11    
260

This page has been left blank intentionally

Notes on Contributors
Rachelle Alterman is based at the Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, 
where she holds the Azrieli Chair in Town Planning. With degrees in planning and 
in law from Canadian and Israeli universities, she is a leading authority on cross-
national comparative analysis of planning laws, land use regulations, property 
rights and planning practice. She is the Founding President of the International 
Academic Association on Planning, Law and Property Rights (2006–10) and 
serves on the editorial boards of leading academic journals. The Association of 
European Schools of Planning has awarded her Honorary Member status (the fifth 
person so honoured).
Jane Ball was admitted as a solicitor in 1978 and practised in property law and then 
in litigation. After starting to lecture in law at Manchester Metropolitan University 
from 1994, she obtained a doctorate from the University of Sheffield on housing 
disadvantaged people in France. A specialist in French law and the sociology and 
economics of housing, she researches areas where there is a mismatch in national 
disciplines, often the neglected fringes of comparison in English property law. 
Now a senior lecturer at Newcastle University, she teaches equity, trusts, land law 
and land use and international security and credit.
Joe Finnerty teaches social policy in the School of Applied Social Studies, 
University College Cork. His housing research interests include the attitudes and 
behaviour of private landlords, the evaluation of homelessness policy and changes 
in the tenure trajectories of low-income households. He is joint coordinator of the 
homelessness working group of the European Network of Housing Researchers 
and is Ireland’s research advisor to the European Observatory on Homelessness.
Mark Jordan is a research fellow at the University of Southampton and a 
graduate of NUI Galway. He is part of the TENLAW research project, where he 
is responsible for researching issues relating to property law, housing law and 
landlord and tenant law across Scotland and the Republic of Ireland. In addition to 
his researching responsibilities, he teaches property law on the LLB programme at 
the University of Southampton. Prior to joining the Law School at Southampton 
in 2012, he carried out research on human rights issues in Ireland on behalf of a 
range of NGOs and charitable bodies.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
x
Elizabeth Kamundia completed an LLM in International and Comparative 
Disability Law and Policy in 2012 at the Centre for Disability Law and Policy, 
NUI, Galway. Prior to joining NUI Galway, she worked at the Kenya National 
Commission on Human Rights (KNCHR) as the Human Rights Officer on 
Disability. She also worked as a researcher with the Committee of Experts on 
Constitutional Review that helped deliver a new Constitution for Kenya in 2010. 
She is an advocate of the High Court of Kenya and also holds a Masters in Public 
International Law from the University of Nairobi. Currently she is working as a 
consultant with Users and Survivors of Psychiatry – Kenya as well as with the 
Open Society Initiative for Eastern Africa and the KNCHR on the reform of legal 
capacity law in Kenya.
Padraic Kenna is a graduate of the School of Law, University of Warwick and 
holds a PhD from NUI Galway. His most recent publication Housing Law, Rights 
and Policy (Dublin, Clarus Press 2011) provides a comprehensive examination and 
critical analysis of contemporary housing law and policy. In 2004, he established, 
with others, the FEANTSA Expert Group on Housing Rights. He is a Member of 
Housing Rights Watch and the Editorial Advisory Board of both the International 
Journal of Law in the Built Environment and the Irish Human Rights Law Review. 
He is also affiliated to the NUI Galway Centre for Disability Law and Policy, 
where he is engaged in research, teaching and PhD supervision. Currently, he is 
developing the new Centre for Housing Law, Rights and Policy at NUI Galway.
Karen Lynch-Shally is a Hardiman PhD Scholar at NUI Galway. Her doctoral 
thesis is entitled ‘Towards a Sustainable European Mortgage System: The Role of 
Regulation’. This undertakes a comparative analysis of the regulation of mortgage 
markets, both from an origination and a funding perspective, in the European and 
international context. The objective of the analysis is to assess the potential for 
regulation to contribute to a sustainable market model.
Sergio Nasarre-Aznar is Professor of Civil Law at the University Rovira i Virgili 
and a Deputy Judge in the Court of Tarragona. He has been awarded European Doctor 
in Law and Masters in Real Estate Economics by the University of Cambridge. 
In 2008 he was made Corresponding Member of the Spanish Royal Academy of 
Jurisprudence and Legislation. He is the author of three books on mortgage market 
and tort law, has edited four more and is the author of over 50 scientific articles 
published in Spain, Germany, the US, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Portugal, 
the UK, Ireland and Poland. He has delivered more than 70 lectures in several 
European countries and has been visiting scholar at the Universities of Barcelona 
(2005), Bremen (2007), Valladolid (2009, 2010 and 2012), National University 
of Ireland (2009), Cambridge (2011, 2012 and 2013) and Duke (2011). He has 
been main researcher of four projects on access to housing (2010, 2011 and 2012) 
and is a member of the TENLAW project, the 7th Framework Programme of the 

Notes on Contributors
xi
EU, the European Network for Housing Research and the Common Core Project 
of the University of Trento. He has taken part in various legislative committees 
for Catalonia (2006 trusts, protection of mortgagors’ intermediate tenures, 2011, 
2012) and across Spain (reform of the Law of Leases 2012 and to draft the Spanish 
Housing Plan 2013–16). The recipient of several awards, his research interests 
are mainly property and real estate law, territorial credit, mortgages, the mortgage 
market, housing, securitization, European private law, trust, mortgage refinancing, 
real estate and tort law.
Maria Antonieta Nestor is a PhD candidate at the School of Law, Trinity College 
Dublin. She holds a Bachelor of Civil Law degree from University College Dublin 
(UCD) and an LLM from the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA). She 
was the first foreign student to be admitted into the prestigious David J Epstein 
Programme in Public Interest Law & Policy in August 2008, where she piloted 
an LLM specialization. She also holds a diploma in journalism, is a trained legal 
interpreter and translator, and is the co-founder and past co-editor of the Irish 
Review of CED Law & Policy.
Cathal O’Connell is Senior Lecturer in Social Policy at the School of Applied 
Social Studies, University College Cork. His research and teaching interests 
centre on the development of Irish social policy, housing policy and social housing 
management. His recent publications include: The State and Housing in Ireland 
(2007, Nova Press), ‘Citizenship and Social Exclusion in Limerick’ in N Hourigan 
(ed), Understanding Limerick: Social Exclusion and Change (Cork University 
Press, 2011) and ‘Social Housing Management, Governance and Delivery in 
Ireland: Ten Years of Reform on Seven Estates’ (2010) 25(10) Housing Studies 
317–34 (with M Norris). He is currently undertaking Irish Research Council-
funded research of the role of young people in housing estate regeneration.
Michelle Oren is a PhD candidate at the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology 
in the Urban Planning Programme. She holds a Master’s degree in Urban and 
Regional Planning from the Technion and a Bachelor in Political Sciences and 
Environmental Studies from the University of Haifa. Born in Israel, she spent her 
childhood years in Bogota, Colombia. In 2012 she worked as an Intern at UN-
Habitat in Nairobi for the policy analysis branch. Her chapter is partially based 
on her PhD thesis. Professor Alterman is her main PhD supervisor and Professor 
Yaffa Zilbershatz from Bar Ilan University Law School is her co-supervisor.
Vanesa Valiño is a Bachelor of Political Sciences and holds a Masters in Gender 
Politics from the Universtat Autònoma de Barcelona. During the last six years, 
she has been the Director of the Observatory of Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights, a non-profit association located in Barcelona which aims to promote social 
rights as fundamental human rights. She has contributed to many publication,s 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
xii
most recently ‘Defender y repensar los derechos sociales en tiempos de crisis’ 
(Observatory DESC 2009). She has also written articles related to housing matters 
such as ‘Derecho a la vivienda ynejecuciones hipotecarias. Estrategias contra el 
sobreendeudamiento de las familias’ (2010)
Yaffa Zilbershats is the Deputy President of Bar-Ilan University and previously 
served as the Dean of the Faculty of Law in Bar-Ilan University. She specializes in 
international, human rights and constitutional law and has published extensivley 
on these topics. She earned her LLB and PhD from Bar-Ilan University’s 
Faculty of Law. Her LLM degree in International Legal Studies was received 
from New York University, where she also served as a Visiting Scholar. She 
has served on Israeli blue-ribbon committees, including the Committee for the 
Preparation of Citizenship Legislation, the Rubinstein Committee for reviewing 
Israeli immigration and citizenship laws, and the Keshev Committee for equality 
in military and civil service. She currently serves as a member of the Board of 
Governors of the International Association of Jewish Lawyers and Jurists and as 
their academic adviser, and as a board member of the Israel Democracy Institute.

Chapter 1 
Introduction
Padraic Kenna
*
Introduction
Housing addresses the basic need for human shelter and facilitates the 
essential human requirement for a home. In recent times, housing has also 
been promoted by global financial institutions as the contemporary repository 
of household wealth and equity.1 Yet, this approach to housing has created the 
greatest global financial crisis for generations. The Economist has pointed out that 
the house price boom that preceded the 2008 financial crisis was remarkable for 
its scope and scale.2 However, house prices have begun to rise again in the US, 
but continued to fall in the peripheral countries of the Eurozone in spring 2013.3 
Indeed, across the world, there is a mixed picture, with house prices falling (the 
largest annual drop of nine per cent in Spain) and rising in equal numbers. In 
spring 2013, The Economist house-price indicators data showed that since 2007, 
house prices had fallen by 49 per cent in Ireland, 24 per cent in Spain, 21 per cent 
in the US, 14 per cent in the Netherlands and Japan, and 11 per cent in Italy and 
the UK.4 However, in that period, house prices had increased by 86 per cent in 
Hong Kong, 24 per cent in Austria and Singapore, 21 per cent in Switzerland, 20 
per cent in Canada, 17 per cent in China, 12 per cent in South Africa and 10 per 
cent in Australia.5 Consequently, the book focuses somewhat on the situations in 
*  I wish to thank all the contributors and especially Robin Paul Malloy and Dee 
Halloran for their valuable assistance in preparing this book.
1  The benefits of home-ownership as a driver of development based on Hernando De 
Soto, The Mystery of Capital (London, Bantam Books 2000) have been promoted by many 
global development institutions. 
2  ‘Home Truths’ The Economist (12 January 2013).
3  Initially, the house price fall in Estonia was sharper than any other country, but 
house prices have now recovered to one-third of the fall experienced between 2005 and 
2007. In Latvia, a large part of the mortgage portfolio has been backed by investment loans. 
See HJ Dübel and M Rothemund, A New Mortgage Credit Regime for Europe (Brussels, 
Centre for European Policy Studies 2013) 8.
4  ‘Home Truths’ The Economist (12 January 2013).
5  The highest annual increases to the fourth quarter of 2012 in the Eurozone were 
Latvia (+9.8 per cent), Estonia (+5.8 per cent) and Malta (+5.4 per cent), with the largest falls 
in the same period occurring in Spain (-12.8 per cent), Romania (-9.1 per cent) and Slovenia 
(-8.8 per cent). See Eurostat, News Release/Euroindicators 55/2013 (11 April 2013).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
2
the two countries (Ireland and Spain) where globalization has had the greatest 
impact on housing systems.
What then are the key contemporary housing issues in a globalized world? 
This book brings together a range of topics and approaches originally discussed 
at the ‘Contemporary Housing Issues in a Changing Europe’ conference held 
at National University of Ireland, Galway, in 2012. This was organized by the 
Centre for Housing Law, Rights and Policy, the European Network of Housing 
Researchers (Legal Aspects of Housing, Land and Planning Group), FEANTSA 
(the federation of European organizations working with homeless people) 
and Housing Rights Watch. The conference, which attracted more than 100 
participants from Europe, the US and Israel, provided an opportunity to examine 
and discuss key contemporary housing issues in the context of the global financial 
and sovereign debt crisis.
The objective of this book is to build on the findings of the conference and 
to take up the challenge of developing a new paradigm, working towards the 
possibility of an alternative future. The book revolves around three constellations 
of writing by diverse authors, each possessing a clear and developed approach to 
contemporary housing issues.
The first major theme considers the crisis in mortgage market regulation, 
the development of mortgage securitization and comparisons between Spain 
and Ireland, two countries at the epicentre of the global housing market crisis. 
The second thematic consideration focuses on housing rights within the 
European human rights architecture, within national constitutions and arising 
from new international instruments, with their particular relevance for persons 
with disabilities and developing economies. The third theme incorporates an 
examination of some responses to the decline and regeneration of inner cities, 
legal issues around squatting in developed economies, and changes in tenure 
patterns away from home-ownership.
A Globalized World
Definitions of globalization are diverse and the term itself is hotly contested.6 
Globalization  is a generic term used to describe a range of economic, industrial, 
social, military and cultural changes which have created high levels of 
interdependence, interaction and integration between different parts of the world, 
6  It has been argued that the epithet ‘global’ was born in ‘business management 
schools’ (Harvard, Columbia, Stanford). Specifically, the first text was The Globalization 
of Markets from Theodore Levitt (Harvard Business Review, May/June 1983). Later, the 
English-language economic press expanded the concept and afterwards the think tanks of 
neoliberalism adopted the concept.

Introduction
3
between people and between producers and consumers.7 Globalization primarily 
involves the intensification of worldwide social relations.
Technological development and communication are key features of globalization, 
which has also been variously conceived as action at a distance; time-space 
compression; accelerating interdependence; a shrinking world; and, among other 
concepts, global integration, the re-ordering of interregional power relations, 
consciousness of global conditions and the intensification of interregional 
connectedness. The local becomes embedded within more expansive sets of 
interregional relations and networks of power – the global village.8
From the information superhighway to the international trade in drugs and arms, 
to the phenomenal impact of Macworld, Nike and the global media, the subject of 
globalization has come to concern all and sundry. At the core of most discussions 
of the issue is the extraordinary explosion of both technology and information, 
in ways that have considerably reduced the twin concepts of time and space. In 
particular, information and communications technology (ICT) has emerged as 
perhaps the most dominant force in the global system of production, albeit with 
significant ramifications in all other spheres of contemporary human existence.9
Giddens regarded globalization as having four dimensions, involving the 
world capitalist economy, the nation-state systems, the world military order and 
the international division of labour.10
A precise and widely quoted definition of globalization is put forward by Held 
and others as:
a process (or set of processes) which embodies a transformation in the spatial 
organisation of social relations and transactions – assessed in terms of their extensity, 
intensity, velocity and impact – generating intercontinental or interregional flows 
and networks of activity, interaction and the exercise of power.11
Globalization has been described as an ideological construction, a convenient 
myth which, in part, helps justify and legitimize the neoliberal global project that 
7  There is an important distinction between internationalization and globalization; see 
David Held et al, Global Transformations, Politics, Economics and Culture (Cambridge, 
Polity Press 1999) 52–58. 
8  See D Held and A McGrew, ’The Great Globalization Debate: An Introduction’ in 
D Held and A McGrew (eds), The Global Transformation Reader (Cambridge, Polity Press 
2000).
9  UN Doc. E/CN.4/Sub.2/2000/13. The Realization of Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights: Globalization and its Impact on the Full Enjoyment of Human Rights. Preliminary 
report submitted by J Oloka-Onyango and Deepika Udagama, in accordance with Sub-
Commission resolution 1999/8, 15 June 2000, at para. 6.
10  Anthony Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity (Cambridge, Policy Press 
1990).
11  See D Held, A McGrew, D Goldblatt and J Perraton, ‘Rethinking Globalization’ in 
Held and McGrew (eds) (n 8) 68. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
4
is the creation of a global free market, and the consolidation of Anglo-American 
capitalism within the world’s major economic regions.12
Of course, contemporary globalization may be viewed as no more than a 
continuation of centuries-old global trade, which hugely intensified after the 
Industrial Revolution, as described by Marx and Engels in their description 
of the global nature of capital.13 Depicting globalization as the second great 
transformation, Howard-Hassmann suggests that globalization is the final assault 
of capitalism on those areas of the world that previously escaped it, either because 
of explicit communism or socialist politics, ‘or because capitalism had no interest 
in the region as a source of capital or resources, a source of workers or a market’.14 
It now appears that globalization is forcing onto an unwilling world the conditions 
of early European capitalism, ignoring the international human rights law that 
now prohibits such conditions.15 Indeed, Andreasson claims that the contemporary 
international vigour to create property rights in land and housing can be viewed 
as merely one step beyond the former colonial processes of dispossession of 
property by force.16
The primary agents and institutional focus of contemporary economic global 
practices are widely identified as transnational corporations.17 But the World Bank, 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Trade Organization (WTO), 
commodity and currency exchanges, and other international organisations, such 
as the World Economic Forum, comprising leading industrialists and politicians, 
set the agenda and course for globalized corporations, states and institutions 
to follow. Indeed, the World Bank has provided the theoretical framework for 
states to create housing policies which sponsored markets as the primary actors 
in housing systems.18
Sachs describes three overarching effects of the new globalization, a 
phenomenon which is globally transformative,19 all of which have a significant 
12  For an excellent account of the development of neoliberalism, see David Harvey, 
A Brief History of Neoliberalism (New York, OUP 2005).
13  See Karl Marx, Capital, A Critique of Political Economy. Volume 2 (London, 
Routledge 1983).
14  RE Howard-Hassmann, ‘The Second Great Transformation: Human Rights 
Leapfrogging in the Era of Globalization’ (2005) 27 HRQ 1, 5.
15  ibid 18.
16  See S Andreasson, ‘Stand and Deliver: Private Property and the Politics of Global 
Dispossession’ (2006) 54 Political Studies 3.
17  See Joel Bakan, The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power 
(London, Constable 2004).
18  See World Bank, From Plan to Market: World Development Report 1996 
(Washington DC, World Bank 1996); World Bank, The State in a Changing World 
(Washington DC, World Bank 1997); World Bank, Development Report (Washington DC, 
World Bank 1997). See also RM Buckley and J Kalarickal, Thirty Years of World Bank 
Shelter Lending – What Have We Learned? (Washington DC, World Bank 2006).
19  Jeffrey Sachs, The Price of Civilization (London, Vintage 2012) 93–103.

Introduction
5
impact on housing policies. The convergence effect refers to the fact that the new 
globalization provides the conduit for today’s emerging economies to leapfrog 
technologies. This leads to the second effect – the labour effects. The opening up 
of China to global trade in 1978 brought millions of low-skilled workers into a 
globally integrated labour pool. Inevitably, manufacturing jobs moved to China, 
with increasing unemployment among traditional manufacturing workers, many 
of whom had mortgages. The third effect – the mobility effect – means that as 
capital becomes internationally mobile, countries begin to compete for it, cutting 
corporate tax rates, easing regulations, reducing social spending and generating a 
‘race to the bottom’. When the 2008 financial crisis struck, it demonstrated a crisis 
of utterly mismanaged globalization.20
Robinson describes the current globalization as the near-culmination of five 
centuries of capitalism, or the fourth epochal shift in social structures.21 The first 
epoch, from 1492 to 1789, was ushered in with the emergence of capitalism from 
its feudal origins in Europe and its outward conquests of other continents. It was 
the epoch of mercantilism and primitive accumulation. The second epoch, which 
lasted until the late nineteenth century, of competitive or classical capitals, was 
marked by the Industrial Revolution, the rise of the bourgeoisie and the forging of 
the modern state, brilliantly described by Hobsbawn.22 The third epoch marked the 
rise of corporate (monopoly) capitalism, ‘the consolidation of a single world market 
and the nation-state system into which world capitalism became organized’.23 It 
was marked by the development of the financial industrial corporation, imperialist 
wars and the emergence of a socialist alternative to capitalism.
Today, in the fourth epoch of capitalism, globalization is associated with 
the microchip and information age. Thomas Friedman’s iconic text The Lexus 
and the Olive Tree viewed this globalization as a new technological economic 
system based on the microchip and driven by financial investors.24 However, this 
epoch also led to the collapse of twentieth-century attempts at socialism, as well 
as a ‘transition from the nation state phase of world capitalism, with its distinct 
institutional, organisations, political, and regulatory structures, to a transnational 
phase’.25 This emerging transnational phase of capitalism is qualitatively new.
The defining feature of this epoch is the rise of transnational capital, which 
creates the basis for globalization. The globalization of the production process, 
orchestrated by global corporations, integrates national circuits of capital into 
20  ibid 103.
21  W.I Robinson, A Theory of Global Capitalism (Baltimore, Johns Hopkins 
University Press 2004) 4–17.
22  See Eric Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution (New York, Mentor 1962); The Age of 
Capital (London, Sphere 1977); The Age of Empire (New York, Pantheon 1987).
23  Robinson (n 21) 4.
24  Thomas Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree (New York, Farrar, Straus & 
Giroux 1999).
25  Robinson (n 21) 5.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
6
global circuits of capital. Foreign direct investment (FDI) represents the emanation 
of this flow, which has played a critical role in integrating different regions of 
the world. In 2012, some 44 per cent of global FDI inflows were hosted by only 
five countries. China attracted the lion’s share (US$253 billion or 18 per cent of 
the total), followed by the US (US$175 billion), Brazil (US$65 billion), the UK 
(US$63 billion) and France (US$62 billion).26
Finance capital has become hegemonic with the use of offshore tax havens as 
impenetrable shields from public accountability, regulation and taxation, as well as 
perfectly legal means of concealing ownership.27 The use of offshore tax havens, 
where an estimated one-third of global wealth is held and through which half of 
all global trade passes, has been highlighted by the International Consortium of 
Investigative Journalists.28 It is suggested that half a million offshore accounts are 
held in the British Virgin Islands, and are estimated to facilitate some 40 per cent 
of global offshore companies. Murphy has identified the perverse effects of this 
‘feral finance’, pointing out that the global stock of financial assets is estimated at 
$220 trillion (of which $150 trillion is debt of some sort), whereas global GDP is 
about $63 trillion per annum. Meanwhile, the total flow of financial speculative 
trades in the world each day was estimated at approximately $4 trillion, or $1 
quadrillion per annum.29
Robinson identifies a ‘transnational capitalist class’ arising from this capital 
globalization, which seeks to capture the commanding heights of state policy-
making in key sectors of the economy, especially central banks and finance and 
foreign ministries.30 This transforms countries, using national state apparatuses 
to re-structure and integrate them into the global economy. Rothkopf describes a 
‘superclass’ or global power elite of about 6,000 people, influencing everything 
from the way currencies are priced worldwide to choosing which political 
candidates would have sufficient funding for presidential campaigns.31 This global 
‘superclass’ – the ‘vanguard of globalization’ – has stepped in to fill the void in 
global governance, but not in a conspiratorial manner.
Business leaders engage in what is effectively self-regulation. Unelected 
clusters of the most powerful effectively drive governments’ decision-making on 
global issues. Empowered individuals direct private resources that have become 
26  See OECD, FDI in Figures (Paris, OECD April 2013). The OECD countries, 
Luxembourg, Belgium, Ireland, Chile and Hungary enjoyed FDI inflows greater than 10 
per cent of GDP in 2012.
27  Nicholas Shaxson, Treasure Islands (London, Bodley Head 2011). 
28  See the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists website: http://www.
icij.org/offshore accessed 24 April 2013.
29  Richard Murphy, The Courageous State. (London, Searching Finance 2011) 249.
30  Robinson (n 21) 47–53.
31  David Rothkopf, Superclass: The Global Power Elite and the World They Are 
Making (London, Little, Brown 2008). Rothkopf points out (at 121) that a few thousand 
people among the corporate elite effectively control perhaps $100 trillion – two-thirds of 
the world’s total assets.

Introduction
7
the sine qua non of development capital flows. These are all important strands 
of the connective tissue binding the global community. The superclass confronts 
issues that many national governments and multilateral organizations cannot or 
will not address.32
Murphy urges politicians to champion a ‘courageous state’, avoiding political 
capture by financial capital, and acting in the public interest. He suggests a remedy 
for the crisis in banking caused by the housing finance crisis:
A Courageous State must now split banks in two so that no bank involved in the 
processing of transaction, managing customer deposits or in routine business 
and household lending, including mortgages, can engage in speculative market 
trading; and nor can such entities themselves or through related entities rely on 
bulk money markets for fund, as, for example, Northern Rock did.33
Globalization of this epoch represents the near-culmination of the centuries-
long process of the extensive enlargement of capitalism. However, many people 
across the world have benefited from this integration into the global economy. 
Sachs has suggested in The End of Poverty that the effect of globalized industrial 
development on Bangladesh has been a 66 per cent drop in infant mortality in 
30 years and a reduction in numbers in extreme poverty in India and China, 
respectively, by 200 and 300 million people since 1990.34 The numbers in the 
world experiencing ‘extreme poverty’ (surviving on less than $1.25 per day) has 
reduced from approximately half to one-quarter of the global population over the 
past 25 years.
Significantly, Sachs claims that the women working in the ‘sweatshops’ 
already ‘have a foothold in the modern economy that is a critical measurable step 
up from the villages of Malawi’.35 Of course, working conditions can be harsh, but 
are better than those of subsistence agriculture, especially for women. Perhaps the 
globalization of production therefore represents, more than anything else, a greater 
proletarianization of women’s work worldwide.
Clapham has pointed out that globalization involves the re-orientation of 
national governments in a climate where regulation and control are increasingly 
difficult.36 The danger of a flight of capital and jobs constrains taxation and public 
expenditure policies, resulting in reduced expenditure on housing. This has 
accompanied an emphasis on targeted spending, ‘value for money’ approaches and 
the privatization of state-owned housing. Regional economic imbalances arising 
from policies of flexible labour markets and freedom to locate given to corporations 
32  ibid 315.
33  Richard Murphy, The Courageous State (London, Searching Finance 2011) 253.
34  Jeffrey Sachs, The End of Poverty (London, Penguin 2005).
35  ibid 11.
36  David Clapham, ‘Housing Policy and the Discourse of Globalization’ (2006) 6(1) 
European Journal of Housing Policy 55.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
8
have resulted in housing shortages in some areas and surpluses in others. The 
flexible labour market approach increases the risk of episodes of poverty, with 
housing systems unable to respond adequately. Increased risk in the labour market 
has been transferred to housing through the deregulated housing finance system. 
Indeed, the role of planning is increasingly seen as merely supporting the housing 
market, even an overheated housing market. There is an emphasis on the supply of 
new housing in areas of economic growth and consequent high demand.37
Housing Issues
Kenna has pointed out that globalization has impacted on homelessness across 
the world, particularly in the creation of millions of migrants; the growth of 
global corporations linked to housing, home construction and consumption; the 
globalization of property rights in housing systems; the global spread of housing 
finance; globalized real estate investment; the re-ordering of cities and slums; and 
the diminution of state housing responses.38
Housing and the built environment are greatly influenced by the current global 
crisis (both social and economic), with governments on the one hand struggling to 
reconcile and regulate the forces of international finance, and on the other, to manage, 
plan and provide a good-quality built environment and housing stock. However, the 
root of the current financial crisis could be seen as the inadequate development and 
fortification of the law of the built environment and housing against the vagaries of 
unregulated global finance. The downgrading of financial and banking regulation in 
the 1980s unleashed an international flow of housing finance which has inundated 
housing systems across the world, integrating housing finance with global finance. 
This lead to mortgage market deregulation and the consequent lowering of lending 
standards.39 In Europe this followed the convergence of national currencies into the 
euro, with a common (and low) interest rate, after 1999.
The World Bank has described the speed at which market-based housing 
finance has spread around the world: ‘Since 2000, the world changed from one 
in which most of the world’s population now lives in countries with a market-
based mortgage finance system with generally affordable terms.’40 Yet, the Bank 
has acknowledged that ‘while market-based housing finance is now available to 
most middle-income people in the world it is still not available in most countries 
or for the poorest people’.41 Many informal housing settlements house renters or 
37  ibid.
38  Padraic Kenna, ‘Globalization and Housing Rights’ (2008) 15(2) Indiana Journal 
of Global Legal Studies 397.
39  Mark Stephens, ‘Mortgage Market Deregulation and its Consequences’ (2007) 
22(2) Housing Studies 201.
40  Buckley and Kalarickal (n 18) xii.
41  ibid.

Introduction
9
squatters who are unable to access housing finance because they have no clear 
marketable or mortgageable title.42
While large-scale informal settlements and individual squatting are prevalent 
in many developing cities, squatters’ rights or adverse possession as a means of 
acquiring property has been part of European law for many centuries. In this 
context, the chapter by Jane Ball examines squatting in England and France, both 
countries with developed property registration systems. She compares individual 
squatting with the emergence of collective squats. In Europe, collective squats 
often arose as a form of protest – ‘squats of conviction’, which act as foci for 
campaigns for political and social change. Historically, individual squatting has 
been treated in the law of both countries as a valuable means of using land which 
has been left idle. However, there is also the fear of granting title to such people 
and various ‘moral panics’ have been fomented. Indeed, the stereotype of the good 
squatter – a white farmer who tills the unused land – is being abandoned in law, 
and recent legislation in both countries seeks to criminalize squatting in residential 
property. Ball also refers to the large informal settlements of developing cities 
and to the Constitution of Brazil (1988), where certain squatters of five years can 
register their title.
Ball uses insider/outsider theory, originally developed by Lindbeck and 
Snower,43 to show how entry and exit costs of employment create a barrier to 
the entry of new employees. In a similar vein, she applies this theory to housing 
systems, based on her research in three regions of France. She posits that, although 
different from employment markets, the theory can be used to explain the 
exclusion of certain people from social housing and owner-occupation. Squatters 
are outsiders in the housing market and social housing system. Although squatting 
is a response to high transaction costs in accessing the housing market or social 
housing, squatters are also stigmatized. She suggests that the high transaction 
costs and outsider/insider approaches ultimately produce housing difficulties for 
everyone, and the emergence of squatting should be viewed as an early warning of 
housing system failure. The practical answer to insider/outsider dichotomies is to 
create a more ‘level playing field’ for all participants in housing systems.
Elsewhere, Angel has promoted regulated housing markets as the key enablers 
of housing across the world, although his analysis is more nuanced than most 
international writers. He defines effective housing systems as comprising five 
subsystems; finance; property registration; infrastructure; regulation; and social/
42  UN Centre for Human Settlements (UNCHS), Cities in a Globalizing World 
(London, Earthscan 2001) 77–87. While this report favours self-build and contrasts the 
view of housing as a right with housing as a function of ability-to-pay or purchase as a 
commodity in housing markets, it nevertheless outlines how globalization impacts on 
housing finance.
43  A Lindbeck and D Snower, The Insider-Outsider Theory of Employment and 
Unemployment (Cambridge, MA, MIT Press 1988).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
10
subsidized housing.44 Significantly, he suggests that, in order for the enabling 
market system itself to have potency, there must be an element of social housing 
or subsidized housing for those who cannot afford to access the market. This 
comprehensive approach to housing market systems should, ideally, ensure a 
supply of housing at affordable prices for all.
However, in most OECD countries with enabling market systems, the share 
of household spending on housing rose during the past decade, partly reflecting 
increased real house prices. From the mid-1980s until recently, particularly large 
price increases were observed in Ireland, Spain, the UK and the Netherlands, 
although prices were stable or even declined in Japan, Switzerland and Germany. 
This surge in housing prices was accompanied by booming housing investment 
in several countries, particularly in Spain and Ireland, and also in some Baltic/
Nordic countries.45
	
available) –200846
44  Schlomo Angel, Housing Policy Matters: A Global Analysis (New York, OUP 2000).
45  See D Andrews, A Caldera Sánchez and Å Johansson, ‘Housing Markets and 
Structural Policies in OECD Countries’, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, 
No 836 (Paris, OECD Publishing 2011). The OECD is made up of 34 countries: Australia, 
Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, 
Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, 
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the UK and the US.
46  ibid 10.
Very large increases
(60 per cent or more)
Moderate to large increases
(20 per cent to 90 per cent)
Stable or declining
(less than 20 per cent 
increase)
Australia
Austria
Chile
Belgium
Canada
Germany
Finland
Denmark
Hungary
Ireland
France
Israel
Netherlands
Greece
Japan
New Zealand
Italy
Korea
Norway
Slovenia
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
US
Table 1.1	
House price increases across the world: 1980 (or earliest year
Nominal prices deflated by the consumer price index.  
Source: national sources and OECD Economic Outlook No. 87.

Introduction
11
According to the UN Special Rapporteur on adequate housing, market-based 
housing finance has contributed to a widespread bubble in real estate prices and a 
decrease in affordability. It has done little to promote access to affordable adequate 
housing for the poorest. Between 1997 and 2004, average housing prices grew by 
149 per cent in Spain, 139 per cent in the UK, 187 per cent in Ireland, 112 per cent 
in Australia, 65 per cent in the US and 227 per cent in South Africa.47 
In 2012, the UN Special Rapporteur on adequate housing outlined the 
globalized prevalence of housing finance policies and their impact on the right to 
adequate housing for those living in poverty:
In the late 1970s a dramatic shift occurred in housing policies, starting with 
North America and Europe, followed later by developing countries in Latin 
America, Asia, Africa and by formerly planned economies. This shift, supported 
by predominant economic doctrine, called for the transfer of activities from State 
control to the private sector and for unrestricted free markets and free trade. 
This view soon gained hegemony, shaping the policies of States, international 
financial institutions and development agencies. The effects of this approach 
on housing policies across the globe have been dramatic and well documented.
A growing consensus was formed, whereby governments renounced their role as 
suppliers of affordable housing and become facilitators, supporting market demand 
rather than directly providing outcomes: ‘Governments should be encouraged to 
adopt policies that enable housing markets to work … and avoid distorting housing 
markets.’48 This new role implies creating conditions, institutions and regulations 
aimed at supporting housing finance systems to promote home-ownership under 
the neoliberal dogma of reliance on private property and market forces. 49
From the 1980s onwards, housing finance became perceived not only as a tool 
for promoting access to adequate housing, but also as critical to the development of 
the financial sector, and gradually became a central pillar of the financial market, 
expanding the terrain for global capital:50
The deregulation, liberalization and internationalization of finance that started 
in the 1980s had major implications for housing and urban development. Funds 
for mortgage lending now derive from national and international capital markets 
47  Raquel Rolnik, Report of the Special Rapporteur on Adequate Housing as 
a Component of the Right to an Adequate Standard of Living: The Rights to Adequate 
Housing, UN Doc A/67/286, 2012, para 12.
48  World Bank, Housing: Enabling Markets to Work, World Bank Policy Paper 
(Washington DC, World Bank 1993) 6.
49  Rolnik (n 47) paras 2–4.
50  ibid para 10.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
12
and not solely from existing savings and retail finance. These developments 
have been characterized as the ‘financialization’ of housing.51
This process has been accompanied by the conceptual transformation of adequate 
housing from a social good into a commodity, and part of a strategy for household 
wealth accumulation and welfare security.52
This ‘tsunami of liquidity’ is described in the chapter by Vanesa Valiño, 
where she traces its impact on Spain’s housing system and how it created an 
over-indebtedness among the working class in the absence of any other housing 
options. Spain has less than one per cent social housing and the rental market 
is not very well developed. The crash exposed the vulnerable position of home-
ownership borrowers, as well as the inconsistencies in the mortgage legislation, 
which is described in detail in the chapter by Sergio Nasarre-Aznar. Indeed, the 
state response was less than adequate in protecting borrowers, a different position 
from that of Ireland, as set out in the chapter by Karen Lynch-Shally. Some limited 
respite from the courts towards borrowers has been evident, particularly in relation 
to EU unfair clauses in consumer contracts provisions. Civil society organizations 
are developing a response in Spain, unlike Ireland, with half a million signatures 
being collected in one petition. Valiño suggests that the Spanish housing policy 
needs to be recast along the lines of the recommendations of the UN Special 
Rapporteur on the rights to adequate housing.
In contrast, the chapter by Joe Finnerty and Cathal O’Connell describes the 
changing tenure trajectories in contemporary Ireland – a country at the epicentre 
of the housing crisis. Reflecting the global policy influences of the World Bank 
and allied institutions, they chart the shift in state policy since the 1980s towards 
supporting the housing market as the primary vehicle for housing supply. This 
invokes the conceptual imagery of the ‘housing ladder’ – a metaphor prevalent 
in academic and public discourse. The embodiment of owner-occupation as the 
symbol of permanent security and stability offered a higher-order existence from 
that of the insecurity of the Irish rented sector. However, despite the dramatic 
surge in lending on home ownership for the past two decades, Ireland’s tenure 
pattern followed a different pattern from that of Spain. Owner-occupation declined 
as a proportion of tenure, as unaffordable house prices and improvements in the 
regulation and standards of private renting took effect. Finnerty and O’Connell 
also question why there has been so little downward slide on the home ownership 
‘ladder’ in Ireland following the financial crisis. There have been few repossessions, 
and here state policy has been a critical factor, providing a safety net for poor 
borrowers unable to repay loans and supporting vulnerable households with 
mortgage arrears. Indeed, there may also be hidden factors influencing the low 
rates of repossession. Low-income households who now enter the Irish housing 
51  Manuel B Aalbers, ‘The Financialization of Home and the Mortgage Market 
Crisis’ (2008) 12(2) Competition and Change 148. 
52  Rolnik (n 47) para 11.

Introduction
13
system will be accommodated within hybrid forms of social/private housing rather 
than being encouraged into low-cost home-ownership schemes. Clearly, political 
and legislative action can reduce the worst effects of the crisis.
Re-ordering and Growth of Cities
At a global level, the most significant contemporary housing issue is the rapid 
growth of urbanization. In the last decade, the urban population in the developing 
world grew by an average of 1.2 million people per week, or about one full 
year’s demographic growth in Europe’s urban areas.53 In the context of housing 
development, it is expected that by the middle of this century, out of every 10 
people on the planet, seven will be living in urban areas. Of course, increasing 
slums are one feature of this global phenomenon.54
A new structural phenomenon has been identified within the world’s cities, 
which are expected to number 358 with a population of more than one million 
people by 2015.55 A new constellation of globally networked cities, sometimes 
referred to as the ‘urban archipelago’, has been identified for over two decades. 
These cities may have more relations with other cities than with their hinterlands.56
In the globalized cities there are ‘mosaics of growing inequality’ within the 
‘global archipelago of interconnected city cores’.57 The combination of new 
information technologies and socio-economic re-structuring is reshaping cities and 
regions, ushering in new urban forms, with deprivation and poor housing locations 
also distinguished by under-investment in such technology and services.58
53  UN-Habitat, State of the World’s Cities 2012/13 Report (Nairobi, Kenya, UN 
Habitat 2012).
54  See Mike Davis, Planet of Slums (London, Verso 2006). 
55  See R Fuchs et al, Mega-city Growth and the Future (New York, UN University 
Press 1994) ch 1.
56  See UNCHS, Cities in a Globalizing World (London, Earthscan 2001). M Davis, 
‘Planet of Slums: Urban Involution and Informal Proletariat’ (2004) 26 NLR 5, 8 points 
out that: ‘Urbanists also speculate about the processes weaving together Third World cities 
into extraordinary new networks, corridors and hierarchies. For example, the Pearl River 
(Hong Kong–Guangzhou) and the Yangtze River (Shanghai) deltas, along with the Beijing–
Tianjin corridor, are rapidly developing into urban-industrial megalopolises comparable to 
Tokyo–Osaka, the lower Rhine, or New York–Philadelphia. But this may only be the first 
stage in the emergence of an even larger structure: “a continuous urban corridor stretching 
from Japan/North Korea to West Java.” Shanghai, almost certainly, will then join Tokyo, 
New York and London as one of the “world cities” controlling the global web of capital and 
information flows. The price of this new urban order will be increasing inequality within 
and between cities of different sizes and specializations.’
57  See UNCHS (n 57).
58  See M Castells, The Informational City: Informational Technology, Economic 
Restructuring and the Urban-Regional Process (Oxford, Blackwell 1989).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
14
In many developing cities, high-quality ICT infrastructures are being packaged 
through entrepreneurial planning, public subsidies and defensive urban design into 
industrial parks for international firms and ‘Euro-American’-style gated residential 
enclaves for social and economic elites.59
Global finance competes with local private and state bodies for land in the 
new globally networked cities. This has an enormous impact on subsequent 
housing costs and the affordability of housing, as well as the location and 
subsidy levels required for social housing.60 As the United Nations Centre for 
Human Settlements (UNCHS) has pointed out, ‘many cities now acknowledge 
that the current funding flows and investment capital demands an international 
urban orientation over and above managing local issues’.61 States are faced with 
the outcomes of rising market prices where key workers such as teachers and 
public servants cannot afford to buy housing. In Europe, political pressure from 
these organized groups has led to various ‘affordable’ housing schemes to enable 
access to the market by state subsidies on mortgages or on land or purchase 
prices.62 The effect, of course, has been to buttress the rising markets, as states 
were drawn into higher and higher levels of subsidies to meet the prices of starter 
homes rising with the market.
The development of housing townships and projects/gated communities 
represents a particularly divisive aspect of recent patterns of urbanization. This 
has led to large tracts of land and civic services being denied to lower-income 
residents of cities. According to Kothari and Chaudhry:
In Shanghai, Pow highlights the moral order underpinning the erection of gated 
communities, which represent the move to create ‘civilised’ communities away 
from the uncivilised and stigmatised underclass of rural immigrants. Caldeira in 
her compelling analysis of Sao Paulo’s gated communities notes that once the 
upper class withdraws into enclaves, an inevitable contraposition between a safe 
and familiar inside and a threatening and unknown outside surfaces. Perhaps 
nowhere is this tendency more extreme than in Dubai, a de facto vast gated 
community founded on overarching commercial interests and built according 
to its global image, in order to attract ‘upper classes’ from all over the world. 
Behind the facade of luxury lies the fate of thousands of Filipino, Indian and 
Pakistani immigrants unable to gain citizenship (and related rights) and de facto 
59  UNCHS (n 57) 11.
60  B Needham, Land for Social Housing (Brussels, CECODHAS 2000).
61  UNCHS (n 57) 4.
62  See Sarah Monk and Christine Whitehead, Making Housing More Affordable: 
The Role of Intermediate Tenures (Oxford, Wiley-Blackwell 2010); Kathleen Scanlon and 
Christine Whitehead, Social Housing in Europe II: A Review of Policies and Outcomes 
(London, LSE Publishing 2008). 

Introduction
15
forced to live in camps on the periphery in extremely precarious conditions, 
working draconian hours, and experiencing totalitarian social control.63
In the introduction to the UN-Habitat State of the World’s Cities 2012/13 Report, 
Joan Clos, the Executive Director of UN-Habitat, points out that the crisis has 
impacted on cities in different ways:
It shows that a lopsided focus on purely financial prosperity has led to growing 
inequalities between rich and poor, generated serious distortions in the form 
and functionality of cities, also causing serious damage to the environment – 
not to mention the unleashing of precarious financial systems that could not be 
sustained in the long run.64
The Report introduces a new tool – the ‘City Prosperity Index’ – together with a 
conceptual matrix, the ‘Wheel of Urban Prosperity’, to assist decision-makers to 
design clear policy interventions. It advocates a transformative change towards a 
people-centred, sustainable urban development, where our current understanding 
of prosperity is revised to include quality of life, infrastructures, equity and 
environmental sustainability.
In this context, the chapter by Marie Antoineta Nestor critically examines 
the various legislative, funding and political measures applied to US inner-city 
under-served communities in the past 60 years. She questions whether the public 
interest law models developed within these neighbourhoods could be effectively 
transposed to similar neighbourhoods in Ireland. Contemporary approaches to 
regeneration of these neighbourhoods have involved developing new legal services 
aimed at combating poverty and social exclusion. Law centres and community 
lawyering seek to empower local people and communities, prompting the practice 
of community economic development. In the US, community lawyers have been 
central to this regeneration response to the globalized re-ordering of inner cities. 
Nestor considers how public interest law and regeneration can be connected in this 
way in Dublin through linking sustainable development with the establishment of 
a community law centre.
Housing and the Global Financial Crisis
At the beginning of 2007, the Mortgage Bankers Association of America 
reported increasing default among American over-indebted home-owners. This 
was but the tip of the iceberg. Beneath the surface was a universal credit crisis 
in housing finance. In short, mortgage lending had expanded into unsustainable 
63  See Miloon Kothari and Shivani Chaudry, Taking the ‘Right to the City’ Forward: 
Obstacle and Promises (New Delhi, India Habitat International Coalition 2010).
64  UN-Habitat (n 54) iv.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
16
territory, with borrowers unable to repay loans. The explosion in credit had led to 
two decades of rising house prices. Sachs points out that the fall in house prices 
in 2006 spelled the end of a couple of decades when the middle classes treated 
their homes as ATM machines, drawing on the ostensible value of their homes 
through equity loans.65
Many American house purchasers had been attracted by novel arrangements, 
such as ‘teaser’ mortgages (below market rates for an initial period), ‘ninja’ 
mortgages (borrower having no income, no job and no assets), ‘piggyback’ 
mortgages (further lending on an existing mortgage to cover repayments) and ‘liar 
loans’ (loans based on unverified statements of income). However nefarious these 
arrangements may have been, and they resulted in many millions of borrowers 
losing their homes, they were only part of the crisis. These arrangements 
were at the base of a global pyramid of ‘synthetic’ securities traded between 
financial institutions. Lenders (usually banks) sold off their riskiest mortgages 
by repackaging them into securities called collateral debt obligations (CDOs), 
channelling the cash flows from thousands of mortgages into a series of tiered 
or tranched bonds, with risks and yields attuned to different investor tastes.66 The 
top-tier tranches would have first call on the underlying cash flows arising from 
the mortgage repayments, and would be rated and sold as AAA-rated bonds. The 
lower tiers, which would have a call on the underlying cash flows, were rated 
lower, but carried higher yields. These ‘securities’ were traded around the world. 
As Soros points out:
Starting around 2005, securitization became a mania. It was easy and fast to 
create ‘synthetic’ securities that mimicked the risks of real securities but did 
not carry the expense of buying and assembling actual loans. Risky paper could 
therefore be multiplied well beyond the actual supply in the market. Enterprising 
investment bankers sliced up CDO and repackaged them into CDOs of CDOs, 
or CDO2s. There were even CDO3s. The highest slices of lower rated CDOs 
obtained AAA ratings. In this way more AAA liabilities were created than there 
were AAA assets. Towards the end, synthetic products accounted for more than 
half the traded volume.67
By 2007, these mortgage-backed securities were held by financial institutions and 
banks around the world. Both public and private-label securitization took place 
outside the regulated financial system in the ‘shadow banking system’. Official 
regulation never really existed.68
65  Sachs (n 19) 16.
66  George Soros, The Crash of 2008 and What it Means (New York, Public Affairs 
2008).
67  ibid xviii.
68  Dübel and Rothemund (n 3) 11.

Introduction
17
From 2007, house price falls rendered most US subprime mortgages worthless. 
The base of the global apex of housing mortgage-related financial derivatives 
began to crumble. When the true nature of these high-risk, low-value instruments 
became evident, the financial system panicked.
In the second half of 2008, the US credit crisis began to trigger a global crisis 
in the financial system that spread to the real economy. Soros points out that 
this crisis was of an entirely different character compared to previous capitalist 
crises.69 It had spread from one segment of the market to others, particularly those 
which employed newly created structured and synthetic instruments. Both the 
exposure and the capital base of major global financial institutions were brought 
into question. Once this crisis began, financial markets unravelled rapidly. It was 
no longer certain which financial institutions were actually solvent, given the 
widespread nature of assets held in these now-worthless ‘synthetic’ instruments. 
Uncertainties about major losses resulted in a lack of confidence between banks 
and a ‘credit crunch’ as the interbanking lending system froze.
From 2007, central banks across the developed world began to inject enormous 
levels of funds to maintain the global banking system.
The convergence of a credit crunch, failing banks, house price collapses and 
economic slowdown prompted states to take action in their housing systems:
The financial crisis starting in 2008, and the important role of mortgage loans 
not only in the subprime crisis in the United States, but also in some EU markets, 
has acted recently as a catalysing factor to change the traditional perspective. 
Mortgages and related asset classes, such as developer loans, are so large in 
proportion to bank assets that, as the crisis developed, the problems in some EU 
mortgage markets no longer remained confined to national boundaries. Rather 
they had EU-wide ramifications, e.g. by affecting investors in other jurisdictions 
funding banks, or by deteriorating the country’s fiscal position as a result of 
massive support for failing banks.70
These housing policy impacts of the international financial crisis differed markedly 
between and within European and other states.71 Some states, such as Ireland, 
undertook to guarantee all the liabilities of banks and thus banking debt became 
69  See Soros (n 67) 26. For Soros, this demonstrated the fallibility of neoclassical 
approaches to economics, based on the supply/demand nexus and the limited techniques 
and metrics used by economics to analyse a situation that is vastly more complex, and 
on which they are not independent observers. These techniques distort the underlying 
information, but take on an existence of their own, further complicating reality and the task 
of understanding it. 
70  Dübel and Rothemund (n 3) 2.
71  See H van der Heijden, K Dol and M Oxley, ‘Western European Housing Systems 
and the Impact of the International Financial Crisis’ (2011) 26(3) Journal of Housing and 
the Built Environment 295.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
18
sovereign debt. The result was the destruction of states’ credit ratings and an 
inability to borrow, requiring intervention from the IMF and the European Central 
Bank – measures which precipitated programmes of austerity. CECODHAS, the 
Federation of Social Housing Organizations in Europe, pointed out in 2012 that the 
deep economic downturn and austerity measures have led to an increase in levels 
of poverty and housing exclusion across Europe; the numbers on waiting lists for 
social housing is increasing rapidly in many countries; state budgets dedicated to 
housing policies have been significantly reduced; mortgage and rent arrears and 
repossessions are increasing; and in some cases social housing organizations are 
re-structuring or selling their stock to raise capital.72
A European Parliament Report in 2013 detailing how EU Member States 
responded to the financial crisis noted that states applied different strategies by 
choosing to finance a specific type (or group) of social expenditure that could 
provide a ‘safety net’ for an increasing share of the population experiencing severe 
economic conditions:73
Despite EU housing markets being characterized by a high share of home-
ownership, the deep economic crisis created an exogenous shock for the social 
housing market with all European countries experiencing a significant increase 
in poverty rates and housing exclusion … The EU recognizes social housing as a 
key instrument in ensuring the right to housing as stated by international law, to 
meet the requirements of the Treaty and achieve Europe 2020 targets.74
Direct state housing provision for low-income households has diminished, 
and some states are unable to dedicate any resources towards social housing. 
Homelessness has risen across the EU as the economic and financial crisis has 
persisted.75 Similarly, the extent of material deprivation or ‘the inability to live a 
decent life’ has increased dramatically in some EU Menber States such as Greece, 
the Baltic States, Ireland and Spain since 2008.76
In this context, the chapter by Sergio Nasarre-Aznar critically examines the 
weaknesses in mortgage lending practices and the deficient common law system 
of mortgage lending regulation. He raises even more significant questions in 
relation to the role and legality of the rating agencies that legitimized the synthetic 
72  CECODHAS, Impact of the Crisis and Austerity Measures on the Social Housing 
Sector. CECODHAS Housing Europe’s Observatory, Research Briefing (Brussels, 
CECODHAS 2012).
73  European Parliament, Directorate General for Internal Policies, Social Housing in 
the EU (Brussels, PE 2013) 492.469.
74  ibid 6–7.
75  Nicole Fondeville and Terry Ward, ‘Research Note 8/2011, Homelessness During 
the Crisis’ (Social Situation Observatory, November 2011).
76  European Commission, EU Employment and Social Situation, Quarterly Review 
(European Commission, Luxembourg June 2012) 48.

Introduction
19
financial products. Major questions are also raised as to the reliability and 
transparency of the US mortgage titling system – issues which may not be entirely 
resolved by a house price recovery and redemption of these mortgages. Examining 
the detrimental impact of the international crisis on the Spanish housing system, 
he shows how excessive and reckless bank lending and the securitization of 
mortgages also contributed to the crisis in Spain. He provides a key contemporary 
legal analysis of the Spanish situation and also outlines valuable initiatives being 
developed to prevent a repeat of this scenario, and to rescue something from the 
gross over-supply of housing.
One of the key areas highlighted by Nasarre-Aznar is the difference 
between recourse and non-recourse across the US and in Spain. The generally 
accepted view that a mortgage is a ‘real right in land created by the owner 
(mortgagor) entitling the mortgagee to payment of a certain sum out of the 
land with priority to other creditors on the forced sale of the property’77 would 
appear to be at odds with the prevalence of recourse mortgages. In Spain, the 
recourse to the assets and income of guarantors to the mortgage (which often 
include extended family members) by the mortgagee in the event of default is 
creating an enormous social impact.
In her chapter, Karen Lynch-Shally compares the constitutional, legislative 
and secondary provisions relating to mortgages in Spain and Ireland in the context 
of the widely differing levels of repossession for arrears. It would appear that 
such provisions exert a significant influence, with relatively few repossessions in 
Ireland where the protection for the borrower has been strong. The courts have 
begun to give legal effect to the consumer codes in Ireland, integrating these 
into mortgage law, following legislation in 2009 which established a distinct 
classification of ‘housing loans’ within mortgage law. However, an unintended 
repeal of a statutory provision in 2009 provided the primary legal reason for the 
low level of repossessions in Ireland.
Housing Rights
Globalization has contributed to the widespread proliferation of human rights 
discourse and information, especially the UN instruments. However, some 
view the move towards rights-based approaches as contemporaneous with a 
move towards individualization in social policy, influenced by the growth of 
consumerism, the development of modernist and postmodernist social theory and 
the effects of globalization.78
77  Real Property Law & Procedure in the European Union (European University 
Institute, Florence, 31 May 2005) 85.
78  See Alastair Hudson, ‘Equity, Individualisation and Social Justice’ in Alastair 
Hudson et al, New Perspectives on Property Law, Human Rights and the Home (London, 
Cavendish Publishing 2004); Kenna (n 38).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
20
Housing rights are viewed as rooted in human rights and particularly socio-
economic rights.79 These rights are now seen as an integral part of economic, 
social and cultural rights within the United Nations, European, Inter-American 
and African human rights instruments. At the level of public international law, the 
UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (UNCESCR) offers a 
global supervisory mechanism for the implementation of housing rights, while the 
European Committee of Social Rights of the Council of Europe (ECSR) is creating 
valuable contemporary clarifications on the nature and extent of housing rights. 
Aspects of housing rights are regularly adjudicated upon in courts throughout the 
world,80 including in the US,81 with contemporary South African jurisprudence 
in this area attracting keen academic interest.82 Social rights (including housing 
rights) have formed part of most new constitutions since 1945, not just in Europe, 
but around the world.83
In their chapter, Michelle Oren, Rachelle Alterman and Yaffa Zilbershatz have 
examined the nature and extent of housing rights across the world within national 
constitutions. This chapter, based on a comprehensive contemporary survey of 
205 national constitutions, reveals three approaches taken by states to incorporate 
such rights. First, there is a direct or explicit approach along the lines of individual 
housing rights for certain persons. Second, housing rights can be found embedded 
within other rights, such as social security, assistance to the needy, etc. Third, 
79  Classical human rights discourse is usually confined to public international law 
largely ignoring housing rights within consumer rights, property rights, family law rights, 
etc. See S Deutch, ‘Are Consumer Rights Human Rights?’(1995) 32(2) Osgoode Hall 
Law Journal 538. For comprehensive overviews of socio-economic rights, see A Eide et 
al (ed), Economic, Social and Cultural Rights: A Textbook, 2nd edn (Dordrecht, Martinus 
Nijhoff Publishers 2001); M Craven, The International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (Oxford, Clarendon Press 2005); MA Baderin and R McCorquodale (eds), 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in Action (OUP 2007).
80  See Jessie Hohmann, The Right to Housing: Law, Concepts, Possibilities (Oxford, 
Hart Publishing 2012); Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions, Litigating Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights (Geneva, COHRE 2003); T Melish, Protecting Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights in the Inter-American Human Rights System (Connecticut, Yale 
Law School 2002); A Nolan, ‘Litigating Housing Rights: Experiences and Issues’ (2006) 
13(1) Dublin University Law Journal 145.
81  See B Harris, Defending the Right to a Home (Aldershot, Ashgate 2004).
82  See especially Government of South Africa and others v Grootboom and others 
CCT11/00 2001 (1) SA 46 (CC), 4 October 2000, 2000 (11) BCLR 1169 (CC); Port 
Elizabeth Municipality v Various Occupiers 2005 (1) SA 217 (CC). Case No CCT 53/03 
City of Cape Town v Rudolph 2003 (11) BCLR 1236 (C).
83  See A Ben-Bassat and D Momi, ‘Social Rights in the Constitution and in Practice’ 
(2008) 36(1) Journal of Comparative Economics 103; JM Woods, ‘Justiciable Social 
Rights as Critique of the Liberal Paradigm’ (2003) 38 Texas International Law Journal 763. 
J Kemeny,  Housing and Social Theory (London, Routledge 1992) points out that the level 
of state control over housing markets reflects the balance of political power between labour 
and capital.

Introduction
21
housing rights can be discerned from indirect or implied rights, such as peaceful 
enjoyment of possessions or privacy rights. The authors suggest that much 
enrichment of international cross-learning on housing rights could develop in this 
area of law.
Beneath the level of constitutions, many housing rights are enshrined in both 
private and public law at the national and local levels, such as regulations on 
rights of access, building standards, planning, sanitation and associated law and 
decisions.84 There are detailed legal regulations and institutionalized regulatory 
systems on land use, building standards and housing cost controls, all with legally 
enforceable sanctions for violations, and compensation for breaches. In line with 
the growth of regulatory systems for over a century, construction and construction 
product norms that establish minimum quality standards are in place in many 
states across the world.85
Courts across the world have enforced housing rights in areas of security of 
tenure, respect for home, non-discrimination, decent physical standards and fair 
procedures in evictions.86 This regulatory machinery seeks to protect, preserve and 
promote the physical and mental health and social well-being of people, control 
nuisances, prevent and control communicable diseases, and regulate adequate 
sanitation and public health.87 The use of planning law to achieve integration 
of social/affordable and private housing, control of land use and quality of 
infrastructure and amenities is now becoming widely recognized, as a somewhat 
lateral but practical means of realizing some housing rights.88 Indeed, some of these 
measures can go so far as to delimit and deny traditional civil and political rights, 
84  UN-Habitat UNHRP Report Series, No 3, National Housing Rights Legislation, 
3rd edn (HS/638/01E) (UNHRP, Nairobi 2006); UN-Habitat UNHRP Report Series, No 
1, Housing Rights Legislation: Review of International and National Legal Instruments 
(HS/638/01E) (UNHRP, Nairobi 2002); Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions, Sources 
No 4: Legal Resources for Housing Rights: International and National Standards 
(COHRE, Geneva 2000): Scott Leckie (ed), National Perspectives on Housing Rights (The 
Hague, Kluwer Law International 2003). See also, for example, Roger Burridge and David 
Ormandy, ‘Health and Safety at Home: Private and Public Responsibility for Unsatisfactory 
Housing Conditions’ (2007) 34(4) Journal of Law and Society 544.
85  Cass Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State 
(Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press 1990). See also P Cartwright, ‘Consumer 
Protection in Financial Services: Putting the Law in Context’ in P Cartwright (ed), Consumer 
Protection in Financial Services (The Hague, Kluwer Law International 1999). 
86  See DB Bryson, ‘The Role of Courts and a Right to Housing’ in Bratt et al, A Right 
to Housing (Philadelphia, Temple University Press 2006).
87  Schlomo Angel, Housing Policy Matters: A Global Analysis (New York, OUP 
2000) 155–60.
88  Juli Ponce-Sole (ed) Land Use Law, Housing and Social and Territorial Cohesion 
(Denver, Rocky Mountain Institute 2006); Padraic Kenna, Housing Law, Rights and Policy 
(Dublin, Clarus Press 2011). 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
22
such as property rights, by extended rights of occupancy for tenants overriding the 
legal owners’ powers to sell.89
In the global context of housing being secured primarily through markets, 
and in terms of owner-occupation, where a loan is required, many states have 
introduced protections for such housing consumers. Indeed, EU law provides that 
such contracts cannot contain unfair terms. A new concept – that of the ‘vulnerable 
consumer’ – has been introduced into Irish consumer protection and mortgage law, 
with lenders required to take reasonable steps to accommodate that person. This 
places a duty of care on lenders so that no inappropriate mortgages are given – a 
situation which would challenge the legality of many subprime loans.
Minimum Core Obligations and Persons with Disabilities
Housing rights are often associated with the right to basic shelter, invoking a 
‘minimum core obligation’ on states. Article 2(1) of the International Covenant 
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights requires states to take steps ‘to the 
maximum of its available resources, with a view to achieving progressively the 
full realization of the rights recognized’.90 This includes housing rights. However, 
without an established measurable baseline of minimum core obligations, it is, in 
reality, impossible to properly measure any progressive realization. UNCESCR 
General Comment 3 (1991) established that:
a minimum core obligation to ensure the satisfaction of, at the very least, 
minimum essential levels of each of the rights is incumbent upon every State 
party. Thus, for example, a State party in which any significant number of 
individuals is deprived of essential foodstuffs, of essential primary health care, 
of basic shelter and housing, or of the most basic forms of education is, prima 
facie, failing to discharge its obligations under the Covenant. If the Covenant 
were to be read in such a way as not to establish such a minimum core obligation, 
it would be largely deprived of its raison d’être.91
While human rights scholars often claim credit for it, the notion of minimum core 
state obligations to ensure people’s basic existence is shared across the political 
spectrum. Frederich Hayek argued that substantive equality and distributive 
(social) justice conflicted with rule of law, but nevertheless accepted that 
89  Christopher McCrudden, Buying Social Justice: Equality, Government 
Procurement, and Legal Change (OUP 2007).
90  UN Doc A/6316 (1966) International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights. UNGA Resolution 2200A (XXI), entered into force 3 January 1976.
91  UN Doc E/1991/23, UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 
General Comment 3, The Nature of States Parties Obligations (art 2, para 1) 12/14/1990, 
para 10. 

Introduction
23
governments could provide a minimum level of support for the ‘unfortunate’ in 
society.92 Similarly, Milton Friedman accepted the need for a guaranteed minimum 
income, albeit at a low level.93 Sen and Nussbaum argue for a minimum provision 
useful for the facilitation of human capabilities, leading to the development of 
people’s lives.94 A classical Marxist approach recognizes that, for the capitalist 
system to continue, capitalism must ensure (either through wages or state welfare 
provision) that workers are able to work, but also that the working class must 
reproduce itself. A minimum core obligation of the availability of basic necessities 
is essential for the reproduction of the working class.
Chapman and Russell describe the ‘minimum core’ as one of the more difficult 
concepts in human rights, ‘bridging the gap, as it does, between lofty goals and 
available resources’.95 Across the world, courts struggle to advance a coherent legal 
approach to making this minimum core a reality.96 However, contemporary writers 
such as King suggest that such social rights can only be advanced incrementally 
by courts – and, indeed, courts have not always proven to be effective guardians 
of such rights.97
Indeed, King proposes state obligations of a ‘social minimum’ or a claim for 
resources required for a minimally decent life. This ‘social minimum’ involves an 
entitlement to resources to meet a healthy subsistence threshold, meeting basic 
physical needs of shelter, nutrition, childhood development, health, psychological 
integrity; a social participation threshold involving education, insurance against 
economic shocks and resources for minimal social engagement with family and 
peers; and finally an agency threshold involving education and economic stability 
to engage in basic life-planning, framing and achieving long-term goals.
92  Frederich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom (University of Chicago Press 1944) 133: 
‘There can be no doubt that some minimum of food, shelter, and clothing, sufficient to 
preserve health and capacity to work, can be assured to everybody.’
93  Milton Friedman (with RD Friedman) Capitalism and Freedom (University of 
Chicago Press 1962) 192.
94  Amartya Sen, Inequality Re-examined (Oxford, Clarendon Press 1992); Martha 
Nussbaum and Amartya Sen (eds), The Quality of Life (OUP 1993). See also NC 
McNaughton, ‘Housing, Homelessness and Capabilities’ (2010) 27(1) Housing, Theory 
and Society 23.
95  A Chapman and S Russell (eds), Core Obligations: Building a Framework for 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Antwerp, Intersentia 2002) 8–9. It is variously 
referred to as minimum core content, core content, essential elements, core obligations and 
minimum state obligations.
96  Government of South Africa and others v Grootboom and others (n 84); R (on the 
application of Limbuela) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL 66, 
[2006] 1 AC 396; Moldovan v Romania (2005) 44 EHRR 16; Shantistar Builders v Narayan 
Khimalal Totame [1990] 1 SCC 520. See also Colm O’Cinneide, ‘A Modest Proposal: 
Destitution, State Responsibility and the European Convention on Human Rights’ (2008) 
5 EHRLR 583.
97  Jeff King, Judging Social Rights (CUP 2012).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
24
Traditional housing rights indicators based on shelter and physical elements of 
housing are also being transcended by a focus on housing rights as a means to an 
end rather than an end in itself. For instance, Article 19 of the UN Convention on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) provides for a right in relation 
to: ‘Living independently and being included in the community.’ States must 
take effective and appropriate measures to facilitate full enjoyment by persons 
with disabilities of this right and their full inclusion and participation in the 
community.98 This includes ensuring that persons with disabilities have access to 
a range of in-home, residential and other community support services, including 
personal assistance necessary to support living and inclusion in the community, 
and to prevent isolation or segregation from the community.99
Elizabeth Kamundia shows in her chapter that the universal nature of UN 
human rights instruments can impact differently on countries with different 
levels of economic resources, despite having legal effect domestically. She traces 
how Article 19 has become part of Kenyan constitutional law and examines key 
legislative and policy provisions. The central and supportive role of families 
for people with disabilities is enormously significant in any discussion of rights 
in the Kenyan (and African) context. However, the right to independent living 
can be hampered by poor education and transport facilities, a lack of assistive 
devices and discrimination. More serious obstacles lie in the structural challenges 
facing the state in relation to poverty and housing deprivation. The resettlement of 
large numbers of internally displaced persons, extremely high levels of poverty, 
acute shortages of habitable dwellings and the prevalence of extensive slums 
and squatter settlements present major obstacles for human rights realization. 
Indeed, Kamundia points out that 60–80 per cent of residents in Kenya’s largest 
urban centres live within informal settlements, lacking basic services. Clearly, 
implementing the right to independent living depends on the effective enjoyment 
of the right to housing.
The contemporary enjoyment of the right to independent living allied to 
housing rights is set to become a key element of housing policies and law, since 
the UNCRPD has now been ratified by 130 states and signed by 155. The Optional 
Protocol attached to the UNCRPD, whereby individuals can make a complaint to 
the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, has already begun 
to create a global jurisprudence in this area.
Thus, while the minimum core obligation on states is becoming more person-
centred, it still requires the devotion of significant resources. The establishment of 
a globally accepted and enforced minimum core obligation, however, has proved 
to be elusive to date.
98  UN Doc A/RES/61/106. 
99  See Report of Inclusion International, Inclusive Communities = Stronger 
Communities, Global Report on Article 19: The Right to Live and Be Included in the 
Community (London, Inclusion International October 2012).

Introduction
25
Globalization Meets Housing Rights
Contemporary debates on housing oscillate between traditional perspectives of 
freedom of contract and sanctity of property on the one hand, and the realization of 
housing and human rights on the other. There is a fundamental difference between 
orthodox economic and human rights approaches to housing across the world 
today. Indeed, some writers suggest that contemporary mainstream economics is 
fundamentally contradictory to many human rights, especially economic, social 
and cultural rights.100 Mainstream economics and human rights have different 
language and conceptual frameworks – the former using the language of wants 
and the latter using the language of rights.
Within the language of wants, ability to pay is the key question, whereas within 
the language of rights, it is entitlement. If in the first case exclusion and inequality 
are tolerable, in the second case the only acceptable situation is one characterized 
by inclusion and equality. In other words, goods and services can be unequally 
distributed, but rights cannot.101 The UN Special Rapporteur on Adequate Housing 
has highlighted this dichotomy in relation to housing:
Housing finance policies based on credit are inherently discriminatory against 
lower-income households, and at their best increase housing affordability for 
upper- and middle-income groups. Housing finance policies often ‘redline’ the 
poor, who are required to pay much higher prices for financial services, exposing 
them to financial risks inherent to global financial markets and indebtedness.102
Indeed, housing policies around the world, since the 1970s, have involved states 
creating conditions, institutions and regulations aimed at supporting globalized 
housing financial systems promoting home-ownership as the primary tenure, 
often under the neoliberal paradigm on private property and market forces.103 
Housing has been promoted as a financial asset rather than a home, and the 
subsequent securitization of housing loans has integrated housing finance into 
global capital movements, effectively freezing mortgage law development. 
However, while robust neoliberal economic arguments against housing rights 
may have historical integrity, they are less than convincing in the context of 
modern industrialized and urbanized societies. As the UN Special Rapporteur 
on the right to adequate housing pointed out in 1993, the ideologies of states are 
reflected in their human settlement policies:
The arguments against awarding socio-economic rights on the grounds of cost 
and their impact on the spending priorities of the Legislature and Executive are 
100  M.C Branco, Economics versus Human Rights (London, Routledge 2009) 4–5.
101  ibid 5.
102  Rolnik (n 47) para 65.
103  ibid para 3. See De Soto (n 1); Buckley and Kalarickal (n 18).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
26
dwarfed in the face of the large-scale public spending programmes and market 
intervention measures, which are a permanent feature of modern governance.104
Even the OECD accepts the need for state intervention in housing systems:
Housing warrants attention for several reasons. It is an important element of 
wealth as well as the single biggest expenditure for a majority of households 
and, as witnessed by the recent financial and economic crisis, housing market 
outcomes can have repercussions for the macro economy. A well-functioning 
housing market supporting geographical mobility is also necessary to ensure 
efficient labour market outcomes. Housing also deserves attention for social 
reasons, inter alia because adequate housing and their future employment. 
A wide range of public policies affect the housing market. Such policies are 
justified on the basis of repairing market failures, pursuing broader economic 
efficiency goals and a desire to influence the housing opportunities available 
to citizens. These interventions include fiscal measures (such as subsidies and 
taxes), direct provision of social housing (i.e. housing let/sold at below-market 
rents and/or allocated by non-market mechanisms) and regulations aimed at 
influencing rental markets, as well as the quantity, quality and allocation of 
dwellings. They also involve public resources being directed to redistribute 
income by supporting housing consumption (e.g. housing allowances).105
Of course, there is no mechanism within markets which can guarantee that rights 
will be provided or that they will be provided equally.106 However, this dissonant 
position has been transcended by states for more than a century and there is a 
ubiquitous acknowledgement by states that access to housing is a human right. 
Both neoliberal and social democratic governments across the world accept the 
market as the primary provider of housing. In both systems, however, state action 
is acceptable to regulate the excesses of the housing market and to intervene 
when the market fails (including the provision of social and subsidized housing). 
Marcuse and Keating point out that the only disagreement between these two 
dominant global political perspectives is on how serious that failure is at any 
particular time, and just what governments should do about it.107 Indeed, such 
104  UN Doc E/CN.4/Sub.2/1993/15, 1st Report of Mr Sachar Special Rapporteur, 
quoting from the 1975 UN Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements. 
105  See Andrews, Caldera Sánchez and Johansson (n 45) 5.
106  But RJ Shiller, Finance and the Good Society (Princeton University Press 2012) 
12 suggests that the real cure for the ills of financial capitalism lies in improving and 
democratizing it, where technology works with financial and legal advice and financial 
education to make it possible for everyone to participate intelligently in the financial system.
107  See P Marcuse and WD Keating, ‘The Permanent Housing Crisis: The Failures 
of Conservatism and the Limitations of Liberalism’ in R Bratt et al, A Right to Housing 
(Philadelphia, Temple University Press 2006). For a thorough examination of the arguments 

Introduction
27
intervention has recently involved the nationalization and state capitalization of 
banks and financial institutions. All across the world, states have recapitalized 
banks whose assets were wiped out through the purchase of securitized subprime 
loans. Social democratic and liberal political systems behaved similarly in the 
recent financial crisis.
These two dominant political approaches can be contrasted with the archetypal 
right-to-housing position ‘in which government’s first obligation is to see that 
all are decently housed, and the for-profit market is managed and regulated in 
a way subservient to that goal’.108 The for-profit market is the default position 
for neoliberal and social democratic policies, while the default position of the 
right-to-housing approach is state support for universal decent and affordable 
housing (but allowing the for-profit market to function where it does not interfere 
or frustrate that position).
While economic liberals posit that globalization is an economic inevitability, 
Anderson suggests that lawyers have come late to this globalization debate,109 
although human rights expert Philip Alston asserted in 1997 that ‘international 
lawyers have, in many respects, served as the handmaidens of the changes wrought 
by globalization’.110 Concurrently, the development of ‘transgovernmentalism’ 
where individual elements of states (or civil servants) interact directly with 
their counterparts abroad is creating a new order.111 A new technocratic elite 
deals with important issues, yet operates not through law or rights, but through 
sharing information, developing common principles and soft law measures at the 
subnational level across states.112 This is the contemporary context within which 
the application of housing rights to housing systems takes place.
Falk has suggested that a subaltern discourse on human rights encompasses 
the full panoply of human rights, with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR) laying the foundations for superseding the dominant globalization 
discourse. There is a core demand, from a strictly materialist perspective, within 
Article 25(1): ‘Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the 
health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, 
in favour of a right to housing from a contemporary American legal perspective, see KD 
Adams, ‘Do We Need a Right to Housing?’ (2009) 9(2) Nevada Law Journal 275.
108  Marcuse and Keating (n 109) 139.
109  GW Anderson, Constitutional Rights after Globalization (Oxford, Hart 
Publishing 2005) 3. 
110  See Philip Alston, ‘The Myopia of the Handmaidens: International Lawyers and 
Globalization’ (1997) 3 EJIL 435.
111  See Sol Picciotto, ‘Networks in International Economic Integration: Fragmented 
States and the Dilemmas of Neo-liberalism’ (1996) 17 Northwestern Journal of International 
Law & Business 1014; A Slaughter, ‘Governing the Global Economy through Government 
Networks’ in M Byers (ed), The Role of Law in International Politics (OUP 2003).
112  For a response to Alston’s article, see SV Scott, ‘International Lawyers: 
Handmaidens, Chefs, or Birth Attendants? A Response to Philip Alston’ (1998) 9 EJIL 750.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
28
housing and medical care and necessary social services.’113 Similarly, Article 11 
of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966) 
(ICESCR) (now adopted by most states in the world) states:
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone to an 
adequate standard of living for himself and his family, including adequate food, 
clothing and housing, and to the continuous improvement of living conditions. 
The States Parties will take appropriate steps to ensure the realization of this 
right, recognizing to this effect the essential importance of international co-
operation based on free consent. 114
There is an obligation on States Parties to recognize, promote, protect, and fulfil the 
right of everyone to an adequate standard of living, including adequate housing.115
Miloon Kothari, UN Special Rapporteur on adequate housing, pointed out in 
2003 that while the debate continues at the international level as to whether or 
not globalization can bring benefits to the world’s poor, the fact remains that the 
deepening inequalities of income and opportunity between and within nations has 
led to an increase in the number of people without adequate and secure housing:
It is time to rethink the current global economic and social policies and to 
recommit ourselves to the human rights principles and standards that offer the 
only real paradigm for improving the lives of millions of the poor … Every 
woman, man, youth and child has the human right to a secure home and 
community in which to live in peace and dignity. This human right has received 
global recognition and is firmly established in a number of international human 
rights instruments, most notably in the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights.116
Notwithstanding the constraints and difficulties placed upon them, central 
governments still have an important role to play in reconciling macroeconomic 
policies with social objectives, keeping in mind the primacy of their human 
rights obligations. They have the responsibility to make targeted interventions 
113  R Falk, ‘Interpreting the Interaction of Global Markets and Human Rights’ in 
A Brysk (ed) Globalization and Human Rights (Berkeley, University of California Press 
2002) 61.
114  UN Doc A/6316 (1966) International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights. UNGA Resolution 2200A (XXI), entered into force 3 January 1976. 
115  P Alston and G Quinn, ‘The Nature and Scope of States Parties Obligations under 
the ICESCR’ (1987) 9 HRQ 156.
116  Miloon Kothari, Privatising Human Rights: The Impact of Globalization on 
Access to Adequate Housing, Water and Sanitation (UN Special Rapporteur on Adequate 
Housing. Montevideo, Uruguay, Social Watch 2003) http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/
public/documents/apcity/unpan010131.pdf accessed 27 November 2012).

Introduction
29
in order to ensure universal access to public services, including water and 
sanitation, on a fair and equitable basis; this is fundamental for the fulfilment of 
the right to adequate housing.117
In a similar vein, the UNCESCR has addressed the role of international 
organizations in protecting housing rights in the age of globalization:
The Committee calls upon the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank 
to pay enhanced attention in their activities to respect for economic, social and 
cultural rights, including through encouraging explicit recognition of these 
rights, assisting in the identification of country-specific benchmarks to facilitate 
their promotion, and facilitating the development of appropriate remedies for 
responding to violations. Social safety nets should be defined by reference to 
these rights and enhanced attention should be accorded to such methods to 
protect the poor and vulnerable in the context of structural adjustment programs. 
Effective social monitoring should be an integral part of the enhanced financial 
surveillance and monitoring policies accompanying loans and credits for 
adjustment purposes. Similarly the World Trade Organization (WTO) should 
devise appropriate methods to facilitate more systematic consideration of the 
impact upon human rights of particular trade and investment policies. In that 
regard the Committee urges the Secretary-General to undertake, if possible in 
collaboration with the WTO, a careful study of the potential impact upon respect 
for economic, social and cultural rights of the draft Multilateral Agreement on 
Investment (MAI) being negotiated within the OECD.118
While the global model – the ‘transmission belt’ of international human rights 
being adopted into national law is widely accepted, it faces major and growing 
obstacles from the new forms of governance and patterns of law, and particularly 
from increasing forms of soft law regulation. This classical approach to 
international human rights law, where states accept, ratify and implement the 
international human rights norms through national laws and other measures, 
is based on a globalized liberal legalist approach. It views laws as coherent 
and autonomous systems of norms ‘that operate as an effective tool of social 
engineering to promote or protect individual freedom’.119 Anderson points out 
that while there has been a huge increase in international and national charters of 
rights, any discussion of states’ constitutional authority ‘now has to take account 
of the disciplining effects of the global economy, and the power networks formed 
by transnational corporations’.120
117  ibid.
118  UNCESCR, Globalization and its Impact on the Enjoyment of Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights. UN Doc. E/1999/22-E/C.12.1998/26; ch VI, s A, para 515.
119  Anderson (n 110) 6.
120  ibid 7.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
30
State and constitutional rights development must now incorporate positive 
obligations on states to intervene and regulate private actors, national and 
international corporations. Michelle Oren, Rachelle Alterman and Yaffa Zilbershatz 
allude to this impact on national constitutions in their chapter, but their analysis 
reveals that rights are also contained in nuanced ways within such constitutions.
A significant number of the 47 Member States of the Council of Europe121 have 
ratified Article 16 of the European Social Charter (ESC), which requires states to 
ensure that adequate and affordable housing is available for families.122 Significant 
jurisprudence on measurable and enforceable standards is being developed by the 
ECSR, which is the supervisory body for the ESC. In their chapter, Padraic Kenna 
and Mark Jordan trace this jurisprudence of the ECSR, which is effectively linking 
Article 16 on the rights of families to social and economic protection, with other 
articles of the Social Charter on the right to protection from poverty and social 
exclusion, and a deeper right to adequate housing for all. Key links are made with 
the developing EU jurisprudence which applies to its 28 Member States.123 In this 
context, the historical and now legally binding Charter of Fundamental Rights 
of the EU has created a ‘right to social and housing assistance so as to ensure a 
decent existence for all those who lack sufficient resources’.124 This could act as a 
defining base for housing rights across Europe.
Indeed, the issue of housing rights is specifically identified in a contemporary 
European Parliament Report:
Housing plays a crucial role in enhancing social cohesion, with adequate housing 
long included among the universal rights in more than one hundred national 
constitutions. Moreover, after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, the 
Charter of fundamental rights including the right to housing assistance has 
become part of the legal basis for EU policies. Although all Member States agree 
that ‘the access to good quality and affordable housing is a fundamental need 
and right’, available statistics indicate that around 3 million people in Europe 
lack access to decent housing.125
Despite all this housing rights development, Branco suggests that contemporary 
economic policies still deride the implementation of economic, social and cultural 
121  The Council of Europe is made up of 47 Member States and overlaps with the 
EU, but these are separate organizations. 
122  Turin, 18 October 1961, Council of Europe, European Treaty Series – No 35; 
European Social Charter. (Revised) Council of Europe, Strasbourg 3 May 1996.
123  The EU 28 States are; Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria , Croatia, the Czech Republic, 
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, 
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, the 
Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the UK.
124  Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, art 34(3), OJ 2010/C 83/02. 
125  European Parliament (n 74) 8.

Introduction
31
rights.126 For instance, no schedule for the full implementation of these rights 
has been created by the UN or any supervisory body. Indeed, many political 
figures and scholars claim that these rights are merely policy goals rather than 
implying and sort of legal responsibility for state institutions. Of course, many 
socio-economic rights are enforced by courts, such as the right to equality, health 
and safety, etc. But mainstream contemporary economics discourse has regarded 
human rights as an institution competing with economic efficiency rather than 
as an instrument complementing economics in promoting human welfare.127 For 
this reason, contemporary mainstream economics discourse constitutes one of the 
major obstacles to the promotion of human rights in the global era.128
Thus, the hegemony of the housing market ideology, with its inherent links 
to global financial markets, represents a major barrier to the advancement of 
housing rights. But major crises have been used in the past to develop radical new 
approaches. Examples include the launch of the current Danish mortgage lending 
system after the great fire of Copenhagen in 1795, which spurred the need for 
an organized mortgage credit market to quickly provide funding to build a large 
number of new buildings, and the German Pfandbriefe (covered bond) system, 
which dates back to 1769 and was heavily influenced by the aftermath of the 
Seven Years’ War. In response to the latest crisis, a number of countries have also 
taken steps to further strengthen their mortgage market regulations.129
In 2009, Raquel Rolnik, the UN Special Rapporteur on adequate housing, 
pointed out that the crisis ‘represents an opportunity for reflection and to consider 
how to improve housing systems, policies and programmes so as to ensure 
adequate housing’.130 Few, however, have used the opportunity to advance the 
incorporation of housing rights into mortgage systems.
Again in 2012, Rolnik set out the UN housing rights approach to the financial 
crisis and the course for a rights-based housing policy.131 She called for a paradigm 
shift from housing policies based on the financialization of housing to a human 
rights-based approach. In this context, she made the following recommendations:
The promotion of access to adequate housing cannot be based solely on financial 
mechanisms. Broader State policies and interventions should be adopted, 
including, inter alia, public investments in infrastructure and basic services, 
126  Branco (n 101) 12.
127  ibid 134.
128  Padraic Kenna, ‘Can International Housing Rights Based on Public International 
Law Really Impact on Contemporary Housing Systems?’ in Lorna Fox and James 
Sweeney (eds), The Idea of Home in Law: Displacement and Dispossession (Farnham, 
Ashgate 2011).
129  International Monetary Fund, Global Financial Stability Report: Durable 
Financial Stability: Getting There from Here (Washington DC, IMF 2011) 115. 
130  UN Doc A/HRC/10/7 (2009), para 75.
131  Rolnik (n 47). 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
32
human settlements upgrading and rehabilitation, urban planning and land policies, 
public financing, land and housing provision, rent regulation and related legal 
and institutional frameworks … States should refrain from focusing their housing 
policies on housing finance schemes with predominantly regressive effects, such 
as mortgage interest rate subsidies or mortgage interest tax exemptions … States 
should promote a mixture of tenure systems, including a public housing sector 
that is not tied to liberalized markets and limited-profit rental or regulated rent 
schemes, in order to prevent social exclusion and segregation. A mixture of 
tenure solutions is essential for the promotion of access to adequate housing for 
the various segments of society and in order to shield the housing sector from 
economic and financial shocks … In their ongoing assessment efforts, States 
should employ human rights indicators to identify trends that signal progress, 
stagnation or retrogression in the realization of the right to adequate housing. 
All indicators should be disaggregated by prohibited ground of discrimination in 
order to identify patterns of marginalization and discrimination … States should 
take prompt measures to increase the availability of adequate housing options, 
particularly for those most affected by sub-prime and predatory mortgage 
lending. States should prioritize funding and construction of public housing 
and the promotion of housing assistance in order to address the impact of the 
economic and financial crises on the most vulnerable … States should increase 
their expenditure on housing in order to circumvent the adverse impacts of the 
crises on the housing sector … States should ensure that recovery measures do 
not further erode social housing programmes and policies.132
The clash between neoliberal globalization and the full implementation of 
housing rights remains unresolved. There remain some critical questions about the 
effectiveness and role of human rights and their advocacy institutions in the context 
of globalization. The World Bank has not proposed the incorporation of human 
or housing rights within its proposals and monitoring of financial institutions 
focusing on traditional responses to the failure of regulation and supervision.133 
In the context of this dissonance between globalization and human rights, Ghazi 
points out that:
One the one side, are the NGOs and human rights activists that, even though they 
defend human values, have very little idea of the functioning of the international 
economic and financial system. The second group of scholars, scholars in the 
field of economics, tend to rally to the dominant ideology and back up the only 
system that is actually in place, while others criticize this vision … Human rights 
are still perceived as an obstacle to political dialogue by IFIs [International 
132  ibid paras 70–71.
133  See World Bank Banking Bank Regulation and Supervision Survey 2011 
(Washington DC, World Bank), where there were no questions on human or housing rights 
addressed in the detailed questionnaires to banks.

Introduction
33
Financial Institutions], and as pressure tool[s] or internal interference by states. 
A mental shift must be made to consider human rights standards and norms as 
an aspect of internal and international affairs that is here, not for controversy, but 
for dialogue and common progress.134
In April 2013, the UN Special Rapporteur on adequate housing met with the World 
Bank and she emphasized:
… that the obligations of States parties to the international human rights treaties 
should be understood as extending to their membership of the World Bank and 
their role as Executive Directors, including decisions to support the adoption of 
operational policies and to approve lending, credit and grant proposals. These 
obligations include the duty of States parties to the International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to respect the rights recognized in the 
Covenant and to take steps through international assistance and cooperation, to 
the maximum of their available resources, with a view to achieving progressively 
the full realization of these rights.135
The Special Rapporteur believes that the World Bank is also uniquely placed to 
support governments around the world in meeting their international human rights 
obligations during the process of development and, in particular, to progressively 
realize economic and social rights in their countries.136 However, she has also 
pointed out that:
From the information gathered during the Special Rapporteur’s visit, it appears 
that there is resistance among Bank staff to the current framework of safeguard 
policies. Safeguard policies are often perceived by [the] Bank’s staff as 
substantially limiting the Bank’s ability to ‘attract’ State clients and compete 
with other regional and international financial institutions.137
Clearly, the position of housing rights in the globalization debate is weak.
134  Bahram Ghazi, The IMF, the World Bank and the Question of Human Rights 
(New York, Ardsley 2005) 311.
135  UN Doc A/HRC/22/46/Add.3. Report of the Special Rapporteur on adequate 
housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and on the right to 
non -discrimination in this context, Raquel Rolnik. Addendum. Mission to the World Bank 
(February 2013) para 9.
136  See Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), Safeguards and Sustainability Policies 
in a Changing World: An Independent Evaluation of World Bank Group Experience 
(Washington DC, World Bank 2010).
137  UN Doc A/HRC/22/46/Add.3. Report of the Special Rapporteur on adequate 
housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and on the right to 
non -discrimination in this context, Raquel Rolnik. Addendum. Mission to the World Bank 
(February 2013) para 70.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
34
Conclusion
The global financial system, and indeed many states, have to date failed to grasp 
the central role of housing in the economy, in society and in people’s lives. Housing 
is rarely seen as the focal point of policies, but regularly as a means of achieving 
other goals. In social stability, political support, expansion of property ownership 
or the construction industry, new technologies, consumer demand, expansion of 
the economy, financial investment, control of unrest or indeed concern for human 
rights, housing plays a central role.
In the midst of scepticism about housing policies, especially in Europe, we 
know that the current crisis, based on the collapse of the boom built around reckless 
lending, touches almost everyone. This tide of international finance has flowed into 
every city in the world, driving up land prices and creating unaffordable housing 
for new households. It has stratified housing markets, creating major inequality 
and life chances for generations to come. In situations of inadequate housing and 
homelessness, particularly for people with disabilities denied opportunities for 
independent living, the full development of people and households is obstructed. 
Where it exists, the market residual model of social housing is failing to meet 
international housing rights obligations in many countries.
The once-exalted asset-based welfare, where older people would release equity 
in their homes to pay for their care in old age, is now a dream of another age for 
many. Housing as a repository of wealth, a nest egg or valuable inheritance is now 
risky. Negative equity is not just a personal problem, but one which global markets 
now follow with great interest.
Housing, then, is at the centre of a global social and economic crisis. It is a 
central issue in the political landscape, as governments struggle to reconcile the 
imperatives of international finance on the one hand, and housing as a home, a 
right and a place of development of people, communities and society, on the other. 
The idea of home is an enormously powerful and evocative concept, bringing 
to mind ideas of security, belonging, family, warmth, privacy, connectedness, 
roots and safety. It is a concept that has been widely studied across several 
disciplines and ‘home’ appears to have three essential elements: first, the physical 
structure which provides shelter, security and a fixed location; second, the social 
relationships within the home and with others in the wider environment of the home 
– neighbours, relatives and other social networks; third, the atmosphere within the 
home, which provides warmth, privacy, control, a place for self-expression and the 
development of self-identity.138
But who is charged with advancing the principle of housing as home? The 
most powerful actors in housing systems are currently financial institutions. It 
is assumed that these can be regulated in the public interest across the world. 
Mortgage market deregulation and the consequent lowering of lending standards 
138  See Lorna Fox, Conceptualising Home, Theories, Law and Policies (Oxford, 
Hart Publishing 2007).

Introduction
35
ultimately generated a subprime lending industry in the US and elsewhere, which 
contaminated the global financial system. Alongside the new globalized financial 
institutions, there has also been an ideological shift in public policy and economics 
towards a neoliberal approach, more redolent of nineteenth-century ideals than 
contemporary popular expectations.139 Yet, critics of this debacle are often accused 
of promoting an ideology. But what is an ideology? Reporting to a Congressional 
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform considering Financial Market 
Regulation (October 2008), Alan Greenspan (erstwhile Chairman of the US Federal 
Reserve from 1987 to 2006), when asked if his ideology was wrong, stated:
Remember what an ideology is. It is a conceptual framework for the way people 
deal with reality – everybody has one – you have to – to exist you need an 
ideology. The question is whether it is accurate or not. What I am saying is – yes 
– I found a flaw. I don’t know how temporary or permanent it is … A flaw in the 
model I perceive as the critical structure that defines how the world works.140
Housing policies are indeed based on ideologies, and the dominant one in recent 
decades has been that of deference to financial and housing markets. The ideology 
of housing as a base, a home, a foundation for participation in family, community 
and society is not yet established in the global narrative of housing. This would 
recognize that personal status, identity and opportunities are largely shaped by 
housing circumstances. Equally, person-centred ideologies of housing and home 
have yet to find their place in legal systems.
Yet, law and housing rights can play an important role in the development of 
housing systems. These can provide a source of autonomous values which can 
temper the housing market system and structure it in different ways. This can draw 
on the reservoir of international jurisprudence, rights and principles to inform and 
creatively expand the conceptual framework of housing law, rights and policy.
The President of Ireland, Michael D. Higgins, has recently pointed out that:
Intellectuals are challenged now, I believe, to a moral choice: to drift into, be 
part of, a consensus that accepts a failed paradigm of life and economy, or to 
offer, or seek to recover, the possibility of alternative futures.141
Nowhere is this more relevant than in housing.
139  Kenna (n 38).
140  See 
New 
York 
Times 
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/24/business/
economy/24panel.html?_r=0 accessed 4 May 2013).
141  President Michael D Higgins, ‘The Role of the University at a Time of Intellectual 
Crisis’, speech on receipt of Doctorate of Laws (Honoris Causa) from the National 
University of Ireland. Full text available at http://www.president.ie/speeches/the-role-of-
the-university-at-a-time-of-intellectual-crisis accessed 24 April 2013.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Chapter 2 
A Legal Perspective of the Origin and the 
Globalization of the Current Financial Crisis 
and the Resulting Reforms in Spain
1
Sergio Nasarre-Aznar
Introduction
This chapter examines the legal factors which were central to the US subprime crisis, 
the international credit crunch and subsequent global economic developments. 
The negative impact of the international financial crisis on the Spanish housing 
system is considered, as well as the limited nature of reforms in the Spanish 
mortgage and housing markets. It is suggested that deficient regulation in the US 
mortgage securitization process has been the catalyst for the global crisis; however, 
its impact has generated significant changes in national mortgage and housing 
legislation in the affected countries. Some innovative developments are examined, 
such as increased protection for mortgage consumers and an intermediate tenures 
project in Catalonia.
From the US Subprime Crisis to the International Credit Crunch and its 
Legal Context
Background to the Crisis
The devastating impact of the US mortgage crisis, involving massive mortgage 
defaults, across the world was fundamentally due to international ‘mortgage 
securitization’ (see Figure 2.1). This is a financial technique to ‘transform’ mortgages 
into securities. It provides funding for a mortgage originator’s lending business 
through the issue of mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) by a special purpose 
vehicle (SPV). In itself, it is not a detrimental process, since it allows lenders to 
access greater levels of funding. However, once the original mortgage, which is the 
collateral base of the security, is defective, the whole process becomes contaminated.
1  This work has been possible thanks to the ‘Las tenencias intermedias para facilitar el 
acceso a la vivienda’ research project (Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, 
DER 2012-31409).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
38
The degradation of the quality of securitized mortgages in the US arose from 
two main sources.2 First, the general policy of maximizing home-ownership at 
any cost, even to those households that clearly did not have the resources to repay 
mortgage loans, created an unsustainable financial subsystem. This situation 
arose due to borrowers’ limited economic capabilities and/or because of the 
conditions of the mortgages themselves, such as a high loan-to-value ratio (LTV) 
coupled with a high interest rate. Both Republican and Democrat administrations 
promoted home-ownership as part of the American Dream. As far back as 1994, 
President Clinton promoted wider home-ownership: ‘More Americans should 
own their own homes, for reasons that are economic and tangible, and reasons 
2  There are others which are also important but which cannot be addressed here, such 
as the insufficient backing given by the US government to the agencies that issued the MBSs, 
the lack of a proper body of rules for MBS business in the US and the lack of liability for 
losses of rating agencies in that jurisdiction. See Sergio Nasarre-Aznar, Securitisation and 
Mortgage Bonds. Legal Aspects and Harmonisation in Europe (Saffron Walden, Gostick 
Hall 2004) 39. This book also discusses the weaknesses of some international mortgage 
securitization systems.
Figure 2.1	
Standard US mortgage securitization
Source: own elaboration

A Legal Perspective
39
that are emotional and intangible, but go to the heart of what it means to harbour, 
to nourish, to expand the American Dream’.3 President George W. Bush endorsed 
this approach and encouraged many ethnic groups to become home-owners.4 
Of course, this generalization of home-ownership necessitated a concurrent 
expansion of mortgage lending. A lowering of standards was also required in 
mortgage underwriting, and thus a reduction of quality of mortgages. There was a 
corresponding increase in the default risk of mortgages, which could not be borne 
by most lenders. For this reason, government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs),5 such 
as Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae, were authorized to buy what were 
increasingly less sustainable mortgages from lenders in order to transform them 
into securities, thus generalizing, externalizing and internationalizing this default 
risk. This process is explained in more detail below.
Second, the moral hazard or conflict of interest inherent in the US model of 
mortgage securitization was hugely significant. It allowed lenders to pass on any 
default risk in the repayment of the mortgages through to MBS investors, many 
of whom were European, international banks and other financial institutions.6 
These institutional investors almost blindly relied on international rating agencies’ 
assessments and the theoretical/implicit backing of the US government to their 
3  Speech of Bill Clinton, 42nd President of the United States of America, ‘National 
Partners in Homeownership’, before the Association of Realtors (Washington DC, 1994).
4  See the American Dream Downpayment Initiative, which was signed into law 
on 16 December 2003 and provided ‘downpayment, closing costs, and rehabilitation 
assistance to eligible individuals’ (for more details, see http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/
affordablehousing/programs/home/addi/ accessed 29 October 2012.
5  Mortgage GSEs were created by the US Congress with the aim of improving the 
flow of credit into certain housing markets while reducing the cost of that same credit. 
6  See H Blommestein, A Keskinler and C Lucas, ‘The Outlook for the Securitisation 
Market’ (2011) 1 OECD Journal: Financial Market Trends 2 at 3. The authors stated 
that ‘regulation and underwriting standards were seen to be significantly more robust in 
Europe’, that ‘there’s no doubt that the securitisation asset class in general was tarnished 
by the fallout from the US subprime crisis’ and that ‘from mid-2007 to the end of 2010, 
only 0.95% of all European structured-finance issues defaulted, compared to 7.7% of 
US structured-finance issues’. See also J Cox, J Faucette and C Valenzuela, ‘Why Did 
the Credit Crisis Spread to Global Markets?’ (2010), available at http://blogs.law.uiowa.
edu/ebook/uicifd-ebook/part-5-ii-why-did-credit-crisis-spread-global-markets, pt 5, p 3 
and 17, which says that ‘European banks became involved when they invested in AAA-
rated asset-backed securities (i.e. subprime mortgage-backed securities) produced in the 
United States’, that ‘Because European banks had heavily invested in U.S.-produced MBS, 
they were greatly exposed to those assets once they became toxic. By February 2009, 
European banks, specifically banks in the United Kingdom, had seventy-five percent as 
much exposure to toxic assets as U.S. banks’ and that ‘unfortunately, a “perfect storm” of 
regulatory breakdowns allowed what initially was a mortgage crisis in the United States to 
morph into a global financial crisis via securitization’.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
40
GSEs.7 We now know that among these securitized mortgages were those created 
through the ‘predatory lending’ of subprime mortgages.8
Subprime mortgages are those that do not fulfil the quality standards for 
repayment for one reason or another. In the US, a variety of these were created 
in unusual circumstances. These included situations where the LTV surpassed 
80 per cent or because these were second mortgages (often described as ‘piggy-
back mortgages’)9 that were charged on the remaining 20 per cent LTV after 
an existing mortgage for the first 80 per cent of LTV. Mass default on the 
mortgages arose when housing prices dropped as mortgagors could not refinance 
their debts. Even in non-recourse states, mortgagors voluntarily defaulted once 
their mortgage debt was more than the value of their property.10 This impacted 
negatively on MBSs and had an even more detrimental impact on those securities 
known as ‘collateralized debt obligations’ (CDOs),11 where the true risk was 
almost impossible to properly assess, due to their financial complexity and the 
remoteness of the underlying collateral. The result was the holding of ‘toxic 
assets by many international financial institutions’.12 Other structural conflicts 
of interest in the standard US mortgage securitization process included the lack 
of incentive for the originator to reveal the true value of a pool of mortgages 
when they are transferred to the arranger of the issue, and there may indeed 
7  See the explicit assertions of N Eric Weiss, ‘Fannie Mae’s and Freddie Mac’s 
Financial Problems’, Congressional Research Service, CRS Report for Congress (10 August 
2012) 17 http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL34661.pdf assessed 4 October 2012: ‘Fannie 
Mae and Freddie Mac are GSEs whose charters limit them to buying single family and 
multifamily home mortgages originated by others. This lack of diversification makes them 
more exposed to housing and mortgage market problems than other financial institutions 
such as commercial banks that have other lines of business. The GSEs’ charters give them 
a special relationship with the federal government, sometimes called an implicit guarantee, 
which has allowed them to borrow at interest rates only slightly above those paid by the 
federal government’.
8  See ‘“Malicious Mortgage” Nets 400 Defendants’ (19 July 2008), https://www.fbi.
gov/news/stories/2008/june/malicious_mortgage061908) accessed 4 October 2012, which 
relates to mortgage fraud schemes that involved 400 defendants.
9  See Jack Guttenburg, ‘Mortgage Crisis Drives Home Value of PMI’ InMan News 
(8 April 2008) http://www.inman.com/buyers-sellers/columnists/jackguttentag/mortgage-
crisis-drives-home-value-pmi accessed 4 October 2012.
10  Todd J Zywicki and Joseph D Adamson, ‘The Law and Economics of Subprime 
Lending’ (2009) 80(1) University of Colorado Law Review 31 and 32. See also Andra C 
Ghent and M Kudlyak, ‘Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default: Evidence from US 
States’, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper No 09-10R (2011) 29.
11  CDOs are asset-backed securities issued over collections of MBSs, i.e., ‘re-securitized’ 
mortgages.
12  This ‘toxicity’ meant that, even if the mortgages had not defaulted, the market 
for them had now disappeared, their value then dropped and the holders (the banks) were 
obliged to correct their books to show this ‘write-down’ loss in order to reflect the new real 
market value of the assets.

A Legal Perspective
41
have been an incentive to hide its risks.13 There was also little to incentivize 
the originator to properly monitor the behaviour of mortgagors in matters such 
as timely repayment or risky behaviour towards the property, as he or she had 
already sold the mortgages to the arranger, passing on any risks of default to the 
MBS investors. While these risks were difficult to avoid, as they are part of a 
standard mortgage securitization process, they could have been reduced through 
effective supervision, due diligence and disclosure obligations.
Legal Regulatory Weaknesses
While these two factors are widely accepted as causes of the US financial 
crisis, there has been little published analysis of the legal factors behind these 
developments. From a legal perspective, there were at least three causative factors 
that explain the collapse of the ‘house of cards’ of the US mortgage market.
First, the lack of a strong regulatory framework for MBSs led to an ‘outlaw-
like’ securitization process. Unlike the highly regulated covered/mortgage bonds, 
such as Pfandbrief in Germany,14 the situation is different in the US, and indeed 
all common law countries. These lack a strong and specific regulatory framework, 
and often there is no clear-cut and dedicated legislation that specifically deals with 
MBSs.15 In my opinion, this situation leads to the circumstances shown in Table 2.1, 
which are evidenced to some extent by the better financial performance of covered 
bonds, as compared with MBSs, from the start of the credit crunch onwards.16
13  The one who financially builds up the pool of mortgages to be securitized.
14  See, for more details, Nasarre-Aznar (n 2) 5–13.
15  Traditionally, many authors in the US see the intervention of the state – even with a 
piece of legislation – in the economy as a mistake, although the fragility of the US banking 
and financial system has been evident throughout its recent history. See the numbers of 
insolvent US banks during the twentieth century in Maury Klein, ‘The Panic of 2008: 
Something Old and Something New’ in Lawrence E Mitchell and Arthur E Wilmarth, Jr 
(eds), The Panic of 2008. Causes, Consequences and Implications of Reform (Cheltenham, 
Edward Elgar Publishing 2010) 49. For the situation in the UK, see Nasarre-Aznar (n 2) 24. 
16  See the constant ascending outstanding covered bonds from 2003 to 2011 in 
European Covered Bond Council, Fact Book, 7th edn (September 2012) 54. Although with 
the help of the European Central Bank and European national central banks that provide 
liquidity to the system (at 21), covered bonds have performed relatively well since 2007 to 
the point that ‘the covered bonds asset class is still the main pillar for real estate financing in 
Europe’ (at 31). Most problems for covered bonds do not arise from their intrinsic standard 
legal structure, but from the decrease of mortgage lending in some EU countries and the 
problems with the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis (at 31 and 32), while the transparency 
to investors remains essential (at 32). This contrasts with MBSs. The outstanding principal 
balances of MBSs insured or guaranteed by the US agencies has constantly decreased 
from $7.5 trillion in 2008 to $2.9 trillion in second quarter of 2012 according to the US 
Federal Reserve: http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/releases/mortoutstand/current.
htm#fn5r) accessed 3 March 2013. Moreover, since the crisis, MBSs have faced increasing 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
42
Contract-based securitization differs fundamentally from covered bonds 
governed by public law regulation. The attributes of public law regulation derive 
from its public character, where rules are published in official documents. It 
also offers transparency, in the sense that these rules, regulations and expected 
outcomes are accessible to everyone, usually without charge (increasingly through 
the Internet) and often translated into English. The rules can be easily understood, 
not least by stakeholders. On the other hand, contractual-based securitization is 
closed. Contractual arrangements only bind the parties and there are no clear rules 
on the disclosure of specific information to others involved in the transaction, 
legal and regulatory restrictions in Europe, such as greater disclosure requirements (see 
Capital Requirement Directive II, 2009/111/EC, OJ L302, 17 November 2009, P 0097–0119), 
more onerous capital requirements for securitizations held in trading books (see Capital 
Requirement Directive III, 2010/76/EU, OJ L329, 14 December 2010, P 0003–0035), more 
onerous liquidity requirements for residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBSs) than for 
covered bonds (see Proposal of Capital Requirement Directive IV; European Commission 
Proposal 20-7-2011, COM(2011) 453 final. For more information on these Directives see 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/regcapital/index_en.htm accessed 3 March 2013. 
Capital surcharge under Solvency II Directive (2009/138/EC, OJ L335, 17 December 2009, 
P 0001–0155) is up to 10 times higher for AAA MBSs than for AAA covered bonds and 
the European Central Bank requires as collateral at least AA MBSs in comparison of only 
B- covered bonds (at 208).
Non-regulated contexts
(most MBS contexts)
Regulated contexts
(most covered bonds contexts)
More flexibility (unlimited types of MBS 
structures that may be adapted quickly to 
the market)
Less flexibility (basically, each national 
covered bond has its own law; non-legal 
covered bonds may exist. but are riskier 
than regulated ones)
Contractual basis (to which extent should 
exist an obligation to disclose contractual 
information to third parties)
Legal basis (everything is public: 
collateralization ratio, role of cover assets 
monitor, minimum quality of covering 
mortgages, etc.)
Rights of the stakeholders left to general 
rules of law
Specific rules for misbehaviour, losses, etc.
More dependence on ‘private opinions’ 
such as the rating agencies or government 
direct sponsorization (e.g. the GSEs, that 
distort the free (concurrence competition) 
in the MBS market in the US)
Transparency of the law need (the lowest 
profile of state intervention) reduces the 
need for rating agencies.
More complex structures (more difficult 
to understand by investors and other 
stakeholders; more intermediation costs)
Simpler and straightforward structures 
(transparency)
Table 2.1	
Regulated versus non-regulated mortgage markets

A Legal Perspective
43
such as investors. There is little transparency in contractual-based securitization. 
Its performance will depend on private arrangements and the ‘opinion’ of private 
agents known as ‘rating agencies’.17 This leads to complicated structures and 
undisclosed procedures. There is a lack of transparency in relation to the description 
and identification of the actual securitized assets and their relevant features, how 
they have been transferred, which law is applicable in case of default of the 
underlying mortgages, etc. This has contributed to the widespread development of 
the so-called ‘blind trust’ crisis, where those taking part in a securitization process 
relied (often without checking due to the complexity and costs) on the statements 
of the previous stakeholder in the process. Clearly, investors were even further 
removed from such enquiries.
In contrast, the covered bonds system promotes more responsible lending, as 
the originator retains the full default risk of the mortgages and is incentivized to 
minimize risks and consequent mortgage default.18 Indeed, it has been estimated 
that the introduction of an effective covered bond system in the US would decrease 
the mortgage default rate eight times more than the provision of section 941 of the 
Dodd-Frank Act, which obliges originators to retain a five per cent credit risk of 
securitized non-qualifying mortgages on their balance sheets.19
Second, the lack of a public standardized MBS in the US was fatal. Covered 
bond legislation in Germany, Spain, France and other European states creates a 
standardized type of covered bond for each country. Moreover, these regulated 
covered bonds fulfil the minimum requirements of Article 52.4 of the UCITS 
Directive and, because of this, they have some benefits across Europe.20 The 
situation in the US has provided the opportunity for private institutions, such 
as rating agencies, to act as private gatekeepers of this market. Using their 
ratings and simple final ‘marks’ (A+, B, etc.), they purport to assess the risk of 
a specific issue of MBS for international investors. This dependence on such 
private control would not have been possible or, at least, would not have been 
so relevant within an effective securities public supervision system. Such a 
system does not exist in the US.21 Indeed, rating agencies are not required to 
assess the ‘legal risk’ of European covered bonds (although rating agencies 
do rate them), as the law is public and transparent for everybody. Only those 
17  See below.
18  European Covered Bond Council (n 16) 151.
19  The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 2010. See Ryan 
Kreitzer, Covered Bond Markets: An Analysis of Their Impact on Mortgage Underwriting 
(New York, Leonard N Stern School of Business 2012) 46 and 47.
20  Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 
July 2009 on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating 
to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS), OJEU 17 
November 2009, L302/32.
21  See Tamar Frankel, ‘Regulating the Financial Markets by Examinations’ in 
Mitchell and Wilmarth, Jr (n 15) 219.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
44
securities that comply with legislative requirements can be called ‘covered 
bonds’. There is even a ‘denomination protection’. The behaviour of the 
rating agencies during the boom years has been heavily criticized for their 
contribution22 to the financial mortgage bubble. The agencies are culpable, 
not least through apparently careless ratings of MBSs and CDOs,23 but also 
in directly assisting the issuer of these instruments in structuring them in a 
way which transmogrified subprime loans into Triple A securities. These were, 
of course, initially attractive for international investors, but were ultimately 
worthless.24 Moreover, from 1983 until the introduction of the Dodd-Frank Act 
in 2010, the rule in s 436(g) of the US Securities Act 1933 prohibited anybody 
from suing for damages against any of the three biggest rating agencies – 
Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch Ratings. These were termed Nationally 
Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (NRSROs). Such a prohibition or 
immunity from justice should not be acceptable in states that guaranteed the 
universal right to access to justice. For instance, in Spain, anybody can sue 
anybody for any reason, according to Article 24 of the Spanish Constitution. 
After the abrogation of section 436(g) by the Dodd-Frank Act 2010, it seems 
clear that rating agencies were considered as experts and were not simply 
giving their ‘opinion’,25 thus losing the protection of the First Amendment of 
22  Frank Partnoy, ‘Overdependence on Credit Ratings was a Primary Cause of 
the Crisis’ in Mitchell and Wilmarth, Jr (n 15) 116. See also Lawrence J White, ‘The 
Credit Rating Agencies’ (2010) 24(2) Journal of Economic Perspectives 218–21: ‘The 
securitization of these subprime mortgages was only able to succeed … because of the 
favourable ratings bestowed on the more senior tranches’.
23  Steven L Schwarcz, ’Too Big to Fail?: Recasting the Financial Safety Net’ in 
Mitchell and Wilmarth, Jr (n 15) 96.
24  Mark Anchor Albert ‘Ratings Wars. The Lawsuit Filed by Calpers May Be Able to 
Overcome the Rating Agencies’ Traditional First Amendment Defense’ Los Angeles Lawyer 
(October 2009) 38. We mentioned above the concept of the ‘blind trust’ crisis. Paragraph 
10 of the introduction of European Regulation 1060/2009, of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 16 September 2009, on credit rating agencies (OJ L302/1, 17 November 
2009) states that: ‘Credit rating agencies are considered to have failed, first, to reflect early 
enough in their credit ratings the worsening market conditions, and second, to adjust their 
credit ratings in time following the deepening market crisis. The most appropriate manner 
in which to correct those failures is by measures relating to conflicts of interest, the quality 
of the credit ratings, the transparency and internal governance of the credit rating agencies, 
and the surveillance of the activities of the credit rating agencies. The users of credit ratings 
should not rely blindly on credit ratings but should take utmost care to perform [their] own 
analysis and conduct appropriate due diligence at all times regarding their reliance on such 
credit ratings’.
25  As was considered the case in many cases, such as Jefferson County Sch Dist v 
Moody’s Investors Servs 1999 175 F 3d 848, 856 (10th Cir 1999) and County of Orange v 
McGraw-Hill Cos 1999 245 BR 151, 157 (CD Cal 1999).

A Legal Perspective
45
the US Constitution for their ratings.26 The CalPERS case27 was an example 
of an institution that incurred losses of about $1,000 million by relying on 
the rating agencies’ representations. In December 2012, the court held that the 
defendants did not seem to be protected by the First Amendment.
Third, the deficient regulation of the ‘US mortgage securitization market’  
is a major concern. At the end of the day, the assets which are securitized in  
a mortgage securitization process are mortgages.28 The strength of a mortgage, 
and the securities it backs, depends on a pool of factors. Some of these are  
directly related to the property charged, such as location, building materials, 
whether the property is a flat or a house, etc. Similarly, the type and features  
of the mortgage loan involved, such as the LTV, interest rate, etc., are important. 
However, some key factors are directly related to the legal configuration of the 
mortgage itself, such as the way in which it is legally structured within a particular 
legal environment.
It is useful to outline here the details of the so-called ‘US mortgage’ – the 
type of mortgage at the base of the chain of any US mortgage securitization 
process, although it is difficult to talk about a single type of ‘US mortgage’.29 
Traditionally, from a legal perspective, there are two basic types: those states, 
mainly west of the Mississippi river, which follow the lien theory (the creditor 
has a security interest, but the title is not transferred to him or her) and those 
states, mainly east of the Mississippi river, which follow the title theory (in which 
the mortgage title is transferred to the lender).30 However, other classifications 
can be made depending on different criteria, such as the way in which mortgages 
are formalized (regular mortgages between mortgagee and mortgagor, deeds of 
trust where there is a trustee between both who holds the mortgage title)31 and 
26  See New York Times v Sullivan 376 US 254 (1964).
27  California Public Employees Retirement Scheme v Moody’s Corp et al CGC-09-
49024. 
See 
http://dockets.justia.com/docket/california/candce/3:2009cv03628/217999 
accessed 17 September 2012.
28  This is true for the US and most countries that allow mortgage securitization, but 
not, for example, for Spain. See Nasarre-Aznar (n 2) 60–63.
29  Although this expression is the one that is used in response to international investors 
when they ask for the type of collateral of the MBSs or CDOs they are about to buy, in 
fact the mortgage pooling is done at the federal level through the agencies, and the rules 
that govern these mortgages are state or even county-based. Conversely, securitizations 
organized in Europe are national and it is not common to sell them whilst saying that they 
are backed by ‘European mortgages’ as no ‘European mortgage’ exists.
30  GJ Siedel and Janis K Cheezem, Real Estate Law, 4th edn (Boston, MA, South-
Western College Publishing 1999) 310.
31  Robert Kratovil, ‘Mortgage Law’ in Robert H Pease and Homer Virgil Cherrington 
(eds), Mortgage Banking (New York, McGraw-Hill 1953) 24 states that this type can be 
useful if there are a number of lenders as a trustee acquires mortgage titles (instead of 
the lenders) who can eventually also foreclose the mortgage instead of the default of the 
mortgagor. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
46
others (reverse mortgages, equitable mortgages). But, apart from this, mortgages 
are registered, conveyed and foreclosed in a different way between states. Indeed, 
this diversification and lack of common regulations at a federal level32 contributes 
to the weakness of an efficient securitization process,33 especially in those aspects 
relating to investors’ protection.
In relation to registration, there is no common land register in the US, but 
instead many county equivalents, amounting to some 3,000 registers, following 
a tradition since the seventeenth century. Each county register has its own 
requirements, fees, procedures, rules, etc. In fact, they have been defined as ‘a 
terribly cumbersome, paper-intensive, error-prone, and therefore costly process 
for transferring and tracking mortgage rights’.34 To attempt to make the system 
more efficient, title insurance companies maintain copies of the records of the 
county recorders and assume, through their policies, the risks (mistakes, omissions, 
etc.) that accompany those records, although this system has its own problems.35 
This wholescale inefficiency in the mortgage registration system was the impetus 
for the main US mortgage market stakeholders – Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and 
the Mortgage Bankers Association of America – to create a private land register 
in 1995. This would operate alongside, but outside of, the rules of the county 
registers:36 a device called Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems (MERS).
MERS performs two functions. It is a private land register for those members 
of the system where they assume the role of ‘land registrars’, as mortgages are 
transferred within the system. Significantly, MERS also acts as the mortgagee in 
each recorded mortgage relationship. Remarkably, it is registered in the county 
register as the mortgagee, even though it is not the lender. Any other operation 
32  Grant S Nelson, ‘Confronting the Mortgage Meltdown: A Brief for the Federalization 
of State Mortgage Foreclosure Law’ (2010) 37(538) Pepperdine Law Review 606. Various 
attempts in the last 90 years at different types of initiatives (e.g. the soft law of the American 
Law Institute with its Restatement (Third) of Property: Mortgages 1997) have been 
insufficient to achieve a country-wide mortgage. In Europe, doctrinal works have been 
carried out through the drafting of a Eurohypothec, a common mortgage for Europe (see 
Agnieszka Dziecrewicz-Tulodziecka (ed), Basic Guidelines for a Eurohypothec (Warsaw, 
Mortgage Credit Foundation 2005). See also Sergio Nasarre-Aznar, ‘Eurohypothec: 
Drafting a Common Mortgage for Europe’ (2010) 2(1) Journal of Legal Affairs and Dispute 
Resolution in Engineering and Construction 50.
33  Nelson (n 32) 594.
34  Phyllis K Slesinger and Daniel McLaughlin, ’Mortgage Electronic Registration 
System’ (1995) 31 (808) Idaho Law Review 808. 
35  Christopher L Peterson, ‘Foreclosure, Subprime Mortgage Lending, and the 
Mortgage Electronic Registration System’ (2010) 78 University of Cincinnati Law Review 
1366. From a European perspective, the problem of data protection should be added to 
those listed by the author, as it is questionable whether private companies can hold and 
manage the personal data and details of the titles over land.
36  Instead of focusing on trying to push forward a sort of harmonized system, such as 
the EULIS initiative in Europe: http://eulis.eu accessed 3 March 2013.

A Legal Perspective
47
with the mortgage registered in this way is not public and does not alter the county 
register,37 but operates within the MERS system. It should be noted that MERS is 
directly operated by the members involved in each transaction38 and is a unique 
system for the whole country. Two-thirds of the mortgages originating in the US 
are contained within MERS, amounting to approximately 60 million mortgages 
in 2007.39 In many ways, the MERS system distorts the character of an ideal land 
registry system, which should be public, accessible by everybody, controlled by the 
public administration and controlling the validity of the recorded titles. Indeed, it 
has created a range of new problems, where, among other issues, it claims to be the 
mortgagee and also the enforcer of the default arrangements, but not the lender. Of 
course, this leaves the mortgagor unprotected, since it is clearly inappropriate that 
the enforcer of the security in the mortgage is not the lender under the mortgage 
loan arrangement. Several court resolutions have stated that MERS cannot enforce 
the mortgage as it does not hold the promissory note (technically it does not 
have a claim),40 which probably has remained in the hands of the originator of 
the mortgage.41 Thus, it may be the case that MERS is contributing to the poor 
identification of liabilities arising from the predatory lending process.42 This may 
be related to the ‘robo-signing’ scandal, involving the forging of false documents 
evidencing the transfer of promissory notes to the bank purported to foreclose the 
mortgage.43 In December 2011, the Massachusetts Attorney General filed the first 
major state lawsuit over ‘robo-signing’ against several major banks and MERS.44 
The Attorney General alleged that these five entities:
engaged in unfair and deceptive trade practices in violation of Massachusetts law 
by pervasive use of fraudulent documentation in the foreclosure process, including 
37  This remains recorded with MERS as ‘mortgagee’. This allows the mortgage 
industry to use MERS to evade paying the fees and taxes related to mortgage transactions. 
See Peterson (n 35) 1362.
38  This leads to new problems, such the one raised in Deutsche Bank National Trust 
Co v Maraj 2008 NY Slip Op 50176 (U) (NY Sup Ct Kings Co).
39  Peterson (n 35) 1362 and 1373.
40  See National Consumer Law Center, Foreclosures (4th edn, Boston, MA, National 
Consumer Law Center 2010) 143. See also the decision in Johnson v Home State Bank 501 
US 78, 111, S Ct 2150, 2154, 115 L Ed 2d 66 (1991). 
41  In fact, it is MERS itself that alternately presents itself as a mere agent of the 
mortgagee (when it is sued for fraud, bad practice or violation of consumers’ rights) or as 
a mortgagee (when tries to foreclose a mortgage). See, in this sense, Peterson (n 35) 1376.
42  ibid, 1399. 
43  ‘Mortgage Mess: Who Really Owns Your Mortgage’ Sixty Seconds (3 April 2011) 
http://www.cbsnews.com/video/watch/?id=7361596n accessed 19 July 2013.
44  Commonwealth of Massachusetts v Bank of America et al (Superior Court 
Depatment of the Trial Court 11-4363, 1 December 2011) http://www.mass.gov/ago/news-
and-updates/press-releases/2011/five-national-banks-sued-by-ag-coakley.html accessed 29 
October 2012.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
48
so-called ‘robo-signing’, foreclosing without holding the actual mortgage, 
corrupting [the] Massachusetts land recording system through the use of MERS, 
and failing to uphold loan modification promises to Massachusetts home-owner.45
In relation to this, JP Morgan, Bank of America, Citigroup, Ally Financial and 
Wells Fargo & Company were accused of faulty foreclosure practices. However, 
in 2012, a settlement was reached with the Department of Justice, the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development and 49 states, through which the lenders 
were given immunity from prosecution for this cause in exchange for direct 
compensation ($25 billion) to home-owners who were at risk of foreclosure or 
who had already been foreclosed.
Thus, the system of mortgage transfer in the US is in jeopardy, giving rise 
to questions concerning the credibility of the whole US mortgage securitization 
process. This situation creates major risks for US MBS holders. It is remarkable 
that only now, after 40 years of US mortgage securitization, is there an active 
discussion in the US on how mortgages can be properly transferred as an essential 
step in any standard US securitization process. This discussion is taking place 
at a number of levels: in the report of the Permanent Editorial Board for the 
Uniform Commercial Code 2011;46 regarding the differences in the transfer of 
regular mortgages and deeds of trust;47 among authors who have evidenced sharp 
differences among different systems;48 within the mortgage industry itself;49 and in 
the courts, such the decisions in Ibanez and Bevilacqua.50
45  ‘First Major State Lawsuit Filed Over “Robo-Signing”’ CNBC (1 December 2011) 
http://www.cnbc.com/id/45511868 accessed 15 March 2013.
46  The Permanent Editorial Board for the Uniform Commercial Code, ‘Application of 
the Uniform Commercial Code to Selected Issues Relating to Mortgage Notes’ 14 November 
2011. The American Law Institute and the National Conference of Commissioners on 
Uniform State Laws (14 November 2011) establishes a set of four rules on the basis of the 
Uniform Commercial Code, but it says that: ‘The enforcement of real estate mortgages by 
foreclosure is primarily the province of a state’s real property law.’
47  See National Consumer Law Center (n 40) 145; and Landmark National Bank v 
Kesler, 216 P 3d 158 (which establishes that separating interests of note and deeds of trust 
can leave the mortgage unenforceable).
48  Nelson (n 32) 591 and 592.
49  See the discussion of the report of the American Securitization Forum, ‘Transfer 
and Assignment of Residential Mortgage Loans in the Secondary Mortgage Market’ ASF 
White Paper Series (16 November 2010).
50  The first case is US Bank National Association v Antonio Ibanez, Supreme Judicial 
Court of Massachusetts, 7 January 2011 (458 Mass 637), in which the Court stated that: 
‘In Massachusetts, where a note has been assigned but there is no written assignment of 
the mortgage underlying the note, the assignment of the note does not carry with it the 
assignment of the mortgage. Barnes v Boardman 149 Mass 106, 114 (1889). Rather, the 
holder of the mortgage holds the mortgage in trust for the purchaser of the note, who has 
an equitable right to obtain an assignment of the mortgage, which may be accomplished 

A Legal Perspective
49
It is worth mentioning the relevant inefficiencies (delays and losses) of the 
mortgage enforcement systems in the US that directly affect the capacity for 
lenders to recover the money they have lent, and therefore the capacity of investors 
in MBSs to recover the money they have invested in those securities. The average 
time to process a foreclosure in the US increased from 253 days in 2007 to 674 
days in 2011, although the duration is about three years in Florida, Washington 
and New York.51 Mortgage foreclosure law differs from one state to another.52 In 
40 per cent of states, it is only possible to start a judicial foreclosure, which is a 
long, complex, expensive and inefficient system.53 If the lender finally succeeds in 
foreclosing, the inefficient auction process involving the sheriff does not facilitate 
a proper sale of the property based on its market price – a system which causes 
losses to the lender that may affect the stability of the securitization structure in 
which that particular mortgage was included. Second, those states in lighter grey 
in Figure 2.2 are non-recourse states – where the mortgagee is only secured with 
the charged property and not with the rest of the estate of the mortgagor. The 
possibility of mortgage default can be up to 81 per cent higher in these compared 
with recourse states.54 This has given rise to the phenomenon of the ‘strategic 
defaulter’ – those mortgagors who can pay the mortgage, but since their property 
is worth less than the money they still owe to the lending institution, they simply 
‘walk away’, giving the lender the keys of the property.55
by filing an action in court and obtaining an equitable order of assignment.’ In the praxis 
this means that thousands or even millions of mortgages are unenforceable (and therefore 
the MBSs issued over them depreciated greatly or simply defaulted as they were often 
structured over closed pools of mortgages) unless mortgagees acquire all those notes or 
‘forge’ them through robo-signing because they did not exist at all. The second case is 
Bevilacqua v Rodriguez, Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, 18 October 2011 (460 
Mass 762), which confirmed that the mortgage holder must have a valid assignment of 
mortgage to foreclose a property.
51  Les Christie, ‘Foreclosure Free Ride: 3 Years, No Payments’ CNN Money (28 
December 2011) http://money.cnn.com/2011/12/28/real_estate/foreclosure/index.htm accessed 
18 September 2012.
52  Nelson (n 32) 586.
53  Prentiss Cox, ‘Foreclosure Reform Amid Mortgage Lending Turmoil: A Public 
Purpose Approach’ (2008) 45 (3) Houston Law Review 699; see also Nelson (n 32) 586.
54  Ghent and Kudlyak (n 10) 29. See also Kreitzer (n 19) 46 and 47.
55  Moreover, there is a plethora of techniques available to the borrower to delay 
the foreclosure, such as filing for bankruptcy, staying at home during foreclosures, equity 
skimming, etc. Other arrangements with the lender, such as deeds in lieu, short sales or 
conciliations, also affect the secondary mortgage market as they usually entail a loss to 
the lender, which is transferred to the MBS investors if that mortgage was included in a 
backing pool.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
50
Source: own elaboration 56
Thus, it is questionable whether the inefficiencies in ‘US mortgages’ were 
already known by investors at the time they bought US MBSs and CDOs, or 
whether they were being taken into account by rating agencies when they were 
giving ‘Triple A’ ratings to those mortgage-collateralized MBSs and CDOs. All 
this evidences a significant level of distortion57 of the legal system and generalized 
reckless practices in the origination, transfer and enforcement of mortgages in the 
US. This has clearly contributed to the failure of the international financial system 
and the globalization of the crisis.
From the International Crisis to the Detrimental Impact on the Spanish 
Housing System
In 2009, global losses in the international banks and other financial institutions 
arising from US-originated assets were estimated at approximately $2.7 trillion.58 
In Europe, three major British banks lost $31.8 billion, two major Swiss banks 
56  Using the data of Ghent and Kudlyak (n 10) 44 and 55.
57  On this concept, see Steven L Schwarcz, ‘Distorting Legal Principles’ (2010) 35(4) 
Journal of Corporation Law, available at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=1532465 accessed 18 September 2012.
58  International Monetary Fund, ‘Global Financial Stability Report (GFSR)’  
(April 2009) 11 http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2009/01/pdf/text.pdf accessed  
18 September 2012.
Figure 2.2	
Recourse (dark grey) and non-recourse (light grey) states

A Legal Perspective
51
lost $62.3 billion, and $41.1 billion was lost by three major German banks up to 
December 2008, – all traceable to the US subprime crisis.59 These losses heavily 
affected the capital position of the banks, which entered a liquidity crisis. The 
securitization market dropped dramatically, as did interbank lending, due to the 
general lack of trust between financial institutions. In some countries, such as 
Spain, banks almost completely ceased lending to families or businesses, thus 
virtually halting the economy. It is significant that in 2007, loans (mostly mortgage 
loans) represented about 65 per cent of the Spanish banks’ balance sheets.60
Indeed, the Spanish economy and financial system has performed even worse 
than would be expected during a globalized crisis, particularly when compared 
to the impact in the majority of EU countries. Although many causes could have 
contributed to this, it is suggested that the last housing boom/bubble (1995–2007) 
is one of the most relevant. In a manner similar to the US pattern described above, 
the promotion of widespread home-ownership at any cost, combined with the 
speculative or the buy-to-let business approach, has been prevalent in Spain and 
other European countries. Spanish housing policy, before and during the housing 
bubble, involved massive construction and enormous levels of mortgage loans, 
which has now led to an over-indebted society.61 This was facilitated by ready 
access to mortgage credit as a result of low interest rates and the liquidity of 
Spanish banks, which benefited from a good interbank lending system (based 
on trust among banks), and the massive issuing of Spanish covered bonds and 
MBSs. In fact, Spanish banks had for many years been the second largest issuer of 
covered bonds and MBSs after Germany (covered bonds), and the UK (MBSs).62 
Other countries such as Ireland experienced similar policies and a housing market 
collapse on a similarly large scale.63
59  Cox, Faucette and Valenzuela (n 6) 18.
60  Ibid.
61  For numbers, see below.
62  See Sergio Nasarre-Aznar, ‘Operaciones pasivas. La refinanciación de créditos y 
préstamos hipotecarios’ in Esther Muñiz Espada, Sergio Nasarre-Aznar and Elena Sánchez 
Jordán (eds), La reforma del mercado hipotecario (Madrid, Edisofer 2009) 399–552, but 
especially 406–12, where the bad performance of Spanish covered bonds when compared 
to other European covered bonds since the beginning of the crisis is discussed.
63  At least three authoritative reports on the Irish financial crisis have highlighted 
massive overlending, which overheated the housing market. See Klaus Regling and 
Max Watson, A Preliminary Report on the Sources of Ireland’s Banking Crisis (Dublin, 
Government Publications Office 2010); Commission of Investigation into the Banking 
Sector in Ireland, Misjudging Risk: Causes of the Systemic Banking Crisis in Ireland 
(March 2011), known as the Nyberg Report; Governor of the Central Bank, The Irish 
Banking Crisis. Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy 2003–2008 (Dublin, The 
Stationery Office 2010). This latter report shows that by 2006, the increase in construction 
and housing had increased beyond population needs, reflecting speculative purchases that 
represented 15 per cent of the housing stock that stood vacant. But it also says (at 30) that 
taxation incentives aimed at the construction sector, e.g. lowering stamp duty five times 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
52
However, in Spain, the situation was more severe as a consequence of the 
unavailability of a real alternative housing tenure to home-ownership. For years, the 
Spanish housing rented sector remained one of the smallest in Europe (see Figure 
2.3), which in practice meant that it was of poor quality and relatively expensive.64 
All tax benefits were targeted at home-owners rather than tenants/lessees. There 
was an inefficient eviction process for rented properties, which compared poorly 
with an efficient (but very lender-oriented) mortgage enforcement procedure. 
State housing plans revolved around build-to-sell rather than a renting-what-is-
already-built-oriented approach. Market advantages, in the form of structured and 
funded mortgage facilities, have overshadowed an undeveloped rented market, 
while Spanish legislation over the past 60 years focused on the needs of banks and 
home-owners rather than lessors and lessees. The result is that, even today, only 
12 per cent of households occupy rented housing and only two per cent occupy 
social rented housing. Thus, there is still no real (in terms of affordability, quality, 
stability, etc.) alternative to home-ownership for families, which is an issue in 
many other European states .65
In fact, since the beginning of the financial crash in the last quarter of 2007 
(and the subsequent mortgage and housing crisis), Spanish economic stability66 
between 2001 and 2007 to improve the affordability of houses to first-time buyers and 
special schemes, existed for many types of constructions. Moreover (at 31), the ceiling on 
the income tax deductibility of mortgage interest for owner-occupiers was increased four 
times between 2000 and 2008. See also P van den Noord, ‘Tax Incentives and House Price 
Volatility in the Euro Area: Theory and Evidence’, OECD Economics Department Working 
Papers No 356, 2011, 9, which clearly stated that the tax system was subsidizing housing in 
Ireland and Spain (among others).
64  See a complete discussion in Sergio Nasarre-Aznar and Estela Rivas Nieto, ‘La 
naturaleza jurídico-privada y el tratamiento fiscal de las nuevas sociedades cotizadas de 
inversión en el mercado inmobiliario (SOCIMI)’ en la Ley 11/2009 Estudios Financieros. 
Revista de Contabilidad y Tributación, 2009 DIC; (321); and D Rae and P van den 
Noord, ‘Ireland’s Housing Boom. What Has Driven it and Have Prices Overshot?’ OECD 
Economics Department Working Papers No 492, 6.
65  See a complete discussion of this in Montserrat Pareja Eastway, ‘El régimen de 
tenencia de la vivienda’ in Jesús Leal (ed), La política de vivienda en España (Madrid, Ed 
Pablo Iglesias 2010) 101.
66  Which has been recently (2011–12) replicated into a political crisis (e.g. the 
form of state divided into autonomous regions since 1978 is in question, with Catalonia’s 
current government requesting the independence from the rest of Spain (see http://
www.nytimes.com/2012/10/06/world/europe/in-catalonia-spain-artur-mas-threatens-to-
secede.html?partner=rss&emc=rss&smid=tw-nytimes&_r=0 accessed 6 October 2012) 
and serious social unrest (e.g. just in the main city of Spain, Madrid, there have been 
983 demonstrations between July and September 2012 (see ‘Las manifestaciones pasan 
factura a Madrid’ LaVanguarida (27 September 2012) http://www.lavanguardia.com/
local/madrid/20120927/54351933893/las-manifestaciones-pasan-factura-a-madrid.html 
accessed 6 July 2013.

A Legal Perspective
53
itself has been in constant danger.67 This has had an important impact on housing. 
The following data outlines the current situation of housing in Spain after five 
years of economic crisis:
1.	 From 2007 to 2011, there have been 330,000 mortgage foreclosures.68 
Paradoxically, the new census of 2011 reveals that there are 3.5 million 
empty dwellings.69
2.	 Mortgage funding and house sales are still decreasing – down by 29.3 in 
2011 compared to 2010.70
67  The massive banking reforms through mergers and acquisitions and nationalization, 
the current lack of liquidity of Spanish banks that remain untrustworthy in international 
business, the ‘intervention’ of the EU in the Spanish economy in July 2012, the creation of 
a ‘bad bank’ with thousands of unsold properties at bargain prices, the sovereign rate risk 
that exceeded 600 basic points in relation to Germany in July 2012 and the cuts in workers’ 
salaries and other social rights are only some examples of the elements of the drama.
68  Consejo General Del Poder Judicial, ‘Datos sobe el efecto de la crisis en los 
órganos judiciales 3T 2011’ (Madrid, 2011) www.poderjudicial.es accessed 19 July 2013, 
under ‘Estadística’. However this data does not differentiate between first residences and 
other dwellings or even between dwellings and other type of properties.
69  See, however, Juan Carlos Martinez, ‘En España un 20 per cent de las viviendas están 
vacías’ El Pais Economia (8 May 2012) http://economia.elpais.com/economia/2012/01/05/
actualidad/1325752378_850215.html accessed 18 September 2012.
70  Statistics can be found at the website of the Ministerio de Fomento http://www.
fomento.gob.es/BE2/?nivel=2&orden=34000000 accessed 18 September 2012.
Figure 2.3	
Number of dwellings by type of tenure in Europe, 2009
Source: Eurostat.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
54
3.	 Some 5.7 million people were unemployed in July 2012, an unemployment 
rate of 24.63 per cent.71 This has a significant influence in the increasing 
number of defaulted (mortgage) loans.
4.	 According to The Economist (9 February 2012), on the basis of 
unemployment and inflation ratios, Spain is currently the sixth poorest 
country out of a list of 92.72 According to UNICEF, some 2.2 million 
children in Spain are living in families below the poverty threshold.73
5.	 According to Eurostat, some 37 per cent of the Spanish population between 
18 and 35 consider access to a dwelling as one of the most important 
problems facing Spanish youth74 and as the main cause of why children 
are not leaving their parents’ house until they are 30 years old.75 Even 
then, some 30 per cent still need economic support from their parents or 
other relatives.76
There are at least four legal factors which, in my opinion, contribute to an 
understanding of the current situation of Spanish housing and mortgage markets, 
and which bear similarities to factors in the US that caused the crisis.
First, bad banking practices are a major contributory factor. For many years, 
Spanish banks undertook bad practices by offering inadequate products,77 
including those related to their mortgage loans. Subprime mortgages were also 
a reality in Spain during the housing bubble. Lenders granted mortgages of even 
more than 100 per cent LTV, regardless of the capability of the borrower to pay 
71  According to the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica (INE): http://www.ine.es/
jaxi/menu.do?type=pcaxis&path= per cent2Ft22 per cent2Fe308_mnu&file=inebase&L=0 
accessed 18 September 2012.
72  ‘Feeling Gloomy’ The Economist (9 January 2012) http://www.economist.com/
blogs/graphicdetail/2012/01/daily-chart-0 accessed 18 September 2012.
73  UNICEF, ‘La infancia en España 2012–2013. El impacto de la crisis en los niños’ 
(May 2012) 8 http://www.unicef.es/sites/www.unicef.es/files/Infancia_2012_2013_final.
pdf accessed 17 September 2012.
74  Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas (CIS), ‘Estudi 2835’ (27 April 2010) 
http://www.cis.es accessed 18 September, 2012.
75  Eurostat, ‘Youth in Europe. A Statistical Portrait’ (2009) 31 http://epp.eurostat.
ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-78-09-920/EN/KS-78-09-920-EN.PDF accessed 18 
September 2012.
76  Fundacion Encuentro, ‘Informe España 2011. Una interpretación de su realidad 
social’ (2011) 191 http://www.fund-encuentro.org/ accessed 19 September 2012.
77  As an example, the Spanish Securities Exchange Commission (Comisión Nacional 
del Mercado de Valores) has established fines for 10 credit institutions for commercializing 
a kind of security called ‘preferred participations’ (participaciones preferentes) without 
explaining them properly to their clients, and thus failing to fulfil the Markets in Financial 
Instruments Directive requirements to obtain a proper consent from them: http://economia.
elpais.com/economia/2012/09/13/actualidad/1347528967_278279.html accessed 13 September 
2012.

A Legal Perspective
55
the instalments under the mortgage.78 The careless examination of the repayment 
capability of the borrower led, according to the Bank of Spain, to a delinquency 
rate of housing mortgage loans of 3.22 per cent in mid-2012, up from 1.31 per 
cent in mid-2008.79 The risk to banks was usually covered by requiring borrowers 
to find a friend or a relative to mortgage their own dwelling, or even provide 
a personal guarantee (aval) with their whole estate for the repayment of the 
mortgage loan. This practice has contributed to the extension of the housing crisis 
among families of all income levels.80 Similarly, for years, Spanish banks had sold 
risky financial products to both small corporations and consumers. These were 
arranged with corresponding credit default swaps, to stabilize the volatility of the 
variable interest rate of their mortgage loans (referenced to the Euribor index)81 or 
to provide a floor clause within the mortgage loan contract terms. These types of 
financial products were commercialized just a few months before the biggest drop 
of the Euribor in its history82 and some months after the first effects of the credit 
crunch in Spain.83 Many of those contracts were worded in an obscure manner for 
clients. The reference indexes were imposed by the banks (a fixed reference index 
of around 4.5 per cent), which, in practice, meant that since October 2008, clients 
have been paying extra over and above their mortgage instalments to the banks 
on a monthly basis. This is the typical obligation resulting from an interest rate 
swap or a floor clause, as the Euribor has remained since then lower than those 
‘agreed’ reference indexes.
Moreover, customers/clients found it very difficult to assess the real legal 
and economic consequences of underwriting those contracts, as neither neutral 
nor complete information was provided to them. There was no legal requirement 
to ensure that customers/clients understood all the details of the arrangement, 
demonstrating the major asymmetry of information between the parties. Banks 
could have reasonably been expected to have known in advance that the Euribor 
rate would drop significantly, or were at least more likely to do so than the 
78  Since 2002, banks have been legally allowed to securitize Spanish subprime 
mortgages through the issue of Spanish asset-backed securities (ABSs) (bonos de titulización 
de activos). This meant that Spanish banks were allowed to get rid of problematic mortgages 
as soon as they were granted and therefore they had no problem in granting them to families 
and people who were unable to repay them.
79  It is about 25 per cent for mortgage loans granted to builders. See Asociación 
Hipotececaria Espanola, ‘Tasas de dudosidad hipotecaria, Segundo Trimestre 2012’ (2012) 
http://www.ahe.es/bocms/images/bfilecontent/2006/04/26/90.pdf?version=17 accessed 6 
October 2012.
80  ‘Las ejecuciones hipotecarias amenazan ya a las familias de las zonas de rentas 
altas’ El Mundo (24 September 2012) http://www.elmundo.es/elmundo/2012/09/24/
suvivienda/1348478744.html accessed 9 September 2012.
81  ‘EURIBOR’ (the Euro Interbank Offered Rate) is the money market reference rate 
for the euro.
82  October 2008.
83  September 2007.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
56
consumers or small businesses with whom they made such arrangements. The 
courts have reacted to this situation by declaring many thousands of swaps, caps, 
floor clauses and similar financial derivative agreements void.
It is significant that the transposition of the Markets in Financial Instruments 
Directive (MiFID)84 into Spanish law arrived late, in 2008, when all banking 
activity had already virtually stopped. Although now implemented, its application 
has been disappointing for non-professional customers. Indeed, non-professional 
customers can still engage in contracts associated with the vast majority of risky 
financial products, even where the non-professional customer has not passed 
the adequacy or convenience test. This, in practice, means that he or she does 
not know what he or she is contracting, and is bound just by signing that he 
or she agrees to the contract (even if he or she does not understand it and/or 
its consequences). Conversely, banks are using these tests as a defence against 
claims from consumers to demonstrate that they had properly assessed them, and 
that the customers wished to enter into contracts for these products, even if they 
did not understand them.85
Spanish legislation has allowed and even promoted new forms of risky 
banking practices, even in the delicate field of housing. In this sense, the reform 
of the mortgage market in Spain, by Act 41/2007,86 introduced two new risky 
84  Directive 2004/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 
April 2004 on markets in financial instruments amending Council Directives 85/611/EEC 
and 93/6/EEC and Directive 2000/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 
and repealing Council Directive 93/22/EEC (OJEU, 30 April 2004, L145/1).
85  This is a similar criticism noted in C Castronove, ‘Information Duties and 
Precontractual Good Faith’ (2009) 4 European Review of Private Law 568 of consumers’ 
protection through long lists of pre-contractual information to be provided by the 
professional seller before an arrangement (see, as an example, the 20 pieces of pre-
contractual information to be provided in distant contracts according to art 6 of Directive 
2011/83/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on 
consumer rights, amending Council Directive 93/13/EEC and Directive 1999/44/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directive 85/577/EEC and 
Directive 97/7/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJEU 22 November 
2011, L304/64). Basically, consumers do not read all this information on a regular basis 
and, even if they do so, in some cases they may not fully understand it, thus evidencing that 
there is not necessarily a correlation between more pre-contractual information and more 
consumer protection. For criticism of this system, see T Sefton Green, Mistake, Fraud 
and Duties to Inform in European Contract Law (Cambridge University Press, 2009) 398. 
See also research on this in the US in O Ben-Shahar and CE Schneider, ‘The Failure of 
Mandated Disclosure’, Chicago Working Paper Series Index (March 2010) 64, where it is 
shown that the history of compulsory provision of information ‘is a history of failure’. See 
also F Marotta Wurgler, ‘Will Increased Disclosure Help? Evaluating the Recommendation 
of the ALI’s “Principles of the Law of Software Contracts”’ (2011) 78 (1) University of 
Chicago Law Review 165. 
86  Spanish Act 41/2007, 7 December, which modifies Act 2/1981, 25 March, of 
regulation of the mortgage market (BOE 8 December 2007, no 294, 50593).

A Legal Perspective
57
practices that were discouraged by the European Commission White Paper on the 
Integration of EU Mortgage Credit Markets.87 The first of the two is related to the 
tying practices, i.e. banking practices that make it more difficult for the borrower 
to change his or her lending institution because of the costs or the numerous links 
with the existing lender. Thus, while Act 41/2007 limited the effects of former 
Article 2 of Act 2/1994 on subrogation and modification of mortgage loans,88 from 
2007 onwards, as soon as the borrower receives an offer from a new lender, he or 
she cannot change if the existing lender matches this offer. Significantly, Objective 
3.4 of the European Commission White Paper 2007 strongly discourages the 
establishment of such limitations on borrowers in Europe.89 Moreover, Article 9 
of the Report of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee90 of the European 
Parliament clearly states that countries should forbid these tying products. 
Surprisingly, however, Article 18 of the same Report foresees a similar outcome 
to the one in Spanish Act 41/2007, which is not desirable as it is contrary to the 
EU principle of freedom of movement of people and is against free competition 
among lending institutions in Europe, freedom of choice and consumer mobility.
A second paradox arises in the context of the Commission’s caution in the White 
Paper in respect of equity-release products, such as the reverse mortgage. Yet, these 
type of products are legally backed in Article 18 of the Report of the Economic 
and Monetary Affairs Committee and the reverse mortgage was introduced for 
the first time into Spanish law by Additional Disposition 1 of Act 41/2007. As an 
example of this approach in Spain, Figure 2.4 shows the ‘recommended’ way in 
which a person’s life can be linked to a single lending institution. First the lender 
grants a mortgage loan to buy the first family dwelling when the borrower is in 
his or her mid-twenties; then it grants consumer loans when the borrower has 
partially repaid the mortgage loan and he or she is between his or her mid-forties 
87  White Paper on the Integration of EU Mortgage Credit Markets, COM(2007) 807 
final. 
88  BOE 4 April 1994, no 80, 10364.
89  Consumer mobility is a clear-cut objective of the White Paper to achieve a true 
European mortgage market. In this sense, it says (at 5) that: ‘Information alone cannot, 
however, facilitate customer mobility. By increasing switching costs, “tying” practices 
(e.g. obliging the consumer to open a current account or take out an insurance policy with 
the same company when purchasing a mortgage credit) effectively bind consumers to a 
particular financial services provider, thus restricting mobility and weakening competition. 
Practices such as obliging consumers to transfer their salary to the current account attached 
to the mortgage credit may have a similar effect. These practices not only have implications 
for customer mobility but can also reduce price and product competition in the markets 
for the tied and tying products and discourage the entry of new players, particular those 
providers specialising in the tied product.’
90  ‘Home Loans: Better Advice for Borrowers, More Stable Markets for Lenders’, 
press release, Committee of Economic and Monetary Affairs (7 July 2012) http://www.
europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+IM-PRESS+20120604IPR462
65+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN&language=EN accessed 9 September 2012.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
58
and mid-sixties; and finally it grants equity-release products when the borrower 
retires. This form of continuous dependency on the same financial institution 
means that it is too onerous or complicated to change the lending institution. From 
25 years to death (where the reverse mortgage operates), this process even links 
the borrower’s heirs to the lender, since the heir must decide whether to repay 
the parent’s reverse mortgage (perhaps with another mortgage loan) or allow the 
family home to be sold or be given to the lender.
	
(literal translation from the original title)91
In relation to mortgage procedural law, the Spanish mortgage enforcement 
system and insolvency system is one of the most lender-oriented in Europe. The 
former has not traditionally allowed the borrower as a consumer to raise any 
defence in relation to abusive clauses (Articles 695 and 698) that may be present in 
the loan contract, an approach which does not seem reasonable.92 A request to the 
European Court of Justice to determine whether the system foreseen in Spanish 
91  Santos Gonzalez Sanchez, ‘Presente y futuro del negocio hipotecario’ a handout 
of a paper given at the Curso de crédito hipotecario conference (Barcelona, Universidad 
Rovira i Virgili 2008).
92  According to art 83 RDL 1/2007, they are void and can render the whole loan 
contract ineffective. In this case, the ineffectiveness of the loan contract will affect the 
mortgage validity that secures that loan contract, thus making it void. This is because 
Spanish mortgages are legally dependent on the credit they secure (legal accessoriness). 
Figure 2.4	
‘Useful’ life of an immovable versus indebtedness
YEARS

A Legal Perspective
59
law conflicts with European consumer law93 has been recently decided (in Aziz v 
Catalunya Caixa),94 where it has been stated that this situation goes against EU 
law (Directive 93/13/CEE).95 thus forcing the Spanish government to reform the 
law (Act 1/2013, 14th May96) and causing the suspension of hundreds of mortgage 
enforcement procedures. Moreover, the mortgagee can, in the same procedure, 
take action against the rest of the estate of the consumer after an unsuccessful 
auction of the mortgaged property (Article 579 LEC), a situation that is not the 
case in many European countries.97
Moreover, the Spanish insolvency legislation does grant any second opportunity 
to ‘start again’ for an ‘insolvent in good faith’98 natural-person borrower after an 
insufficient/unsuccessful insolvency process. In contrast, many other European 
jurisdictions offer more lenient insolvency consequences for natural-person 
borrowers or consumers, as is shown is Figure 2.5.99 A timid reform on this field has 
not arrived until art. 21 Act 14/2013, 27 September100, to promote entrepreneurship.
To further demonstrate the lender-oriented nature of Spanish law, it is notable 
that one of the most relevant problems for the Spanish insolvency procedure is the 
opacity of the auction of the immovable property. Quite often, only professional 
auctioneers attend these auctions, which often end without any offer. In this case, 
the property is assigned to the lender, thus bypassing the historical prohibition of 
the pactum commissorium (Article 1859). This makes it more difficult to achieve 
the real price of the property, a situation detrimental to the borrower, since he 
And this is precisely the mechanism that cannot be discussed – because of legal constraints – 
during a mortgage enforcement procedure, which of course affects the rights of consumers. 
93  OJEU 12 November 2011, C 331/7.
94  Case C-415/11. 
95  Directive 93/13/CEE of 5 April 1993 on unfair terms in consumer contracts (OJEC 
L095, 21 April 1993).
96  BOE 15 May 2013, no 116, 36373.
97  See the whole discussion for both aspects in Sergio Nasarre-Aznar, ‘Malas 
prácticas bancarias en la actividad hipotecaria’ (2011) 727 Revista Crítica de Derecho 
Inmobiliario 2721–23.
98  ‘Bona fide insolvent’ is quite a difficult concept, but basically means that such a 
person has not put himself or herself negligently into insolvency, that he or she has always 
collaborated with his or her creditors to try to solve his or her case, and that he or she has 
not hidden goods or has not lied to the judge or to the insolvency trustees. 
99  Figures 2.5 and 2.6 are the result of an intensive research task undertaken by more 
than 30 researchers from around Europe and Japan, led by Dr Otmar Stöcker (VdP), since 
2005 on mortgage law in Europe in the so-called ‘Runder Tisch’. The latest versions of 
the maps can be found in M Stocker Otmas and Rolf Sturner, Flexibilität, Sicherheit und 
Effizienz der Grundpfandrechte in Europa Band III, 3 erweiterte Auflage, Band 50 (Berlin, 
Verban Deutscher Pfandbriefbanken 2012).
100  BOE 28 September 2013, no 233, 78787.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
60
Figure 2.5	
The insolvency process against consumers in Europe
Source: Runder Tisch, 2012.99

A Legal Perspective
61
Figure 2.6.	
Minimum advertising of an auction in order to facilitate maximum publicity
Source: Runder Tisch, 2012.99

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
62
or she remains a debtor for life101 for the amount of the loan not covered by the 
amount obtained by the sale of the house.102 As shown in Figure 2.699, Spain is one 
of the very few countries in Europe (together with Belgium and Bosnia) which 
requires that only an announcement on the physical noticeboard of the court where 
the auction is going to take place is adequate publicity for a mortgaged property 
auction. Clearly, this is insufficient for an open, transparent international property 
market. A sort of system of auctions resulting from mortgage enforcements is 
foreseen in Act 1/2013, although it still needs to be developed through regulations 
to exist in the praxis.
Finally, Spain still has inadequate regulation of the mortgage securities. 
Spanish covered bonds (cédulas hipotecarias) and MBSs (bonos de titulización 
hipotecaria) are insufficiently regulated under Spanish mortgage market 
legislation. As this has been developed in depth elsewhere,103 just two remarks 
are necessary here. The first is that the security of Spanish covered bonds for 
investors is unclear and comparatively insufficient, and their performance in cases 
of insolvency of the issuer is below the standard of the securities in other European 
jurisdictions. For instance, no separate estate is created in the case of insolvency 
of the originator/issuer that may allow the continuation of a healthy covered bonds 
business. The second is that the legal construction of Spanish MBSs is insufficient, 
from a civil law point of view, to assure that the SPV (issuer) is an insolvency-
remoteness entity, and the rights of MBS holders, in case of mismanagement by 
any stakeholders, are weak and unclear. This lack of legal certainty contributes 
to the international lack of trust towards Spanish banks and Spanish mortgage-
related financial products. Despite this, no reform is foreseen in the short term in 
this area, although it would be highly desirable.
101  For a number of situations, however, this is more a theoretical than a real situation 
as the RDL 8/2011, 1 July (BOE 7 July 2011, no 161, 71548), has increased the mortgagor’s 
minimum unforeclosability threshold (i.e. the part of the monthly income of a mortgagor 
that cannot be foreclosed by the mortgagee). In a standard case in 2012, it has risen from 
about €642/month (Art 607 LEC) to €962/month. Moreover, it is quite theoretical that a 
bank will be able to recover the owed amount after a partially unsuccessful auction of the 
borrower’s main residence, as it is likely that he or she has no more valuable goods and 
will not have any for many years. Therefore, the ‘recourse’ to the rest of the estate of the 
borrower acts more as a preventive and deterrent measure than as a real way for the lender 
to recover the rest of the money.
102  This has led to social movements to push legislative changes in Spain in favour 
of the introduction of a forced datio pro soluto, which, in case they succeed, would convert 
Spain into a form of ‘non-recourse’ state. As seen above in the case of the US, this does not 
seem to be a good solution for any mortgage market. 
103  See Nasarre-Aznar (n 2) 58. The problems addressed there were not solved in the 
reform of Spanish mortgage securities in 2007, as is explained in Nasarre-Aznar (n 62). For 
a summary, see also Nasarre-Aznar (n 96).

A Legal Perspective
63
Insufficient Reforms in the Spanish Mortgage and Housing Markets
The Guidelines for a New Situation
In relation to the Spanish situation, a number of appropriate reforms, based on the 
preceding analysis, can be suggested:
1.  Measures should be taken to avoid a repetition of any of the following 
circumstances that led Spain to the current situation: the easy access to 
credit regardless of mortgagors’ resources or repayment capacity; the 
absence of any real alternative to home ownership; the promotion of 
the social value of massive consumption104 and a pro-lender and weak 
mortgage securities legislation. All of these contributed decisively to the 
creation of the mortgage and housing bubble in Spain.
2.  The choices for families should not be either over-indebtedness due to 
home-ownership or the lack of stability that results from renting a house 
in Spain. Yet, even today, access to home-ownership automatically 
involves over-indebtedness, since salaries in recent years have not 
increased at the same rate as house prices. In June 2012, five years 
after the collapse of the mortgage and housing market in Spain and 
internationally, house prices remain as high as in 2005, one year before 
the peak of the housing bubble. Even in the rental sphere, there are few 
signs of improvement. The Spanish government has recently passed Act 
4/2013, 4th June105 to reform the Spanish law on urban leases (Ley de 
arrendamientos urbanos: LAU). This reform brings even less stability 
to tenants. For example, there is a reduction in the protection period 
from five to three years, the legal right of pre-emption for the tenant is 
removed and referenced prices during the protection period is removed. 
Clearly, this will not increase the attractiveness of renting as a type of 
housing tenure for families.
3.  Mortgagors, and consumers in general, should be able to calculate, from 
the very beginning of a mortgage agreement, the costs of the mortgage 
they are about to sign. Equally, mortgagors should be aware of the risks 
that this might entail. Spain lacks specific protective legislation for 
mortgagors (as consumers), and these consumers are even explicitly 
excluded from regular consumer protection laws.106 The rules foreseen 
104  See Jim Kemeny, The Myth of Homeownership. Private vs Public Choices in 
Housing Tenure (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul 1981) 62 and 63.
105  BOE 5 June 2013, no 134, 42244.
106  See, as examples, Act 22/2007, 11 July, on distance financial contracts (BOE 12 
July 2007, no 166, 29985); or Act 47/2007, 19 December (BOE 20 December 2007, no 
304, 52335) on the transposition of the MiFID Directive. Even the Spanish legislator did 
not take advantage of the possibility given in EU Directive 2008/48/CE of the European 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
64
in Order EHA/2899/2011107 to avoid future bad banking practices do not 
appear sufficient to avoid future bad banking practice and do not add 
anything extra to the current situation. Indeed, there are no specific legal 
consequences for misbehaviour by lenders in the marketing and pre-
contractual phases, such as the failure to properly assess the capability of 
the debtor to repay the offered mortgage or the failure to disclose sufficient 
information to the debtor so that he or she is able understand the cost and 
the legal and economic consequences of the legal documentation he or 
she is about to sign. Nor are there any legal consequences from this upon 
the loan contract. There is a simple administrative fine in Article 14, but 
this does not in any way lead to the possible invalidity of the loan contract 
or any type of contractual or torts liability on the lender. Moreover, the 
rules in this Order do not create greater obligations for those who take 
part in the standard process of granting a mortgage loan. For instance, 
there is no compulsion on a notary public to check for the validity of 
all type of pre-formatted and pre-included clauses in the loan contract, 
or to forbid excessively onerous mortgage loans. Indeed, the functioning 
of the Latin notarial system in Spain is now being questioned.108 Notary 
publics in Spain still claim that it is not their duty to assess the position 
of the parties, although legislation provides that they have to ‘inform’ or 
to ‘warn’ them. But there is no requirement to ensure that they understand 
the legal and economic consequences of underwriting a mortgage loan. 
Nor, it is claimed, is it their duty to control the legality of any abusive 
clauses incorporated into the public deeds unless they had previously been 
declared void by a judge. This would appear to be a reasonable request, 
according to Article 83 RDL 1/2007, which provides that if an abusive 
clause in a contract with consumers is void, this fact must be declared by 
any person, especially by notaries, which should prevent the registration of 
that mortgage loan with that clause.
Parliament and of the Council, of 23 April 2008 on credit agreements for consumers and 
repealing Council Directive 87/102/EEC (OJEU, 22 May 2008, L 133/66) to extend its 
scope to mortgage consumers, when it implemented this Directive through Act 16/2011, 24 
June (art 3a); BOE 25 June 2011, no 151, 68179.
107  BOE 29 October 2011, no 261, 113242.
108  See, as an example, U Schmid Christoph et al, ‘Conveyancing Services Market’, 
ZERP, Study COMP/2006/D3/003 (University of Bremen, December 2007) 77 which 
establishes that: ‘As shown above, most of this regulation, particularly on numerus clausus, 
fixed fees and reserved rights is unacceptable when considered in the light of European 
competition and internal market law.’ Moreover, the STS 16 December 2009 (RJ 2010/702) 
revealed that lending institutions used to include void clauses in mortgage contracts that 
had not been properly controlled by notary publics. 

A Legal Perspective
65
In addition to this, in order to resolve previous banking practices, the RDL 6/2012109 
was passed on 9 March 2012. However, its efficacy is very limited. First, the 
‘good banking practices code’ which is proposed as the basic tool for protection of 
mortgagors is merely voluntary. Second, there are a large number of requirements 
to be fulfilled by mortgagors in order to qualify for specific solutions to address 
mortgage default or arrears, such as acquittances, postponement of payments, 
reduction of interest rates, datio pro soluto, etc. Some of these requirements are 
extremely onerous to achieve, such as the one that states that the whole family of the 
mortgagor must be unemployed and the loan should not have more guarantees. There 
is also a limitation to properties within a certain maximum value for the mortgaged 
property, depending on the size of the city where it is located. The aforementioned 
Act 1/2013 has recently relaxed the requirements to achieve by debtors and families 
in need to benefit from RDL 6/2012 but it is still uncertain if this time they will be 
the adequate to help those that really deserve these special rules.
As a consequence of all this, new and stronger rules are still required to 
create a comprehensive form of mortgagors’ protection, both in relation to the 
current consequences of reckless past lending and to avoid the negative effects 
of another housing bubble.
Forthcoming Measures
There are essentially two types of forthcoming measures that are being introduced 
into the Catalan legal system, thus they will only apply to Catalonia once passed 
into law. One group of provisions will deal with the necessity to really strengthen 
the protection of mortgage consumers. Another group of provisions will deal with 
the fact that new types of housing tenures are needed to augment the housing 
market, and to adapt it to the economic capabilities of each family, instead of 
making families to choose between full ownership and renting.
More protection for mortgage consumers
Devolution rules in relation to mortgages are unclear in the decentralized regions 
of Spain. Despite this, the Catalan legislator has drafted a Law Project to reform 
the Catalan Consumer Code (CCC) in July 2012,110 which addresses the main 
issues in relation to protection of the mortgagor.111 This reform is inspired in the 
Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on credit 
agreements relating to residential property of March 2011112 and goes beyond any 
109  BOE 10 March 2012, no 60, 22492.
110  DOGC 30 July 2012, no 364, 34. Although the Catalan Parliament is to be 
dissolved because of the calling of an election, it is foreseeable that this draft will continue 
to be processed after the elections. If it is passed, it will be in force only in Catalonia.
111  I was, in fact, personally involved in the drafting of its first version in September 
2011.
112  Brussels, 31 March 2011, COM(2011) 142 final.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
66
measures taken until now for the whole of Spain (including many aspects of Act 
1/2013). The relevant issues are as follows:
(a) A clear legal limitation (new Article 251-6 CCC) on the rate of interest 
charged on arrears to be limited to no more than 2.5 times the legal 
interest rate of money (which is fixed on an annual basis by the Spanish 
government), regardless of what the parties have arranged in the mortgage 
contract. Indeed, it is currently usual to find interest rates on arrears of more 
than 20 per cent in mortgage loan contracts.
(b) The obligation on the professional lender to check the economic capacity 
of the borrower (consumer) to repay the mortgage loan he or she is offering 
to him or her. If the lender discovers the unsuitability of that mortgage 
for a particular borrower, he or she should warn the borrower about its 
unsuitability (new Article 263-2.3 CCC). Unfortunately, the Catalan reform 
does not foresee the same strong results as are foreseen in Article 14.2 of 
the Directive Proposal (at least in its first version of 31 March 2011113) in 
the event of the contravention of this obligation. Under Catalan law, the 
borrower will be allowed to contract such a mortgage anyway, while in the 
Directive Proposal, there is a clear prohibition on the lender from granting 
it. However, the Directive Proposal fails to state the consequences for the 
lender who grants that inadequate mortgage to the borrower. The natural 
consequence in many legal jurisdictions would be the voidability of that 
mortgage loan, which entails a difficult situation for the borrower, who 
will then be obliged to return an amount of money he or she no longer 
has. This is not the only case in which the Catalan proposal could have 
further protected the mortgagor. The defining of the notarial role in the new 
Article 123-10 CPCC is another. On the one hand, this increases notarial 
duties in relation to the provision of information to the mortgage consumer 
in a way in which it can be understandable,114 while on the other hand, it 
limits the notarial control to those clauses in mortgage contracts that have 
been previously declared void by a judge. Instead, it could have expanded 
the notary’s duty to those clauses which are clearly abusive (regardless of 
113  But no longer in its version resulting of its adoption by the European Parliament 
on 10 September 2013 (T7-0341/2013). Its art. 18.5 states that: “Member States shall 
ensure that: (a) the creditor only makes the credit available to the consumer where the result 
of the creditworthiness assessment indicates that the obligations resulting from the credit 
agreement are likely to be met in the manner required under that agreement” while art. 14.2 
of the Project at 31 March 2011 stated that: “Member States shall ensure the following: (a) 
Where the assessment of the consumer’s creditworthiness results in a negative prospect for 
his ability to repay the credit over the lifetime of the credit agreement, the creditor refuses 
credit”, which at least seems a more expedited wording.
114  This is essential because simply providing long lists of information is not enough, 
especially for financial products. See the discussion above about the dubious efficacy of 
the ‘long lists’ system to protect consumers that is normally used in European Directives. 

A Legal Perspective
67
whether they have been previously declared void by a judge) in Article 83 
RDL 1/2007.
(c) Pre-contractual clear information for mortgagors is required in the 
marketing phase of the contractual path (new Articles 262-3 and 262-4  
CPCC). For example, when the law is passed, the following sentence 
(or something similar) will be compulsory in each advertisement for a 
mortgage product: ‘Contracting this mortgage may cause you to lose your 
dwelling and a part of your personal estate.’ After the marketing phase, but 
before the contract is signed, the offer by the professional lender should be 
incorporated and given to the mortgagor in a pre-formatted form, which 
should be the same for every professional lender. This application form 
should be formatted in such a way that it discloses the grounds for the 
final price of the mortgage loan (i.e. to which extent swaps, caps, floors, 
insurances and other linked financial products influence the final interest 
rate of the mortgage loan and its other conditions). Only then will the 
mortgage borrower have the sufficient information to be able to compare 
this particular offer with other offers from the same or another professional 
lender – this is what is needed by every consumer.
New Forms of Housing Tenure – The Catalan Intermediate Tenures
Justification
The measures described above would improve the current situation and would 
avoid repeating the mistakes of the last 15 years in relation to housing and the 
mortgage markets. However, they do not, in fact, create anything new, and there 
is really a need for imaginative measures to overcome the current situation and to 
re-start both markets.
Intermediate tenures can play an important role here. The Directive Proposal 
2011, as was mentioned previously, will no longer allow lending institutions to 
grant subprime mortgages, which would mean, in practice, that the maximum 
LTV would, in a best-case scenario, amount to no more than 80 per cent. If this 
is passed in this or in a similar way115, it will bring a completely new set of rules 
to play in the Spanish mortgage market, as it would essentially mean that lending 
institutions would only be allowed to fund 80 per cent of the value of the house. 
The other 20 per cent should be paid by the buyer upfront. Numerically, this 
would mean that for a flat valued at €150,000,116 the mortgagor would have to pay 
115  As said, this seems to have been somehow softened by its version of 10 September 
2013, although member states should control anyhow that no more careless lending is 
undertaken by lending institutions.
116  This is nearly the medium price for a 80m2 dwelling in Spain according to fotocase.
es http://www.fotocasa.es/indice-inmobiliario__fotocasa.aspx accessed 19 October 2012.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
68
€30,000 upfront in cash, quite a large amount for many. In effect, this might mean 
that many families will never be able to become home-owners117.
One significant initiative118 that is being developed in Catalonia119 is the 
regulation of intermediate tenures,120 based on the success of the shared-ownership 
model in the UK,121 and the work of housing associations there in developing social 
housing on this basis. The UK shared-ownership model is based on the device of 
the leasehold, an approach conceived under common law that is unknown in many 
civil law jurisdictions.122
That is why, under Catalan law, the proposal is to differentiate between ‘shared 
ownership’ (propietat compartida) and ‘temporal ownership’ (propietat temporal). 
The using of the word ‘ownership’ is crucial to differentiate these two forms of 
tenure from limited real rights – traditionally not an attractive option for either 
consumers or financers to access a dwelling. This proposal clearly points out that 
they are two new alternative ways to the ‘traditional ownership’123 (propietat) of 
achieving all faculties of the full ownership – step by step in shared ownership and 
time-framed in temporal ownership.
This approach is conceived, in fact, as a middle way between ownership and 
renting, and is intended to create a real third housing market, which will lead 
to a viable alternative for families to achieve a type of housing tenure which is 
117  The only remaining option being to rent, and it has already addressed the issues 
in relation to this type of tenancy in Spain. 
118  By the Housing Research Group of University Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain 
http://www.urv.cat/grups_recerca/housing/english/RGAH/Welcome.html accessed 19 July 
2013. 
119  The proposal is currently under consideration in the Catalan Codification 
Commission in order to introduce the intermediate tenures into the Catalan Civil Code.
120  As mentioned in note 1, this work belongs to a Project of the Spanish Ministry 
of Economy and Competitiveness to expand the intermediate tenures to the rest of Spain. 
121  See a complete study on economic aspects of intermediate tenures in Sarah Monk 
and Christine Whitehead, Making Housing More Affordable: The Role of Intermediate 
Tenures (Oxford, Wiley-Blackwell 2010).
122  Although as Jane Ball in ‘Fragmentando la propiedad para la asequibilidad: la 
shared ownership o ‘nuevas’ tenencias en Inglaterra y Francia’ in Sergio Nasarre-Aznar 
(ed), El acceso a la vivienda en un context de crisis (Madrid, Edisofer 2011) 173 states, 
‘there might exist similar institutions in Continental Europe, such as the emphyteusis or the 
usufruct. However, they do not achieve the grade of “utility” or “usability” as the leasehold, 
as they are not ownership-like institutions but only rights in re aliena, which are quite 
limited in their scope’.
123  This ‘traditional ownership’ date from the French Revolution and entails all 
rights of use and disposal (usus, fructus et abusus) in relation to a thing. It is present both 
in the Spanish Civil Code (art 348 CC) and in the Catalan Civil Code (art 541-1 CCC). 
Both are constitutionally palliated (i.e. those faculties within the ownership are limited) by 
their social function (e.g. someone cannot destroy their own thing if this affects another’s 
fundamental rights, and nobody is allowed to exploit a property if, in doing so, it affects 
another’s fundamental rights).

A Legal Perspective
69
Ideal goals of housing 
policies according to the 
current situation
Shared ownership
Temporal ownership
To reduce the vacant 
housing stock and to 
reactivate the housing and 
mortgage market
Allows the sale of portion 
of ownership of dwellings 
instead of complete title 
of dwellings (that are not 
being sold today anyway)
Allows the sale of 
dwellings for periods of 
time, adapted to the needs 
of each family
To reduce the financial 
illiquidity of financial 
institutions
Loans of smaller amounts: 
this will depend on the 
percentage of the acquired 
share of the property
Loans of smaller amounts: 
this will depend on how 
long the buyer has the 
property
To prevent families from 
becoming over-indebted
To grant smaller and more sustainable mortgage loans. 
Investment in housing will be more needs-based, relying 
somewhat on savings rather than borrowing
To create a favourable 
context for responsible 
lending and borrowing
Progressive acquisition 
of home-ownership 
(staircasing)
Real necessity to buy a 
dwelling based on time 
limits. This type of tenure 
clearly goes against 
speculative operations
To allow flexibility of 
approaches in access to a 
dwelling
A continuum in the form of housing tenure can be 
achieved; thus, there is one for each type of family need
To develop stable but 
flexible tenure
When there is more 
need for a stable tenure 
(ex. retirement), the 
full ownership has been 
already acquired. In the 
meantime, there is a clear 
and progressive investment 
in one’s house
During the tenure, the 
buyer becomes the true 
owner of the house. Once 
the time expires, it returns 
ex lege to the original 
owner
In the current context of 
social housing, today’s 
conjuncture does not allow 
too onerous intervention 
in social housing by the 
public administration
The public administration 
can limit its intervention 
to the part of rent of the 
shared ownership
The public administration 
can sell real estate and 
dwellings to families 
that can be recovered at 
a certain point in time 
to be reused (and given 
to another family in 
need), refurbished (if it is 
deteriorated) or rebuilt (if it 
is in derelict)
Table 2.2	
Goals to achieve the Catalan intermediate tenures

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
70
affordable (avoiding over-indebtedness), stable (allowing families to become 
established, unlike the aforementioned reform of the Spanish law of leases) and 
flexible (not necessarily tying families to a piece of land for 30 or more years). 
Intermediate tenures would help to reduce the vacant housing stock, alleviate the 
need for liquidity for Spanish lending institutions and, ultimately, help families to 
access to a sustainable and stable home. Table 2.2 shows how this can be achieved 
through the developing Catalan shared and temporal ownership approach.
Shared Ownership (propietat compartida)
The shared ownership approach provides the buyer (the shared owner) with a 
share of the property, while the other share is owned by the seller (the original 
owner), both coexisting. In other words:
i. The buyer is the (shared) owner of (a part of) the property from the outset. 
In this sense, this approach differs from others, such as the rental with 
purchase option (which usually only entails a delay in the purchase for 
about three years) or rights to build.
ii. The shared owner pays the (shared) seller of the property a rent for 
the portion of the legal element of the property that the former does not 
currently own. This, in combination to his or her owned share, entitles him 
or her to use the whole property in an exclusive way.
iii. This means that shared owners have all the rights related to home-
ownership: the exclusive use and enjoyment of the whole property, and the 
ability to dispose of the share he or she owns, both inter vivos and mortis 
causa. As a consequence of this, the shared owner pays all taxes relating 
to the use and ownership of the house (e.g. utility bills, taxes on home-
ownership). He or she can attend the condominium government body and 
can take part in its decisions.
iv. The shared owner can mortgage his or her share on the property, even 
for funding his or her acquisition. Of course, a mortgage on 20 per cent 
of the property (based on the norm under the English shared ownership 
scheme of five per cent funded by the buyer from his or her own resources, 
20 per cent as the first share of acquisition and 75 per cent held by the 
seller/lessor) is less onerous for the buyer and for the credit institution than 
a mortgage to fund the acquisition of the whole property.
v. The shared owner has the right to progressively acquire more shares of 
the ownership of the property (staircase up). In social housing, the scheme 
would also offer the possibility ‘to staircase down’, i.e., the shared owner 
can reduce his/her share of the property in accordance to his housing and 
economic needs.
Thus, the shared ownership approach has been designed to give those in need of 
housing and those that cannot buy a property in the private home-ownership market 

A Legal Perspective
71
the possibility to own (step by step) a house without becoming over-indebted. The 
shared owners (buyers) are granted all powers necessary to act as full owners of 
the property, although with certain limitations to protect the interests of the seller 
(who is retaining, in our example, 75 per cent of the property), and the eventual 
financer of the acquisition. Of course, the buyer in a shared-ownership scheme 
cannot alter the substance of the property, and he or she must use it for the agreed 
purpose (e.g. residence in case of social housing) and cannot alter its structural 
elements.
Temporal Ownership (propietat temporal)
There is also temporal ownership, where a new owner acquires the ownership 
from an original owner of a property, but only for a certain and determined period 
of time. During this time, he or she has all the powers on the property (use, 
enjoyment, disposal inter vivos and mortis causa and charge – e.g. with a mortgage 
to acquire the temporal ownership), as he or she is considered a ‘temporal owner’. 
For this same reason, the temporal owner will be responsible for all expenses 
related to the property.
This approach differs substantially from the current system, where a property 
is acquired ‘forever’ (i.e. eternally) under Spanish and Catalan laws. The 
introduction of ‘temporal ownership’ will allow the purchase of a property for 
a specified number of years. This entails important stability for the buyer and 
significantly increases its affordability. After this specified number of years, the 
ownership of the property will revert automatically and without cost to the original 
owner (the seller), unless extensions are agreed. The original owner is entitled to 
be compensated for all depreciation of the property caused by the negligent or 
wilful misconduct of the temporary owner.
This temporal ownership approach may provide a solution to a variety of 
situations, given that its duration may be decades or hundreds of years in length. 
Moreover, it is foreseen that it can be used in combination with shared ownership, 
thus increasing the fragmentation and the affordability of the available housing 
stock in the same way as the leasehold is used in combination with shared 
ownership in the UK.
Conclusions
It is now widely accepted that the current global financial, economic, mortgage 
and housing crisis started in the US in 2007. The origins of the US crisis can also 
be explained as a consequence of severe deficiencies in the legal architecture and 
institutions. It is difficult to understand how a market of several trillion US dollars 
could effectively operate without a specific piece of legislation covering the rights 
and obligations of the parties, or how mortgages could be effectively recorded 
and verified through more than 3,000 land registers, or how these could have been 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
72
properly and efficiently transferred fulfilling traditional rules of common law, or 
how they could be properly enforced in non-recourse states, or in those states 
with only judicial enforcement procedures. Only in this context can we understand 
the misbehaviour of the rating agencies, the existence of structural problems in a 
standard US mortgage securitization process, or the creation of MERS. The US 
crisis spread to Europe and to the rest of the world due to the international mortgage 
securitization of US subprime mortgages through MBSs and CDOs. This created a 
‘lack of trust’ crisis among credit and investment institutions globally, from which 
many countries have not yet recovered. Some countries, such as Spain, are in an 
even deeper crisis due to a variety of factors, but fundamentally due to the high 
dependence of their economy in recent years on housing construction.
Spain’s current situation is a result of a range of factors that have led to a housing 
bubble and its subsequent bursting. Among these are the widespread existence 
of mortgage loans, now acting in detriment to other more affordable types of 
housing tenure, the inadequate regulation of the mortgage and banking operations, 
the lack of sufficient protection for mortgagors and bad banking practices. The 
measures undertaken in reaction to the crisis by the Spanish government to date 
have been insufficient. However, new measures involving increased protection 
for mortgagors are being considered by Catalan legislators, which deal with some 
bad banking practices and abuses, and also with the lack of sufficient and effective 
pre-contractual information. There are also some innovative approaches being 
developed, which seek to create a third type of housing market (in addition to 
the two classic ones: home-ownership and renting) and which have the potential 
to reinvigorate the housing and the mortgage market systems in Spain. These are 
the so-called ‘intermediate tenures’, which in Catalonia are being adopted in the 
forms of shared and temporal ownership. Clearly, in the face of the global and 
local economic collapse which relied on many outdated and inadequate legal 
structures and regulatory mechanisms, new and innovative legal approaches are 
now required more than ever in relation to housing.

Chapter 3 
Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland  
and Spain
Karen Lynch-Shally
Introduction
There are striking similarities between Ireland and Spain. Both experienced 
sustained and significant house price inflation and, in the reversal of house price 
trends since 2007, were amongst those countries which experienced the highest 
consistent house price falls in Europe.1 The extension of credit in an inflationary 
context, based on inexpensive capital from increasingly integrated global and 
national capital markets, created a major house price bubble. This was followed by 
massive unemployment of 14 per cent in Ireland and 25 per cent of the workforce 
in Spain, which was triggered by the bursting of the housing bubble.2 This, and 
the ensuing global recession, has led to an indebtedness crisis amongst national 
mortgage consumers. It is manifested in a repossessions crisis in Spain. However, 
in Ireland, the level of repossessions is low, although mortgage arrears are high. 
The question arises as to whether this difference in repossession rates is linked to 
differences in the national legal framework applicable to mortgage consumers. In 
Ireland and Spain, the rights and protections of mortgage consumers are contained 
in a variety of constitutional provisions and primary and secondary legislation. 
This chapter identifies the nature and scope of existing frameworks in both 
markets. It also examines the comparative status of the mortgage consumer under 
contemporary national provisions.
1  HJ Dübel and M Rothemund, A New Mortgage Credit Regime for Europe, Centre 
for European Policy Studies (CEPS) Special Report (Brussels, CEPS, June 2011) 8. 
Although Latvia suffered an even sharper house price to income correction than Ireland, 
there has been a recovery in Latvian house prices, which increased by 9.8 per cent in Q4 
2012 compared to the same quarter in 2011.
2  Irish Mortgage Arrears Analysis (Dublin, Davy Research, August 2012) 18, 19 and 
41. The report cites employment as the key variable driving mortgage arrears in Spain. 
The scale of post 2007, house price deflation in Ireland raises questions as to the dynamic 
between negative equity and arrears. The report identifies high Loan to Value Ratios 
(LTV’s) within sample data of mortgage arrears from the Central Bank of Ireland (CBI), but 
ultimately asserts that negative equity ‘has not been a clear trigger for arrears behaviour’.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
74
The National Mortgage Market Profile
In 2009, the populations of Ireland and Spain were 4.45 million and 45.82 million, 
respectively.3 In Ireland, 73.7 per cent of householders were owner-occupiers, of 
which 32.9 per cent had an outstanding loan or mortgage.4 Some 26.3 per cent of 
households were in rental tenure, 11.3 per cent were tenants with rent at market 
price and the remaining 15 per cent had rent at a reduced rate or free.5 In Spain, 
the ownership rate was 83.2 per cent, of which 34.5 per cent had a mortgage or 
outstanding loan.6 The proportion of the households in rental tenure was 16.8 per 
cent, of which 8.2 per cent were tenants with rent at market price.7 The volume of 
outstanding residential mortgage loans was €147.65 billion in Ireland and €678.87 
billion in Spain, while the mortgage debt to GDP ratios were 90.3 per cent and 
64.6 per cent, respectively.8
This situation was the result of a major expansion in national mortgage markets 
in the preceding decade. In 1999, the volume of outstanding residential mortgage 
loans was €26.18 billion and represented 26.5 per cent of GDP in Ireland, compared 
to €154.55 billion and 23.9 per cent of GDP in Spain.9 The expansion in mortgage 
lending paralleled significant and sustained house price inflation in both markets. 
In an analysis of house price cycles in 18 OECD markets from 1970 to 2005, 
Ireland registered an increase in real house prices of 242.7 per cent and Spain an 
increase of 114.2 per cent in the upswing to the mid-2000s.10
3  Europe in Figures – Eurostat Yearbook 2012 edition (Belgium, Eurostat 2012). 
Population: Ireland 4,450,030; Spain 45,828,172.
4  ibid. In parallel with house price inflation, ownership tenure had been in decline 
in Ireland. In 2004, the percentage of owners was 81.8 per cent; by 2010, this figure had 
fallen to 73.4 per cent. Although the percentage of owners with a mortgage has remained 
relatively stable (35.3 per cent in 2004 and 34.6 per cent in 2010), the decrease in the 
percentage of owners without a mortgage or loan (from 46.5 per cent in 2004 to 38.8 per 
cent by 2010) points to increased leverage amongst consumers. In contrast, the figures for 
Spain show less variation, although the Eurostat dataset commences at a later period. The 
rates of ownership in 2007 and 2011 were 83.6 per cent and 82.7 per cent, respectively. The 
percentage of owners without an outstanding mortgage or loan was 50.4 per cent in 2007 
and 49.8 per cent in 2011. A similar percentage of owners with a mortgage or loan were 
recorded in 2007 (33.2 per cent) and 2011 (32.9 per cent).
5  Europe in Figures – Eurostat Yearbook 2012 edition (n 3). 
6  ibid.
7  ibid.
8  Hypostat 2009 (Brussels, European Mortgage Federation (EMF), November 2010) 
70 and 82: Ireland €147.654 billion; Spain €678.872 billion.
9  ibid: Ireland €26.186 billion; Spain €154.556 billion.
10  N Girouard, M Kennedy, P van den Noord and C Andre, ‘Recent House Price 
Developments: The Role of Fundamentals’, OECD Economics Department Working Paper, 
No 475, 2006, 8. The term ‘real house prices’ refers to the ratio of actual house prices to 
the Consumer Price Index (CPI). Of the 18 OECD states analysed, Ireland recorded the 
most significant increase in percentage terms. The percentage for Ireland is for the period 

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
75
However, from 2007 onwards, there was a reversal of house price trends, with 
Irish prices dropping by 51 per cent by February 2013.11 Figures from the official 
Spanish House Price Index assert that national house prices are now 27.1 per cent 
below their peak in nominal terms.12 Expressed as a percentage of nominal GDP, 
household debt in Ireland was 116.6 per cent compared with Spain at 83.8 per 
cent by the end of 2011.13 In March 2013, in Ireland, some 11.9 per cent (94,488) 
of private residential mortgage accounts for principal dwelling houses were in 
arrears in excess of 90 days.14 However, notwithstanding such a high arrears rate, 
the banks disposed of only 178 properties during the last quarter of 2012, and at 
that point a total of 903 properties were in the banks’ possession.15 In contrast, 
the arrears rate cited for Spain was 3.07 per cent, but there have been in excess of 
400,000 repossessions in Spain since the beginning of the crisis.16
This prompts the question, why is the rate of repossessions so low in Ireland ?. 
In order to fully consider this situation, I will examine mortgage law and consumer 
protection in both countries, including constitutional law, case law, primary 
legislation and secondary legislation.
National Constitutions
Both Ireland and Spain have written constitutions, adopted in 1937 and 1978, 
respectively.17 These documents contain provisions which are of relevance to an 
1992–2005, while the previous increases in the period under review were 53.9 per cent 
(1970–81) and 27.7 per cent (1987–90). In Spain, the percentage quoted related to the 
period from 1996 to 2004 and was preceded by deflation in the 1991–96 (-18.3 per cent) 
and 1978–86 (-32.2 per cent) periods, and a significant increase of 134.8 per cent in the 
period from 1986 to 1991.
11  Residential Property Price Index (Dublin, Central Statistics Office (CSO), 
February 2013).
12  Housing Price Index (Madrid, Instituto Nacional Estadística, March 2013).
13  Irish Mortgage Arrears Analysis (Dublin, Davy Research, August 2012). The Irish 
figures are for Q1 2012. 
14  Residential Mortgage Arrears and Repossessions Statistics, Q1 2013 (Dublin, 
Central Bank of Ireland, March 2013).
15  ibid. In total, 134 properties were taken into possession during Q4 2012. Of 
these, 38 were on the basis of a court order and the remaining 96 were either voluntarily 
surrendered or abandoned. 
16  Datos sobre el efecto de la crisis en los organos judiciales 1T 2013, Consejo 
General del Poder Judicial España, (Madrid, 2013). In the period from Q1 2008 to Q4 
2012, there have been 415,117 mortgage foreclosures in Spain, although the data does not 
indicate what proportion of orders relate to principal private dwellings. Irish Mortgage 
Arrears Analysis (Dublin, Davy Research, August 2012) 41. The arrears figure cited in the 
report is based on data from the Banco De Espana for Q1 2012.
17  The 1937 Irish Constitution, Bunreacht na hEireann, replaced the previous 1922 
Irish Constitution. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
76
assessment of the protections available to mortgage consumers. The Articles may 
be distinguished both by subject matter and the nature of any right conferred on 
the mortgage consumer.
Constitution of Ireland – Bunreacht na hEireann
Private property  A mortgage is a ‘real right in land created by the owner 
(mortgagor) entitling the mortgagee to payment of a certain sum out of the land 
with priority to other creditors on the forced sale of the property’.18 A mortgage 
is a real property right, and as a result, constitutional provisions which recognise 
and protect property rights are pertinent. The Irish Constitution (Bunreacht 
na hEireann) contains two Articles which refer to two property rights.19 The 
contemporary judicial view is that the provisions ‘mutually inform’ each other, so 
both have to be taken into account by the courts when assessing the constitutional 
protection of property rights.20 The first reference is contained in Article 40.3, 
‘Personal Rights’, and it provides;
1° The State guarantees in its laws to respect, and, as far as practicable, by 
its laws to defend and vindicate the personal rights of the citizen.
2° The State shall, in particular, by its laws protect as best it may from unjust 
attack and, in the case of injustice done, vindicate the life, person, good 
name, and property rights of every citizen.
The second reference contained in Article 43, ‘Private Property’, states:
1.1° The State acknowledges that man, in virtue of his rational being, has 
the natural right, antecedent to positive law, to the private ownership of 
external goods.
2° The State accordingly guarantees to pass no law attempting to abolish 
the right of private ownership or the general right to transfer, bequeath, and 
inherit property.
2.1° The State recognises, however, that the exercise of the rights mentioned 
in the foregoing provisions of this Article ought, in civil society, to be 
regulated by the principles of social justice.
18  Real Property Law & Procedure in the European Union (Florence, European 
University Institute, May 2005) 85.
19  Report of the Constitution Review Group (Dublin, The Stationery Office 1996). 
Commissioned by the Government of Ireland, the report recommended the replacement 
of the existing provisions with a single article which would expressly protect the right to 
property subject to limitations imposed on the grounds of social justice or public policy. 
Consumer protection was identified as a basis for the imposition of limitations on the right.
20  GW Hogan and GF Whyte, JM Kelly: The Irish Constitution, 4th edn (Dublin, 
LexisNexis 2004) 1978.

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
77
2° The State, accordingly, may as occasion requires delimit by law the 
exercise of the said rights with a view to reconciling their exercise with the 
exigencies of the common good.
The cumulative effect of the provision is that the state guarantees to protect and 
vindicate the private property rights of Irish citizens, including the right to own 
and transfer property. This secures the right to home-ownership and the use of a 
mortgage to secure the loan. However, the constitutional protections conferred are 
not absolute, but are limited by the principles of social justice. Although the state 
is precluded from passing a law the effect of which would be to abolish the right 
of private ownership or the general right to transfer property, it is empowered to 
limit the exercise of such rights where in the interests of  the common good it is 
necessary to do so.
Inviolability of the dwelling  Constitutional provisions are also relevant in the 
context of enforcement of the security by the creditor due to the existence of a 
provision asserting the inviolability of the dwelling.
Article 40.5, ‘Personal Rights’, of the Irish Constitution states that:
‘The dwelling21 of every citizen is inviolable and shall not be forcibly entered 
save in accordance with law.’ 
The provision broadly guarantees that entry into the home may take place only with 
the consent of the individual or in accordance with the law. The provision assures that 
enforcement of the mortgage security by the lender must comply with mortgage law.
The provisions concerning private property and the inviolability of the 
dwelling are contained in the Social and Fundamental Rights section of the Irish 
Constitution. Article 40.3.122 imposes a duty on the state to prevent an infringement 
of the personal rights contained therein, whilst Articles 40.5 and 43 contain an 
express guarantee of rights subject only to limitation on the grounds specified.
Directive principles of social policy  These provisions in the Irish Constitution 
are merely intended to guide the development of national legislation. Article 45, 
‘Directive Principles of Social Policy’, states:
The principles of social policy set forth in this Article are intended for the general 
guidance of the Oireachtas. The application of those principles in the making of 
laws shall be the care of the Oireachtas exclusively, and shall not be cognisable 
by any Court under any of the provisions of this Constitution.
21  DPP v Corrigan [1986] IR 290, 296, Blayney J: ‘Dwelling in this section means 
a house or part of a house.’ 
22  Hogan and Whyte (n 20) 1296; ESB v Gormley [1985] ILRM 494. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
78
In the current context, Article 45 (2)(iv) is of particular relevance:
2. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing:
––
iv. That in what pertains to the control of credit the constant and 
predominant aim shall be the welfare of the people as a whole.
This suggests that the framing of legislation in the context of mortgage finance 
must be examined in the context of collective welfare. Hogan and Whyte identify 
early legislative recognition of this constitutional provision by its inclusion in  
s 6(1) of the Central Bank Act 1942.23 The provision asserts that in addition to the 
powers, duties and functions specifically conferred by law, the Central Bank had 
the general function and duty of ensuring that in the control of credit, the constant 
and predominant aim shall be the welfare of the people as a whole.
Spanish Constitution – Constitución Española
The Spanish Constitution also contains provisions of relevance to a discussion of 
residential mortgages.
Private property  The Spanish Constitution contains a singular provision which 
addresses the constitutional right to private property.24 Article 33 states:
(1) The right to private property and inheritance is recognized.
(2) The social function of these rights shall determine the limits of their 
content in accordance with the law.
(3) No one may be deprived of his or her property and rights, except 
on justified grounds of public utility or social interest and with a proper 
compensation in accordance with the law.
Article 33 acknowledges the right of ownership.25 It provides that the scope of the 
right should be determined by the legislator with reference to its social function, 
an open concept which encompasses both individual and collective benefit.26 
Although the precise scope and content of the guarantee is not fixed, it preserves 
the ‘institution of private ownership’ and prevents the legislator from suppressing 
ownership or restricting its scope to the extent that the acknowledgment becomes 
23  Hogan and Whyte (n 20) 2086.
24  Chapter 2 of the Spanish Constitution is entitled ‘Rights and Freedoms’ and 
is subdivided into Division 1 – Fundamental Rights and Public Freedoms (arts 15–29 
inclusive) and Division 2 – Rights and Duties of Citizens (arts 30–38 inclusive).
25  TC 2.12.1983 (RTC 111). The acknowledgment of the right of ownership is from 
an individual and institutional standpoint. 
26  TC 26.3.1987 (RTC), TC 17.3.1994 (RTC 89). Function of property has an 
individual and collective dimension, i.e. satisfaction of owners interests and common good. 

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
79
devoid of any meaning.27 The right of expropriation reserved to the legislator in 
s.s (3) limits the right of ownership in safeguarding social or public interests. 
However, it guarantees that this is the sole context in which the owner can be 
deprived of his/her rights and that he/she must be compensated.
Inviolability of the dwelling  The Spanish Constitution also asserts the 
inviolability of the dwelling. Article 18.2 provides:
The home is inviolable. No entry or search may be made without the consent of 
the householder or a legal warrant, except in cases of flagrante delicto.
The substance of the provision is similar to the Irish equivalent, in that it guarantees 
that entry into the home may take place only with the consent of the individual or 
in accordance with the law.
Article 53(1) of the Spanish Constitution addresses the nature of the rights 
conferred in articles 33 and 18(2). It states;
The rights and freedoms recognized in Chapter 2 of the present Part are binding 
on all public authorities. Only by an act which in any case must respect their 
essential content could the exercise of such rights and freedoms be regulated, 
which shall be protected in accordance with the provisions of Article 161(1)(a).
Article 53(1) thus asserts the binding nature of the rights conferred in the 
aforementioned Articles. It stipulates that the exercise of the rights can only be 
regulated by law, which must in any event respect the essential content of the 
right. Article 161(1)(a) asserts the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court to hear 
applications concerning the constitutionality of legislation.
Principles governing economic and social policy  Chapter 3 of the Spanish 
Constitution is entitled ‘Principles Governing Economic and Social Policy’.28 Two 
of the Articles within the chapter, Articles 47 and 51, are of particular significance 
in the current context. Article 47 addresses constitutional housing rights. It states:.
All Spaniards have the right to enjoy decent and adequate housing. The 
public authorities shall promote the necessary conditions and establish 
appropriate standards in order to make this right effective, regulating land 
use in accordance with the general interest in order to prevent speculation.
The community shall have a share in the benefits accruing from the 
town-planning policies of public bodies.
27  JF Angosto Saez, ‘The Constitutional Concept of Ownership’ in S Van Erp and 
A Vaquer Aloy (eds), Introduction to Spanish Patrimonial Law (Granada, Comares 2006) 
263.
28  Chapter 3 comprises arts 39–52 inclusive.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
80
Article 51 is directly relevant to the current examination as it identifies the 
protection of consumers and users as an impetus to the development of economic 
and social policy:
(1) The public authorities shall guarantee the protection of consumers 
and users and shall, by means of effective measures, safeguard their 
safety, health and legitimate economic interests.
(2) The public authorities shall promote the information and education of 
consumers and users, foster their organizations, and hear them on those 
matters affecting their members, under the terms established by law.
(3) Within the framework of the provisions of the foregoing paragraphs, 
the law shall regulate domestic trade and the system of licensing 
commercial products.
The use of the word ‘right’ in Article 47 would appear to infer a binding obligation. 
However, in common with the corresponding Irish provisions, these ‘principles’ 
are intended to guide the development of legislation and policy, and do not confer 
directly enforceable rights. This is confirmed by Article 53(3) which states: 
Recognition, respect and protection of the principles recognized in Chapter 3 
shall guide legislation, judicial practice and actions by the public authorities. 
They may only be invoked before the ordinary courts in accordance with the 
legal provisions implementing them.
Irish Mortgage Law
The contemporary Irish mortgage has evolved through a combination of common 
law supplemented by equitable principles and statute law. The original common 
law mortgage entailed a conveyance of the fee simple to the lender, subject to 
the condition that the estate would be re-conveyed to the borrower, provided 
that the debt was repaid by the legal date of redemption, otherwise the land was 
forfeit, although the borrower remained liable for the debt. The harshness of the 
outcome at common law in the event that a borrower did not repay the mortgage 
by the due date and the land was forfeited led to the intervention of the Court of 
Chancery through the development of the equity of redemption. A corpus of case 
law prescribes the rights and duties of borrowers and lenders from this time and 
until 2009, the statutory framework for mortgagors and mortgagees was contained 
in the Conveyancing Acts 1881–1911.29
Prior to 2009, the requirements for the creation of a legal mortgage were 
determined by whether the land in question was registered or unregistered. The 
former is land the title to which is registered in the Land Registry according to the 
29  P Kenna, Housing Law, Rights & Policy (Dublin, Clarus Press 2011) 441.

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
81
statutory framework contained in the Registration of Title Act 1964,30 as amended 
by the Registration of Deeds and Title Act 2006 and the Land and Conveyancing 
Law Reform Act 2009. Unregistered land is land subject to the registration 
system established under the Registration of Deeds (Ireland) Act 1707, which 
was applicable to legal or equitable interests in land, arising from wills, deeds, 
and conveyances.31 Memorials of deeds relating to a transaction in land were 
registered in the Registry of Deeds and although registration was not compulsory, 
there was an incentive to do so as registered deeds took priority over unregistered 
deeds.32 The statutory framework for mortgages created after 1 December 2009 is 
contained in Part 10 of the Land and Conveyancing Law Reform Act 2009.33
Spanish Mortgage Law
Spain is a civil law jurisdiction. The hypothec (la hipoteca) performs the same 
function in Spanish law as the common law legal mortgage in Ireland. The hypothec 
is regulated by title XV of the Spanish Civil Code and the Ley Hipotecaria 1946 
(LH).34 It is a real right which charges the immoveables or immoveable property 
of the debtor to guarantee payment of a credit.35 In Spanish law, the hypothec 
is not fully constituted until it is registered in the Land Registry.36 Only public 
documents can be registered, and accordingly the hypothec is always created by a 
public document, such as a notarial public deed.37 Upon registration, the hypothec 
is given a ranking, which determines its priority relative to other charges on the 
land. The Spanish hypothec is an accessory mortgage. This means that it may 
only be created to secure a credit, and its continued existence is dependent on the 
existence of the secured claim.38 The mortgagor is entitled to possession of the 
property and is free to dispose of it, in which context the hypothec will ‘follow the 
30  Section 31 of the Registration of Title Act 1964 provides that the register is 
conclusive evidence of ownership and any rights and burdens affecting the land. 
31  M. Donnelly, The Law of Credit and Security, (London, Thomson-Reuters, 2011), 
400. 
32  See JCW Wylie, Irish Land Law, 4th edn (Dublin, Bloomsbury Professional 2010) 
chapters 13 and 22.
33  Land and Conveyancing Law Reform Act (Commencement) Order 2009 (SI 
356/2009).
34  Spanish Civil Code (Madrid, Ministerio de Justicia 2009). Title XV, Chapter one, 
‘Provisions common to pledges and mortgages’, arts 1857–62, Chapter three, ‘Mortgages’, 
arts 1874–80. RCL 1946/886 Ley Hipotecario of 8 February 1946.
35  Article 1874 CC, art 106 LH. Under art 107 LH, a hipoteca can be created over 
any real right which can be transferred. It is possible in Spanish law to have a hypothec over 
certain moveables, although this is not relevant in the current context. 
36  Article 1875 CC; arts 106 and 145 LH.
37  Article 1216 CC: ‘Public instruments are those authorised by a Notary Public or 
competent public employee, with the solemnities required by the law.’
38  Articles 1857(1), 1860 and 1876 CC.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
82
property’, which continues to guarantee performance of the secured obligation.39 
The creditor has the right to protect their claim by making an application to the 
courts in the context where the actions of the debtor may result in a depreciation 
of the value of the property.40
In the context of default, the creditor is entitled to seek enforcement of 
the security, i.e. acción hipotecaria.41 Most frequently enforcement is via the 
summary judicial procedure regulated by the Civil Procedure Act.42 However, it 
is also possible for the sale to occur on an extra-judicial basis if it is provided for 
in the document creating the hypothec.43 A recent case of the Court of Justice of 
the European Union (CJEU) has implications for Spanish mortgage law. In Aziz 
v CaixaCatalunya,44 the court held that the restricted scope of defence against an 
action for enforcement, permitted under current Spanish law, is inconsistent with 
the objectives of the EU Unfair Contract Terms Directive, since the declaratory 
proceedings before which broader challenges may be raised do not have the power 
to stay the Spanish enforcement proceedings.45 This imputes a change to existing 
Spanish enforcement law.
Irish Primary Legislation
Land and Conveyancing Law Reform Act 2009 (LCLRA) – Part 10
There are two aspects of the LCLRA which are significant in the present context. 
The first is its impact on mortgage law in regard to the creation of a legal mortgage. 
A legal mortgage may now only be created by a charge by deed, irrespective of 
whether the land in question is registered or unregistered, thus removing the 
prior distinction.46 The mechanisms which existed prior to 2009 for creating an 
39  Articles 1857(3) and 1859.
40  Article 117 LH.
41  Article 129 LH. 
42  Law 1/2000 of 7 January on Civil Procedure. Book III, Title IV, arts 681 et seq.
43  Article 129 LH provides that this procedure is premised on art 1858 CC and will 
be conducted by a notary in conformance with the formalities of the Mortgage Regulations, 
Decree of 14 February 1947 (BOE 106 of 16 April 1947).
44  C – 415-11 Judgment of the Court, 14 March 2013.
45  Council Directive 93/13/EEC of 5 April 1993 on unfair terms in consumer contracts. 
Under Spanish law, art 695 (LEC) permits a challenge to enforcement proceedings only 
on the following grounds: (a) extinguishment of the security or secured obligation, (b) an 
error in determining the amount due, or (c) the existence of another guarantee or mortgage 
registered before the security subject to the proceedings. Article 698 (LEC) provides that 
challenges on any other grounds shall be settled in subsequent proceedings without having 
the effect of staying or terminating the judicial enforcement proceedings. The court held 
that payment of damages was insufficient in the circumstances to compensate for the loss 
of a home.
46  Section 89(1). 

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
83
equitable mortgage are unaffected by the statute.47 The law of equity provides that 
an attempt to use one of the pre-LCLRA mechanisms for the creation of a legal 
mortgage, where monies have been advanced on the assumption that it would be 
so created, would give rise to an equitable mortgage.48
The second significant aspect of the LCLRA is the establishment of a new 
and differential treatment of housing loan mortgages as compared with other 
mortgages. Housing loans are defined as:
(a) an agreement for the provision of credit to a person on the security of a 
mortgage of a freehold or leasehold estate or interest in land:
––
(i) for the purpose of enabling the person to have a house constructed 
on the land as the principal residence of that person or that person’s 
dependants, or
––
(ii) for the purpose of enabling the person to improve a house that is 
already used as the principal residence of that person or that person’s 
dependants, or
––
(iii) for the purpose of enabling the person to buy a house that is already 
constructed on the land for use as the principal residence of that person 
or that person’s dependants, or
b) an agreement for refinancing credit provided to a person for a purpose 
specified in paragraph (a)(i), (ii) or (iii), or
(c) an agreement for the provision of credit to a person on the security of 
a mortgage of a freehold or leasehold estate or interest in land on which 
a house is constructed where the house is to be used, or to continue to be 
used, as the principal residence of the person or the person’s dependants, or
(d) an agreement for the provision of credit to a person on the security of 
a mortgage of a freehold or leasehold estate or interest in land on which a 
house is, or is to be, constructed where the person to whom the credit is 
provided is a consumer.49
The LCLRA confirms that the new ‘mortgage by charge’ will confer the same 
security rights and remedies as the previous mortgage by conveyance or 
47  Section 89(6) of the LCLRA states that ‘nothing in this section affects the creation 
of equitable mortgages of land’. Prior to the introduction of the LCLRA, an equitable 
mortgage was created in three contexts: where the mortgagor only has an equitable interest 
in the land at the time the mortgage is created, where the parties have a specifically 
enforceable agreement to create a mortgage, although this has not occurred, and where 
there is a deposit of title deeds. The Registration of Deeds and Titles Act 2006 abolishes the 
latter possibility in the context of registered land as land certificates are no longer issued 
and existing certificates ceased to have force and effect as of 1 January 2010.
48  JCW Wylie, Irish Land Law (4th edn, Dublin, Bloomsbury Professional 2010) 
767.
49  Section 2 of the Consumer Credit Act 1995, as amended by pt 12, sch 3 of the 
Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Act 2004.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
84
assignment.50 The significance of this provision is that existing Irish mortgage law 
has continued applicability, subject to any reform introduced within the LCLRA 
itself. The most significant change within the statute arises from the distinction 
between the statutory rights, duties and powers of the parties of ‘housing loans’ as 
compared with other mortgages.51
The LCLRA provides that a mortgagor can now redeem a ‘housing loan’ without 
having to redeem any other mortgage with the mortgagee, whether in respect of 
the same or another property.52 A general power of leasing is conferred on the 
mortgagor and contractual restrictions on the sale or transfer by the mortgagor of 
their interest in the property are prohibited.53
Section 97 of the LCLRA provides that a mortgagee cannot take possession 
of the property without a court order unless the mortgagor ‘consents in writing 
to such taking not more than 7 days prior to such taking’.54 The exercise of a 
mortgagee’s inherent common law power of sale similarly necessitates a court 
order, unless the mortgagor consents in writing to the exercise of the power no 
more than seven days prior to the sale.55 The LCLRA provides that the Circuit 
Court has exclusive jurisdiction to deal with orders for possession or sale in the 
context of housing loans, whereas for all other mortgages, jurisdiction lies with the 
High Court.56 The mortgagee is under a statutory obligation to obtain the best price 
which can reasonably be obtained when selling the property.57
The High Court decision in Start Mortgages v Gunn58 highlighted a potential 
lacuna in the law. The drafters of the LCLRA repealed the statutory right to apply 
for an order of possession under s 62(7) of the Registration of Title Act 1964 
without replacing it with a similar provision. Dunne J asserted that where in the 
50  Section 90.
51  Section 96(3). In relation to other mortgages, the provisions take effect subject to 
the mortgage unless the provision provides otherwise.
52  Section 92 altering s 17 of the Conveyancing Act 1881.
53  Sections 94 and 112.
54  Section 97. Under s 98, an emergency possession order may besought ‘where 
a mortgagee has reasonable grounds for believing that the mortgagor has abandoned the 
mortgaged property and urgent steps are necessary to prevent deterioration of, or damage to, 
the property or entry on it by trespassers or other unauthorised persons’. Under a possession 
order pursuant to s 98, the mortgagee is not strictly liable to account to the mortgagor.
55  M Donnelly, The Law of Credit and Security (London, Thomson-Reuters 2011). 
This may not be varied by contract for housing loan mortgages and Donnelly suggests that, 
due to the practical difficulties associated with the seven days prior to sale pre-requisite, it 
is probable that lenders will seek a court order in all cases in which contractual variation 
is prohibited. 
56 
Section 101(5). An application for an emergency possession under s 98 may 
be made to the District Court or any other court ‘already seised of any application or 
proceedings relating to the mortgaged property’.
57  Section 103.
58  Start Mortgages v Gunn [2011] IEHC 275. 

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
85
context of registered land, the statutory right had not been incorporated into the 
mortgage contract, unless the principal monies had become due and a demand 
had been made prior to the repeal (1 December 2009), the statutory right of 
possession for default had not accrued or been acquired. The result is that only 
where the mortgage was in arrears and a demand for all outstanding monies had 
been made by the mortgagee by the specified date could a possession order be 
sought. It should be noted here that this situation arose from what appears to have 
been an oversight in the drafting of the LCLRA and not through any political or 
judicial activism. In EBS v Gillespie,59 Laffoy J confirmed the legislative gap. 
Draft legislation to reinstate the necessary provisions is currently being debated in 
the Irish Parliament.60
Consumer Credit Act 1995
In Ireland, the Consumer Credit Act 1995 (CCA), which provides a statutory 
framework for certain types of consumer credit, contains provisions which are 
relevant to mortgage consumers.61 Part IX of the Act applies to ‘housing loans’ 
made by a mortgage lender. The provisions of the Act are thus applicable where 
the loan falls within the scope of the definition of ‘housing loan’ as contained in 
the statute. The CCA regulates the content and format of information and warnings 
which must be contained in the credit agreement.62 It confers a statutory right to 
early redemption on the mortgagor, whilst prohibiting the imposition of any fees, 
59  EBS v Gillespie [2012] IEHC 243 [25]: ‘In order to establish that its claim for 
possession came within s. 62(7) prior to 1st December, 2009, the plaintiff has to establish 
compliance with the two requirements expressly set out in the sub-section, namely (a) 
that repayment of the principal monies secured by the Charge had become due by that 
date; and (b) that the plaintiff was the registered owner of the Charge. Apart from those 
two requirements, the Court must be satisfied that it would have been proper to afford the 
plaintiff the statutory remedy of an order for possession against the defendant to enforce 
the right acquired. Having regard to the observations of Geoghegan J. in Bank of Ireland 
v. Smyth quoted earlier, I consider the Court would have to be satisfied not only that the 
application was made bona fide with a view to realising the plaintiff’s security, but also that 
the power of sale had arisen and was exercisable by virtue of the terms of the agreement 
between the plaintiff and the defendant contained in the Charge.’ 
60  Land and Conveyancing Law Reform Bill 2013.
61  Consumer Credit Act 1995 (Commencement) Order 1996 (SI 121/1996). In 
Ireland, consumer credit which is not subject to the Consumer Credit Act is governed by the 
European Communities (Consumer Credit Agreements) Regulations 2010 (SI 281/2010).
62  The Consumer Credit Act 1995 transposed Directive 87/102/EEC on Consumer 
Credit. Mortgage and housing loans were excluded from the scope of the Directive; however, 
Irish consumer law included housing loans within the remit of the domestic legislation. The 
level of consumer protection in Ireland thus exceeds other EU Member States. Section 129 
mandates the provision of particular information on the front page of the credit agreement. 
A template is contained in pt II of the Third Schedule of the Act.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
86
save in the context of fixed-rate agreements.63 It imposes limitations on the ability 
of lenders to levy charges in respect of valuation reports and legal costs associated 
with the investigation of title.64 It also prohibits linking practices and imposes a 
statutory obligation on the lender to arrange mortgage protection insurance for all 
housing loans.65 Breach of the provisions of the CCA in a housing loan context 
results in administrative sanctions for the lender.66
Spanish Primary Legislation
Royal Decree Law 27/2012 
Royal Decree Law 27/2012 of 15 November was an emergency measure 
introduced in response to incidents of suicide amongst distressed mortgagors 
facing eviction.67 The law imposes a two-year moratorium on the execution of 
an eviction order arising from enforcement proceedings by the creditor, where it 
relates to the residence of vulnerable debtors.68 The moratorium relates only to 
loans granted for the purpose of and secured on the debtors’ primary residence.69 
There are twin eligibility requirements to access relief under the law. The debtor 
must be classified as ‘vulnerable’, a term defined with reference to the size and 
composition of the household, the employment and income status of the debtor 
and the capacity of members of the family unit to work.70 In addition, the debtor 
must fulfil specified economic criteria.71 The focus of the economic criteria is on 
aggregate household income and the proportion of income required to sustain the 
63  Section 121.
64  Sections 123 and 125. The lender is required to provide a copy of any valuation 
report to the applicant in all cases.
65  Sections 126 and 127. There are limited exceptions to the obligation to arrange 
mortgage protection insurance (MPI), such as where the house is not intended for use as the 
principal private residence of the borrower.
66  Section 13, but see the judgment of Laffoy J in Stepstone Mortgage Funding v 
Fitzell [2012] IEHC 142 below, which explores the effect on possession proceedings of 
non-compliance by the lender with mandatory statutory provisions.
67  Royal Decree Law 27/2012 of 15 November (BOE 276 of 16 November 2012). 
On 9 November 2012, 53-year-old Amaia Egana jumped from her fourth-storey window 
in the Basque Country as officials arrived to evict her from her home. Hers was the second 
eviction-related suicide in Spain in a matter of weeks. Public demonstrations followed 
and international media coverage ensued, and Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy 
announced hours after Egana’s death: ‘I hope that on Monday we’ll be able to talk about a 
temporary suspension of evictions for the most vulnerable families.’ 
68  Article 1(1). The law applies both to judicial and out-of-court enforcement 
commenced prior to the entry into force of the law, i.e. 16 December 2012.
69  Article 1(3)(d). The residence must be the only home owned by the debtor and the 
loan in question must have been advanced for its purchase.
70  Article 1(2)(a)–(g).
71  Article 1(1) and (3).

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
87
mortgage obligation.72 The law stipulates that there must have been a detrimental 
change in economic circumstances in the four years preceding the application.73 
This is assessed with reference to an increase in the mortgage debt burden relative 
to income.74 The application may be made by the debtor at any time prior to the 
execution of the eviction order and the documentation required to support the 
application is identified in Article 2.
In addition, the law contains a proposal for a collaborative scheme between the 
government and the financial sector to provide social housing on a rental basis.75 
The proposal envisages the use of the unoccupied housing stock held by credit 
institutions to offer access to those vulnerable debtors who fall within the scope of 
the law but who have already been evicted from their homes.
Royal Decree Law 6/2012
Royal Decree Law 6/2012 of 9 March was introduced to address the plight of 
mortgagors who were struggling to sustain their mortgage obligations.76 It applies 
a primary residence requirement and thus addresses those whose homes are at risk 
in the context of default.77 The loan must have been advanced for the purchase 
of and secured on the debtors’ primary residence, and must be in existence at the 
date that the Law came into force, ie 11 March 2012.78 There are twin eligibility 
requirements to access relief under the scheme. First, the debtor must fall within 
the exclusion threshold, the criteria for which are identified in Article 3.79 As with 
other Spanish statutes, the emphasis is on individuals who have lost their income 
due to the deterioration in macroeconomic conditions and who are lacking any 
other means to support their mortgage obligations. In addition, the purchase price 
of the property must not exceed the value outlined in Article 5, which is determined 
with reference to the population of the municipality in question.80 The measures 
72  Article 1(3)(a)–(d).
73  Article 1(3)(b) and (c).
74  Article 1(4)(a). The amount of loan instalments must have increased by 150 per cent 
relative to net income, resulting in a mortgage payment greater than 50 per cent of net income.
75  Additional provision.
76  Royal Decree Law 6/2012 of 9 March (BOE 60 of 10 March 2012).
77  Article 3(1)(d).
78  Article 2.
79  ibid. With two exceptions, the provisions of the law are applicable only to debtors 
within the exclusion threshold. These exceptions are art 12, the extra-judicial enforcement 
procedure which is generally applicable to debtors, and art 13, pursuant to which debtors 
who have been evicted due to judicial or extra-judicial enforcement from 1 January 2012 
onwards are eligible for aid to tenants under the terms established in arts 38 and 39 of 
Royal Decree 2066/2008 of 12 December, regulating the Housing and Rehabilitation Plan 
2009–12. 
80  Article 5(2). The monetary limitations in respect of which the Code is applicable 
are as follows: for municipalities with up to 100,000 inhabitants, the purchase price cannot 
exceed €120,000; between 100,001 and 500,000 inhabitants, the threshold is €150,000; and 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
88
contained in the Law are not mandatory and are applicable only to those lenders 
who voluntarily subscribe to the Code of Good Practice.81
There are two main mechanisms through which the Law attempts to offer relief 
to debtors. The first is the inclusion of provisions to prevent an escalation of the 
mortgagors’ indebtedness. The Law imposes a cap on the financial penalties which 
can be levied on a debtor in default.82 The procedure for out-of-court mortgage 
foreclosure and auction is also amended to minimize expenses and prevent the 
underselling of assets.83 The purpose of these amendments is to minimize the 
amount payable by the mortgagor in the context of enforcement.
The second mechanism is a framework, in the form of a Code of Good 
Practice, contained in an Annex to the Law, which addresses the viability and 
sustainability of loans. The Code provides three options for debtors, dependent 
on their situation. First, a debtor within the exclusion threshold may request 
and obtain a re-structuring of their mortgage debt so as to achieve medium- to 
long-term sustainability. The statute provides income-based parameters which 
determine the viability of re-structuring arrangements. Secondly, where a 
restructuring of existing debt is not viable, the debtor may request a rebate on 
the outstanding principal amount.84 Thirdly, the Code details measures to replace 
mortgage foreclosure where neither of the foregoing options is successfull. The 
measure which is referred to as dación comprises delivery of the mortgaged asset 
to the mortgagee institution, which is obliged to accept it in settlement of both 
the secured debt and any related personal liability.85 This is in contrast to the legal 
status of Spain as a recourse jurisdiction in which the debtor remains personally 
liable for mortgage debt, which is not discharged by the realization of the housing 
asset.86 When applying for dación, the debtor may request to remain in the house 
as a tenant for a period of two years, with a rent equivalent to three per cent of the 
total amount of the debt at the time of dación.87
for municipalities with between 500,001 and 1,000,000 inhabitants or integrated townships 
in metropolitan areas with over 1,000,000 inhabitants, the upper limit is €180,000. The 
maximum purchase price of €200,000 is reserved for municipalities with populations in 
excess of 1,000,000 inhabitants. For assessments pursuant to the decree, the statute provides 
that population figures can be verified in the Municipal Register.
81  Article 5(1).
82  Article 4. A cap of 2.5 per cent of the outstanding principal of the loan is the 
maximum additional interest payable in respect of loans covered by the Royal Decree.
83  Article 12.
84  Annex, Code of Good Practice for the Viable Restructuring of Debts Secured by 
Mortgages on the Residence, s 2. 
85  ibid s 3(a) and (b).
86  1911 CC.
87  Section 3(c). According to s 3(e), the option of dación is not available where the 
property has already been listed for auction or where the property has other encumbrances.

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
89
Royal Decree Law 8/2011
Royal Decree Law (RDL) 8/2011 of 1 July was enacted in response to the plight 
of mortgage debtors who contracted at the height of the inflationary trend in the 
Spanish property market and who have lost their homes due to their inability to 
sustain their contractual obligations.88 It focuses on the issue of preservation of 
income and introduces reforms to minimize the residual debt obligation in the 
context of sale of the residence. The objective of the statute is to protect low-
income families and to ensure that ‘foreclosures are conducted without causing 
abusive situations or underselling of affected assets’. The legislation acknowledges 
the policy dilemma inherent in its intervention. The social and public policy 
objectives underlying the responsive provisions are juxtaposed with the desire to 
maintain ‘the fundamental elements of collateral for loans and, with them, the 
safety and soundness of our mortgage’.89
Essentially, the legislation amends articles in the Civil Law Procedure Act 
(LEC) 1/2000 of 7 January, which govern two aspects of the enforcement process, 
the first of which is the auction of the mortgaged property. It amends Articles 670(4) 
and 671 LEC, thereby increasing the minimum threshold for the adjudication 
of the asset to the creditor, where the property has failed to meet its reserve or 
where there are no bidders.90 The deposit required by potential bidders has been 
reduced from 30 per cent to 20 per cent of the appraised value in an attempt to 
promote greater participation and competition by bidders.91 The objective of the 
amendment is to ensure that the borrower will receive adequate compensation for 
the property, which will allow him/her to cancel or minimize the remaining debt.
The second aspect of the enforcement process which is subject to amendment 
is the attachment of wages and pensions, where the auction of the mortgaged 
asset is insufficient to cover the related credit. RDL 8/2011 increases the 
unforecloseability threshold to 150 per cent of the minimum wage. It stipulates 
that the threshold increases by an additional 30 per cent in respect of each member 
of the household who does not receive an income, salary or pension in excess of 
the minimum wage.92 The measures are designed to protect what is deemed to be a 
basic minimum income for those families who had lost their primary residence as 
a result of ‘difficult economic circumstances’.
88  Royal Decree Law 8/2011 (BOE 161 of 7 July 2011).
89  Royal Decree Law 8/2011 of 1 July 2011 (BOE of 7 July 2011) preamble. 
90  Chapter 1, s 2, arts 2.2 and 3, amending arts 670(4) and 671 of the Civil Law 
Procedure Act (LEC) 1/2000, of 7 January. The property can be awarded for no less than 60 
per cent of its appraised value.
91  Chapter 1, s 2, art 2.1, amending arts 669(1) and 671 LEC.
92  Chapter 1, s 2, art 1, amending art 607(1) LEC. The household for the purposes of 
RDL 8/2011 is defined as ‘spouse or domestic partners, ascendants, descendants of the first 
degree’ who live with the owner-occupier of the forecloseable dwelling. Where the income 
of these household members exceeds the minimum wage, they will be attachable on an 
incremental basis according to the provisions of art 607(2) LEC.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
90
Sustainable Economy Law 2/2011
Article 29 of the Sustainable Economy Law (SEL) 2/2011 of 4 March outlines 
principle-based parameters for the implementation of measures to promote 
responsible lending and consumer protection in financial services.93 It is 
framework legislation and Article 29(2) requires the Minister for Finance to 
adopt rules to ensure an appropriate level of consumer protection in respect of 
consumer interaction with credit institutions, including ‘measures relating to the 
transparency of the financial conditions of loans, mortgages and consumer credit’. 
Significantly, the article imposes a statutory obligation on credit institutions to 
assess the creditworthiness of borrowers, the first time that such an obligation 
has been imposed in Spain.94 Article 29 was implemented through Order EHA 
2899/2011, which also consolidated pre-existing provision regarding transparency 
and consumer protection in financial services.95
Law 2/2009
The statutory framework for the protection of consumers who source loans from 
non-credit institutions is contained in Law 2/2009 of 31 March.96 Prior to its 
enactment, non-credit institutions were unregulated, so the existence of the law 
is of itself an enhancement of consumer protection. The consumer, as defined in 
Article 1(b), encompasses both natural and legal persons who are acting in a field 
which is outside their trade, business or profession. The provisions of the Law are 
mandatory and the rights conferred on consumers cannot be waived.97 The Law 
requires lenders to comply with the transparency regime in respect of general and 
personalized pre-contractual information contained in Order EHA2899/2011.98 
This establishes a universally applicable minimum threshold of information to 
be provided to consumers, irrespective of the classification of mortgage lender. 
93  Sustainable Economy Law 2/2011 of 4 March (BOE 55 of 5 March2011).
94  Article 29(1).
95  Order of 5 May 1994 and Circular 5/1994 contained the prior transparency regime 
for the financial condition of mortgage loans. These have been repealed and replaced by 
Order EHA2899/2011 and Circular 5/2012.
96  Law 2/2009 of 31 March (BOE 79 of 1 April 2009); Study on the Role and 
Regulation of Non-Credit Institutions in EU Mortgage Markets (London Economics for 
EU Commission, 19 September 2008). The report identifies six types of credit institution in 
Spain: banks, official credit institutions, savings banks, credit cooperatives, financial credit 
entities and electronic money institutions. A non-credit institution is a lender which is not 
included in this classification.
97  Article 2 of Order EHA/2899/2011, which contains the provisions applicable to 
credit institutions, permits clients acting ‘within the scope of their business or profession’ 
to waive all or part of the provisions of the order, except as provided in Title III, Chapter II 
of the Rules on Loans and Mortgages. 
98  The first transparency regime on the financial condition of mortgage loans was 
contained in Order 5 May 1994 and Circular 5/1994. This has been repealed and replaced 
by Order EHA/2899/2011 and the related Circular 5/2012. 

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
91
The notary has a broadly similar role as under the regime applicable to credit 
institutions and is prohibited from authorizing loans that do not comply with the 
Law.99 Amongst the duties of notaries are the obligations to inform the customer 
of the scope of the obligations assumed and to check for inconsistencies in the pre-
contractual information, binding offer and contract.100
Despite this convergence in the regimes applicable to the different classifications 
of lender, there are also differences. Some of these can be attributed to the lack 
of regulatory competence by the Banco de Espana and the corresponding need 
to increase the protection afforded to consumers. This is exemplified by the 
imposition of additional disclosure and transparency requirements in relation 
not only to products, services and costs but also to the lending entity itself.101 
Article 3 requires companies, prior to the commencement of activity, to be listed 
in the register of the autonomous community in which the company is registered. 
Foreign companies who do not have a registered office in the Spanish territories 
must be inscribed in the State Register at the National Consumer Institute (INC).102 
Companies are under a statutory obligation to provide ‘truthful and verifiable 
information’ to the public authorities and those responsible for maintaining the 
records.103 A pre-requisite to registration is that the entity must obtain civil liability 
insurance or a bank guarantee to cover the liability they might incur vis-à-vis the 
consumer in the supply of intermediation services or lending activity.104
The Law confers standing on the INC to apply for an injunction against 
conduct by the lender which adversely affects the collective consumer interest.105 
Significantly, there are no obligations imposed in respect of responsible lending 
and the responsible lending provisions of Order EHA/2899/2011 are inapplicable. 
Law 2/2009 pre-dates the introduction of the statutory obligation in Spanish law, 
so it is unsurprising that it is not contained in Law 2/2009 as enacted. However, 
the failure to amend the law to incorporate such an obligation would appear to be 
a policy choice.106
99  Article 18. The duty under this article extends to registrars who are prohibited 
from registering a non-compliant contract. Where a notary discovers an inconsistency, he/
she is required to inform the consumer of the differences and his/her right to cancel the 
transaction.
100  Article 18.
101  Articles 4 and 5.
102  Article 3(2).
103  Article 3(5). 
104  Article 7.
105  Article 11. The standing extends to any other consumer association or user 
who meets the requirements of Royal Decree 1/2007 or of regional consumer protection 
legislation where applicable. An injunction may be sought to compel cessation of ongoing 
conduct or to prohibit reoccurrence of prior conduct. 
106  Study on the Role and Regulation of Non-Credit Institutions in EU Mortgage 
Markets, Report for the EU Commission (London Economics, September 2008). In the 
report, it was asserted on the basis of information provided by the Spanish Public Treasury 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
92
Breach of the obligations imposed by the Law is addressed by Royal Decree 
1/2007 of 16 November.107 Of particular note is the impact of failure by the lender 
to meet the requirements in respect of pre-contractual information. Article 14(3) 
specifies that such a failure may lead to the invalidity of the contract.
Irish Secondary Legislation
Consumer Protection Code 2012
The Consumer Protection Code 2012 (CPC) has been applicable as of 1 January 
2012. The CPC defines a ‘mortgage’ as a loan secured by a property, and provisions 
in respect of mortgage credit refers to all such credit sought or obtained by personal 
consumers, whether in respect of a principal private residence or investment 
property.108 The CPC contains an expansive definition of consumer, but the 
provisions in respect of ‘mortgage credit’ are addressed to personal consumers’, 
a subset which accords with the more traditional statutory definition of ‘a natural 
person acting outside his or her business, trade or profession’.109 It also introduces 
the concept of the ‘vulnerable consumer’ as a subset of the personal consumer. 
This is defined as a natural person who due either to incapacity or individual 
circumstances requires assistance in making decisions.110 An obligation is imposed 
on the lender to ensure that where a personal consumer has been identified as a 
vulnerable consumer, he/she is provided with ‘such reasonable arrangements and 
or assistance that may be necessary to facilitate him or her in his or her dealings 
with the regulated entity’.111 The CPC is applicable to the ‘regulated activities of 
and the Spanish Mortgage Association that any lending in the Spanish market by non-credit 
institutions is marginal.
107  Title IV, book I. Breach of the registration obligation contained in Art 3 is cited 
as a very serious offence, resulting in the imposition of sanctions by the National Consumer 
Institute, pursuant to Arts 51 and 52 of the revised text.
108  Consumer Protection Code 2012 Guidance (Dublin, Central Bank of Ireland, 
December 2011) 3 and 4. 
109  ibid 73.
110  ibid 75. The definition of ‘vulnerable consumer’ contained in the Code is: 
‘a natural person who: (a) has the capacity to make his or her own decisions but who, 
because of individual circumstances, may require assistance to do so (for example hearing 
impaired or visually impaired persons); and or (b) has limited capacity to make his or her 
own decisions and who requires assistance to do so (for example, persons with intellectual 
disabilities or mental health difficulties)’. A guidance document which accompanied the 
Code provides further detail on the categories of vulnerable consumer, identifying those 
who are capable of making decisions but whose ‘particular life stage or circumstances 
should be taken into account when assessing suitability’. The examples of vulnerability 
listed are ‘age, poor credit history, low income, serious illness bereaved etc’. 
111  Provision 3.1.

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
93
regulated entities operating in the State’ and in a mortgage context, this includes 
all lenders, irrespective of classification.112
The CPC regulates the provision of pre-contractual information to mortgage 
consumers both in respect of the lender and the mortgage products, specifying 
the content, format, presentation and timing of information and warnings to 
be provided.113 The CPC also imposes disclosure requirements to increase 
transparency regarding the existence, basis and quantum of charges and the 
commercial arrangements between mortgage intermediaries and product 
producers.114 It imposes restrictions and prohibitions on market practices, as in 
the context of product bundling, which is prohibited, unless there is demonstrable 
financial benefit for the consumer.115 Similarly the CPC regulates product tying, 
contingent sales and consolidation of charges.116 The CPC identifies the post-sale 
information requirements117 and regulates the manner and extent of contact that the 
lender can have with consumers who are existing or potential customers.118
Chapter 5 of the CPC imposes a substantive obligation on the lender to 
assess the suitability of the products offered to consumers, and an assessment 
of affordability is a central component.119 The provisions address the issues of 
affordability, sustainability and suitability, which are central to the current 
indebtedness issue affecting Irish mortgage consumers. The CPC stipulates the 
minimum requirements in the assessment of product suitability and mandates 
a written statement of suitability to be provided to the consumer.120 There is a 
requirement to maintain consumer records such that any material change is noted, 
and the regulated entity is prohibited from supplying products or services to a 
consumer who has refused to provide the information required to make a suitability 
assessment.121 It is mandatory to take account of assessments of affordability when 
112  Consumer Protection Code 2012 Guidance (n 107) 3 and 4. Retail credit firms and 
home reversion firms became subject to the Code following the introduction of legislation 
governing their authorization.
113  Provisions 4.7–4.20 (provisions regarding regulatory status, the regulated entity 
and its regulated activities), 4.23–4.29 (provision of information for credit including 
mortgages) and 4.41–4.45 (provision of information in context of lifetime mortgages and 
lifetime reversion agreements).
114  Provisions 4.54–4.56 (information on charges) and 4.57–4.61 (remuneration for 
mortgage intermediaries).
115  Provision 3.19.
116  Provisions 3.17–3.23.
117  Provisions 6.5–6.12 (credit) and 6.18–6.19 (information on charges).
118  Provisions 3.37–3.45 (telephone contact and personal visits).
119  Provisions 5.1–5.8 (knowing the consumer) and 5.9–5.15 (assessing the 
affordability of credit). 
120  Provisions 5.16–5.18 (assessing suitability) and 5.19–5.23 (statement of 
suitability).
121  Provisions 5.3 and 5.4. The 2006 Code required only that the refusal was noted 
on the consumer’s record. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
94
deciding whether a personal consumer is likely to be able to comply with the terms 
of the credit agreement.122 However this does not amount to a prohibition on the 
provision of credit in the context of a negative assessment of affordability.
The CPC states that its provisions ‘are binding on regulated entities and must, 
at all times, be complied with when providing financial services’.123 The Central 
Bank has the power to administer sanctions for contravention of the CPC, pursuant 
to Part IIIC of the Central Bank Act 1942.124
Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears 2010
The CPC addresses the policies, practices and procedures surrounding the ongoing 
provision of mortgage credit. In contrast, the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears 
(CCMA) addresses the context in which the borrower is having or anticipates 
having difficulty in meeting his/her repayment obligations under the mortgage 
contract.125 The current CCMA is applicable as of 1 January 2011, it applies to ‘the 
mortgage loan of a borrower which is secured by their primary residence’ and is 
applicable to all lenders, except credit unions.126
It imposes a statutory obligation on the lender to engage with the borrower 
in an attempt to put in place arrangements to resolve the arrears problem.127 
The centrepiece of the CCMA is a five-step Mortgage Arrears Resolution 
Process (MARP), which comprises; communication with the borrower, 
financial information, assessment, resolution and appeals.128 Where a borrower 
is cooperating with the lender, the CCMA imposes a 12-month moratorium 
on the commencement of enforcement proceedings.129 Notwithstanding the 
commencement of legal action, it requires lenders to attempt to maintain contact 
with the borrower or his/her representative.130 In the event that agreement can be 
reached and an alternative arrangement can be put in place before an order for 
possession is granted, the lender is obliged to suspend proceedings for the period 
that the borrower adheres to the terms of the alternative repayment arrangement.131 
Where a borrower is engaged in the process, the CCMA prohibits the imposition 
122  Provision 5.13.
123  The current legislative basis for the Code: s 117 of the Central Bank Act 1989; 
ss 23 and 37 of the Investment Intermediaries Act 1995; s 8(h) of the Consumer Credit Act 
1995; and s 61 of the Insurance Act 1989.
124  As inserted by s.10 Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Act 
2004. 
125  Chapters 1 and 2.
126  Chapters 1, 2 and 3. It is not necessary to be in occupation of the property if it is 
the sole property owned by the borrower.
127  Chapter 3, s 46. 
128  Chapter 3.
129  Chapter 3, s 47.
130  Chapter 3, s 50.
131  Chapter 3, s 50.

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
95
of fees, charges and surcharges on the arrears to prevent an escalation of the 
borrower’s indebtedness.132
The CCMA clearly delineates the time periods which do or do not constitute a 
portion of the 12-month moratorium.133 It also addresses organizational aspects of 
the arrears process, such as personnel and contact points, staff training and systems 
requirements.134 The CCMA mandates the scope and content of information to 
be provided to borrowers.135 In common with the CPC, it requires that processes 
and justification of options are documented and that the lender is required to be 
able to demonstrate compliance with the Code.136 It also imposes prohibitions on 
practices and regulates the number of unsolicited communications which a lender 
can initiate outside of those required by the CCMA or other regulation.137 The 
underlying objective of the statute is to prevent the loss of homes by facilitating 
the rehabilitation of viable loans; however, there is no suggestion that every loan 
is viable. Sections 39 and 40 outline the requirements where the MARP process 
results in a finding that the loan is not viable.
In common with the CPC, the statutory basis for the CCMA is s 117 of the 
Central Bank Act. Ostensibly, breach of the provisions of either of the Codes incurs 
administrative sanction, but, significantly, does not affect the validity of the loan 
contract. However, the question of whether the provisions of the CCMA are implied 
contractual terms has arisen in possession proceedings. Recent case law appears to 
indicate a change in judicial approach to the impact of these statutory codes.
In Stepstone Mortgage Funding v Fitzell, Laffoy J in the High Court refused 
an order for repossession on the basis that the provisions of the CCMA had not 
been complied with:
I find it impossible to agree with the proposition that, in proceedings for 
possession of a primary residence by way of enforcement of a mortgage or 
charge to which the current code applies, which comes before the court for 
hearing after the current code came into force, the plaintiff does not have to 
demonstrate to the Court compliance with the Current Code. 138
She also opined that ‘some development of the jurisprudence in this area in 
the future may be anticipated’. In a recent High Court decision, Irish Life and 
Permanent PLC v Malcolm Duff and Susan Duff, Hogan J, following the reasoning 
132  Chapter 3, s 9.
133  Chapter 3, s 47.
134  Chapter 3, ss 1–4 and 11.
135  Chapter 3, ss 10–14.
136  Chapter 3, ss 52–56.
137  Chapter 3, ss 21 and 35. 
138  [2012] IEHC 142 at 8, para 5.5.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
96
of Laffoy J in Stepstone, refused an order for possession on the basis of non-
compliance by the lender with the provisions of the Code.139
It would appear that the Codes have become part of mortgage law with 
significant implications for consumer protection.
Spanish Secondary Legislation
Order EHA2899/2011
Order EHA2899/2011 of 28 October is the statutory framework for banking services 
offered or supplied by credit institutions.140 In Spanish consumer legislation, the 
term ‘consumer’ usually refers to ‘natural or legal persons’. However, Article 19 
asserts the applicability of the rules on loans and mortgages to those undertaken 
with a ‘customer as an individual’ after the entry into force of the Order.141
The provisions for mortgage consumers are contained in Title III, which has a 
dual orientation. Chapter I addresses the statutory duty to assess creditworthiness 
of a borrower prior to the conclusion of a credit or loan agreement as a component 
of responsible lending. It is a new development in Spanish mortgage protection 
provisions and one which is currently only applicable to credit institutions. The 
credit institutions are responsible for the development of internal procedures to 
assess the client’s ability to meet the obligations under the agreement.142 The 
procedures must be reviewed periodically, and whilst the credit institutions are 
free to develop the procedures internally, the Order stipulates the minimum 
requirements of these procedures.143 Article 18(4) provides that the existence of 
insurance in respect of the loan should not alter the requirement for a positive 
assessment of the client’s creditworthiness and repayment capacity. Where 
credit is refused on the basis of credit history and income status, this should be 
disclosed to the client.144
139  [2013] IEHC 43. The possession order related both to registered and unregistered 
land. The court held that in respect of the registered land, the lender had not ‘accrued’ the 
right to demand possession prior to 1 December 2009, and due to the repeal of s 62(7) of 
the Registration of Title Act 1964 under the LCLRA, the court had no jurisdiction to grant 
an order. In respect of the unregistered land, although the court had jurisdiction to grant 
possession, it held that the bank had not complied with the requirement in the Code of 
Conduct on Mortgage Arrears not to seek an order for possession until ‘every reasonable 
effort has been made to agree an alternative repayment schedule’. It also held that the 
defendants could not be classified as non-cooperating borrowers. 
140  Order EHA/2899/2011 of 28 October (BOE 261 of 29 October 2011).
141  Article 19(1). 
142  Article 18.
143  Article 18(1) and (2).
144  Article 18(5).

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
97
Chapter II is entitled ‘rules on loans and mortgages’ and contains the current 
transparency regime applicable to housing and mortgage loans.145 There are 
a number of new requirements under the regime. It mandates the provision 
of general (FIPRE), and personalized (FIPER) information sheets and the 
development by the Banco de España of a ‘Mortgage Loan Access Guide’ to assist 
consumers in making a decision.146 The Order introduces a specific transparency 
regime for reverse mortgages, which stipulates the provision of an independent 
advisory service alongside delivery of the binding offer.147 In respect of interest 
rates, there is an effort to enhance the visibility of floor and ceiling clauses, as the 
requirement to include such clauses in the contractual documentation is replaced 
by a requirement to include them in an annex to the FIPER.148 The Order also 
regulates the components and calculation of the annual percentage rate (APR).149
Breach of the provisions of the Order does not affect the validity of a notarized 
and registered contract.150 However, under Article 30(3), a notary may refuse to 
authorize a contract which does not comply with the provisions of the law.
Conclusion
There are significant parallels between Ireland and Spain, both in pre-2007 
developments in housing and mortgage markets and the subsequent indebtedness 
crisis amongst mortgage consumers. The challenge facing both jurisdictions is 
twofold. First, there is a need to address the social and economic difficulties arising 
from the inflationary pre-crisis period. Second, there is a requirement to establish 
parameters for future lending to address the practices, policies and procedures 
which gave rise to the crisis. In response to these requirements, measures have 
been introduced in both countries to assist distressed mortgagors and to amend the 
protocols for loan origination. Notwithstanding the commonality of objectives, 
there are differences in the form and effect of these national provisions.
In Ireland, distressed mortgage loans are now addressed through a single 
statutory CCMA. In contrast, there have been a total of four laws introduced 
145  Chapter II has six sections: general provisions, pre-contractual information, 
provisions on interest rates and reference indices, contractual documentation, the Annual 
Percentage Rate (APR) and its calculation and reverse mortgages.
146  Articles 20(1), 21(1) and 22(2). Annex I and II of the Order contain templates of 
the FIPRE and FIPER, respectively. 
147  Article 32. Annexes III and IV provide templates for the FIPRE and FIPER in 
the context of a reverse mortgage, which also has its own specific mortgage access guide.
148  Article 25.
149  Article 31 and Annex V.
150  Law 26/1988 of 29 July (BOE 182 of 30 July 1988) contains the sanctions for 
breach of the provisions of the Order.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
98
in Spain to address the issue of distressed mortgagors.151 Notwithstanding the 
multiple statutes, the Spanish mortgage consumer is not in a better position than 
his/her Irish counterpart. Only Royal Decree Law 6/2012 addresses the issue of 
over-indebted mortgagors in a pre-enforcement context.152 In the relevant statutes, 
both jurisdictions target loans in which the residence of the borrower is at risk 
in the context of default and offer re-structuring options. Despite these parallels, 
there are significant distinctions in the scope of applicability of provisions. The 
Irish CCMA is a permanent framework for addressing distressed loans and is of 
mandatory applicability to all lenders. In contrast, the Spanish Law is applicable 
only to loans which existed on 11 March 2012, participation by lenders is on a 
voluntary basis and it imposes eligibility requirements.153 If a debtor cannot satisfy 
the eligibility requirements or can, but his/her lender is not participating in the 
scheme, there is no substantive relief available pre-enforcement.
The recent development in Irish mortgage law, whereby the Irish High Court 
has refused orders for repossession in the context of non-compliance by lenders 
with the Code, has undoubtedly strengthened the Code as an instrument of 
consumer protection. The contrast between the low repossession rate alongside 
high mortgage arrears in Ireland and the low arrears and high repossession rate in 
Spain could not be greater. However, the question is whether the low repossession 
rate in Ireland to date is attributable to the efficacy of the Code in facilitating 
re-structuring or the inadvertent lacuna in the law relating to repossession of 
registered land, created by the LCLRA.
The other legislative focus is on the protocols for current and future loan 
origination. Both Ireland and Spain have introduced provisions which impose 
information-based requirements and responsible lending obligations. The efficacy 
of these measures is difficult to assess in what is currently a conservative credit 
market. However, there are some observations which can be made. The Irish 
CPC is applicable to all lenders, and thus there is no distinction in terms of the 
protection conferred on consumers. In contrast, there is a differential treatment 
of consumers in Spain based on the classification of lender. There are distinct 
statutory frameworks applicable to credit and non-credit institutions, and only 
151  In addition to the current laws, Royal Decree 1975/2008 of 28 November (BOE 
290 of 2 December 2008) contained a temporary and partial moratorium on the payment of 
mortgage loans. Although it was extended in Royal Decree 97/2009 of 6 February (BOE 33 
of 7 February 2009), the moratorium came to an end on 28 February 2011. 
152  Royal Decree Law 8/2011 is aimed at post enforcement income and debt aspects, 
and Royal Decree Law 27/2012 imposes a temporary moratorium on the execution of an 
eviction order.
153  In practice, the cumulative pre-requisites for eligibility, in particular the ceiling on 
loan values and the requirement for not only the household but also the mortgage guarantor 
to be devoid of payment capacity, have precluded its applicability to the vast majority of 
mortgagors. See V Valiño, ch 4 in this volume. The author asserts that the failure of the 
RDL 6/2012 to offer widespread relief can be inferred from the introduction of urgent new 
measures to address the worsening crisis amongst borrowers less than seven months later. 

Comparing Mortgage Law in Ireland and Spain
99
credit institutions are currently subject to responsible lending obligations.154 It is 
notable that under the statutory responsible lending obligation, neither country 
currently imposes an express prohibition on lending in the context of a negative 
assessment of creditworthiness.155
The new ‘vulnerable consumer’ in Irish law may offer additional protection 
in this context, as it increases the obligation on lenders to substantiate that the 
decision to offer credit was appropriate, with reference to factors such as age, 
low, income and poor credit history. It is arguable that the existence of this type 
of provision in a pre-crisis context may have prevented some of the inappropriate 
lending decisions that occurred.
154  It is unclear why the obligation has not been imposed, although notably the sanctions 
for non-compliance by non-credit institutions with the information-based requirements is 
more punitive than for credit institutions, potentially invalidating the contract.
155  If the Draft EU Directive on Credit Agreements relating to Residential Property 
COM (2011) 142 remains in its present format, it will necessitate the imposition of this 
prohibition pursuant to Art 14. It will also require the equalization of the responsible 
lending obligations in Spain under Art 2. 

This page has been left blank intentionally

Chapter 4 
Mortgage Foreclosure and Housing Rights  
in Spain: Crisis or General Deception?
Vanesa Valiño
Introduction
This chapter highlights the contemporary housing situation in Spain, one of the 
countries experiencing the worst outcomes of the global financial and housing 
crisis. With more than 500 daily evictions, almost 400,000 foreclosures since 
the beginning of the economic crisis in 2007 and at least five known suicides 
by home-owners who could not meet their mortgage payments, the situation can 
only be described as catastrophic. The severity of the problem is due not only to 
the flood of evictions, but also to the fact that the majority of people affected by 
mortgage foreclosures not only lose their homes but end up in debt for life. Second, 
apart from documenting the devastating mortgage losses and demonstrating the 
detrimental impact on home-owners affected by this problem, this chapter also 
demonstrates the links between the current housing crisis and certain political 
policies. These policies were implemented by public and private parties obsessed 
with the possibility of earning indiscriminate profits. To date, however, they have 
not accepted responsibility for the consequences of this in the current economic 
crisis. Third, the chapter outlines the gap in Spanish mortgage laws in terms of 
effective judicial protection and the right to a home, which is affecting so many 
home-owners, and also the lack of second-chance policies for over-indebted 
individuals. Fourth, it aims to identify the controversy which surrounds the current 
legislation and condemns thousands of families to social exclusion, as well as 
studying the various responses from institutions and the victims themselves.
The Origin of the Problem: Urban Planning in Spain
Urban planning in Spain has been characterized by envisaging the construction 
of homes and infrastructures as investment goods, a source of business, instead 
of fixed assets linked to public needs. This business, the real estate business, is 
based, above all, on the ability to add considerable value to land prices for the 
mere sake of being developable, an approach which explains the indiscriminate 
proliferation of homes, motorways and high-speed trains that has taken place in 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
102
recent decades.1 The continual rezoning of land outside areas included in urban 
and territorial planning without taking into account basic environmental factors, 
the construction of new homes above the average disposable income without 
addressing population growth, along with the destruction of real estate patrimony 
are all common factors in the history of Spanish urbanism starting in the Franco 
era, prolonged during the democratic transition and still visible today. All this has 
been facilitated by the existence of two large and powerful business groups that 
have close ties to public administrations at local, regional and national levels.
These two business groups – construction companies and banks – have become 
very well established since Franco’s time and are very interested in urban growth.2 
Indeed, a significant part of the land reclassification operations driven by local 
authorities have been linked to raising funds to make up for a financial system 
that disregards the economic needs of local authorities,3 speculative processes and 
corruption,4 instead of resolving housing issues.
In order to encourage growth in the financial and real estate sector and urban 
growth, the housing policy during the last 60 years has promoted access to private 
home-ownership. Tax relief on property investment and different measures, such 
as easy access to loans, has situated private home-ownership as the main dwelling 
tenancy preference. This has had a negative effect on other more affordable 
means, such as renting, leasing, collective ownership or surface rights. In fact, 
the current prominence of private ownership in housing systems contrasts greatly 
with the general trend for rented property, which was characteristic in the housing 
industry up until the 1950s.5 Hence, the general residential needs of the public 
1  Spain is currently the EU country with the most housing per inhabitant. Whilst 
China claims first place, Spain has the second highest worldwide percentage of high-speed 
trains per km2, exceeding Japan and Germany. It also has the highest rate of secondary 
residences and vacant housing in Europe. See José Manuel Naredo, ‘The Spanish Property 
Model and its Implications’ in Jordi Borja and Mireia Belil (eds), Cities: An Impossible 
Equation (Barcelona, Icaria Ed 2012).
2  See Naredo (n 1).
3  Local governments only receive 15 per cent of public income and are contending 
with a very high percentage of public services. During the real estate boom, much of the 
gap between income and expenditure was covered by incomes derived from urbanism. 
These incomes were considered normal, when in fact they were extraordinary and should 
have been administered with more caution, allowing for the subsequent crisis in the housing 
industry. See Jamie Buron, ‘The Challenges of Local Governments and Housing Policies’, 
Province of Barcelona, 2012. 
4  Urban corruption in the local councils is one of the main reasons why Spain 
continues to appear in the global Corruption Perceptions Index. In 2012, according to the 
Global Corruption Report created by the NGO International Transparency, Spain occupied 
thirtieth place out of a total of 180 countries along with Cyprus, Estonia and Botswana.
5  The building and housing census of 1950 indicated that more than half of Spanish 
housing stock was rented, and this percentage reached levels of almost 90 per cent in large 
cities such as Madrid (94 per cent), Barcelona (95 per cent), Seville (90 per cent) and Bilbao 

Mortgage Foreclosure and Housing Rights in Spain 
103
have been dependent on banks and leading real estate companies. Even public 
housing (official protection housing – Viviendas de Protección Oficial (VPO)) has 
been offered mainly as private ownership. This initiative was aimed at stimulating 
the construction industry in times of recession in order to reactivate the economy 
and generate employment, but failed to take into consideration whether prices 
would be affordable for impoverished people.
At present, there is no public homes supply available – the percentage of social 
rental housing is below one per cent of the total stock, compared to a European 
average of between 20 and 30 per cent. Nor is the rental market in the private 
sector sufficiently large – at less than 10 per cent – when the EU average is 
between 30 and 50 per cent. Intervention schemes have not been applied to the 
Spanish housing market in order to prevent speculation.
The Over-indebtedness of the Working Class During the Construction Boom
The central role of the real estate market became dangerously large during the 
construction boom that took place between 1997 and 2007. These years were 
characterized by a marked increase in liquidity at the international level and 
an excellent return on investment property. This ‘tsunami of liquidity’ meant 
indiscriminate access to credit for the construction sector, which accounted for 
almost 70 per cent of credit loans, and also to the working class as a gateway 
to home-ownership.6
The generalization of credit allowed Spain to become the European Union (EU) 
member with the most motorways and high-speed trains per square metre, and a 
leader in cement consumption. The housing stock, meanwhile, grew by 25 per cent 
so that the Spanish state, with 25.5 million homes, had one of the highest ratios 
of housing per capita in the EU. Many of these properties, however, were built 
on developments far from city centres or in run-down tourist sites along the coast 
and responded to the speculative process instead of genuine residential demands.7
Thus, despite the significant increase in the housing stock available and 
although the real value of wages did not grow during the 10 years of the housing 
bubble, house prices tripled. The housing bubble led to various abuses and 
(88 per cent). This situation has since reversed dramatically. Today there is an excess of 
housing available, which is predominantly privately owned. See José Manuel Naredo, By 
an Opposition that Opposes (Barcelona, Anagram 2001).
6  Ada Colau and and Adrià Alemany, Mortgaged Lives: From the Housing Bubble to 
Rights to a Home (Barcelona, Angle Editorial 2012) is fundamental on this aspect. 
7  The supply growth was consistently above the level of houses required to meet 
the demand for new households. Between 1997 and 2007, 390,000 new households were 
created each year. However, 6.6 million homes were constructed during this time, a figure 
higher than those built in France, Italy and Germany. In total, it is estimated that between 
empty housing and second homes, 35 per cent of the housing stock is not utilized.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
104
discrimination against non-EU immigrants interested in renting a home, growth 
of substandard housing and overcrowding. However, the most widespread abusive 
practice during the housing boom was the over-indebtedness of the working class. 
In this way, the remarkable increase in housing prices was largely concealed by 
generalizing the over-indebtedness, which increased from 55 per cent to 130 per 
cent of households’ disposable incomes during the decade 1997–2007.8
During these years, loans of up to 120 per cent of the value of property were 
given, with payments that could be returned over timeframes of 30, 40 and even 
50 years. Many of the conditions were agreed through misleading advertisements 
which did not take into account scenarios forecasted by financial experts, such as 
interest rate increases or the bursting of the real estate bubble, which led to the 
devaluation of property. Moreover, a significant percentage of the mortgage loans 
included complex investment products that were causing significant economic 
losses to mortgage debtors.
The repertoire of abusive practices is vast. The granting of ‘growing mortgages’ 
starts off with affordable instalments that can later be tripled in a short period 
of time; the obligatory inclusion of additional products of questionable value in 
mortgages such as unemployment insurance with small print specifying that the 
policy would only be effective when the person had previously held a permanent 
contract, establishment of cross-guarantors, through which family and friends 
as well as strangers agreed to meet not only their own mortgage payments but 
also those of others in the event of default, and the inclusion of ‘ground clauses’ 
that did not protect the buyer against interest rate increases and at the same time 
prevented him/her from benefiting from drops in interest rates.
Meanwhile, access to rental housing was not without its complications. A 
shortage of available rental property, many not meeting the minimum conditions 
of habitability, was compounded by the imposition of conditions that were difficult 
to fulfil, such as the requirement of deposits of six months’ to one year’s rent, 
indefinite work contracts and equally exorbitant rents. Immigrants in particular 
experienced multiple discrimination based on their nationality, skin colour, lack 
of long-term employment contracts, etc. These obstacles were reinforced by 
legislation governing urban renting, which enables indiscriminate increases in 
rental contracts every five years and provides insufficient protection to tenants, 
along with an endlessly repeated message that states that renting equated to 
throwing away money. In turn, since pensions and social welfare payments cannot 
guarantee decent living conditions for adults, resolving the housing issue has 
become a basic necessity of life.
While accessing housing caused over-indebtedness amongst large sections of 
the population, the working class were particularly affected. Racial discrimination 
and the absence of family networks in the case of foreigners, and a tendency to 
8  From 1997 to 2007, the average mortgage increased from €50,786 to €149,007, and 
the average mortgage timeframe increased from 19 to 28 years. Meanwhile, the number of 
mortgages formalized annually was around 822,000. See Colau and Alemany (n 6).

Mortgage Foreclosure and Housing Rights in Spain 
105
be employed in temporary positions in the service and construction sectors all 
represented major obstacles in trying to access rented accommodation. This was 
not the case, however, when applying for a mortgage.
The Bursting of the Housing Bubble and Inconsistencies in Mortgage 
Legislation
At the end of 2007, the US suffered a subprime mortgage crisis. The consequences 
of this crisis were noted quickly in Spain. Rising interest rates and the international 
credit crunch severely affected the real estate business, a strategic sector in terms 
of employment.9 Growing unemployment in the context of over-indebtedness 
quickly resulted in increasing difficulties in meeting mortgage payments. 
Unemployment has risen from eight per cent in 2007 to 25 per cent in 2012,10 
particularly affecting young people and immigrants. Therefore, from 2008 to 
2013, there has been an unprecedented increase in the number of foreclosures. 
According to the General Council of the Spanish Judicial Authority, a total of 
397,651 procedures have been initiated from 2007 to the first half of 2012, and 
the rate of foreclosures initiated during the first half of 2012 was more than 
500 a day.11 Unfortunately, there are no official figures regarding the number of 
procedures that relate to normal housing as the figures available do not distinguish 
between second homes or business premises.
However, we must remember that foreclosure processes affect not only the 
individual but also the entire family unit. Furthermore, a single foreclosure process 
can involve more than one home. Many financial institutes foresaw potential 
difficulties in repayments of high-risk mortgages and demanded guarantees, and 
often the home of a close relative, particularly those of parents, was used as equity. 
The Platform for People Affected by Mortgages estimates that the problems of 
9  During the peak years of the bubble, the volume of the real estate sector accounted 
for 18 per cent of GDP (30 per cent taking into account the indirect economic activities 
which proliferated under the umbrella of construction) and employed 13 per cent of the 
population, well above the 6.7 per cent in Germany and 8 per cent levels in the UK, See 
Colau and Alemany (n 6) 35.
10  The number of unemployed people in the third quarter of 2012 reached 4.7 
million people and the autonomous communities Andalusia and Catalonia have been 
the most affected. In more than 1.4 million households, all household members are 
unemployed (National Institute for Employment, 2012). Meanwhile, the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has forecast an increase in the Spanish 
unemployment rate to 26.9 per cent in 2013.
11  Foreclosures rose from 25,943 in 2007 to 58,686 in 2008, 93,319 in 2009, 93,636 
in 2010, 77,854 in 2011 and 48,213 in the first six months of 2012. Meanwhile, during the 
first half of 2012, 94,502 dispossession orders were issued, which means that each day in 
Spain, 512 evictions take place. Supreme Judicial Council, ‘Report on the Impact of the 
Crisis on the Judiciary Authorities’ (Q2, 2012).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
106
foreclosure affect two million people in Spain directly and indirectly. As a result, 
various organizations have reported the emergence of new phenomena in housing, 
such as subletting rooms by entire families, the occupation of abandoned buildings 
by excluded population groups and a significant increase in homelessness.12
However, in the case of Spain, the issues concerning people with unaffordable 
mortgages are not only to do with the loss of housing. The prevailing legislation 
is based on the principle of universal liability and does not permit the cancellation 
of the debt with the handing over of the home. The debt is associated entirely with 
the owner and not with the property, and the mortgagor must respond with his/her 
property as well as current and future salaries.
Moreover, foreclosure legislation does not allow judges to have access to 
important facts, such as whether the contract includes unfair terms or the reasons 
why the home-owner is not meeting mortgage payments. Finally, unlike other 
European countries, no process exists to resolve situations of personal indebtedness, 
such as ‘second-chance policies’13 which allow individuals to overcome their 
insolvency. The lack of this opportunity implies that those affected can remain on 
debtors’ lists for life and are impeded from carrying out necessary functions, such 
as renting a home, having access to credit and applying for a government job, not 
to mention the stigma attached.
Far from helping to avoid the disintegration of families with mortgages, 
Spanish legislation shows complete juridical injustice towards insolvent people. 
The Insolvency Act 22/2003, passed on 9 July at a time of economic growth and 
absolute majority of the Popular Party (PP), was aimed theoretically at covering 
both corporate entities and physical persons. In practice, it allows companies 
to settle debts and start over. However, the same does not hold for insolvent 
families. Article 55 states that once the bankruptcy process has commenced, all 
financial activities are put on hold, except when the creditors have access to a 
security right, as is the case with property loans. At the same time, Article 56 
states that only activities linked to the professional activity will be put on hold, 
which, according to the traditional understanding that the law has adopted, would 
exclude the individual’s home.14
12  Marta Plujà i Calderon, With a Roof But No Home: Effects of Substandard Housing 
on the Lives of People (Barcelona, Caritas 2011).
13  Second-chance policies refer to those mechanisms or institutions such as the 
Commission for Indebtedness in France or the English Insolvency Agency. The goal of 
these organizations is to help ‘honest’ people who have been affected. Through financial 
reorganization and payment plans, they can once again benefit from equality in legal 
transactions. It is as much about debt relief as overcoming the restrictions associated with 
payment defaults. Ultimately these processes help to avoid social exclusion by allowing 
people to overcome their debts and promote economic growth.
14  Luis Gonzaga Serrano, ‘Administrative Economic Law Reflections on Bankruptcy 
and Second Chances’ (presentation given by the Minister for Tourism and Commerce, 
Madrid, 28 September 2011).

Mortgage Foreclosure and Housing Rights in Spain 
107
Moreover, the Civil Law Procedure Act (LEC) 1/2000 of 7 January restricts 
rather than facilitates the exercise of the right to effective legal protection 
throughout the foreclosure process. Article 695 limits its claims to cases whereby 
the loan has already been cleared or where the bank has made a miscalculation, 
hence preventing judges from examining the circumstances that led to the 
insolvency of the family. They are also unable to assess the level of information 
available to the victims when they took out their mortgages and whether unfair 
terms existed in their contracts.
Another controversial aspect of the same Act is the reference to the auction 
of the property as mortgage collateral. Article 671 establishes that in cases of 
unsuccessful auctions, the creditor may claim the right to the property for 60 per 
cent of its appraised value. With the outbreak of the economic crisis, there has 
been a substantial drop in bidding, meaning that the financial institutions can 
reclaim the property at 60 per cent of the valuation price and demand payment 
of the remaining 40 per cent, plus interest and legal costs by the mortgage owner 
or its guarantors. This means that families not only lose their homes, but are also 
indebted for life to financial institutions, which, in turn, can refinance the sale of 
the same property at a higher price than that at which it was repossessed.
Meanwhile, the free legal aid regulation establishes revenue-based scales 
which, a priori, often exclude the indebted households, based on the fact that 
they are considered property owners. Article 3.1 recognizes the right to free legal 
aid for those individuals whose resources and income do not exceed two times 
the minimum wage. This figure is calculated annually based on general concepts 
of the family unit and equates to a maximum monthly income of €1,054.48 per 
household. In many cases the average income of families with mortgages exceeds 
this figure. However, almost the entire household income is dedicated to mortgage 
repayments and, as a result, many people with obvious cases of bankruptcy are 
excluded from access to free legal aid.
Institutional Responses to the Problem of Foreclosures
The plight of thousands of people unable to pay mortgage fees and the corresponding 
debts associated with the handing back of property, as organized by the Platform 
of People Affected by Mortgages, has generated much public debate. To date, 
the central government has shown more concern for guaranteeing the solvency 
of the financial institutions than considering the implementation of measures to 
help avoid foreclosures and assist people with unaffordable mortgages. Nor is it 
addressing the gap between the huge amount of existing empty housing stock and 
the growing number of homeless people.15 Unlike the rapid transfusion of funds 
15  According to information conducted by the National Institute of Statistics 2012 
Census, there are six million empty homes (20 per cent of the total). This percentage 
exceeds the average of the most advanced countries of the EU, which is between 2.5 and 5 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
108
injected into the financial sector, the measures aimed at resolving family issues 
have been very few and of limited scope.16
The main measure that the Socialist Party government implemented to 
help solve insolvency within the family unit was a moratorium on the payment 
of a portion of the mortgage payment, approved in late 2008. Known as the 
Moratorium of the Official Credit Institute (ICO), and with a designated budget of 
€6 billion, it allowed unemployed people to postpone up to €500 on their monthly 
mortgage payments. However, the requirements necessary to benefit from this 
measure did not cover most of the affected population. First, the moratorium only 
applied to mortgages that did not exceed €170,000. This figure may have been 
representative of the general housing price in Spain as a whole. However, this was 
not the case in large cities such as Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia and Murcia, where 
during the construction boom an apartment seldom cost less than €200,000. In 
addition, the moratorium could only be applied when there was no default on any 
of the mortgage payments. Finally, even when the individual met the necessary 
requirements, it was entirely up to the bank whether it accepted the moratorium or 
not. Hence, while the government forecasted helping 500,000 families, from the 
time it was implemented in March 2009 until it finished in late 2010, only 13,665 
individuals benefited from the measure. A total of €78 million, just one per cent of 
the appropriated funds, ended up being assigned to the cause.17
Subsequently, the persistent augmentation of the problem led to the approval 
of the Royal Legislative Decree 8/2011 of 1 July in order to provide support to 
mortgage borrowers, and two basic changes were implemented. On the one hand, 
the appraisal value price with which financial entities could acquire property at 
auctions was increased from 50 per cent to at least 60 per cent. As such, if an 
auction was unsuccessful, as has often been the case since the onset of the crisis, 
the creditor now has to pay 60 per cent of the evaluation price of the property 
instead of 50 per cent and follow up on remaining payments, legal costs and any 
existing interest charges. On the other hand, there was a slight increase in the 
volume of controlled rental properties for people who had lost their homes through 
foreclosure. In short, it is a legislative reform aimed at alleviating the financial 
sentence which hangs over mortgage debtors, but due to its limitations, hardly any 
changes in the living conditions of the people affected are visible.
The amendment of the Insolvency Act 22/2003 with Law 38/2011 on 10 
October was another missed opportunity by the Socialist government to tackle 
the problem of over-indebtedness and put into place a second-chance policy. 
per cent. Meanwhile, financial institutions estimate that the stock of unsold new homes is 
between 800,000 and one million.
16  In 2008, due to the financial crisis, the government created the Fund for Orderly 
Bank Restructuring (FROB), which was basically oriented to rescue the financial sector 
with a budget of €9 billion.
17  Javier Gómez Guinda, Financing of Public Housing Policy (Official Credit 
Institute (ICO) 2011).

Mortgage Foreclosure and Housing Rights in Spain 
109
Despite the large number of insolvencies that existed due to the crisis, the reform 
of the Bankruptcy Act was not used to adapt the bankruptcy procedure to assisting 
the problematic over-indebtedness of mortgagors. The only agreement that was 
reached was the possible adaptation of future second-start measures.18
On the other hand, since its coming into power in December 2011, the Partido 
Popular has not suitably addressed the problematic issue of thousands of people 
being affected by foreclosures. The answers have been prioritized at all times to 
serve the interests of financial institutions and have only ever tried to partially 
resolve the most extreme cases.
The first measure, the ‘Code of Good Banking Practice’ approved to protect 
mortgage owners in March 2012 by Royal Decree-Law 6/2012, was announced 
with much song and dance as an innovative proposal in curtailing the financial 
drainage associated with mortgages. This law, theoretically aimed at resolving 
mortgage over-indebtedness by facilitating mortgage renegotiation and in extreme 
cases the cessation of payments, establishes overly restrictive conditions.
Again, as in the ICO Moratorium adopted by the Socialist government, the 
limitations – the mortgage ceiling, the lack of application when the mortgage 
guarantor had payment capacity and the maximum income criteria of the 
mortgagor19 – meant the exclusion of the vast majority of people affected by the 
repercussions of the housing bubble. The clearest signs of the limited impact of 
this measure were, first, the positive response by the financial institutes, which all 
demonstrated their immediate approval, and, second, the necessity to adopt new 
urgent measures only seven months after its introduction.
In fact, the last reaction of the government, the Royal Decree Law 27/2012 
of 15 November, an urgent measure introduced to increase protection for 
mortgagors, responds to the situation of social alarm created through the media 
attention surrounding several suicides in less than a month by people who were 
due to be evicted from their homes.20 Hence, the decree, presented as a draft 
law, aimed at promoting a two-year moratorium in cases of evictions rather 
18  ‘This report shall include the possible adoption of other measures, both substantive 
and procedural, through appropriate initiatives, which complete economic and social 
protection of consumers and families. For this purpose, out-of-court dispute resolution 
options such as notary, registration, mediation, or other types may be proposed.’ Single 
Additional Provision, Law 38/2011, Bankruptcy Reform, 10 October. 
19  The price of housing for eligibility cannot exceed €200,000 in big cities and 
€120,000 in smaller urban areas.
20  It is difficult to estimate with certainty the number of people who have taken their 
lives because of their inability to meet the payment of housing. In any case, to show the 
extent of the problem, it is sufficient to talk about the cases of 54-year-old José Miguel 
Domingo, a resident of Granada, who hanged himself on 25 October 2012 a few hours 
before being evicted; 53-year-old GB Manuel, who that same day jumped from a balcony 
in his home in Valencia after a member of the judicial commission came to evict him; and 
53-year-old Egaña Amaia, from Barakaldo, Euskadi, who threw herself from the window of 
her fourth-floor home on 9 November when the judicial commission was going to evict her.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
110
than trying to renegotiate the outstanding debt. A social housing scheme was 
also set up for people evicted from their homes following the non-payment of 
mortgages. The creation of the fund is based on the government working closely 
with the credit institutions.
Once again, the requirements needed in order to benefit from the moratorium 
on evictions are difficult to meet. The family income cannot be more than €1,597, 
half of which must be applied to mortgage payments, and certain inconsistent 
social requirements also apply, such as families with children below the age of three 
being included. However, families with two or more children above four years of 
age or single mothers with one child are excluded. In addition, the moratorium 
is only effective when the financial institute takes ownership of the home. The 
limited impact of the measure has been recognized by the government, whose 
initial calculations forecasted assistance for 600,000 families, while in practice 
the figure has been less than 120,000. In addition, following the criteria of the 
European Commission, the law does not stipulate any changes in the foreclosure 
process, nor does it take into account the hundreds of thousands of people who 
have lost their homes and continue to be in debt, nor does it establish changes for 
the future. It doesn’t even specify whether default interest is suspended during the 
two-year delay in repayments.
Along with the moratorium, the law stipulates the creation of a social fund 
for rental property at affordable prices for people who have lost their homes. 
According to the limited information available, the government´s intention is that 
the financial institutions will provide the use of unoccupied property as social 
housing. However, it is not known what methods will be used to promote the 
social rental of the thousands of empty apartments currently controlled by the 
financial entities. So far, the numerous attempts by public authorities to reach an 
amicable agreement with the banks have been ignored.
Generally speaking, the public authorities seem more concerned with reviving 
the vital signs of the financial and real estate business than with meeting public 
housing needs.21 Proof of this is the new legislative reforms applied to property 
rentals, as well as the new operation to rescue banking through ‘bad banking 
solutions’. For example, the reform of the rental market means that eviction can 
now take place in just 10 days, hence the term ‘express eviction’, while it neglects 
the reasons as to why the rent is not being paid. Overall, the changes in rental 
legislation are aimed at suppressing basic tenant rights, such as protection against 
indiscriminate price increases, and at the same time promote investment funds in 
the rental market.22 Meanwhile, the public bailout of toxic financial assets held 
21  Meanwhile, the Autonomous Regions and municipalities pressurized by the 
collectives of people affected also put forward different symbolic responses, such as 
resolutions and declarations in favour of the ceding of payment, as well as mediation 
services and legal advice for people affected.
22  Vanesa Valiño and Caterina Rilo, ‘The Vulnerability of Tenants Implies No Real 
Way Out of the Housing Crisis: Notes on the Proposed Reform of the Rental Market’ 

Mortgage Foreclosure and Housing Rights in Spain 
111
by the nationalized banks (‘bad banks’) does not anticipate the possibility of 
providing a government social housing stock. Instead, the objective of the bad 
bank is to stop real estate prices from falling and favours the purchase of property 
by large investment funds.23 The clearest sign yet of the government’s desire to 
promote the real estate business at all costs is the announcement that in November 
2013, it will offer residence permits to immigrants who purchase properties for 
more than €160,000.
Institutional Responses in the Judicial Field
Along with the local governments, the judicial courts are one of the areas hardest 
hit by the avalanche of foreclosure proceedings. Judges and lawyers who have 
come into close contact with the problem have made numerous public declarations 
through progressive judges’ and magistrates’ organizations, such as democratic 
judges and affiliated bar associations. These declarations defend the need to reform 
the mortgage legislation in order to stop mortgage owners with unaffordable loans 
from ending up in debt for life once they lose their homes.
For the time being, while we wait for suitable legislative reform, different 
measures have been initiated to defend the interests of mortgage-owning families. 
In September 2010, the Judge Magistrate of the Court of First Instance No. 2 in 
Sabadell, Guillem Soler, raised a question of unconstitutionality concerning the 
foreclosure process and possible infringement of rights to effective legal protection, 
as well as the right of an individual to adequate housing. The appeal challenged 
the debtor’s ability to defend why he/she was not meeting the mortgage payments 
and demonstrated the general inability of the judge to assess the conditions 
pertaining to the mortgage. The matter was dismissed by the Constitutional Court 
in July 2011, alleging, amongst other things, that the foreclosure procedure was a 
legislative matter rather than a judicial one.24
In an attempt to dissolve the mortgage debt when the mortgagor hands over 
the home, some judges have opted for an alternative interpretation of the Civil 
Procedure Code. In order to avoid banks repossessing the property for 60 per cent 
(DESC Observatory, 2012).
23  In fact, what is presented as mere asset management involves creating the largest 
Spanish real estate of all times, the ‘Asset Management Company for the Restructuring 
of the Banking Sector’ (SAREB), which is estimated to own 89,000 finished homes 
covering 13,000 km2 of land. Both SAREB and the banks will offer the property through 
public financial support and state guarantees on loans given to private investors. See the 
communication published by the DESC Observatory along with other social organizations: 
‘Evictions and Bad Banking: A Historic Opportunity’ (November 2012).
24  Guillem Soler, ‘Possible Elements of Unconstitutionality in the Foreclosure 
Process’ (Observatorio DESC, Conference on ‘Foreclosure and Housing Rights: Legal 
Strategies Against Insolvency of Families’, Barcelona, September 2009).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
112
of the valuation price and pursuing the remaining 40 per cent of the debt by seizing 
current and future assets, more and more verdicts are favouring the repossession 
price being equal to the official valuation price of the property that was originally 
accepted by the mortgage bank. In addition, some of the sentences passed allude 
to the necessity of taking into account factors such as the impact of unemployment 
on families and the responsibility of the banking sector in the current crisis.25
Finally, another foreclosure appeal has been opened by the Magistrate of the 
Mercantile Court No. 3 in Barcelona, Fernández Sejio, who presented a preliminary 
ruling to the European Court of Justice for a possible violation of consumer rights 
caused by EU regulations.26 The magistrate presented the following issues before 
the Luxemburg Tribunal:
a.	 Judges do not know what conditions apply to mortgage contracts and is this 
not a potential violation of consumer rights.
b.	 It is disproportionate that banks can demand early termination of long-term 
loans (in the case in question, the loan period was 33 years) for failing to 
meet payments during a very limited period of time.
c.	 Is the application of penalty interest rates (in this particular case, higher 
than 18 per cent) not an unjust measure which would be considered a 
violation of consumer rights in other sectors?
d.	 To what extent does the inclusion of variable interest rates imply that the 
mortgagor cannot negotiate the repayment amounts with their banks before 
eviction takes place?
In November 2013, the considerations of the Attorney General of the European 
Court of Justice will be made public, thus implying that the Spanish eviction 
legislation violates EU consumer protection rights by containing unfair terms. 
While waiting for judicial resolution, several courts have taken advantage of the 
situation by imposing delays on current foreclosure cases.
The Response of Society and the People Affected
Since the bursting of the housing bubble in 2007, many groups have highlighted 
the co-responsibility of general banks, savings banks, notaries, valuation agencies, 
real estate agencies and public administrations for the over-indebtedness of 
households. The need for a social audit has been defended in order to demonstrate 
the various degrees of responsibility for the current crisis, to restore the self-
25  To consult sample judicial decisions, see www.observatoridesc.org/es/sentencias-
dacion-hipoteca.
26  Case C-415/11 concerning Directive 93/13/EEC of the Council of 5 April 1993 
about unfair terms in consumer contracts.

Mortgage Foreclosure and Housing Rights in Spain 
113
esteem of over-indebted families and to investigate where the millions of euros 
generated in the real estate boom have gone.
A second claim, also in the same order, is to stop aid and guarantees designed 
to recapitalize banks using public money. The management of these grants, 
more than €250 billion between funds and guarantees, lacks transparency and 
the monetary authorities have not taken a single step in trying to launch a new 
financial order that will avoid the negative factors which caused the detonation of 
the crisis. Neither the increased availability of money nor larger banking entities 
means more and improved control of the banking system. On the contrary, the 
bulk of the resources should be devoted to supporting vulnerable groups, such 
as people affected by high rates of unemployment and people struggling to pay 
for their homes.
Given the institutional neglect of the thousands of people with unaffordable 
mortgages, in 2009 the Platform of People Affected by Mortgages (PAH) was 
set up.27 Apart from providing a meeting point and collective advice for the 
mortgagees, its main objectives are to promote the retroactive payment in kind for 
those affected by foreclosure procedures affecting their only home, and to delay 
evictions until alternative housing is guaranteed. To highlight social support and 
the need for essential changes in direction of support policies within the banking 
sector, the PAH and the two largest unions, along with neighbourhood and social 
organizations such as DESC Observatory, started a Popular Legislative Initiative 
(ILP) in April 2012 for payment in kind, social renting and protection for people 
being evicted. The demands of the ILP include that the handing over of property 
constitutes the cancellation of a mortgage, the suspension of evictions driven by 
financial institutions and the possibility that people affected can remain in their 
homes under social rental schemes. This citizen participation programme is not 
very strong yet, as the 500,000 signatures collected so far will not warrant a 
change in the current legislation. However, the million signatures that they expect 
to acquire will serve to demonstrate a social rejection of policies whose concern 
for rescuing financial institutions is condemning thousands of families to poverty.
In short, the social organizations and the victims have proposed that operations 
to save banks using public money be redirected towards the creation of public 
housing rental stock for people in need of homes. They have also vindicated 
the need for a change in the housing policy. As United Nations Special Housing 
Rapporteur Raquel Rolnick states in her annual reports,28 a thorough review of 
the housing policy that has been adopted in Spain throughout the last few years is 
fundamental. We need to consider the housing policy as a public service designed 
to ensure a proper human right instead of bringing out urgent decrees to cover only 
the most extreme cases.
27  Colau and Alemany (n 6).
28  See Report of the United Nations Special Housing Rapporteur Raquel Rolnick, A/
HRC/10/7, of 4 February 2009 on the economic crisis, and Report A/67/286 of 10 August 
2012 on financing housing policy.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Chapter 5 
Housing Rights in Europe: The Council of 
Europe Leads the Way
Padraic Kenna and Mark Jordan
Introduction
In global terms, housing is Europe1 is widely regarded as among the best developed 
and with the highest standards. Yet, among the population of the European Union 
(EU) Member States, which numbers some 500 million, approximately six per cent 
suffered from severe housing deprivation in 2009, while some 30 million people 
suffered from both lack of space and poor housing conditions. The most frequent 
problems were noise from the neighbourhood (22.2 per cent), overcrowding (17.8 
per cent) and pollution, crime or other environmental problems (16.5 per cent). 
In addition, 12.2 per cent of people in the EU lived in households affected by 
high housing costs.2 Direct state housing provision for low-income households 
continues to diminish and some states are unable to dedicate any resources 
1  It is important to differentiate between the European Union with its 28 Member 
States and the Council of Europe. The 28 EU Member States are Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, 
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, 
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the UK. The Council of 
Europe includes all 28 EU Member States and 20 more, including the Russian Federation, 
Georgia, Azerbeijan, etc. See Council of Europe, ‘About the Council of Europe’ http://
www.coe.int/T/e/Com/about_coe accessed 31 July 2013, which gives a brief summary of 
the Council, its history and its aims. 
2  See A Rybkowska and M Schneider, Statistics in Focus, Population and Social 
Conditions (Eurostat 2011) In 2008, the EU adopted the Regulation establishing common 
rules for the decennial provision of comprehensive data on population and housing, 
establishing a common set of housing topics to be collated by Member States. Regulation 
EC 763/2008, 13 August 2008, OJ L218/14. See also Regulation (EC) No 315/2006 of 22 
February 2006 implementing Regulation (EC) No 1177/2003 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council concerning Community statistics on income and living conditions 
(EU-SILC) as regards the list of target secondary variables relating to housing conditions. 
‘Severe deprivation’ is defined the percentage of the population living in a dwelling which 
is considered to be overcrowded and with at least one of the following three housing 
situations: (1) a leaking roof, or damp walls, floors, foundations, or rot in window frames or 
floor; (2) neither a bath, nor a shower, nor an indoor flushing toilet; or (3) too dark. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
116
towards social housing. Homelessness has risen across the EU as the economic 
and financial crisis has persisted.3 Similarly, the extent of material deprivation or 
‘the inability to live a decent life’ has increased dramatically in some EU Member 
States such as Greece, the Baltic States, Ireland and Spain since 2008.4
In 2010, the European Commission launched the ‘Europe 2020 Strategy’, 
primarily to encourage economic growth out of the contemporary crisis and prepare 
the EU economy for the next decade. The Strategy contained an EU poverty target, 
which is defined as follows: ‘promoting social inclusion, in particular through the 
reduction of poverty, by aiming to lift at least 20 million people out of the risk of 
poverty and exclusion’.5 However, it is noticeable that the concept of a ‘Social 
Europe’ or a major commitment to social cohesion no longer appears in official 
documents. Meanwhile, the European Parliament has stated that ‘homelessness 
continues to affect people in all EU Member States and is an unacceptable 
violation of human rights’.6 It is becoming clear that as the EU abandons much of 
its commitment to social cohesion and a ‘Social Europe’, those who are excluded 
from markets will rely more on social and economic rights to achieve access to the 
resources which lead to a ‘decent existence’.
Housing rights are growing in significance in the context of homelessness, 
poor-quality housing, access and affordability problems, and social segregation 
across Europe. The right to adequate housing has been accepted by all European 
states (both EU and non-EU) under the international instruments of the United 
Nations and the Council of Europe. States guarantee to secure for certain categories 
of people in their jurisdictions a minimum standard of adequate housing and the 
prevention and reduction of homelessness.7
To date, EU law has not focused directly on housing or indeed housing rights. 
Instead, the Council of Europe has led the way. The Council, which was established 
in 1949 and now has 47 Member States, promotes housing rights through the 
3  See European Commission, Research Note 8/2011, Homelessness During the Crisis 
(Brussels, Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion, European Commission 2011).
4  European Commission, EU Employment and Social Situation, Quarterly Review 
(Brussels, European Commission, June 2012) 48. See also Padraic Kenna, ‘Globalization 
and Housing Rights’ (2008) 15(2) Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies 397.
5  For an evaluation of the open method of coordination in the field of social inclusion 
and consideration of the new ‘Europe 2020’ strategy, see H Frazer, E Marlier and I Nicaise 
, A Social Inclusion Roadmap for Europe 2020 (Antwerp, Garant 2010).
6  See Declaration of the European Parliament of 16 December 2010 on an EU 
homelessness strategy, EP T7-0499/2010.
7  In a significant development in December 2010, some 391 Members of the European 
Parliament signed a written declaration stating that homelessness is an unacceptable 
violation of fundamental human rights and calling on the Council of Ministers to end street 
homelessness by 2015. See Declaration of the European Parliament of 16 December 2010 
on an EU homelessness strategy, P7_TA-PROV(2010)0499. 

Housing Rights in Europe
117
European Social Charter and the Revised Charter,8 and in an oblique way through 
its European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms (ECHR).9 Through its novel Collective Complaints system, it enables 
international and some national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to 
submit complaints concerning Member States which are not satisfactorily applying 
their adopted Charter provisions. This process is leading to the development of  
a new jurisprudence on defining the elements of housing rights in a wider 
European context.
Significantly, with the adoption of the now-binding Charter of Fundamental 
Rights of the Lisbon Treaty, on matters of interpretation of EU law, the jurisprudence 
of the Council of Europe with regard to rights to social and housing assurance will 
be a source of law. Of course, this may result in a parallel and inconsistent housing 
rights jurisprudence between EU and Council of Europe Member States, but in 
any case, there is now a new synergy developing in this area.
The Council of Europe and Housing Rights
The European Social Charter is a Council of Europe treaty  which guarantees 
social and economic human rights.10 It was adopted in 1961 and was revised in 
8  Turin, 18 October 1961, Council of Europe, European Treaty Series – No 35; 
European Social Charter (Revised), Council of Europe, Strasbourg, 3 May 1996. The 
binding nature at the national level of the Charters depends on whether a dualist or monist 
legal system pertains, but many dualist states have incorporated the Charter (or parts of it) 
into national law. A total of 43 states have ratified the Charter (either the 1961 Charter or 
its revised version). Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, 
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, 
Romania, the Russian Federation, Serbia, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 
the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, the UK and Ukraine have signed and 
ratified the Social Charter or the Revised Charter. The four states which have signed but not 
yet ratified the Charter are Lichtenstein, Monaco, San Marino and Switzerland.
9  The Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe, Mr Thomas 
Hammarberg, clarified the legal protection of housing rights, obstacles and gaps in their 
implementation, with recommendations on how these rights are to be realized. See Housing 
Rights: The Duty to Ensure Housing for All, CommDH/IssuePaper (2008) 1 Strasbourg, 
25 April 2008  https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1292391&Site=CommDH accessed 20 
April 2013.
10  The Treaty of London (1949), which established the Council of Europe, had as its 
foundation the aim of greater unity among the signatory states. Article 1(b) of the Treaty 
sets out that ‘greater unity will be pursued through the organs of the Council by discussion 
of questions of common concern and by agreements and common action in economic, 
social, cultural, scientific, legal and administrative matters and in the maintenance and 
further realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms’. In this manner, the Treaty of 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
118
1996.11 The Revised Charter (RESC) came into force in 1999 and is gradually 
replacing the initial 1961 Charter. The revisions, which began during the 1990s, 
were designed to revitalize the Charter by re-designing the reporting system and 
adding a number of new social and economic rights including the express right 
to housing set out in Article 31 of the RESC. In 1995, the Council adopted a 
Protocol to the Charter that provides for a collective complaint mechanism as an 
additional compliance procedure.12 States have discretion over which provisions 
of the Charter they agree to; however, once a state ratifies and signs the Charter, 
it has committed itself to the effective realization of a number of human rights. 
To date, the RESC has been signed by all 47 Member States of the Council of 
Europe, 43 of which have ratified the Charter, although only 15 have accepted 
the appurtenant collective complaint supervisory procedure which was introduced 
with the Revisions of 1996. The rights enshrined within the Charter include the 
right to housing, health, education, employment, legal and social protection, free 
movement of persons and freedom from discrimination.
States which sign and ratify the European Social Charter and RESC, with its 
31 Articles on socio-economic rights, accept as the aim of their policies, to be 
pursued by all appropriate means, both national and international in character, the 
attainment of conditions in which the rights and principles within the Charters may 
be effectively realized without discrimination.13 The Charters establish housing 
obligations in relation to physically and mentally disabled persons,14 children and 
young persons,15 and rights to social, legal and economic protection for families, 
London put in place the foundation for both the European Convention for the Protection of 
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms 1950 and the European Social Charter of 1961.
11  See the Council of Europe website http://www.coe.int/T/DGHL/Monitoring/
SocialCharter accessed 21 April 2013.
12  Additional Protocol to the European Social Charter Providing for a System of 
Collective Complaints, ETS No 158; 34 ILM (1995) 1453; and Basic Documents, at 451.
13  Part V of art E of the Charter states: ‘The enjoyment of the rights set forth in this 
Charter shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as race, colour, sex, 
language, religion, political or other opinion, national extraction or social origin, health, 
association with a national minority, birth or other status.’ States Parties have to accept 
at least six of the nine articles of the ‘hard core’ provisions of the Charter (arts 1 (right 
to work), 5 (freedom of association), 6 (collective bargaining), 7 (right of children and 
young persons to protection), 12 (right to social security), 13 (right to social and medical 
assistance), 16 (right of the family to social, legal and economic protection), 19 (right of 
migrant workers and their families to protection) and 20 (right to equal opportunities and 
equal treatment in matters of employment and occupation without discrimination on the 
grounds of sex), and select an additional number of articles or numbered paragraphs to 
be bound by. The total number of articles or numbered paragraphs by which every state is 
bound is not less than 16 articles or 63 numbered paragraphs.
14  Article 15.
15  Article 17.

Housing Rights in Europe
119
including a state obligation to provide family housing.16 The Social Charters grant 
migrant workers an explicit right to be treated equally in relation to access to 
housing.17 Article 23 sets out the right of elderly persons to provision of housing 
suited to their needs and their state of health.18 Article 30 obliges ratifying states to 
ensure the exercise of the rights to protection against poverty and social exclusion 
within the framework of an overall and coordinated approach. The significant 
references to rights to adequate housing are set out in Article 31(1):
With a view to ensuring the effective exercise of the right to housing, the Parties 
undertake to take measures designed:
1.	 to promote access to housing of an adequate standard;
2.	 to prevent and reduce homelessness with a view to its gradual elimination;
3.	 to make the price of housing accessible to those without adequate resources.19
Monitoring and the Collective Complaints System
The ECSR monitors states’ compliance with the Charter through regular reports 
from states and the Collective Complaints system.20 It ascertains whether there  
16  Article 16 on the right of the family to social, legal and economic protection states: 
‘With a view to ensuring the necessary conditions for the full development of the family, 
which is a fundamental unit of society, the Contracting Parties undertake to promote the 
economic, legal and social protection of family life by such means as social and family 
benefits, fiscal arrangements, provision of family housing, benefits for the newly married, 
and other appropriate means.’
17  Article 19. 
18  Article 23. 
19  States which ratified art 31(1) on 26 March 2013 were Andorra, Finland, 
France, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, 
Turkey and Ukraine. See http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/socialcharter/Presentation/
ProvisionTableRevMarch2013_en.pdf accessed 19 August 2013.
20  The mission of the ECSR is to judge that States Parties are in conformity in law 
and in practice with the provisions of the European Social Charter. In respect of national 
reports, the Committee adopts conclusions and in respect of collective complaints,  
it adopts decisions. The Committee is composed of 15 independent, impartial experts, 
elected by the Council of the Europe Committee of Ministers for a six-year term of office, 
which is renewable once. The ECSR issues a set of questions to states in preparation  
of periodic monitoring reports and in relation to Article 31(1), the following questions 
are raised: ‘Please describe the obligatory standards that apply in relation to housing 
quality. Please provide information on the extent to which sub-standard dwellings  
exist. Please indicate what measures are taken to improve housing standards, especially 
in public-owned housing stock. Please describe the means by which compliance  
with housing standards is ensured in practice.’ See R Brillat, ‘The Supervisory 
Machinery of ECS: Recent Developments and their Impact’ in G De Búrca and B De 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
120
has been satisfactory application of the Charter by reviewing the materials 
submitted by the signatory states in regular monitoring reports. These are 
conducted through regular monitoring cycles of adopted articles, and Conclusions 
are issued by the ECSR setting out the results of its examination. This process  
has been supplemented since 1996 by the Collective Complaints system.
The Council of Europe Additional Protocol of 199521 providing for a system 
of Collective Complaints laid the foundations for an additional supervisory 
mechanism which sought to improve the effective enforcement of the social and 
economic rights guaranteed by the Charter.22 Article 1 of the Protocol specifies 
that organizations of employers or trade unions and accredited international 
and some NGOs only can submit Complaints to the ECSR. The complaint file 
must contain details concerning the complainant organization, an indication 
concerning the provisions of the Charter that have allegedly been violated and the 
subject matter of the complaint. In this respect, some evidence must be presented 
to support the alleged violation.23 Once the ECSR has determined admissibility, 
it will proceed to examine the merits of the complaint in light of the arguments 
made by the concerned parties.
Based on these procedures, the ECSR can conclude that there has been an 
unsatisfactory application of the Charter. The ECSR ‘shall draw up a report in 
which it shall describe the steps taken by it to examine the complaint and present 
its conclusions as to whether or not the Contracting Party [state] concerned has 
Witte (eds), Social Rights in Europe. (Oxford, OUP 2005); R Churchill and U Khaliq, 
‘The Collective Complaints System of the European Social Charter – An Effective 
Mechanism for Ensuring Compliance with Economic and Social Rights?’ (2004) 15 
European Journal of International Law 417; H Cullen, ‘The Collective Complaints 
System of the European Social Charter: Interpretative Methods of the European 
Committee of Social Rights’ (2009) 9(1) Human Rights Law Review 61–93. Significant 
housing-related Collective Complaints include Autism-Europe v France (n 27); ERRC 
v Greece (n 22); ERRC v Italy (n 34); ERRC v Bulgaria (n 20); and Complaint 51/2008 
European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC) v France. For summaries of the decisions on the 
merits of collective complaints registered between 1998 and 2010, see http://www.coe.
int/t/dghl/monitoring/socialcharter/ComplaintSummaries/CCSummariesMerits2012_
en.pdf accessed 21 April 2013.
21  Additional Protocol to the European Social Charter Providing for a System of 
Collective Complaints, ETS No 158.
22  See Complaint No 1/1998, where the ECSR considered that the object of the system 
of collective complaints, ‘which is different in nature from the procedure of examining 
national reports, is to allow the Committee to make a legal assessment of the situation of a 
State in the light of the information supplied by the complaint and the adversarial procedure 
to which it gives rise’ ([10]).
23  It would appear that the evidentiary requirements are not extensive at the 
admissibility stage; see Complaint No 5/1999. However, Complaints have been declared 
inadmissible at the subsequent merits stage due to a lack of evidence; see Complaint No 
2/1999. See also Churchill and Khaliq (n 49) 456.

Housing Rights in Europe
121
ensured the satisfactory application of the provision of the Charter referred to in 
the complaint’.24 This report shall be transmitted to the Committee of Ministers 
of the Council of Europe, the organisation which lodged the complaint and 
the state concerned. It must be transmitted to the Parliamentary Assembly of 
the Council of Europe and published within four weeks after being sent to the 
Committee of Ministers.25
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe ‘shall adopt by a majority 
of two-thirds of those voting, a recommendation addressed to the Contracting 
Party [state] concerned’.26 The state concerned ‘shall provide information on the 
measures it has taken to give effect to the Committee of Ministers’ recommendation, 
in the next report which it submits’.27 In this way, the complaint by an NGO can 
ultimately result in the Committee of Ministers examining the measures taken by 
a state which has unsatisfactorily applied some rights of the Charter.
In terms of the success of complaints, only four were held to be inadmissable 
between 1998 and 2010;28 as such, the majority of complaints proceed to the merits 
stage. To date, at the merits stage there have been 13 complaints where there has 
been a finding of non-violation of the Charter29 and eight complaints where there 
has been a partial violation,30 and in the remainder there have been findings of an 
unsatisfactory application of the Charter. As such, it is clear that the majority of 
Collective Complaints have revealed a violation of the Charter, a situation which 
perhaps would not have been revealed via the cyclical reporting procedure alone. 
In this way, the Collective Complaints procedure represents a robust mechanism 
of examining state obligations under the RESC. It can be argued that the Collective 
Complaints procedure has revitalized the Charter by, for example, allowing greater 
specification in supervision by the ECSR and increased participation.31 However, 
  
24  Additional Protocol to the European Social Charter Providing for a System of 
Collective Complaints, ETS No 158, art 8.
25  ibid.
26  ibid art 9.
27  ibid art 10.
28  These are Complaint No 3/1999, Complaint No 28/2004, Complaint No 29/2005 
and Complaint No 36/2006.
29  These are Complaint No 2/1999, Complaint No 11/2001, Complaint No 23/2003, 
Complaint No 14/2003, Complaint No 19/2003, Complaint No 20/2003, Complaint 
No 25/2004, Complaint No 26/2004, Complaint No 37/2006, Complaint No 42/2007, 
Complaint No 40/2007, Complaint No 43/2007 and Complaint No 50/2008.
30  These are Complaint No 6/1999, Complaint No 9/2000, Complaint No 12/2002, 
Complaint No 16/2003, Complaint No 22/2003, Complaint No 24/2004, Complaint No 
30/2005 and Complaint No 45/2007.
31  See Brillat (n 49) 34, where it was set out that the ECSR, as a result of the Charter, 
has assumed a quasi-judicial function.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
122
the mechanism is not without its detractors.32 Robust criticism has been levied at 
the discretion left to ratifying states over whether or not to accept the Collective 
Complaints procedure. This discretion has resulted in only 14 of the 47 Member 
States of the Council of Europe ratifying the Collective Complaints Protocol and, 
as such, has limited the remit of the mechanism accordingly.33 Nevertheless, to 
date (26 September, 2013) already 101 Collective complaints were lodged, the 
trend towards increasing popularity of the complaint procedure is apparent.34 With 
regard to the spread of complaints the housing-related complaints, Article 31 (15 
complaints) and Article 16 (18 complaints) are the most litigated provisions of the 
Charter after Article E (20 complaints).
Indeed, it has been argued that the system ‘provides an opportunity for 
non-governmental bodies to try to persuade the ECSR towards the progressive 
development of standards’.35 When viewed in light of the functional overlap which 
exists between provisions within the Charter, this characteristic of the Collective 
Complaints procedure could present significant challenges to the legitimacy of the 
Charter, as states could be caught by obligations arising from provisions which 
they have not accented.
The European Committee of Social Rights (ECSR) (described below), which 
monitors the application of the Charter by states, has clarified the meaning of the 
term ‘adequate’ housing within Article 31(1) in a number of Conclusions and within a 
number of Decisions on Collective Complaints. In this context, it is significant that the 
ESCR has held in ERRC v Bulgaria36 that Articles 16 and 31 of the Charter overlap. 
This is important because to date only 13 countries have accepted the provisions of 
Article 31 and as a result the overlap has played a key role in helping to protect the 
right to housing by using Article 16, which has been more widely accepted:
The Committee considers that, as many other provisions of the Charter, Articles 
16 and 31, though different in personal and material scope, partially overlap 
with respect to several aspects of the right to housing. In this respect, the notions 
of adequate housing and forced eviction are identical under Articles 16 and 31.
32  See Churchill and Khaliq (n 51) 456 for a detailed analysis of the Collective 
Complaints procedure.
33  These states are Belgium, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Finland, France, 
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Sweden. See http://
conventions.coe.int/Treaty/Commun/ChercheSig.asp?NT=158&CM=8&DF=&CL=ENG.
34  At time of writing, the final complaint published on the Council of Europe website 
is Complaint No 82/2012 Comité européen d’action spécialisée pour l’Enfant et la Famille 
dans leur milieu de vie (EUROCEF) v France.
35  See Churchill and Khaliq (n 49) 450, where the authors identify that ‘the collective 
complaints system importantly, however, provides an opportunity for non-governmental 
bodies to try to persuade the ECSR towards the progressive development of standards’.
36  Complaint No 31/2005 European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC) v Bulgaria [17].

Housing Rights in Europe
123
Thus, the interpretation of the obligations of Article 16 of the Charter on the 
rights of families to social, legal and economic protection encompasses a right 
to adequate housing.37
Article 16 in its very wording of the Charter (the English version, which 
clarifies the French version) provides for the right to housing of families as an 
element of the right of the family to social, legal and economic protection. The 
Committee has already given an interpretation of the notion of the right to housing 
under Article 16. It summarized this interpretation in its decision on the ERRC v 
Greece complaint as follows: 
The Committee recalls its previous case law to the effect that in order to satisfy 
Article 16 states must promote the provision of an adequate supply of housing 
for families, take the needs of families into account in housing policies and 
ensure that existing housing be of an adequate standard and include essential 
services (such as heating and electricity). The Committee has stated that adequate 
housing refers not only to a dwelling which must not be sub-standard and must 
have essential amenities, but also to a dwelling of suitable size considering the 
composition of the family in residence. Furthermore the obligation to promote 
and provide housing extends to security from unlawful eviction.38
The jurisprudence of the ECSR in relation to Article 16 is, of course, relevant to 
the application of these standards of adequacy only to families.39 In relation to the 
definition of ‘family’, the ECSR has pointed out that the protection afforded in 
this provision covers single-parent families. The definition may also be enlarged 
37  Council of Europe states which ratified art 16 on 26 March 2013 are: Austria, 
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, 
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Montenegro, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, the Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine and the UK. See http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/
socialcharter/Presentation/ProvisionTableRevMarch2013_en.pdf accessed 12 March 2013.
38  Complaint No 15/2003 European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC) v Greece [16].
39  However, it was established in Complaint No 47/2008 DCI v The Netherlands that 
States Parties must make sure that evictions are justified and are carried out in conditions 
that respect the dignity of the persons concerned, and must make alternative accommodation 
available. In this case, the ECSR held that ‘since in the case of unlawfully present persons 
no alternative accommodation may be required by States, eviction from shelter should be 
banned as it would place the persons concerned, particularly children, in a situation of 
extreme helplessness which is contrary to the respect for their human dignity’. Therefore: 
‘On the basis of the above, the Committee concludes that States Parties are required, under 
Article 31§2 of the Revised Charter, to provide adequate shelter to children unlawfully 
present in their territory for as long as they are in their jurisdiction. Any other solution 
would run counter to the respect for their human dignity and would not take due account of 
the particularly vulnerable situation of children’ ([64]).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
124
by reference to the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) 
in relation to Article 8, which states that ‘Everyone has the right to respect for his 
private and family life, his home and his correspondence’:40
Since ‘family’ can mean different things in different places and at different times, 
the Charter refers to the definitions used in national law. No distinction is made 
between the various models of family and, in keeping with the case law of the 
European Court of Human Rights in relation to Article 8 of the Convention; the 
scope of Article 16 is not restricted to family based on marriage. Consequently, 
every constellation defined as ‘family’ by national law falls under the protection 
of Article 16. States enjoy a margin of appreciation to choose the means in their 
endeavour to ensure the social, legal and economic protection of the various 
types of families that can be found in the population.41
Thus, some 3942 ratifying states have accepted the obligations of ensuring that 
existing and new housing for families must be of an adequate standard under the 
Articles 16 and 31 of the Charter, and this definition has wider implications than 
just the standard of the dwelling. It is important to examine how the ECSR has 
treated this definition in detail to clarify the obligations of these 39 states.43 For 
example, in Autism-Europe v France, the ECSR stated that:
The Committee recalls, as stated in its decision relative to Complaint No.1/1998 
(International Commission of Jurist v. Portugal, § 32), that the implementation 
of the Charter requires the State Parties to take not merely legal action but 
also practical action to give full effect to the rights recognised in the Charter. 
When the achievement of one of the rights in question is exceptionally complex 
and particularly expensive to resolve, a State Party must take measures that 
40  The ECtHR has interpreted family as including those with close family ties, although 
there is no pre-determined model of a family or family life. It includes any stable relationship, 
be it married, unmarried, engaged or de facto, between parents and children, same-sex couples, 
siblings, grandparents and grandchildren. See Schalk and Kopf v Austria (Application No 
31041/04), Judgment 24 June 2010, where the ECtHR held that a same-sex couple living in 
a stable de facto relationship fell within the notion of ‘family life’. See also Kozak v Poland 
(Application No 13102/02), Judgment 2 March 2010; Keegan v Ireland (1994) 18 EHRR 342; 
Marckx v Belgium (1979) 2 EHRR 330. In Kroon and others v The Netherlands (Application 
No 18535/91), Judgment 27 October 1994, the ECtHR held that the notion of ‘family life’ in 
art 8 was not solely confined to marriage-based relationships and might encompass other de 
facto ‘family ties’, such as where parties are living together outside marriage.
41  Conclusions 2006, Statement of Interpretation on Article 16, 13. 
42  28 countries ratified Article 16 of RESC and 10 countries ratified Article 16 of 
ESC and 1 country (Andorra) didn’t ratified Article 16, but ratified Article 31.
43  See Digest of the Case Law of the European Committee of Social Rights, Council 
of Europe (September 2008). Conclusions of the ECSR are available at: http://hudoc.esc.
coe.int/esc2008/query.asp?language=en accessed 3 March 2013.

Housing Rights in Europe
125
allow it to achieve the objectives of the Charter within a reasonable time, with 
measurable progress and to an extent consistent with the maximum use of 
available resources. States Parties must be particularly mindful of the impact 
that their choices will have for groups with heightened vulnerabilities as well as 
for others persons affected including, especially, their families on whom falls the 
heaviest burden in the event of institutional shortcomings.44
In Autism Europe v France, the ECSR established that the measures taken to 
implement the Charter Articles must meet three criteria: (i) a reasonable timeframe; 
(ii) a measurable progress; and (iii) a financing consistent with the maximum 
use of available resources.45 In FEANTSA v France, the ECSR pointed out that 
the implementation of the rights to housing must be monitored as well as their 
impact. Reasonable deadlines must be set and Article 31 must be considered in 
the light of other international housing rights instruments such as the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICECSR) and the ECHR as 
well, particularly Article 846:
The Committee notes that in several areas the Government fails to supply 
relevant statistical information or does not compare identified needs with the 
resources made available and results achieved. Regular checks do not appear to 
be carried out on the effectiveness of the policies applied. In the absence of any 
commitment to or means of measuring the practical impact of measures taken, the 
rights specified in the Charter are likely to remain ineffective. In connection with 
timetabling – with which other regulatory bodies of international instruments are 
also very concerned – it is essential for reasonable deadlines to be set that take 
account not only of administrative constraints but also of the needs of groups 
that fall into the urgent category. At all events, achievement of the goals that the 
authorities have set themselves cannot be deferred indefinitely. The authorities 
must also pay particular attention to the impact of their policy choices on the 
most vulnerable groups, in this case individuals and families suffering exclusion 
and poverty (Autisme Europe v France, Complaint No 13/2002, decision on the 
merits of 4 November 2003, §53).
On the interpretation of Article 31 in the light of other international instruments
The Committee considers that Article 31 must be considered in the light of 
relevant international instruments that served as inspiration for its authors or in 
conjunction with which it needs to be applied.47
44  Complaint No 13/2002 Autism-Europe v France [53].
45  ibid. 
46  Complaint No. 33/2006 (paras. 68−69): ‘The Committee is particularly concerned 
that its interpretation of Article 31 is fully in line with the European Court of Human Rights’ 
interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Convention’.
47  Complaint No 39/2006 FEANTSA v France [61]–[64].

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
126
Again, in FEANTSA v France, the ECSR also pointed out that the obligation of 
states in realizing the rights in the Charter must be practical and effective:
The Committee agrees that the actual wording of Article 31 of the Charter 
cannot be interpreted as imposing on states an obligation of ‘results’. However, 
it notes that the rights recognised in the Social Charter must take a practical 
and effective, rather than purely theoretical, form (International Commission of 
Jurists v Portugal, Complaint No. 1/1998, decision on the merits of 9 September 
1999, §32). This means that, for the situation to be compatible with the treaty, 
states party must:
a. adopt the necessary legal, financial and operational means of ensuring steady 
progress towards achieving the goals laid down by the Charter;
b. maintain meaningful statistics on needs, resources and results;
c. undertake regular reviews of the impact of the strategies adopted;
d. establish a timetable and not defer indefinitely the deadline for achieving the 
objectives of each stage;
e. pay close attention to the impact of the policies adopted on each of the 
categories of persons concerned, particularly the most vulnerable.48
The ECSR has set out detailed housing obligations arising from the Charter in 
relation to the definition and scope of the term ‘adequacy’ of housing.
Definition and Material Scope
States must guarantee to everyone the right to adequate housing.49 They should 
promote access to housing in particular to the different groups of vulnerable 
persons, such as low-income persons, unemployed persons, single-parent 
households, young persons and persons with disabilities, including those with 
mental health problems.50
The definition of adequate housing must be applied not only to new 
constructions, but also gradually to the existing housing stock. It must also be 
applied to housing available for rent as well as to owner-occupied housing.51
48  ibid [55]–[56].
49  Conclusions 2003, France, 221. Of course, this does not require that states directly 
provide housing for all. However, states must ensure that there is a sufficient supply of 
adequate and affordable housing to meet the varying needs. Sufficient social housing or 
housing allowances must be provided for those unable to access adequate and affordable 
housing in the purchase or rental markets. See M Mikkola, Social Human Rights in Europe 
(Helsinki, Legisactio Oy 2010) 348.
50  Conclusions 2003, Italy, 342.
51  Conclusions 2003, France, 221; FEANTSA v France (n 29) [77].

Housing Rights in Europe
127
Habitability and Standards
In ERRC v Italy,52 the ECSR emphasized the obligations of adequacy under Article 
31(1), which means a dwelling that is structurally secure, safe from a sanitary and 
health perspective (i.e. possesses all basic amenities, such as water, heating, waste 
disposal, sanitation facilities and electricity), not overcrowded and with secure 
tenure supported by law. There are overlaps here with the minimum standards 
established under the Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human 
Rights, where the protection of life, prevention of inhuman and degrading treatment, 
and respect for home and family life have established minimalist benchmarks.53
The notion of ‘adequate housing’ must be defined in law. It means:
1. a dwelling which is safe from a sanitary and health point of view, i.e. that 
possesses all basic amenities, such as water, heating, waste disposal, sanitation 
facilities, electricity, etc and where specific dangers such as the presence of lead 
or asbestos are under control;54
2. a dwelling which is not over-crowded, that the size of the dwelling must be 
suitable in light of the number of persons and the composition of the household 
in residence;
3. a dwelling with secure tenure supported by the law. This issue is covered by 
Article 31§2.55
In FEANTSA v France, the ECSR pointed out that it attaches great importance 
to General Comments 4 and 7 of the UN Committee on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights.56 Thus, the obligations established under the General Comments 
(outlined above) will apply to the evaluation of compliance with Article 31 and 
Article 16 of the Charter.
Suitability
Suitability is often related to size, surroundings, size, location, etc., as well as 
cultural factors, and the standards of General Comment 4 will be applicable. The 
52  Complaint No 27/2004 European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC) v Italy.
53  See, for example, Öneryıldız v Turkey (2004) 39 EHRR 12; Moldovan v Romania 
(2005) 44 EHRR 16; Lopez Ostra v Spain (1991) 14 EHRR 319; Geurra v Italy (1998) 
EHRR 357; Moreno-Gomez v Spain (2005) 41 EHRR 40.
54  In 2007 the ECSR requested further information from Italy on levels of asbestos: 
‘In order to decide whether the situation is in conformity with the Revised Charter, the 
Committee asks for detailed information in the next report on the measures taken as well as 
their effectiveness. It also reiterates its request for information on the control of exposure to 
lead and asbestos.’ See Conclusions 2007, Italy, Vol 2.
55  Conclusions 2003, France, 221.
56  FEANTSA v France (n 29) [67].

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
128
Committee emphasized cultural adequacy in the Complaint No. 61/2010 (paras. 
49-50): ‘The Committee held that social housing offered to Roma should be, as far 
as possible, culturally suited to them. Re-housing of Roma families in apartment 
blocks has often prevented family and casual gatherings, given that their means of 
existence as a community and bonds of solidarity are broken. Moreover, they are 
also faced with hostile attitudes of neighbours in apartment blocks’.
Effectiveness and Enforcement
It is incumbent on the public authorities to ensure that housing is adequate 
through different measures such as, in particular, an inventory of the housing 
stock, injunctions against owners who disregard obligations, urban development 
rules and maintenance obligations for landlords. Public authorities must also 
act to limit the interruption of essential services such as water, electricity and 
telecommunications.57
Even if under domestic law, local or regional authorities, trade unions or 
professional organizations are responsible for exercising a particular function, 
States Parties to the Charter are responsible, under their international obligations, 
to ensure that such responsibilities are properly exercised. Thus, ultimate 
responsibility for policy implementation, involving at a minimum the supervision 
and regulation of local action, lies with the government, which must be able to 
show that both local authorities and itself have taken practical steps to ensure that 
local action is effective.58 Indeed, in COHRE v Croatia,59 it was stated that:
In respect of the adequacy of the housing and tenure provided to families 
who have returned or wish to return to Croatia, the Committee holds that the 
complainant organisation has not produced sufficient evidence to establish that 
the quality of housing provided under the housing programme does not fulfil 
Article 16.
In every European country, there is a building regulatory system encompassing 
the building regulations and the building control system. Building regulations 
set minimum quality requirements to ensure that buildings are safe, healthy, 
energy-efficient and accessible to everyone who lives and works in and around 
them. Building control aims to guarantee the application and enforcement of these 
minimum requirements. The purpose and the subjects covered by the building 
regulations are identical in EU Member States. However, there are many differences 
57  Conclusions 2003, France, 224.
58  ERRC v Italy (n 34) [26]; FEANTSA v France (n 33) [79]. 
59  Complaint No 52/2008 COHRE v Croatia, Decision on the Merits, 22 June 2010 
[76]. This Complaint under Article 16 related to the failure to provide adequate restitution 
or compensation to ethnic Serbs who were arbitrarily expelled from their homes during the 
conflict in former Yugoslavia. 

Housing Rights in Europe
129
between countries regarding who sets the building regulations, how the technical 
building regulations are organized and formulated, what the role of national 
standards comprises and how building regulations apply to existing buildings.60
The effectiveness of the right to adequate housing requires its legal protection 
through adequate procedural safeguards. Occupiers must have access to affordable 
and impartial legal and non-legal remedies.61 Any appeal procedure must be 
effective.62 The ECSR held that insufficient progress as regards the eradication 
of substandard housing and the lack of proper amenities of a large number of 
households constitutes a violation of Article 31(1) of the RESC.63
Temporary Accommodation
The adequacy of emergency housing or shelters has also been examined by the 
ECSR. In ERRC v Bulgaria, the ECSR again emphasized that the temporary 
supply of shelter cannot be considered as adequate and that individuals should 
be provided with adequate housing within a reasonable period.64 In France v 
FEANTSA, the ESCR held that:
As regards living conditions in sheltering facilities, the Committee believes 
these should be such as to enable living in keeping with human dignity, and 
that support should be routinely offered to help the persons within the facilities 
to attain the greatest possible degree of independence. It also recalls that the 
temporary provision of accommodation, even decent accommodation, cannot be 
considered a satisfactory solution, and people living under such conditions must 
be offered housing of an adequate standard within a reasonable time.65
The ECSR considered that it would be positive if the conversion of homeless 
shelters into around-the-clock structures became a general practice, and that any 
offer of accommodation in them should lead in the short or medium term to an 
independent housing solution.66
60  See JB Pedro, F Meijer and H Visscher, ‘Comparison of Tasks and Responsibilities 
in the Building Control Systems of European Union Countries’ in Proceedings of COBRA 
2008 (London, RICS 2008) 1339–55; F Meijer, H Visscher and L Sheridan, Building 
Regulations in Europe, Parts I & 2: A Comparison of the Systems of Building Control in 
Eight European Countries (Delft, Delft University Press 2002).
61  Conclusions 2003, France, 224. 
62  FEANTSA v France (n 29) [80]–[81]. 
63  ibid [81].
64  ibid [34].
65  ibid [108].
66  ibid [109].

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
130
A Functional Overlap between the Articles
The ECSR has, during the Collective Complaints procedure, consistently set out 
that the overlap between provisions of the RESC is a key functional aspect of 
the Charter. In practice the ECSR will interpret ESC rights separately from one 
another, and non-ratification of one ESC right will not prevent related obligations 
arising under another right. In FIDH v Belgium,67 the Belgian government, during 
the submissions on the merits, directly challenged this principle of overlap with 
regard to Articles 16 and 31 of the RESC.
As such, the operation of this overlap has been cast in the spotlight. In Mental 
Disability Advocacy Centre (MDAC) v Bulgaria,68 a complaint was registered 
which related to Article 17(2) (the right of children and young persons to social, 
legal and economic protection) and Article E (non-discrimination) of the RESC. 
It was alleged that children living in homes for mentally disabled children in 
Bulgaria received no education. The government argued that the case related to 
Article 15(1) of the RESC, since it covered the right of persons with disabilities, 
an article that Bulgaria had not accepted, but not the right of children and young 
people to social, legal and economic protection provided for by Article 17(2), as 
the MDAC maintained. The ECSR addressed the argument that the complaint was 
founded on a provision which the government had not accepted, i.e. Article 15, by 
setting out that:
The Charter was conceived as a whole and all its provisions complement 
each other and overlap in part. It is impossible to draw watertight divisions 
between the material scope of each article or paragraph. It therefore falls to the 
Committee to ensure at the same time that obligations are not imposed on States 
stemming from provisions they did not intend to accept and that the essential 
core of accepted provisions is not amputated as a result of the fact it may contain 
obligations which may also result from unaccepted provisions.69
From MDAC v Bulgaria, it is quite clear that an overlap exists between provisions 
of the RESC and that the Committee has discretion over the parameters of this 
67  Complaint No 62/2010 International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH) v 
Belgium.
68  Complaint No 41/2007 Mental Disability Advocacy Center (MDAC) v Bulgaria.
69  See ibid, decision on admissibility, 27 June 2007, §9, where the Committee of 
Social Ministers set out that: ‘The Charter was conceived as a whole and all its provisions 
complement each other and overlap in part. It is impossible to draw watertight divisions 
between the material scope of each article or paragraph. It therefore falls to the Committee 
to ensure at the same time that obligations are not imposed on States stemming from 
provisions they did not intend to accept and that the essential core of accepted provisions is 
not amputated as a result of the fact it may contain obligations which may also result from 
unaccepted provisions.’

Housing Rights in Europe
131
overlap. The ECSR administers this discretion in the light of competing concerns 
of granting efficacy to the provisions of the Charter while also ensuring that the 
legitimacy of the Charter is not harmed in the process. In light of the progressive 
nature of the Collective Complaints procedure, this overlap can present 
significant challenges for the ECSR.70 However, in this respect, the ECSR must 
administer the discretion identified in MDAC v Bulgaria with care. The danger 
is that an unprincipled discretion in considering the overlap between provisions 
of the Charter would serve to delegitimize the Charter, as obligations could be 
imposed on states from provisions which they had no intention of accepting and 
could reduce respect for economic and social rights. The fundamental challenge 
for the ECSR is maintaining the legitimacy of the Charter in a dynamic and 
progressive legal environment.
International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH) v Belgium
The extent of the overlap between Articles 16 and 31 was recently contested in 
FIDH v Belgium.71. This complaint concerned an alleged violation of rights related 
to housing for travellers under the Charter. In particular, issues concerning the 
insufficiency of stopping places, non-recognition of caravans as a home, lack of 
respect for the required conditions when carrying out evictions, lack of a global 
and coordinated policy to combat the poverty and social exclusion of travellers, 
among other issues. The complaint concerned Article 16 and Article 30 of the 
RESC as well Article E, the non-discrimination clause.
The overlap between Article 16 and Article 31 regarding the right to housing 
was central to the complaint. While the Belgian government accepted the overlap 
as was set out in the ERRC v Greece complaint, it challenged the parameters of 
this overlap. In particular, it challenged the assertion that the ERRC v France 
complaint must also apply to Belgium.
70  See P Alston, Assessing the Strengths and Weaknesses of the European Charter’s 
Supervisory System, Center for Human Rights and Global Justice, Working Paper, 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Series (NYU School of Law, No 6, 2005), 4–5, where 
it was noted ‘the bottom line, however, is that the collective complaints system represents 
an important development in the procedure and one which has the potential to transform the 
effectiveness of the ESC system as a whole. Because the procedure also has the potential 
to convince governments that complaints systems in relation to these rights represent a 
step too far, it is important for the ECSR to tread carefully and to ensure that its case law is 
strongly reasoned and consistent.’
71  Complaint No. 62/2010.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
132
In ERRC v France, a breach of Article 3072 was established via a breach of 
Article 31.73 The Belgian government went on to submit that ‘this makes it clear 
that the violation of Article 30 is the result of the finding of a violation of Article 
31 of the Charter. Such a reasoning can in no way apply to Belgium, as the FIDH 
maintains, for the simple reason that Belgium has not ratified Article 31 of the 
Charter’. At the admissibility stage, the ECSR drew attention to the decision in 
MDAC v Bulgaria and at the merits stage the Committee re-affirmed the principle 
of overlap.74 The Belgian government’s argument – that complaints detailing 
violations of Article 30 arising from Article 31 do not transfer to a complaint 
alleging a breach of Article 30 due to a breach in Article 16 where the respondent 
state has not accepted or ratified Article 31 – lay down a direct challenge to the 
ECSR’s discretion regarding the overlap between provisions of the Charter.
In order to address this argument, it is necessary to begin by noting that the 
concept of adequate housing was central to the ERRC v France complaint. From 
ERRC v Greece, it is clear that concepts of adequate housing are the same under 
Article 31 as Article 16. Therefore, a breach of Article 30 arising from inadequate 
housing cannot be limited to subsequent complaints relating to Article 16 or Article 
31. As such, the rationale of the Belgian government’s argument is at variance 
with the principle of overlap as outlined in ERRC v Greece. 
The fact that Belgium was caught by obligations arising from provisions which 
it had not expressly accepted could at first glance risk delegitimizing the Charter. 
However as set out above, this is not the case. Rather the ECSR will interpret ESC 
rights separately from one another, and non-ratification of one ESC right will not 
prevent related obligations arising under another right.. The link between housing 
as between Articles 16, 31 and 30 arises at first instance in the common wording 
set out in those provisions, i.e. housing is expressly set out in the three articles. In 
the decision on the merits, delivered in 2012, the Committee found the Belgium 
to have violated the right to housing and in doing so reaffirmed the principle of 
overlap between Articles 16 and 31.75
72  Article 30 of the RESC: ‘With a view to ensuring the effective exercise of the 
right to protection against poverty and social exclusion, the Parties undertake: (a) to take 
measures within the framework of an overall and co-ordinated approach to promote the 
effective access of persons who live or risk living in a situation of social exclusion or 
poverty, as well as their families, to, in particular, employment, housing, training, education, 
culture and social and medical assistance; (b) to review these measures with a view to their 
adaptation if necessary.’
73  See ERRC v France (n 49). With regard to the alleged violation of art 30 of the 
Revised Charter, para 95 reads: ‘The Committee considers that it is clear from its conclusions 
under Article 31 that the housing policy for Travellers is inadequate. It accordingly finds 
that France has failed to adopt a co-ordinated approach to promoting effective access to 
housing for persons who live or risk living in a situation of social exclusion’.
74  Complaint No 62/2010, paras 43–46.
75  Complaint No. 62/2010, [44–47].

Housing Rights in Europe
133
Potential Future Developments on this Treatment of Overlapping Rights
The overlap between Articles 16 and 31 of the RESC has allowed for the cross-
article transfer of key concepts, including the definition of adequate housing. 
This interaction is indicative of a more general principle of overlap which 
is a key functional aspect of the RESC. The cross-article transfer arising from 
this functional overlap presents interesting possibilities when cast against the 
progressive and dynamic nature of the Collective Complaints procedure. In 
particular, the relationship between the right to housing as stated in Articles 31 
and 16, and the wider right to protection against poverty and social exclusion 
enshrined in Article 30 may present opportunities for examining the concept of 
adequate housing through the prism of social inclusion and participation.
With respect to Article 30, the Committee has set out ‘that governments 
must adopt an overall and coordinated approach, which must comprise an 
analytical framework, and take measures promoting access to social rights, in 
particular employment, housing, training, education, culture and social and 
medical assistance for persons in, or at risk of finding themselves in, a situation 
of poverty or social exclusion’. As such, in characterizing the signatory states’ 
obligations under Article 30, the Committee have consistently set out that Article 
30 has a direct link with the right to housing.76 In ERRC v France, it endorsed 
an inclusivity-centric interpretation of Article 30 after setting out that living in 
a situation of social exclusion violates the dignity of human beings.77 It further 
advocated monitoring mechanisms involving all relevant actors, including civil 
society and persons affected by exclusion.78
Indeed, the right to adequate housing is interdependent with other human 
rights. The UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has set out 
that the right to participate in public decision-making is indispensible if the right 
to adequate housing is to be realized and maintained by all groups in society.79 
Indeed, the right to participate has been cast as intrinsically linked with human 
dignity. In practice, participation is a multifaceted concept. Arnstein has identified 
that there are significant gradations of citizen participation ranging from citizen 
76  Conclusions 2009, art 30, Italy, 37. 
77  ERRC v France (n 49) [93]. 
78  ‘With a view to ensuring the effective exercise of the right to protection against 
social exclusion, Article 30 requires States Parties to adopt an overall and co-ordinated 
approach, which should consist of an analytical framework, a set of priorities and measures 
to prevent and remove obstacles to access to fundamental rights. There should also be 
monitoring mechanisms involving all relevant actors, including civil society and persons 
affected by exclusion. This approach must link and integrate policies in a consistent way’: 
Conclusions 2003, art 30, France, 214.
79  ‘The right to adequate housing cannot be viewed in isolation from other human 
rights … the right to participate in public decision-making – is indispensable if the right to 
adequate housing is to be realized and maintained by all groups in society’: UN Committee 
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No 4.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
134
power, which includes citizen control, delegated power and participation, to 
tokenism, which includes placation, consultation and informing, and non-
participation, which includes therapy and manipulation.80 While meaningful 
participation can break a deadlock, leading to better policy and implementation 
decisions and fostering education for all involved, it has also been argued that 
ill-conceived participation models can be time-consuming and costly and can 
actually lead to worse policy decisions.81 It is the dynamic nature of the Collective 
Complaint mechanism, allowing advocates to frame the parameters of the dispute, 
which presents the avenue for novel arguments concerning the indivisibility of 
human rights to be put before the ESC. However, advocates must bear in mind that 
this is not a general overlap rather in practice the ECSR will interpret ESC rights 
separately from one another, and non-ratification of one ESC right will not prevent 
related obligations arising under another right.
Housing Rights in the EU: The Charter of Fundamental Rights
While the 1957 Treaty of Rome and subsequent EU treaties do not specifically 
refer to housing at all, much EU social policy, particularly the drive toward a single 
market in goods and services, environmental sustainability and the standardization 
of products, has a bearing on housing rights and housing policy. Following from 
freedom of movement, equality and citizenship treaty and regulation provisions, 
individuals have been able to rely on their status as ‘citizens of the Union’ to obtain 
access to social benefits in other Member States, such as minimum subsistence 
and maternity benefits.82 Unfair contract terms in housing contracts are prohibited 
across Europe under the 1993 Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Directive.83
80  Sherry R Arnstein, ‘A Ladder of Citizen Participation’ (1969) 35(4) Journal of 
the American Institute of Planners 216–24. Arnstein also identifies significant challenges 
regarding achieving genuine levels of participation; these include racism, paternalism 
and resistance to power re-distribution. Further difficulties relate to the: ‘Inadequacies of 
the poor community’s political socio-economic infrastructure and knowledge base, plus 
difficulties of organising a representative and accountable citizens’ group in the face of 
futility, alienation, and distrust’.
81  RA Irvin and J Stansbury, ‘Citizen Participation in Decision Making: Is it Worth 
the Effort?’ (2004) 64(1) Public Administration Review 55. See also R Hearne, Public 
Private Partnerships in Ireland (Manchester, Manchester University Press 2011).
82  Case C-184/99 Rudy Grzelcyck v Centre public d’aide sociale d’Ottignies-
Louvain-la-Neuve [2001] ECR I-6193; Case C-85/96 Martinez-Sala [1998] ECR I-2681; 
Case C-274/96 Bickel and Franz [1998] ECR I-7637. See further H de Waele, ‘EU 
Citizenship: Revisiting its Meaning, Place and Potential’ (2010) 12 European Journal of 
Migration and Law 319–36.
83  See Report from the Commission on the Implementation of Council Directive 
93/13/EEC of 5 April 1993 on Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts, COM (2000) 248 final 
(27 April 2000). 

Housing Rights in Europe
135
Since the Maastricht Treaty, subsequent EU treaties have referred to the 
jurisprudence of the ECHR, although in reality, with its minimalist standards, this 
correlates with a very low ‘floor’ for housing rights. Article 19 of the Treaty on 
European Union (TFEU) reiterates that the EU has competence to legislate to 
combat discrimination on grounds of sex, race or ethnic origin, religion belief, 
disability, age or sexual orientation.84 Articles 151 and 153 of the TFEU commit the 
EU to combat social exclusion, but not through harmonized legislative measures. 
Yet, as Craig and De Búrca point out:
Despite the declaration that in Article 2 that the EU is founded on, inter alia, the 
value of respect for human rights, and the stipulation in Article 3 that the EU’s 
aim is to promote its values, the EU still requires specific competence under a 
provision of the Treaties if it is to take concrete action. The Treaties still do not 
provide the EU with ‘any general power to enact rules on human rights’.85
In the 1990s, to avoid a ‘race to the bottom’ or competition between states to 
lower wages and taxes, and in the absence of EU institutional competence (outside 
labour legislation) to introduce minimum standards in areas of social policy, the 
EU developed an alternative approach based on ‘fundamental social rights’.86 This 
culminated in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (EUCFR), adopted at Nice 
in 2000, but not as enforceable law. However, the Charter of Fundamental Rights 
of the European Union has now been incorporated into the Treaty of Lisbon87 and 
enjoys full legislative force within the Treaty of Lisbon under Article 6:88
1. The Union recognises the rights, freedoms and principles set out in the Charter 
of Fundamental Rights of the European Union of 7 December 2000, as adapted 
at Strasbourg, on 12 December 2007, which shall have the same legal value as 
the Treaties.
The provisions of the Charter shall not extend in any way the competences of the 
Union as defined in the Treaties.
The rights, freedoms and principles in the Charter shall be interpreted in 
accordance with the general provisions in Title VII of the Charter governing its 
84  OJ C83/01, 2010.
85  P Craig and G De Búrca, EU Law: Cases and Materials (5th edn, Oxford, OUP 
2011) 392.
86  See TK Hervey and J Kenner (eds), Economic and Social Rights under the Charter 
of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (Oxford, Hart Publishing 2003).
87  Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union [2010] OJ C83/02. See also 
Consolidated Versions of the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning 
of the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union [2010] 
OJ C83/13, 30 March. 
88  Poland and the UK originally opted out of the Charter, but Poland has made some 
newer arrangements. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
136
interpretation and application and with due regard to the explanations referred to 
in the Charter, that set out the sources of those provisions.
2. The Union shall accede to the European Convention for the Protection of 
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Such accession shall not affect the 
Union’s competences as defined in the Treaties.
3. Fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the 
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and as they result from 
the constitutional traditions common to the Member States, shall constitute 
general principles of the Union’s law.
Article 51(1) of the Charter stipulates that:
the provisions of this Charter are addressed to the institutions, bodies, offices 
and agencies of the Union with due regard for the principle of subsidiarity and 
to the Member States only when they are implementing Union law. They shall 
therefore respect the rights, observe the principles and promote the application 
thereof in accordance with their respective powers and respecting the limits of 
the powers of the Union as conferred on it in the Treaties.
While there is not a specific right to housing in the Charter, Article 34(3) on social 
security and social assistance states:
In order to combat social exclusion and poverty, the Union recognises and 
respects the right to social and housing assistance so as to ensure a decent 
existence for all those who lack sufficient resources, in accordance with the rules 
laid down by Union law and national laws and practices.89
The wording of Article 34(3) of the Charter is distinctive, in that it states that 
a specific right to social and housing assistance is recognized and respected.90 
Contrast this with Article 34(1) in relation to social security, which merely states 
that the EU recognizes and respects the entitlement to social security benefits and 
social services providing protection in cases involving maternity, illness, industrial 
accidents, dependency or old age.91
89  Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (n 89) art 34(3).
90  De Waele points out that art 34(2) is of stellar importance as it proclaims that 
‘everyone residing and moving legally within the European Union is entitled to social 
security benefits and social advantages in accordance with Union law and national laws and 
practices’. He points out that ‘Everyone, i.e. excluding none – Pandora’s box might never 
appear more open, and it seems incredible that the Member States managed to agree on the 
inclusion of this phrase’. See de Waele (n 84) 319, 333.
91  See J Tooze, ‘Social Security and Social Assistance’, in Hervey and Kenner (n 88).

Housing Rights in Europe
137
The Explanations to the Charter92
There is considerable guidance on the interpretation of each Charter article to be 
given by the courts and EU Member States. Article 52(7) of the Charter states that:
The explanations drawn up as a way of providing guidance in the interpretation 
of this Charter shall be given due regard by the courts of the Union and of the 
Member States.93
These explanations state that paragraph 34(3) of the Charter:
draws on Article 13 of the European Social Charter and Articles 30 and 31 of 
the revised Social Charter and point 10 of the Community Charter. The Union 
must respect it in the context of policies based on Article 153 of the Treaty on 
the Functioning of the European Union.94
Thus, the interpretation of the content of Article 34(3) can be drawn from the 
jurisprudence of the ECSR, which evaluates and clarifies the obligations contained 
in Articles 30 and 31 of the RESC.95 The ECSR has held that Article 30 requires 
States Parties to adopt an overall and coordinated approach, which should consist 
of an analytical framework, a set of priorities and measures to prevent and remove 
obstacles to access fundamental social rights. There should also be monitoring 
mechanisms involving all relevant actors, including civil society and persons 
affected by poverty and exclusion.96
In relation to Article 31, the ECSR pointed out in FEANTSA v France that the 
obligation of states in realizing the housing rights must be practical and effective. 
92  Article 52(7) of the Charter states that: ‘The explanations drawn up as a way of 
providing guidance in the interpretation of this Charter shall be given due regard by the 
courts of the Union and of the Member States.’ These explanations relating to the Charter 
of Fundamental Rights ([2007] OJ C303/02) have been updated under the responsibility of 
the Praesidium of the European Convention, in the light of the drafting adjustments made 
to the text of the Charter by that Convention (notably to arts 51 and 52) and of further 
developments of EU law. However: ‘Although they do not as such have the status of law, 
they are a valuable tool of interpretation intended to clarify the provisions of the Charter.’ 
93  Explanations relating to the Charter of Fundamental Rights ([2007] OJ C303/02). 
94  Indeed, most of the articles of the Charter are worded identically or are clearly 
based on rights set out in other instruments, such as the ECHR, and the explanations 
specifically refer to the direct connection, and the corresponding wealth of jurisprudence 
already developed through the originating article.
95  For a consideration of the obligations on states in relation to the European Social 
Charter and the Revised Charter, see http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/socialcharter/
ecsr/ecsrdefault_EN.asp accessed 4 March 2013. See also Mikkola (n 31).
96  Statement of Interpretation on Article 30; see in particular ECSR Conclusions 
2003, France, 214. See ECSR (2008) Digest of Case Law 167–69.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
138
In ERRC v Italy, the ECSR emphasized the obligations of adequacy under Article 
31(1). In ERRC v Bulgaria, the ECSR again emphasized that the temporary supply 
of shelter cannot be considered as adequate and that individuals should be provided 
with adequate housing within a reasonable period.97
The explanations relating to Article 34(3) also state that the EU must respect 
the EUCFR in the context of social inclusion policies based on Article 153 of the 
TFEU. Thus, the framing and adoption of social inclusion policies, many of which 
are prepared jointly between EU agencies and Member States, should contain 
details of how the right to social and housing assistance as set out in the Charter 
is being addressed.
Although Article 34(3) may not lead to regulations and directives on social and 
housing assistance, the institutions and agencies of the EU, as well as the Member 
States ‘implementing’ EU law, must recognize and respect the rights contained 
therein, clarification for which is available from the jurisprudence of the ECSR. 
It is also clear that the housing-related jurisprudence of the ECtHR and the ECSR 
will become an integral element of the interpretation of state obligations under 
the EUCFR when they are implementing EU law.98 Yet, it may be in the arbitrage 
between EU law provisions and national laws which contain an element of EU law 
that the hitherto hidden power of the Charter will emerge. While Article 51(2) of 
the Charter states that it does not extend the field of application of EU law, there 
are a host of areas (e.g. consumer protection and financial regulation) where EU 
law applies and which affect housing rights. Indeed, the institutions, bodies, offices 
and agencies99 of the EU include, among others, the European Central Bank and 
the European Commission,100 which are regularly putting forward measures which 
impact on housing and housing rights.
A range of measures have been undertaken by the Commission to ensure 
that the EU as a body complies with Charter obligations. The Strategy for the 
effective implementation of the Charter by the Commission101 states that there is 
97  ERRC v Bulgaria (n 20) [34].
98  See Housing Rights: The Duty to Ensure Housing for All (n 9).
99  See Regulation (EC) No 58/2003 of 19 December 2002 laying down the statute 
for executive agencies to be entrusted with certain tasks in the management of Community 
programmes.
100  For details of EU institutions and agencies, see http://europa.eu/institutions/
index_en.htm accessed 31 July 2013.
101  See Communication from the Commission, Strategy for the effective 
implementation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the European Union, COM 
(2010) Final, Brussels, 19 October 2010. See also Communication from the Commission 
Impact Assessment Guidelines, SEC(2009) 92 of 15 January 2009; Report on the practical 
operation of the methodology for a systematic and rigorous monitoring of compliance 
with the Charter of fundamental rights, COM(2009) 205 Final of 29 April 2009; Report of 
the European Parliament Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, on the 
situation of fundamental rights in the European Union (2009) – effective implementation 
after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon (2009/2161(INI)), A7-0344/2010; Council 

Housing Rights in Europe
139
now a member of the Commission with specific responsibility for the promotion 
of justice, fundamental rights and citizenship, and the members of the European 
Commission promised, in a solemn undertaking before the Court of Justice, to 
uphold the Charter. The Strategy also states:
The objective of the Commission’s policy following the entry into force of the 
Lisbon Treaty is to make the fundamental rights provided for in the Charter as 
effective as possible. The Union must be exemplary in this respect. The Charter 
is not a text setting out abstract values, it is an instrument to enable people to 
enjoy the rights enshrined within it when they are in a situation governed by 
Union law. This is why the Commission will focus its efforts on the effective 
implementation of the Charter.102
The Commission routinely checks its legislative proposals and the acts it adopts 
to ensure that they are compatible with the Charter. The Strategy states that 
fundamental rights may, under certain conditions, be subject to limitations, but 
these must be provided for in law, respect the essence of the said rights, observe 
the principle of proportionality, be necessary and effectively meet objectives.103 A 
fundamental rights checklist is used by the Commission, as set out in the Strategy.104
The Commission Report on the Application of the EU Charter of Fundamental 
Rights (2010)105 states that there is an urgent need to better inform people as to 
when the rights of the Charter apply and on ‘how to enforce them in practice if 
they are violated’. Indeed, the Report states that the Commission has the power to 
start infringement proceedings against a Member State which violates the Charter 
in implementing EU law. It states that: ‘The individual can also complain to the 
Commission, which has the power to start infringement proceedings against a 
Member State which violates the Charter in implementing EU law.’106
In any case, the Charter has already impacted on EU law in a number of 
significant cases, such as Test-Achats ASBL v Belgium,107 where the European 
Court of Justice invalidated Article 5(2) of EU Directive 2004/113/EC of 13 
December 2004 implementing the principle of equal treatment between women 
and men in the access to and supply of goods and services, on the grounds of its 
incompatibility with the EUCFR. Thus, it is clear that any provision of EU law can 
of the European Union, Draft Council conclusions on the role of the Council of the European 
Union in ensuring the effective implementation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the 
European Union, 6387/11, Brussels, 11 February 2011.
102  COM (2010) Final, Brussels, 19 October 2010, 3. 
103  ibid 4.
104  ibid 5.
105  COM (2011) 160 Final, Brussels, 30 March 2011.
106  ibid 7.
107  Case C-236/09 Test-Achats ASBL v Belgium (March 2011).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
140
be held to be invalid if it breaches any of the rights in the EUCFR, such as the right 
to social and housing assistance so as to ensure a decent existence.
Conclusion
It is a time of great potential for housing rights advocates in Europe – or perhaps 
there will two Europes. One set of 28 EU Member States will rely on the EUCFR, 
while these and a further 20 states will base their housing rights on the Council 
of Europe. As we have seen, there is significant development of the jurisprudence 
within the Council of Europe and the potential for direct complaints to the 
monitoring body – the ECSR will enhance its effectiveness. Clearly, at the EU 
level, the EUCFR with its ‘right to social and housing assistance so as to ensure a 
decent existence for all those who lack sufficient resources’108 is poised to become 
a key influence in the balance of power between the competing free market or 
social Europe ideologies. Of course, the interactivity between the jurisprudence 
of the ECSR and the interpretation of Article 34(3) of the EUCFR gives an added 
impetus to the development and interpretation of housing rights. However, many 
housing advocates in Europe have yet to embrace these approaches through test 
cases and references to the Court of Justice of the European Union. In any case, 
the housing rights embedded within EU law will emerge in a variety of cases, and 
perhaps in ways which we may not yet have envisaged.
108  Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union [2010] OJ C83/02, art 
34(3).

Chapter 6 
Housing Rights in Constitutional 
Legislation: A Conceptual Classification
Michelle Oren, Rachelle Alterman and Yaffa Zilbershats
Introduction
Housing rights are conditions granted by statutes, or entitlements by law, that 
rest on the understanding of a need for housing. They imply certain duties and 
obligations either taken by the state or other entities and individuals.1 Much has 
been written about housing rights in the international human rights context.2 
However, little comparative work has been published at the national level, 
particularly in relation to any classification or categorization of the status of 
housing rights in national constitutions.3
At the international level, housing rights are embedded in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights4 at Article 25(1) and in the International Covenant 
1  Peter King, ‘Housing as a Freedom Right’ (2003) 18(5) Housing Studies 661.
2  Scott Leckie, From Human Needs to Housing Rights: An Analysis of the Right 
to Adequate Housing Under International Human Rights Law (London, International 
Institute for Environment and Development 1992); Scott Leckie, ‘The Justiciability of 
Housing Rights’ in Fons Coomans and Fried van Hoof (eds.), The Right to Complain 
about Economic, Social and Cultural Rights: Proceedings of the Expert Meeting on the 
Adoption of an Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (Utrecht, 25–28 January 1995) 24–30; Scott Leckie, ‘The Human Right 
to Adequate Housing’ in A Eide, C Krause, A Rosas and M Scheinin (eds.), Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights: A Textbook (2nd edn, The Hague, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers 
2000); Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE), Legal Resources for Housing 
Rights: International and National Standards (Geneva, COHRE 2003); Padraic Kenna, 
‘International Instruments on Housing Rights’ (2010) 2(1) Journal of Legal Affairs and 
Dispute Resolution in Engineering and Construction 11–20; Padraic Kenna, Housing Law, 
Rights and Policy (Dublin, Clarus Press 2011) Ch. 8.
3  Although the UN – Habitat Reports – UN-Habitat UNHRP Report Series, No 3, 
National Housing Rights Legislation (3rd edn) (HS/638/01E) (UNHRP, Nairobi, 2006); UN-
Habitat UNHRP Report Series, No 1, Housing Rights Legislation: Review of International 
and National Legal Instruments (HS/638/01E) (UNHRP, Nairobi, 2002) provide an 
overview many new constitutions have emerged since that research was undertaken.
4  UN Doc A/810, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), (UDHR) 
UNGA Resolution 2200A (XX1). Adopted and proclaimed by General Assembly Resolution 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
142
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) at Article 11(1).5 In the 
European context, housing provisions are anchored in the Council of Europe’s 
European Social Charter (ESC) (Part I, principle 31), Articles 15(3), 16, 19(4), 
30 and 31 (1961, revised 1996).6 Article 13 of the European Convention on the 
Legal Status of Migrant Workers (1977) also provides for housing rights for this 
particular social group7. In addition, some rights established under the European 
Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) (1950) have 
indirect implications for housing rights.8
These international instruments have influenced domestic laws in different 
ways and to different degrees. However, the right to housing and other forms of 
housing rights were legislated in some national constitutions decades before they 
were debated in the international sphere. Mexico (1917), South Korea (1948), 
Costa Rica (1950) and possibly a number of other national constitutions that are no 
longer in force already had a right to housing before the creation of the ICESCR. 
By the 1990s, the right to housing and other forms of constitutional housing rights 
already existed in over 24 national constitutions (which are still in force). Indeed, 
217A (III) of 10 December 1948, stipulates in Article 25 that: ‘Everyone has the right to a 
standard of living adequate for the health and wellbeing of himself [herself] and of his [her] 
family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, 
and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old 
age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his [her] control.’
5  UN Doc A/6316, International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
(1966), (ICESCR) UNGA Resolution 2200A (XXI) (entered into force 3 January 1976) 
states in Article 11(1): ‘The State parties to the … [ICESCR] recognize the right of 
everyone to an adequate standard of living for himself [herself] and for his [her] family, 
including adequate food, clothing and housing, and to the continuous improvement of 
living conditions. The States Parties will take appropriate steps to ensure the realization of 
this right, recognizing to this effect the essential importance of international co-operation 
based on free consent.’
6  Turin, 18 October 1961, Council of Europe, European Treaty Series – No 35; 
European Social Charter. (Revised), Council of Europe, Strasbourg, 3 May 1996. Article 
15 relates to the right of persons with disabilities to independence, social integration and 
participation in the life of the community; art 16 relates to the right of the family to social, 
legal and economic protection; art 19(4) relates to the right of migrant workers and their 
families to protection and assistance; art 30 relates to the right to protection against poverty 
and social exclusion. Article 31 states that everyone has the right to housing: ‘With a view 
to ensuring the effective exercise of the right to housing, the Parties undertake to take 
measures designed: (1) to promote access to housing of an adequate standard; (2) to prevent 
and reduce homelessness with a view to its gradual elimination; (3) to make the price of 
housing accessible to those without adequate resources.
7  Council of Europe, European Convention on the Legal Status of Migrant Workers, 
Strasbourg, 24 November 1977, art 13. 
8  Council of Europe, Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms, Rome, 4 November 1950.

Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation
143
it was only in the 1990s, according to Leckie,9 that the right to housing began to 
gain importance within the international sphere, leading to its official recognition 
as an international human right. General Comment 4 of the ICESCR on the human 
right to adequate housing (1991)10 accentuated the central importance of housing 
for the enjoyment of all other economic, social and cultural rights as ‘the right 
to live somewhere in security, peace and dignity’. The UN Special Rapporteur 
on the Right to Adequate Housing suggested at the UN Commission of Human 
Rights in 1995 that all states proceeding with the elaboration of new, revised or 
amended national constitutions should give due attention to including housing 
rights provisions in these texts.11
With the beginning of the twenty-first century came a better understanding 
of the way in which international human rights norms affect national and local-
level law. In several cases, constitutional or legislative texts were modeled after 
international standards, principles and norms.
This chapter focuses on housing rights at the level of national constitutions. 
It presents an overview of the current state of the right to housing within 
national constitutions, and a classification of constitutional housing rights. The 
classification, which is based on a survey of 205 national constitutions (including 
non-sovereign states),12 reveals three major forms by which countries have chosen 
to incorporate housing into their constitutions:
1.	 explicit (direct) right to housing;
2.	 embedded rights, that is, rights included in articles referring to housing as 
a component of some other right;
3.	 indirect or implied rights.
Certain constitutions include up to 10 articles (e.g. Ecuador, 2008) on housing, and 
a single national constitution may contain all three forms of housing rights or any 
combination of them.
9  S Leckie, National Perspectives on Housing Rights (The Hague, Martinus Nijhoff 
Publishers 2003) ix.
10  See UN Doc E/C.12/1771/4, UNCESCR, General Comment 4. The Human Right 
to Adequate Housing. 
11  UN Doc E/CN.4/Sub.2/1995/12, The Realization of Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights, The Right to Adequate Housing, final report submitted by Mr. Rajindar Sachar, 
Special Rapporteur, para 164.
12  All constitutions were collected from governmental sites. The constitutions 
presented in this chapter are official translations to English.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
144
Direct rights
Embedded rights
Indirect rights (examples)
•	
Right to housing,  
stand-alone
•	
Partial list of social 
rights
•	
Responsibilities of the 
state
•	
Workers’ rights
•	
Property rights 
(explicit)
•	
Children/youth rights
•	
Elder rights 
•	
Planning and urban 
politics
•	
Adequate standard of 
living 
•	
Responsibilities of 
regional and local 
authorities
•	
Human dignity
•	
Fiscal policy
•	
Inclusion and equality
•	
Indigenous rights
•	
Social security
•	
Disability rights
•	
Mandatory Report on 
the implementation of 
the right to housing
•	
Right to challenge court 
decisions
•	
Agricultural policy
•	
Rural politics
•	
Homelessness 
•	
Access to basic 
domestic services
•	
Family rights 
•	
Property rights
•	
Freedom of residence
•	
Right to privacy
•	
Right to life
•	
Right to be free from 
cruel or degrading 
treatment
Table 6.1	
Conceptual classification of constitutional housing rights

Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation
145
Direct Housing Rights within Constitutions
Direct rights refer to constitutional articles that explicitly mention ‘the right to 
housing’ either as a dedicated (stand-alone) article or among a list of social rights.
The Right to Housing as a Stand-alone Article
Incorporating the right to housing as a stand-alone article in a constitution is probably 
the strongest expression of recognition of housing as a national issue. While some 
countries merely recognize the right, others specify the measures and responsibilities 
in greater detail. In a five-level scale, the following formats were found:
•	
Every person/citizen has a right to housing.
•	
Public authorities shall promote the necessary conditions/policy to ensure 
the right to housing.
•	
Every person/citizen has a right to housing. The state must take specified 
measures for the realization of that right.
•	
Everyone has the right to a specific standard of housing. The state must 
take listed measures for its implementation, including a national plan, 
finance and specialized institutions or funds. The parties involved are listed 
(municipalities, private sector, etc.). 
Partial List of Social Rights
Some national constitutions explicitly provide for ‘the right to housing’ among 
a list of other rights. Thus, the right to housing appears in a single article with a 
myriad of other social rights, such as education, social security as rights, food, 
work, maternity protection and assistance to the needy, leisure, decent standards 
of sanitation and access to safe water sources. The Constitution of Kenya (2010) 
provides an example of this approach:
Constitution of Kenya (2010)
Chapter four. The Bill of Rights.
Part 2. Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
43(1) Every person has the right – 
(a) to the highest attainable standard of health, which includes the right to health 
care services, including reproductive health care;
(b) to accessible and adequate housing, and to reasonable standards of sanitation;
(c) to be free from hunger, and to have adequate food of acceptable quality;
(d) to clean and safe water in adequate quantities.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
146
The Embedded Form of Constitutional Housing Rights
The most widespread form of housing rights in national constitutions occurs in 
articles that, while explicitly mentioning housing, list those rights as a component 
of some other general right.
Responsibilities of the State
Laws of state responsibility are the principles governing the what, when and how 
a state is held responsible to provide its citizens with an agreed-upon good (right, 
duty or other). This group of articles is usually included under the chapter of the 
‘State’ or ‘Duties of the State’. The content of the housing-related responsibilities 
varies between constitutions and may include:
•	
granting the government exclusive jurisdiction over housing policies;
•	
adopting measures for the delivery of housing and the distribution of public 
estates; 
•	
supplementing private initiative and responsibility by fulfilling the housing 
needs of citizens; 
•	
promoting housing construction programmes and the improvement of 
living conditions;
•	
satisfying the housing needs of citizens, combating homelessness, 
promoting low-income housing and supporting home-ownership;
•	
creating opportunities for citizens to obtain decent housing;
•	
providing the basic necessities of life including housing; 
•	
permitting the greatest number of home-owner families and undertaking to 
see that every farm-owner provides his workers with comfortable homes;
•	
pursuing a policy establishing rights to housing;
•	
legislating against abuses in tenancy matters, particularly unfair rents, and 
challenging unlawful leases.
Workers’ Rights
Workers’ rights and claims regulate labour relations between workers and 
employers, such as workers’ pay, benefits and safe working conditions. In this 
context, housing-related articles include:
•	
establishing a minimum wage/income that meets housing needs;
•	
specifying which enterprises must provide housing for their workers;
•	
establishing specific entities to support the finance of workers’ housing 
projects;
•	
establishing a national housing fund for workers and cooperative 
construction societies;
•	
providing an exclusive housing right to agricultural workers and peasants.

Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation
147
Property Rights
While property rights are a classic example of indirect rights, there are cases in 
which housing is explicitly mentioned in a property-related article. Housing-
related articles include those which:
•	
oblige the state to provide housing for citizens with limited income;
•	
protect rights to acquire and own housing;
•	
protect from arbitrary deprivation of housing;
•	
compensate owners for expropriated land for purposes such as housing;
•	
protect against forced evictions and the demolition of poor dwellers’ 
housing.
Children’s Rights
These rights give special protection and care to the young, including their right 
to association with both biological parents and human identity, as well as the 
fulfillment of basic needs for food, universal state-paid education, health care, 
criminal laws appropriate for the age and development of the child, and shelter. 
The Constitution of Honduras (1982) provides an example of this approach:
Constitution of Honduras (1982)
Chapter iv.
Rights of children.
Article 123. Every child shall enjoy the benefits of the social security and 
education. Have the right to grow and develop in good health, for which must 
be provided, both to him and his mother, special care from the prenatal period, 
taking right to enjoy food, housing, education, recreation, sports and adequate 
medical services.
Elder Rights
Factors such as rapid increases in the elderly population and age, as well as ageism, 
have led to the advent of elders’ law. Benefits to the elderly include social security, 
pensions and access to nursing homes, the delivery of housing suited to their needs 
and their state of health or of adequate support for adapting their housing. The 
Constitution of Angola (2010) provides an example:
Constitution of Angola (2010)
Chapter III Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and Duties.
Article 82. (The elderly)
1. The elderly shall have the right to economic security, housing and a family 
and community life that respects their personal autonomy and prevents and 
overcomes isolation or social marginalization.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
148
2. Policies for the elderly shall include economic, social and cultural measures 
that offer elderly people opportunities for personal fulfillment through active 
participation in community life.
Planning and Urban Politics
Planning and urban politics are the technical and political processes concerned 
with the control of the use of land and design of the urban environment, including 
transportation networks. The role of planning is to ensure the orderly development 
of human settlements and communities. Housing rights are found in various 
formats here, including the following:
•	
providing that urban development, housing, infrastructure and transport be 
under the regulatory control of the state;
•	
enabling citizens to claim ownership over previously unclaimed property 
used for living purposes;
•	
providing that programmes of urban land reform and housing be undertaken 
by both the state and the private sector;
•	
providing that housing plans be determined by laws aimed at ensuring 
sufficient affordable housing and state control of real estate for public housing;
•	
providing for legislation to regulate citizens’ rights to undertake construction 
of housing and to protect the interests of landlords and tenants.
Adequate Standard of Living
The right to an adequate standard of living is understood to establish a minimum 
entitlement to food, clothing and housing at a subsistence level. The Constitution 
of Armenia (2005) provides an example of this approach:
Constitution of Armenia (1995 revised in 2005)
Chapter 2. Fundamental Human and Civil Rights and Freedoms.
Article 31.
Every citizen is entitled to an adequate standard of living for himself or herself 
and his or her family, to adequate housing, as well as to the improvement of 
living conditions. The state shall provide the essential means to enable the 
exercise of these rights.
The Responsibilities of Regional and Local Authorities
Regional and local authorities are recognized as a form of public administration 
by many national constitutions, and in most contexts, they exist as the lower 
tiers of administration within a given state, as entities distinct from national or 
federal authorities. Some constitutions enumerate the duties and responsibilities 
of regional and local jurisdictions, including housing affairs. In Venezuela, Article 

Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation
149
178 of the Constitution of Venezuela (1999) establishes that municipal authorities 
shall govern all affairs of ‘local living’ such as rental politics with criteria of 
equality and justice, while protecting social interest and improving the living 
conditions of the community, including social housing. Article 184 establishes that 
the law will create open and flexible mechanisms to enable the decentralization 
of power from provinces and municipalities to capable local communities and 
organized neighbourhood groups so that they can administer their own services in 
several fields, including housing and the maintenance of urban areas. 
Human Dignity
Dignity is intimately linked to humanity, freedom and equality. Humans are born 
with dignity as an inherent quality that is neither deserved nor capable of being 
confiscated. This commitment to dignity has been endorsed in the vast majority 
of codified constitutions, with some constitutions explicitly listing housing as a 
component of this right. The Constitution of Belgium provides an example of this 
approach:
Constitution of Belgium (1994)
Title II. On Belgians and their rights
Article 23.
Everyone has the right to lead a life consistent with human dignity. To that end, 
the laws, decrees or rules established under article 134 guarantee, taking into 
account the corresponding obligations, economic, social and cultural rights 
of which they determine the conditions for their implementation. These rights 
include, in particular,
… (3) The right to adequate housing.
Fiscal Policy
Fiscal policy is the means by which a government adjusts its levels of spending in 
order to monitor and influence a nation’s economy. Housing is one of the policy 
areas where significant levels of spending may be involved, and constitutions 
explicitly mention housing in articles defining the fiscal policy of the state. The 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran provides an example:
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran (1979)
Chapter IV. Economy and Financial Affairs.
Article 43. The economy of the Islamic Republic of Iran, with its objectives 
of achieving the economic independence of the society, uprooting poverty and 
deprivation and fulfilling human needs in the process of development while 
preserving human liberty, is based on the following criteria:

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
150
(1) The provision of basic necessities for all citizens: housing, food, clothing, 
hygiene, medical treatment, education and the necessary facilities for the 
establishment of a family.
Inclusion and Equality
Inclusion and equality involve eliminating discrimination, and enabling equal 
opportunity by providing access to housing or protection against exclusion. 
Housing is explicitly mentioned in such articles in the following forms:
•	
the delivery of a national development plan, composed by housing among 
other things, will be guided by these principles, including non-discrimination; 
•	
the uplift of economically and socially backward groups (landless, squatters 
and victims of conflict including women) and marginalized populations by 
making provisions that include housing. 
Indigenous Rights
Indigenous rights involve the recognition of the specific conditions of those 
defined as the original settlers of a land that has been conquered or colonized. 
Such rights include the right to physical survival and integrity, the preservation of 
land, religion, language and other elements of cultural heritage, including housing. 
This can be seen in the Constitution of Guatemala (1985):
Constitution of Guatemala (1985)
Title II. Human rights.
Chapter II. Social rights.
Section III. Indigenous communities.
Article 67. Protection of Indigenous Agricultural Lands and Cooperatives.
The lands of the cooperatives, native communities, or any other forms of 
communal possession or collective of agrarian ownership, as well as the 
family heritage and popular housing, will enjoy the special protection of the 
State, preferential credit and technical assistance, which may guarantee their 
ownership and development in order to insure [sic] an improved quality of life 
to all inhabitants.
Social Security
Social security is defined as government action programmes intended to promote 
welfare for the population at large as well as potentially vulnerable segments of 
the population, such as children, the elderly, the sick and the unemployed. It is 
provided through assistance measures that guarantee access to sufficient resources 
for food and shelter, and to promote health and well-being. The Constitution of 
Argentina (1994) provides an example:

Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation
151
Constitution of Argentina (1994)
First Part.
Chapter I. Declarations, rights and guarantees.
Section 14bis. Labor in its several forms shall be protected by law, which shall 
ensure to workers: dignified and equitable working conditions; limited working 
hours; paid rest and vacations; fair remuneration; … 
The State shall grant the benefits of social security, which shall be of an integral 
nature and may not be waived. In particular, the laws shall establish: compulsory 
social insurance, which shall be in charge of national or provincial entities with 
financial and economic autonomy, administered by the interested parties with 
State participation, with no overlapping of contributions; adjustable retirements 
and pensions; full family protection; protection of homestead; family allowances 
and access to a worthy housing.
Disability Rights
Disability covers impairments, activity limitations and participation restrictions. 
These rights are meant to secure equal opportunities and equal rights for people 
with disabilities, including accessibility and safety in transportation, architecture 
and the physical environment, freedom from abuse, neglect and violations of 
patients’ rights, and equal opportunities in independent living, employment, 
education and housing. Housing in the context of disabled people’s rights appears 
in the constitutions of Ecuador:
Ecuador Constitution (2008)
Section 6: Persons with disabilities
Article 47. The State shall guarantee disability prevention policies and, along 
with society and the family, it shall ensure equal opportunities for persons with 
disabilities and their social integration.
Persons with disabilities are recognized the following rights: …
6. Adequate housing, with facilities for access and the conditions needed to 
address their disability and to achieve the highest possible degree of autonomy 
in their daily life. Persons with disabilities who cannot be cared for by their 
relatives during the day or who have no permanent place to live shall have 
welcoming centers for their shelter
Mandatory Report on the Implementation of the Right to Housing
The South Africa Constitution (1996) declares the functions of the South African 
Human Rights Commission. Chapter 9, section 184 states that each year, the 
South African Human Rights Commission must require the relevant organs of the 
state to provide the Commission with information on the measures that they have 
taken towards the realization of the rights in the Bill of Rights concerning housing 
among other subjects.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
152
Right to Challenge Court Decisions
The Ukrainian Constitution (1996) states that human and citizens’ rights and 
freedoms (including the right to housing enumerated in Articles 47 and 48 of the 
Constitution) are protected by the court (Article 55). Everyone in Ukraine has 
the right to appeal for the protection of his or her rights to the Authorized Human 
Rights Representative of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. After exhausting all 
domestic legal remedies, everyone has the right to appeal for the protection of his 
or her rights and freedoms to the relevant international judicial institutions or to 
the relevant bodies of international organizations of which Ukraine is a member 
or participant.
Agricultural Policy
Agricultural policy describes a set of laws relating to domestic agriculture 
and imports of foreign agricultural products. Governments usually implement 
agricultural policies with the goal of achieving a specific outcome in the domestic 
agricultural product markets, such as a guaranteed supply level, price stability, land 
use or employment. Article 187 of the Brazilian Constitution (1988) establishes 
that an agricultural policy shall be planned and implemented pursuant to law, with 
regular participation in that process by the production sector  –  involving both rural 
producers and workers  –  as well as by the marketing, warehousing and transportation 
sectors, considering housing for the rural worker among other subjects.
Rural Politics
Rural politics focus on the key issues affecting rural areas today, such as water 
pollution, forestry, the greening of agricultural policy, as well as mainstream 
agricultural policy. Article 28 of the Democratic Republic of Korea’s Constitution 
(1998) provides that the state should undertake the building of production facilities 
of the cooperative farms and modern houses in the countryside at its expense, 
with the purpose of increasing the role of the countryside and eliminating the 
city/country divide.
Homelessness
Homelessness is defined as the condition of people who are often unable to acquire 
and maintain regular, safe, secure and adequate housing or night-time residence. 
The legal definition of ‘homeless’ varies from country to country and among 
institutions in the same country or region. Article 21(4) of the Greek Constitution 
(2001) addresses homelessness by stating that providing housing to those who are 
homeless or live in inadequate housing conditions shall be the subject of special 
attention by the state.

Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation
153
Access to Basic Domestic Services
In modern times, access to and delivery of basic needs includes obtaining water, 
food, health services and shelter in adequate quantity and quality to ensure 
survival and to satisfy their right to ‘life with dignity’. Article 20 of the Bolivian 
Constitution (2009) guarantees access to basic domestic services in a universal and 
equitable manner, including potable water, sewage, electricity, domestic gas, postal 
and telecommunications. Services must be accountable, accessible, continuous, of 
sufficient quality, efficient and effective, with equitable and necessary coverage 
rates, and with participation and social control.
Family Rights
Human rights law upholds the positive right of all peoples to marry and have a 
family. It bolsters the family unit by specifying state obligations to keep families 
together and to reunify them when they have become separated, for example, as 
a result of a refugee crises. It insists on maternity rights for mothers to allow time 
and space for the bond to develop between mother and child. It also prescribes 
detailed standards for the treatment of children who lack parental care and 
require state intervention, and the delivery of foster care or adoption. Article 59 
of the Constitution of Paraguay (1992) protects family property, recognized as an 
institution of a social interest. Family property consists of the family house or estate 
and its furniture and working tools, which cannot be subjected to any attachment.
Indirect or Implied Constitutional Housing Rights
Indirect forms of protection do not include an explicit mentioning of housing, so in 
order to turn constitutional language into operative law, the courts and the parliaments 
would need to interpret general constitutional language as concrete protection.
Property Rights
Property rights grant the peaceful enjoyment of material possessions such as 
dwellings and land while protecting owners from their deprivation. According 
to Youngs,13 property must be subject to the state’s power to impose taxes, 
enforce court decisions and intervene wherever the balance between the public 
interest and the applicant’s right to peaceful possession is disrupted. Forms of 
state intervention include deprivation, limitation, expropriation or compulsory 
purchase and compensation.
13  R Youngs, English, French and German: Comparative Law (2nd edn, London, 
Cavendish Publishing 2007) 302–04. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
154
Some countries have no constitutional protection of housing rights, but 
do hold a strong protection of private property. The Constitution of the US, 
for example, protects property rights mainly through the Fifth Amendment’s 
‘Takings or Just Compensation’ clause: ‘nor shall private property be taken for 
public use without just compensation’. America’s ‘Founders’ understood clearly 
that private property is the foundation not only of prosperity and basic fairness, 
but also of individual liberty itself.14 Hartman15 refers to this as the American 
anti-safety-net political climate, because housing is viewed primarily as property 
and a commercial asset.
In contrast, the Dutch Constitution (1983) includes a housing right (Article 
22), but it does not include a general right to property, although it includes the 
prohibition of unlawful expropriation (Article 14). The reason for this, which 
has been defended by successive governments, is that property rights are so 
fundamental to Dutch society that it is redundant to explicitly mention them.16
Housing and property rights also intersect in the event of ‘repossession’, that 
is, the right of refugees and displaced persons to repossess property they have 
lost in conflict situations through abandonment and subsequent reallocation. 
Repossession is considered sustainable if the displaced persons can return to their 
pre-conflict homes, and in many cases this has been elaborated in peace treaties 
ending hostilities. The reference to ‘home’ has often been defined as return and 
repossession of the actual property lost during the conflict. The term ‘home’ here 
may be wider than the term ‘housing’. The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
(1995) provides an example of this approach:
Bosnia and Herzegovina (1995)
Article II. Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
Paragraph 5. Refugees and Displaced Persons:
All refugees and displaced persons have the right freely to return to their homes 
of origin. They have the right, in accordance with Annex 7 to the General 
Framework Agreement, to have restored to them property of which they were 
deprived in the course of hostilities since 1991 and to be compensated for any 
14  See E Ziegler and J Laitos, ‘Property Rights, Housing, and the American 
Constitution: The Social Benefits of Property Rights Protection, Government Interventions, 
and the European Court on Human Rights, Hutten-Czapska Decision’ (2011) 21(25) Indiana 
International & Comparative Law Review 2011. 
15  C Hartman, ‘The Case for a Right to Housing in the United States’ in Leckie  
(n 11) 230–31.
16  As a corollary to these property rights, it is significant that independent housing 
associations were incorporated into the Dutch housing laws over 100 years ago, making the 
Dutch housing policy rather unique. See K Olds, ‘The Role of Courts in Making the Right 
to Housing a Reality Throughout Europe: Lessons from France and the Netherlands’ 28 
Wisconsin International Law Journal (2010) 170–99.

Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation
155
such property that cannot be restored to them. Any commitments or statements 
relating to such property made under duress are null and void.
Two subjects that deserve their own chapters are takings and evictions. 
Recently, much literature has been dedicated to evictions, including many reports 
by the UN on forced evictions. Takings (expropriations/eminent domain) and 
compensation are frequently mentioned in constitutions, in most cases as an 
integral part of the right to property.17 Although housing may not be mentioned in 
these clauses, expropriation issues necessarily have a direct bearing on housing.
Freedom of Residence
Freedom of residence is a component of freedom of movement. It guarantees the 
liberty to choose where to live within the territory of a state and it often provides 
legal protection from discrimination in housing. Most national constitutions have 
incorporated this freedom. In the EU, a right of citizens of the EU to move and 
reside freely within the Member States has been established in the treaty law of 
the EU since 1992. Article 21(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union states that: ‘Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and 
reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject to the limitations and 
conditions laid down in this Treaty and by the measures adopted to give it effect.’18
Areas in which conflict is taking place frequently find themselves restricting 
and even violating this freedom. In apartheid South Africa, freedom of residence 
was systematically violated by the apartheid regime, which used legislation to 
heavily restrict the free movement of black South Africans to and from urban areas.
In situations of internal displacement, the right to freedom of movement and 
freedom of residence are temporarily restricted. Such was the case in Zimbabwe 
in 2005, where, despite the constitutional freedom provided, the Government of 
Zimbabwe embarked on Operation Restore Order with little or no warning. The 
movement, which began in Harare, rapidly evolved into a nationwide demolition 
and eviction campaign carried out by the police and the army. While purporting 
to target illegal dwellings and structures and to clamp down on alleged illicit 
activities, it resulted in the destruction of homes, business premises and vending 
sites. It is estimated that 700,000 people in cities across the country lost their 
homes.19 Yet, the Constitution of Zimbabwe (1979) provided:
17  R Alterman, Takings International: A Comparative Perspective on Land Use 
Regulations and Compensation Rights (Chicago, ABA Press 2012).
18  Consolidated versions of the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union [2010] OJ C83/47, 30.March.
19  See Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC)/Norwegian Refugee 
Council, ‘Training on the Protection of IDPs’ http://www.internal-displacement.
org/8025708F004BE3B1/(httpInfoFiles)/86B7E7913E385A9EC125711500473D9B/$file/
Protection%20from%20module%20handout%20prevention.pdf accessed 24 April 2013.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
156
Constitution of Zimbabwe (1979)
Chapter III. The Declaration of Rights.
Section 22. Protection of freedom of movement.
(1) No person is deprived of his freedom of movement, that is to say, the right to 
move freely throughout Zimbabwe, the right to reside in any part of Zimbabwe, 
the right to enter and to leave Zimbabwe and immunity from expulsion from 
Zimbabwe.
Right to Privacy
Privacy rights are embedded in personality rights and include the protection of 
privacy, marriage and family life, home and correspondence. The right to privacy 
states that no interference with this right by a public authority is permitted. The 
right may be limited in accordance with the law and as necessary in a democratic 
society, in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-
being of the country for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection 
of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.20 
Privacy and housing rights come within the ambit of family rights, since home 
is where private life and family life develop. Where members of a family are at 
risk, such as in situations of unsanitary living conditions, the state may interfere 
with privacy in order to implement social welfare policies and may provide 
public housing/shelter.21
Housing and privacy are also relevant in the context of inviolability of the 
home, which is the right to respect for the physical area of a home and the quiet 
enjoyment of it. State interference may include nuisance, emissions, smells or 
other disruptions. The state must take positive steps to protect rights even in the 
area of relationships between individuals.22 The right to privacy is found in most 
constitutions worldwide. An example can be found in the recent Constitution of 
Kyrgyzstan (2010):
Constitution of Kyrgyzstan (2010)
Chapter II. Human rights and freedoms.
Article 30.
1. Everyone shall have the right of the inviolability of housing as well as other 
objects to which he/she has proprietary or other right. No one may penetrate 
housing or other objects against the will of a person who uses them. 
20  Youngs (n 15) 222.
21  ibid 224–25.
22  ibid 227.

Housing Rights in Constitutional Legislation
157
Right to Life
The essential right to life means that a human being has the right not to be killed 
by another human being. In the context of housing, the right to life applies to 
regions with extreme weather conditions where a lack of emergency shelter could 
pose risks to life and personal security. This component of the right to life was 
identified by the International Human Rights Committee while dealing with 
Canada. The Committee concluded that homelessness could lead to serious health 
problems and death.23
Finland, where the coldest winter days can be as low as −40°C (−40°F), 
provides an example of an attempt to incorporate a specific right to shelter into the 
clause on the right to life. Section 7 of Chapter II of the Constitution of Finland 
(2000) was originally meant to include shelter, but when the clauses were re-
ordered in the final draft, a clause on subsistence and care was transferred to the 
section of economic and social rights.24 The Constitution of Finland provides that:
Constitution of Finland (2000)
Chapter II. Basic Rights and Liberties.
Section 7 The right to life, personal liberty and integrity.
(1) Everyone has the right to life, personal liberty, integrity and security.
(2) No one shall be sentenced to death, tortured or otherwise treated in a manner 
violating human dignity.
The Right to be Free from Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
The right to be free from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment defines the 
minimal conditions that a person should be allowed, in order to preserve his or her 
human character in places where liberty is deprived, such as in prisons. This right 
relates to housing by defining the minimal needs in terms of shelter necessary to 
preserve human dignity.
For example, Haiti’s Constitution (1987) requires the Government of Haiti to 
protect the rights of individuals deprived of their liberty. Yet, prisons and detention 
centres in Haiti have been reported to be overcrowded, poorly maintained and 
unsanitary, periodically lacking in food and water, as well as basic medical 
services and medical isolation units for contagious patients. In certain cases, 
especially following a cholera outbreak, the conditions have resulted in an arbitrary 
deprivation of life:25
23  UN Doc CCPR/C/79/Add.105, Concluding Observations on Canada, 7 April 1999.
24  M Scheinin, ‘Protection of the Right to Housing in Finland’ in Leckie (n 11) 245. 
25  P Avril, Justice versus Politics in Haiti (2001–2004) (Boca Raton,  Universal 
Publishers 2007); Institute for Justice and Democracy in Haiti, ‘Criminal Justice: 
Submission to the UN Universal Periodic Review’ (IJDJ 2011) http://ijdh.org/wordpress/
wp-content/uploads/2011/03/UPR-Prisons-SR-English-Final.pdf accessed 24 April 2013.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
158
Constitution of Haiti 1987
Chapter II. Basic Rights.
Section J. ARTICLE 44-1:
Prisons must be operated in accordance with standards reflecting respect for 
human dignity according to the law on this subject.
Conclusion
Examination of the various constitutions shows the complexity of housing rights. 
These are not always presented in distinct clauses, but at times are embedded 
in other rights. The findings presented in this chapter could serve as a guide for 
legislators seeking to constitutionalize housing rights. These findings shed light on 
the comparative variations in housing rights across the world’s constitutions and 
reveal the many categories and nuances of these rights.
The broad range of expression of housing rights in the constitutions of 
nations around the world should enrich the discussion within each jurisdiction.26 
It is hoped that this survey of approaches will allow cross-learning from one 
jurisdiction to another, not only in new legislation but also in the ongoing 
interpretations by the courts – those that permit the incorporation of approaches 
from foreign court opinions.27
26  See R Lefler, ‘A Comparison of Comparison: Use of Foreign Case Law as 
Persuasive Authority by the United States Supreme Court, the Supreme Court of Canada, 
and the High Court of Australia’ (2002) 11 Southern California Interdisciplinary Law 
Journal 165.
27  An example of such use was seen in 2011 following the legislation of a right 
to housing in Kenya’s new Constitution (2010). Two court decisions taken by the High 
Court of Kenya on domestic housing matters quoted extensively from the South African 
constitutional authorities Satrose Ayuma and others v The Registered Trustees of the 
Kenya Railway Staff Benefits Scheme and others (High Court Petition No 65 of 2010); 
and Susan Waithera and others v The Town Clerk, Nairobi City Council and others (High 
Court Petition No 66 of 2010). See also Government of the Republic of South Africa v 
Grootboomand Others (2001) (1) SA 46 CC; Modderklip Boerdery v President Van Die Rsa 
en Andere (2003) (6) BC LR 638(T).

Chapter 7 
Independent Living for People  
with Disabilities in Kenya:  
Charting the Way Forward
Elizabeth Kamundia
Introduction
This chapter explores the concept of independent living and living in the 
community from the perspective of a developing country – Kenya. It begins 
by defining independent living, identifying its key elements and examining 
its historical and theoretical underpinnings. Second, it provides a rationale for 
exploring the right to independent living from the perspective of a developing 
country. It notes that although a significant amount of literature exists on the 
meaning of independent living with regard to developed countries, little has been 
written from the perspective of developing countries. Third, it considers measures 
taken by the government of Kenya towards providing support to persons with 
disabilities, noting that no single measure is taken specifically with the aim of 
enabling persons with disabilities to live independently. Fourth, it examines what 
Kenya reported under Article 19 to the Committee on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (CRPD Committee) and then concludes with some recommendations 
for future action.
This chapter argues that independent living is as relevant for developing 
countries as for developed countries. Indeed, it is significant that the notion of 
independent living does exist in Africa, although it has been expressed through 
different concepts. In Africa, emphasis has been placed on habilitation and 
rehabilitation aimed at enabling persons with disabilities achieving independence. 
The effect of this in Kenya has been a narrow focus on persons with physical 
and sensory disabilities, to the exclusion of those with intellectual disabilities, 
psychosocial disabilities and multiple disabilities.1
1  See, for example, the Kenya Society for the Mentally Handicapped website, which 
features a story of a person with intellectual disabilities who was tied, chained and locked 
up for 35 years. Due to this, he developed muscular atrophy, and lost the use of his legs 
to date. See http://www.ksmh.org/ksmh-at-work/interventions/rescues accessed 15 March 
2013. For more information on the lives of people with intellectual and mental disabilities 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
160
Defining Independent Living and Identifying its Key Elements
Article 19 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)2 
provides that persons with disabilities have the right to live independently in the 
community:
States Parties to the present Convention recognize the equal right of all persons 
with disabilities to live in the community, with choices equal to others, and shall 
take effective and appropriate measures to facilitate full enjoyment by persons 
with disabilities of this right and their full inclusion and participation in the 
community, including by ensuring that:
(a) Persons with disabilities have the opportunity to choose their place of 
residence and where and with whom they live on an equal basis with others and 
are not obliged to live in a particular living arrangement;
(b) Persons with disabilities have access to a range of in-home, residential and 
other community support services, including personal assistance necessary 
to support living and inclusion in the community, and to prevent isolation or 
segregation from the community;
(c) Community services and facilities for the general population are available 
on an equal basis to persons with disabilities and are responsive to their needs.3
Community living (also known as independent living)4 refers to persons with 
disabilities being able to live in their local communities as equal citizens, with the 
support that they need in order to participate in everyday life.5 Independent living 
is about having the autonomy and independence to make decisions and having 
control over the choices and shape of one’s life. Where support, such as care in the 
home and personal assistance, is needed to live in the community, this should be 
made available as part of the obligations of the state.6
The core elements of independent living are self-determination, choice, 
autonomy, equal access, living in community and inclusion and participation. 
These elements are universal and are not context-specific. Indeed, independent 
in Kenya, see the website of the Kenya Association of the Intellectually Handicapped at 
http://kaihid.org accessed 2 August 2013.
2  UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities adopted on 13 December 
2006 during the sixty-first session of the UNGA Resolution A/RES/61/106, signed by 155 
states and entered into force 3 May 2008.
3  UN Doc A/RES/61/106. 
4  European Coalition for Community Living, Focus on Article 19 of the UN 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Focus Report 2009). 
5  European Coalition for Community Living, Creating Successful Campaigns 
for Community Living: An Advocacy Manual for Disability Organisations and Service 
Providers (London, European Coalition for Community Living 2008).
6  UNICEF It’s About Ability: An Explanation of the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities (New York, UNICEF 2009).

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
161
living ‘has been regarded as a concept rather than an issue requiring specific legal 
definition’.7 Seen in this light, it is the philosophy underpinning the struggle by 
people with disabilities to achieve self-determination, choice, autonomy, equal 
access, community inclusion and participation. Article 19 also extends the 
traditional right of liberty. Kayess and French equate Article 19 with the right of 
persons with disability to live in and be a part of the community.8
Article 19 is a clear demonstration of how the CRPD blurs the line traditionally 
established in human rights between the traditional civil and political rights and 
economic, social and cultural rights.9 Indeed, it is difficult to separate the civil 
and political aspects and the social, economic and cultural aspects within the right 
to independent living.10
Historical and Theoretical Underpinnings of Article 19
Independent living is a civil rights movement of people with disabilities, which 
grew in the US at the end of the 1960s as a protest against clinical living conditions 
in institutions. This led to the Independent Living Movement, which views 
disability primarily as a social and political problem. It adopted the approach of 
highlighting issues and developing strategies along the lines of the black civil 
rights and the feminist movements. These key issues for people with disabilities 
are the articulation of one’s own needs, self-determination, assistance geared to 
the consumer and participation in politics and administration.11
Theoretically, the right to independent living is grounded in the social model 
of disability,12 which distinguishes between the impairments that people have and 
the oppression which they experience. Most importantly, it defines ‘disability’ 
as the social oppression, not the form of impairment.13 This model is reflected 
in the CRPD, which recognizes that disability is an evolving concept and that it 
results from the interaction between persons with impairments and attitudinal and 
environmental barriers that hinder their full and effective participation in society 
on an equal basis with others.
7  Camilla Parker and Luke Clements, ‘The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities: A New Right to Independent Living?’ (2008) 4 EHRLR 509.
8  Rosemary Kayess and Phillip French, ‘Out of Darkness into Light? Introducing 
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities’ (2008) 8(1) Human Rights Law 
Review 1.
9  ibid.
10  Gerard Quinn, ‘Reflecting Strategically about the UN Convention on the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities’ (Interights Guest Speaker Series, London, December 2011). 
11  Ingolf Osterwitz, The Concept of Independent Living – A New Perspective in 
Rehabilitation’ (HELIOS European Workshop, Venice, October 1994).
12  Parker and Clements (n 7).
13  Mike Oliver, The Politics of Disablement (London, Macmillan 1990) 22.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
162
Article 19 and Developing Countries
Article 19 of the CRPD is one of the articles that illustrated a clear divide between 
the negotiating standpoints of the developing and developed countries.14 The issue 
presents itself differently in the Global North and in the South.15 The critical issue 
in the Global North is institutionalization. As Parker and Clements argue, ‘in many 
parts of Europe the predominant provision for disabled people (children as well as 
adults) continues to be institutionalisation (often for life)’.16
The critical issue in the Global South is the absence of the required support 
services to enable independence and facilitate participation in society.17 Further, in 
most countries of the Global South, mutual caring and support in the community 
is a norm, and it is often felt that there is no need for disabled persons to live 
physically and financially apart from their families. The emphasis is on one 
becoming a contributing member of the family rather than on managing one’s 
own household alone. Thus, the concept of independent living associated with 
developed countries is not always relevant in developing countries. As a result, 
during the negotiations on the CRPD, the Global South placed great emphasis on 
support to families taking care of persons with disabilities. Further, states from the 
Global South emphasized the promotion of supportive assistance rather than an 
obligation to provide such assistance.
In Kenya (and in most African states), institutionalization is not the key 
issue. The Kenyan context is one in which persons with disabilities live with 
their families, but without state-funded individualized support services, in the 
background of a cultural context of a (largely) communal way of life.18 Hence, in 
Kenya, access to housing is not perceived as being key to the implementation of 
Article 19. Indeed, the State Report to the CRPD Committee makes no mention of 
the right to housing when reporting on measures taken towards implementing the 
14  A developing country, also called a less-developed country (LDC), is a nation 
with a low living standard, under-developed industrial base and a low UNDP Human 
Development Index (HDI) relative to other countries. There is no universal, agreed-upon 
criterion for what makes a country developing versus developed and which countries fit 
these two categories, although there are general reference points, such as the size of a 
nation’s GDP compared to other nations. Kenya was ranked 145th in the 2012 HDI. 
15  The Global South refers to the countries of the rest of the world, most of which 
are located in the Southern Hemisphere. It includes both countries with medium human 
development (88 countries with an HDI less than 0.8 and greater than 0.5) and low human 
development (32 countries with an HDI of less than 0.5). For a more detailed discussion on 
cultural relativism and universal human rights, see Jack Donnelly, ‘Cultural Relativism and 
Universal Human Rights’ (1984) 6 Human Rights Quarterly 400.
16  Parker and Clements (n 7).
17  Inge Komardjaja, ‘Independent Living and Self-determination of Women with 
Physical Disabilities in Bandung, Indonesia’ (2004) 24 Disability Studies Quarterly 1.
18  While generally institutionalization is not the predominant provision for persons 
with disabilities in Kenya, it is with regard to persons with psychosocial disabilities. 

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
163
right of persons with disabilities to live independently in the community. Indeed, 
the concept of independent living does exist in Kenya, except that it has been 
expressed through different concepts. In Kenya (and in most of Africa), emphasis 
has been placed on habilitation and rehabilitation aimed at enabling persons with 
disabilities to achieve independence.
Interlinks within the Convention
In order to understand the full import of Article 19, one must be cognizant of 
the links that exist throughout the Convention.19 Article 19 has been classified 
alongside other autonomy and dignity articles, i.e. Articles, 12, 17, 18 and 22 
(legal capacity, liberty of movement and nationality, personal integrity and privacy, 
respectively).20 It is also closely linked to participation rights, enshrined in Articles 
9, 13, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 29 (accessibility, access to justice, employment, 
health, education, personal mobility, habilitation, participation in private and 
public life, and freedom of expression, respectively).21 While independent living 
is closely linked to the above rights, it is more than the sum of these rights, Article 
12, on legal capacity, is a particularly key to independent living. 22 International 
disability rights experts Gerard Quinn and Michael Stein have stated the following 
with regard to the right to legal capacity:
This right acknowledges that people with disabilities have an innate capacity 
to decide their destinies for themselves – where to live, who to live with, what 
education or employment to pursue – and to have those choices respected. And if 
there is to be an intervention on the part of the State, the primary impulse should 
be to support a residuum of capacity, and to intervene to support people to make 
decisions for themselves, with appropriate safeguards.23
Defining Independent Living
According to the UK Office for Disability Issues:
19  Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, ‘On Progress 
in the Implementation of the Recommendations Contained in the Study on the Human 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities’, UN Doc A/HRC/4/75, para 19.
20  Eilionoir Flynn, ‘UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities’ (9th 
Irish Human Rights Commission & Law Society Conference, Dublin, October 2011).
21  ibid.
22  Commissioner for Human Rights, ‘The Right of People with Disabilities to Live 
Independently and Be Included in the Community’, COMM, Issue Paper (2012) 3.
23  Focus Report 2009 (n 4). 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
164
Independent living does not mean doing things for yourself, or living on your own. 
Instead, it means having choice and control over the assistance and/or equipment 
needed to go about your daily life and having equal access to housing, transport 
and mobility, health, employment and education and training opportunities.24
Clearly, these issues are relevant to people with disabilities living both in developed 
and developing countries.
Prior to the CRPD, no other human rights instrument contained an explicit 
right for all persons with disabilities to live in the community as equal citizens.25 
The right to independent living as defined by the CRPD is not a new right, but, 
rather, a creative interpretation of existing rights that has been specially tailored 
to apply to the context of persons with disabilities. In particular, the UN Standard 
Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities 199326 
already provided that ‘persons with disabilities are members of the society and 
have the right to remain within their local communities. They should receive the 
support they need within ordinary structures of education, health, employment and 
social services’. The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child General Comment 
7 (2006) stated that young children should never be institutionalized solely on the 
grounds of disability.27 It added that it is a priority to ensure that they have equal 
opportunities to participate fully in education and community life, including by 
the removal of barriers that impede the realization of their rights. Further, young 
disabled children are entitled to appropriate specialist assistance, including support 
for their parents (or other caregivers).
Article 19 of the CRPD requires that States Parties recognize the equal rights 
of persons with disabilities to live in the community with choices equal to others, 
and to facilitate the full inclusion and participation of persons with disabilities in 
the community. Community living (also known as independent living in some 
jurisdictions) refers to persons with disabilities being able to live in their local 
communities as equal citizens, with the support that they need to participate in 
everyday life. It is about persons with disabilities participating in the life activities 
that matter to all of us, including education, health care, occupation, leisure, social 
support, civic engagement and housing.28
Article 19 applies to all people with disabilities, regardless of their support 
needs. It has been demonstrated that people who were deemed too ‘disabled’ to 
24  Office for Disability Issues, Independent Living: A Cross-government Strategy 
about Independent Living for Disabled People (London, February 2008).
25  ibid.
26  UN Doc A/RES/48/96. 
27  UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment 7, (2005) UN Doc 
CRC/C/GC/7/Rev.1.
28  Camilla Parker, ‘Article 19 – Living Independently and Being Included in the 
Community: Realizing the Right to Community Living’ (4th International Summer School, 
Galway, June 2012).

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
165
benefit from community inclusion thrive in an environment where they are valued, 
where their autonomy is nurtured and where they are given choices.29 In applying 
the social model of disability to Article 19, people with high support needs are not 
excluded from society ‘because of any inherent feature or condition of the person 
him or herself, but by the social and physical environment in which they live’.30 
Community living emphasizes that whatever support and assistance that may be 
given should be based on the will and preferences of the person with disabilities.
The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which monitors 
the implementation of the CRPD, has already begun to clarify the nature of state 
obligations arising from ratification, recently examining reports from Spain,31 
Tunisia,32 Peru,33 Argentina,34 China35 and Hungary.36 Three key conclusions arise 
from the Committee Reports. First, the Committee has interpreted Article 19 as 
placing choice and autonomy at the centre of the right to live independently and 
be included in the community. Second, the States Parties are required to make 
available adequate funding in order for the right to be effectively vindicated.37 
Third, reasonable accommodation is crucial for the inclusion of persons with 
disabilities in their local communities.
The Situation in Kenya
The Constitution of Kenya, 2010
Kenya ratified the CRPD on 19 May 2008. A new Constitution for Kenya was 
adopted on 27 August 2010, and Article 2(6) states that: ‘Any treaty or convention 
ratified by Kenya shall form part of the law of Kenya under this Constitution.’ 
Hence, the CRPD is now an integral part of Kenyan constitutional law.
The Constitution of Kenya provides for social economic rights, including the 
right to the highest attainable standard of health, to adequate food, to safe water, to 
social security and to education. Article 43(1)(b) provides for the right to housing: 
29  ibid.
30  ibid.
31  Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 6th Session (19–23 
September 2011) UN Doc CRPD/C/ESP/CO/1.
32  UN Doc CRPD/C/TUN/CO/1.
33  UN Doc CRPD/C/PER/CO/1.
34  UN Doc CRPD/C/ARG/CO/1.
35  UN Doc CRPD/C/CHN/CO/1.
36  UN Doc CRPD/C/HUN/CO/1. 
37  See Gerard Quinn and Suzanne Doyle, Getting a Life – Living Independently and 
Being Included in the Community – A Legal Study of the Current Use and Future Potential 
of the EU Structural Funds to Contribute to the Achievement of Article 19 of the United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNHR, Regional Office for 
Europe 2012). 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
166
‘every person has the right to accessible and adequate housing, and to reasonable 
standards of sanitation’. Article 21(2), (3) and (4) of the Constitution allows for the 
progressive realization of the economic and social rights, and requires particular 
attention to be paid to vulnerable persons, including persons with disabilities.
Interpreting the new Constitution, the High Court of Kenya sitting in Embu 
in Sangor Osman in November 2011 adopted the iconic (but limited) precedent 
of the South African case of Grootboom,38 as well as other international human 
rights standards, in a landmark decision. The case involved over 1,000 residents of 
Garissa town in the north-east of the country who had been evicted by government 
agents in 2010. The Court found that their eviction was unconstitutional. Further, 
it upheld the principle of indivisibility of all human rights and proceeded to 
order the government to provide shelter and other basic amenities to the same 
standard as existed before the eviction took place. In rendering its decision, the 
Court articulated that the obligation to take requisite measures did not mean that 
states should do more than its available resources permitted. However, it drew 
inspiration from the provisions of the South African Constitution, which obliged 
the ‘state to devise and implement a coherent, co-coordinated programme’ that 
would ensure that the realizations of the rights as guaranteed in the Constitution 
were not jeopardized.
Legislation
Kenya has enacted six legislative measures relating to housing. The Building 
Societies Act 1956, the Housing Act 1953 and the Sectional Properties Act 1987 
provide the legal bases for financing and ownership arrangements for housing. The 
Building Societies Act 1956 provides for the formation and registration of building 
societies, while the Sectional Properties Act 1987 provides for the division of 
buildings into units to be owned by individual proprietors, and common properties 
to be owned by proprietors of the units as tenants in common. The Housing Act 
1953 provides for public financing for home development as it establishes the 
National Housing Corporation (NHC), a parastatal organization which is charged 
with providing loans from public funds for the construction of private dwellings. 
The Housing Act 1953 does not provide for any tangible right to housing, sanitation 
or water. The only provision that somehow ‘resembles’ (and very weakly at that) 
a right to adequate housing is the proviso in s 23 that:
Whenever it appears to the Minister, and after a local inquiry in public by an 
officer appointed by the Minister for that purpose at which the local authority 
and other parties interested shall be entitled to be heard, that the provision made 
in the area of any local authority for the needs of persons ordinarily employed 
within that area for normal requirements is inadequate or unsuitable, the Minister 
38  Government of the Republic of South Africa and others v Grootboom and others 
2000 (11) BCLR 1169 (CC).

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
167
may, by written notice, require that local authority, within such time as may be 
stated in the notice, to make such provision for the housing of such persons as 
the Minister may specify.
The Rent Restriction Act 1959 sets limits on arbitrary increases of rent,39 penalties 
for accepting excessive rent40 and restrictions on distress for rent.41 The Act also 
establishes a tribunal,42 which is mandated with, among other functions, the right 
to investigate complaints made against a tenant or a landlord, and consequently 
to make such orders as it may deem necessary. The Landlords and Tenants Act 
1965 makes provision with respect to certain premises for the protection of tenants 
of such premises from eviction or exploitation. Both of these regulate relations 
between landlords and tenants. An associated law requires employers to subsidize 
their employees’ housing costs.
The Persons with Disabilities Act 2003 provides for the rights and rehabilitation 
of persons with disabilities, the achievement of the equalization of opportunities 
for persons with disabilities and the establishment of the National Council for 
Persons with Disabilities. The Act touches on housing in two regards. First, 
one of the members of the National Council for Persons with Disabilities is a 
representative from the Ministry of Housing. Second, one of the functions of the 
Council under s 7 of the Act is to consult with the government in relation to the 
provision of suitable and affordable housing for persons with disabilities. In the 
absence of data, it is difficult to say whether the Council has taken any steps under 
this mandate and, if so, how effectively this has been done.
Policy Documents
There are several policy documents that touch on housing in Kenya. These include 
Vision 2030,43 Kenya’s National Land Policy 2009,44 the Draft National Policy 
on Human Rights 201045 and Kenya’s National Housing Policy.46 The National 
Housing Policy specifically identifies the poor, women, children in difficult 
39  Rent Restriction Act 1959, s 9. 
40  ibid s 10. 
41  ibid s 16. 
42  ibid s 4.
43  The National Economic and Social Council of Kenya (NESC), Kenya Vision 2030: 
The Popular Version (2007). Vision 2030 is the Kenyan government’s key development 
blueprint on which specific government policies are based.
44  Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Lands, Sessional Paper No 3 of 2009 on Land 
Policy (Nairobi, 2009).
45  Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Justice, National Cohesion and Constitutional 
Affairs & Kenya National Commission on Human Rights, Draft National Policy on Human 
Rights, 2010) (2010).
46  Republic of Kenya, Ministry of Housing, Sessional Paper No 3 of 2004 on 
National Housing Policy for Kenya (Nairobi, 2004).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
168
circumstances, persons with disabilities, internally displaced persons and the 
elderly as groups of persons requiring priority consideration in gaining access to 
adequate housing and related resources.47
The National Housing Policy outlines several objectives in order to improve 
the housing situation of the identified vulnerable or disadvantaged groups. 
It provides that the state must facilitate greater access to housing finance to 
vulnerable groups and take steps to assist economically vulnerable groups in 
housing improvement and/or production. More specifically, it mandates the 
state to facilitate the development of credit institutions that can provide shelter 
financing to persons with disabilities, among other marginalized groups. The 
policy also urges the state to upgrade slums and informal settlements, and to 
develop dwellings that are friendly to persons with disabilities. This is critical, 
taking into account the fact that the majority of persons with disabilities in urban 
areas live in informal settlements.48
While the National Housing Policy does not specifically identify housing 
discrimination as an issue, it implicitly recognizes that certain groups of people 
have historically suffered direct and indirect forms of housing discrimination. 
Consequently, it provides that the state must give these vulnerable or disadvantaged 
groups priority consideration in accessing adequate housing.49 While the National 
Housing Policy makes reference to the progressive realization of the right to 
adequate housing, this has not been accompanied by comprehensive programmes, 
strategies and allocation of resources.
The Situation of Persons with Disabilities in Kenya with Regard to Article 19
According to the 2009 Population and Housing Census report, Kenya has a 
total population of 38,610,097 people, 4.6 per cent of whom are persons with 
disabilities.50 However, the 4.6 per cent disability prevalence figure is disputable 
on several grounds. First, the World Report on Disability (2011) estimates that 
including children, over a billion people (or about 15 per cent of the world’s 
population) live with a disability.51 Second, there is a symbiotic relationship 
47  Hakijamii, Assessment of the Realization of the Right to Housing in Kenya 2009–
2010: Taking Stock of What is and What Ought to Be (January 2011).
48  Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, ‘Future Sessions, 
Consideration of Reports’; National Report: Kenya’s Initial Report Submitted under Article 
35(1) of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities – 31st 
August 2011.
49  Hakijamii (n 47).
50  Kenya National Bureau of Statistics and Population and Housing Census http://
www.knbs.or.ke/censuspopulation.php accessed 29 June 2013.
51  World Health Organization and the World Bank, World Report on Disability 
(Malta, WHO 2011). 

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
169
between poverty and disability. Hence, the current high levels of poverty in the 
country are likely to result in a greater proportion of the population being persons 
with disabilities. Third, there is a problem with the instruments used to identify 
persons with disabilities, so that mild to moderate impairments frequently go 
undetected.52 Hence, the actual number of persons with disabilities in Kenya is 
likely to be over five million people, most of whom live with their families, but 
without the necessary support to ensure their participation and inclusion in the 
community. Consequently, the issue of exclusion is important because it affects a 
significant sector of the society whose inclusion and participation Article 19 of the 
CRPD seeks to ensure.
The legal position of persons with disabilities in Kenya has radically improved 
since the early 2000s. Kenya enacted the Persons with Disabilities Act 2003, which 
provided, for the first time, a right to non-discrimination on grounds of disability. 
In 2008, Kenya ratified the CRPD, which became part of Kenyan law with the 
promulgation of the Constitution of Kenya 2010.53 However, despite these positive 
changes in the law, ‘the lives of people with disabilities in Kenya are marked by 
experiences of discrimination, prejudice and inequality’.54
Several Kenyan studies demonstrate that for the majority of persons with 
disabilities in Kenya, Article 19 remains unfulfilled. For instance, investigations 
carried out for the UN Universal Periodic Review found that approximately 74 
per cent of people with disabilities interviewed reported that they were denied 
the right to make decisions on issues affecting their own lives. They described 
how they had been forced into situations against their will because they had been 
judged incapable of making decisions on their own.55
52  University of Nairobi, A Final Report of the University Disability Mainstreaming 
Committee (February 2011).
53  Equal Rights Trust and Kenya Human Rights Commission, In the Spirit of 
Harambee: Addressing Discrimination and Inequality in Kenya (London, February 2012).
54  African Union of the Blind, Kenya Union of the Blind and Centre for Disability 
Rights Education and Advocacy, State of Disabled Peoples Rights in Kenya (Kenya, 2007). 
In preparing this report, the authors interviewed 95 persons with various forms of disability 
in three different regions of Kenya with the aim of identifying the barriers they faced and 
understanding the human rights situation of disabled people. A total of 86 per cent of 
respondents stated that they had experienced unequal treatment, while 80 per cent reported 
experiencing isolation, segregation and lack of support for their needs, and 74 per cent 
felt they had been denied the right to make decisions regarding their own lives. The report 
identified three types of barrier preventing people with disabilities from participating in life 
on an equal basis: abuse and violence, discriminatory attitudes and limited access. A total 
of 56.8 per cent of participants in the study reported that they had experienced abuse and 
violence in the community or society at large, while almost three-quarters (74.7 per cent) of 
interviewees had experienced discriminatory attitudes in society. 
55  Kenya UPR Stakeholders Coalition, Univeral Periodic Review, ‘Annual Progress 
Report 22nd September 2010 – 21st September 2011’ (Nairobi, Kenya, September 2011).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
170
The majority of persons with disabilities in Kenya live with their families, and 
the primary responsibility for providing the necessary support is situated within 
the family.56 In a study of people with disabilities in Kenya conducted by Ingstad 
and Grut in 2007, they note that: ‘Individual independence can be a solution when 
the family is non-supportive, but we have seen that those who manage almost as a 
rule have a supportive family to rely on.’57
In spite of the central role of families, a 2012 report carried out by the Equal 
Rights Trust (ERT) and Kenya Human Rights Commission states that:
ERT’s interviews with persons with different forms of disability found that 
prejudice, stigma and discriminatory attitudes towards disability prevailed 
within families, and that the discriminatory treatment which persons with 
disabilities experienced in the home often had far-reaching consequences for 
their ability to participate equally in other areas of life.58
Thus, it is clear that although the majority of persons with disabilities live 
with their families and are physically located in the community, this does not 
necessarily translate into their participation and inclusion in the community on 
equal terms with others.
The right to live independently is further hampered by poor education (and the 
poor self-image and self-motivation that follow), which hinder market entry at a 
level that is genuinely commensurate with an individual’s abilities.59 Furthermore, 
a lack of equally effective and accessible transport facilities hinders not merely 
labour market mobility but also ordinary social intercourse.60 Lack of access to the 
assistive devices needed to enable active and equal participation in life presents 
a particular problem for many of those with physical and sensory disabilities, 
which, in combination with direct discrimination against them, acts as a barrier 
56  See Open Society’s blog: ‘Only a fraction of the people in Kenya in need of 
support services end up in Mathari (Kenya’s only psychiatric facility), thankfully. But most 
of the rest are isolated at home without the support they need’ http://blog.soros.org/2011/03/
the-other-side-of-kenyas-terrible-secret accessed 25 February 2013.
57  Benedicte Ingstad and Lisbet Grut, ‘See Me But Do Not Forget Me; People with 
Disabilities in Kenya’ (SINTEF Health Research, Oslo, Norway, 2007) 52.
58  Equal Rights Trust and Kenya Human Rights Commission (n 53).
59  UN Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding Observations 
on Kenya, UN Doc E/C.12/KEN/CO/1, 2008, paras 16, 34. The UNCESCR in its concluding 
observations on the Government of Kenya’s 2007 report drew attention to the fact that 
many persons with disabilities remained unemployed and had limited access to education.
60  Gerard Quinn, ‘The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and 
Disability: A Conceptual Framework’ in Theresia Degener and Yolan Koster-Dreese (eds), 
Human Rights and Disabled Persons: Essays and Relevant Human Rights Instruments 
(Dordrecht, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers 1995).

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
171
to independent living.61 Other problems affecting persons with intellectual and 
mental disabilities include the under-provision of specialist facilities and services 
and a lack of facilitation for augmentative and alternative communication (AAC). 
All these issues profoundly affect the right to live in the community.
While the majority of persons with disabilities in Kenya live with their families, 
institutionalization does occur in the context of mental health care and, to some 
extent, the provision of education in separate settings for children with disabilities. 
In the context of mental health care in Kenya, the only formalized support comes 
in the form of institutionalization in psychiatric hospitals. Community-based 
mental health-care services in Kenya are limited62 and lack adequate funding to 
reach a wider proportion of the population affected. Kenya has little provision for 
mental health; the government only spends 0.01 per cent of its health budget on it.63 
Persons with psychosocial disabilities either live in their homes without support 
(without meaningful engagement in the community) or as homeless people, 
particularly in urban areas. Otherwise, they are institutionalized in psychiatric 
hospitals, usually Mathare Mental Hospital – the main referral hospital in Kenya 
with regard to mental healthcare (in Kenya, referral hospitals are the highest level 
of health institutions).
Institutionalization in Kenya to a significant extent also occurs in the provision 
of education for learners with disabilities in separate settings.64 Learners with 
disabilities largely access education in boarding schools, away from their families 
and their communities from primary-school level upwards, largely due to a lack of 
choice. Learners without disabilities also attend boarding schools, but usually from 
secondary-school level upwards. Primary-level education is state-funded; hence, 
non-disabled learners attending boarding schools at primary-school level do so 
out of choice (usually to get to a better school), which is not the case for learners 
with disabilities. The latter are often barred from mainstream education and can 
only access education in separate settings, usually far away from their community. 
This lack of choice is also evident at secondary-school level – although less so, in 
the sense that the better-quality public secondary schools for all students tend to 
61  Equal Rights Trust and Kenya Human Rights Commission (n 53). The report 
further notes that: ‘In many parts of the country, access to assistive devices and specialist 
services for persons with physical and sensory disabilities is low, creating substantial 
problems across all areas of life.’
62  Elizabeth Kamundia, ‘Choice, Support and Inclusion: Implementing Article 19 of 
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Kenya’ (LLM thesis, National 
University of Ireland, Galway 2012).
63  Mind Freedom Kenya, ‘Report on Mental Health in Kenya’ (Nairobi, Kenya, 
October 2008).
64  Public education in Kenya is based on an 8-4-4 system, with eight years of primary 
education followed by four years of secondary school and four years of college or university. 
Kenya Education System Overview http://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/772/Kenya-
EDUCATIONAL-SYSTEM-OVERVIEW.html accessed 2 July 2013.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
172
be boarding schools. The implication of this is that children with disabilities are 
denied the choice to exercise their right to education within the community.65
It is important to note that the level of participation and involvement in 
community life depends on how adequately a person’s support needs are addressed. 
The needs of persons with high support needs are often not met, leading to a 
greater incidence of exclusion from society. This distinction has been expressed in 
terms of the ‘double invisibility’ of some persons with disabilities.66
The Situation of Persons with Disabilities in Kenya with Regard to the Right 
to Housing
Persons with disabilities are among the groups identified as vulnerable or 
disadvantaged by General Comment 4 of the UN Committee on Economic and 
Social Rights.67 Hence, policy and legal frameworks for housing must take into 
account the special housing needs of persons with disabilities. This is not the case 
in reality in Kenya. The Standard Media Group reported on the difficulties that 
Keziah Mwelu, a woman with physical disabilities, faced with regard to housing:
The switches, cooking slabs, kitchen sinks, kitchen cabinets and taps are too 
high for her and she has to ask for assistance when using them. The washrooms 
too, are not disability compliant – there are no support rails and neither is there 
enough space to maneuver about. It gets worse when renting a house and the 
entire ground floor is taken, nobody is willing to give up their house for this 
disabled person who cannot get themselves to say, the fourth floor.68
Persons with intellectual disabilities and those with psychosocial disabilities also face 
difficulties accessing housing, primarily because most of them are unemployed.69 
This significantly impacts their capacity to choose where and with whom to live, 
and, indeed, their capacity to have choice and control over their lives generally.
The overall housing situation is a major factor in the implementation of Article 
19. In this context, it is important to highlight some general issues with regard to 
65  Kamundia (n 62).
66  Gerard Quinn and Theresia Degener, ‘The Current Use and Future Potential of 
United Nations Human Rights Instruments in the Context of Disability’ (United Nations, 
2002, HR/PUB/02/1, 23): ‘Some groups of people with disabilities are more invisible than 
others ... People with intellectual disabilities find it difficult in many societies to make 
progress – or at least as much progress as other groups with disabilities.’
67  Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, ‘General Comment No 4: 
The Right to Adequate Housing’ UN Doc E/1992/23, annex III at 114 (1991). 
68  Nloki Chege, ‘Home and Away: Building for the Disabled’ Standard Digital 
(Nairobi, 7 July 2011).
69  Kamundia (n 62).

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
173
the right to housing in Kenya in order to really comprehend the dilemmas arising 
with regard to a specific group – persons with disabilities.
Kenya is currently grappling with the issue of resettling internally displaced 
persons who were displaced as a result of the post-election violence of 2008. 
Persons with disabilities, of course, are among the internally displaced persons. 
Kenya experiences high levels of poverty. According to the UN Human 
Development Reports, Kenya is rated as being of medium human development, 
ranking in the lower quarter of 182 countries. Some 50 per cent of the population 
live below the poverty line.70 Poverty in urban areas involves an acute shortage 
of habitable dwellings, inadequate infrastructure, basic amenities and services, 
overcrowding, extensive slums and squatter settlements.71 Some 60–80 per cent 
of residents in Kenya’s largest urban centres, Kisumu, Mombasa and Nairobi, 
live in informal settlements. These informal settlements are crowded, with poor-
quality housing, and lack basic services such as access roads, education facilities 
and sanitation facilities, and also suffer from chronic insecurity.72 This is further 
compounded by the endemic cases of forced evictions, most of whose victims are 
the poor and marginalized groups .
Conditions of poverty have a direct bearing on the realization of the right to 
housing, particularly in the Kenyan context, where housing developments and 
provision remain in the hands of the private sector. The result is that quality low-
cost housing remains unavailable for the majority of low-income urban dwellers, 
among whom persons with disabilities are disproportionately over-represented.
Kenya’s complex ethnic diversity has also presented challenges with regard 
to discrimination in housing. There have been occasional media reports of 
individuals denied opportunities to rent on the basis of ethnicity and race. Kenya 
lacks an adequate legal framework specific to discrimination in housing which 
leaves victims with little recourse. This is compounded in the context of persons 
with disabilities, due to the fact that they face additional barriers in accessing 
justice. Work on the realization of the right to housing is also hampered by the 
lack of data and statistics, particularly with regard to economic and social rights.
In this context, Article 19(c) of the CRPD requires the Kenyan state to ensure 
that ‘community services and facilities for the general population are available 
on an equal basis to persons with disabilities and are responsive to their needs’. 
The services referred to by Article 19(c) include housing, but the level of general 
housing services in Kenya, particularly in urban areas, is poor. The difficulty in this 
regard is clear – how does one access the right to housing if there are no affordable 
70  In terms of its population living under $1.25 and $2.00 a day, it ranks at 70.7 per 
cent and 80.0 per cent respectively. 
71  Kamau Esther Njeri, ‘They Are No Longer Policy Goals But Rights: 
Justiciability of Housing and Water Rights for Slum Dwellers in Kenya in the Wake 
of the New Constitution’ http://www.kituochasheria.or.ke/index2.php?option=com_
docman&task=doc_view&gid=74&Itemid=92 accessed 15 October 2012.
72  Hakijamii (n 47).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
174
houses? How does one exercise choice of where and with whom to live if one’s 
resources are limited? Most importantly, in circumstances where public services 
are limited for everyone, what does this mean for persons with disabilities? At the 
very minimum, it means they should be able to avail themselves of services at a 
level commensurate with others, but this is not saying very much where there are 
no services to speak of for everyone. This demonstrates the difficulties inherent in 
implementing Article 19 in a resource-scarce setting.
Some Recommendations on Implementing Article 19
To facilitate the right to independent living, it is necessary to remove the barriers 
that hinder its realization. In the context of Kenya, these barriers stem from a 
combination of various factors, including stigma, inaccessibility of places, 
services and social structures, and lack of support within the community.73 The 
right to housing is adversely affected by the high levels of poverty currently being 
experienced in the country, which negatively impact on the fulfilment of social and 
economic rights generally. In order to address these and other barriers, and move 
along the implementation of both the right to live independently in the community 
and the right to adequate housing, the following recommendations are pertinent.
The government should set aside more funds for the Kenya Slum Upgrading 
Project,74 which seeks to improve housing in the informal settlements. Further, a 
special tax should be imposed on unused land to go towards the purchase of land 
for upgrading urban settlements.75 This is particularly pertinent where the vast 
majority of persons with disabilities in urban areas live in informal settlements. 
The upgraded shelter should be accessible to persons with disabilities, in line with 
Article 43(1)(b) of the Constitution.
The government should review all existing legislation and policies that touch 
on housing to bring them into line with the constitutional recognition of the right to 
accessible and adequate housing. Specifically, there is need to ensure that the most 
vulnerable individuals are protected through the prohibition of discrimination in 
housing.76 Discrimination here must be understood in line with the CRPD, wherein 
the denial of reasonable accommodation is deemed to be discrimination.
The implementation of the National Housing Policy would go a long way 
towards ensuring that persons with disabilities can access housing in Kenya. While 
independent living in the community does not mean merely having a house in which 
to live and includes many other factors, access to housing is key to the enjoyment 
73  Commissioner for Human Rights (n 22).
74  See UN Habitat, ‘Kenya Slum Upgrading Project’ http://www.unhabitat.org/
content.asp?cid=668&catid=206&typeid=13 accessed 17 August 2013. 
75  Nairobi Peoples’ Settlement Network, ‘The Peoples’ Budget: Priorities for Action 
in Nairobi Peoples’ Settlements 2007/08’ (Ufungamano House, 18 April 2007).
76  Hakijamii (n 47).

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
175
of this right. Following Grootboom,77 the measures taken to operationalize the 
National Housing Policy should be comprehensive, coordinated, reasonably 
implemented, balanced, targeted and flexible, and make appropriate provision for 
attention to those whose needs are most urgent and whose ability to enjoy all rights 
is most in peril. Persons with disabilities in Kenya certainly fall within this group. 
These measures should include adequate budgetary allocation towards housing.
The government should engage constructively with the private sector in Kenya 
with regard to the provision of accessible and adequate housing. The Economic 
and Social Rights Centre (Hakijamii), a non-governmental organization (NGO) 
that monitors economic, social and cultural rights in Kenya, asserts that:
Future work on the right to housing must track developments in the private 
sector not just to highlight violations but to provide policy advice on how the 
private sector can be better regulated and incentivized to contribute better to the 
housing rights particularly among the poorest and most vulnerable.78
The government should also involve NGOs working on the right to housing, as 
well as disabled peoples’ organizations (DPOs). These NGOs and DPOs should 
take the lead in assisting the government to set up specific policy and legislative 
frameworks on accessible and adequate housing.79 Together, these organizations 
can help the government in areas where it may be lacking in skills, resources 
or knowledge, particularly with regard to highlighting housing issues that affect 
persons with disabilities. Indeed, Article 4(3) of the CRPD requires that persons 
with disabilities be consulted in all decision-making processes affecting them.
The need for accurate data on disability and the right to housing cannot be 
emphasized sufficiently strongly. There should be widespread awareness-raising 
on the rights of persons with disabilities. Private developers would certainly benefit 
from such knowledge and may be more compelled to design universally accessible 
houses as a result. Failing this, there may be some merit in examining how the 
law may be used to ensure that large-scale developments contain units which are 
accessible to persons with disabilities. Awareness-raising, targeted at persons with 
disabilities and their families, also has a major role to play in enhancing choice and 
control within the lives of persons with disabilities in Kenya.
While commending the Cash Transfer Programme for Persons with Severe 
Disabilities80 which currently exists in Kenya, the state should upscale the 
provision of financial support to families and to persons with disabilities 
77  Government of the Republic of South Africa and others v Grootboom and others 
(n 38).
78  Hakijamii (n 47) 35.
79  ibid.
80  Republic of Kenya, National Plan of Action for Orphans and Vulnerable Children 
2005/6–2009/10 (Nairobi, Department of Children’s Services, Ministry of Gender, Children 
and Social Development 2008).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
176
progressively. In line with the principle of progressive realization, the support 
provided should be adequate to ensure that families can access adequate housing, 
among other social economic rights.
In order to address the instances where institutionalization occurs in the 
country, the state should address mental health care in the country as well as enable 
inclusive education. With regard to mental health care, the state should embody 
the paradigm shift of the CRPD, switching from institutionalization towards a 
community-based mental health-care system. This may be one of the ways of 
addressing the fact that families sometimes abandon their members with mental 
health conditions, leaving them in mental hospitals, and such people become long-
term inmates in psychiatric institutions. It may also lead to reduced homelessness 
among persons with mental health conditions. There is also a need to examine the 
provision of safe houses for persons with psychosocial disabilities transitioning 
from institutionalization back to the community.
With regard to education, the state should progressively reduce the numbers 
of students with disabilities accessing education in separate settings and should 
relocate them, together with the requisite resources to mainstream schools.
It is widely acknowledged that there is a link between Article 19 and Article 12 
of the CRPD on legal capacity.81 The legal requirement to ensure that one should 
be of sound mind in order to enter into contracts exists in Kenyan law. Persons 
with disabilities do not, at least by law, enjoy legal capacity on a par with others. 
The effect this has on access to housing for persons with disabilities, particularly 
those with intellectual and psychosocial disabilities, should be explored.
Finally, the state should provide state-funded centres for community living. 
This is particularly pertinent to the implementation of Article 19(b) of the CRPD.
Conclusion
The answer to the key question ‘is the right to housing of relevance to the right of 
people with disabilities in Kenya to live independently?’ is yes. First, it is obvious 
that according to the social model of disability in which this chapter is grounded 
and upon which the CRPD is predicated, disability is to be understood as resulting 
from the interaction of impairments with an inaccessible environment. With 
regard to Article 19, accessible housing would result to increased choice, control 
and independence among persons with disabilities in the country.
Second, Article 19(c) requires equal access to services, and this must be 
understood to include housing. Additionally, the National Housing Policy 
provides that the state must give these vulnerable or disadvantaged groups priority 
consideration in accessing adequate housing,82 and this includes persons with 
disabilities. Third, Article 19 is about exercising choice of where and with whom to 
81  Focus Report 2009 (n 4) 21.
82  Hakijamii (n 47).

Independent Living for People with Disabilities in Kenya
177
live. The fact that persons with disabilities are disproportionately over-represented 
among the homeless imperils their inclusion in the community. Indeed, fulfilling 
the right to adequate housing is critical for persons with disabilities (particularly 
persons with psychosocial disabilities whose families tend to abandon them in 
mental health facilities), who may not for the time being be in a position to access 
employment in the competitive labour market.
Clearly, there are significant links between the right to live independently 
in the community and the right to adequate housing. It may be that the key to 
implementing Article 19 is the full realization of the right to housing for all.

This page has been left blank intentionally

Chapter 8 
Public Interest Law and Regeneration:  
The Case of Ballymun Community Law 
Centre – Connecting the Dots through 
Community Economic Development
Maria Antonieta Nestor
Introduction 
The development of public interest law in the US in recent years, particularly 
in the field of community economic development (CED), offers a platform for 
comparison through which to assess the evolution of public interest law within 
the CED field in Ireland. While the origins of CED grew amidst the social, 
economic and political changes brought by the War on Poverty of the Kennedy 
and Johnson administrations in the US during the 1960s, in Ireland its origins 
differ. Given the dearth of research in the public interest law arena, little is known 
about the everyday impact of public interest law within Irish society. Moreover, 
developments in other jurisdictions seem not to be present in the Irish public 
interest law landscape. Although this chapter does not provide detailed evaluations 
and country comparisons, suffice it to say that in the US, the involvement of public 
interest lawyers in urban revitalization efforts such as regeneration and urban 
renewal became the main catalyst for the rise of CED law/lawyering,1 an area 
of law that since the 1990s has become a ‘significant new area of public interest 
law’,2 contributing to the narrowing of the gap in accessing civil justice and civil 
legal aid as well as helping to create sustainable communities.
In Ireland, although the development of CED (particularly CED law and 
lawyering) has been influenced by the community law centre movement and 
the search for alternative options to the statutory civil legal aid scheme, urban 
revitalization efforts such as regeneration of affordable housing have also meant 
that the revitalization of low-income communities is taking centre stage in ‘our 
1  It is important to highlight that CED as a movement and as a concept can be traced 
much further back – its roots and genesis can be found within the pre-Civil Rights era. 
2  Brian Glick and Matthew Rossman, ‘Neighborhood Legal Services as House 
Counsel to Community-Based Efforts to Achieve Economic Justice’ (1997) 23 NYU Rev 
L & Soc Change 105, 110.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
180
version’ of CED law and lawyering. This chapter therefore aims at finding how 
CED law and lawyering is practised in Ireland by examining the case of the 
Ballymun Community Law Centre and by arguing that public interest law and 
regeneration efforts can be connected through the further development of CED.
Definitions 
When we speak of CED, three different definitions need to be understood, namely 
CED, CED law and CED lawyering. In short, CED is addressed at the local 
(although nowadays calls to expand the definition of ‘local’ are starting to emerge 
as different types of communities such as immigrants and others are also using 
CED).3 It has a specific geographical focus, makes the community the recipients of 
development and makes that development accountable to the community it serves. 
CED law in turn embraces the efforts made by that local community at developing 
jobs, housing, combating drug abuse and the creation of businesses for low-
income people among others – efforts which are on many occasions supported by 
non-profit organizations and community groups. CED lawyering therefore acts as 
a facilitator by using different legal tools and approaches, all of which are geared 
towards the socio-economic improvement and empowerment of the community.4
Public Interest Law and CED in the US: A Brief Overview 
CED in the US developed out of a social movement5 that tried to ‘revitalize low-
income communities’ and in which affordable housing development played a 
central role.6 The goal of having a ‘decent home and a suitable living environment 
for every American family’ was put on a statutory footing as far back as 1949 
with the enactment of the Housing Act of 1949.7 Since then, efforts to develop and 
3  Wiliam H Simon, ‘Introduction: Lawyers and Community Economic Development’ 
(2007) 95 Cal L Rev 1821. See also Carmen Huertas-Noble, ‘Promoting Working-Owned 
Cooperatives as a CED Empowerment Strategy: A Case Study of Colors and Lawyering 
in Support of Participatory Decision Making and Meaningful Social Change’ (2010) 17 
Clinical L Rev 255, 262–64.
4  For detailed definitions, see Maria A Nestor, ‘CED Lawyering in Ireland: An 
Overview’ (2011) 1(1) Ir Rev CED Law & Pol 6.
5  The community economic development movement originated in the 1960s, but it 
has its roots in the early 1900s, when Booker T Washington and WEB DuBois looked 
at African-American emancipation. See Roger A Clay, Jr and Susan R Jones, ‘What is 
Community Economic Development?’ in Roger A Clay Jr and Susan R Jones (eds), Building 
Healthy Communities: A Guide to Community Economic Development for Advocates, 
Lawyers, and Policy Makers (Chicago, American Bar Association 2009) 5.
6  Clay, Jr and Jones (eds) (n 5).
7  42 USCA §1441.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
181
redevelop communities have shaped the evolution of CED as a whole,8 making 
it into the composite of legal, social and community development that it is today.
While market-based anti-poverty mechanisms or techniques such as the 
channelling of capital via tax financing and investment options (Low-Income 
Housing Tax Credits,9 New Markets Tax Credits10 or the creation of Empowerment 
Zones,11 for example) have played more of a role in the practice of CED law 
in the US, public interest lawyers in Ireland, in contrast, have focused more on 
innovative tools to gain access to justice such as efforts and initiatives that provide 
legal (and non-legal) services to the poor12 – which in turn facilitate the building 
and empowering of communities – rather than on market-based techniques.13
8  Note, however, that the practice of CED law and lawyering came about much 
later in the 1980s with the realization that poverty lawyers were part of the problem of 
client disempowerment rather than the solution to it. See, for example, Scott L Cummings, 
‘Community Economic Development as Progressive Politics: Towards a Grass Root 
Movement for Social Justice’ (2002) 54 Stanford Law Review 400–93; and Daniel S Shah, 
‘Lawyering for Empowerment: Community Development and Social Change’ [1999] 6 
Clinical L Rev 217, 231. 
9  Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) started in 1986 during the Reagan 
administration under the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (100 Stat 2085, 26 USCA §§47, 1042). 
It seeks to leverage investment by obtaining funding from the private market. It has been 
successful in building housing units, whose numbers are well over one million. However, 
how effective the LIHTC has been is hard to tell. For more information about it, see, for 
example, Bill Lockyer, ‘Annual Report 2011: Report on the Allocation of Federal and 
State Low Income Housing Tax Credits in California’ (California Tax Credit Allocation 
Committee, April 2012) 1 www.treasurer.ca.gov/ctcac/2011/annualreport.pdf accessed 18 
January 2013.
10  In 2000, the Clinton administration started the use of New Markets Tax Credits 
(NMTCs), which were set under the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000 (Pub L 
106–554, §1(a)(7) [HR.5662], 21 December 2000, 114 Stat 2763, 2763A–587) in order 
to stimulate business development. In short, the NMTCs were designed to give a jump-
start to low-income communities by encouraging investment. For more information, see 
Rapoza Associates, ‘The New Markets Tax Credit: Progress Report 2012’ (New Markets 
Tax Credit Coalition, June 2012) 1, 5. The Act can be accessed at www.hud.gov/offices/
cpd/economicdevelopment/lawsandregs/laws/actof2000.pdf accessed 18 January 2013.
11  Empowerment Zones (EZs) were created by the Clinton administration as a way 
of following some of the themes of the ‘War on Poverty’ of President Johnson and reverting 
back to the Model Cities Programs. The EZs provided a number of federal benefits over 
a 10-year period. Some of the benefits included in them were an increase of grants for 
social services and economic development, the waiver of certain regulatory matters and 
tax benefits among others. For more information on EZs, see William H Simon, ‘The 
Community Economic Development Movement’ [2002] Wis L Rev 377–436, 389. 
12  For example, community legal education on housing law and policy or consumer 
law and group work enabling women to have a voice.
13  Market-based techniques such the use of tax incentives have been used in 
regeneration efforts and other types of development in Ireland, but public interest lawyers 
seem not to appear on the landscape. For example, when the regeneration of Dolphin’s 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
182
The tackling of urban poverty and the creation of a better urban economy in 
Ireland has meant that the government has played much more of a role in funding 
the development of social housing regeneration schemes14 when compared to the 
US, giving the Irish public interest lawyer a certain advantage and disadvantage 
when it comes to regeneration efforts.15 The advantage in Ireland is based on the 
government reaching out to community groups, non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) and service providers with the aim of engendering collaborative efforts 
in order to achieve specific regeneration goals, whereas in the US, there has 
been much more private market intervention. By the same token, this approach 
has created a disadvantage for Irish public interest lawyers as it has made them 
indifferent when private market intervention in regeneration efforts is concerned. 
Anecdotal evidence shows that when PPPs16 were used in regeneration efforts, 
local communities were at a great disadvantage as there were no lawyers 
representing community interests.17
Regeneration efforts in Ireland and the involvement of public interest law 
are best exemplified by the regeneration efforts of Ballymun and most recently 
Limerick, as it is possible to find that because of regeneration, access to legal 
aid services has become part of the development/regeneration agenda rather than 
existing in isolation. This change of approach that placed legal aid services within 
a regeneration framework did not look at access to justice and the provision of 
Barn via a public-private partnership (PPP) took place, there were no lawyers representing 
the community interests and, to date, there is no record of lawyers representing community 
interests in relation to social housing regeneration under PPP schemes: email correspondence 
from Dr Rory Hearne to the author (February 2012). For an account of the type of policies 
and legislation in relation to fiscal incentives, see Brendan Williams, ‘Fiscal Incentives and 
Urban Regeneration in Dublin’ (University College Dublin 2006) Working Papers Series, 
Planning and Environmental Policies Research Series.
14  Regeneration of social housing in Ireland has taken place under different schemes 
and under an array of government department. Data from 2006 indicate that there were 
18 separate schemes administered by five different government departments and agencies. 
These schemes can be divided into three different types according to the way they are 
funded, namely local authority-led, multi-agency-led and PPPs. For more detail on this 
matter, see Kasey Treadwell Shine and Michelle Norris, Regenerating Local Authority 
Housing Estates: Review of Policy and Practice (Dublin, Centre for Housing Research 
2006), Housing Policy Discussion Series 15–30.
15  The role of housing associations has also aided government efforts. Their role in 
CED would require further research which is outside the remit of this research.
16  PPPs were first introduced in Ireland on a pilot basis in June 1999. For more 
information on PPPs, see Rory Hearne, ‘Origins, Development and Outcomes of Public-
Private Partnerships in Ireland: The Case of PPPs in Social Housing Regeneration’ (Combat 
Poverty Agency, November 2009) Working Paper Series 09/07; and Rory Hearne, Public 
Private Partnerships in Ireland: Failed Experiment or the Way Forward? (Manchester, 
Manchester University Press 2011).
17  See n 11 and Hearne, ‘Origins’ (n 16).

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
183
legal aid services from an exclusively legal perspective,18 but rather from a much 
wider perspective aimed at combating poverty and social exclusion. Law would 
form part of a composite of legal, social policy and community development 
efforts that as a whole would interact to address issues of poverty and empower the 
local community, thus developing our understanding of CED law and lawyering.
Thus, Ballymun Community Law Centre (BCLC) was born out of a development/
poverty agenda based on regeneration, particularly social regeneration,19 and 
not directly as a result of access to justice calls – an agenda under which public 
interest lawyers reacted favourably to regeneration efforts by contributing to 
the creation of this independent community-based law centre, resulting in the 
formation of a collaborative practice that made lawyers part of the development 
process20 rather than simple observers.21 Moreover, BCLC would eventually 
facilitate the improvement of the socio-economic infrastructure and development 
of the community by using different legal approaches and techniques, such as 
the establishment of community legal education and the creation of mediation 
services,22 as well as working in partnership with government.
Consequently, the creation of BCLC provided for the use and implementation 
of a strategic (and comprehensive) model of legal aid supported by the government, 
an approach which had been called for since the 1970s but had been ignored by the 
government until then.
This chapter therefore aims to discover how CED law and lawyering is practised 
in Ireland by examining the case of BCLC as an example of the interaction between 
public interest law and regeneration. The first part offers a brief overview of public 
interest law and CED in the US with a focus on disinvestment and redevelopment 
as a way of having some grounds for comparison. The second part offers a 
background as to the regeneration process in Ireland, including (with broad strokes) 
the influences of sustainable development policies in regeneration. The third part 
gives an overview of the regeneration process of Ballymun, thus providing the 
context for the case study. The fourth part offers BCLC as a case study of CED, 
18  It could be argued that the Free Legal Aid Centres campaign for a strategic model 
of legal aid was always part of a general anti-poverty campaign, but it has always been 
viewed from a legal stance.
19  Interview with Evelyn Hanlon, Chair of the Board of Directors, BCLC Ltd (Dublin 
Civic Offices, 17 January 2012).
20  Because the lawyer can provide, for example, legal education, it helps with the 
understanding of the rights/obligations of the community.
21  The different origins of BCLC when compared to other community law centres 
in Ireland such as the Northside Community Law and Mediation Centre (NCL&MC) has 
important practical implications – for example, it places community law centres within a 
regeneration/sustainable development agenda. 
22  Note, however, that community legal education and mediation services were part of 
legal approaches and techniques already used in Ireland by the NCL&MC and until 2002, it 
was the only community-based law centre existing in the country. More information about 
the NCL&MC can be accessed through its website www.nclc.ie accessed 18 January 2013. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
184
arguing that CED law and lawyering exist in Ireland and that their use and practice 
can help with the strategic model of legal aid by expanding the role of law and the 
legal system in bringing about social change via the combination of law, social 
policy and community development, while at the same time changing lawyering 
attitudes through a re-balancing of power, thus achieving empowerment.
Origins of CED 
Although CED as a movement started in the 1960s, its roots and genesis can be 
traced back to the pre-Civil Rights era and the disinvestment in American cities 
from the 1900s to the 1950s. The pre-Civil Rights era sought to aid the economic 
achievement and political power of the ‘newly emancipated African American 
slaves’.23 The views of community development espoused by Robert Owen and 
Charles Booth in the nineteenth century,24 coupled with the ideologies of Booker 
T. Washington and W.E.B. DuBois in the early twentieth century and the lack of 
investment in the inner cities, also had an input in cementing these roots. Booker 
T. Washington sought to create black self-help and mutual assistance, developing 
and promoting black business ventures and economies,25 as he felt that people were 
not ready for integration.26 W.E.B. DuBois, for his part, promoted the education of 
black students to college level, as he saw education as the best way for advancing 
the development of African Americans.27
The disinvestment in American cities from the 1900s to the 1950s was mainly 
an urban problem that was rooted in a combination of political, economic and 
historical causes. The industrialization of the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries acted as an engine attracting people to the cities as there were plenty of 
jobs available. Immigration from 1880 to 1920 brought millions from Europe and, 
after 1920, a large number from Mexico.28 In this climate of new people, there was 
still much segregation. According to Massey and Denton,29 segregation was never 
as severe as with African Americans. Their pattern of internal migration meant 
people from the southern cities went to the northern cities in search of work and 
people from rural areas travelled to urban areas also looking for work. This shift 
occasioned a fast increase in population and within 40 years (1910s–1950s), the 
social landscape had changed forever. By the 1950s, the level of net-flow migration 
23  Clay, Jr and Jones (n 5) 5.
24  Robert Halpern, Rebuilding the Inner City: A History of Neighborhood Initiatives 
to Address Poverty in the United States (New York, Columbia University Press 1995) 128. 
25  Clay, Jr and Jones (n 5) 5.
26  Halpern (n 24) 128.
27  Clay, Jr and Jones (n 5) 5.
28  Douglas S Massey and Nancy A Denton, American Apartheid: Segregation and 
the Making of the Underclass (Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press 1993) 18.
29  ibid 17–59.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
185
from rural to urban had reached 1.5 million, with 1.4 million in the 1960s, further 
transforming the racial and class composition of American cities.30
These new arrivals to the cities settled where their predecessors lived, which 
in turn gave rise to overcrowding, a shortage of facilities and public services 
and a growth in the population size of the ghettos. Yet, despite the population 
growth during the 1950s and the 1960s, especially in the northern cities,31 housing 
segregation was maintained.32 From the 1950s to the 1970s, the percentage of 
African Americans in these cities doubled.33 By then, the black migrant population 
had increased to 4.5 million.34
The segregation problem was also aided by the use of racially restrictive 
covenants which restricted the amount of housing available for African Americans, 
making segregation in urban communities even more acute. Many neighbourhood 
associations agreed not to sell to African Americans. This created an effective 
mechanism to keep ‘people out’ until the 1940s, when the Supreme Court ruled 
that racially restrictive covenants were unconstitutional.35 Violence and private 
contracts also played their part, which were also sanctioned by the police by not 
recruiting people of colour until after the 1950s. Other mechanisms used to maintain 
and reinforce racial segregation within cities were also fostered, intentionally or 
unintentionally, by some of the policies of the federal government.36
Consequently, activists working in low-income communities in the 1960s 
wanted local residents to be part of the revitalization of their own communities,37 
as it was the input from the local population that could best address the issues 
of segregation, lack of services and disinvestment. Added to this, philanthropic 
responses to disinvestment, such as those promoted by the Ford Foundation in 
the early 1960s, as well as the creation of different government programmes that 
sought the participation of local communities under the auspices of the War on 
Poverty and beyond, further encouraged this approach, marking the start of the 
CED movement, a movement aimed at benefiting those neighbourhoods that on 
many occasions commercial development would not touch because of the social 
conflicts found within them.38
30  ibid 45.
31  ibid. The main cities that saw large increases of the population were Chicago in its 
south and west areas, Cleveland on its east side, Philadelphia on its north and west sides, 
and Newark, Detroit, Baltimore and Washington DC in their central areas.
32  ibid 46.
33  ibid 45.
34  ibid 46.
35  Shelley v Kraemer 334 US 1 (1948). 
36  See later on in this chapter for a description of some of these policies.
37  Clay, Jr and Jones (n 5) 4. 
38  ibid.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
186
Philanthropic responses to disinvestment: the Gray Areas programme and 
Mobilization for Youth
In 1961, as a policy response to community disinvestment, the Ford Foundation 
funded two major neighbourhood-based initiatives: the Gray Areas programme 
(Gray Areas) and Mobilization for Youth (MFY).39
Gray Areas was a new institution which sought to leverage funds in the 
private sector to create projects in the public sector.40 It also brought to the 
fore a discussion in terms of policy. By looking at low-income and inner-city 
communities from the inside out, it was felt that these communities could be fixed. 
It was designed to coordinate local institutional actors and focus on the growth 
of local areas. However, it failed, as its policy was not receptive to community 
participation. It did not emphasize the participation of the residents of the 
communities it was trying to fix41 and ended up not doing what it said it would 
(i.e. fix communities from the inside out). However, it did not demolish or destroy 
the local communities it focused on. Instead, it informed policy to create the War 
on Poverty42 by moving neighbourhood-based initiatives from the philanthropic 
sector to the federal government.
MFY, the second initiative, was aimed at tackling the gang problem in the 
inner cities.43 It encouraged residents to define their own agenda, expanding 
the idea of community work to that of becoming an organizer, and, at the same 
time, organizers could receive a salary for their community work. It was much 
more militant, ‘more activist and confrontational’,44 than Gray Areas. It offered 
leadership development within the inner city areas, a type of leadership that would 
play a bigger role in the late 1960s.45 It also influenced the institutional reforms 
required in schools, welfare and housing departments, and community initiatives.46
Government programmes and participation of local communities 
The Community Action Programme and the Community Action Agencies  The 
Community Action Programme47 (CAP) was one of the programmes of the War on 
Poverty of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.48 It was established under 
39  Halpern (n 24) 89.
40  Gray Areas was different from redevelopment or urban renewal as it was a 
departure from these previous models. 
41  Halpern (n 24) 92.
42  The War on Poverty set out in the Economic Opportunity Act 1964 had two main 
objectives: to prepare children, youths and ‘to some extent’ adults to take advantage of the 
economic opportunities created, and at the same time to enhance those opportunities: ibid 107.
43  ibid 101.
44  ibid 105.
45  ibid.
46  ibid.
47  Pub L 88-452, 20 August 1964, 78 Stat 508. Title II, Part A, Sec 202.
48  1961–69.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
187
the Economic Opportunity Act 1964,49 with the goal of utilizing and mobilizing 
resources (either in rural or urban areas or both), providing social services, 
assistance or other activities (such as ‘developing employment opportunities, 
improving human performance, motivation, and productivity, or bettering the 
conditions under which people live, learn, and work’)50 that would in turn tackle 
poverty (including its cause or causes). The administration and coordination of 
CAP was performed by the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), an agency 
also established under the Act for this purpose.51
Under the CAP, financial assistance for these programmes would be provided 
through public and non-profit agencies eligible for funding. These agencies 
therefore came to be called Community Action Agencies (CAAs).52 CAAs 
thus embodied ‘the federal government’s assumptions, intentions and specific 
programs’.53 The CAP, through the CAAs, had the fiscal duty of administering two 
different types of funding: one for local initiatives and one for national emphasis 
programmes. The former had a budget allocation of 40 per cent, while the latter 
had 50 per cent. Legal aid projects (through the Legal Services Programme)54 were 
to be funded by the national emphasis programmes, while community economic 
development was under the umbrella of local initiatives.55
In order to qualify for funding, the projects had to include participation from the 
residents of the locality where the funding was sought. However, 90 per cent of the 
project funding went to ‘direct services’, such as health, education and housing.56
However, the CAP, via the CAAs, was not successful as a twofold problem 
was created: on the one hand, there was never enough local participation, and 
on the other hand, the staff of the CAAs dominated the projects, while the CAA 
boards were sometimes unaccountable.57 There were also further problems with 
the OEO58 and, as a result, it was abolished in 1974.59 Its grant-making power was 
49  Pub L 88-452 (n 48).
50  Pub L 88-452 (n 48) Sec 202(a)2.
51  ibid Title VI, Part A.
52  Clay, Jr and Jones (n 5) 7.
53  Halpern (n 24) 107.
54  The Legal Services Programme was one of the programmes of the War on Poverty. 
For more information on the programme, see Lauren Breen, Louise Howells, Susan R Jones 
and Deborah S Kenn, ‘An Annotated Bibliography of Affordable Housing and Community 
Economic Development Law’ (2003) 13 J Affordable House & Cmty Dev L 334, 335.
55  Halpern (n 24) 108.
56  It is interesting to note that CAAs were meant to administer a variety of services, 
including ‘community economic development’. See Simon (n 11) 386; and also Halpern 
(n 24) 108. 
57  Simon (n 11) 386.
58  The OEO administered not only CAP but also the other programmes established 
under the Economic Opportunity Act.
59  Peter Edelman, ‘The War on Poverty and Subsequent Federal Programs: What 
Worked, What Didn’t Work, and Why? Lessons for Future Programs’ (2006) Clearinghouse 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
188
later given to the Office of Community Service within the Department of Housing 
and Urban Development (HUD).
Thus, CAA organizations that had received funding prior to all these changes 
‘reinvented themselves as economic developers’60 and those who survived played 
a role in the strengthening of the CED movement. This is because the organizations 
that had sought funding from CAP paved the way for the creation and nurturing of 
different affiliations, organizations and peoples who would otherwise never have 
come together. They all could enter into dialogue as to how the community could 
be improved from different angles and also gave poor people a voice as to some 
of the problems affecting their lives.61 These dialogues could take place among 
‘single-issue coalitions, tenants’ organizations, legal services, public interest law 
firms [and] various rights organizations’.62 Furthermore, the government never 
really grasped the type of ‘indigenous movement that was becoming the principal 
engine of development in inner-city communities’, that is, the CED movement.63
From a policy perspective, the CAP, through the CAAs, was different from the 
‘Gray Areas’ model of 1961, as it included, in its own way, community input. The 
federal government was learning from the urban renewal mistakes of the past.64 
This meant that community input or ‘organizing’ was moved into federal policy. 
However, the CAP also experienced problems as CAAs faced corruption, and their 
boards on many occasions were motivated by self-interest rather by the benefit of 
the community. CAAs also experienced lack of resources and issues of control. 
There were also critiques about the failure of CAAs to properly implement the 
requirement of ‘maximum feasible participation’.65 The concept of maximum 
feasible participation meant that local residents would take charge of their own 
‘problems’ through playing a significant role in ‘determining their priorities, 
resource priority and local activities of local “War on Poverty”’66 by participating 
in the boards of CAAs – which meant that the whole community would work 
towards the same goal. However, not all the community was represented as people 
on the boards were not the ‘most disfranchised’ section of a community, but rather 
frequently represented only a fraction of them, usually family and friends of 
Review Journal of Poverty Law and Policy 7, 10.
60  Simon (n 11) 387.
61  Halpern (n 24) 115–16.
62  ibid 115.
63  ibid 114. Halpern also says that the reasons for this, in the historical record, are 
not clear.
64  Although CAP was based on the Gray Areas model which incorporated its place-
based approach, it modified some aspects as a response to what people thought the limits 
of the Gray Areas were.
65  In 1966 the government amended the 1964 Act requiring that one-third of the 
board be made up of ‘representatives of the poor’, but things did not change. See Halpern 
(n 24) 110–11.
66  Ibid 108.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
189
specific interests.67 In other words, board members often were not representative 
of the community. 
Most importantly, however, members of Congress started to criticize CAAs 
as they noted that they were becoming vehicles for mobilizing communities in 
demanding reforms and local access to jobs, resources for schools, housing, etc.,68 
and because of this, they argued, local government might eventually lose control.69 
Thus, regional OEO administrators started to back down from prior commitments 
as to what they would fund.70
CAAs therefore made the city governments very uncomfortable as they were 
essentially organizing communities against their own cities through community 
action and participation. Although participation was viewed by the OEO as an end 
to the alienation of communities and thus as a way of strengthening democracy,71 
in practice, the reality was very different, as participation was used as ‘a vehicle 
for political power’.72
The Model Cities Program  The Model Cities Program73 was a new federal 
measure against the threat of local mobilization created by the CAP.74 It was the 
first federal programme of the HUD75 and the last government effort by President 
Lyndon B. Johnson76 and the War on Poverty to bring an end to crime in urban 
areas among other reasons. Funds for the Model Cities Program were channelled 
via the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Development Act 1966.77
The Model Cities Program was meant to change inner-city neighbourhoods 
through the coordination of federal and local efforts pertaining to ‘professional 
planning, coordination of federal and local programs, concentration of resources 
67  ibid 110.
68  ibid 110–14.
69  ibid 110–15.
70  ibid 116–17. Halpern cites an example of when local communities set their own 
priorities, such as the setting-up of a community school and a reading programme, they 
were told that these ‘were not OEO priorities’.
71  The strengthening of democracy by way of participation of the individual within his 
or her community is also an important aspect of how CED lawyering developed in Ireland. 
See below, particularly the case study of BCLC and the concept of social regeneration and 
citizenship.
72  Halpern (n 24) 109.
73  42 USC §3301 et seq. See also CE Olken, ‘Economic Development in the Model 
Cities Program’ (1971) 36 Law & Contemp Probs 205. 
74  Halpern (n 24) 118.
75  The HUD was created as a government department by the Department of Housing 
and Urban Development Act 1965 (Pub L 89-174). For a history of the HUD, see http://
portal.hud.gov/portal/page/portal/HUD/about/hud_history accessed 18 January 2013.
76  1963–69.
77  Pub L 89-754, 3 November 1966, 80 Stat 1255 (42 USC 3301 et seq). 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
190
and innovation’. However, it lacked community input.78 This lack of community 
input made the  Program resemble the Gray Areas’ view of how to tackle poverty,79 
silencing the voice of the community once more.
Because of the social unrest of the 1960s, the few businesses that had planned 
to relocate to the ghettos no longer did so, and the original funding for the Model 
Cities Program was reduced. Within two years, the budget of $500 million in 
funding to cover 75 cities became a budget of $300 million in funding to cover 
150 cities.80 Thus, the  Program was ended in 1974.
The Use of Policy and Legislation Towards the Advancement of CED and the 
Emergence of CED Law 
It is important to highlight that the 1960s was also a period of social unrest. There 
was social unrest due to the ‘Ghetto riots’81 which took place during the summers 
of 1963–68 and there were further riots occasioned by the assassination of Dr 
Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968. There was also the passage of the Civil Rights 
Act 196482 and of the Fair Housing Act 1968,83 both of which were intended to 
put an end to discrimination. Moreover, there was an emergence of direct action 
strategies and a renewed interest in community development, as residents 
were tired of the segregation, disinvestment, lack of interest and investment 
by the government, and were inspired by the ideas of Saul Alinsky84 – ideas 
that talked about those who have and those who have not.85 By the end of 
the decade, people had seen the possibility of social change through community 
action and participation, which in turn had further influenced the viability of a 
number of government programmes,86 adding to the growth of CED.
By the 1970s and the 1980s, neighbourhood activism exploded as community 
groups were formed in order to ‘demand more and better services from city 
governments’.87 The government responded by the formulation of policies and 
the updating and enactment of legislation that created institutions and enhanced 
community participation, involvement in land use and environmental process. 
78  Halpern (n 24) 118.
79  ibid.
80  ibid 120–21.
81  ibid 119.
82  Pub L 88-352, 78 Stat 241, enacted 2 July 1964.
83  42 USCA §§ 3601–31.
84  Saul Alinsky was a community organizer and is considered to be the father of the 
modern community organizing movement. He also created the Industrial Areas Foundation 
(IAF) in the 1940s, a national community organizing network.
85  Halpern (n 24) 87.
86  This meant that the social and political landscape was very different from that of 
the beginning of the 1960s.
87  Simon (n 11) 388.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
191
This allowed for the challenging of infrastructure developments in court.88 The 
evolution of these policies also created trends which sought the decentralization 
of public administration on the one hand and the development of local markets 
along ‘socially desirable paths’ on the other.89 As a result, the CED movement 
could direct these government efforts towards the tackling of poverty and the 
empowerment of communities.
What follows is therefore an explanation of the most important policies, 
legislation and tools relevant to CED, which in turn brought about the emergence 
of CED law and lawyering, particularly those relating to redevelopment and 
access to capital, with the understanding that some of the policies, legislation and 
tools pre-date those enacted by the War on Poverty, while others became highly 
technical or too complex to be understood by non-professionals in the field.90
Policies, legislation and tools 
Redevelopment  In short, the primary function of redevelopment (which is also 
known as urban renewal) is the removal of blighted areas by bringing revenue 
to these areas, while at the same time redirecting capital flow and enhancing 
accountability. But redevelopment may further represent two different functions 
or meanings. On the one hand, redevelopment may be equated with the changing 
of the physical infrastructure in a localized area. However, it may also refer to 
the legal process that brings about that change in the physical infrastructure.91 
For the purposes of this chapter, when referring to redevelopment, the latter 
meaning is preferred.
The redevelopment process, from a legal point of view, was created in the US 
in 1949 under the auspices of the National Housing Act 194992 and the Housing 
Act 1954,93 which supported the local efforts to revitalize ‘blighted’ areas. It 
created structured negotiations and produced binding contracts to ensure that 
these renewal efforts could take place by providing federal funds to ‘acquire slum 
properties, assemble them into large parcels, clear them of existing structures and 
prepared them for ‘redevelopment’.94 Redevelopment, however, was criticized as 
it created a process of removal that did not benefit the people it was supposed to. It 
88  ibid.
89  ibid 378. 
90  Clay, Jr and Jones (eds) (n 5); William B Fulton, A Guide to California Planning 
(Point Arena, CA, Solano Press Books 1999).
91  WH Simon refers to Redevelopment (with a capital R) as a ‘term of art’ which 
refers to a special legal process. See William H Simon, The Community Economic 
Development Movement: Law, Business, and the New Social Policy (2nd edn, Durham, NC, 
Duke University Press 2001) 7.
92  Title V of PL 81-171 (Title V of Public Law, approved 15 July 1949).
93  Massey and Denton (n 28) 55.
94  ibid.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
192
caused injustices by giving a series of tax incentives to local areas in order to carry 
out development. It further subsidized ‘the private participants through sweetheart 
land deals, cheap financing, tax breaks, and publicly provided infrastructure 
tailor[ed] to their investments’.95
Due to the negative impact that the redevelopment process had caused, the 
federal government ended some of the financial support allocated for redevelopment. 
Now, under the patronage of the Housing and Community Development Act 
1974,96 funding is granted in the form of Community Development Block Grants 
(CDBGs) instead.97 Under this arrangement, each local government, rather than the 
federal government, could decide how to allocate the CDBG funds given to them.98
Statutory reform was also put in place to ensure that there was community 
participation in the redevelopment process. Federal laws applicable to federal 
and locally supported federal projects gave relocation rights to displaced tenants, 
home-owners and businesses. Some states, such as California, also enacted rights 
for projects that received state funding.99
However, the redevelopment process (before the 1974 Act) survived under 
the law of some states as the local tax revenue from properties was limited.100 
This meant that redevelopment could channel further income towards the coffers 
of the local government via the tax revenues produced by redevelopment. In 
California, this process became known as the ‘fiscalization of land use’ (the local 
government obtains income revenue from land use and development). The effects 
of this fiscalization of land use triggered the redevelopment of areas, even though 
these areas were not ‘blighted’, but they were nevertheless redeveloped, as local 
governments could collect the tax revenue.101 As will be shown in a later section, 
redevelopment would become an important element in the further advancement of 
CED law and lawyering.
Redevelopment and its interaction with CED  To further understand 
redevelopment and how it interacted with CED, it is also important to highlight 
that redevelopment was also influenced and shaped by other types of government 
95  Simon (n 11) 381.
96  Pub L 93-383, as amended; 42 USC-5301 et seq. 
97  For a current view on the distribution of CDBGs, see: http://portal.hud.gov/
hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/comm_planning/communitydevelopment/
programs/entitlement accessed 18 January 2013.
98  Simon (n 11) 381–82.
99  ibid 382–83. This also means that there are some good examples of redevelopment, 
such as the City of East Palo Alto in California and the Dudley Street Neighborhood 
Initiative (DSNI) in Boston. DSNI is a non-profit corporation that organizes locals around 
development planning, which, thanks to a Massachusetts Redevelopment Law, it has been 
given various powers, including Eminent Domain. 
100  ibid 382 at note 7. Simon mentions Proposition 13 as one example in California.
101  This practice of using redevelopment to obtain income became very popular in 
the 1980s and 1990s. 

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
193
policies, such as the Federal Housing Administration’s loan programme, 
the urban renewal of 1949, the use of public housing, the auto industry and 
transportation, and the allocation of tax breaks for home-ownership, all of which 
are briefly described below.
The Federal Housing Administration and its Loan Programme  The Federal 
Housing Administration (FHA) was created in 1934,102 under the National Housing 
Act 1934,103 in order to stimulate the construction industry. Its aim was to promote 
home-ownership, which had come to a halt after the Great Depression. However, 
in order to promote home-ownership, it also had to guarantee home loans. The 
effect produced by the FHA loan guarantee scheme meant the banks were free to 
make more loans, as the loans were low risk (because of the FHA guarantee). This 
process facilitated the purchase of homes in the suburbs, originating the ‘white-
flight’ phenomenon. This was a move away from the overcrowded city dwellings 
to the idyllic suburban residence of single-family homes. One of the consequences 
of this subsidized move – which was originated by this government policy – was 
the creation of an exclusionary movement that did not provide finance for multi-
family dwellings, leaving the poor in the overcrowded inner-city ghettos. In this 
way, the FHA loan programme added momentum to the development of CED.
The Urban Renewal of 1949  The urban renewal of 1949 helped in bringing 
infrastructure development to poor areas, but also exacerbated the redevelopment 
problem. First, there was an identification process which included condemnation 
areas104 through the use of eminent domain. Second, private developers received 
federal government funding in the form of subsidies in order to redevelop those 
condemned areas. As a result, the development of luxury housing increased, 
while at the same time housing for low-income people decreased. This method of 
urban renewal had the effect of displacing the poor without replacing the housing 
destroyed in the process. Note that urban renewal was supposed to improve the 
cities and benefit the poor, not displace them. Again, the impact on CED was that 
it added momentum to the CED movement, as urban renewal was decreasing the 
amount of available housing for those less well-off.
Public Housing  Although the idea of providing public housing for the poor had 
been around for decades, it was not until the 1930s that the idea of building public 
housing first emerged in poor neighbourhoods, as the building of public housing 
could increase the creation of jobs in the construction sector during the Great 
102  Peter Dreier, Todd Swanstrom and John H Mollenkopf, Place Matters: 
Metropolitics for the Twenty-First Century (Lawrence, University Press of Kansas 2001) 108.
103  Pub L, 84-345, Stat 847.
104  Condemnation is the term used in the US to indicate that an area has been ‘taken’ 
by government for redevelopment, public use (such as for the widening of a road) or other 
purpose. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
194
Depression.105 The first urban public housing was carried out by the Public Works 
Administration, together with unions and non-profit organizations.106 The public 
housing model first tried was in 1934, under the National Housing Act 1934 (the 
same Act that created the FHA), under which local housing authorities built and 
operated the housing units. Later, in 1937, a new National Housing Act107 was 
passed,108 which set the path for the massive public housing construction of the 
1950s. It created subsidies for housing construction109 in the form of ‘low-cost 
loans to local and state governments’.110
However, in the 1950s, the selection of sites on which to build public housing 
was carried out by municipal planning departments, which in turn was dominated 
by private real estate and outside interests.111 This meant that the construction of 
public housing was situated in low-income communities, most of which were 
located in areas adjacent to rivers and highways.112 This oversight left the public 
housing residents with a lack of economic opportunity. The public housing areas 
had no economic base in which the residents could take part and, if they existed, the 
economic opportunities were very minimal, leaving the newly built public housing 
communities with no essential basis that could create viable communities.113 The 
only feasible economic ventures to which residents could aspire were the creation 
of informal economies such as drug dealing.114 At the time, one of the greatest 
housing projects built was ‘Pico Aliso’,115 located in the City of Los Angeles. Pico 
Aliso was said to be ‘socially optimum’, but in time became a place that harboured 
criminals and criminality.116
Then, in the 1970s, rather than having the local authorities manage and build 
public housing, a new public housing model was tested, which tried to expand 
tenant choice and the availability of public housing. This programme was called 
105  Halpern (n 24) 71.
106  ibid 72.
107  Pub L 75–412, 50 Stat 888.
108  The 1937 Act is also known as the Wagner-Steagall Act.
109  Massey and Denton (n 28) 52.
110  Halpern (n 24) 72.
111  ibid.
112  The location of the public housing construction was due, in part, to a flawed 
design. 
113  The issue of public housing would also be a factor in the regeneration of 
Ballymun, as discussed later on in this chapter.
114  Halpern (n 24) 77.
115  http://articles.latimes.com/keyword/pico-aliso-housing-project accessed 18 January 
2013.
116  Pico Aliso has now been demolished and replaced with more suitable housing 
focused on the ‘new urbanism’ theory. Demolition started in 1997 and was completed 
in 1999. For more information, see ‘Demolition of Pico-Aliso Housing Project Begins’ 
(8 August 1997) http://articles.latimes.com/1997/aug/08/local/me-20535 accessed 18 
January 2013.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
195
‘Section 8’, referring to the section of the Act in which it was found. Under s 
8 of the Housing and Community Development Act 1974, certificates are given 
to people who meet means-tested criteria in order to help them pay the costs of 
rent. The rent charge can only be 30 per cent of the household income. Thus, the 
certificate given is intended to cover the difference between the market-based rent 
and the maximum rent payable by the tenant.117
The way in which ‘Section 8’ operated led to a change of approach by the first 
Bush and Clinton administrations118 in two ways: by the issuance of vouchers, 
commonly known as ‘voucherization’, and by the provision of HUD programmes. 
Voucherization means that a tenant receives a flat amount of money in the form of 
a voucher to help with the costs of rent, but the amount is not related to the market 
value of a rented property. The tenant is therefore free to negotiate for a rental 
price that could come as close as possible to the value of the voucher. However, 
this voucher approach does not incentivize the building of new housing or tenant 
participation which goes against the development of CED.
In contrast, the provision of HUD programmes does help in the development 
of CED as the programmes favour a ‘community building approach’,119 which 
encourages tenant participation. HUD programmes also promote home-
ownership by encouraging the buying of government housing by the tenants, 
and by combining housing with financial assistance so that residents can achieve 
economic independence. One example of the HUD programmes is HOPE VI,120 
which is also a major participant in the building of public housing.121
The Auto Industry and Transportation  The development of the auto industry and 
transportation at the federal level was similar to that of redevelopment. The federal 
highway programme under the Federal-Aid Highway Act 1956122 displaced as 
many people as urban renewal (redevelopment) did.123 Communities, particularly 
African-American and Latino communities, were displaced or broken apart in order 
to free up land for the construction of motorways. In Los Angeles, for example, the 
main Mexican-American neighbourhood, Boyle Heights, was fragmented by the 
construction of five highways running through the neighbourhood.124 Ironically, 
the construction of motorways and the destruction of neighbourhoods stopped 
when funding for defence issues became a priority during the Cold-War.
117  Simon (n 11) 391–95. 
118  1989–93 and 1993–97, respectively (Clinton was re-elected; his second term was 
1997–2001).
119  Simon (n 11) 394.
120  ibid 395. HOPE stands for Housing Opportunities for People Everywhere.
121  This is described in more detail below.
122  Public Law 84-627. For a current view of the Federal Highway Administration, 
see: www.fhwa.dot.gov/index.html accessed 18 January 2013.
123  Halpern (n 24) 69.
124  ibid 70.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
196
This meant that policies relating to transport, together with the auto industry, 
were breaking up long-established communities and creating exclusion, not to 
mention the lack of public transport facilities for those communities.
Tax Breaks for Home-Ownership  Tax breaks for home-ownership gave a tax 
subsidy to home-owners but not to renters. This meant that there was a large 
federal involvement in the process, facilitating the white-flight phenomenon and 
the impoverishment of inner-city areas, while at the same time creating inequality.
Gentrification 
The features of gentrification are usually the adaptation of physical infrastructures: 
there is a change in housing, new businesses enter an area at a disproportionate 
rate and more retail stores open. There is more public investment, new public 
infrastructure and extra financing from the private sector. There is also greater 
policing of low-income communities and a rise of landlord harassment towards 
tenants. Thus, gentrification is a controversial issue for low-income communities, 
as on the one hand, it improves neighbourhoods, but on the other, it also causes 
displacement. It is a force of private action and of public policy in which the public 
dimension also plays an important role as to how it is conducted.
Causes and consequences of gentrification
The causes and consequences of gentrification are the two sides of the currency 
of redevelopment. There is a government angle and a private angle, two different 
points of views that on many occasions work in unison, creating a ripple effect 
of causes and consequences. From a government point of view, gentrification 
plays an important part in the redevelopment process as it increases tax revenues 
by the issuance of the different licences and permits involved in the process. 
Eminent Domain125 also plays a role as the land subject to the gentrification and 
redevelopment plans may need to be purchased. As a consequence, the more an 
area is gentrified, the higher the revenues for the local government.
From a private point of view, gentrification means that there are new business 
opportunities in which investors and speculators have a say. The earlier move from 
the city to the suburbs under the ‘white-flight’ phenomenon becomes a flight from 
the suburbs into the city, as people want to live near work and enjoy the lifestyle 
it offers and the ease of convenience of living within the city, not to mention the 
cultural amenities that exist within the city. This ‘flight back’ is therefore the ripple 
effect of further causes and consequences that feed gentrification.
But the obvious, yet forgotten, consequences of gentrification are the socio-
economic changes it brings to the inhabitants of the gentrified areas. Many 
statistical comparisons conclude that there are no differences in the rate of exit 
of population from gentrified areas (i.e. the population level of people leaving the 
125  In Ireland, its equivalent is the Compulsory Purchase Order.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
197
area and moving into the area remains the same), yet the studies do not mention the 
reasons why people leave or migrate to a gentrified area. Sometimes the empirical 
evidence126 does not show the true picture about displacement issues. For example, 
the statistical story could be accurate but displacement could still be occurring, as 
the dynamics of the neighbourhood become different, rather than the rate of people 
arriving and leaving.127 Over time, there is a reduction of affordable housing as the 
housing stock dwindles, the displacement of small businesses by bigger chain-
type businesses takes place, and there is a further impact on the homelessness 
population as they are forced to move out of the area as well.
Gentrification at the federal level: HOPE VI 
The appearance of public housing in most of the US was, for many years, the 
physical high-rise ‘suburb in the sky’ style. Most people living in these suburbs 
were low-income people who also faced segregation as most of the public housing 
was located in central city areas and in low-income neighbourhoods. Poverty 
became encapsulated between tower blocks, leaving few employment prospects 
for its residents. This concentration of poverty fostered crime, especially in these 
types of suburbs in the sky.
Due to the poverty and crime situation, two different proposals were translated 
into policies that resulted in the Housing for People Everywhere (HOPE)128 
programme. First, there was a de-concentration in housing in the 1960s in 
Chicago, which led to a lengthy period of litigation, with its effects lasting for 
around 40 years.129 Although it was a long fight, it formed a consensus that de-
concentration was needed at the national level. And second, in the 1980s and the 
1990s, the presidential commissions130 focused on getting rid of public housing by 
126  It is uncertain if there is a problem with the dataset of the studies conducted in 
certain gentrified areas.
127  More often than not, the homeless population is told to move out without offering 
alternatives to their homelessness. It is a ‘not in my backyard’ attitude that gets rid of the 
poorest of the poor.
128  http://portal.hud.gov/portal/page/portal/HUD/programdescription/hope1 
accessed 18 January 2013. Please note that the link is to HOPE I, but is to refer to the 
meaning of the acronym, not HOPE VI itself.
129  In 1966, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) initiated a class-action 
lawsuit against the Chicago Housing Authority, indicating that the policy of the housing 
authority to build social housing only in areas with high levels of poor people (including a 
high number of minorities) meant that there was a contravention of the 1964 Civil Rights 
Act (racial segregation). The aim was to have social housing built in white-neighbourhood 
areas. The case eventually ended up in the Supreme Court in 1976 as Hills v Gautreaux 
(425 US 284), as a result of which the Chicago Housing Authority was ordered to build 
housing in different areas.
130  These presidential commissions were held by President Reagan under the 
Commission on Housing 1982 and were later endorsed by President George HW Bush.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
198
demolishing it. This, combined with the need of de-concentration of housing at a 
national level, led to HOPE VI.
HOPE VI was designed in 1992 as a way of revitalizing housing programmes, 
moving public housing into a new phase, which resulted in a slowdown of the 
gentrification process. The housing model was now moved from high density to 
low density and was dispersed among the mixed-income population. The physical 
structures that were built were also different, as they predicated the theory of 
‘New Urbanism’.131 For the first few years, HOPE VI was implemented via 
housing proposals, and in 1998, there was the housing law reform which started 
to codify HOPE VI.
Viewed from a public policy angle, in theory, HOPE VI creates an emphasis 
on the participation by the private sector in the government gentrification process, 
as financing can be made available to the private developer, which in turn can be 
directed towards building public housing in areas that have been gentrified.132 But 
in reality, this structure moves low-income residents away from their communities 
and replaces their homes with private housing. It is a double act that responds to 
gentrification and in turn facilitates gentrification. So, as a matter of policy, HOPE 
VI favours projects which have private funding, posing the question of whether 
the mixed financing model is a good model for public housing or not, as one of the 
concerns is that the private market displaces low-income housing.133
Redevelopment in California: gentrification at the local level
Although the federal government ended some of the support for redevelopment 
in 1974, redevelopment survived in the form of state law, as states could obtain 
revenue from the proceeds of land use and development. This fiscalization of land 
use in California, for example, gave rise to a number of legislative instruments, 
131  New Urbanism is an urban design movement that ‘focuses on building walkable, 
mixed use neighborhoods with a strong sense of place as an alternative to sprawling low-
density, single-use, automobile dependent development’. Brian W Ohm and Robert J 
Sitkowski, ‘Integrating New Urbanism and Affordable Housing Tools’ (2004) 36 Urban 
Lawyer 857. For an interesting account of its development, see Jerry Frug, ‘The Geography 
of Community’ (1995) 48 Stanford Law Review 1047, particularly at 1089–94. For 
more information, including a Charter for new urbanism, see the Congress for the New 
Urbanism’s website (they are the main promoters of new urbanism in the US): www.cnu.
org accessed 18 January 2013.
132  See the earlier discussion of LIHTCs above for the mechanisms and involvement 
of private developers within government housing.
133  The consequences of HOPE VI are varied, depending on the location and the 
state at which it is used. A tracking study was undertaken in the 2000s. For example, there 
was little displacement in Washington DC and it was also discovered that there was not 
a lot targeted for the residents who were displaced, which was about 78 per cent. For a 
CED critique of HOPE VI, see Ngai Pindell, ‘Is There Hope for HOPE VI?: Community 
Economic Development and Localism’ (2002) 35 Connecticut Law Review 385, 395–408.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
199
including the California Community Redevelopment Law,134 and the creation 
of the California Redevelopment Association.135 This organization provides a 
number of services to the community, such as legislative advocacy, professional 
development and public education, among others.136
For example, in Los Angeles to date, there are 32 redevelopment areas.137 In 
1999, the publication of a study138 evaluating the ‘commercial redevelopment 
activities in the 1990s’139 of the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City 
of Los Angeles, ‘the oldest and best-known economic development agency in the 
city’140 concluded that there was a ‘substantial amount of development activity in 
many low income areas … [but] the “return” of that investment … was mixed’.141 
Thus, the city needed to focus first on developing an ‘economic development 
strategy’,142 as it lacked one, and second, on the quality of the jobs available and 
offered in these areas as a result of the development.143 This meant that poverty 
lawyers had to expand their portfolios, thus using transactional law to alleviate 
poverty as well as allowing new economic justice groups to emerge, furthering the 
development of CED as a whole.
Added to this, the internal critique of CED posed by Cummings,144 who 
argued that market-based CED was not helping communities to alleviate 
poverty,145 together with changes in neighbourhood dynamics in the 1990s and 
the 2000s (brought about by the real estate market), altered the structure of what 
community-based organizations could do.146 Now communities could have a say 
134  California Health & Safety Code §§ 33000 et seq. Available at www.leginfo.ca.gov/
cgi-bin/calawquery?codesection=hsc&codebody=&hits=20 accessed 18 January 2013.
135  www.calredevelop.org/CRA accessed 18 January 2013.
136  ibid.
137  There have also been an extra two proposed redevelopment areas to date. See 
www.crala.net/internet-site/Projects/index.cfm accessed 18 January 2013.
138  The study was carried out by the UCLA Center for Labor Research and Education 
and the School of Public Policy and Social Research of UCLA together with the Los 
Angeles Alliance for a New Economy (LAANE).
139  UCLA and LAANE, ‘Who Benefits from Redevelopment in Los Angeles? An 
Evaluation of Commercial Redevelopment Activities in the 1990s’ (1999). http://laane.org/
downloads/WhoBenefitsStudy.pdf accessed 18 January 2013.
140  ibid.
141  ibid.
142  ibid.
143  ibid.
144  Cummings (n 8); see also Scott L Cummings, ‘Mobilisation Lawyering: 
Community Economic Development in the Figueroa Corridor’ in Cause Lawyers and 
Social Movements (Stanford, Stanford University Press 2006).
145  Cummings (n 8). Cummings argued that market-based CED was privileging 
localism, which impeded the promotion of broad-based economic reform through ‘cross-
neighborhood coalitions’ that integrated legal advocacy and community organizing.
146  Scott L Cummings and Benjamin S Beach, ‘Further Consideration: Community 
Benefits Agreements’ in Community Economic Development Law: A Text For Engaged 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
200
in the development of their own communities, which is best exemplified through 
Community Benefit Agreements.
An example of redevelopment, public interest law and CED: Community Benefit 
Agreements and the empowerment of communities  The ‘hot real estate market’ 
which characterized the period from the mid-1990s until the late 2000s, meant 
changes for neighbourhood dynamics as well as in the structure of what community-
based organizations could do. Disadvantaged areas were now the subject of local 
development programmes that promoted city redevelopment rather than urban 
sprawl. In addition, the internal critiques of CED meant that some community 
groups sought for development to be accountable, thus ensuring that government 
subsidies received by developers to revitalize low-income communities truly 
benefited these communities.147
City redevelopment meant that poor communities were now in the plans of 
developers, private re-investment and speculators – all of which contributed to 
the rise in value of real estate, gentrification and the displacement of low-income 
residents. This also brought about changes in the structure of what community 
organizations could do.148 Faced with this dilemma, community groups and 
residents had to decide how to best participate in local development decisions and 
ensure that affordable housing and living wage jobs benefited the residents (thus 
making local development accountable), which came in the form of Community 
Benefit Agreements (CBAs).149
CBAs are basically contracts between the community or different organizations 
representing the community, the local authority and the developer which impose 
a number of positive obligations on each party. For example, the developer 
agrees to provide public amenities, while the community agrees not to disrupt 
the development, and the local authority’s role is to ensure that this takes place.150
CBAs emerged in Los Angeles around the late 1990s due to the many issues 
that had arisen because of gentrification.151 Different community groups wanted to 
change the conditions of the local population by challenging outside investment 
and bringing benefits to the community, which was often overlooked during the 
gentrification process. As a movement, CED had an interest in having an impact 
Learning (Durham, NC, Carolina Academic Press 2012) 322–23.
147  ibid 322–25. For a full internal critique of CED, see also Cummings (n 8).
148  Cummings and. Beach (n 146) 322–23; Cummings (n 144).
149  Cummings and. Beach (n 146) 325–26.
150  Cummings and Beach (n 146) 326–28. In Ireland, the equivalent may be some 
of the planning obligations under the Planning and Development Act 2000 (or s 106 of the 
English Town and Country Planning Act 1990). However, more research in Ireland would 
be needed to ensure that this assertion is correct.
151  At the time, Richard Riordan, a Republican, was the Los Angeles City Mayor 
(1993–2001) and under his policy, it was very easy to do business as there was no focus on 
job quality and the industries that supported the Mayor had low wage policies.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
201
on job creation and ensuring that there were quality jobs in the gentrified areas. 
In the 1990s, there was no CED strategy to combat the issues of gentrification for 
the Los Angeles area. Therefore, when the development of the ‘Staples Center’ 
in the downtown area of Los Angeles threatened the displacement of many of 
its low-income residents and existing communities, the creation of CBAs was an 
attractive model for community groups and CED lawyers to pursue.152
Twenty-nine organizations came together, forming a coalition that focused on 
the development of the Staples Center, among which were those who opposed 
the agreement, those who supported the agreement conditionally and those who 
supported it fully.153
The Sructure and Mechanisms of the CBA  The parties to the CBA were the 
coalition, the city and the private developer. They formed a triangle in which 
the coalition spoke to the other two parties. The city gave tax subsidies to the 
private developer and the coalition formed a cooperation agreement in order not to 
disrupt the developer (otherwise the coalition would have threatened disruption). 
There were also different ways to threaten disruption, such as lawsuits, strikes, the 
divestment of funding from political funds (no monetary support to politicians), 
etc., which enabled participants to use the CBA as leverage.154 This leverage, 
rather than just litigation, was and is constantly used within CBAs.155
Although there were also other types of leverage available for community 
groups, such as the use of publicity (which could harm the project and repeat 
players such as developers need good publicity), the housing element, the Mello 
Act 1982,156 Civil Rights law, door-to-door organizing (such as sending letters) 
152  Note that the precursor of the Staples Center CBA was the Hollywood & Highland 
Complex. LAANE had agreed with the Los Angeles City and the developer to an agreement 
that would benefit the local residents. 
153  Strategic Actions for a Just Economy (SAJE) and LAANE were the main players 
within the coalition. LAANE had a bigger agenda as its work related to the labour movement 
in Los Angeles. Also by this time, LAANE had grown in size and it had started to work on 
the improvement of business sectors under a ‘sector to sector’ approach. This meant that by 
the late 1990s, it was working on the creation of ‘good jobs’.
154  For example, with regard to the environmental review process which the Staple 
Center had forgotten to carry out (or overlooked), the coalition could only push for the 
delay of the project until the environmental review process had taken place, but could not 
stop it. As the administration of the city was changing from Republican to Democrat and 
all of the approvals were at a specific stage (development agreement, subsidies, land), the 
developers had to give in to the requests as highlighted in the approvals, which would not 
have occurred before the political change had taken place.
155  Beach has also written about the CBA experience in Los Angeles. See Benjamin 
Beach, ‘Strategies and Lessons from the Los Angeles Community Benefits Experience’ 
(2007) 17 Journal of Affordable Housing 77–112. 
156  The Mello Act of 1982 is California state law ‘which seeks to preserve housing 
for persons and families with low and moderate incomes in California’s Coastal Zone’. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
202
and the influence of council members, the use of the CBA was the main leverage of 
all of them. Thus, in 2001, a CBA agreement was negotiated, which also became 
known as the ‘Staples CBA’ and which formed the basis for the creation of other 
CBAs around the country.
CBA Mechanisms in General – Lessons Learned for the Future  The development 
agreement for the Staple Center, which contained the CBA, was subsequently 
changed, resulting in a modification to the inclusionary housing requirement. This 
issue raised the question of the enforceability of the CBA, as once the CBA was 
agreed and contained within the development agreement, the coalition could not 
challenge it. Thus, because of the lessons learned, subsequent CBAs have taken 
different forms, for example, by making the coalition a third-party beneficiary 
of the development agreement or by placing the CBA under statute.157 Recently, 
scholarly research has also suggested that CBAs are seen not as a good idea in the 
long term because of ‘their potential for misuse’.158
For example, CBAs in New York have unfortunately been the victims of the 
‘heavy-handed involvement of public officials’,159 which have used CBAs as 
a disguise in order to involve a single private entity among a community,160 to 
receive public subsidies161 and to organize a ‘one-sided’ three-member coalition 
which ‘reportedly had no independent legal representation in the negotiations’.162 
This is why CED lawyers ensure there is, first, plenty of communication among 
all the coalition members, second, that there is a consensus on the non-negotiable 
points and, third, that as part of the strategy, disruption is to be kept as part of a 
leverage point rather than to be used for something else.
To date, a good number of CBAs have taken shape across the US.163 Some 
other examples of successful CBAs are: FRESC for Good Jobs and Stronger 
For more information, see the Los Angeles Housing Department’s explanation of the 
Mello Act Procedures http://lahd.lacity.org/lahdinternet/Portals/0/Occupancy/LandUse/
MelloProcedures.pdf accessed 18 January 2013.
157  In 2005, the city of Milwaukee was the first city within the US to enact a CBA 
under legislation. The CBA, also known as the Milwaukee Park East Redevelopment 
Compact (PERC), is mentioned here because it applied the CBA concept as created but 
modified it to suit its own situation, something that Ireland could also do. However, further 
research in this area would be needed to assess if CBAs could be accommodated within the 
Irish landscape. It is submitted that community groups, partnership bodies and others would 
also have to be consulted. For more information in relation to the PERC, see http://www.
communitybenefits.org/article.php?id=1494 accessed 24 July 2012.
158  Julian Gross, ‘Community Benefit Agreements’ in Clay, Jr and Jones (eds) (n 5) 189.
159 
ibid 198.
160  ibid.
161  ibid.
162  ibid.
163  Glover Blackwell indicates that CBAs have taken place in ‘dozens of communities’. 
See Angela Glover Blackwell, ‘Equitable Development’ in Clay, Jr and Jones (eds) (n 5) 184. 

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
203
Communities in Denver, Colorado; Georgia Stand up in Atlanta and the Connecticut 
Center for a New Economy in New Haven.164 In 2009, the Community Benefits 
Law Center was also opened in San Francisco,165 a project of the Partnership  
for Working Families.166
As such, CBAs effected innovation and the advancement of CED lawyering, 
widening the perception of how access to justice could take place. The use of 
law, community action and organizing also played an important role and, as such, 
these also offer an attractive option for the development of CED in Ireland.167 Yet, 
the links between regeneration and public interest law in Ireland took place in a 
different manner, underpinned by the concept of sustainable development and the 
auspices of regeneration.168
Background to the Regeneration Process in Ireland 
Because the issue of regeneration is a broad area that can be researched in many 
forms, such as part of housing policy,169 geography,170 sustainable development171 
and others,172 it is important to highlight that for the purposes of this research, 
regeneration in Ireland will be discussed in very broad terms in order to place 
164  Greg LeRoy, ‘Making Economic Development Accountable’ in Clay, Jr and 
Jones (eds) (n 5) 228.
165  http://www.communitybenefits.org/article.php?list=type&type=132 accessed 2 
May 2012.
166  http://www.communitybenefits.org/index.php accessed 2 May 2012.
167  This offers further food for thought when comparing the redevelopment process 
of Ireland to that of the US and how CED law and lawyering can further benefit the 
community. However, due to the scope of this research, it is only mentioned in passing.
168  To date, there is no exact definition of regeneration; it could be argued that 
gentrification in the US means regeneration in Ireland.
169  See, for example, Treadwell Shine and Norris (n 14); Michelle Norris, 
‘Regenerating Run-Down Public Housing Estates: A Review of the Operation of the 
Remedial Works Scheme’ (2001) 49 Administration 25–45.
170  See, for example, Andrew MacLaran (ed), Making Space: Property Development 
and Urban Planning (London, Edward Arnold Limited 2003); Peter Roberts and Hugh 
Sykes (eds), Urban Regeneration: A Handbook (London, Sage 2000).
171  Nessa Winston, ‘From Boom to Bust? An Assessment of the Impact of Sustainable 
Development Policies on Housing in the Republic of Ireland’ (2007) 12 Local Environment: 
The International Journal of Justice and Sustainability 57–71; Nessa Winston, ‘Regeneration 
for Sustainable Communities? Barriers to Implementing Sustainable Housing in Urban 
Areas’ [2009] Sustainable Development 319–30; Nessa Winston, ‘Urban Regeneration for 
Sustainable Development: The Role of Sustainable Housing?’ [2009] European Planning 
Studies 1781–96.
172  Andrea Colantonio and Tim Dixon, Urban Regeneration and Social Sustainability: 
Best Practice from European Cities (Hoboken, Wiley-Blackwell 2011); Tony Manzi, Karen 
Lucas, Tony Lloyd Jones and Judith Allen (eds), Social Sustainability in Urban Areas: 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
204
the regeneration of Ballymun into a CED context. As such, it was deemed 
appropriate to also emphasize the role that sustainable development173 has played 
in regeneration efforts before introducing the subject of regeneration itself.
The Role of Sustainable Development
Sustainable development ‘is a fundamental and overarching objective of the 
European Union, aiming to continuously improve the quality of life and wellbeing 
for present and future generations, by linking economic development, protection 
of the environment and social justice’.174 If the achievement of sustainable 
development objectives175 (as envisioned by the EU and Ireland) is measured by the 
outcomes of development investment, such as regeneration (better infrastructure, 
better housing and roads, more jobs, more green areas), then the question that 
comes to mind is how these current regeneration efforts that promote sustainable 
development goals have influenced and facilitated the development of CED law 
and lawyering in Ireland.
Communities, Connectivity and the Urban Fabric (Oxford, Earthscan 2010) particularly 
chs 9–11.
173  It is important to keep it mind that theories about development also affect the type 
of policies that are enacted towards its achievement. In an article discussing the issue, Davis 
and Trebilcock indicate that the theories about development are ‘highly contested’, and they 
place sustainable development under one of these theories. While they briefly carry out a 
survey of these theories, they indicate that a sustainable development perspective means the 
identification of ‘specific relationships between the environment and health status’ as well 
as the relationship between ‘poverty alleviation and enhanced environmental quality’. As 
a result, the creation of legal institutions that support the role of development are needed 
as they also carry implications for a wide range of form of law, such as constitutional, 
administrative, civil procedure and property law. The other theories they discuss are: 
modernization theory, dependency theory, economic growth, welfarism and feminism. 
See Kevin E Davis and Michael J Trebilcock, ‘Legal Reforms and Development’ [2001] 
22(1) Third World Quarterly 21–36. For more scholarly writings about law and economic 
development, see Hans-Bernard Schäfer and Angara V Raja (eds), Law and Economic 
Development (Cheltenham, Edward Elgar Publishing 2006). In Ireland, poverty alleviation 
has also played a role in determining how sustainable development is achieved, particularly 
when it comes to social inclusion. It is submitted that further research is needed in relation 
to this, but this topic is outside the scope of this research.
174  Eurostat, ‘Sustainable Development in the European Union: 2009 Monitoring 
Report of the EU Sustainable Development Strategy – Executive Summary’ (Luxembourg, 
Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 2009) 2, available at http://
epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/865-EN/EN/865-EN-EN.PDF accessed 18 
January 2013 (emphasis added).
175  For example, social inclusion or the promotion of a healthy economy.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
205
Funding for infrastructure development and regeneration has changed the 
landscape for a number of cities and towns in Ireland,176 yet regeneration and the 
creation of sustainable communities do not equate immediately to access to legal 
services. Social inclusion cannot be achieved in isolation or without a proper civil 
legal aid system.177 Achieving social inclusion under the umbrella of sustainable 
development becomes an illusion. It can be argued that the need to translate the 
sustainable development idea (including social inclusion) into concrete examples, 
such as regeneration, has influenced and facilitated the evolution of CED lawyering 
in Ireland, thus widening the development of access to legal services. In other 
words, by using a sustainable development approach, legal services are taken out 
of the field of ‘justice’ and become part of the array of services that a community 
should have in order to be sustainable at a social, economic and environmental 
level. This approach, in turns, helps not only CED lawyering but also CED as a 
whole to evolve.178
Sustainable development at the EU level
Sustainable development has become one of the fundamental objectives of the 
European Union (EU) in relation to the development of the EU as a whole.179 The 
176  In Ireland, only Ballymun and Limerick are listed as part of the regeneration 
programme in terms of housing schemes under the Department of the Environment’s website. 
However, there are also other areas which are or were regenerated under refurbishment 
schemes, such as Knocknaheeny in Cork or Cranmore in Sligo; see http://www.environ.ie/
en/DevelopmentHousing/Housing/SocialHousingSupport/RegenerationSchemes accessed 
21 November 2012. It is important to note that although the regeneration of the Docklands 
in Dublin also contained the building of affordable housing and the regeneration of certain 
areas, the regeneration process of the Docklands was carried out in a different manner, 
so it is not included in the regeneration programme of housing schemes. For a thorough 
understanding of the Dublin Docklands Regeneration, see Niamh Moore, Dublin Docklands 
Reinvented: The Post-Industrial Regeneration of a European City Quarter (Dublin, Four 
Courts Press 2008).
177  Social inclusion within the legal system is part and parcel of public interest law 
and is thus highly relevant if we are to create synergies and proper sustainable communities 
in which access to legal services is a vital component of the development discourse in order 
to meet the needs of the ‘most vulnerable in society’ as indicated by the EU SDS.
178  Although the impact of this approach would need further assessment in the 
future, the opening of the law centre in Limerick confirms this point; thus, they have been 
established under the auspices of the Limerick Regeneration Agencies.
179  In order to provide some background to the situation, the concept of sustainable 
development was first formulated in the Report of the Brundtland Commission (Our 
Common Future) in 1987 and was defined as ‘development that meets the needs of the 
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’. 
In 1997, the EU incorporated the concept of sustainable development as a fundamental 
objective of the EU by incorporating it into the Treaty of Amsterdam, under art 2 (now art 
3(3) of the Consolidated Treaty of Lisbon).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
206
Preamble of the Treaty on European Union as amended by the Treaty of Lisbon180 
indicates that all of the signatories to the Treaty are:
Determined to promote economic and social progress for their peoples, taking 
into account the principle of sustainable development and within the context 
of the accomplishment of the internal market and of reinforced cohesion and 
environmental protection, and to implement policies ensuring that advances in 
economic integration are accompanied by parallel progress in other fields.
The Treaty does not have a definition of what is meant by sustainable development, 
although it is mentioned throughout.
In June 2006, the European Council adopted a renewed strategy towards 
sustainable development for the EU. The EU Sustainable Development Strategy181 
(EU SDS) defined what sustainable development meant for the EU as a whole.182 
It indicated that:
Sustainable development means that the needs of the present generation 
should be met without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs. It [sustainable development] is an overarching objective of 
the European Union set out in the Treaty, governing all the Union’s policies 
and activities. It is about safeguarding the earth’s capacity to support life in 
all its diversity and is based on the principles of democracy, gender equality, 
solidarity, the rule of law and respect for fundamental rights, including freedom 
and equal opportunities for all. It aims at the continuous improvement of the 
quality of life and well-being on Earth for present and future generations. 
To that end it [sustainable development] promotes a dynamic economy with 
full employment and a high level of education, health protection, social and 
territorial cohesion and environmental protection in a peaceful and secure 
world, respecting cultural diversity.
Moreover, it indicated that if sustainable development were to be achieved, 
four key objectives had to be integrated into the process, namely: (i) economic 
180  The Treaty of Lisbon 2009. 
181  The overall aim of this renewed EU SDS is 
‘to identify and develop actions to enable the EU to achieve continuous 
improvement of quality of life both for current and for future generations, 
through the creation of sustainable communities able to manage and use 
resources efficiently and to tap the ecological and social innovation potential of 
the economy, ensuring prosperity, environmental protection and social cohesion’. 
Council of the European Union, ‘Note from the General Secretariat to Delegations on the 
Review of the EU Sustainable Development Strategy (EU SDS) − Renewed Strategy’ of 
9 June 2006 [2006] (10117/06), available at: http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/06/
st10/st10117.en06.pdf accessed 18 January 2013.
182  ibid.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
207
prosperity; (ii) environmental protection; (iii) social equity and cohesion; and (iv) 
meeting the EU international responsibilities.
In 2009, upon reflecting on how sustainable development could be achieved in 
the future and in response to the economic crisis, a revised EU SDS strategy was 
agreed.183 Thus, it was established that this strategy:
could focus on the EU’s long-term goals in crucial areas, notably by … 
promoting social inclusion [as it is] [t]he most vulnerable in society [who] are at 
risk of being the most badly hit by the economic crisis and its effects may linger 
longest for them unless effective measures are provided.184
The question therefore arises as to how to provide effective measures in order to 
promote social inclusion under the umbrella of sustainable development and in order 
to meet one of the EU’s fundamental objectives (i.e. sustainable development). It 
can be argued that CED can indeed offer an answer to this dilemma as it can use its 
mixture of social policy, community development and legal tools for the benefit of 
local communities, creating a space for sustainable development to grow.
Sustainable development at a national level
At the turn of the century, the Sustainable Development Council185 (Comhar)186 
published a series of principles for sustainable development which could be used 
to determine if existing or future Irish policies were ‘likely to lead to sustainable 
development’.187 Moreover, Comhar’s members agreed that if Ireland were 
to meet the goal of sustainable development, then sustainable development 
had to include ‘environmental protection, economic development, and social 
development in an integrated manner’.188
183  Commission of the European Communities, ‘Mainstreaming Sustainable 
Development into EU Policies: 2009 Review of the European Union Strategy for 
Sustainable Development’, July 2009, available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriserv/
LexUriserv.do?uri=COM:2009:0400:FIN:EN:PDF accessed 18 January 2013.
184  ibid 15 (emphasis added).
185  On 10 October 2011, it was indicated that the Council will become part of 
the National Economic and Social Council (NESC) and the role of the Council will be 
discontinued. See http://www.comharsdc.ie/index.aspx accessed 14 December 2011. 
186  Previously known as the National Sustainable Development Partnership, the 
Comhar Sustainable Development Council has multiple stakeholders. It is made up of 25 
people drawn from five sectors: the state sector, the economic sector, environmental NGOs, 
social/community NGOs and the professional/academic sector. See http://www.comharsdc.
ie/about/index.aspx accessed 4 February 2011.
187  Comhar, the National Sustainable Development Partnership, ‘Principles for 
Sustainable Development’ 2. Available at http://www.comharsdc.ie/about/index.aspx 
accessed 21 November 2012.
188  ibid.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
208
The 12 principles189 were brought together under a number of different 
groups or ‘themes’,190 although Comhar recognized that separating these 
principles into themes was ‘somewhat arbitrary because by definition, principles 
are inter-dependent’ and that integration between the different themes and 
citizen participation was essential.191 Among these themes was that of social 
equity, which acted as an ‘umbrella theme’ for two separate principles: ‘social 
inclusion’ (Principle 8) and ‘co-operation and agreement between states’ 
(Principle 9). Principle 8 indicated that ‘social inclusion should be promoted to 
ensure an improved quality of life for all’.192 Furthermore, it specified that the 
significance, meaning and justification of this principle of social inclusion was 
based on the achievement of:
a quality of life which provides essential needs and offers dignity. There is [a] need 
for social inclusion and equality of outcomes, so that there is no discrimination 
through which some sectors of society are disadvantaged and therefore unable 
to meet their own needs … [a]t a very practical level, there cannot be long-
term planning in a society in which poverty is rife … Without social cohesion, 
the implementation of long-term strategies is made very difficult. Everybody, 
as a human right, should have the opportunity to make a living and achieve a 
satisfactory quality of life. But there exist social and economic barriers to the 
achievement of such equity.193
189  The are 12 principles overall: (1) the use of non-renewable resources should 
be minimized; (2) the use of hazardous/polluting substances and waste created should 
be minimized and waste management should be environmentally sound; (3) renewable 
resources should be used within the capacity for regeneration; (4) the quality of soils and 
water resources should be maintained and improved; (5) the diversity of wildlife, habitats 
and species should be maintained and improved; (6) air and the atmosphere should be 
protected and human-induced effects on climate should be minimized; (7) the development 
of resource potential in one region should not compromise the ability of other regions 
to achieve their own potential; (8) social inclusion should be promoted to ensure an 
improved quality of life for all; (9) sustainable development depends on co-operation and 
agreement between states (emphasis added); (10) the quality of landscapes, the heritage 
of the man-made environment and historical and cultural resources should be maintained 
and improved; (11) decision-making should be devolved to the appropriate level; (12) 
stakeholder participation should be promoted at all levels of decision-making.
190  The seven themes are: satisfaction of human needs by the efficient use of resources 
(Principles 1 and 2); equity between generations (Principles 3 and 4); respect for ecological 
integrity and biodiversity (Principle 5); equity between countries and regions (Principles 6 
and 7); social equity (Principles 8 and 9); respect for cultural heritage/diversity (Principle 
10); good decision-making (Principles 11 and 12).
191  Comhar (n 187) 3.
192  ibid 5.
193  ibid 21.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
209
Comhar indicated that within Ireland, examples of inequalities in wealth and 
quality of life existed in every town, whether rural or urban, and thus affected social 
cohesion. Moreover, Comhar indicated that ‘Access to basic services and the ability 
to meet fundamental needs are accepted as essential to sustainable development’,194 
and if the problems created by the inequalities are to be addressed, then ‘a broad 
strategy is needed if Ireland is to achieve or come close to sustainability’.195
Access to basic services is therefore an important element in providing 
effective measures that promote social inclusion under the umbrella of sustainable 
development, which in turn meets one of the EU’s fundamental objectives.196 
Although the description of the principle of social inclusion does not mention 
access to legal services as part of it, it is well known that social and economic 
barriers exist where access to legal services is concerned. Access to legal services, 
and particularly the practice of CED law and CED lawyering, does enable 
people and communities to have the opportunity to make a living and achieve a 
satisfactory quality of life.
Sustainable development and social inclusion
As observed, integrating social inclusion into sustainable development goals 
is not something new, yet the possibilities of research are still unfolding. For 
example, research that combines the social, economic and environmental aspects 
of sustainable development or addresses the social aspects is still relatively 
new.197 Similarly, in Ireland, social inclusion seems to be a common theme 
on the policy/government agenda,198 and research into the social aspects of 
sustainable development is progressing. For example, there is now an interactive 
option on Comhar’s website that looks at a series of 20 sustainable development 
indicators which inform the country about ‘broad strategic progress on sustainable 
development challenges’.199 Social inclusion is one of these indicators and it is 
intrinsically linked to poverty rates. This in turn can inform policy using a series of 
interconnected factors to ensure that there is sustainable development.
194  ibid.
195  ibid.
196  It is important to highlight that since 2012, the sustainable development role 
previously performed by Comhar has been integrated into the NESC.
197  See, for example, Malcolm Eames with Maria Adebowale (eds), Sustainable 
Development and Social Inclusion: Towards an Integrated Approach to Research (York, 
Joseph Rowntree Foundation 2002); Colantonio and Dixon (n 172).
198  For example, the Department of Social Protection has under its umbrella a social 
inclusion division. See http://www.socialinclusion.ie accessed 21 November 2012; the 
Economic and Social Research Council (ESRI) also has an area of research focused on 
social inclusion and quality of life. See http://www.esri.ie/research/research_areas/social_
cohesion_and_quality_of_life accessed 21 November 2012.
199  http://www.comharsustainableindicators.ie/explore-the-indicators/comhar-
indicators.aspx accessed 21 November 2012.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
210
Sustainable development and local empowerment
The issue of local empowerment is a part of sustainable development strategies 
and Comhar also sees local empowerment as essential. In 2007, Comhar carried 
out a review of Ireland’s sustainable development strategy, in which it recognized 
that exclusion in relation to the decision-making process was still taking place 
and that Principle 8 (social inclusion) had been left in the back-burner. Moreover, 
under the ‘Theme for Governance and Sustainable Development’, Comhar 
indicated that local and community grassroots groups played a governance role via 
community action. But, to date, there is no mentioning of the role of legal services 
(or lack of it) in the empowerment of communities or how they can contribute to 
the advancement of sustainable development. It is submitted that CED lawyering 
(and public interest law) can help to fill this gap as it provides for community legal 
education not just to individuals but also to community groups.
Regeneration: A Background
Defining regeneration depends on the particular viewpoint of each person.200 In 
Ireland to date, there has been no real definition of regeneration.201 Moreover, there 
is no national regeneration agency underpinned by legislation. For example, in 
reviewing the policy and practice of regeneration of social housing in Ireland, 
Treadwell Shine and Norris concluded that the current social housing regeneration 
arrangements are fragmented and that much more work is needed if Ireland is 
to have a coherent and cohesive regeneration policy.202 Moreover, their research 
also showed that there were three different approaches to the implementation of 
regeneration projects within social housing. Depending on the type of funding 
received, these regeneration schemes could be divided into local authority, multi-
agency or public-private partnerships. Local authority-funded schemes could also be 
subdivided into local authority-led or by led by an independent urban development 
company set up by the local authority to specifically oversee the regeneration 
(Ballymun and Limerick Regeneration Agencies are examples of this).
Some other scholars, namely Colantonio and Dixon, have argued that 
regeneration could be categorized under some ‘main thematic narratives’ in order to 
facilitate its understanding. For example, in relation to area-based regeneration and 
renewal, regeneration could be divided into a ‘property-led physical approach’, a 
‘business-driven approach’ and a ‘health and well-being approach’, among others.203
Thus, it can be asserted that regeneration can, on the one hand, be divided 
according to how it is funded (Treadwell and Norris) and, on the other hand, 
200  Colantonio and Dixon (n 172) 7.
201  Albeit that urban renewal is mentioned on a number of acts directed towards the 
promotion of fiscal incentives for developers (which intrinsically includes regeneration), 
urban renewal is not defined either.
202  Treadwell Shine and Norris (n 14) particularly 51–52.
203  Colantonio and Dixon (n 172) 8.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
211
according to the type of approach used (Colantonio and Dixon). In Ireland, one 
can find all of the above approaches existing either separately or in conjunction. 
For example, Ballymun falls under the local authority health and well-being 
approach,204 and most of the well-known ‘commercially focused’ regeneration 
that has taken place in Dublin has been ‘area-based’, which includes the 
property-led physical approach.
Urban regeneration 
Context  The Irish Department of Environment, Community and Local Government 
defines the aim of regeneration as:
to build sustainable communities through a combination of social, educational 
and economic initiatives and also by rejuvenating the built environment by a 
mixture of demolition, construction and refurbishment of dwellings having 
regard to urban design guidelines. In addition, local authorities are also required 
to focus on a strategic multifaceted approach to address the range of social, 
educational and economic issues that may be evident. Procurement may take 
a number of forms, using public monies or private funding through a Public-
Private Partnership. It is a matter for the local authority to submit proposals for 
regeneration of an area.205
Significantly, ‘the process which facilitates sustainable development at a community 
level’ (also known as ‘Local Agenda 21’) is separated from the regeneration 
schemes (regeneration schemes are found under social housing support), giving 
the impression that development and housing relate to infrastructure and to the 
physical development of an area, and are not related to the concept of sustainable 
development or to the environment at all. However, regeneration, particularly from 
the point of view of communities, is linked to Local Agenda 21.206 The Department 
indicates that Local Agenda 21 is:
a process which facilitates sustainable development at community level. It is an 
approach, based on participation which respects the social, cultural, economic 
and environmental needs of the present and future citizens of a community in 
all its diversity and which relates that community and its future to the regional, 
national and international community of which it is a part.207
204  Studying the type of regeneration and how they fall under the different 
classifications would require further research that is outside the scope of this paper.
205  http://www.environ.ie/en/DevelopmentHousing/Housing/SocialHousingSupport/
RegenerationSchemes/ accessed 11 February 2012 (emphasis added).
206  No changes, to date, have been seen in relation to the new government (Fina 
Gael-Labour Coalition 2011).
207 
http://www.environ.ie/en/Environment/LocalAgenda21/ accessed 21 November 2012. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
212
Similarly, the Sustainable Development Unit of the Department recognizes that 
sustainable development is a matter for all concerned and deals with the policy 
issues driving the sustainable development agenda.208 This aim of regneration is 
to be ‘underpinned’ by four different goals. These are: (i) to promote awareness, 
knowledge and uptake of a wide range of statutory, voluntary and community 
services; (ii) to increase access to formal and informal educational, recreational 
and cultural development activities and resources; (iii) to increase peoples’ work 
readiness and employment prospects; and (iv) to promote engagement with policy, 
practice and decision-making processes on matters affecting local communities.209
Consequently, it is argued that the policies which facilitate sustainable 
development and the synergies between sustainable development and urban 
regeneration could assist in the construction of community law centres and in the 
achievement of social inclusion. This, in turn, could influence the further role/
development of CED and CED lawyering in empowering local communities – and 
Ballymun is a good example of this.210
Regeneration of social housing  In 1997, the Department of the Environment 
published a document entitled Sustainable Development: A Strategy for 
Ireland,211 which contained a planned strategy for the achievement of sustainable 
development under the concept of urban regeneration.212 Under this concept, 
the document indicated that the policies for achieving ‘sustainable urban 
regeneration’ would have ‘key elements’, such as the integration of strategic 
economic and social planning.213
Although the regeneration of individual dwellings had started to take place in 
Ireland from 1981 under a programme that provided for ‘new windows, heating 
systems, bathrooms and extensions to inadequate local authority dwellings’,214 the 
refurbishment of entire housing estates did not take place until 1985.
208  ‘While obviously this is an overarching issue, which concerns all sections of this 
Department, all other Government Departments and the whole of society’: http://www.
environ.ie/en/Environment/SustainableDevelopment/ accessed 21 November 2012. 
209  ibid.
210  The sustainable development concept is also shaping the community legal services 
to be provided by the regeneration scheme in Limerick. See PILA, ‘New Community Law 
and Mediation Centre to Open in Limerick’, 12 December 2012, available at: http://www.
pila.ie/bulletin/december-2012/12-december-2012/new-community-law-and-mediation-
centre-to-open-in-limerick/ accessed 18 January 2013.
211  Department of the Environment, ‘Sustainable Development: A Strategy for 
Ireland’, 1997, available at: http://www.environ.ie/en/Environment/SustainableDevelopment/
PublicationsDocuments/FileDownLoad,1825,en.pdf accessed 21 November 2012.
212  ibid foreword. 
213  ibid 150. 
214  Norris (n 169) 27.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
213
Literature on urban regeneration and management of social housing in Ireland 
is increasing,215 but it does not deal with access to legal services or with services 
overall. Nessa Winston, in writing about urban regeneration and sustainable 
development, states that:
For schemes in disadvantaged areas, social supports are crucial for the success 
of regeneration programmes. Some progress in addressing social disadvantage 
may be made from the provision of high quality, affordable housing in attractive 
environment. However, a whole range of local support services are also required 
… These elements of community and neighbourhood regeneration tend to be 
neglected in research, despite an acknowledgement that physical regeneration 
alone is not sufficient.216
While there is some recent literature on urban regeneration and social 
sustainability,217 there is nothing on urban regeneration and access to legal 
services.218 Moreover, recent literature indicates that ‘a comprehensive study 
of urban regeneration from a social-sustainability (i.e. the social dimension of 
sustainable development) perspective is still missing’.219
In relation to, on the one hand, housing law and policy and, on the other hand, 
social policy, there has also been a lack of in-depth research conducted into their 
influences on regeneration schemes in Ireland.220 A study carried out in 2006 by Dr 
Rory Hearne in relation to the role of PPPs in social housing regeneration indicated 
that PPPs left residents worse off, displacing and breaking up communities.221
215  See, for example, ibid; Kasey Treadwell Shine, ‘Regenerating Unpopular Social 
Housing Estates: Can Complexity Theory Help to Achieve Best Possible Solutions?’ (2006) 
23 Housing, Theory and Society 65–91; Winston, ‘From Boom to Bust?’ (n 171); Winston, 
‘Regeneration for Sustainable Communities?’ (n 171); Winston, ‘Urban Regeneration for 
Sustainable Development’ (n 171); Treadwell Shine and Norris (n 14).
216  Winston, ‘Urban Regeneration for Sustainable Development’ (n 171) (emphasis 
added).
217  Colantonio and Dixon (n 172); Manzi et al (n 172).
218  Regeneration as part of urban studies/geography area seems to have advanced in 
Ireland, yet to date, nothing has been found from a legal angle. 
219  Colantonio and Dixon (n 172) 9.
220  Email from Dr Padriac Kenna to the author, NUI Galway (15 December 2011).
221  Note that this type of relationship (between the private and the public) is what 
one often sees and perceives in relation to some housing estates in Ireland as well as 
some ‘famous regeneration projects’ abroad. For example, the regeneration experience of 
downtown Los Angeles and the creation of a new downtown displaced and broke up entire 
communities. Ballymun was fortunate as it was not regenerated under a PPP approach per 
se. Recently, however, a new type of housing policy is developing in Ireland which may 
leave the provision of social housing to the private market (Dr Padraic Kenna’s Housing 
Law & Policy class, Ballymun, January 2012).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
214
The concept of citizenship under the remit of social policy has also played 
an important role in ensuring that an array of social services are provided as 
part of regeneration schemes, including community legal services. This is best 
exemplified by the regeneration of Ballymun and the creation of BCLC, but again, 
this area is only mentioned in passing.
The Regeneration of Ballymun 
Background 
Ballymun was to be the ‘housing estate of the future’. It comprised a set of seven 
high towers, all named after the leaders of the 1916 Irish Rebellion, as well as 
a number of spine blocks and two-storey housing units. The Ballymun housing 
estate was to house a large number of families following the collapse of a number 
of tenement buildings222 and the subsequent evacuation of the rest of the tenements 
in Dublin City in 1963. Ballymun was officially ‘opened’ in 1969, with many of 
its new residents experiencing ‘life’ in high-rise buildings for the first time. It 
initially contained 2,820 flats, a number later increased by the addition of 1,600 
two-storey public housing units, making it ‘one of the largest public housing 
estates in Europe’.223 By the 1980s, much had changed and the housing estate of 
the future with its seven towers had become a housing estate error of the past.224 
Ballymun was now home to a high level of unemployment, with a large number 
of single-parent families and poorly serviced communal areas. Nevertheless, the 
1980s was also a ‘breeding ground’ for activism in Ballymun.225
Due to the costs associated with improving/refurbishing the existing 
stock of housing, together with the expense of remedying structural defects, it 
was determined that the tower blocks and spine blocks would be demolished 
‘progressively over eight years’ and replaced by new housing:
The redevelopment of the housing was to be the central element in an integrated 
strategic plan for the economic and social development of the area which 
would include arrangements for consultation with, and involvement of the local 
community in its implementation.226
222  In June 1963, four people died following the collapse of tenement buildings in 
Bolton Street and Fenian Street.
223  Aibhlín McCrann (ed), Memories Milestones and New Horizons: Reflections on 
the Regeneration of Ballymun (Belfast, Blackstaff Press 2008) Foreword.
224  However, when first built, the architecture was considered modern.
225  Local activist presentation by Áine Rooney from the Ballymun Welfare Rights 
Group to the NUI Galway student’s day trip to Ballymun, 11 March 2011.
226  BRL, ‘Ballymun Regeneration Limited Completion Report’ (2008) 7.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
215
Thus, in March 1997, the go-ahead was given for the redevelopment of Ballymun 
by the then Minister for the Environment and the Minister for Housing and Urban 
Renewal,227 and following a consultation with the then Department of the Environment 
and Dublin Corporation228 (now Dublin City Council), a company limited by 
guarantee with no share capital was established to oversee the redevelopment.229 
The company became known as Ballymun Regeneration Limited (BRL).230
The master plan for the regeneration/redevelopment of Ballymun took place 
‘in consultation and partnership’ with the community231 and adjacent areas.232 
It proposed a strategy for the regeneration of the social, economic and physical 
aspects of the community and not solely for the physical infrastructure. Among the 
recommendations made during the consultation process carried out on a ‘Public 
Planning Day’, it was indicated that the residents needed ‘decentralised advice and 
welfare rights’233 among others. This recommendation would become the seed of 
the start of a community civil legal aid centre.
The master plan contained a huge number of proposals and different points 
of views. To date, 5,000 housing units have been built, with 80 per cent of them 
owner-occupied and 10 per cent rented.
Equipped with the strategy of creating social, economic and physical 
regeneration, and with the view of the community that there was a need to have 
a decentralized advice and welfare rights service, the idea of a community legal 
centre for the local residents came to the fore. Providing legal services would 
fall within the remit of social regeneration, a concept that places the idea of 
citizenship at its core.
Moreover, BRL viewed the concept of citizenship as that which included 
rights and responsibilities; therefore, a place where legal services were provided 
would be fundamental to the regeneration scheme. By having a law centre, 
people could learn about their rights and responsibilities. For BRL, having rights 
227  ibid.
228  Dublin Corporation was renamed Dublin City Council in 2002.
229  It was felt that because of the distrust that the local community felt in relation to 
the government, having an independent body would be more appropriate. Interview with 
Sheena McCambley, Senior Planner BRL (Ballymun, 11 March 2011). 
230  See McCrann (n 223) particularly 1–43.
231  The community consultation group was comprised of different ‘umbrella’ groups, 
namely Ballymun Housing Task Force, Ballymun Partnership, Area Forums, the Design 
Group, focus groups, working groups and adjacent Resident Associations. 
232  The then Managing Director of BRL indicated that over 2,000 local people 
became involved in designing ‘their new town’, a figure which increased to over 5,000 
when the Draft Master Plan was launched. BRL, ‘Masterplan for the New Ballymun’, 1998 
(Foreword).
233  The recommendation was placed under the umbrella of ‘Advice, Support and 
Community Development’. This umbrella or theme was one out of six themes that BRL 
decided to establish in order to address six key social themes that required specific attention 
under the Masterplan. ibid 6.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
216
and responsibilities meant participation and involvement in the community, so 
everyone (people and community institutions) could be accountable.234 Thus, 
BRL became a significant funder and proponent of having a community law 
centre as it would provide a service where none existed before. Furthermore, 
the community law centre would also act as an agent of empowerment, both 
through raising awareness of the relevance of law in society and through its 
educational activities.235
Case Study – Ballymun Community Law Centre 
Background 
The aim of this case study is to argue that CED lawyering exists in Ireland 
and that its use and practice can help in the promotion and implementation of 
a strategic model of legal aid, as well as to argue that public interest law and 
regeneration efforts can be connected through the further development of CED. 
It is envisaged that by expanding the role of law and the legal system in bringing 
about social change via the combination of law, social policy and community 
development tools, public interest lawyers can further understand and develop this 
innovative area of law. Although there is some research describing how BCLC 
was established,236 it is submitted that by exploring BCLC from a CED perspective 
and focusing on its ongoing community involvement as a way of bringing about 
social regeneration, such as the provision of community legal education, an Irish 
version of CED lawyering can come to the fore.
In operation since 2002 and serving a population of almost 20,000,237 BCLC’s 
creation and history arose out of Dublin’s blueprint for the regeneration of a 
disadvantaged neighbourhood, rather than out of a demand for the establishment 
of a community law centre.238 Ballymun could be replaced with ‘a self-sustaining 
urban centre’ for the people in the area and the redevelopment plan could also 
provide for ‘consultation with, and involvement of, the local community in its 
234  ibid.
235  Email from Sheena McCambley to the author (11 March 2011).
236  Gerry Whyte, ‘Providing Effective Access to Legal Services: The Experience of 
the Ballymun Community Law Centre’ in McCrann (n 223) 115–34.
237  Ursula Halpin, Sylvia Mooney, Katrin Todt and Bernadette Walsh, ‘Ballymun 
Community Law Centre: Evaluation Report 2009’ (BCLC 2009) 12. The evaluation report 
contains a series of social demographics as published in the 2006 Census. Data from the 
most recent census is not yet available. 
238  Gerry Whyte explains that the FLAC, following the establishment of the then 
‘Coolock Law Centre’, campaigned for the creation of a community law centre in Tallaght, 
but it was never developed by the government. See Gerry Whyte, Social Inclusion and the 
Legal System: Public Interest Law in Ireland (Dublin, Institute of Public Administration 
2002) 311, note 143.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
217
implementation’.239 This is because the Sustainable Development document issued 
by the Department for the Environment indicated that ‘sustainability in housing 
require[d] tenant participation and empowerment’.240Although the document did 
not mention the provision of a community law centre, it was government policy that 
the ‘strategic economic and social planning’ linked the measures and programmes 
for urban renewal on an integrated basis to address the physical, economic, social 
and environmental regeneration of urban areas.241
As such, it can be said that the regeneration of Ballymun and the subsequent 
birth of BCLC is the first example in Ireland of how the practice of CED 
as a whole (i.e. as a concept and as a lawyering strategy) has evolved with 
open support from the government. Moreover, and although the government 
may not have realized it,242 it can be argued that the government approach 
of addressing the physical, economic, social and environmental needs of the 
community on an integrated basis firmly rooted the concept of CED within that 
of regeneration and sustainability on the one hand and public interest law on 
the other (via BCLC). Although it took a few years following the beginning of 
the regeneration process for BCLC to open its doors, it celebrated its 10-year 
anniversary in November 2012.
It is also important to highlight that because BCLC was part of the 
regeneration project, it also received government support from the Legal Aid 
Board (LAB) in addition to state funding via BRL. This process of collaboration 
between the LAB and BCLC – a government-run civil legal aid scheme on 
the one hand and an independent civil legal aid service (in the form of the law 
centre) on the other – would not have been possible before, despite the call 
made by the Free Legal Advice Centre (FLAC) for the establishment of local 
community centres as part of its ‘National Advice and Legal Service Council’ 
programme back in 1992.243
239  Department of the Environment (n 211) 156.
240  ibid.
241  ibid 150. 
242  BRL called for community services to be set up within the newly regenerated 
area. The process relating to the establishment of BCLC is described below. See also, 
Whyte (n 238) 332, note 215. 
243  A call for the establishment of community law centres had also been requested 
in its submission to the Pringle Committee and mentioned in the Pringle Report back in 
the 1970s. For more information on the Pringle Report, see Dennis A Pringle, Report to 
Minister for Justice: Committee on Civil Legal Aid and Advice (London, The Stationery 
Office 1977); and also Mel Cousins, ‘Legal Aid in France and the Republic of Ireland in the 
1990s’ in The Transformation of Legal Aid: Comparative and Historical Studies (Oxford, 
Oxford University Press 1999) 162.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
218
How the Law Centre Became Part of the Master Plan244 
In relation to regeneration, it was felt that there should be representative groups and 
organizations which were resourced to channel concerns, instead of the traditional 
outlets of protest marches and public meetings, where feelings and positions 
became entrenched and nothing got resolved. The provision of an independent 
organization with professional legal advisors and representation meant that if the 
people experienced what they saw as injustice, they could resolve it as equals; 
people tended to use the media and the political system for larger issues and 
disputes, but individuals tended to use the law centre.
Following the public meeting, a number of public consultations took place 
and a committee to oversee its establishment also met regularly.245 Thus, in 2000, 
a Feasibility Study Report indicated that despite the evidence of deprivation 
and marginalization found within Ballymun, there was a strong network of 
community groups and organizations which, until then, had arranged among 
themselves to meet the needs of the community.246 The Report called for the 
need to develop information and advice services to meet the changes brought 
about by regeneration, such as rectifying the decades of neglect and deprivation 
experienced within Ballymun.
The Report further recognized there were already a huge range of information 
and advice services within Ballymun, but no proper legal services. The FLAC 
only operated a voluntary service twice a week.247 Moreover, it was an ‘advice 
244  Special thanks to Evelyn Hanlon, the current Chair of the Board of Directors of 
BCLC, for her insights into the history of BCLC. This section is based on the findings of a 
long interview with her (n 19). 
245  The consultative process had taken place under a series of meetings. It included: 
BRL, Coolock Community Law Centre, Ballymun Community Action Programme, 
Ballymun Welfare Rights Group, Men’s Networking Resource Centre, FLAC, Youth Action 
Programme, Ballymun MABS, Eastern Health Board – Community Welfare Service, 
Gardai, Dublin Corporation (now Dublin City Council), Women’s Resource Centre, 
Threshold, Ballymun Housing Task Force, Balcurris/Baltbutcher Lane Estate Forum, 
Poppintree Estate Forum, Ballymun Youth Reach, Linx Project and Ballymun Men’s 
Centre. The Committee also heard the views from other interested groups and individuals. 
David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: Feasibility 
Study Report’, January 2000, 4. Note that the Action Plan also mentions Ballymun Citizen 
Information Centre. See David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community 
Law Centre: Action Plan 2000’, November 2000, 4. 
246  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Feasibility Study Report’ (n 245) 7. The author quotes the Gamma Report 1995 (to date, I 
have been unavailable to find the original source).
247  FLAC was set up in Ballymun around 1969–70 and was run by law students. The 
solicitor would advise the students as to how to advise the client, so the solicitor never meet 
the clients personally. ‘History of FLAC in Ballymun’ 15–16, written by Dennis Barror, 
found at BCLC, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre Annual Report 2006’, 2006.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
219
only service’ and there were no private solicitors in the area.248 Thus, establishing 
a community law centre could satisfy the unmet legal need of the community as 
well as that of community groups, as people were seeking legal advice from the 
existing support groups available at the time, but these groups could not offer such 
legal advice.249 The Report also deemed that the development of the law centre 
should be based on a number of principles250 and the services should be offered 
through a combination of different approaches, namely casework, community 
support groups, training, information/education programmes and law reform and 
social policy work.251
More importantly, for the purposes of this research, the feasibility study also 
contained a definition of what a community law centre was,252 thus setting the 
standard as to what a community law centre was supposed to do. This definition 
indicated that a community law centre was:
an independent and community-based service which provides free legal aid and 
advice to individuals and groups in marginalised areas. It provides court and 
tribunal representation and usually concentrates on areas of law such as housing, 
debt, employment law, welfare rights, equality issues, and family law. However, 
a community law centre does not confine its work to individual casework. It 
also recognises that local information/advice/support groups also need to use 
248  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Action Plan 2000’ (n 245) 8.
249   David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Feasibility Study Report’ (n 245). The consultation process had also indicated that local 
groups were looking for a ‘back-up service’ in relation to their case work and a place 
that could offer training in legal issues and expertise in making submissions for reform, 
hence a law centre was best suited in terms of satisfying all these requirements. David 
Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: Action Plan 2000’ 
(n 245) 8.
250  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Feasibility Study Report’ (n 245) 9. The principles were to: provide a community-based 
legal service; work to protect and promote the constitutional, legal and social rights of 
marginalized individuals and groups; work with existing community organizations to 
complement and support their work; provide an independent, professional and confidential 
service; be committed to a consistently excellent standard of service; ensure that the service 
be based on respect for individuals and equality of treatment; ensure that the service would 
seek to empower both the individuals and groups it works with. One way in which BCLC 
pursues working with groups is via its legal education services to groups when needed. 
Thus, community groups are trained to service their clients (emphasis added).
251  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Action Plan 2000’ (n 245) 9–10. The feasibility study further indicated that the law centre 
should also work closely with the then CCLC and create a formal mechanism for an 
exchange of ideas, cooperation and, ‘when appropriate’, a sharing of resources. 
252  The earliest definition offered to the government as to what a community law 
centre was can be found in the Pringle Report. See Pringle (n 243).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
220
the legal resources available in the community law centre to assist them in their 
work. This strengthens the work of such groups and enables them to meet the 
needs of their users more effectively. In addition these groups may need legal 
service to meet their own requirements, for example, in relation to company 
formation, or drawing up contracts of employment. Again the community law 
centre model will provide this service.253
By indicating that the role of the law centre was also to service community groups 
which in turn would also help to strengthen their work so that the community groups 
could meet the requirement of their users,254 the author of the Report, Dave Ellis, 
had unknowingly described part of the process of CED law and lawyering, and 
how it worked in action. This is partly because the vision of BCLC was the product 
of the many years of experience Ellis had spent working with the NCL&MC, but 
also because the establishment of BCLC included a very different approach when 
compared to how the NCL&MC was created. 255 For BCLC, regeneration and the 
government policy of working in an integrated manner played a key role in its 
development. As such, there was an explicit acknowledgement that the role of a 
law centre is to serve community groups.
Additionally, Ellis, drawing on his experiences with the NCL&MC and his 
desire to involve more community development into law and legal practice,256 
shaped and cemented his vision of how a law centre would look in theory 
and practice. Aided and inspired by the potentials of regeneration, the vision 
precipitated the creation of a law centre which could not only meet a legal need but 
could also provide for the social and economic development of the community.257 
In other words, regeneration sparked the blossoming of CED lawyering in Ireland, 
connecting public interest law and regeneration under the umbrella of BCLC while 
at the same time addressing the need for an integrated approach in the provision of 
information and advice services, as indicated in the Report.258
253  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Feasibility Study Report’ (n 245) 6. The description of what a community law centre is 
also appears in the Action Plan. See David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun 
Community Law Centre: Action Plan 2000’ (n 245) 6.
254  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Action Plan 2000’ (n 245) 6.
255   This is in contrast to the NCL&MC, which was set up to meet unmet legal needs, 
but under an access to justice approach. This difference also explains the geographical 
focus of BCLC when compared with the NCL&MC. The NCL&MC services two electoral 
district areas with a population of about 140,000. 
256  Conversation with Sarah Flynn, wife of the late David Ellis (International 
Community Development Conference, NUI Maynooth, 16 November 2011).
257  This vision of community development when compared to the NCL&MC 
presents some interesting views in relation to the impact of CED. 
258  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Feasibility Study Report’ (n 245) 16.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
221
The Report also proposed to meet the needs for family law issues in conjunction 
with the LAB,259 acknowledging this would ‘break new ground’, but it was 
important to realize that the regeneration of Ballymun necessitated all types of 
services, both statutory and non-statutory, and thus new forms of thinking and the 
validity and recognition of new approaches when delivering legal services.260 This 
process of collaboration proved to be crucial as it also facilitated the delivery of a 
strategic model of legal aid in partnership with the government, which up to that 
point had been unattainable,261 thus supporting the argument that CED could act 
as a link between public interest law and regeneration and, as such, that it could 
facilitate the practice of the strategic approach to legal aid.
Local Management and Control
The attainment of local management and control of BCLC by the community is 
an ongoing process and goal, as reflected in the development of its management 
structure. The Report originally proposed that the running of the centre could 
be performed by a company limited by guarantee with an elected board,262 
indicating that the board ‘should be as representative of the people of the area 
as possible’ so that it could be aware of the needs of the community.263 This 
model reflected the existing arrangements of the other existing independent 
community law centres at the time.264 However, its management board would be 
different as it would also contain nominees of statutory agencies and others.265 
The membership of BCLC Ltd was later addressed in the Action Plan indicating 
that it should represent the people of Ballymun in order for the law centre to be 
‘responsive to the needs of the community’.266
In reality, however, local management and control has worked rather differently. 
According to Frank Murphy, the Managing Solicitor of BCLC:
259  The Civil Legal Aid Board had also proposed to work with BCLC following an 
interview with Morning Ireland (unfortunately, the date of the interview was unobtainable). 
260   David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Feasibility Study Report’ (n 245) 11.
261   The NCL&MC and FLAC have been unsuccessful in obtaining government 
support in relation to the practice of strategic legal aid, although they have received 
government funding by the Department of Social Protection and the Department of Justice 
respectively.
262  BCLC would be a limited company limited by guarantee and managed by a 
management board.
263  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Feasibility Study Report’ (n 245) 17. 
264  At the time, the only other independent community law centre was the NCL&MC.
265  David Ellis Community Legal Resource, ‘Ballymun Community Law Centre: 
Action Plan 2000’ (n 245) 19. 
266  ibid 20.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
222
one cannot just present a law centre as a fait accompli. One has to grow it in 
the community with the community and for the community. In an area where 
there were no solicitors, one has to work with the community to develop the law 
centre and its management.267
Currently, the management board is composed of nine people, two of which 
represent the local community. BCLC hopes that in the future, more community 
representatives will become involved. In the words of Murphy:
in order to build local management and control takes place, there is a lot of 
ground to cover first, to make up for people’s distrust in the legal system. After 
all, there were no legal services facilities in the area since the foundation of the 
housing estate.268
This view of rebalancing of power, of understanding the background of people 
and the community has also required BCLC to become a facilitator and take a 
step back and offer legal help when required, thus changing lawyering attitudes in 
order to achieve empowerment. This process, in turn, acts as a further example of 
CED lawyering in action as the lawyer acts as a facilitator, and by using different 
legal tools and approaches, it empowers the community. CED lawyering can 
therefore help to further facilitate local management and control, but it might take 
much more time than originally anticipated.
One important element of how BCLC can achieve local management and 
control is the role played by the project officer, whose main aim is to look for 
projects within the community and assess how BCLC can contribute to or create 
further projects that are needed within the community. This position was not 
envisaged within the original management structure, but it has proven to be a 
crucial role. For example, at present, the project officer runs a series of projects 
targeting the local community269 in which BCLC can make an impact. The project 
officer also looks for projects within the community under which BCLC can 
provide assistance, making the role an example as to how CED lawyering as a 
lawyering strategy is currently being practised.
Services Provided
The current services provided by BCLC vary. According to Frank Murphy, BCLC 
aims to provide integrated ‘holistic’ services and it has a strategic approach ‘vision’ 
as to how to achieve this. It also provides for advocacy and it is open to trying 
267  Interview with Frank Murphy, Managing Solicitor of BCLC (Ballymun, 23 
February 2011).
268  ibid. 
269  For example, the project officer has established a ‘restorative justice’ project. 
Please see below for more information.

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
223
new things in order to achieve integrated holistic services. Otherwise, the law and 
the legal process become detached from reality, isolating the law from the other 
components of a person’s life, such as their mental well-being and family-related 
problems.270 The law needs to be available to people in a wholesome/holistic/all-
encompassing approach.271
The lack of a test-case approach also shows the more collaborative approach 
that BCLC has taken, and although it has represented clients in court in very 
important cases, particularly those relating to housing issues, it is the client 
and not the law centre who gives the instructions as to how the case is to be 
handled. Pro bono services are also offered by barristers and solicitors either in 
the form of representation or in delivering courses or seminars. NUI Galway, 
Trinity College Dublin and Dublin City University also support the educational 
work of BCLC.272
In an evaluation report carried out in 2009, it was indicated that the aim of 
BCLC in relation to community legal education was to deliver ‘innovative legal 
education programmes’ by promoting ‘understanding of the law and encourage [sic] 
disadvantaged communities to use the law and work with the legal profession’.273 
Currently, three courses have been delivered to the community.274 One course that 
has proven particularly beneficial is the housing law and policy course, as it directly 
relates to the changes faced by the regeneration of Ballymun as well as delivering 
an innovative approach by creating ‘community legal education without walls’.275
The Restorative Justice Project for primary schools began in 2008 and is 
delivered in six primary schools within Ballymun under the umbrella of ‘peer-to-
peer mediation’. It teaches the children how to manage conflict and thus provides 
270  It is interesting to point out that J Michael Norwood and A Paterson wrote an 
article back in 2002 about how to provide holistic legal services. Although the article was 
based on the ABA Rules of Ethics and the example used was from the New Mexico Law 
School Child Advocacy Clinic, it offers great insight as to how holistic legal services can be 
offered under an approach referred to as Multidisciplinary Practice (MDP). See J Michael 
Norwood and Alan Paterson, ‘Problem-Solving in a Multidisciplinary Environment? Must 
Ethics Get in the Way of Holistic Services?’ [2002] 9 Clinical L Rev 337. Note that if the 
Legal Services Regulation Bill 2011 is passed, provision to establish partnerships with non-
legal professionals will be allowed, thus making it easier for CLCs to provide holistic legal 
services, which in turn will make it easier for CED lawyers to partner with other professions 
for the benefit of the community. Part 7 of the Bill even includes the term ‘Multidisciplinary 
Practices’. See http://www.oireachtas.ie/documents/bills28/bills/2011/5811/document2.pdf 
accessed 20 January 2013.
271  Interview with Frank Murphy (n 267).
272  Halpin et al (n 237) 50–51.
273  ibid 17.
274  Such as social welfare law, family law and mental health law. The most recent 
Housing Law and Policy course offered by Dr Kenna started in January 2013 (the last one 
was completed in March 2012). 
275  At present, further research into this approach is being carried out by the author.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
224
for a better way to go into secondary education.276 At the secondary level, the 
project is run under the umbrella of ‘the law club’ and covers legal topic courses 
as well as trips to the courts, a mock trial and a placement in a solicitor’s firm to 
obtain work experience.
BCLC also has a number of mediation projects, which act as an alternative to 
conflict resolution. The idea of having mediation services from the outset was due, 
in part, to the view that legal issues could be resolved by other means than recourse 
to the courts.277 To date, there have been a number of different mediation services: 
peer mediation, community mediation, family mediation and a pilot mediation 
project run in conjunction with the courts services. BCLC also runs outreach 
clinics every week in different areas within Ballymun with the aim of bringing 
legal services to those who cannot or who are unable to make it to BCLC’s offices.
Extensive training programmes have been put in place to support community 
groups and maximize the community understanding of the law. In 2010, for 
example, BCLC participated in the advisory group of the ‘Telling Women’s 
Stories Project’, a project facilitated by Amnesty International as part of the 
International Women’s Day celebration (the project which included a session on 
human rights)278 and in the ‘Young Ballymun Literacivic Project’, a project aimed 
at civic literacy.279
Funding
BCLC is currently funded by BRL,280 the Law Society and the Bar Council.281 The 
role played by BRL has been crucial in this regard as without it, BCLC would 
not exist. Evelyn Hanlon282 explains that initially the then Department of Social 
276  For recent evaluation of the Peer Mediation Programme in primary schools, 
see Seamus Farrell, ‘An Evaluation of Ballymun Community Law Centre’s Pilot Peer 
Mediation Programme in National Primary Schools in Ballymun Community: Managing 
Relationships and Behaviour in Schools through Mediation and Restorative Practices’, 
2010, on file with the author.
277  The way in which funding for the law centre came about is also important. See 
interview with Evelyn Hanlon (n 19) in relation to the origins of the law centre.
278  BCLC (n 247) 10.
279  ibid. BCLC was part of the advisory group.
280  BRL took over the funding in late 2004, when a request was made to it to take 
over the Joseph Rowntree Charitable Trust, which had funded the first three years of BCLC. 
BRL gave funding for the next three years (2005–08). See BCLC, ‘Ballymun Community 
Law Centre Annual Report 2004’ 4.
281  Between 2005 and 2008, the then Department of Community Rural and Gaeltacht 
Affairs also gave some funding for the development and delivery of Further Education and 
Training Awards Council (FETAC) accredited courses on Employment Law and Corporate 
Governance. Pobal provided funding for Housing Advice and Advocacy and the pilot peer-
to-peer training. And in 2007, the Irish Fund funded the Community Mediation Training. 
282  Interview with Evelyn Hanlon (n 19).

Public Interest Law and Regeneration 
225
Welfare283 was approached, but it was very clear that it did not wish to provide any 
funding for the Ballymun project. The Department of Justice was also approached, 
but indicated that it already provided for the LAB.
Thus, because BRL is funded by the Department of the Environment, the 
Department has been responsible for the continued existence of the law centre 
in Ballymun. It undertakes this funding as part of its commitment to social 
sustainability and social regeneration. Initially, some politicians wanted assurances 
that the centre would not take any clients who wished to take a case against the 
regeneration company or the council. However, as indicated above, the whole 
purpose and point of establishing a community law centre was to provide access 
to the law, other than in respect of family and criminal law, for people who could 
not afford it, regardless of what the basis for their complaint was. However, both 
BRL and BCLC did strongly promote the idea of alternative dispute resolution and 
community mediation as alternatives to going to court in every instance.284
Yet the main issue with BCLC’s current funding situation is not about being able 
to meet the targets set in its Action Plan (2000),285 but rather in relation to financial 
sustainability. The question that continues to linger around concerns the financial 
sustainability of BCLC in the long term, as once the mandate of BRL is completed, 
BCLC would no longer have an umbrella organization to channel funding.
Conclusion 
The goals of achieving empowerment and having better communities have become 
clichés or even part of the rhetoric of development in the past few decades.286 
Nonetheless, the role of law and lawyers in promoting social inclusion as part 
of a sustainable development strategy has not become part of the sustainable 
development discourse.287 If we are to overcome economic downturns, create jobs 
and enhance local economies, then the practice of CED lawyering can become 
an important aspect of how answers and solutions could be created while at the 
same time promoting social inclusion. Although it could be argued that lawyers 
are not really needed to combat social inclusion, the fact that BRL sees access to 
283  The Department of Social Welfare funds (among other donors) the NCL&MC.
284  Interview with Evelyn Hanlon (n 244).
285  The conclusion of the 2009 evaluation report indicated that the areas of service 
provided as set out in the 2000 Action Plan were all on target and that the legal education 
programmes have filled the information gap within the community, not to mention the use 
of technology in linking its housing course with NUI Galway, its engagement with schools 
and free lunch talks. Halpin et al (n 237) 51–55. 
286  A quick Google scholar search for ‘community empowerment’ revealed over 
530,000 articles.
287  Except when drafting contracts and the legal issues associated with regeneration, 
but these are not from a community perspective.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
226
legal services as part of social regeneration as a way of ensuring real citizenship in 
which rights and responsibilities can be ascertained by the community as well as 
by government is an indication that lawyers are needed. Because CED lawyering 
acts as a facilitator, CED is best placed to join the dots between regeneration and 
public interest law, and this is why BCLC offers the best example of how CED has 
developed and how it can continue to do so.
If economic recovery means economic development, then the role and 
evolution of CED lawyering is influenced by the goal of sustainable development, 
which in turns creates a new vision as to how to enhance the provision of civil 
legal aid services among communities.
Although there is nothing linking access to legal services to sustainable 
development, providing access to basic services, such as civil legal aid, in 
regenerated areas has created this link in an unexpected way. The link has allowed 
for the creation of a community law centre under a regeneration framework. 
Moreover, it has facilitated the role of CED lawyering in promoting/implementing 
a strategic model of legal aid.
BCLC overcame the constraints posed by the Irish government in respect of 
funding legal aid as the project was seen as part of the regeneration project of the 
area, as part of a public issue and as part of government policy as to how to achieve 
sustainable development. By developing new and innovative ways as to what is 
meant by legal aid and access to civil legal aid services, which includes access to 
legal services by community groups, a new form of lawyering can ensue, making 
the practice of CED law a reality.
Furthermore, although CED lawyering does not equate with merely servicing 
community groups, the involvement of NGOs is an essential component of its 
practice288 and the case study of Ballymun has highlighted this.
288  Dana A Thompson, ‘The Role of Nonprofits in CED’ in Clay, Jr and Jones (eds) 
(n 5) 57–82.

Chapter 9 
From Individual to Collective Squat: 
Economic Theory and the Regulation of 
Squatting in England and France
Jane Ball
Introduction
Squatters have been observed to be outsiders to society and treated as morally 
deficient. For Foucault,1 stigma is produced by a discourse evidencing weakness 
in a power relationship with society. This kind of stigmatization was underlined 
by recent English legislation designating all residential squatting as a criminal 
activity. Nonetheless, squatters have choices.
There is also the question as to why individuals choose to join a collective 
squat (as defined below) rather than seek a home to themselves. France has a 
stronger history of militant squatting than England,2 and therefore comparative 
study might assist in developing a response to this question. This situation will 
then be examined using insider-outsider theory, an economic theory originally 
developed by Lindbeck and Snower,3 and adapted to housing markets by Ball.4 
Essentially, this theory suggests that established residents can protect their position 
because of ‘transaction costs’, which are the financial costs in terms of time, effort 
and money which create barriers to access to housing, but which incidentally also 
create barriers to eviction. If these barriers/costs are excessively high, the result 
is the stigmatization and exclusion of outsiders, which can involve the eviction of 
squatters even from disused non-residential buildings.
1  Michel Foucault, L’Ordre du Discours (Paris, Gallimard 1971).
2  England must be discussed rather than the UK because there are significant 
differences in the laws governing Wales, Northern Ireland and particularly Scotland.
3  Assar Lindbeck and Dennis Snower, The Insider-Outsider Theory of Employment 
and Unemployment (Cambridge, MA, MIT Press 1988); Assar Lindbeck and Dennis 
Snower, ‘The Insider-Outsider Theory: A Survey’ (July 2002) IZA Discussion Paper No 
534 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=325323 accessed 14 August 2012.
4  Jane Ball, Housing Disadvantaged People? Insiders and Outsiders in French Social 
Housing (London, Routledge 2012).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
228
The advantage of individual squatting is that such long-term adverse 
occupants can acquire ownership rights over the property by ‘adverse possession’5 
in England and by prescription acquisitive6 in France. These are similar legal 
claims with similar results, but with very different terminology. The popular word 
‘squatter’ is common to England and France, and so it is overwhelmingly useful 
to speak of ‘individual squatting’ to obtain ‘squatters’ title’. Today, squatters’ 
websites use the terminology themselves, tending to shift the word away  
from the derogatory.7
In England, there may be an increase in collective squatting in response 
to the increasing criminalization of individual residential squatting, shortages 
of affordable housing and the policy of stigmatization of the squatter. The 
‘collective squat’ here means a mutually defensive position for a group of 
squatters, occupying a small home, perhaps for communitarian, socialist, 
political or practical reasons. Alternatively, a collective squat might involve 
larger shifting populations or larger spaces: whole blocks, offices or factories, as 
in the French experience.
This chapter avoids the well-trodden path of economic and moral debates 
about the usefulness of squatting in order to explore the effects of transaction costs 
on the regulatory procedures obstructing or assisting this activity. The strategies 
of squatters and of the public authorities are explored, first using theories of 
stigmatization and then in the light of insider-outsider theory. The prospects of 
obtaining individual squatters’ title are outlined, a situation which contrasts with 
collective squats offering a series of advantages of mutual support and claims 
of moral legitimacy. Finally, the different effects of this theory of power are 
considered in the global context.
Introducing Squatters and Their Choices
Squatters find themselves in a difficult position as stigmatized outsiders. 
Individual and collective squatting offer different routes to redeeming or 
combatting the moral views held against them. This is a question of strategy in 
different regulatory conditions.
5  Section 15 of the Limitation Act 1980.
6  Title XXI of Book 3 of the Code Civil, particularly arts 2272 to 79.
7  The word was always derogatory in the past because it used to refer to the non-
English practice of individuals squatting on their heels on the ground. 

From Individual to Collective Squat
229
Squatters as Outsiders
Becker8 and Bouillon9 both describe the position of squatters as outsiders. 
Cohen10 and Cooper11 argue that all squatters can be stigmatized as ‘folk devils’ 
accused of criminality and deviancy. Becker12 goes further in his deviancy 
argument, suggesting that social groups which break rules or norms are labelled 
as outsiders by more powerful groups, and that this amplifies their disadvantaged 
societal position by adding adverse moral meaning to this. Bouillon13 illustrates 
this by observing that squatters are perceived as having cumulatively dangerous 
characteristics: immigrants, poor people, the young, drug-takers.14 This stereotype 
also involves danger to neighbourhood property prices, damage to property, and 
criminal and anti-social behaviour.
The stigma exists despite the variations in types of squatter. Bouillon15 
interviewed squatters and those dealing with them in the poor quarters of Marseille 
in a qualitative participant-observation study of several groups in 2000–05. She 
found that the age, motivation and moral rectitude of squatters were extremely 
variable, with a wide variety of reasons for resorting to squatting.16 Fox-O’Mahony 
and Cobb17 suggested a diversity of motive and types of property squatted in 
England, including neighbours disputing boundaries. Squatters are just people, 
but they tend to be demonized or idealized without a space for ordinariness.
Foucault18 described power relationships embodied in discourse which produce 
stigmatization. The example given by Foucault was that the role of the madman in a 
drama has a double function: in the first place, he normally represents a stigmatized 
and incoherent presence who is not listened to, yet in the second place the madman 
sometimes speaks up, conveying the ‘masked truth’.19 In some ways, the strategy 
of collective squats declaring the moral bankruptcy of society, could encompass 
8  Howard S Becker, Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance (New York, 
Simon & Schuster 1963).
9  Florence Bouillon, Le Squat: Problème Social ou Lieu d’Emancipation (Paris, 
Editions Rue d’Ulm 2011).
10  Stanley Cohen, Folk Devils and Moral Panics (London, Routledge 2002).
11  Charlie Cooper, ‘Places, “Folk Devils” and Social Policy’ in Nigel Sprigings and 
Peter Somerville (eds), Housing and Social Policy, Contemporary Themes and Critical 
Perspectives (London, Routledge 2005) 69–85.
12  Becker (n 8).
13  Bouillon (n 9) 23–35.
14  ibid 29.
15  ibid .
16  ibid 4, 42–50.
17  Lorna Fox-O’Mahony and Neil Cobb, ‘Taxonomies of Squatting: Unlawful 
Occupation in a New Legal Order’ (2008) 71(6) Modern Law Review 878, 882.
18  Foucault (n 1) 14.
19  ibid 3.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
230
the second function of truth-speaker, although the stigmatization of individual 
squatters means the squatter often appears to fulfill the first.
A Choice of Strategy
Squatters can adopt two strategies to counter moral disapproval. The first involves 
the individual acquisition of squatters’ title and the second is collective protest 
or other collective activity. These are not mutually exclusive, but there is often 
a choice to be made according to which is the easiest to achieve. This chapter 
concerns the effects of morality as a strategy rather than arguing for or against the 
content of the morality presented.
Squatters’ title can be obtained by individual squatters whose status might flip 
from immoral outsider to the traditionally moral status of property owner by this 
means. Green suggested tension between the English law of adverse possession 
and the English landowner as ideal citizen rooted in a long rural history. This 
produced a moral stereotype – a white, male farmer leaning on his gate: ‘a pillar 
of the community, the backbone of the country, the salt of the earth’. Anyone 
who did not fit this stereotype would be regarded as an ‘outsider’.20 Similarly, 
Guerrand21 recounted a nineteenth-century French view of the moralizing qualities 
of property ownership – people acquiring ownership underwent a novitiate, a 
training for a religious order.
The moral impression made is critical to this ‘rehabilitation’, so that the 
prospect of squatters’ title incentivizes their developing a good relationship with 
their neighbours. Bouillion found that some squatters had a strategy of befriending 
neighbours to avoid detection, a time-consuming but personally rewarding 
transaction costs in the form of effort rather than money. Conversely, where other 
squatters were a neighbourhood nuisance, this would tend to alert the police or 
owners to their presence. 22
Medium-size collective squats often adopt a moral political position to counter 
the perceptions of immorality arising from their stigmatization (these squats are 
described as ‘medium-sized’ to distinguish them from large shanty towns outside 
cities such as Istanbul). Bouillon described a collective ethos where squats create 
a ‘place of emancipation’ through their social, political and artistic activities or 
perhaps by allowing social asylum or experiment. She observed two types of 
squatting: first, the ‘housing ‘squat or ‘squat of necessity’23 – ‘necessity’ here 
expresses the desperate choices of people in need of housing seeking shelter; 
20  Kate Green, ‘Citizens and Squatters: Under the Surfaces of Land Law’ in Susan 
Bright and John Dewar (eds), Land Law, Themes and Perspectives (Oxford, OUP 1998) 
242 and 231.
21  Roger-Henri Guerrand, Les Origines du Logement Social en France 1850–1914 
(Paris, 41 Editions Ouvrières 1966), Introduction. 
22  Bouillon (n 9) 25.
23  ibid 7.

From Individual to Collective Squat
231
second, the ‘squats of activity’ or ‘squats of conviction’,24 which were a matter of 
choice and were intended for the reception of artistic, cultural or militant projects, 
although these tended to have less success in sustaining their occupation in France. 
There is a continuum from collective residential squats to pure protest, but this 
chapter concerns housing squats.
Collective housing squats are conducted, for example, by Droit au Logement, 
the Right to Housing (DAL)25 – a militant French squatting movement. This 
tradition goes back to 1911, when demonstrations and squats were led by Cochon, 
an anarchist carpet-maker and housing campaigner who founded a 100,000-strong 
tenants’ organization before the First World War. 26 The ‘right to housing’27 
campaigned for by DAL is seen as a collective right, a social and economic right 
often associated with the political left. It is the legal basis for both tenants’ rights 
and for the rights of disadvantaged people to be housed by the state. DAL is an 
association,28 a not-for-profit vehicle for voluntary or political activity, and this is 
seen as a collective voice.29 Such an explicitly collective approach attracts media 
interest in exposing a housing crisis.
England has its own protests, even if collective action is not legally reinforced 
as strongly as in France.30 Reeve31 described the UK post-war squatter movements 
as not always agreeing whether to behave in an exemplary manner or to use the 
politics of social confrontation. This collective tradition continues. Last year, 
the ‘Occupy London’ movement camped by St Paul’s Cathedral. The movement 
included groups for education and debate. Unlike the DAL squats, this camp 
was to protest about a variety of social causes, but whose housing need was not 
so obvious. The groups were ultimately evicted,32 showing that this was one of 
Bouillon’s less successful ‘squats of activities’.
24  ibid. 
25  DAL, Le Logement un Droit pour Tous (Paris, Le Cherche Midi Editeur 1996).
26  Now reformed as la Confédération Nationale du Logement with a similar number 
of members.
27  Although mentioned in statutes since 1990, this was declared to be of constitutional 
value by décision no 94-359DC, 19 janvier 1995C of the Constitutional Council, now 
including the right to sue the state to provide housing (Code de la Construction et de 
l’Habitation arts L300-1 toL300-2).
28  Under a statute of 1 July 1901.
29  The association is connected to the right of association and is intrinsically 
collective.
30  For an account of collective culture and representation in housing and elsewhere, 
see Ball (n 4).
31  Kesia Reeve, ‘Squatting Since 1945: The Enduring Relevance of Material Need’ 
in Sprigings and Somerville (n 11).
32  Ben Quinn and Dave Johnson, ‘Occupy London: Police and Bailiffs Move in to 
Evict St. Paul’s Protesters’ The Guardian (London, 28 February 2012). Available at: http://
www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/feb/28/occupy-london-camp-police-clearance accessed 2 
August 2012.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
232
Squatting in England is generally more covert. Tough enforcement of English 
eviction law could offer almost a complete explanation for this compared to overt 
collective squatting found elsewhere. Protest is, however, a frequent feature of 
collective housing squats and a different tactic from the private law approach.
Insider-Outsider Theory and Squatting
This section considers how the difficulties, costs and expenses suffered by 
squatters and, conversely, the difficulties faced by owners in removing them can 
change squatter strategies. It uses insider-outsider theory, which casts light on the 
cause, nature and consequences of this. Insider-outsider theory was originally a 
only labour market theory based on the effect of transaction costs. Consequently, 
it should be explained what these costs are, how they are used in labour market and 
housing market theory, and then how they can be applied to squatters.
Insider-Outsider Theory and Transaction Costs
Williamson33 described how the costs of making transactions could be so 
high that this changed people’s economic behaviour. Indeed, they might not 
contract at all in order to avoid having to pay costs, such as legal fees or taxes. 
Transaction costs are not just about financial loss of profit, but also the time, 
effort and general inconvenience of acting. This has an effect on the functioning 
of markets where such costs are widespread. Coase34 developed the idea that 
this changed individuals’ behaviour. In another substantial development, 
Lindbeck and Snower35 observed how transaction costs affect labour markets to 
protect ‘insiders’, well-established employees, although this also disadvantaged 
unemployed labour market outsiders without a job.
Insider/outsider theory explains how employers lose profits because of 
the transaction costs of ‘hiring and firing’36 employees, described as insiders. 
These transaction costs give insider employees an inherent economic advantage, 
because employers are reluctant to incur loss of profits arising from removing 
them and recruiting new employees. These costs and difficulties include barriers 
to entry, such as requirements for trade union membership, or other limitations 
to access to jobs. They might include barriers to exit, such as loss of productivity 
when there is a vacancy, severance payments, legal costs and the personal 
difficulty of the situation.
33  Oliver E Williamson, ‘The Economics of Organization: The Transaction Cost 
Approach’ (1981) 87(3) American Journal of Sociology 548–77.
34  RH Coase ‘The Nature of the Firm’ (1931) 4(16) Economica 386–405.
35  Lindbeck and Snower, The Insider-Outsider Theory of Employment and 
Unemployment (n 3).
36  Lindbeck and Snower, ‘The Insider-Outsider Theory: A Survey’ (n 3) 8.

From Individual to Collective Squat
233
As a consequence, insider employees can bargain to increase these transaction 
costs, again increasing the costs of dismissal, increasing wages and adversely 
affecting outsiders – those unlikely to obtain jobs. The extent of employee 
protection is a question of balance, of what is acceptable in any given society, 
but it is clear that unemployed outsiders would have to offer much lower pay to 
compensate the employer for incurring these costs and the risks of an unknown 
candidate. A situation with very high barriers to access and exit from employment 
is described by Lindbeck and Snower as ‘insiderness’.
Lindbeck and Snower37 described the stigmatization of outsiders as the result 
of this insiderness in the labour market. Where there is insiderness, insider 
workers desperately hang on to their job because employers become reluctant to 
hire anyone except the most qualified because of the great difficulty in dismissing 
a bad choice of employee in an unbalanced labour market. For outsiders, the 
effect is that their qualification for jobs deteriorates with the passing of time 
as difficult access to jobs means they lose contacts, training or references, and 
this produces social exclusion. Lindbeck and Snower38 describe outsiders thus: 
‘They often live in the underclass neighborhoods of large cities, with meager 
social services, poor schooling, and scant police protection. These are the real 
“outsiders” in society.’
This chapter explores more effects of this well-established labour market 
theory and applies it to housing, in this case, to squatting. As concerns labour, 
the theory has been tested variously by econometric and empirical labour market 
studies internationally.39 An example is that the Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD) has used this to recommend reforms to 
labour markets in France, where high transaction costs were identified as causing 
market problems, including difficulties in job creation.40 Significantly, outsiders 
are in a position of economic weakness in the job market.41
Lindbeck and Snower42 argue that insider-outsider theory could be applied 
sociologically to any situation where there are insiders and outsiders. It has been 
applied to housing markets by a number of authors, particularly to describe how the 
entrenched interests of established local residents can be favoured: Berry and Hall,43 
37  ibid.
38  ibid 3.
39  There is a review of developments in the previous 25 years and proof of the theory 
since 1988 in ibid.
40  The more accurate economic term for this phenomenon is ‘hysteresis’, a delay 
before the market responds to stimuli such as increased demand.
41  A general theme in ‘The Insider-Outsider Theory: A Survey’ (n 3).
42  ibid 30.
43  Mike Berry and Jon Hall, ‘Institutional Investment in Rental Housing in Australia: 
A Policy Framework and Two Models’ (2005) 42(1) Urban Studies 91–111.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
234
Malpezzi,44 Dogge and Smeets,45 and Lux.46 These locals were insiders in a broad 
sense. Ball47 conducted semi-structured interviews with French social housing actors 
in three regions of France in 2005–06, finding that there were high transaction costs for 
access to and exit from housing. There were related tendencies to exclude outsiders, 
who in this study were disadvantaged people.
Insider tenants can protect their position in similar ways to employees. Removing 
tenants will cause the landlord to suffer loss of profits due to the transaction costs 
of rent loss, eviction costs and recruitment costs. This means insider tenants have 
an inherent bargaining advantage with the landlord.48 Negotiated transaction costs 
and barriers to access and exit might include requirements for rental guarantees, 
tenant insurance and high deposits,49 lower rents for insider tenants and serious 
difficulties in evicting. Again, when there is insiderness in housing markets, 
outsiders would have to offer much higher rent to compensate the landlord for 
these costs and risks of taking on someone unknown.
Housing markets have some differences from employment markets. The 
position of tenants compared with outsiders is strengthened by the fact that they 
pay rent, the direct source of profit, unlike the position of a paid employee. This 
tenant advantage applies so long as they pay. Owner-occupiers are insiders in a 
broad sense because the transaction costs of access and exit from these homes 
are very high, a kind of insiderness. This must have some effect, even if this only 
means that their homes are unavailable to outsiders.
Housing campaigners commonly seek the reduction of barriers to access, but 
not barriers to exit by eviction. To some extent, one often depends on the other and 
there is an almost brutal even-handedness about the practicality of this. A major 
objective of housing policy and a dilemma must be to find ways to enhance the 
security of citizens without excluding outsiders in ways that threaten their future 
capacity for a full and productive life.
Applying Insider-Outsider Theory to Squatters
It is an additional step to apply the theory to squatting. But how can you have 
transaction costs when there is no market and no normal financial transaction? 
Even though squatters do not pay for their space, they still have transaction costs 
44  Stephen Malpezzi, ‘Housing Prices, Externalities and Regulation in US 
Metropolitan Areas’ (1996) 7(2) Journal of Housing Research 209–41.
45  Patrick JC Dogge and Jos Smeets. ‘Freedom of Choice on the Housing Market: 
The Case of Eindhoven’ (ENHR conference, Rotterdam, June 2007).
46  Martin Lux, ‘Housing Systems: Change on the Way to the EU. Similarities and 
Differences, Integration or Convergence’ (ENHR conference, Ljubljana, 2006).
47  Ball (n 4).
48  ibid.
49  In France, often provided by social organizations (such as Action Logement) set 
up to collect funding from working people to assist the housing effort.

From Individual to Collective Squat
235
based on Williamson’s description of difficulties of action. These include barriers 
to access, the deterrence of the law and unfavourable conditions of occupancy. 
The costs of eviction are weighed against its economic advantages of free 
accommodation or acquiring title. Squatters are outsiders directly affected by 
barriers to access in the normal housing market. These transaction costs mean the 
balance of advantage can lie in collective squatting rather than seeking individual 
squatters’ title when the latter is seriously obstructed.
Once squatters are in place, the transaction costs of evicting squatters are 
central to this analysis and this occupation of space is their major advantage. 
Home-owners might be reluctant to incur these costs for a building which might 
be unused and not producing a profit anyway. The cost and difficulty of evicting 
squatters increase when they squat collectively. Few would dispute that access 
to buildings for squatting should be difficult. Both English and French law treat 
intrusion into occupied homes with criminal penalties.50 However, long-term 
unoccupied property is often the target of squatting and the morality of evictions 
or legal penalties is more equivocal.
There are also incentives to squat and related transactions. Entering a home 
has some qualities of a financial transaction because squatters choose to act to 
acquire valuable living space, albeit without consent. There are other transactions. 
Partially acquired rights to squatters’ title might in principle be sold or inherited in 
both France51 and England,52 and there may be subletting, even if this agreement 
has no legal force. Bouillon53 records a young couple hiring a room in a squat to 
take drugs in an otherwise normal transaction. She said the French authorities had 
criminalized traffic in squatted property. In the very large settlements of Istanbul, 
there are multi-storey concrete flat blocks with squatter landlords letting to squatter 
tenants.54 The economic exigencies of life still intrude into squatting.
Squatters might also prefer to squat because it could be preferable to transactions 
within the normal market. In France, for example, in a housing crisis, people might 
encounter marchands de sommeil (sleep sellers), landlords charging outrageous 
prices for inferior and illegal accommodation. They are reputed to force recovery 
of rent by violence or by driving vulnerable women into prostitution.55 In such 
contexts, squatting might seem comparatively civilized.
50  For example, Code Pénal, art 226-4 in France and Criminal Law Act 1977, s 6(1), 
in England.
51  Code Civil, art 2265.
52  Asher v Whitlock (1865) LR 1 QB 1, modified for registered land by the Land 
Registration Act 2002, sch 6, para 11. This might be modified by criminalization of 
squatting; see below.
53  Bouillon (n 9) 18.
54  Jasemin Alkiser, ‘The Impact of Legal Regulations on the Squatter Housing 
(“Gecekondu”) Phenomenon in Turkey’ (ENHR conference, Toulouse, 2011).
55  Ball (n 4) 228.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
236
Squatters are particularly strongly affected by stigma and difficulty in access 
to housing, because of insiderness. Bouillon56 described squatters as ashamed to 
admit their status. Ex-squatters are particularly unlikely to find the references 
and deposits required for access without help. The personal situation of a person 
without housing deteriorates rapidly.
Central to insider-outsider theory is that the insider occupies a position, whether 
a job or a housing space, and they act to advance their economic interests, whether 
individually or collectively. This is normal and not essentially a cause for blame, 
but within a democracy intended to represent everyone, it can become distorted if 
the voices of outsiders are not heard.
Individual Squatting
Squatters can act individually or collectively in occupying a home. This section 
looks first at the acquisition of title by individual squatters in England and France. 
Then, the advantages of acquiring squatters’ title are considered from the point of 
view of public order, with an emphasis on the importance of possession. Next, it 
must be recounted how the prospects of acquiring squatters’ title or even remaining 
in place have been cut down in civil and criminal law in England.
Individual Squatting and the Private Law
The process of obtaining squatters’ title might support public order due to the 
fact that it rewards those acting peacefully, like a property owner57or a good 
neighbour. This is a low-cost alternative to eviction for governments. However, 
the transaction costs of acquiring title have become almost impossibly high. This 
has long been the case in France and is becoming so in England. Nonetheless, 
some continental legal views on this procedure support the idea that squatters’ title 
might be valuable for wider reasons.
Obtaining squatters’ title is a small-scale and personal process, because this 
requires physical possession of the land by or on behalf of named individuals 
making the claim. This requires open and unconcealed possession and control 
of land for a fixed period of time: 12 years in England58 and 30 or 10 years in 
France (explicitly peaceful occupation).59 English title is acquired through adverse 
56  Bouillon (n 9) 49.
57  Acting like a property owner is a requirement of French squatters’ title but is 
presumed: Code Civil, arts 2256 and 2261.
58  Occupation should be open, notorious and unconcealed: Lord Advocate v Lord 
Lovat (1880) 3 App Cas 273 at 291, 296. 
59  Code Civil, art 2272. The French general requirements are that possession of the 
land by the squatter should be ‘uninterrupted, peaceful, public and unequivocal, and as an 
owner’ (art 2261, author’s translation).

From Individual to Collective Squat
237
possession where s 15 of the Limitation Act 1980 cuts off the former owner’s title, 
while French squatters obtain title through prescription acquisitive, a slow process 
of accretion of rights.
The transaction costs of squatting might include physical force to obtain 
possession (although this is discouraged in both countries) and then physical force 
to evict. Usucapio, is a Latin term for presciption acquisitive which came down 
from the Romans in different social circumstances.60 In the wilder reaches of the 
Roman Empire, displaced owners still might be obliged to carry out their own 
evictions, or call in the army. Here, squatters’ title allowed recognition of a state of 
semi-military possession and control. In French law, the physical act of eviction is 
still designated as manu militaria (by the military hand).
Physical possession is still an essential element of both ownership61 and 
acquiring squatters’ title in England and France.62 Indeed, there have been long 
European philosophical debates about the legal role of possession in ownership. 
In the nineteenth century, Savigny asked how possession, without any regard to 
its own lawfulness, can be the basis for rights. In a debate with von Ihéring, two 
arguments were proposed to justify the protection of existing possessors of land. 
Gordley describes these arguments and their use by continental jurists:63 ‘One, for 
which they often cite Savigny, is to preserve public order. The other, for which 
they often cite von Ihéring,64 is to provide a more complete protection for the true 
owner. These are almost the only explanations that French jurists give.’65
Public order in French law encompasses not just law and order enforced by 
police, but rather the smooth running of society.66 Following Savigny, the French 
legal notion of prescription extinctive by possession protects existing owners.
The idea that property is proved by physical possession deals with a procedural 
problem known as the preuve diabolique (diabolical proof).67 If ownership is proved 
only by title deeds, then the passing of time means this proof must constantly be 
60  RW Lee, Elements of Roman Law (4th edn, London, Sweet and Maxwell 1956) 
119–23.
61  In England, this means acquiring a freehold or leasehold estate (more exactly 
described in the Law of Property Act 1925, s 1(1)(a) and (b)) or propriété (ownership) in 
France (Code Civil, art 544).
62  For France, Code Civil, arts 2255 to 57 and 2278. For England, see Kevin Gray, 
and Susan Francis Gray, Elements of Land Law (5th edn, Oxford, OUP 2009) Part II, but 
particularly 106.
63  James Gordley, Foundations of Public Law. Property, Tort, Contract, Unjust 
Enrichment (Oxford, OUP 2006) 56, referring to FC von Savigny, Das Recht des Besitzes 
(1803).
64  Rudolf von Ihéring (1818–92), a noted German jurist.
65  Gordley (n 63) 53.
66  See Code des Communes, art L.131-2 for the mayor’s duties in this respect.
67  Often known as probatio diabolica, described in Philippe Malaurie and Laurent 
Aynès, Les Biens (Paris, Défrenois 2010) 193–94; and François Terré and Philippe Simler, 
Droit Civil, Les Biens (5th edn, Paris, Editions Dalloz-Sirey 1998) para 515.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
238
renewed. If deeds are lost or something cannot be documented, then clear proof of 
occupation allows the continuation of the legitimate owners’ title. This means that 
the transaction costs of such proof must not be too high.
Given that land is notionally perpetual, this view of possession provides 
a protection for individuals against losses in public land registers or against 
corruption.68 In the long run, the peaceful presence of people on land is the best 
evidence of legitimacy. This common European view that possession is the root 
of property ownership tends to be undermined by the English development of 
title being proved by registration.69 What if, with the passage of the centuries, the 
government was no longer benign in registering titles based on long occupancy 
for whatever reason, such as unacknowledged bureaucratic errors or lost deeds? 
The idea of possession in French law is a procedural part of the protection of the 
individual against the state.
Reducing Access to Squatters’ Title
Access to squatters’ title in England and France is difficult. However, this was 
recently relaxed slightly. In France there is the possibility of interrupting or 
postponing the passing of time needed to give squatters the right to title for a 
series of practical reasons.70 A recent statutory reform addressed the problem that 
these postponements and interruptions were too long and numerous and that the 
law was too complicated.71 From 1804, the law had required good faith on entry 
to land.72 Since 2008, there is an accelerated claim for squatters’ title – 10 years as 
against 30.73 This requires both ‘fair title’74 and good faith. Good faith is always 
necessary, but is presumed. This presumption can be disproved.75 Traditionally, 
good faith requires that occupiers should believe their occupancy to be legally 
justified, even if this is mistaken.76 Many squatters might thus face a period of 30 
years to obtain title. French tenants remaining in situ after their tenancy ends are 
68  Malaurie and Aynès (n 67).
69  Note 58 refers to the Law Commission’s view of this.
70  According to Code Civil, arts 2227 to 2246, for example, time does not start to run 
until the owner could have known of the occupation (art 2227) or when an owner is unable 
to act because he or she is a minor (art 2234).
71  Philippe Malaurie, ‘Exposé de Motifs’ in P Catala (ed), Avant-projet de Réforme 
du Droit des Obligations et de la Prescription (Paris, La Documentation Française 2006) 
Third book, Title XX. Statutory interruptions to prescription tend to favour certain types 
of owner, such as minors, by Code Civil, arts 2233 to 2239 applied by virtue of art 2259, 
which has no real English equivalent.
72  Under the old Code Civil, art 2258.
73  ibid art 2272.
74  ibid art 2274.
75  ibid. 
76  Malaurie and Aynès (n 67) 173.

From Individual to Collective Squat
239
expressly excluded from squatters’ title.77 Obtaining squatters’ title is thus more 
possible, but is still very circumscribed.
In England, civil law barriers to obtaining title by adverse possession have 
become higher. English law does not require good faith in the French sense 
above, and proof includes factual occupation adverse to the owner (without their 
permission) and with an intention to possess.78 Acts of ownership, such as putting 
up fences and looking after the property, can act as evidence of this possession.79 
Nonetheless, acquisition of title to registered land (now most land in the UK) has 
become substantially harder, because when adverse possessors seek to register 
the occupied land, notice must be given to the property owner to allow them to 
object.80 Then, the grounds which allow possessors to override objections from 
property owners are limited, such as a mistake about ownership by the possessor81 
or that it would be unconscionable not to register.82
However, in both France and England, governments have sought to strengthen 
the criminal law against squatting. In France, an amended article 224-6 of the Code 
Pénal was intended to create an offence of occupying a home without the owner’s 
or tenant’s permission.83 However, parts of the bill were held to be unconstitutional 
by the Constitutional Council because the sanctions were disproportionate.84 
In England, s 144 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders 
Act 2012 created an offence where someone enters a residential building who 
knows or ought to know that they are trespassing,85 and if they have the intention 
of living there.86 This is punishable by up to six months in prison and a £5,000 
fine.87 For this type of offence, it would be relatively easy to justify arrest, such as 
for damage to property or lack of an address of the defendant.88 The Criminal Law 
Act 1977, s. 7 already created an offence where the squatter displaced the owner or 
tenant once the latter had requested the squatter to leave a home and they did not. 
77  Code Civil, art 2269.
78  Powell v McFarlane (1979) 38 P & CR 452.
79  Seddon v Smith (1877) 36 LT 168.
80  Land Registration Act 2002, sch 6, para. 2.
81  ibid para 5(4)(c).
82  ibid para 5(2)(a). If the estate owner fails to respond to the notice, then the squatter 
can re-apply after 12 years adverse possession to be the registered proprietor. See Fox-
O’Mahony and Cobb (n 17).
83  By original art 32 ter of the bill, now statute no 2011-267 du 14 mars 2011.
84  Due to décision no. 2011-625DC du 10 Mars 2011. This judgement did not 
specifically refer to the amendment, but to the government database of legislation.
85  For the non-common law reader, essentially entering and staying without 
permission.
86  Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 s 144(1). See also 
Neil Cobb, ‘Property’s Outlaws: Squatting, Land Use and Criminal Trespass’ [2012] Crim 
LR 114.
87  ibid s 144(5).
88  Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, s 25.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
240
It remains to be seen if the new English offence will be strictly enforced or if the 
homelessness which often drives squatting continues to do so. Indeed, following 
the French view above, this new offence might be seen as disproportionate. It 
involves imposing criminal sanctions on a squatter who might be in urgent need of 
shelter or who is a long-established resident, as compared to the damage caused or 
the need to protect empty property. Disproportionality can be a violation of human 
rights89 applying in France, as in England through the Human Rights Act 1998. 
The offence could breach the European Convention for the Protection of Human 
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms:90 Article 3 (against inhuman and degrading 
treatment), Article 8 (protecting the home and family life) or Article 6 (requiring 
fair procedure in both administration and criminal cases.
This reduction in squatters’ title can be seen as the product of stigmatization, 
resulting in a hostile public environment to this activity. The English Law 
Commission referred to squatters’ title as ‘theft of land’ when proposing changes 
to Land Registry rules.91 These changes make registration of squatters’ title more 
difficult. Fox O’Mahony and Cobb set out arguments for and against squatting 
to consider this, but said that the Commission’s view ‘has copper-fastened the 
portrayal of the squatter’s actions as wrong (tantamount to criminal activity), with 
the dispossessed landowner as the “victim” of the piece’.92 
There is a progression from stigmatization to criminalization. Someone in the 
course of acquiring title might still pay taxes, send their children to school and 
obey the law generally. This useful kind of public order is less likely for a squatter 
designated as a criminal, because ‘open’ occupation might get them arrested.
Such an approach leaves little scope for acquiring title to disused or 
mistakenly occupied homes. Even the sale or other transmission of squatters’ 
rights is made difficult in practice by s 144(4) of the 2012 Act, which states: 
‘The fact that a person derives title from a trespasser, or has the permission of a 
trespasser, does not prevent the person from being a trespasser.’ This could mean 
fresh opportunities to arrest heirs and purchasers. The law is also retrospective, 
applying to squatters entering a home before 1 September 2012.93 Within the time 
limits for criminal prosecution, even property owners who have neglected to act 
to protect their property94 can have established occupants removed and charged 
with an offence, instead of issuing proceedings to allow occupants to stay in 
89  Dirk Van Zyl Smit and Andrew Ashworth, ‘Disproportionate Sentences as Human 
Rights Violations’ (2004) 67(4) Modern Law Review 541.
90  Council of Europe, 4 November 1950.
91  Law Commission, Land Registration for the 21st Century: A Consultative 
Document (Law Com No 254) (London, HMSO 1998) para 10.5; Fox-O’Mahony and Cobb 
(n 17) 879.
92  Fox-O’Mahony and Cobb (n 17) 879.
93  Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, s 144.
94  Neglect by landowners is one of the traditional justifications of squatting; see Fox-
O’Mahony and Cobb (n 17).

From Individual to Collective Squat
241
place until a civil hearing, an effective attack on adverse possession. This reflects 
a kind of insiderness.
The Collectivization of Squats
Due to the physical presence of squatters and the transaction costs involved in 
removing them, collective squatting can offer a better defence to this hostile 
regulatory environment for squatters than individual squatting, although such 
collective action might not appeal to everyone. This section concerns the effects 
of this. First, the observations about the effects of unionization by Lindbeck and 
Snower are considered, then how squatters can react collectively against insiderness 
to improve their position, and finally the high cost of suppression of this.
Lindbeck and Snower on Collectivization
The collectivization of squatters could be a response to insiders uniting against 
them (in a broad sense). Lindbeck and Snower95 described collective action in the 
unionized workforce. They argued that trade unions increase the disruptive power 
of workers acting together, such as by striking to improve pay and conditions. In 
this way, unionization thus increases the transaction costs protecting insiders. This 
was the case even where employers were unionized as well (as in France).
Rueda96 suggested that insiderness in labour markets means that the government 
listens more to insiders by the privileging of lobbies, formal or informal, with 
stigmatization attaching to the less well off. This collective lobbying has a formal 
form in France and an informal form in England for both the labour and housing 
markets.97 Nonetheless, it has been seen that England also has strong exclusionary 
policies in the area of the criminalization of squatting. These are different areas of 
law so that insiderness can be judged by the extent of any kinds of barrier to access 
to housing as well as by evidence of social exclusion.
In housing markets in France, there are patterns of insider representation and 
exclusionary behaviour similar to those in the labour markets. There is formal 
collective representation of tenants and landowners, collective bargaining 
processes influencing housing administration and the aligned content of laws. This 
form of unionization is common for all societal interests, including disadvantaged 
people represented by associations. It must be said that the same system of 
95  Lindbeck and Snower, The Insider-Outsider Theory of Employment and 
Unemployment (n 3) 5.
96  David Rueda, ‘Insider-Outsider Politics in Industrialized Democracies: The 
Challenge to Social Democratic Parties’ (2005) 99(1) American Political Science Review 61.
97  Detailed information about French collective representation and social housing 
allocation in housing is available in English in Ball (n 4).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
242
representation is responsible for the creation and administration of the welfare 
state which benefits the most disadvantaged.
Despite the provision of welfare, there is a particular problem of French 
localism obstructing policies to house disadvantaged people. Local insiders 
(here, local representatives of tenants, workers and local people) were strongly 
represented in planning, construction and social housing allocation decisions. 
However, outsiders seeking housing had very little voice in these various fora. 
This resulted in the tendency for local representatives to severely limit or refuse 
access to social housing for the most disadvantaged. There were also difficulties 
of access to private rental housing.
An effect of insiderness leads to both more squatting, due to difficulty accessing 
ordinary housing, and at the same time reduced rights for squatters. This is the 
stigmatization and the result of collective influence that Lindbeck and Snower 
predicted. You would expect exceptional hardship to be met by society with the 
greater provision of welfare, but if the condition of being an outsider increases the 
stigma attached to them, the result is likely to be less welfare provision for greater 
need, not more. Squatters and other outsiders are somehow seen as automatically 
unworthy, whatever the cause of their condition.
Why Collective Squats?
Where there is no longer any usefulness in the open and peaceful occupation 
required for squatters’ title to be acquired, there are several incentives to squat 
collectively. This is a radical response to stigmatization and exclusion from 
housing due to insiderness, due to the impossibly high transaction costs in 
obtaining such title, and to barriers to access to housing generally. There are a 
number of advantages inherent in collective squatting. 
It has been seen that collective squatters can strategically take the moral 
high ground by espousing causes or social activities. In France, combining a 
demonstration with occupation has been a popular tactic. This has been the case 
ever since the supporters of Cochon before the First World War occupied high-
profile public buildings to draw attention to housing problems.98 Mass squats by 
people in need of housing can involve occupying buildings that are unsuitable for 
housing, such as factories, public buildings or offices. This unsuitability underlines 
their housing need. In 2001, for example, 200 people occupied buildings belonging 
to a hospital organization in Marseille,99 and the local court delayed their eviction 
due to a lack of local housing.
Squatting in buildings that are not homes has not been a common feature in 
England. Nevertheless, in England, the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment 
of Offenders Act 2012, only criminalizes residential occupation, and therefore 
98  DAL (n 25).
99  Described in a law report: TGI de Marseille, 16 mars 2001, ‘L’assistance publique-
hôpitaux de Marseille’ Le Monde (Paris, 20 March 2001, 20).

From Individual to Collective Squat
243
squatting in non-residential property becomes more likely. Already, there has been 
a case of squatting in a London public library by way of protest.100
For effective communication and publicity, squatters are assisted by digital 
networks. The fate of collective squats can be followed on international websites, 
such as the multilingual [Squat!net]101 containing news, information and activities. 
In England, after the criminalization of squatting, legal advice is already available 
for squatters in this position by a dedicated website (www.squatter.org.uk), whilst 
more secure occupancy is campaigned for by Squatters’ Action for Secure Homes 
(SQUASH). Any squatter with a smartphone can access these sites.
Collective squatters can appeal over the heads of neighbours to a larger 
political struggle: seeking support locally by manning squatted social centres and 
nationally by promoting various causes and internationally appealing to squatters’ 
movements, to movements against eviction (such as the International Alliance 
of Inhabitants) or to human rights organizations. The support of immediate 
neighbours still matters, but less so.
There are other practical gains from banding together. Squatters might work 
in shifts to occupy a home to reduce the risk of eviction, and this group continuity 
does not rely on particular individuals. Groups can provide mutual support or 
physical defence, or even cheap places for people passing through. These activities 
can attract people who do not need to squat, increasing the incidence of squatting. 
Most important of all, a group is harder to evict than a single person. 
In this way, collective action has benefits compared to individual squatting. 
Coase102 suggested that people in business choose to work together in a firm if that 
firm’s internal transaction costs are low. In that case, collective activity becomes 
more rewarding than working separately – a matter of economic convenience. 
Similarly, people act separately if the costs of acting together are too high. Added 
into this equation is that squatters might need to work together defensively in the 
face of insiderness, such as criminalization, which is difficult to avoid.
High Public Cost
There are at least three kinds of public costs involved in enforcing the 
criminalization of residential squatting: the possible very high costs of trying 
to evict a collective squat in a glare of publicity; the policing, surveillance 
and enforcement costs of trying to stop more vulnerable but mobile individual 
squatters; and the impact on individuals evicted requiring public welfare support. 
100  See BBC News, ‘Squatters re-open Friern Barnet Library’ online at http://
www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-19590224 (accessed 26 September 2013). This 
double protest about closure of the lending library and about criminalization of squatting 
succeeding in keeping the library open.
101  [Squat!net] online at http://planet.squat.net/ (accessed 26 September 2013). The 
square brackets are part of the name of the organisation.
102  Coase (n 34).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
244
The authorities face numerous dilemmas: how to fulfil their human rights 
duties; how to support tenants or property owners; how to investigate criminal, 
illegal immigrant or radical occupants within the squat; and how to evict people 
appealing to public sympathy.
In litigation to recover land, protesting squatters seeking publicity may wait 
until the final physical eviction before leaving their homes. A normal tendency in 
eviction cases is for individuals to depart in the earlier stages of the case, as can 
be seen by comparing statistics in England and France.103 An English example of 
a difficult late-stage eviction was that of the Dale Farm travellers in 2011. These 
were not actually squatters, but home-owners evicted for a persistent breach of 
planning rules. However, it was one of the few recent examples of a collective 
eviction by the state in England. The policing costs of the eviction were estimated 
at £18 million.104 Indeed, the rather effective English eviction process has been 
disapproved of outside England. Hoonakker105 regretted the absence of a code 
of conduct for English bailiffs106 in a multi-authored European work comparing 
national eviction and debt procedures. However, the privatization of the bailiff 
service increases this bad impression, with as yet relatively few formal safeguards 
for the public, compared to France, where there are also possible long delays in 
eviction.107 Whatever the system, the existence of collective squatting increases 
the costs of eviction and has the potential to undermine public trust in the process 
if the eviction is seen to be unfair.
In France, there is a tradition of militant squats staying until the last stage of 
an eviction to make a point before the watching media. Physical eviction is a voie 
de fait, meaning a process normally in breach of human rights, which can only be 
carried out by the central state and by the police. Members of the militant squatting 
organization DAL have often confronted the police. At Cachan, some 500 squatters 
were evicted from disused university residences. The squatters initially refused to be 
split up and some went on hunger strike.108 Collective squats can sometimes muster 
a public demonstration when they are evicted, again increasing eviction costs.
The criminalization of squatting by itself involves public costs relating 
to investigation, removal and arrest, detention pending trial, the trial itself and 
103  Agence Nationale d’Information pour le Logement (ANIL), ‘Droit et pratique 
de l’expulsion: une comparaison Angleterre France’ (Habitat Actualité, December 2004).
104  Alexandra Topping, ‘Dale Farm Evictions Mean the End of the Traveller Lifestyle, 
Say Gypsies’ The Guardian (London, 18 September 2011); Robert Home, ‘Forced Eviction 
and Planning Enforcement: The Dale Farm Gypsies’ (2012) 41(3) International Journal of 
Law in the Built Environment 178.
105  Philippe Hoonakker (ed), L’Exécution Immobilière en Europe. Entre Tradition 
et Modernité, Quelle Saisie Immobilière pour Demain, Editions Juridiques et Techniques 
(Paris, Editions Juridiques et Techniques 2005).
106  At the time of writing reform is proposed.
107  See Ball (n 4) 238.
108  Bertrand Bissuel, ‘Deux anciens squatters en grève de la faim ont été hospitalisés’ 
Le Monde (Paris, 4 October 2006).

From Individual to Collective Squat
245
imprisonment. Afterwards, squatters with a criminal record are unlikely to be 
viewed as an acceptable tenant anywhere and thus will need to squat again. Even 
if squatters are only briefly detained, as Lindbeck and Snower suggested, the 
situation of stigmatized outsiders will deteriorate, in this case, due to the loss of a 
home and perhaps also the related loss of employment or family-break-up.
If the public authorities take care of the evicted, there might be less of a problem, 
but SQUASH109 published a study in 2012 showing that implementing the Legal 
Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 would cost between £319 
million and £790 million over five years compared to the £25 million estimated by 
the government.110 Government figures had not included increased housing benefit 
costs and housing demand for squatters following the loss of free accommodation, 
costs to the public services of rehabilitating street sleepers and the costs of training 
and guidance. SQUASH did not take into account the potential extra cost of mass 
evictions or the possibility that individuals might not be rehabilitated, turning 
to crime, or that the stress of eviction and continuing difficulty in finding an 
appropriate home or rough sleeping can cause permanent damage to health.
Collective squatting and the criminalization of residential squatting both 
involve high public costs for relatively small benefits to insiders. This could 
also create a disruptive class of outsiders when accompanied by a sense of 
procedural unfairness. The divisiveness of protest conducted in this way is a 
problem for public order.
Different Global Responses to Squatting
Collective squatting will always have the benefit of weight of numbers. Insider-
outsider theory and the ideas of Foucault describe squatters as being in a weak 
position, but large numbers of them might make a difference to the balance of 
power. This section widens the enquiry about how squatters are excluded or not 
excluded in different ways in France, the Netherlands, Turkey and elsewhere.
The dynamics of squatting will be affected by transaction costs, but the result 
might differ because of a whole series of factors. In the mature economies of 
Europe and the US, the extent of squatting can depend on various factors: transient 
occupation by young people accustomed to international travel; immigrants 
experiencing housing difficulties; expensive accommodation in cities; the amount 
of housing stock; the extent of law enforcement and surveillance; and the extent 
of local welfare provision. Where emerging or growing economies result in rapid 
109  SQUASH, ‘The Case Against Section 144’ (March 2013) http://www.
squashcampaign.org/docs/SQUASH-Campaign-Case-Against-Section-144.pdf accessed 1 
May 2013.
110  The report was supported by Professor Danny Dorling of the University of 
Sheffield.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
246
urbanization and very large suburban squatter settlements, there will be additional 
problems in coping with the sheer number of squatters.
One alternative is that collective squatting in homes is suppressed, but if the 
basic problem is housing need, this will be simply displaced. It has been seen that 
French squatting has involved large-scale invasions of non-residential property, 
but there have also been shanty towns or camps.111 Le Marchand112 described 
squatters living in disused tanker lorries, and local tradesmen would carry out 
adaptations to these as if they were normal homes. These are a form of collective 
squat, although they have become more covert in modern times.
Developments in the Netherlands suggest that the number of squatters can 
make a difference to the toleration of squatting. In the 1980s there were battles 
between groups of 20,000 or more squatters and the police, followed by a policy 
of pacifying squatters. Their numbers are now approximately 4,000 and, in 2010, 
the Dutch government passed a severe anti-squatting law, banning squatting 
anywhere.113 Another recent development is what the Dutch call ‘anti-squatters’, 
known as ‘house-sitters’ in English (derived from ‘baby-sitters’). These people 
occupy buildings to deter squatters for little reward, while in return being allowed 
to live in the buildings they protect. Priemus estimated that there were around 
20,000 anti-squatters in the Netherlands, but these were people who might 
otherwise be squatters themselves. There was concern about vulnerable anti-
squatters occupying offices and factories that were unsuitable for habitation and 
who might be endangered if the building were to be entered mob-handed.
In contrast, the growing strength of very large-scale suburban squatting has 
meant, first, the rediscovery of the usefulness of endowing people with ownership 
as a matter of law and order, and, second, the emergence of a common global 
support for squatters based on their housing needs. Governments across the world 
have endowed some of the inhabitants of large squatter settlements with ownership 
by public decree.
This has happened to some extent around Istanbul, where there was rapid 
urbanization and where squatter settlements housed up to half of the urban 
population. A patchwork of policies included pardoning squatters, granting 
title or allowing squatters to exchange plots. Alkiser has pointed out that ‘this 
approach creates many conflicts and contradictions about property/tenure rights, 
public benefits, unearned income (undeserved urban rent), environmental quality 
and the liveable environments for everyone’.114 This approach was thus not 
111  Ball (n 4).
112  Arnaud Le Marchand, ‘Travail mobile et habitat non-ordinaire dans les villes 
portuaires’ in Valérie LaFlamme, Claire Lévy-Vroelant, Douglas Roberson. and Jim Smyth 
(eds), Le Logement Précaire en Europe. Aux Marges du Palais (Paris, L’Harmattan 2007) 
243.
113  Hugo Priemus, ‘Squatters and Municipal Policies to Reduce Vacancy; Evidence 
from the Netherlands’ (ENHR conference, Toulouse, 2011).
114  Alkiser (n 54).

From Individual to Collective Squat
247
without its problems. Granting titles by public decree could raise expectations, 
with uncontrolled squatter settlements moving out of the city suburbs towards 
the wooded hills that provided the city’s water supply. A lack of regularization 
meant a problem of enforcement of decent housing conditions, in supplying 
services, in planning and the ability to tax squatters. This shows the dynamics of 
a power relationship and the practical difficulties of moving on squatters linked to 
economic change, law and order.
In the case of very large-scale squats, the law can sometimes come full circle 
from resisting to accommodating squatters. Title by decree may not have quite the 
same advantages for incentivizing neighbourly behaviour as adverse possession 
and prescription acquisitive. A middle way can be found in Brazil, where title can 
be obtained after three years’ occupation. Article 183 of the Brazilian Constitution 
of 1988 states that ‘those who are squatters in an urban area of up to 250,000 
(m2), for a continuous period of at least five (5) years, without claim for housing, 
will be able to have its domain unless he/she has another urban or rural property’, 
assuming the property upon which they are squatting is not being otherwise 
utilized. This accelerated approach is not new; in the US, the Homesteads Act 
1848 provided title after 18 months in some cases of adverse possession.
These squats might well be too large to share the ethos of a collective squat but 
occupying space brings some power in any event. The transaction costs involved 
in removing squatters would be impractically high, particularly since the labour 
force of these suburbs might support the economic life of the city. Endowing them 
with property rights is useful for public order, peace and regulation, in spite of 
the problems identified by Alkiser. Despite these highly variable situations, the 
rhetoric from large urban slums has fed into a common moral rhetoric for all 
squats. The International Alliance of Inhabitants (IAI) has ‘zero evictions’ days115 
as part of its international campaigns, a globalization of justification and support.
To propose that eviction should not be allowed at all is just as one-sided as 
barring the way to squatters’ title or declaring all squatters to be criminals. There is 
a question of balance. The objectivity of insider-outsider theory can lead to a way 
forward for study that might temper extremes. This means observing transaction 
costs and their effects as an indicator of where the economic problems lie.
Towards Solutions
Policies towards squatters tend to follow international trends and although 
a policy may exist in one country, there is no guarantee that it works. Three 
jurisdictions – England, France and the Netherlands – have attempted to increase 
the criminalization of squatters, although this attempt has failed in France. Of 
course, criminalizing large urban squatter settlements in developing cities could 
115  See IAI, ‘Zero Evictions Campaign’ (2012) http://www.habitants.org/campana_
cero_desalojos accessed 14 August 2012.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
248
be counter-productive, since these might contain a majority of citizens. How can 
insider/outsider policy help?
Rueda116 used insider-outsider theory to suggest that there are economic 
advantages in supporting outsiders in need before constituencies of insiders 
who need less help. This can improve the functioning of the market generally. 
Insider-outsider theory suggests that high transaction costs ultimately produce 
housing market difficulties for everyone. This affects vulnerable people first, 
particularly squatters, and especially if they are criminalized in ways that are 
disproportionate in relation to the alleged offence committed. If squatters are 
suffering difficulties or their numbers increase because of high transaction costs, 
then this might provide an early warning of problems in the housing market and 
consequent social disruption. The fact that they cannot find a home becomes a 
question of general interest, since difficulties in relation to access to the housing 
market due to high transaction costs may often be used to explain why they 
became squatters in the first place.
It might be possible to lower transaction costs one at a time, but this is difficult 
if there is a dominance of insiders affecting public decision-making. Lindbeck 
and Snower117 make the practical suggestion that the answer to insiderness is to 
create a more ‘level playing field’ between insiders and outsiders. This can be done 
by increasing the voice of outsiders, reducing the voice of insiders or improving 
access to housing by reducing transaction costs. This might mean reducing 
the voice of local insiders in relation to decisions to provide housing, because 
housing-disadvantaged outsiders might not be popular locally. An example of 
such a mechanism is the decision of the French Constitutional Council that the 
criminalization of squatting is disproportionate, because it gave an ear to outsiders, 
not just insiders. Other major approaches involve the improved representation of 
outsiders and policies specifically taking account of their circumstances.
Conclusion
Squatting is frequently a response to high transaction costs in accessing the 
housing market. Consequently, squatters are strongly affected by these market 
conditions and are witnesses to its problems. These costs and conditions will affect 
others who are not squatters, or not yet squatters. The prevalence of squatting 
often demonstrates where these policies are failing. Studying these costs and 
insider-outsider theory can help to produce practical solutions. This necessarily 
means being wary of stigma associated with squatting, except as a symptom of 
a loss of bargaining power, or indicating the presence of barriers in relation to 
access to housing. More controversially, barriers to exit from housing cannot be 
too high, in the sense that procuring eviction in an appropriate case should not be 
116  Rueda (n 96).
117  Lindbeck and Snower, ‘The Insider-Outsider Theory: A Survey’ (n 3) 40.

From Individual to Collective Squat
249
too difficult. What is considered too difficult is often a national cultural matter. 
Insider-outsider theory is an established economic theory that is applicable to the 
labour and housing markets. Extending this theory to squatting is fairly new, but 
requires further empirical study.
The increases in barriers to access described here tend to result in a move from 
individual to collective squatting. If access to squatters’ title is effectively cut off 
by a move from high transaction costs to near-impossibility, there is also the loss 
of an incentive to care for the property and have good relations with neighbours. 
Such squatting could reduce state welfare costs for formerly homeless occupants 
and can be a means of integration. Ownership is still based on long-term possession 
and if individuals cannot support their title by showing a long period of possession 
or ‘squatting’ (often essentially the same thing), this also threatens ordinary home-
owners. These owners might suffer difficulties with the ‘diabolical proof’, because 
of the perpetual need for evidencing transmission of ownership. 
In addition, criminalization in England makes squatting yet more difficult, 
but also adds very high public costs in terms of policing and dealing with its 
consequences. The provision for this seems to be inadequate and does not 
holistically consider its ramifications. Prison is expensive and may leave people 
with a criminal record and no way back into normal housing or a job. Civil law 
adjudication as to whether squatters might have squatters’ title becomes unlikely, 
however strong an individual case. The benefits of the policy are as yet uncertain.
It is not surprising that squatters choose to adopt the defensive position of 
collective squatting. Whatever the political or moral nature of the collective 
squat, its members can provide mutual support and continuity. As a group, they 
are much more difficult and expensive to evict, particularly if they are very 
numerous, such as in very large squats in emerging economies.118 There is a 
danger of wider social unrest.
A collective squat can also call on wider digital and international communities 
to support an ethos of protest. This might shift public perceptions of morality to 
opposing the public authorities. Connections to politics and human rights can add 
an extra dimension to the moral arguments for and against squatters’ title. This 
moral competition is progressed by squatters’ local social and artistic activities or 
campaigns against homelessness generally. Such activities can bring people into 
squats who are attracted to the ethos of protest rather than because of a housing 
need to squat. A clumsy mass eviction could cause the general public to lose faith 
in the fairness of the eviction system or indeed support the squatting protest.
Insider-outsider theory involves examining what barriers are faced by all 
home-seekers. This is particularly useful when the moral debate has become so 
adversarial. It can show the costs of exclusionary policies within a future cost-
benefit analysis, including the high public and personal costs of criminalizing 
squatters. This approach can also lead to better understanding of what causes these 
118  Alkiser (n 54) 28.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
250
problems. The representation of outsiders would also lead to a more democratic 
system with an all-round view of the procedural issues.

Chapter 10 
Housing Ladders and Snakes:  
An Examination of Changing Residential 
Tenure Trajectories in the Republic of 
Ireland
Joe Finnerty and Cathal O’Connell
Introduction
This chapter explores aspects of current and prospective residential tenure 
trajectories in the Irish housing system, drawing on the metaphor of housing 
ladders and snakes. In common with many other countries, home-ownership, 
commonly portrayed as the highest ‘rung’ of this ladder, has been widely pursued 
at a policy level for many decades. In addition, low-income households have 
historically been accommodated by the state through the provision of social 
housing which has provided them with long-term, affordable, secure housing and 
which also held out the potential for tenants to become owner-occupiers through 
exercising a ‘right to buy’ tenant purchase option.
Since the onset of economic recession in 2008 and in line with the dominance 
of a home-ownership discourse, policy and media attention has been focused on 
the unsustainable mortgages of many of the cohort of home-owners who had 
bought homes at the height of the Irish house price bubble, which peaked in 2006. 
This chapter addresses this dominant discourse and its focus on home-ownership 
in two ways: first, it explains the puzzling issue of why a widespread slide – via a 
repossessions ‘snake’ – down the Irish tenure ladder for distressed mortgage holders 
has thus far not occurred; and, second, argues that the long-term re-structuring of 
the ladder’s ascent for low-income households requiring social housing support 
has not received a commensurate degree of policy or popular attention, despite the 
fact that it signifies a major reconfiguration of the role of the state as an actor in 
the Irish housing system, especially in relation to housing options for low-income 
households. Prior to exploring these issues in greater detail, there is a discussion of 
the uses of metaphors in housing discourse and research, followed by an analysis 
of established residential tenure trajectories in the Irish housing system.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
252
Housing Metaphors: Ladders and Snakes 
The use of symbolic language in housing discourse and research has received 
increasing scrutiny in recent years, partly under the increased influence of social 
constructionism in housing studies.1 A particular concern of such a constructionist 
approach relates to the unexamined assumptions embodied in the use of metaphors. 
In the case of the ‘ladder’ metaphor, there is a danger that presenting owner-
occupation as the highest rung of the ladder reproduces the biases of the current 
Irish and other tenure systems, and privileges owner-occupation above all other 
tenures. To avoid this assumption, this chapter places long-term social housing 
and owner-occupation jointly at the top rung of the ladder as alternative forms of 
what is termed permanent settled accommodation.
The tenure housing ladder depicts an upwards tenure trajectory of the 
household from a situation of housing insecurity and vulnerability to one of relative 
security and stability in the form of settled/permanent housing. Conversely, the 
repossessions ‘snake’ (to expand the metaphor to include the traditional children’s 
board game of Snakes and Ladders) portrays an enforced downwards trajectory 
of the household from a situation of relative security and stability in the form 
of settled/permanent housing to lower steps on the tenure ladder. The work of 
Kendig, Paris and Anderton,2 Elphicke3 and Beer, Faulkner, Clower and Paris4 is 
drawn upon here, as is the wider application of the model of trajectories of social 
inclusion and exclusion employed by Room.5
1  K Jacobs and T Manzi, ‘Discourse and Policy Change: The Significance of 
Language for Housing Research’ (1996) 11 Housing Studies 543; K Jacobs, J Kemeny and 
T Manzi, ‘Introduction’ in K Jacobs, J Kemeny and T Manzi, (eds), Social Constructionism 
in Housing Research (Aldershot, Ashgate 2004); R Fopp, ‘Metaphors in Homelessness 
Discourse and Research: Exploring “Pathways”, “Careers” and “Safety Nets”’ (2009) 26(4) 
Housing, Theory and Society 271.
2  H Kendig, C Paris and N Anderton, Towards Fair Shares in Australian Housing 
(Canberra, National Committee of Non-Governmental Organisations, International Year 
for the Homeless 1987).
3  N Elphicke, ‘The Impact of the Recession. Rising Home Repossessions in the UK’ 
(Social Situation Observatory – Network on Income Distribution and Living Conditions, 
Seminar – Housing, Social Inclusion and the Economy, 21 April 2009) http://ec.europa.eu/
social/main.jsp?catId=1049&langId=en&newsId=1877&moreDocuments=yes&tableNam
e=news accessed 22 August 2013.
4  A Beer, D Faulkner, T Clower and C Paris, Housing Transitions through The Life 
Course: Aspirations, Needs and Policy (Bristol, Policy Press 2011).
5  G Room, ‘Trajectories of Social Exclusion: The Wider Context for the Third and 
First Worlds’ in D Gordon and P Townsend (eds), Breadline Europe (Bristol, Policy Press 
2000).

Housing Ladders and Snakes
253
Established Tenure Trajectories in the Irish Housing System
To set the context for addressing aspects of snakes and ladders in the current Irish 
housing system, some discussion of the nature of established household tenure 
trajectories is required. For the past five decades, households entering the housing 
system in Ireland could expect to follow a housing career which would ultimately 
lead to secure/permanent accommodation in either social housing rented from 
the state or owner-occupier housing funded by long-term mortgage borrowings.6 
Eligible low-income households could normally expect to secure a local authority 
dwelling after a period spent on the local authority waiting list, while middle to 
high-income groups could avail themselves of a plethora of incentives to become 
owner-occupiers.7 Many households that began their housing careers as tenants in 
local authority housing also became home-owners by availing themselves of the 
long-standing right to buy option, known in Ireland as the tenant purchase scheme, 
through which tenants could acquire their local authority dwelling at a heavily 
discounted price. For many households, regardless of their final destination, a brief 
transitional period was spent in the private rented sector and this was frequently 
the first source of independent housing for newly formed households. Only for a 
very small minority was private renting a final tenure destination, partly because of 
the appeal of social housing and owner-occupation, and partly because of the weak 
regulation of the sector and the poor standards of accommodation, especially at its 
lower end.8 As a result of these established trajectories, a particular tenure division 
came to dominate the Irish housing system until recently in which a large majority of 
households followed a pathway to home-ownership, a further proportion rented from 
the state, while private renting played a largely transitional role as an initial tenure 
and accommodated a very small permanent tenant population mainly comprised of 
elderly tenants who occupied rent-controlled dwellings on a lifetime basis.
The established tenure trajectory followed by Irish households involved a 
progression from the household formation stage through short-term occupancy 
in private renting and on to permanent settled housing either as a traditional 
local authority tenant or as an owner-occupier. For the majority of households, 
the rungs of the ladder were sufficiently close together to facilitate reasonably 
unproblematic progression towards permanent settled housing on the basis that 
there was an adequate supply of social housing for prospective tenants to rent from 
6  J Finnerty, ‘Homes for the Working Class? Irish Public House-Building Cycles, 
1945–2001’ (2002) 27 Saothar 65. See also C O’Connell, The State and Housing in Ireland: 
Ideology, Policy and Practice (New York, Nova 2007).
7  D Redmond and M Norris, ‘Setting the Scene: Transformations in Irish Housing’ 
in M Norris and D Redmond (eds), Housing Contemporary Ireland (Dublin, IPA 2005).
8  A Ryall, ‘A Review of Housing Legislation Since 1992’ in Threshold, Private 
Rented Housing: Issues and Options (Dublin, Threshold 1999). See also Y Galligan, ‘The 
Irish Private Rented Sector’ in Norris and Redmond (n 7). See also P Kenna, Housing 
Rights, Law and Policy (Dublin, Clarus 2011).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
254
the state and access to housing capital, combined with a range of state-provided 
fiscal incentives for aspiring owner-occupiers to purchase a dwelling on the open 
market. Over the last two decades, however, the tenure distribution has changed, 
notably in terms of the contraction of owner-occupation and local authority 
housing, and the expansion of the private and housing association rental sectors. 
This suggests that a structural shift may be occurring, in part promoted by the 
increasing role played by both private for-profit and not-for-profit landlords, and 
the elimination of policy biases which historically favoured owner-occupation.9 
These issues will be covered later on in the chapter.
Tenure Trends in the Irish Housing System
In reviewing housing trends in the Irish housing system, a striking feature has been 
the historically high level of owner-occupation and the consequent overshadowing 
effect this has had on the other tenures – private renting and local authority/social 
housing. At its peak, owner-occupation accounted for almost 80 per cent of the 
total housing stock, although over the past two decades this figure has fallen to its 
present level of just below 70 per cent.10 In terms of market share, local authority 
housing peaked in the early 1960s, when it accounted for approximately 18 per 
cent of the total stock due to large-scale slum clearance and new construction 
programmes in urban areas dating from the 1930s onwards. Despite extensive 
building during the 1970s and 1980s, its overall proportion has never reached such 
heights again, largely due to the impact of privatization through tenant purchase 
schemes and more recently to the absence of large-scale new building output.11 
Private renting was once the dominant tenure in cities and towns and it housed 
over 85 per cent of urban households up to the 1940s. However, from that time 
onwards, it experienced a persistent decline in its share of the stock.12 This was 
due to two main factors: first, the impact of slum clearance programmes and 
social housing provision for low-income households; and, second, the departure 
of middle-income households to home-ownership as a result of improved access 
to capital and a range of direct and indirect incentives provided by the state. Thus, 
the traditional dominance of owner-occupation was the outcome of state-driven 
political tenure strategies which promoted it over other tenures through a range 
of direct and indirect incentives. Furthermore, the growth of rental tenures was 
constrained by various factors which further enhanced the appeal of owning. 
Barriers to social housing entry, such as means-testing, resulted in access being 
confined almost exclusively to low-income households. In the private rented sector, 
9  O’Connell (n 6).
10  Central Statistics Office, Profile 4, The Roof Over Our Heads – Housing in Ireland 
(Cork and Dublin, CSO 2012).
11  Finnerty (n 6).
12  Galligan (n 8).

Housing Ladders and Snakes
255
weak levels of tenant protection and lack of security of tenure, as well as under-
developed governance structures, relegated its function to a short-term transitional 
housing option. Thus, it could be argued that the growth of owner-occupation was 
as much a reflection of tenure constraint as tenure choice for households entering 
the housing market, as the alternatives were inaccessible or unappealing as long-
term destinations for the majority of households.13
Recent Changes in Irish Tenure Patterns
The long-term dominance of owner-occupation in the Irish housing system 
would appear to be waning. In each of the four census counts conducted since 
the early 1990s, the level of home-ownership has declined, and according to the 
census of 2011, this form of tenure now includes just below 70 per cent of Irish 
households.14 In the same period, the proportion of households accommodated in 
the private rented sector has risen from 10 per cent to 19 per cent, while social 
housing experienced a continued though minor reduction in its overall share and 
now houses 11 per cent of households.
As stated above, the underlying driver behind the reduction in the extent of 
owner-occupation has been the elimination of bias in Irish housing policy. There 
has been a gradual shift towards policy neutrality as many of the long-standing 
incentives and policy measures aimed at promoting owner-occupation have been 
phased out, among them first-time house buyers’ grants, mortgage interest relief 
and the absence of property taxes. In addition, since the mid-1990s, rising house 
prices, which peaked in 2006, have had the effect of deterring some households 
from accessing the sector. Paralleling these developments, there have been signs of 
improvements in the regulation and governance of the private rental sector, which 
has resulted in strengthened tenant protection and tenancy rights (though this process 
remains a work in progress).15 The private rented sector has also grown over the past 
two decades as a result of tax incentive-based urban renewal programmes in cities 
and towns which were introduced by the state in the 1990s to boost the construction 
sector and improve run-down urban areas.16 This had the effect of bringing on-
stream large volumes of apartments, many of which were purchased by investors 
for letting as private rentals. Policy change in relation to social housing, notably in 
terms of reductions in the volume of new building and a shift towards long-term 
leasing from the private sector, will also be a likely contributor to changing tenure 
trends,17 and the implications of these prospective changes to the social housing 
13  O’Connell (n 6).
14  Central Statistics Office (n 10).
15  Kenna (n 8).
16  Commission on the Private Rented Residential Sector, Report of the Commission 
on the Private Rented Residential Sector (Dublin, The Stationery Office 2000).
17  J Finnerty, ‘A New Model of Social Housing?’ (2010) 42 Cornerstone Issue 11. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
256
rungs of the housing ladder are discussed further under the heading ‘Changes to 
Tenure Trajectories for Low-Income Households’ below.
Ireland in Comparative Context
Though owner-occupation is growing in many European countries, there would 
still appear to be a more balanced distribution between the owning and renting 
rungs of the tenure ladder in these countries, with the exception of Southern 
European countries such as Italy, Spain and Portugal, where ownership rates 
match if not exceed those in Ireland.18 In Northern European housing systems, the 
rate of ownership is much lower and renting is more common than in Ireland. The 
UK (67 per cent), the Netherlands (58 per cent), Germany (41 per cent), France 
(57 per cent), Denmark (46 per cent) and Sweden (41 per cent) all have ownership 
rates below those of Ireland (69 per cent),19 while their rental sectors are more 
mature in terms of ownership structures, governance and regulation, and tenants’ 
rights. Comparisons with former communist Eastern European countries are more 
tenuous as a result of the mass privatization of social housing since the 1990s.20
An Irish Housing Snake?
Trends in Mortgage Arrears, Repossessions and Homelessness
The collapse of the Irish housing market, with price falls estimated to be in the 
region of 60 per cent since the peak in 2006,21 and the accompanying economic crisis 
have severely reduced the number of households ascending to owner-occupation. 
Furthermore, the conditions for an emerging owner-occupation housing snake in 
the form of the enforced displacement of households to a lower tenure rung are 
present in the form of growing mortgage arrears, which have arisen out of and are 
compounded by rising levels of unemployment and stagnant economic growth. 
There has been a clear upward trend in the numbers of mortgages falling into 
arrears.22 For instance, by June 2013, of the 770,610 private residential mortgage 
18  A Pittini and E Laino, Housing Europe Review 2012: The Nuts and Bolts of 
European Housing Systems (Brussels, CECODHAS 2011). 
19  Central Statistics Office (n 10).
20  J Hegedus, M Lux and N Teller, Social Housing in Transition Countries (London, 
Routledge 2013).
21  Daft.ie, ‘The Daft.ie House Price Report: An Analysis of Recent Trends in the 
Irish Residential Sales Market 2012 Q3’ http://www.daft.ie/report/Daft-House-Price-
Report-Q3-2012.pdf accessed 19 March 2013.
22  Central 
Bank 
of 
Ireland, 
‘Residential 
Mortgage 
Arrears, 
and 
Repossession 
Statistics 
Q2 
2013’ 
http://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/press-releases/

Housing Ladders and Snakes
257
accounts for principal dwellings held in the state, 97,874 or 12.7 per cent were in 
arrears of more than 3 months – up from 10.6 per cent in June 2012.23 The question 
which arises from this trend is whether such arrears levels are generating ‘snakes’ 
in the housing system, as measured by key indicators such as house repossessions 
and rising levels of homelessness.
With regard to house repossessions, the evidence to date suggests that the 
snake has not taken hold. Despite the scale of arrears, the extent of repossessions 
is modest and in comparative international terms is extremely low. In the period 
from January 2012 to June 2013, a cumulative total of 1,050 residential units 
were repossessed from their occupants by lenders.24 With regard to trends in 
homelessness, the Irish homeless population remains low and relatively stable.25 
While there has been an increase in the Dublin and Cork rough sleeper population 
in the latter half of 2012,26 there is no evidence of the influence of structural 
mechanisms such as mortgage distress on the size or composition of the homeless 
population; individual or meso-level mechanisms such as mental health and 
addictions issues continue to predominate.
Banishing the Irish Snake? Policy Levers and Safety Nets
If the conditions for a snake are present in the Irish housing system, a puzzling 
issue is why has it not materialized in the form of mass repossessions? There are 
two primary explanations for the absence of a repossessions snake. First, there 
are the effects of public policy levers on the behaviour of financial institutions 
which have mediated the interactions between lenders and borrowers, and, second, 
there is evidence of effectively functioning social policy safety nets within the 
housing system. The primary public policy levers have taken the form of a code 
of conduct on mortgage arrears whereby mortgage lenders are legally bound to 
adhere to a Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process, which includes a moratorium 
on repossession proceedings against households that fall into arrears. This was 
imposed by the Irish state on banks and financial institutions which were the 
beneficiaries of the 2008 financial bailout. Under the terms of the bailout, the 
bad debts and defaulting loans (mainly those issued by Irish banks to developers 
PagesMortgageArrearsandRepossessionStatisticsQ22013.aspx accessed 02 July 2013.
23  ibid.
24  ibid.
25  J Finnerty, ‘Housing Exclusion and Homelessness in Ireland’, Research Seminar: 
Housing, Social Affairs and Inclusion http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?langId=en&catId
=1049&newsId=1877&furtherNews=yes accessed 26 August 2013.
26  Dublin Region Homeless Executive 2012, ‘Number of People Sleeping Rough 
in Dublin in November 2012 at 87 Persons’ http://www.homelessagency.ie/Media/2012-
News/Number-of-People-Sleeping-Rough-in-Dublin-in-Novem.aspx accessed 19 March 
2013. Eoin English ‘Trebling in numbers sleeping rough as funds fall’ Irish Examiner, (19 
July 2013) http://www.irishexaminer.com/ireland/cwmhqlmhauid/rss2/ accessed 20 July 
2013.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
258
at the height of the property boom) were acquired by the state through a special 
purpose vehicle known as the National Asset Management Agency at an average 
discount of 57 per cent. In a gesture to distressed mortgage holders, a condition 
of participation in the bank rescue scheme was that the banks concerned could 
not initiate repossession proceedings for at least two years against households 
that fell into loan arrears. As a result, the repossession figures which have been 
recorded are comprised almost exclusively of foreign lenders who were not 
party to the state bailout, subprime lenders who lent money at very high interest 
rates to borrowers deemed to be too risky by mainstream banks, and mainstream 
bailed-out banks where the terms of existing agreements have not been adhered 
to by borrowers. Arising from the moratorium, financial institutions have been 
exhorted to be more proactive in dealing with borrowers and this has resulted 
in a greater level of engagement when repayment difficulties arise or mortgages 
are vulnerable to going into arrears. Most evidently, this appears in the form of 
the numbers of loans which have been re-structured. In the period from June 
2011 to August 2012, this has grown from 66,000 to almost 82,000 mortgages, 
entailing a variety of re-structuring arrangements between lenders and borrowers 
including interest-only repayments, reduced instalments, loan term extensions, 
arrears capitalization, payment moratoria and deferred interest arrangements.27 An 
implicit concern on the part of the banks that full acknowledgment of the extent 
of defaulting mortgages might necessitate either widespread debt write-downs or 
large-scale repossessions, with unwelcome financial and political consequences, 
has also played a role.
One obvious question which arises is what will happen when the moratorium 
period expires and banks are permitted to initiate repossession proceedings against 
mortgage holders who have fallen into arrears? According to observers, the most 
likely scenario to emerge will be one in which proposed personal insolvency 
legislation will have been enacted and settlements on mortgage debt will occur 
under its auspices. It is also likely that a graduated approach will be adopted by 
the lenders in pursuing arrears, with repossession of family homes acting as a last 
resort in favour of rental agreements which will allow households to remain in 
situ. Repossession of ‘buy to let’ rental properties which have arrears outstanding 
is far more likely to occur once a legal impediment in the Land and Conveyancing 
Law Reform Act 2009 relating to mortgages created before December 2009 and 
precluding banks from seeking possession has been eliminated.
The second part of the explanation for the absence of a snake in the Irish 
housing system relates to the effectiveness of existing social policy safety nets 
to support vulnerable households. The most prominent of these is known as the 
Mortgage Interest Supplement (MIS). This provision was introduced in the 1980s 
by the Department of Social Welfare (now known as the Department of Social 
27  Central Bank of Ireland, ‘Residential Mortgage Arrears, and Repossession 
Statistics Q3 2012’ http://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/press-releases/Pages/
MortgageArrearsandRepossessionStatisticsQ32012.aspx accessed 3 March 2013.

Housing Ladders and Snakes
259
Protection) and is administered by community welfare officers. It is a part of the 
supplementary welfare scheme which offers temporary support to borrowers who 
need assistance to meet the interest element of mortgage repayments. Though 
historically an under-utilized provision, in recent years it has been availed of to a 
much greater extent as increasing numbers of home-owners encounter difficulties 
in meeting their mortgage repayments. Until the economic crash, the number of 
households availing themselves of MIS was modest and stable. However, since 
2008, coinciding with the onset of the economic crisis, this number has grown 
significantly and had risen to approximately 19,000 by the end of 2011, with an 
expenditure of €67.8 million.28
This part of the discussion has explained why the threat of enforced tenure 
displacement facing some households at the top rung of the tenure ladder (those in 
the owner-occupied tenure with distressed mortgages) has not materialized, largely 
as a result of the effects of policy levers and social policy safety nets. However, as 
more households encounter difficulties in servicing their housing debts, it is likely 
that these policy levers and safety nets, in Ireland as elsewhere, will come under 
increasing strain, within the wider context of continuing economic stagnation, 
rising unemployment and government-imposed austerity policies.29 Additionally, a 
restriction of MIS to borrowers in arrears for more than 12 months was introduced 
in June 2012, with the stated reason being to encourage lenders to engage more 
proactively in the mortgage arrears process.
Changes to Tenure Trajectories for Low-Income Households
The understandable focus on the difficulties of the cohort at the uppermost rung 
of the tenure ladder has resulted in a neglect of the longer-term public policy issue 
of how the reality of tenure trajectories has and will increasingly diverge from the 
policy and popular discourse of housing ladder ascent – the ideal of permanent 
settled accommodation – for Irish households.30 While factors such as uncertainties 
around income, employment and house prices, and restrictions on mortgage 
credit have widened the rungs of the ladder for middle-income households, the 
focus in this section of the discussion turns to the ascent of the housing ladder 
by low-income households and specifically examines what is happening to the 
traditional tenure trajectory of low-income households towards permanent settled 
accommodation in local authority housing, with the scope for owner-occupation 
via tenant purchase. Continuing to employ the ladder as a housing metaphor, we 
28  Department of Social Protection, Annual Social Welfare Services Statistical Report 
– 2011 (Dublin, DOSP 2012) http://www.welfare.ie/en/downloads/ar2011.pdf accessed 3 
March 2013.
29  A Wallace, D Quilgars and J Ford, Exiting Unsustainable Home Ownership (York, 
Centre for Housing Policy 2011).
30  Finnerty (n 17).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
260
ask: (i) has the housing ladder changed for low-income households; and (ii) if so, 
what is the nature and impact of such change, especially for newly formed low-
income households?
Changes to the Tenure Ladder
Drawing on an analysis of recent policy changes in relation to provision for low-
income households, evident changes have occurred to the tenure ladder, mainly 
arising out of a reconfiguration of the relationship between private renting and 
social housing. The former is assuming a new policy significance while the latter 
appears to be falling out of favour and is being replaced by new arrangements 
which entail short-term and long-term leasing schemes for sourcing social 
housing in the private market. Table 10.1 below illustrates how direct provision 
by local authorities has been falling in recent years, while there has been a parallel 
growth in provision through the Rental Accommodation Scheme and the Long-
Term Leasing Scheme, both of which draw heavily on the private rental sector 
as a source of accommodation and on the supplementary welfare rent allowance 
scheme as a source of funding.
The Role of Supplementary Welfare Rent Supplement
As stated earlier, until recently, private renting was viewed as a transitional 
tenure for many low-income households and as a permanent destination for a 
very small minority. Because they were low-income households, many private 
renters qualified for social housing but required financial assistance to meet the 
gap between their income and the rents demanded by landlords while they were 
on the waiting list. This gap was covered by a social welfare payment known as 
Table 10.1	
Sources of social housing provision 2006–11
Source: DECLG various years
Year
Direct Provision 
by Local 
Authorities
Direct Provision 
by Voluntary
Landlords
Rental 
Accommodation 
Scheme
Long-Term Lease
Scheme
2006
5,121
1,240
828
N/a
2007
6,988
1,685
2,077
N/a
2008
5,692
1,896
3,012
N/a
2009
4,089
2,011
1,990
N/a
2010
2,178
285
3,642
1,223
2011
810
140
6,337
1,193

Housing Ladders and Snakes
261
the rent supplement. Similar to the MIS for home-owners, the rent supplement is 
a welfare payment which is meant to be a temporary support until households are 
in a position to become self-sufficient in meeting rent payments.31 Over time, a 
number of developments have occurred which show that private renting in Ireland 
is changing from a transitional to a longer-term housing destination for increasing 
numbers of low-income households. First, the rent supplement has unintentionally 
become a permanent housing support as many low-income households rely on it 
on an ongoing basis. This is evident from the growth in the number of claimants 
over the past decade, from 45,000 in 2001 to 100,000 in 2011, and amounted to 
an annual expenditure of €500 million in the latter year. Furthermore, a large 
proportion of these claims now extend beyond one year in duration.32 In parallel 
with this, as the figures in Table 10.1 above illustrate, there has been a clear shift in 
emphasis in social housing policy in recent years away from direct housing output 
by local authorities towards rental and leasing schemes in the private market. In 
2012 the state directly funded a total of 800 units, of which half were built by 
local authorities and the remainder by voluntary bodies, with most of these being 
allocated to ‘special needs’ rather than general needs households.33 The shift away 
from direct provision towards market-based sources has been gradual and has 
been signalled for some time.34 For instance in 2009 the then Housing Minister 
Michael Finneran TD stated that:
We can no longer rely on the traditional acquisition and construction approach 
to meeting social housing needs. We must embrace every opportunity for 
delivering additional supply through market based mechanisms.35
This process is now well advanced and has been given added impetus in the most 
recent government Housing Policy Statement published in June 2011, which 
envisaged:
A restructuring of the social housing investment programme to allow for the 
delivery of new social housing through more flexible funding models will provide 
key sources of delivery in the period ahead. The social housing leasing initiative 
31  Department of Social and Family Affairs, Report of the Social Partners’ Group on 
Rent Supplement (Dublin, DoSFA 2004).
32  Department of Social Protection (n 28).
33  Department of Environment Community and Local Government, ‘Housing Minister 
Jan O’Sullivan Announces Funding of Over €250m to LAs from a Total Budget of €691m’ 
Development/Housing News (20 March 2012) www.environ.ie/en/DevelopmentHousing/
Housing/News/MainBody,29654,en.htm accessed 3 March 2013.
34  D Coates and D Silke, The Rental Accommodation Scheme – An Overview of 
Financial Management and Control Systems (Dublin, Centre for Housing Research 2006).
35  M Finneran, Ministerial Address (2009) http://icsh.ie/content/events/2009-
national-social-housing-conference accessed 26 August 2013.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
262
and, in particular, the Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS) will each play 
their part as long-term social housing supports. The Government also recognises 
that rent supplement – intended as a short-term income support – has become 
a de facto social housing support with many thousands of households reliant 
on the supplement to support accommodation costs for longer periods. This is 
not in the interests of the households receiving the support, local authorities or 
the Exchequer. The Government will rectify this by transferring responsibility 
for providing for the housing needs of long-term rent supplement recipients to 
housing authorities on a phased basis.36
The use of private renting to meet the housing needs of low-income groups has 
been recently reiterated by the government in terms of further reforms of how that 
sector is regulated. Under the auspices of injecting more ‘tenure neutrality’ into 
the housing system, there is a clear inference that this is being pursued in order 
to strengthen the capacity of private renting to fill a gap due to lower output from 
local authorities and social housing organizations. According to the Minister for 
Housing and Planning, Jan O’Sullivan TD:
The challenge for government is to support the transition to a mixed tenure 
market that does not prioritise one housing tenure over another, that recognises 
that households housing needs will change over time and that provides a safety 
net to assist the most vulnerable to find housing solutions that meet their needs 
at a point in time.37
To the critical observer, the claim of tenure neutrality can be interpreted as favouring 
market-based solutions over direct provision funded by central government and 
delivered by local authorities. In practice some local authorities appear to view this 
as an opportunity to redefine their responsibilities from provision to procurement. 
In the face of severe reductions in capital building budgets, many local authorities 
have begun to revise their criteria for allocating social housing by classifying 
long-term rent allowance recipients as having their housing needs adequately 
met. In effect, this formalizes the status of such households as long-term residents 
of the private rental sector through rental and leasing arrangements with private 
landlords.38 The shift to relying on the private market to meet long-term social 
36  Department of Environment, Heritage and Local Government, ‘Housing 
Policy 
Statement’ 
2011 
http://www.environ.ie/en/DevelopmentHousing/Housing/
PublicationsDocuments/FileDownLoad,26867,en.pdf accessed 26 August 2013.
37  Jan O’Sullivan, ‘Putting Houses in Order’ Irish Examiner (Lapps Quay, 14 
January 2013) http://www.irishexaminer.com/weekend/putting-houses-in-order-219479.
html accessed 19 March 2013.
38  Fingal County Council, ‘Housing Strategy 2011–2017’ (2011) http://www.
fingalcoco.ie/Publications/Housing/Draft%20Housing%20Strategy%202011%20to%20
2017.pdf accessed 3 March 2013.

Housing Ladders and Snakes
263
housing needs has not occurred as a result of a planned policy process. In reality, 
it amounts to the formalization of a de facto situation which has evolved over a 
long period. In that respect, it is not untypical of many aspects of Irish social policy 
where ad hoc responses which occur on an unplanned and uncoordinated manner 
are eventually reconstituted as new policy departures.39
Wider Rungs and Bigger Gaps
A number of implications arise from the move away from direct provision of 
social housing to procurement in the private market. For the majority of new social 
housing applicants, it signals the end of the traditional role played by social housing 
as a source of permanent settled accommodation.40 The distinctions between local 
authority tenancies and private tenancies reveal how the former can be considered 
effectively a lifetime guarantee of settled permanent accommodation, while 
the latter is much more tenuous in terms of security and continuity. While local 
authority tenants and landlords may unilaterally terminate a tenancy under s 62 
of the 1966 Housing Act, in practice this rarely occurs and qualitatively such a 
provision has no practical impact. The other mechanism by which a local authority 
can terminate a tenancy is by using the provisions of the 1997 Housing Act in 
relation to anti-social behaviour. However, in practice this is a convoluted and 
deeply contested route to adopt, and only occurs in extreme instances of anti-social 
behaviour. In contrast, private rental tenancies are regulated by the Residential 
Tenancies Act 2004, which provides a series of grounds for landlords to terminate 
a tenancy and the timeframes under which this can occur. Under the 2004 Act, 
the grounds for terminating a tenancy are set out systematically and clearly. Thus, 
while a tenancy cannot be terminated without reason, there are many grounds 
which a landlord can invoke and it is clear that the legislation weighs in their 
rather than the tenant’s favour.41
There is also the question of what longer-term gain accrues to the state. Under 
long-term rental and leasing arrangements, dwellings revert to the possession of 
private landlords at the end of the stipulated rental or lease period regardless of the 
outlay of the state in rent payments. Thus, at the end of an extended and potentially 
expensive leasing period, the state is left with no capital interest in the dwelling. 
There are also issues in relation to continuity of supply as there is no guarantee 
that leases will be renewed by landlords, thus giving rise to implications for the 
housing stability and security of the tenants concerned. In certain circumstances, 
such as in competitive urban housing markets, where demand outstrips supply, 
landlords may prefer to let their units on the open market on the basis that higher 
39  O’Connell (n 6). See also Department of Social and Family Affairs (n 31).
40  Finnerty (n 17); Kenna (n 8).
41  Kenna (n 8).

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
264
rents can be secured there, as opposed to renewing social housing leases where 
rents are capped below market rates.42
Rental accommodation and leasing schemes effectively categorize the social 
housing population into different classes of tenants based on their access to 
permanent settled accommodation. None of the types of tenancy now on offer to 
social housing applicants as a result of the shift towards sourcing social housing 
in the private market reach the bar of permanent settled accommodation set by 
traditional social housing. Existing tenants of local authorities occupy the top rung 
of the ladder in terms of secure settled accommodation, with the added benefit of 
being able to acquire their dwellings through the tenant purchase scheme. These 
are followed closely by tenants of voluntary and social housing landlords, who 
now have a variant of the ‘right to buy’ conferred on them under an incremental 
purchase scheme and are also protected from the vagaries of the free market 
with what are effectively lifetime tenancies. In contrast, tenants living in leased 
units are vulnerable to a range of factors outside their control that will influence 
how secure and settled their accommodation will be. In the best-case scenario, a 
household will be allocated accommodation under a long-term lease arrangement 
agreed between a social landlord and a property owner for a period of between 
10 and 20 years. Under such an arrangement, a tenancy may be terminated by a 
landlord under the terms of the Private Rented Tenancies Act 2004 and a dwelling 
may be re-let on the open market at the end of the agreed lease period. However, 
of most concern is the situation faced by vulnerable low-income households that 
will continue to occupy mainstream private rented tenancies and have a portion 
of their rent paid under the state rent supplement scheme. Such tenancies can 
be terminated by landlords through a range of grounds provided for under the 
2004 legislation. Such tenants also have a far lower threshold of continuity of 
accommodation and security compared to those in long-term leases and so must 
be considered very vulnerable to disruptions in their housing security. These 
vulnerabilities are faced by low-income tenants across the housing system; 
however, they are especially acute for those trying to access accommodation in 
competitive rental markets in large cities, where rental accommodation is much 
sought-after and where landlords can afford to be very selective about lettings in 
terms of tenant profile and duration.
The impact of these policy shifts is that the private rental sector as a terminal 
destination of low-income households will become formalized. The most 
recent official assessment of housing need recorded that the largest category of 
households who qualified for social housing were those in the private rented sector 
who were deemed to be ‘unable to meet cost of their current accommodation’.43 
Traditionally this signalled entitlement to and allocation of conventional social 
housing. However, in the new policy environment, such households will be deemed 
42  Finnerty (n 17). See also J Finnerty and C O’Connell, ‘Return to Social Housing 
Preferable’ The Irish Times (Dublin, 29 July 2004) 14.
43  Department of Social Protection (n 28).

Housing Ladders and Snakes
265
to have their housing needs satisfied if they are in receipt of rent allowance for 
18 months or more, or if the landlord they are renting from opts to join one of the 
long-term leasing schemes.
Conclusion
This chapter has examined two aspects of recent household tenure trajectories 
in the Irish housing system through the widely used metaphor of the housing 
‘ladder’. First, it has explored whether there is evidence of a snake in the Irish 
housing ladder which is leading to higher incidences of tenure displacement. 
Second, it has examined structural changes to the housing ladder itself and has 
analysed whether recent policy changes will make a trajectory towards permanent 
settled housing less likely for low-income households.
Current available evidence does not signal the emergence of a snake in the form 
of mass repossessions, largely due to the influence of public policy levers and the 
effectiveness of social policy interventions. However, this conclusion is subject 
to qualification as both of these factors will come under increasing strain if the 
public policy levers, especially in relation to conditions imposed on lenders, are 
relaxed or if social policy fiscal supports are curtailed as a result of the imposition 
of deepening austerity measures.
A broader issue, and arguably one more structurally significant in terms of 
housing policy, concerns the experiences of low-income households that have 
traditionally been housed directly by the state through local authority provision. 
It is clear that the housing ladder has changed for them and these changes are 
significant. Low-income households that enter the housing system are now almost 
certainly destined to be accommodated in a hybrid form of social housing which 
is predominantly owned by private landlords and leased temporarily by the state, 
which is manifestly not as secure as state-provided social housing.44 Beyond the 
immediate experiences of households losing out on access to permanent settled 
accommodation is the underlying re-structuring of Irish social housing policy 
as we witness the end of large-scale direct provision by local authorities and 
the privatization of a key aspect of Irish social policy delivery. While the role 
of social housing has been much contested in academic and policy quarters in 
the UK, such as by Hills45 and King,46 no comparable conversation has occurred 
44  For further discussion on issues relating to notions of security and well-being 
related to tenure, see R Hiscock, A Kearns, S Macintyre and A Ellaway, ‘Ontological 
Security and Psychosocial Benefits from the Home: Qualitative Evidence on Issues of 
Tenure’ (2001) 18(1–2) Housing, Theory and Society 50.
45  J Hills, Ends and Means: The Future Roles of Social Housing in England (London, 
CASE 2007).
46  P King, ‘No Choice: Reforming Social Housing in England’ (2008) 28(2) 
Economic Affairs 37.

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
266
in Ireland, despite the structural implications for the sector arising from current 
policy developments.

Index
AAA ratings 16, 39n6, 41n16, 44, 50
see also rating agencies
Action Logement 234n49
adequate housing, concept of 123, 127
affordable housing 11, 14, 27, 30, 126n49, 
197
see also adequate housing; community 
economic development (CED) and 
public interest law; housing rights; 
social housing
Alinsky, Saul 190
Alkiser, Jasemin 246, 247
Ally Financial 48
Alston, Philip 27, 131n70
Alterman, Rachelle 20, 30
American Dream Downpayment Initiative 
39n4
Anderson, G.W. 27, 29
Anderton, N. 252
Andreasson, S. 4
Angel, Schlomo 9–10
Angola, constitutional housing rights 
147–8
Argentina, constitutional housing rights 
150–51
Armenia, constitutional housing rights 148
Arnstein, Sherry R. 133–4
Australia, house prices 1, 11
Austria, house prices 1
Autism-Europe v France 124–5
Ball, Jane 9, 68n122, 227, 234
Ballymun housing estate (Ireland)
Ballymun Community Law Centre 
(Ireland) 180, 182, 183–4, 212, 
216–25
regeneration process 205n176, 210–11, 
213n221, 214–16
see also community economic 
development (CED) and public 
interest law; Ireland
Baltic States, material deprivation 18
Banco de España 91, 97
Bangladesh, positive effects of 
globalization 7
Bank of America 48
banks
credit crunch 17, 37, 41, 55, 105
drop in interbank lending 51
global losses from US crisis 50–51
recapitalization by states 17, 27
‘shadow banking system’ 16
splitting of (retail vs investment 
banking) 7
toxic assets 39n6, 40, 110–11
see also European banks; European 
Central Bank; financial crisis 
(2007–); Ireland; Spain; United 
States (US)
Becker, Howard S. 229
Beer, A. 252
Belgium
constitutional housing rights 149
FIDH (International Federation of 
Human Rights) v Belgium 130, 
131–2
Foreign direct investment (FDI) 6n26
Test-Achats ASBL v Belgium 139
Berry, Mike 233–4
Bevilacqua v Rodriguez 48n50
‘blind trust’ crisis 43, 44n24
Blommestein, H. 39n6
References to figures are shown in italics. References to tables are shown in bold. 
References to footnotes consist of the page number followed by the letter ‘n’ followed by 
the number of the footnote, e.g. 26n106 refers to note no. 106 on page 26. 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
268
Bolivia, constitutional housing rights 153
Booth, Charles 184
Bosnia and Herzegovina, repossession rights 
(refugees and displaced persons) 
154–5
Bouillon, Florence 229, 230, 231, 235, 236
Branco, M.C. 30–31
Brazil
constitutional housing rights 152
Foreign direct investment (FDI) 6
gated communities (Sao Paulo) 14
squatting 247
British Virgin Islands, offshore tax haven 6
Brundtland Commission (Our Common 
Future) report 205n179
Bulgaria
ERRC (European Roma Rights Centre) 
v Bulgaria 120n20, 122–3, 129, 138
MDAC (Mental Disability Advocacy 
Centre) v Bulgaria 130–31, 132
Bush, George H.W. 195, 197n130
Bush, George W. 39
buy-to-let business approach 51
California Redevelopment Association 199
see also Los Angeles (California, US)
Canada
house prices 1
International Human Rights Committee 
and homelessness 157
capitalism
finance capital 6–7
financial capitalism 26n106
and globalization 3–4, 5
and minimum core obligations concept 
23
transnational capital 5–7
see also globalization; neoliberalism
Catalonia (Spain)
new forms of housing tenure 67–71, 69
protection of mortgage consumers 
65–7, 72
see also Spain; Spanish mortgage crisis 
and legal reforms
CBAs (community benefit agreements) 
200–203 
see also redevelopment
CCMA (Code of Conduct on Mortgage 
Arrears) 94–6, 97, 98 
CDOs (collateral debt obligations) 16, 40, 
44, 50, 72
CECODHAS 18
CED (community economic development), 
see community economic 
development (CED) and public 
interest law
Central Bank of Ireland 78, 94, 94n123,  
95
Centre for Housing Law, Rights and Policy 
(NUI Galway) 2
Chapman, A. 23
Chaudry, Shivani 14–15 
Chege, Nloki 172n68
children
constitutional housing rights 147
DCI (Defence for Children International) 
v The Netherlands 123n39
disability rights 164, 171–2, 176
Chile, Foreign direct investment (FDI) 
6n26
China
Foreign direct investment (FDI) 6
gated communities (Shangai) 14
house prices 1
labour effects of globalization 5
positive effects of globalization 7
Churchill, R. 122n35
Cities in a Globalizing World (UNCHS) 
9n42, 13n56, 13n57, 14
Citigroup 48
citizen participation, see local 
empowerment; participation
City Prosperity Index 15
Clapham, David 7
Clinton, Bill 38–9, 181n10, 181n11, 195
Clos, Joan 15
Clower, T. 252
Coase, R.H. 232, 243
Cobb, Neil 229, 240
Cochon, Georges 231, 242
Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears 
(CCMA) 94–6, 97, 98
Code of Good Banking Practice 109
Cohen, Stanley 229

Index
269
COHRE (Centre on Housing Rights and 
Evictions) v Croatia 128
Colantonio, Andrea 210–11, 213n219
collateral debt obligations (CDOs) 16, 40, 
44, 50, 72
Comhar (Sustainable Development Council) 
207–10
Community Action Agencies (CAAs) 
186–9
Community Action Programme (CAP) 
186–9
community benefit agreements (CBAs) 
200–203
see also redevelopment
Community Development Block Grants 
(CDBGs) 192
community economic development (CED) 
and public interest law
background 179–80
CED definitions 180
Ireland
Ballymun Community Law Centre 
180, 182, 183–4, 212
background to case study 
216–17
creation of the Centre 218–21
funding 224–5
local management and control 
221–2
services provided 222–4
Ballymun housing estate 
regeneration 205n176, 210–11, 
213n221, 214–16
CED lawyering 181–3, 189n71, 
204–5, 209, 210, 212, 216, 
220–21, 222, 225–6
regeneration process
concept and approaches 203–4, 
210–11
social housing 212–14
sustainable development 204–5
sustainable development and 
local empowerment 210
sustainable development and 
social inclusion 209
sustainable development at EU 
level 205–7
sustainable development at 
national level 207–9
urban regeneration 211–12
United States 179, 180–81, 183
CED, origins of 184–6
Community Action Programme 
(CAP) and Community 
Action Agencies (CAAs) 
186–9
Gray Areas and Mobilization 
for Youth programmes 186
Legal Services Programme 187
Model Cities Program 189–90
policies, legislation and CED law 
190–91
gentrification 196–7
gentrification at federal level 
(HOPE VI) 197–8
gentrification at local level 
(California) 198–200
gentrification vs regeneration 
203n168
redevelopment 191–2
redevelopment and CED 192–6
redevelopment and community 
benefit agreements (CBAs) 
200–203
see also Irish housing tenure trajectories
community living 160, 164, 176
see also independent living and 
disability (Kenya)
constitutional housing rights
conceptual classification 143–4, 144
direct housing rights
partial list of social rights 145
stand-alone article 145
embedded housing rights
access to basic domestic services 
153
adequate standard of living 148
agricultural policy 152
children’s rights 147
disability rights 151
elder rights 147–8
family rights 153
fiscal policy 149–50
homelessness 152

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
270
human dignity 149
inclusion and equality 150
indigenous rights 150
mandatory report on 
implementation of the right to 
housing 151
planning and urban politics 148
property rights 147
responsibilities of regional and 
local authorities 148–9
responsibilities of the state 146
right to challenge court decisions 
152
rural politics 152
social security 150–51
workers’ rights 146
indirect/implied housing rights
freedom of residence 155–6
property rights 153–5
right to be free from degrading 
treatment (prisons) 157–8
right to life 157
right to privacy 156
international jurisdiction and domestic 
laws 141–3
constructionism, and housing studies 252
consumer protection
EU Unfair Terms in Consumer 
Contracts Directive (1993) 134
Ireland
Consumer Credit Act (1995) 85–6
Consumer Protection Code (CPC, 
2012) 92–4, 98
‘vulnerable consumer’ concept 22, 
92, 99
‘long lists’ system 56n85, 66n114
Spain
EU consumer law and Spanish 
mortgage law 59
foreclosure appeal to European Court 
of Justice (Case C-415/11) 112
forthcoming measures (Catalonia) 
65–7, 72
Law 2/2009 (Spain) 90–92
Spanish constitution 80
Sustainable Economy Law 2/2011, 
Article 29 (Spain) 90
tying practices 56–8, 93
‘vulnerable consumer’ concept 22, 92, 
99
‘Contemporary Housing Issues in a Changing 
Europe’ conference (2012) 2
Cooper, Charlie 229
Corruption Perceptions Index 102n4
Costa Rica, constitutional housing rights 
142
Council of Europe
EU Sustainable Development Strategy 
(EU SDS) 204n174, 206–7
European Convention for the 
Protection of Human Rights and 
Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) 
117, 125, 135, 138, 142, 240
member states 115n1
see also Council of Europe, European 
Committee of Social Rights 
(ECSR)
Council of Europe, European Committee 
of Social Rights (ECSR) 20, 30
Council of Europe vs EU law 115–17
European Social Charter (ESC/RESC) 
and Collective Complaints system 
117–34, 142
Autism-Europe v France 124–5
COHRE (Centre on Housing Rights 
and Evictions) v Croatia 128
DCI (Defence for Children 
International) v. The Netherlands 
123n39
ERRC (European Roma Rights 
Centre) v Bulgaria 120n20, 
122–3, 129, 138
ERRC (European Roma Rights 
Centre) v France 120n20, 
131–2, 133
ERRC (European Roma Rights 
Centre) v Greece 120n20, 123, 
131, 132
ERRC (European Roma Rights 
Centre) v Italy 120n20, 127, 
138
FEANTSA (homelessness) v France 
125–6, 127, 129, 137
FIDH (International Federation of 
Human Rights) v Belgium 130, 
131–2

Index
271
functional overlap between articles 
130–34
MDAC (Mental Disability Advocacy 
Centre) v Bulgaria 130–31,  
132
housing obligations
definition and material scope 126
effectiveness and enforcement 
128–9
habitability and standards 127
suitability 127–8
temporary accommodation 129
RESC and the EU Charter of 
Fundamental Rights (EUCFR) 117, 
134–40
covered bonds 31, 41–4, 42, 51, 62
Cox, J. 39n6
Craig, P. 135
credit crunch 17, 37, 41, 55, 105
see also financial crisis (2007–)
creditworthiness assessment 66n113, 90, 
96, 99
Croatia, COHRE (Centre on Housing Rights 
and Evictions) v Croatia 128
Cummings, Scott, L. 199, 199n145
DAL (Droit au Logement) squatting 
movement 231, 244
Dale Farm travellers, eviction of (2011) 
244
Davis, Kevin E. 204n173
Davis, Mike 13n56
DCI (Defence for Children International) v 
The Netherlands 123n39
De Búrca, G. 135
de Waele, H., see Waele, H. de
Degener, Theresia 172n66
Denmark
home-ownership rates 256
mortgage lending system 31
Denton, Nancy A. 184, 191n94
DESC Observatory 113
developing countries
independent living and disability 159, 
162–3, 164
urbanization growth 13
disability rights
Cash Transfer Programme for Persons 
with Severe Disabilites (Kenya) 
175
and children 164, 171–2, 176
and constitutional housing rights 151
‘double invisibility’ 172
Mental Disability Advocacy Centre 
(MDAC) v Bulgaria 130–31, 132
and minimum core obligations 24
State of Disabled Peoples Rights in 
Kenya (Kenya, 2007). 169n54
UN Standard Rules on the Equalization 
of Opportunities for Persons with 
Disabilities (1993) 164
see also independent living and 
disability (Kenya); UN Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (CRPD), Article 19
displaced persons, repossession rights 
154–5
dispossession 4, 105n11
see also evictions; housing rights; 
property rights
Dixon, Tim 210–11, 213n219
Dogge, Patrick J.C. 234
Donnelly, M. 84n55
Dorling, Danny 245n110
Droit au Logement (DAL squatting 
movement) 231, 244
Dubai, gated communities 14
Dübel, H.J. 17n70
Dublin Docklands regeneration 205n176
DuBois, W.E.B. 180n5, 184
Dunne, Judge, Start Mortgages v Gunn 
84–5
EBS v Gillespie 85
ECSR (European Committee of Social 
Rights), see Council of Europe, 
European Committee of Social 
Rights (ECSR)
Ecuador, constitutional housing rights 143, 
151
Ellis, Dave 220
Elphicke, N. 252
End of Poverty, The (Jeffrey Sachs) 7
Engels, Friedrich 4

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
272
England, see squatting (England); squatting 
(England and France); United 
Kingdom (UK)
Equal Rights Trust (ERT ) 170, 171n61
ERRC (European Roma Rights Centre), 
see Roma
Estonia, house prices 1n3, 1n5
EU SDS (Sustainable Development 
Strategy) 204n174, 206–7
EUCFR (Charter of Fundamental Rights) 
30, 117, 134–40
Euribor 55–6
Euro 8
European banks
and covered bonds 41n16
losses from 2007 crisis 50–51
and mortgage securitization 39n16
European Central Bank
and covered bonds 41n16
and financial crisis (2007– ) 18
and housing/housing rights 138
European Commission
‘Europe 2020 Strategy’ 116
implementation of EU Charter of 
Fundamental Rights (EUCFR) 
138–40
White Paper on Integration of EU 
Mortgage Credit Markets 57
European Committee of Social Rights 
(ECSR), see Council of Europe, 
European Committee of Social 
Rights (ECSR)
European Convention for the Protection of 
Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms (ECHR) 117, 125, 127, 
135, 138, 142, 240
European Convention on the Legal Status 
of Migrant Workers (1977) 142
European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) 
124, 125
European Court of Justice 139, 140
European Federation of National 
Organisations working with the 
Homeless (FEANTSA), see 
FEANTSA (European Federation 
of National Organisations working 
with the Homeless)
European Network of Housing Researchers 
(Legal Aspects of Housing, Land 
and Planning Group) 2
European Parliament
‘Home Loans’ report 57n90
homelessness strategy 116
Social Housing in the EU (2013) 18, 30
European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC), 
see Roma
European Social Charter (ESC/RESC), 
see Council of Europe, European 
Committee of Social Rights (ECSR)
European Union (EU)
Brundtland Commission (Our Common 
Future) report 205n179
consumer law and Spanish mortgage 
law 59
Draft Directive on Credit Agreements 
relating to Residential Property 
99n155
EU Charter of Fundamental Rights 
(EUCFR) 30, 117, 134–40
EU Sustainable Development Strategy 
(EU SDS) 204n174, 206–7
‘Europe 2020 Strategy’ 116
European mortgages 45n29, 46n32
freedom of residence 155
home-ownership 256
homelessness 18, 116, 118, 129
house prices 1, 1n5
housing and 2007 financial crisis 17–18
housing consumer protection laws 22
housing data and statistics 115n2
housing rights 115–17
housing tenure, types of 53
insolvency process 60–61
Markets in Financial Instruments 
Directive (MiFID, 2004) 56
member states 115n1
poverty 18, 116
rating agencies (European Regulation 
1060/2009) 44n24
renting sector 256
social housing 115–16, 126n49
Social Housing in the EU (2013) 18
sustainable development 205–7
Treaty of Amsterdam 205n179

Index
273
Treaty of Lisbon 30, 117, 139, 
205n179, 206
Treaty of Maastricht 135
Treaty of Rome 134
Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union (TFEU) 135, 137, 
138, 155
UCITS (Undertakings for Collective 
Investment in Transferable 
Securities) Directive (2009) 43
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts 
Directive (1993) 134
White Paper on Integration of EU 
Mortgage Credit Markets (2007) 
57
see also Council of Europe, European 
Committee of Social Rights (ECSR)
evictions
eviction of Dale Farm travellers (2011) 
244
eviction-related suicides 86, 101, 109
of squatters 232, 243–5, 249
see also dispossession 
Falk, R. 27
Fannie Mae 39, 40n7, 46
Faucette, J. 39n6
Faulkner, D. 252
FEANTSA (European Federation of 
National Organisations working 
with the Homeless) 2
FEANTSA v France 125–6, 127, 129, 
137
FIDH (International Federation of Human 
Rights) v Belgium 130, 131–2
finance capital 6–7
financial capitalism, need for 
democratization 26n106
financial crisis (2007–)
and housing finance 1, 8, 15–17, 53–4
impact on housing policies 17–19
mismanaged globalization 5
social democratic and liberal 
governments’ responses 27
US crisis
global losses from US crisis 50–51
US financial mortgage 
(securitization) crisis 37–41, 38
US legal regulatory weaknesses
lack of regulatory framework 
for MBSs 41–3, 42
lack of standardized public 
MBS 43–5
poor regulation of mortgage 
securitization market 
45–50, 71–2
recourse vs non-recourse states 
49–50, 50
‘financialization’ of housing 12, 31
see also housing finance; market-based 
housing systems
Finland, constitutional housing rights 157
Finneran, Michael 261
Finnerty, Joe 12
fiscalization of land use 192, 198
Fitch Ratings 44
Ford Foundation 185, 186
Foreign direct investment (FDI) 6
Foucault, Michel 227, 229, 245
Fox-O’Mahony, Lorna 229, 240
France
Action Logement 234n49
Autism-Europe v France 124–5
ERRC (European Roma Rights Centre) 
v France 120n20, 131–2, 133
FEANTSA v France 125–6, 127, 129, 
137
Foreign direct investment (FDI) 6
home-ownership rates 256
insider-outside theory and housing 
market 234, 241–2
insider-outside theory and labour 
market 233
law and intrusion into occupied homes 
235
marchands de sommeil (sleep sellers) 
235
moral status of property owner 230
shanty towns 246
see also squatting (England and 
France); squatting (France)
Freddie Mac 39, 40n7, 46

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
274
freedom of residence 155–6
French, Phillip 161
Friedman, Milton 23
Friedman, Thomas, The Lexus and the 
Olive Tree 5
Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring 
(FROB) 108n16
gated communities 14–15
gentrification 196–200, 203n168
Germany
banks’ losses from 2007 crisis 50–51
home-ownership rates 256
house prices 10
Pfandbriefe (covered bond) system 31, 
41, 51
Giddens, Anthony 3
Ginnie Mae 39
globalization
concept 2–4
globalized cities 13–14
and housing finance 8, 11–12
vs human rights legislation 27–9, 32–3
impact on homelessness 8
impact on housing 7–9, 28
and international lawyers 27
mismanaged globalization 5
overarching effects 4–5
positive effects 7
and rights-based approaches 19
transnational capital and superclass 5–7
see also capitalism; Cities in a 
Globalizing World (UNCHS); 
neoliberalism
Glover Blackwell, Angela 202n163
Gordley, James 237
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) 
39–40
Gray Areas Program 186
Greece
ERRC (European Roma Rights Centre) 
v Greece 120n20, 123, 131, 132
homelessness and constitutional 
housing rights 152
material deprivation 18
Green, Kate 230
Greenspan, Alan 35
Grootboom case 20n82, 23n96, 158n29, 
166, 175
Gross, Julian 202n158
Grut, Lisbet 170
GSEs (government-sponsored enterprises) 
39–40
Guatemala, constitutional housing rights 
150
Guerrand, Roger-Henri 230
Haiti, constitutional housing rights 157–8
Hall, Jon 233–4
Halpern, Robert 188n62, 188n63, 189n70, 
189n72, 194n110
Hammarberg, Thomas 117n9
Hanlon, Evelyn 218n244, 224–5
Hartman, C. 154
Harvey, David 4n12
Hayek, Frederich 22–3
Hearne, Rory 181n13, 182n16, 213
Held, A. 3
Higgins, Michael D. 35
Hills, J. 265
Hobsbawn, Eric 5
Hogan, G.W. 78
Hogan, Judge, Irish Life and Permanent 
PLC v Malcolm Duff and Susan 
Duff 95–6
holistic services 223
home, concept of 34, 35
home-ownership
European comparisons 256
intermediate tenures (Catalonia) 68–71, 
69, 72
Ireland 74, 251, 253–5, 256
and ladders and snakes metaphors 252
and neoliberalism 11, 25
shared-ownership model 68, 69, 70–71
Spain 51, 74, 102–3, 256
vs squatting 228, 230
temporal ownership 68, 69, 71
United States 38–9, 193, 195, 196
see also housing tenures; renting 
sector; social housing
homelessness
and constitutional housing rights 152, 
157

Index
275
and disability (Kenya) 171, 176, 177
European Union 18, 116, 118, 129
and gentrification 197
and globalization 8
Ireland 257
Spain 106, 107
see also FEANTSA (European 
Federation of National 
Organisations working with the 
Homeless); squatting (England and 
France)
Honduras, constitutional housing rights 
147
Hong Kong, house prices 1
Hoonakker, Philippe 244
HOPE (Housing Opportunities for People 
Everywhere) VI 195, 197–8
house prices
and explosion in mortgage lending 16
Ireland 1, 2, 10, 11, 73, 74–5
from mid-1980s 10–11, 10
post-2007 financial crisis 1–2, 17
Spain 1, 1n5, 2, 10, 11, 63, 67n116, 73, 
74–5
see also market-based housing systems
‘house-sitters’ 246
housing allowances/benefits 26, 119n16, 
126n49, 245, 260–65
see also social housing
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) 
programmes 188, 189, 195
housing finance
and 2007 financial crisis 1, 8, 15–17
and globalization 8, 11–12
vs housing rights 25
market-based housing systems 8–11, 
10
and neoliberalism 35
see also mortgages
housing rights
concept and nature of 19–22
concept of minimum core obligations 
22–4
and development of alternative housing 
systems 35
vs housing finance 25
and international organizations 29
legislation frameworks vs globalization 
27–9
and mainstream economics 25, 30–31, 
32–3, 34–5
vs neoliberalism 25, 32
and role of the state 25–7, 28–9, 30, 
31–2
see also constitutional housing rights; 
Council of Europe, European 
Committee of Social Rights 
(ECSR); dispossession; independent 
living and disability (Kenya); 
property rights; Spanish mortgage 
foreclosures and housing rights
Housing Rights Watch 2
housing tenures
different types (EU) 53
new forms (Catalonia) 67–71, 69, 72
see also home-ownership; Irish 
housing tenure trajectories; renting 
sector; social housing
Howard-Hassmann, R.E. 4
HUD (Housing and Urban Development) 
programmes 188, 189, 195
human rights 19–20, 24, 27–9, 32–3
European Convention for the 
Protection of Human Rights and 
Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) 
117, 125, 127, 135, 138, 142, 240
European Court of Human Rights 
(ECHR) 124, 125
International Federation of Human 
Rights (FIDH v Belgium) 130, 
131–2
International Human Rights Committee 
157
Kenya Human Rights Commission 
170, 171n61
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights (UDHR), Article 25(1) 
27–8, 141
see also housing rights
Hungary, Foreign direct investment (FDI) 
6n26
IAI (International Alliance of Inhabitants) 
243, 247

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
276
ICESCR (International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights) 22, 28, 33, 125, 141–2, 143
Ihéring, Rudolf von 237
ILP (Popular Legislative Initiative) 113
IMF (International Monetary Fund) 4, 18, 
29
independent living and disability (Kenya)
Article 19, UN Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(CRPD)
concept and key elements 24, 
159–61
defining independent living 163–5
developed vs developing countries 
162–3
historical and theoretical 
underpinnings 161
links with other articles 163
Kenya
Cash Transfer Programme for 
Persons with Severe Disabilites 
175
Constitution (2010) 165–6
legislation 166–7
number of persons with disabilities 
168–9
persons with disabilities and CRPD 
(Article 19) 168–72
persons with disabilities and right 
to housing 172–4
policy documents 167–8
recommendations on implementing 
CRPD (Article 19) 174–6
State of Disabled Peoples Rights in 
Kenya (Kenya, 2007). 169n54
summary and conclusion 176–7
Independent Living Movement 161
India, positive effects of globalization 7
Ingstad, Benedicte 170
inner-cities 2, 15
see also gentrification; redevelopment; 
regeneration; social housing
insider-outsider theory, and squatting 9, 
227–8, 232–6, 241, 245, 247–50
insolvency process, Spain and Europe 
58–60, 60–61, 62
International Alliance of Inhabitants (IAI) 
243, 247
International Consortium of Investigative 
Journalists 6
International Covenant on Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) 22, 
28, 33, 125, 141–2, 143
International Federation of Human Rights 
(FIDH), FIDH v Belgium 130, 
131–2
International Human Rights Committee, 
homelessness 157
international lawyers, and globalization 27
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 4, 18, 
29
internationalization, vs globalization 3n7
Iran, constitutional housing rights 149–50
Ireland
banking sovereign debt 17–18
Central Bank Act (1942) 78, 94
Central Bank Act (1989, s 117) 
94n123, 95
Central Bank’s regulatory competence 
94
Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears 
(CCMA, 2010) 94–6, 97, 98
Comhar (Sustainable Development 
Council) 207–10
Constitution Bunreacht na hEireann 
75–8
Consumer Credit Act (1995) 85–6
Consumer Protection Code (CPC, 
2012) 92–4, 98
Dublin Docklands regeneration 
205n176
EBS v Gillespie 85
Foreign direct investment (FDI) 6n26
home-ownership 74, 251, 253–5, 256
homelessness 257
house prices 1, 2, 10, 11, 73, 74–5
housing/mortgage crisis 12–13, 51, 
256–7
inner-cities 15
Irish Life and Permanent PLC v 
Malcolm Duff and Susan Duff 95–6
Land and Conveyancing Law Reform 
Act 2009 (LCLRA) 82–5, 98

Index
277
Legal Aid Board (LAB) 217, 221, 225
Limerick regeneration 182, 205n176, 
205n178, 210, 212n210
Local Agenda 21; 211
material deprivation 18
Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process 
257–8
Mortgage Interest Supplement (MIS) 
258–9
renting sector 74, 253–5, 260–65
repossessions 19, 73, 75, 84–5, 95–6, 
98, 251, 257–9, 265
social housing 212–14, 251, 253, 254, 
255–6, 260–65, 260
social inclusion 209
Start Mortgages v Gunn 84–5
Stepstone Mortgage Funding v Fitzell 
86n66, 95–6
unemployment 73
‘vulnerable consumer’ concept 22, 92, 
99
see also community economic 
development (CED) and public 
interest law; Irish housing tenure 
trajectories; Irish mortgage law
Irish housing tenure trajectories
home-ownership discourse 251
home-ownership rates (European 
comparisons) 256
housing tenure trajectories 253–4
housing tenure trends 254–6
ladders and snakes metaphors 252
mortgage crisis 256–7
repossessions, policy levers and safety 
nets 257–9, 265
social housing provision 260, 260, 
265–6
state rent allowance and private renting 
260–65
tenure trajectories for low-income 
households 259–65
see also community economic 
development (CED) and public 
interest law; Irish mortgage law
Irish Life and Permanent PLC v Malcolm 
Duff and Susan Duff 95–6
Irish mortgage law
legal framework and repossession rates 
73
mortgage law (common and statute 
law) 80–81
mortgage market profile 74–5
national constitution (Bunreacht na 
hEireann) 75–6
directive principles of social policy 
77–8
inviolability of the dwelling 77
private property 76–7
primary legislation
Consumer Credit Act (1995) 85–6
Land and Conveyancing Law 
Reform Act 2009 (LCLRA) 
82–5, 98
secondary legislation
Code of Conduct on Mortgage 
Arrears (CCMA, 2010) 94–6, 
97, 98
Consumer Protection Code (CPC, 
2012) 92–4, 98
summary and comparison with Spanish 
mortgage law 97–9
Istanbul, squatting 235, 246–7
Italy
ERRC (European Roma Rights Centre) 
v Italy 120n20, 127, 138
home-ownership rates 256
house prices 1
Japan, house prices 1, 10
Johnson, Lyndon B. 179, 181n11, 186, 189
Jordan, Mark 30
JP Morgan 48
Kamundia, Elizabeth 24
Kayess, Rosemary 161
Keating, W.D. 26, 27n108
Kendig, H. 252
Kenna, Padraic 30
Kennedy, John F. 186
Kenya
constitutional housing rights 145, 
158n29
homelessness and disability 171, 176, 
177

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
278
Kenya Slum Upgrading Project 174
poverty and disability 168–9, 173
see also independent living and 
disability (Kenya)
Kenya Human Rights Commission 170, 
171n61
Keskinler, A. 39n6
Khaliq, U. 122n35
King, Jeff 23
King, Martin Luther 190
King, P. 265
Korea, Democratic Republic of, 
constitutional housing rights 152
Kothari, Miloon 14–15, 28
Kyrgyzstan, constitutional housing rights 
156
ladders and snakes metaphors, and housing 
studies 252
Laffoy, Judge
EBS v Gillespie 85
Stepstone Mortgage Funding v Fitzell 
86n66, 95–6
Latvia, house prices 1n3, 1n5, 73n1
lawyers, and the globalization debate 27
Le Marchand, Arnaud 246
Leckie, S. 143
legal aid
Ireland
Ballymun 215, 216, 219, 221
community economic development 
(CED) lawyering 179, 182–4, 
205, 226
Legal Aid Board (LAB) 217, 221, 
225
Spain, mortgage foreclosures 107
United States, Legal Services 
Programme 187
legal capacity right 163, 176
Lexus and the Olive Tree, The (Thomas 
Friedman) 5
‘liar loans’ 16
liberal governments
and regulation of housing market 26–7
see also neoliberalism
liberal legalist approach 29
Limerick regeneration 182, 205n176, 
205n178, 210, 212n210
Lindbeck, Assar 9, 227, 232, 233, 241–2, 
245, 248
Local Agenda 21; 211
local empowerment 210, 225
see also participation
‘long lists’ system 56n85, 66n114
Los Angeles (California, US)
Boyle Heights 195
CBAs (community benefit agreements) 
200–201
Pico Aliso housing project 194
redevelopment areas 199, 213n221
Lucas, C. 39n6
Lux, Martin 234
Luxembourg, Foreign direct investment 
(FDI) 6n26
Lynch-Shally, Karen 12, 19
Malawi, positive effects of globalization 7
Malpezzi, Stephen 234
Malta, house prices 1n5
marchands de sommeil (sleep sellers) 235
Marcuse, P. 26, 27n108
market-based housing systems 8–11, 10
see also housing finance; mortgages
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 
(MiFID) 56
MARP (Mortgage Arrears Resolution 
Process) 257–8 
Marx, Karl 4
Marxism, capitalism and minimum core 
obligations concept 23
Massey, Douglas, S. 184, 191n94
MBSs (mortgage-backed securities) 38n2, 
39–45, 42, 48, 50, 51, 62, 72
MDAC (Mental Disability Advocacy 
Centre) v Bulgaria 130–31, 132
MERS (Mortgage Electronic Registration 
Systems) 46–8, 72
Mexico, constitutional housing rights 142
MiFID (Markets in Financial Instruments 
Directive) 56
minimum core obligations 22–4
MIS (Mortgage Interest Supplement) 
258–9
Mobilization for Youth Program 186
Model Cities Program 189–90
Moody’s 44

Index
279
Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process 
(MARP) 257–8 
mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) 38n2, 
39–45, 42, 48, 50, 51, 62, 72
Mortgage Bankers Association of America 
15, 46–7
Mortgage Interest Supplement (MIS) 
258–9 
Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems 
(MERS) 46–8, 72
mortgage law, see Irish mortgage law; 
Spanish mortgage law
mortgages
and 2007 financial crisis 15–17, 18–19, 
53–4
Danish and German systems 31
European mortgages 45n29, 46n32
and globalization 11–12
‘liar loans’ 16
Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process 
(Ireland) 257–8
mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) 
38n2, 39–45, 42, 48, 50, 51, 62, 72
mortgage bubble and rating agencies 
44
Mortgage Electronic Registration 
Systems (MERS) 46–8, 72
mortgage foreclosures (Spain) 53, 
62n101, 75n16, 88, 89, 101, 105–6
mortgage foreclosures (US) 47–8, 49
Mortgage Interest Supplement (MIS, 
Ireland) 258–9
mortgage market deregulation 8, 34–5
mortgage securitization 2, 16, 19, 25, 
37–41, 38, 42–3, 45–51
‘ninja’ mortgages 16
‘piggyback’ mortgages 16, 40
recourse/non-recourse mortgages 19, 
49–50, 50, 62n101, 62n102
reverse mortgages 57–8
state subsidies 14
subprime mortgages 17, 27, 35, 39n6, 
40, 44, 54–5, 67, 72
‘teaser’ mortgages 16
title vs lien theory 45
tying practices 56–8, 58
US mortgage types 19, 45–6
White Paper on the Integration of EU 
Mortgage Credit Markets (EC, 
2007) 57
see also housing finance; Irish 
mortgage law; over-indebtedness; 
Spanish mortgage crisis and 
legal reforms; Spanish mortgage 
foreclosures and housing rights; 
Spanish mortgage law
Multidisciplinary Practice (MDP) 223n270
Murphy, Frank 221–3
Murphy, Richard 6, 7
Nasarre-Aznar, Sergio 12, 18–19
National University of Ireland Galway, 
Centre for Housing Law, Rights 
and Policy, ‘Contemporary 
Housing Issues in a Changing 
Europe’ conference (2012) 2
Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating 
Organizations (NRSROs) 44
see also rating agencies
negative equity 34, 73n2
neoliberalism
concept 2n6
and globalization 3–4
and home-ownership 11, 25
and housing finance 35
vs housing rights 25, 32
and regulation of housing market  
26–7
see also capitalism; globalization; 
market-based housing systems
Nestor, Marie Antoineta 15
Netherlands
constitutional housing rights 154
DCI (Defence for Children 
International) v. The Netherlands 
123n39
home-ownership rates 256
house prices 1, 10
squatting 246, 247
New Urbanism 194n116, 198
‘ninja’ mortgages 16
non-recourse vs recourse mortgages 19, 
49–50, 50, 62n101, 62n102
Norris, Michelle 210, 212n214

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
280
North Korea, constitutional housing rights 
152
Northern Rock 7
Norwood, J. Michael 223n270
NRSROs (Nationally Recognized 
Statistical Rating Organizations) 44
see also rating agencies
Nussbaum, Martha 23
‘Occupy London’ movement 231
O’Connell, Cathal 12
OECD, on state intervention in housing 
systems 26
OECD countries, house prices 10, 10
offshore tax havens 6
Oren, Michelle 20, 30
O’Sullivan, Jan 262
over-indebtedness, Spain 104–5
Owen, Robert 184
PAH (Platform for People Affected by 
Mortgages) 105, 107, 113 
Paraguay, constitutional housing rights  
153
Paris, C. 252
participation
concept and forms of 133–4
concept of maximum feasible 
participation 188–9
see also local empowerment
Paterson, A. 223n270
Permanent Editorial Board for the Uniform 
Commercial Code, 2011 report 48
Pfandbriefe (covered bond) system 31, 
41, 51
see also covered bonds
Pico Aliso housing project (Los Angeles, 
US) 194
‘piggyback’ mortgages 16, 40
Platform for People Affected by Mortgages 
(PAH) 105, 107, 113 
Popular Legislative Initiative (ILP) 113
Portugal, home-ownership rates 256
poverty
and disability (Kenya) 168–9, 173
End of Poverty, The (Jeffrey Sachs) 7
European Union 18, 116
positive effects of globalization 7
poverty alleviation and sustainable 
development 204n173
United States 197, 199
PPPs (public-private partnerships) 181n13, 
182n16, 210, 211, 213
Priemus, Hugo 246
privacy rights, and constitutional housing 
rights 156
property ownership
vs squatting 230
see also home-ownership
property rights
and constitutional housing rights 147, 
153–5
and globalization 8
see also dispossession; housing rights
public housing, see social housing
public interest law
and social inclusion 205n177
see also community economic 
development (CED) and public 
interest law
public-private partnerships (PPPs) 181n13, 
182n16, 210, 211, 213
Quinn, Gerard 163, 172n66
‘race to the bottom’ 5, 135
Rajoy, Mariano 86n67
rating agencies 18–19, 38n2, 39, 43, 44–5
see also AAA ratings
Reagan, Ronald 181n9, 197n130
recourse vs non-recourse mortgages 19, 
49–50, 50, 62n101, 62n102
redevelopment
and community benefit agreements 
(CBAs) 200–203
and community economic development 
(CED) 191–6
see also community economic 
development (CED) and public 
interest law; gentrification; 
regeneration; social housing
Reeve, Kesia 231
refugees, repossession rights 154–5
regeneration
concept and approaches 203–4,  
210–12

Index
281
Dublin Docklands regeneration 
205n176
vs gentrification 203n168
Limerick regeneration 182, 205n176, 
205n178, 210, 212n210
see also Ballymun housing estate 
(Ireland); community economic 
development (CED) and public 
interest law; gentrification; 
redevelopment; social housing; 
sustainable development
renting sector
European comparisons 256
intermediate tenures 68
Ireland 74, 253–5, 260–65
need for regulation 26
Spain 52, 63, 74, 87, 102–3, 104–5, 
110–11
see also social housing
repossession rights (refugees and displaced 
persons) 154–5
repossessions
and 2007 financial crisis 18
Ireland 19, 73, 75, 84–5, 95–6, 98, 251, 
257–9, 265
and ladders and snakes metaphors 252
Spain 19, 73, 75, 86–7, 98
reverse mortgages 57–8
rights-based approaches 19
see also housing rights
Robinson, W.I. 5, 6
‘robo-signing’ 47–8
Rolnik, Raquel 31, 33, 113
Roma
ERRC (European Roma Rights Centre) 
and European Social Charter 
120n20, 122–3, 127, 129, 131–2, 
133, 138
housing suitability 128
see also travellers
Romania, house prices 1n5
Room, G. 252
Rothemund, M. 17n70
Rothkopf, David 6
Rueda, David 241, 248
Russell, S. 23
Sachar, Rajindar 143n13
Sachs, Jeffrey 4–5, 16
The End of Poverty 7
SAREB 111n23
Savigny, F.C. von 237
Schmid, Christoph, U. 64n108
second-chance policies 101, 106
Sejio, Fernández 112
Sen, Amartya 23
shared-ownership model 68, 69, 70–71
Shiller, R.J. 26n106
Simon, William H. 188n60, 190n87, 
191n89, 191n91, 192n95, 192n100, 
195n119
Singapore, house prices 1
Slovenia, house prices 1n5
slums
France 246
Kenya Slum Upgrading Project 174
and squatting 247
and urbanization growth 13
Smeets, Jos 234
Snower, Dennis 9, 227, 232, 233, 241–2, 
245, 248
social constructionism, and housing studies 
252
social democratic governments, and 
regulation of housing market 26–7
social exclusion
trajectories of social inclusion/
exclusion model 252
see also social inclusion
social housing
and 2007 financial crisis 18
European Union 18, 115–16, 126n49
and globalized cities 14
Ireland 212–14, 251, 253, 254, 255–6, 
260–65, 260
and ladders and snakes metaphors 252
and shared ownership (Catalonia) 68, 
70–71
Social Housing in the EU (2013) 18
Spain 52, 87, 103, 110–11, 113
and state intervention 26
United States 193–5, 197–8
see also affordable housing; Ballymun 
housing estate (Ireland); 
community economic development 
(CED) and public interest law; 

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
282
housing allowances/benefits; 
housing rights; housing tenures; 
Los Angeles (California, US); 
redevelopment; regeneration; 
renting sector
social inclusion
and community economic development 
(CED) lawyering 225–6
EU Charter of Fundamental Rights 
(EUCFR) 138
‘Europe 2020 Strategy’ 116
European Social Charter (ESC/RESC) 
133
and public interest law 205n177
and sustainable development 204n173, 
205, 207, 208–10
trajectories of social inclusion/
exclusion model 252
socialism 4, 5
soft law regulation, and human rights 29
Soler, Guillem 111
Soros, George 16, 17
South Africa
constitutional housing rights 151
freedom of residence vs apartheid 155
Grootboom case 20n82, 23n96, 158n29, 
166, 175
house prices 1, 11
housing rights 20
South Korea, constitutional housing rights 
142
Spain
banks
bad banking practices 54–6, 63–5
Banco de España, ‘Mortgage Loan 
Access Guide’ 97
Banco de España’s regulatory 
competence 91
Code of Good Banking Practice  
109
impact of 2007 crisis on 51, 53n67
insolvency process 58–60, 60–61, 
62
mortgages and tying practices 
56–8, 58
and property market 102–3, 110–11
recapitalization by state 113
Constitution 44, 75–6, 78–80
Corruption Perceptions Index 102n4
covered bonds 51n62
DESC Observatory 113
eviction-related suicides 86, 101, 109
Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring 
(FROB) 108n16
home-ownership 51, 74, 102–3, 256
homelessness 106, 107
house prices 1, 1n5, 2, 10, 11, 63, 
67n116, 73, 74–5
legal aid 107
material deprivation 18, 54
mortgage foreclosures 53, 62n101, 
75n16, 88, 89, 101, 105–6
notarial system 64, 66–7, 91, 97
Platform for People Affected by 
Mortgages (PAH) 105, 107, 113
Popular Legislative Initiative (ILP) 113
recourse mortgages 19, 62n101, 
62n102
renting sector 52, 63, 74, 87, 102–3, 
104–5, 110–11
repossessions 19, 73, 75, 86–7, 98
reverse mortgages 57
SAREB 111n23
social housing 52, 87, 103, 110–11, 113
subprime mortgages 54–5, 67, 105
unemployment 54, 73, 105
see also Spanish mortgage crisis and 
legal reforms; Spanish mortgage 
foreclosures and housing rights; 
Spanish mortgage law
Spanish mortgage crisis and legal reforms
housing/mortgage crisis (post-2007) 
19, 51–4
inadequate banking practices 54–6, 
63–5
insolvency process 58–60, 60–61, 62
insufficient regulation of mortgage 
securities 62
mortgages and tying practices 56–8, 58
reforms in Catalonia 65–71, 69, 72
suggested reforms 63–5
see also Spanish mortgage foreclosures 
and housing rights; Spanish 
mortgage law
Spanish mortgage foreclosures and housing 
rights

Index
283
construction boom and over-indebtedness 
103–5
foreclosure legislation
Civil Law Procedure Act (LEC) 
1/2000; 107
Insolvency Act 22/2003; 106, 108
housing crisis and mortgage 
foreclosures 105–6
housing policies and property market 
101–3
institutional responses to foreclosures 
problem 107–11
Code of Good Banking Practice 
109
Law 38/2011; 108–9
Moratorium of the Official Credit 
Institute (ICO) 108
Royal Decree-Law 6/2012; 109
Royal Decree Law 8/2011; 108
Royal Decree Law 27/2012; 109–10
judges’ responses 111–12
response of society and people affected 
112–13
see also Spanish mortgage crisis and 
legal reforms; Spanish mortgage 
law
Spanish mortgage law
legal framework and repossession rates 
73
mortgage law (civil law jurisdiction) 
81–2
mortgage market profile 74–5
national constitution (Constitución 
Española) 75–6
inviolability of the dwelling 79
principles governing economic and 
social policy 79–80
private property 78–9
primary legislation
Law 2/2009 (consumer protection) 
90–92
Royal Decree Law 6/2012; 87–8, 
98, 98n153
Royal Decree Law 8/2011; 89, 
98n152
Royal Decree Law 27/2012; 86–7, 
98n152
Sustainable Economy Law 2/2011, 
Article 29; 90
secondary legislation, Order 
EHA2899/2011; 64, 96–7
summary and comparison with Irish 
mortgage law 97–9
see also Spanish mortgage crisis and 
legal reforms; Spanish mortgage 
foreclosures and housing rights
Squatters’ Action for Secure Homes 
(SQUASH) 243, 245
squatting (England)
collective squatting 227, 228, 242–3
criminalization of squatters 247, 249
eviction law 232
eviction of Dale Farm travellers (2011) 
244
evictions, public costs of 245
‘house-sitters’ 246
law of adverse possession 228, 230, 
236–7, 239, 241, 247
law re. intrusion into occupied homes 
235
law re. residential squatting 228
moral status of property owner 230
‘Occupy London’ movement 231
squatter movements 231
Squatters’ Action for Secure Homes 
(SQUASH) 243, 245
squatters’ title 235, 236–7, 238,  
239–41
see also squatting (England and France); 
squatting (France)
squatting (England and France)
background 227–8
collective squatting 227, 229–30, 235
benefits of collective squats 242–3, 
249
collectivization and insider-outsider 
theory 241–2, 249
ethos of protest 9, 230–32, 243, 
245, 249
high public costs of eviction 
243–5, 249
England, law re. residential squatting 
227
individual squatting 228, 230

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
284
and squatters’ title 228, 230, 235, 
236–41, 249
insider-outsider theory
and squatting 232, 234–6, 247–50
and transaction costs 232–4
and market-based housing finance 8–9
other counties’ responses (Netherlands, 
Turkey and Brazil) 245–7
squatters as outsiders 229–30
subletting in squats 235
towards solutions 247–8
see also squatting (England); squatting 
(France)
squatting (France)
collective squatting 227, 228, 242, 244, 
246
criminalization of squatters 247, 248
Droit au Logement (DAL squatting 
movement) 231, 244
eviction of squatters 244
law of prescription acquisitive 228, 
237, 247
law of prescription extinctive 237
preuve diabolique (diabolical proof) 
237, 249
squatters’ title 235, 236–9, 240
see also squatting (England); squatting 
(England and France)
Standard & Poor’s 44
Start Mortgages v Gunn 84–5
state housing policies, and globalization 8
Stein, Michael 163
Stepstone Mortgage Funding v Fitzell 
86n66, 95–6
Stöcker, Otmar 59n99
‘strategic defaulter’ phenomenon 49
subprime mortgages
and recapitalization of banks 27
Spain 54–5, 67, 105
United States 17, 35, 37, 39–40, 44, 51, 
72, 105
superclass 6–7
sustainable development
at EU level 205–7
and local empowerment 210
at national level 207–9
and regeneration 204–5
and social housing 212–14
and social inclusion 204n173, 205, 
207, 208–10
and urban regeneration 211–12
Sweden, home-ownership rates 256
Switzerland
banks’ losses from 2007 crisis 50–51
constitutional housing rights 151
house prices 1, 10
‘synthetic’ securities 16–17
taxation
offshore tax havens 6
role in subsidizing housing 51n63, 52, 
196
‘teaser’ mortgages 16
tenure patterns, see housing tenures
Test-Achats ASBL v Belgium 139
toxic assets 39n6, 40, 110–11
transaction costs, and insider-outsider 
theory 232–4, 241
transgovernmentalism 27
transnational capital 5–7
transnational corporations 4
transport, impact on housing 195–6
travellers
Dale Farm travellers, eviction of 
(2011) 244
FIDH (International Federation of 
Human Rights) v Belgium 131–2
see also Roma
Treadwell Shine, Kasey 210
Trebilcock, Michael J. 204n173
‘tsunami of liquidity’ 12, 103
Turkey, squatting 235, 246–7
tying practices 56–8, 93
Ukraine, constitutional housing rights 152
UN, see United Nations (UN)
UN Committee on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (UNCESCR) 20, 
22, 29, 127, 133, 170n59, 172
UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, 
General Comment 7 (2006) 164
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities (CRPD), Article 
19
concept and key elements 24, 159–61
defining independent living 163–5

Index
285
developed vs developing countries 
162–3
historical and theoretical underpinnings 
161
links with other articles 163
situation in Kenya 168–72, 173–7
see also independent living and 
disability (Kenya)
UN-Habitat
State of the World’s Cities 2012/13 
Report 15
see also UNCHS (United Nations 
Centre for Human Settlements)
UN Special Rapporteur on Adequate 
Housing
1993 Report 25–6
1995 Report 143
2009 Report 31, 113
2012 Report 11, 25, 28, 31–2, 113
2013 Report 33
UN Standard Rules on the Equalization 
of Opportunities for Persons with 
Disabilities (1993) 164
UNCHS (United Nations Centre for 
Human Settlements)
Cities in a Globalizing World 9n42, 
13n56, 13n57, 14
see also UN-Habitat
unemployment
Ireland 73
Spain 54, 73, 105
United Kingdom (UK)
banks and toxic assets 39n6
banks’ losses from 2007 crisis 50–51
British Virgin Islands (tax haven) 6
EU Charter of Fundamental Rights 
(EUCFR) 135n88
Foreign direct investment (FDI) 6
home-ownership rates 256
house prices 1, 10, 11
mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) 51
shared-ownership model 68
UK Office for Disability Issues, 
independent living concept 163–4
see also squatting (England); squatting 
(England and France)
United Nations (UN)
housing rights 19–20
human rights 19, 24
International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights 
(ICESCR) 22, 28, 33, 125, 141–2, 
143
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR), Article 25(1) 27–8, 141
United States (US)
American Dream Downpayment 
Initiative 39n4
banking system, fragility of 41n15
Bevilacqua v Rodriguez 48n50
California Redevelopment Association 
199
Civil Rights Act (1964) 190
Community Action Programme (CAP) 
and Community Action Agencies 
(CAAs) 186–9
Community Development Block 
Grants (CDBGs) 192
constitutional housing rights 154
Dodd-Frank Act (2010), section 941; 
43, 44
Fair Housing Act (1968) 190
Federal Housing Administration (FHA) 
Loan Programme 193
financial crisis (2007–)
global losses from US crisis 50–51
US financial mortgage 
(securitization) crisis 15–17, 
37–41, 38
US legal regulatory weaknesses
lack of regulatory framework 
for MBSs 41–3, 42
lack of standardized public 
MBS 43–5
poor regulation of mortgage 
securitization market 
45–50, 71–2
recourse vs non-recourse states 
49–50, 50
Foreign direct investment (FDI) 6
Gray Areas Program 186
GSEs (government-sponsored 
enterprises) 39–40
home-ownership 38–9, 193, 195, 196

Contemporary Housing Issues in a Globalized World
286
HOPE (Housing Opportunities for 
People Everywhere) VI 195, 197–8
house prices 1, 11
Housing and Community Development 
Act (1974) 192
Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD) programmes 188, 189, 195
housing rights 20
Independent Living Movement 161
inner-cities 15
Legal Services Programme 187
Los Angeles (California, US)
Boyle Heights 195
CBAs (community benefit 
agreements) 200–201
Pico Aliso housing project 194
redevelopment areas 199,  
213n221
Mobilization for Youth Program 186
Model Cities Program 189–90
Mortgage Bankers Association of 
America 15, 46–7
Mortgage Electronic Registration 
Systems (MERS). 46–8, 72
mortgage foreclosures 47–8, 49
mortgage systems 19, 45–50
Nationally Recognized Statistical 
Rating Organizations (NRSROs) 
44
Permanent Editorial Board for the 
Uniform Commercial Code, 2011 
report 48
Pico Aliso housing project (Los Angeles) 
194
poverty 197, 199
recourse vs non-recourse states 49–50, 
50, 62n102
‘robo-signing’ 47–8
social housing 193–5, 197–8
squatting 245, 247
subprime mortgages 17, 35, 37, 39–40, 
44, 51, 72, 105
tax breaks for home-ownership 196
transportation and housing 195–6
urban renewal (1949) 193
US Bank National Association v 
Antonio Ibanez (2011) 48n50
US Securities Act 1933, s 436(g) 44
War on Poverty 179, 181n11, 185, 
186–7, 188, 189, 191
see also community economic 
development (CED) and public 
interest law
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR), Article 25(1) 27–8, 141
urbanization
City Prosperity Index 15
gated communities 14–15
globalized cities 13–14
‘urban archipelago’ 13
US Bank National Association v Antonio 
Ibanez (2011) 48n50
Valenzuela, C. 39n6
Valiño, Vanesa 12, 98n153
Venezuela, constitutional housing rights 
148–9
‘vulnerable consumer’ concept 22, 92, 99
Waele, H. de 136n90
War on Poverty (US) 179, 181n11, 185, 
186–7, 188, 189, 191
Washington, Booker T. 180n5, 184
Weiss, N. Eric 40n7
Wells Fargo & Company 48
Wheel of Urban Prosperity 15
White, Lawrence J. 44n22
Whyte, G.F. 78, 216n238
Williamson, Oliver E. 232, 235
Winston, Nessa 213
women, positive effects of globalization 7
World Bank 4, 8–9, 11, 29, 32, 33
World Economic Forum 4
World Trade Organization (WTO) 4, 29
Youngs, R. 153
Zilbershatz, Yaffa 20, 30
Zimbabwe, freedom of residence vs 
Operation Restore Order 155–6

