Brief books for people who make websites
 No.8
content strategy 
For Mobile
Karen McGrane
Foreword by Paul Ford
www.allitebooks.com

CONTENT STRATEGY
FOR MOBILE
Karen McGrane
www.allitebooks.com

Copyright © 2012 Karen McGrane
All rights reserved
Publisher: Jeffrey Zeldman 
Designer: Jason Santa Maria 
Editor: Mandy Brown 
Copyeditor: Krista Stevens 
Compositor: Rob Weychert
eBook Production Services: Nellie McKesson
ISBN 978-1-937557-0-89
A Book Apart 
New York, New York 
http://abookapart.com
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
www.allitebooks.com

TABLE OF CONTENTS
chapter 1
Your Content, Now Mobile
7
chapter 2
Content Before Platform
33
chapter 3
Adaptive Content
47
chapter 4
Strategy and Planning
83
chapter 5
Writing and Editing
95
chapter 6
Information Architecture
109
chapter 7
People and Process
137
Conclusion: It Can Be Done
148
Resources
156
References
158
Acknowledgements
Index
164
166
Introduction
1
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

FOREWORD
When people develop websites they talk about users. Users 
are weird creatures with strange intentions. They click every-
thing, even where they are not supposed to. They rarely fol-
low instructions. They are unpredictable. And yet we must 
love them. That is our job. Even when they are hard to love, 
even when they send us angry emails or tweet about how  
stupid we are.
When people talk about content they discuss readers. 
Readers are a known quantity. They start at the top of a  
page and go to the bottom, sentence by sentence. Sometimes 
they might skim, but often they’re fully engaged. They pause 
and think things through. They might even read the same  
section twice.
The reader is, of course, easy to love. Because the reader is us.
“It is better to have 100 functions operate on one data struc-
ture,” wrote computer scientist Alan J. Perlis, thirty years ago, 
“than ten functions on ten data structures.” He meant: focus 
on your data, then code around it. Applications are there to 
serve the data, not the other way around. 
It’s a simple lesson but hard to follow. Mobile websites 
and custom apps have proliferated at a furious rate. They are 
costly and complex and have special data needs; ministering 
to those needs can take away from your ability to create great 
content. Worse, there are ever-more platforms. There’s iOS 
and Android and Kindle Fires and the web; email and SMS 
and Facebook, Twitter, or Pinterest. Every platform tells you 
that it’s the best, that it is worthy of your time and attention. 
But there’s always another platform.
Let’s put it another way: it is better to have 100 platforms 
operate on one content model than to have ten platforms on 
ten content models.
There’s a huge lesson in this book: that users have been read-
ers all along. The rise of mobile platforms just makes this fact 
plain. Reader-users read differently than their forebears—they 
www.allitebooks.com

read Twitter to find links to long articles that will interest 
them; they switch between phone calls and the Kindle app. 
And yes, they watch video, play games, and listen to music. 
But language still knits it all together, and words have more 
work to do than they ever did before.
“The reader’s freedom,” writes the essayist William Gass, 
“is a holy thing.” As content strategists we are responsible for 
preserving that freedom. It’s a significant responsibility. Trust 
in the content, in the words, images, and experiences. Let 
content lead—the rest will follow.
—Paul Ford
www.allitebooks.com

 	
Introduction	 1	
INTRODUCTION
There’s no such thing as content strategy for mobile.
Wait! Don’t throw the book away yet!
There is such a thing as a content strategy that plans for 
how you’ll publish and maintain your content across all these 
new and emerging platforms: smartphones and tablets, sure, 
but also smart TVs, refrigerators, in-car audio systems—even 
the desktop web. But “holistic enterprise content strategy” just 
doesn’t have the same ring to it, right? Mobile’s the buzzword 
on everyone’s lips right now, so that’s the label we’ve slapped 
on this problem.
When we talk about content strategy for mobile, we’re 
not talking about publishing different content to be read on 
smartphones. That wouldn’t be much of a strategy—who can 
afford to create content for only one platform? If content strat-
egy means developing a plan for how you will create, deliver, 
maintain, and govern your content, then content strategy for 
mobile looks at the special challenges in getting your content 
onto a variety of devices, screen sizes, and platforms—includ-
ing mobile web, native apps for iOS, Android and Windows, 
and, yup, even the desktop.
When we talk about content strategy for mobile, we’re also 
not talking about delivering content to serve the “mobile con-
text.” “Mobile” seemingly implies motion, mobility. We imag-
ine a hurried businesswoman, dashing through the airport, 
glancing at the screen out of the corner of one eye. But like 
the “dial” tone, the “return” key, and “cut and paste,” the word 
“mobile” has expanded to mean something different from its 
analogue in the physical world. Anyone who’s ever pecked at 
his mobile phone from the couch, too lazy to walk over to his 
desktop computer just a few feet away, knows exactly what 
we’re talking about. Anyone who’s ever waited for hours in 
that same airport, passing the time transfixed by a tiny glow-
ing screen, knows the same thing. “Mobile” doesn’t necessar-
ily mean you’re on the move.
www.allitebooks.com

	
2 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
If mobile doesn’t imply a specific device or a specific con-
text, then what does it mean? The only thing it really tells us 
is that the user isn’t seated at a computer, with all that tells  
us about the interaction model. With a desktop machine, we 
can assume the user has a monitor, and we can know with 
almost total certainty that the monitor has a resolution of 
1024×768 pixels or higher. We can assume the user has a point-
er, controlled by an external pointing device like a mouse or a 
trackpad. We can probably assume that the user has a broad-
band connection.
When we say someone is on mobile, all we know is they’re 
using a device that is…not a desktop. We know very little 
about what they see and how they interact. They might have 
a tiny 240×320 BlackBerry Bold screen, or a glorious iPad 
2048×1536 Retina display, large enough to rival even a desktop 
monitor. Their pointing device might be as direct as touching 
the screen with their fat, greasy fingers, or as abstract as navi-
gating with a four-way rocker. They might have a connection 
that’s no better than a 56K modem, or a connection that’s  
as zippy as a full-fledged workstation with a dedicated T3  
connection. All we know is that we can’t really count  
on anything.
Daunting, right? How are we supposed to make good de-
sign decisions if we don’t know the boundaries of what the 
user will see? How do we structure information, if we don’t 
know how the user will navigate and make selections? Most 
important, how do we know what content someone’s going to 
want, when we don’t know anything about their context?
It seems that many businesses are choosing to answer 
these questions by hiding their heads in the sand. “No one 
will ever want to do that on mobile,” they insist. “Only a frac-
tion of our visits today come from mobile devices,” they sigh. 
“Users need only location-based services on mobile,” they say, 
stubbornly.
If there’s one thing we should have learned from the web, 
it’s that user behavior evolves more quickly than businesses 
realize. User expectations evolve and move forward, and only 
later do organizations hurry to catch up. If you’re wondering 
www.allitebooks.com

 	
Introduction	 3	
if you’re going to need to invest in getting your content on 
mobile, quit hoping you won’t have to. Your customers are 
already there.
What you’ll get from this book
This book discusses why and how to get your content onto 
many different devices, platforms, screen sizes, and resolu-
tions. Content includes your text, images, videos, charts, and 
any other forms of information your reader might want  
from you.
While the smartphone isn’t the sole focus of this book, 
many of the examples will focus on smartphones because they 
are both the most common device and most challenging form 
factor. Getting content onto mobile phones is top of mind for 
many organizations.
If you’re stuck on whether and why to be on mobile, this 
book can help you make the case. You’ll get data and statistics 
about how people use their phones today, including insight 
into emerging audiences like the “mobile-mostly” user. You’ll 
also get analysis and rationale about why it’s important to get 
all your content onto mobile—not just a subset that you de-
cided was appropriate for the “mobile context.”
If you want to know how to get your content (especially 
desktop web content) ready for multi-channel publishing 
(especially onto mobile devices) this book will help you get 
there. You’ll learn about adaptive content and how this ap-
proach to structured content will help you publish flexibly to 
multiple channels. By creating presentation-independent con-
tent that includes meaningful metadata, you’ll set yourself up 
for a future where your content can go anywhere.
You’ll learn how to evaluate whether your current desk-
top content will work on mobile—and how to edit it down 
to provide a better reading experience for both desktop and 
mobile users. A content inventory and content audit will help 
you evaluate whether you should revise, delete, or keep your 
content as-is.  You’ll also figure out if you need to create new 
content by conducting a gap analysis.
www.allitebooks.com

	
4 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Want to know how to structure your content so users can 
easily read and navigate it on a mobile device? You’ve come to 
the right place. While navigation models and screen layouts 
might differ for mobile, you can develop an underlying infor-
mation architecture that will give you the flexibility you need.
You’ll also learn how your internal processes need to 
change—your editorial workflow, content management tools, 
and organizational structure—to support great content on  
mobile. Managing people and process gets more complex 
when you’re dealing with multi-channel publishing, and this 
book will help you make sure you can maintain your content 
over time.
What you won’t get from this book
There are many topics, even some closely related to the 
themes discussed in this book, that I simply can’t cover in one 
slender volume. Fortunately these topics have been discussed 
at length by other people:
• This book is geared toward organizations with dozens, 
hundreds, thousands, even millions of pages of content on 
a desktop website, most likely published out of a content 
management system, that now need to be published to new 
devices and platforms. If you build transactional applica-
tions—like web apps that enable people to manage their 
finances or personal health, or social applications focused 
on user-generated content—this book is not going to dis-
cuss how to adapt your application interface and interac-
tion design for mobile. 
• This book will not tell you whether you should develop 
a mobile website or a native application. There are good 
reasons for each approach, and others have covered this 
debate at length. This book will help you get your content 
into shape so that you can publish it to the mobile web, 
native apps, and anywhere and everywhere else you might 
want it to go. As a result, I’ll often discuss mobile web and 

 	
Introduction	 5	
mobile apps interchangeably. I know they’re not the same 
from a development and interaction perspective, but from 
a content perspective, your goal should be to make it pos-
sible to publish to any or all of them.
• This book will not recommend whether you should use re-
sponsive web design or develop separate templates to cover 
different form factors. Again, there are lots of reasons, pro 
and con, for choosing one approach over another, and the 
decision depends on your unique situation. Because your 
content management infrastructure does influence which 
approach you choose, I’ll touch briefly on this topic in this 
book. However, no preference should be taken for one ap-
proach over the other. Only you can decide what works for 
your content and your organization.
• I’m also not going to tell you which content management 
system is the “best” one. There are many, many factors that 
go into a decision of that magnitude. There’s no best CMS, 
only the CMS that’s best for you. If you’re considering im-
plementing a new CMS to help you manage multi-channel 
publishing more easily, I will offer some general guidance 
about what to consider—but I won’t recommend a particu-
lar platform.
Let’s kick this off by looking at why you need to get your 
content on mobile.


 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 7	
YOUR CONTENT, 
NOW MOBILE1
When we talk about how to create products and services 
for mobile, the conversation tends to focus on design and de-
velopment challenges. How does our design aesthetic change 
when we’re dealing with a smaller (or higher-resolution) 
screen? How do we employ (and teach) new gestural interac-
tions that take advantage of touchscreen capabilities? How 
(and who) will write the code for all these different plat-
forms—and how will we maintain all of them?
Great questions, every one. But focusing just on the design 
and development questions leaves out one important subject: 
how are we going to get our content to render appropriately 
on mobile devices? 
The good news is that the answer to this question will help 
you, regardless of operating system, device capabilities, or 
screen resolution. If you take the time to figure out the right 
way to get your content out there, you’ll have the freedom 
(and the flexibility) to get it everywhere. You can go back to 
thinking about the right design and development approaches 

	
8 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
for each platform, because you’ll already have a reusable base 
of content to work from.
The bad news is that this isn’t a superficial problem. 
Solving it isn’t something you can do in isolation, by sandbox-
ing off a subset of your content in a stripped-down mobile 
website or app. The solution requires you to look closely at 
your content management system, your editorial workflow, 
even your organizational structure. You may need different 
tools, different processes, different ways of communicating.
Don’t despair. There’s even better news at the end of this 
rainbow. By taking the time now to examine your content and 
structure it for maximum flexibility and reuse, you’ll be (bet-
ter) prepared the next time a new gadget rolls around. You’ll 
have cleared out all the dead wood, by pruning outdated, 
badly written, and irrelevant content, which means all your 
users will have a better experience. You’ll have revised and 
updated your processes and tools for managing and maintain-
ing content, which means all the content you create in every 
channel—print, desktop, mobile, TV, social—will be more 
closely governed.
Sounds great, right? Well, to get there, you first need to ad-
mit you have a problem.
DO WE REALLY NEED TO GET OUR CONTENT  
ON MOBILE?
Do you have a website? Then you need to get your content 
onto mobile devices. Period.
Advertisers
Let’s say your company advertises on television. Or maybe 
outdoors. Ads are expensive! Maybe you put a URL at the end 
of the TV spot, maybe you don’t. Maybe you put a QR code 
on your billboard, maybe you don’t. (Please don’t.) Either 
way, if you’re not considering what happens when your po-
tential customer picks up her phone after seeing your adver-
tisement, you’re wasting money. 

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 9	
Eighty-six percent of smartphone owners say they use 
their phone while watching television, and forty-one percent 
say they do it every day. The numbers are even higher for 
tablet owners (http://bkaprt.com/csm/1). Think all those dual-
screen users are just tapping away on Facebook? Think again: 
seventy-one percent of smartphone users say they’ve searched 
for more information on their mobile device after seeing an 
advertisement on TV, in print, or online (http://bkaprt.com/
csm/2). 
What do you think will happen after someone sees your 
TV spot? She’ll remember to look you up tomorrow, when 
she’s back at her desk? She’ll be satisfied to squint at your 
desktop website through her tiny little viewport? She’ll really 
enjoy the error message that says Flash is required to view 
your website (fig 1.1)? 
Or do you want her to find engaging information about 
your products and services that will help her decide or make 
her feel more positive about your brand? A lot of rhetoric 
about “marketing to the mobile context” can be summed up 
simply: don’t waste money on advertising if you don’t have a 
mobile website to back it up.
Fig 1.1: Apparently none of Pepsi’s $1.7 
billion marketing budget was spent on 
content for their mobile website.

	
10 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Retailers
Retailers need to support three distinct mobile contexts.
First, they need to support customers who use their smart-
phones to “pre-shop” stores, compare prices, and look up 
product features and customer reviews before deciding to 
transact. Sixty-six percent of smartphone owners say they 
use their phones in just this way to become smarter shoppers 
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/3).
Second, retailers also need to support a truly mobile 
use case. During the 2011 holiday season, one-third of all 
American adult cell phone users say they used their mobile 
phone to look up information while physically in a traditional 
retail store—either product reviews or pricing information. 
How many sales are retailers gaining or losing because of 
information customers find on their phone—potentially infor-
mation from a competitor? It’s clear that mobile phones influ-
ence purchase behavior: when people used their phones  
to look up pricing information while in-store, thirty-seven 
percent decided not to buy the product at all and nineteen 
percent left the store and went online to buy the product 
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/4).
Finally, retailers need to support ecommerce shoppers who 
choose to transact on their phone instead of on the desktop or 
in-store. Those shoppers have high expectations: eighty-five 
percent expect the mobile experience to be equal to or better 
than the desktop web, and eighty percent expect the experi-
ence to be at least as good, if not better, than shopping in the 
store. Unfortunately, the real world doesn’t live up to their  
expectations: eighty-four percent of people who have trans-
acted on mobile report experiencing a problem, including  
error messages, wonky navigation, or insufficient, incorrect, 
or confusing information (http://bkaprt.com/csm/5). 
Part of the problem is that only thirty-seven percent of 
retailers have a website that’s compatible with mobile brows-
ers, and only twenty-six percent of those mobile websites 
rendered properly in all six major mobile browsers. Apps 
don’t offer much salvation either—only twenty-six percent of 

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 11	
retailers offer any flavor of downloadable app (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/6).
Shoppers deserve better than the superficial, unhelpful mo-
bile sites even major retailers provide. Mobile sites that don’t 
provide information, don’t enable transactions, and don’t in-
fluence purchase decisions really aren’t very strategic (fig 1.2).
Publishers
I have a print subscription to The New Yorker, which I read 
exclusively on airplanes during the twenty minutes around 
takeoff and landing, when electronic devices are prohibited. 
Recently, I was flipping through the magazine and came 
across a long article I looked forward to reading. “I’ve already 
saved this to Instapaper,” I thought. “I’ll save it until I can read 
it on my phone later.”
Rich Ziade, CEO of read-it-later app Readability, shared  
insights from their analytics data in an email that show  
many people seem to enjoy—not just tolerate—reading on 
their phones:
Fig 1.2: If what you want is a mobile-
optimized country selector that will 
just dump you on the desktop site, 
IKEA has that in stock.

	
12 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
People read on their phones…a lot. A device doesn’t need to be 
the size of a book for people to want to engage it. In fact, the 
iPad is proving less than ideal for reading. The screens on our 
phones have moved beyond the BlackBerry. They’re bigger  
and sharper and fit in your pocket. We read on our phone.  
Who knew?
Readability’s data shows that users are even more engaged 
in reading on their mobile devices than on the desktop—and, 
surprisingly, on the iPad. In March and April 2012, the aver-
age time readers spent on the mobilized article view was even 
longer than the time people spent reading on both the desktop 
and on tablets.
Publishers, therefore, have one of the most demanding 
challenges in getting their content onto mobile devices. Users 
insist on consuming content on the device most convenient 
for them. A content strategy that limits access to a particular 
channel or device will simply alienate readers and send them 
to a competitor. Given the economics of the publishing indus-
try, publishers need a content strategy that supports efficient 
and cost-effective multi-channel publishing most of all.
Financial services
More than any other industry, mobile websites for financial 
services seem to focus on supporting quick tasks for the on-
the-go user. Many mobile websites for banks and investment 
firms offer transactional access only for current customers. 
And, of course, an ATM finder (fig 1.3).
But users want more than just transactional capabilities and 
location-based services. They want information. Fifteen per-
cent of searches for finance and insurance content come from 
mobile devices (http://bkaprt.com/csm/7; PDF). They’re not all 
looking for the closest ATM.
Desktop websites for financial services firms, on the other 
hand, offer a mix of informational content and task-focused 
functionality. Visiting the desktop website, users can find 
product marketing, information about professional services, 
financial research and data, and tools to help make financial 

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 13	
decisions—all of this in addition to the transactional function-
ality available to customers behind a login. 
Even if most users who visit a website for their bank or 
investment firm go directly to the login, that’s not a reason to 
ignore all the other reasons that users might visit. Information 
about the firm’s products and services is just as important—
optimizing for the main use case doesn’t mean ignoring every-
thing else.
Healthcare
Health organizations especially seek to deliver content via 
mobile devices. Personal, private, and always with us, mobile 
phones seem perfectly suited to deliver intimate information 
about our health and well-being.
It should come as no surprise that health information was 
the top-growing content category on mobile in 2011, with 
18.5 million American mobile users accessing health-related 
content and information, an increase of 134 percent over the 
previous year (http://bkaprt.com/csm/8).
Fig 1.3: Bank of America prioritizes 
transactional functionality aimed at 
current customers, perhaps because it 
assumes you won’t want to become a 
new customer.
www.allitebooks.com

	
14 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Mobile phones are also a useful healthcare tool because 
they’re so ubiquitous across age groups, income levels, and 
ethnic groups. They’re especially powerful at reaching under-
served populations, according to Pew Research (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/9):
If your organization’s information is not available on a small 
screen, it’s not available at all to people who rely on their mobile 
phones for access. That’s likely to be young people, people with 
lower household incomes, and recent immigrants—arguably 
important target audiences for public health messages.
Fig 1.4: Tsk, tsk, Marlboro, making users pinch and zoom through a desktop site to find 
resources for quitting smoking.

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 15	
Whether you have a public mission aimed at improving 
health and wellness, or are a private company that needs 
to communicate with your audience about their medical 
and healthcare choices, getting content onto mobile devices 
isn’t something you can ignore. You have a responsibility to 
make that content available on mobile devices. For example, 
Marlboro (fig 1.4) is legally obligated to provide information 
about the health consequences of cigarettes and smoking  
cessation resources. But by forcing users to go to the desktop 
site to find it, they imply those messages just aren’t as impor-
tant as the marketing information available on their mobile-
optimized website.
Universities
Universities have rightly invested in building mobile web-
sites and apps for their students. Of course they have—you 
wouldn’t believe how attached young adults are to their 
phones! (And even if you’re not a university—if you’re trying 
to reach teens and young adults, you’d better think about how 
to reach them on their mobile device.)
As of February 2012, sixty-two percent of Americans aged 
eighteen to twenty-four own a smartphone. When this age 
group buys a new phone, they’re disproportionately choosing 
to buy smartphones: eighty percent of those who bought a 
new phone in the previous three months chose to get a smart-
phone (http://bkaprt.com/csm/10). What’s more, forty-two per-
cent of smartphone owners aged eighteen to twenty-nine say 
they mostly go online using their phone—they rarely use the 
desktop web (http://bkaprt.com/csm/11).
Universities have invested in building mobile websites and 
apps aimed at current students. Campus maps, building phone 
numbers, and parking information are available in a mobile-
optimized version at most universities.
Here’s the problem: it’s not just current students who might 
want information about the university on their phones. 
It’s also prospective students. As of March 2012, thirty-one 
percent of teens aged fourteen to seventeen have a smart-
phone. That number is higher for older teens, aged sixteen to 

	
16 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
seventeen. Teens whose parents have a college education 
are also slightly more likely than other teens to have a 
smartphone. 
As you might imagine, teenagers use their phones to go 
online. Over the course of a month, ninety-two percent of 
teen smartphone owners say they’ve used their phone to go 
online. Guess what that replaces? Yup, desktop computer use. 
Teen smartphone owners say they’re less likely to have used 
a desktop computer than their peers who don’t have a smart-
phone (http://bkaprt.com/csm/12).
While library hours, campus shuttle schedules, and dining 
hall menus are readily available, admissions and academics 
information is notably missing (fig 1.5). What about all the 
prospective students who will never see the campus tour or 
application deadlines because they’re glued to their phones?
Restaurants
“Mobile users want to see our menu, hours, and delivery number. 
Desktop users definitely want this 1MB png of someone smiling  
at a salad.”
—Mat Marquis (http://bkaprt.com/csm/13)
Fig 1.5: The mobile website for 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
provides many resources and tools to 
help students and visitors navigate the 
campus. But what about prospective 
students?

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 17	
Restaurant websites are justifiably mocked for being terrible. 
Flash intros. Menus only available as PDFs. Navigation that 
dances around the screen, just out of reach. Auto-playing au-
dio files. They’re like a guided tour through web design worst 
practices. But what’s teeth-gnashingly irritating on the desk-
top becomes positively impossible on mobile (fig 1.6).
Farhad Manjoo of Slate, in a hard-hitting exposé, tried to 
uncover the reasons why restaurateurs design websites that 
are an assault on good taste and seemingly hostile to user 
Fig 1.6: Now you can have the 
experience of not being able to get in 
to Per Se right on your phone! One of 
the finest restaurants in the world has 
one of the worst mobile websites.

	
18 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
intentions. Along the way, he learned that mobile may just 
be the catalyst hungry diners need to prompt restaurants to 
design better websites: “I spoke to a few restaurateurs who’ve 
created great, easy to use, elegant sites, and they all said they 
were motivated by one thing: they were missing out on traf-
fic from mobile devices,” (http://bkaprt.com/csm/14). Small 
wonder: about thirty percent of searches for restaurants come 
from mobile, more than for any other industry (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/7).
MOBILE IS NOT THE “LITE” VERSION
“It looks like you're on a train. Would you like me to show you the 
insultingly simplified mobile site?”
—Cennydd Bowles (http://bkaprt.com/csm/15)
If people want to do something on the internet, they will 
want to do it using their mobile device. Period.
The boundaries between “desktop tasks” and “mobile 
tasks” are fluid, driven as much by the device’s convenience as 
they are by the ease of the task. Have you ever tried to quickly 
look up a bit of information from your tablet, simply because 
you’re too lazy to walk over to your computer? Typed in a 
lengthy email on your BlackBerry while sitting at your desk, 
temporarily forgetting your keyboard exists? Discovered that 
the process to book a ticket from your mobile was easier than 
using the desktop (looking at you, Amtrak!) because all the 
extra clutter was stripped away?
Have you noticed that the device you choose for a given 
activity does not necessarily imply your context of use? 
People use every device in every location, in every con-
text. They use mobile handsets in restaurants and on the sofa. 
They use tablets with a focused determination in meetings 
and in a lazy Sunday morning haze in bed. They use laptops 
with fat pipes of employer-provided connectivity and with a 
thin trickle of data siphoned through expensive hotel Wi-Fi. 
They use desktop workstations on the beach—okay, they  
really only use traditional desktop machines at desks. You’ve 
got me on that one.

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 19	
Knowing the type of device the user is holding doesn’t tell 
you anything about the user’s intent. Knowing someone’s 
location doesn’t tell you anything about her goals. You can’t 
make assumptions about what the user wants to do simply 
because she has a smaller screen. In fact, all you really know 
is: she has a smaller screen.
The immobile context
Users have always accessed our content from a variety of 
screen sizes and resolutions. Data reported by SecureCube 
shows that in January 2000, the majority of users visited from 
a browser with an 800×600 resolution, but a significant mi-
nority (twenty-nine percent) accessed the site at 1024×768 or 
higher, with a smaller percentage (eleven percent) viewing 
the site at 640×480 (http://bkaprt.com/csm/16; fig 1.7). At that 
time, decisions about how best to present content were seen 
as design challenges, and developers sought to provide a good 
reading experience for users at all resolutions, discussing ap-
propriate ways to adjust column widths and screen layouts as 
content reflowed from smaller to larger screens.
Screen Resolution, 
January 2000
■  Higher (4%)
■  1024×768 (25%)
■  800×600 (56%)
■  640×480 (11%)
■  Other (4%)
Fig 1.7: We have plenty of experience delivering content to a variety of screen resolutions. 
Why do we assume that mobile screens necessarily indicate a different context?

	
20 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
What you didn’t hear designers talking about was the 
“640×480 context” and how it differed from the “1024×768 
context.” No one tried to intuit which tasks would be more 
important to users browsing at 800×600, so less important 
options could be hidden from them. No one assumed that 
people’s mindset, tasks, and goals would be different, simply 
because they had a different-sized monitor.
Why do we assume that mobile is any different?
THE MOBILE-ONLY USER
“Mobile was the final front in the access revolution. It has erased 
the digital divide. A mobile device is the internet for many people.”
—Susannah Fox, Pew Research Center (http://bkaprt.com/csm/9)
The statistics about how mobile computing has changed hu-
man behavior often emphasize the developing world. Seventy-
five percent of the population of India—approaching a billion 
people—has a mobile phone (http://bkaprt.com/csm/17). China 
now has more mobile internet users than there are people 
in the United States (http://bkaprt.com/csm/18). Of the ten 
million people in Egypt who access the mobile web, seventy 
percent of them are mobile only—they never use the desktop 
internet (http://bkaprt.com/csm/19). For billions of people in 
the developing world, mobile phones are the only way they 
will ever connect to the internet.
For many of us, those numbers seem positive and exciting, 
but remote. We might not be trying to connect with custom-
ers outside our own country, and we perhaps aren’t looking 
to reach people in the developing world. We may never have 
a need to communicate with our audience using SMS, because 
everyone we want to reach has access to the web, email, and 
chat. We assume that a “mobile-only” user is as foreign to us 
as a villager in Africa, in India, in China. 
We’re wrong.
In developed nations, a large and growing minority of  
users are mobile only. As of June 2012, thirty-one percent of 

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 21	
Americans who access the internet from a mobile device say 
that’s the way they always or mostly go online—they rarely 
or never use a desktop or laptop computer (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/20). Those numbers are growing: the Pew Research 
Center reported in an earlier study from July 2011 that twenty-
eight percent of smartphone users go online mostly using 
their phone (http://bkaprt.com/csm/11). While some of those 
users may also have access to a computer at home or at work, 
one-third of those “mobile mostly” users have no access to a 
broadband connection at home (http://bkaprt.com/csm/21).
And for those who would argue that mobile mostly users 
can still access your website via desktop, let’s be clear about 
who gets to make that choice: they decide how and when they 
want to access your content, not you.
As of April 2012, thirty-five percent of Americans currently 
have no internet access at home. Sixty percent of Americans 
who make less than $30,000 per year don’t have a broadband 
connection at home. About half of African American and 
Hispanic households don’t have broadband access to the inter-
net at home. And eighty-eight percent of Americans without a 
high school diploma don’t have a broadband internet connec-
tion (http://bkaprt.com/csm/22).
But as of early 2012, eighty-eight percent of American 
adults do have a mobile phone (http://bkaprt.com/csm/23). As 
of July 2012, 54.9 percent of mobile users own a smartphone—
and two-thirds of people who acquired a new phone in the 
previous three months chose to get a smartphone (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/24).
As more and more people acquire smartphones, many  
people who don’t currently have access to the internet will 
suddenly have it in the palm of their hands. A growing num-
ber of people who cannot afford to pay for both mobile phone 
and broadband internet access pick one device—the phone.
An April 2012 Pew Internet Project report on “Digital 
Differences” explains how mobile is changing the makeup  
of who has internet access (http://bkaprt.com/csm/22):

	
22 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Groups that have traditionally been on the other side of 
the digital divide in basic internet access are using wireless 
connections to go online. Among smartphone owners, young 
adults, minorities, those with no college experience, and  
those with lower household income levels are more likely than 
other groups to say that their phone is their main source of 
internet access.
By 2015, more Americans will access the internet through 
mobile devices than through desktop computers, according to 
a prediction by International Data Corporation (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/25). Some of these people may still have access to 
the desktop web, but for reasons of context, ease, or laziness, 
will choose their mobile first. For others, they will have no 
other way to view your content. For this growing population, 
if your content doesn’t exist on the mobile screen, it doesn’t 
exist at all.
The latest personal computing revolution
Before the personal computer put an IBM clone on every 
desk, computer usage was available only to mainframe users, 
who gained access to precious computing time via terminals, 
restricted to using the computer for only a few brief minutes 
or hours each week. Though personal computers lacked the 
processing power of a mainframe, what users gained in flex-
ibility, speed, and the ability to directly interact with the ma-
chine made up for the deficiencies in the PC. People adopted 
this new computing technology and didn’t look back.
For users with no home access to a desktop computer, it’s 
not hard to imagine them as similar to the mainframe users 
of the past, signing up by the hour for a sliver of computer 
access at an internet café, a school computer lab, or a library. 
And like the PC before it, the smartphone will leapfrog these 
users past reserved-by-the-hour connectivity and onto an 
internet where they’re in control. Will the limitations of the 
smartphone deter them, sending them back to the internet 
café when they have an important task? Not likely, or only in 
the most limited of circumstances. For an increasingly large 

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 23	
segment of the population, the mobile computer will be their 
only computer. And like the mainframe users of yore, they 
won’t mourn the desktop. Instead, they’ll define an entirely 
new way to interact with the device.
No heads in the sand
“There is no reason for any individual to have a computer in  
his home.”
—Ken Olsen, CEO of Digital Equipment Corporation  
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/26)
“There is no reason that anyone will need to do that on mobile.”
—Your company, probably
Ken Olsen was the cofounder and CEO of Digital Equipment 
Corporation (DEC), the second-largest computer company 
in the US during the late 1980s, makers of the very successful 
PDP and VAX lines of minicomputers. DEC’s downfall (the 
company was sold to Compaq in 1998) is partially blamed 
on Olsen’s failure to respond quickly enough to the rising 
demand for personal computers. DEC struggled in the early 
1990s to adapt its business away from its historically profitable 
line of minicomputers and toward a new line of microcom-
puters for personal use. 
Right now, someone in your company is doing the same 
thing. Someone in your business is telling himself that mobile 
is a blip, a grace note, a mere satellite to the larger desktop 
website. A team of people are all agreeing that offering a full 
set of content on mobile is a “nice-to-have,” something to 
think about only after investing in yet another redesign of the 
“real” website.
They’re wrong.
Delivering content on mobile isn’t an afterthought. It’s a 
necessity. It isn’t a luxury. It’s a requirement. Do people want 
to look it up? They’ll want to look it up on mobile. Do people 
need to search for it? They’ll want to search for it on mobile. 
www.allitebooks.com

	
24 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Do people want to read it, deeply and fully? They’ll expect 
to read it on mobile. Do they need to fill it out, document it, 
and enter it into the system? They’ll need to do it on mobile. 
Think of any piece of information people may want to access 
on the internet. They will need to access it on a device that 
isn’t a desktop website.
This goes double for any organization that needs to reach 
people outside mainstream desktop users. Are you a govern-
ment institution? You have a civic responsibility to deliver 
your content to all your citizens, which means providing it 
to them on mobile. Are you an equal-opportunity employer? 
You’re really not—unless you’re delivering your content 
where African American and Hispanic users can find it. To 
reach all of these groups, you can’t assume that they’ll take the 
extra step to go find your desktop website. You need to bring 
it to where they are. Which is mobile.
MOBILE TASKS, MOBILE CONTENT
I recently departed Austin, Texas, traveling with three friends. 
Since we arrived at the airport a bit early, I wanted to lounge 
in the comfort of the United Club, away from the teeming 
masses. I felt it would be rude to abandon my friends to a sim-
ilar fate outside, and so I wanted to know how many guests I 
could bring with me to the club.
A simple Google search should clear up this problem. Sure 
enough, I quickly found a link that seemed promising (fig 1.8).
Alas, following the link to United Club Membership just 
took me to the homepage for mobile.united.com. When users 
search from a mobile device, United automatically redirects 
links from Google to its mobile website—without checking to 
see if the content is available on mobile. If the content doesn’t 
exist on mobile, the user gets unceremoniously dumped on 
the homepage of the mobile website. Mobile redirects that 
break search—how is that ever a good user experience? 
Sure, there’s a link to the full desktop site, but that too 
just dumped me on the desktop homepage. I could try to 
use United’s internal site search, but I’d wind up pinching 

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 25	
and zooming my way through several search result screens 
formatted for the desktop. And honestly: why should I have 
to? An answer that should take me one tap from the Google 
search results should not require searching and tapping 
through several pages on both the mobile and the desktop sites.
I went and asked the representative at the desk. (Correct 
answer: two guests.)
I don’t bring this up just because I want to shame United 
for wantonly redirecting links to a mobile URL when the 
content isn’t available on its mobile website. (That’s a terrible 
thing to do, but it comes after a long list of other bad things 
I’d like to shame United Airlines for doing.) No, I use this 
example to illustrate a common misconception about mobile 
devices: that they should deliver only task-based functionality, 
rather than information-seeking content.
Fig 1.8: Searching for “United Club Membership” shows that the content exists on the 
desktop site. But because the mobile website redirects the URL, users wind up on the 
homepage of the mobile site.

	
26 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Information seeking is a task
Luke Wroblewski, in his book Mobile First, tells us that 
Southwest Airlines is doing the right thing by focusing only 
on travel tasks (fig 1.9):
The mobile experience…has a laser-like focus on what customers 
need and what Southwest does: book travel, check in, check 
flight status, check miles, and get alerts. No room for anything 
else. Only what matters most.
Mobile experts and airline app designers don’t get to decide 
what “actually matters.” What matters is what matters to the 
user. And that’s just as likely to be finding a piece of informa-
tion as it is to be completing a task.
Eighty-six percent of smartphone owners have used  
their phone in the previous month to look up information—
whether to solve a problem, settle an argument, get up-to-the 
minute information such as traffic or sports scores, or to 
Fig 1.9: The Southwest Airlines iPhone 
application only has room for what 
actually matters…if what matters 
doesn’t involve looking up information.

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 27	
decide whether to visit a business like a restaurant (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/27). Don’t believe me? Look at your own 
search history on your mobile device—you’ve probably tried 
to answer all sorts of questions by looking up information on 
your phone.
The Southwest Airlines desktop website includes infor-
mation about their baggage policies, including policies for 
checked bags, carry-ons, and pets, as well as lost and found, 
delayed baggage, and a variety of other traveler information, 
such as what to do if you lose your ticket, need to rebook, or 
your flight is overbooked. It even includes information for 
parents looking to book travel for unaccompanied minors, and 
how Southwest accommodates disabled flyers and the elderly. 
The mobile experience does not. Who are we to say that 
this content doesn’t actually matter?
It’s fine to optimize the mobile experience for the most 
common tasks. But that doesn’t mean that you should exclude 
valuable content.
Mobile is social
Have you ever clicked on a link from Facebook or Twitter on 
your phone? How about a link someone sent you in an email?
Of course you have. Sharing content with our friends 
and colleagues is one of the bedrock ways we communicate 
these days. Users don’t distinguish between accessing email, 
Facebook, Twitter, or other social services on the desktop or 
on mobile—they choose them fluidly, depending on which 
device they’re closest to at the time. In fact, as of June 2012, 
nearly twenty percent of Facebook members use it exclusively 
on mobile (http://bkaprt.com/csm/28).
If your content isn’t available on mobile—or provides a bad 
reading experience—you’re missing out on one of the most 
compelling ways to get people to read it. Is your site littered 
with icons trying to get people to share your content? If your 
readers just get an error message when they tap on shared 
content, all the effort you put into encouraging social sharing 
is wasted (fig 1.10).

	
28 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
DESIGNING FOR CONTEXT
“Context” is the buzzword everyone throws around when 
talking about mobile. At the South by Southwest Interactive 
conference in 2011, the panel called “Designing for Context” 
was the number one must-see session, according to .net  
magazine (http://bkaprt.com/csm/29). 
The dream is that you can tailor your content for the user’s 
context—location, time of day, social environment, personal 
preferences. Based on what you know about the user, you can 
dynamically personalize the experience so it adapts to meet 
her needs.
Today, we use “designing for the mobile context” as an ex-
cuse to make mobile an inferior experience. Businesses want 
to invest the least possible time and effort into mobile until 
they can demonstrate return on investment. Designers believe 
they can guess what subset of information or functionality 
users want. Everyone argues that they’re designing for the 
“mobile use case.”
Fig 1.10: “No mobile content found. 
Would you like to visit the desktop 
version of the site?” asks The Guardian. 
Can you guess the answer?

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 29	
Beware of personalized interfaces
Presuming that the “designer knows best” when choosing 
how to deliver personalized content or functionality is risky. 
We’re notoriously bad about predicting what someone will 
want. Even armed with real data, we’re likely to make incor-
rect assumptions when we decide to show some things and 
hide others.
Microsoft Office tried this strategy in the late 1990s.  
Office 97 offered many new features and enhancements, 
which made the user interface more complex. Long menus 
and dense toolbars gave the impression that the interface  
was “bloated” (http://bkaprt.com/csm/30). Sound like any  
desktop websites you know?
In response, Microsoft developed “personalized menus” 
and “rafted toolbars” which showed the most popular  
items first (fig 1.11). Although Microsoft had good data and 
a powerful algorithm to help determine which items should 
be presented first, it turned out that users didn’t like being 
Fig 1.11: Personalized menus in Office 97 attempted to prioritize only the options 
Microsoft thought users wanted. They were a failure.

	
30 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
second-guessed. People found it more frustrating to go 
through a two-stage process, hunting through multiple menus 
to find what they were looking for. Personalized menus vio-
lated one of the core principles of usable design: put the user 
in control.
Now imagine that instead of clicking a chevron at the bot-
tom of the menu to expand it, the user has to click a link to 
“full desktop website” and then hunt around in the navigation 
while squinting at a tiny screen. If your website’s mobile ver-
sion only offers a subset of your content, you’re giving your 
users the same frustrating experience. Only much worse.
You don’t have good data
Microsoft had a ton of data about which options people used 
most frequently. They developed a complex algorithm to pres-
ent the default “short” menu based on the items people were 
most likely to want, based on years of history and research 
with multiple iterations of their product. And they still made 
mistakes.
The choices you make about which subset of content you 
want to deliver probably aren’t backed up by good data. They 
might not be backed up by any research at all, just a gut feel-
ing about which options you imagine will be most important 
to the mythical on-the-go user. 
Even if you do have analytics data about which content 
people are looking for on mobile, it’s not likely you’re get-
ting an accurate picture of what people really want. Today’s 
crippled mobile experiences are inadequate testing grounds 
for evaluating what people wish they could do on mo-
bile. As Jason Grigsby, Cofounder of CloudFour.com and 
MobilePortland.com, says: “We cannot predict future behav-
ior from a current experience that sucks” (http://bkaprt.com/
csm/31).
Context is the future!
Designing for context doesn’t necessarily mean delivering 
less. In the future, it will mean prioritizing information  

 	
Your Content, Now Mobile	 31	
differently, anticipating what the user wants based on  
known data about the environment or in response to the 
user’s explicit request. 
We’re not there yet. To get there, we need to know a lot 
more about how people use their mobile devices. Contextual 
research, usability studies, analytics data, and participatory 
design are all tools that we can use to determine how best to 
design for context.
But none of that research will be meaningful if we don’t 
have a full set of content to work from. If we want objective 
and accurate data about how people engage with mobile de-
vices, we first need to get all of our content on mobile. Only 
then will we be able to get real facts and glean meaningful 
insights about what people want, when they want it, and how 
they want it presented. Until then, we’re just guessing.
If your vision for mobile is designing for context, then  
the first step you need to take is getting all your content onto 
mobile devices. 
ALL OF IT? REALLY?
Really. Your content strategy for mobile should not be to de-
velop a satellite to your desktop site, showing only the subset 
of content you’ve decided a mobile user will need. That’s not 
going to work because:
• People move fluidly between devices, often choosing a 
mobile device even when they have access to a desktop 
computer. Don’t assume you can design for “the on-the-go 
user” because people use their mobile devices anywhere 
and everywhere.
• Mobile-only users want and need to look at your content 
too! Don’t treat them like second-class citizens just because 
they never or rarely use the desktop. Even if you think of 
them as “mobile-mostly” users, remember that you don’t 
get to decide which device they use to access your content. 
They do.
• Mobile supports reading content just as well as it supports 
functional tasks. Don’t pat yourself on the back just be-

	
32 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
cause you’ve mobile-ized some key features—there’s more 
work to do with your content.
• Context is a cop out. Don’t use context as a rationale to 
withhold content unless you have real research and data 
about what users need in a given situation or environment. 
Unless you have that, you’re going to guess wrong. (And 
even if you do have that—given the crappy experiences 
most users get on mobile today, you’ll still probably  
guess wrong.)
You should aim for content parity between your desktop 
and your mobile experiences—maybe not exactly the same 
content presented exactly the same way, but essentially the 
same experience. Never force users to go to the desktop web-
site for content they’re seeking on a mobile device.
Freaking out? Convinced it’s impossible to achieve content 
parity across all your devices? There is a way.

 	
Content Before Platform	 33	
2
CONTENT BEFORE 
PLATFORM
Any conversation about mobile seems to focus on these 
debates:
• Should we design a mobile website or a native app?
• Should we build separate apps for iOS and Android? What 
about building apps on other platforms, like Windows?
• Should we plan a responsively designed website that will 
adapt across desktop, tablet, and phones?
• Should we create a separate mobile website, with its own 
set of custom-designed templates?
From a design and development perspective, the answer  
to these questions is: it depends. There are good arguments  
in favor of each of these options. Speed, gestures, polish,  
discoverability, search, sharing, accessibility—all these and 
more come into play. There are plenty of pundits out there 
willing to argue with you late into the night about which ap-
proach is best.
www.allitebooks.com

	
34 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
But there’s no point in debating the merits of the container 
if you don’t know what you want to put in it. Or if you don’t 
have a funnel.
The real problem for most companies isn’t which format 
they choose to get their content on mobile. It’s getting their 
content on mobile at all.
The answer to these questions—at least as far as your con-
tent is concerned—is: yes. Chances are, you will need to get 
your content onto the mobile web (responsive or no) and into 
native apps designed for iPhones, iPads, Android phones and 
tablets, Windows, and BlackBerry. 
Like with the web before it, we’ve focused on talking about 
design and development before figuring out the content. 
We’re so caught up in the excitement around gestures and 
geolocation, HTML5, and responsive design, that we’ve lost 
sight of mobile’s real challenge. Which, like the web before it, 
is content strategy: figuring out how we’re going to create,  
manage, and maintain our content across all these platforms 
and devices.
Our first-order problem is to develop processes and infra-
structure to get your content into a format that your user can 
view on whichever platform they choose. What will your 
workflow be for managing content across platforms? Can you 
live up to the demands of regular multi-channel publishing, 
keeping everything in sync? Whether you want a mobile web-
site, a native app, or both, designing and developing for that 
platform will be easier if you have a content strategy in place.
A SEPARATE MOBILE WEBSITE
Recently, usability pioneer Jakob Nielsen argued that you 
should “Build a separate mobile-optimized site (or mobile site) 
if you can afford it,” where you cut features and content “that 
are not core to the mobile use case,” (http://bkaprt.com/csm/32).
Mobile designers and developers responded swiftly to 
argue that creating a separate mobile website is a bad idea 
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/33). According to Josh Clark, author 
of Tapworthy: Designing Great iPhone Apps, suggesting that a 

 	
Content Before Platform	 35	
separate mobile website is an appropriate strategy perpetuates 
“several stubborn mobile myths that have led too many to cre-
ate ‘lite’ mobile experiences that patronize users, undermine 
business goals, and soak up design and tech resources” (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/34).
Noz Urbina, Senior Consultant and Business Development 
Manager for Mekon Ltd., told me that the idea of a separate 
mobile website rests on a false expectation about how you 
will manage and maintain your content:
The solution being a mobile site implies two falsehoods: that 
“mobile” is just one platform and needs only one site to solve 
it, and that maintaining separate sites per platform is going to 
be a sustainable strategy. Your content is a constantly evolving 
body of assets that must be maintained, and the same users will 
be accessing your content in various ways. Sites like Facebook, 
eBay, Amazon, Evernote, and myriad more are setting a market 
expectation that no matter the mode of interaction, content 
should be consistent, relevant, and up-to-date—regardless of 
how it’s accessed.
From a content strategy perspective, the risk of developing 
a separate mobile website is that you’ll wind up maintaining 
duplicate content in multiple places. News flash: this will be a 
disaster. Separate processes. Out-of-sync updates. Wasted effort.
The reason a separate mobile website is dangerous is that, 
in general, you want to avoid creating multiple versions of 
your website. It’s called forking, and it’s a forking nightmare 
from a maintenance perspective. If you fork your website 
into separate mobile and desktop versions, then you’re stuck 
updating both every time there’s a change. Avoiding this prob-
lem is tricky, even with sophisticated content management sys-
tems. But before we get there, let’s start with a simple scenario.
Manage content like it’s 1999
Imagine you have a static website that you created back in 
the late 90s. There’s no CMS, so all the content is hard-coded 

	
36 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
into your HTML. (If you can’t imagine any organization still 
living in these dark ages, take note that fifty-seven percent of 
domains under development by American federal agencies are 
not being built with a CMS: http://bkaprt.com/csm/35; PDF.)
You decide that you want to join the twenty-first century 
by creating a mobile website. Good for you! Except for the 
nightmare part, which is that you’ll essentially create a totally 
separate website, and now you must update both versions 
every time there’s a change. You must code two completely 
different sets of pages: unique templates for both desktop and 
mobile. And even if—especially if—you want to publish ex-
actly the same content to both places, you must maintain two 
separate versions of the content too. Double your workload, 
double your fun?
Cut features! Cut content!
Great! You might think creating distinct content is actually 
an advantage. A separate mobile website will still be aces if 
you don’t want to publish exactly the same information. Cut 
features, cut content, and re-prioritize your messages. You’ll 
publish a mobile website that only shows a subset of content, 
targeted specifically at the mobile user’s needs.
Let’s set aside for a moment the argument about whether 
or not that’s the right user experience. (It’s not.)
From a maintenance perspective, you’re still forking your 
content. Want to add a new page? Edit a description? Fix a 
typo? You’ll be doing it twice.
But that’s why I have a CMS
The whole point of having a content management system is to 
help streamline the publishing workflow, right? So of course, 
you just assume that your current CMS will make it easy to 
publish content to different channels and platforms.
Jakob Nielsen makes this assumption when asked about the 
dangers of forking your content (http://bkaprt.com/csm/36):

 	
Content Before Platform	 37	
I would assume that most industrial-scale sites would be 
generated from a single back-end product database and content 
management system, with the different designs represented  
by templates and rules about what information goes into  
what version.
Unfortunately, today, many CMSs don’t easily support 
this type of multi-channel publishing without considerable 
investment in custom development. Ask your CMS to display 
similar-but-not-the-same content in different templates ac-
cording to a set of business rules, and it’ll start spewing out 
yards of dot-matrix printer paper, beeping that it “does not 
compute.” True multi-channel publishing isn’t built into low-
cost or even mid-range CMSs—usually only larger enterprise 
CMSs designed to support publishing to both print and web 
can handle it.
You have a Web CMS
Many CMSs are designed to publish to one and only one plat-
form: the desktop web. In a Web CMS, content authoring and 
management functions are “coupled” with content publishing 
and display functions. (If you have a large-scale enterprise 
CMS, it’s likely “decoupled” and this point may not apply  
to you.)
Most websites simply don't have a content management 
backend that will support populating different design tem-
plates with different content. Content assets (like text fields, 
images, and supporting media) are usually locked to a specific 
output format or design. That wasn’t a problem until now, be-
cause no one expected the CMS to have to support publishing 
to different channels—the desktop web was all there was.
The fact that the CMS works this way is no mere imple-
mentation detail. Unfortunately, it’s fundamental to the way 
content is published on the web today. We’ve got to fix this  
if we’re going to deliver optimized experiences on desktop 
and mobile.

	
38 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Multi-theme management
Now, some CMSs do, in fact, support publishing content to 
multiple templates. Publishing the same content to different 
“themes” allows a WordPress blog or a Drupal site to have 
separate templates for desktop and mobile content display. 
Note that says “separate templates”—not separate content. 
These CMSs still like to publish the same content on both 
sites. (Specifically, they’re happy when publishing the same 
blob of “body” or “node” content one-to-one across desktop 
and mobile. Other content elements, like sidebars or user 
comments, are often stored in a different location and may be 
stripped out.)
What these CMSs don’t do (at least not without putting sig-
nificant effort into it) is support publishing different content 
to different templates according to a set of business rules. So if 
you plan to deliver less content to your mobile user, chances 
are your CMS isn’t going to make that easy on you. You’re still 
going to have to maintain two versions of that content, and 
update them separately whenever there’s a change.
In other words, you’re forked.
Responsive design to the rescue?
Responsive design is often held up as a solution that saves you 
from having to maintain multiple separate codebases for your 
front-end code. Put the effort in to developing one set of code 
that will adapt to different screen sizes and progressively en-
hance for different device capabilities, and you’ll save time in 
the long run. You’ll also get out of the arms race of having to 
support dozens of different devices and form factors.
Responsive design is also an approach that saves you from 
forking your content. If you have a coupled CMS that can only 
handle publishing to one set of templates, then you can trick 
your CMS into publishing to different devices by handling the 
conversion to mobile or tablet sizes on the front-end.
But responsive design is just one tactic that may help solve 
this problem. The decision on whether to develop a respon-
sive site or to maintain different templates for desktop, phone, 

 	
Content Before Platform	 39	
and everything in-between is a pragmatic choice based on 
how you want to allocate time and resources for develop-
ment and maintenance. There are good reasons for both 
approaches—often rooted in the specifics of how your CMS 
functions—and what works for one organization may not 
work for another.
Whether you choose to employ a responsive design or opt 
to develop separate templates for different screen sizes, there 
is still an underlying issue that needs to be solved. Let’s not 
lose sight of the fundamental issue, which is how to evolve 
our content management tools and processes to effectively 
support multi-channel publishing.
DON’T GET FORKED IN THE APP
The CEO of BigCo got an iPad on the day it came out. (He’s 
got friends in Cupertino.) He loves his new toy. He loves it so 
much, in fact, that he wants to give iPads to his entire sales-
force. He imagines the tablet will be a great sales tool—more 
intimate than a presentation given in a dark conference room 
by the light of the projector and less awkward than having 
prospective clients huddle around a laptop. Also? Way cooler.
He gives his team a mandate: he wants the salesforce outfit-
ted with iPads that they’ll use to demo products by the end of 
the year. He’s not alone in this ambition. Seventy-eight per-
cent of enterprises surveyed by Model Metrics say they plan 
to deploy tablets by the end of 2013, and forty-seven percent 
of them say they want to use tablets as tools for their sales-
force (http://bkaprt.com/csm/37; PDF).
The digital team started brainstorming how their native 
iPad app should look and work. Excited about the possibili-
ties, they imagined interactive graphics showing schematic 
product diagrams, video demos, even product spec sheets that 
can be customized on the fly. And, of course, all the slick mo-
tion transitions and gestural behaviors that come along with a 
native iOS app. 
Exciting, right? “Hold on there, guys,” the lone content 
strategist said, “I have a few questions.” Questions like:

	
40 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
• Are we going to repurpose the product information from 
the desktop website for this app, or do we need to create all 
new content?
• What about the videos and interactive graphics? Those 
don’t exist today—are we going to create all of them? 
Creating new videos and graphics will be expensive, so 
shouldn’t we have a plan to put them up on the desktop 
website too?
• Is all this content going to live in our current CMS? What 
will be the process to publish content from the CMS to the 
iPad app? If we’re creating different content for the desk-
top website and the iPad, will the CMS make it possible to 
manage that content as one integrated package?
• What if the CMS won’t play nicely with the iPad app? Will 
we need to migrate a chunk of the content to live in the app?
• If we’re maintaining two completely separate versions of 
our product content, what will happen when we update the 
product information, or when we launch a new product? 
How will we keep the website and the iPad app in sync?
• Are you going to double my salary now that I’m doing 
twice the work?
These examples aren’t mere hypotheticals. Great ideas for 
mobile experiences—carried out by successful companies 
with the resources and budget to develop them—can fail if 
they haven’t figured out the workflow needed to support and 
maintain them.
DON’T DOUBLE YOUR WORKLOAD
Imagine you visited the Gap’s website on your laptop com-
puter one day this spring. You might have been enticed to 
buy a spring raincoat, or maybe even try this season’s hottest 
trend, neon denim trousers. (Or maybe not.) Had you visited 
the mobile website on the very same day, you would have felt 
a chill in the air from all the winter clothes on that homepage 
(fig 2.1).
Looking at the disparity between these two sites, you 
might wonder if Colin, the junior marketing guy in charge of 

 	
Content Before Platform	 41	
Fig 2.1: Spring has sprung on the Gap’s 
desktop website. Too bad someone 
forgot to tell those poor shivering kids 
over on the mobile site.

	
42 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
updating the mobile website, got fired over this boneheaded 
mistake. Looking at this problem across an entire industry, 
however, you realize the solution isn’t blaming the low man 
on the totem pole.
The Gap’s problem isn’t Colin. The Gap’s problem is that 
they have two completely separate processes for maintaining 
each homepage—maybe even two distinct systems, operated 
by two different people. Instead of updating the new home-
page graphic in one place and having it automatically publish 
to everywhere it needs to go, they forked their content.
Even though they have processes that encourage this kind 
of inconsistency, the Gap still wants to communicate the same 
messages to the same customers. (It’s not like they realized 
that all their mobile users live in the frozen tundra, right?) 
American Eagle pulls this off by not forking their content. 
They maintain one set of content—they use the same homep-
age image everywhere, even though it might be cropped and 
laid out differently for different screen sizes (fig 2.2). This 
means they can communicate one consistent message across 
the desktop, mobile web, and mobile app. Their process and 
workflow is simplified, because they only have to update the 
content in one place. (Or maybe their version of Colin is just 
way more on the ball.)
More work in your workflow
Since 2010, magazine publisher Condé Nast has invested 
heavily in building custom iPad editions for some of its most 
popular titles, including Glamour, GQ, Wired, and Vanity 
Fair. Existing art and production staffers have doubled—no, 
tripled—their workload, first laying out the print edition, then 
repurposing its design and content for two different iPad lay-
outs: portrait and landscape (http://bkaprt.com/csm/38).
These iPad editions are not so much a digital magazine as a 
giant PDF of the print edition. As such they lack many of the 
benefits you might expect from a truly digital property:

 	
Content Before Platform	 43	
Fig 2.2: American Eagle pulls off a hat trick: consistent content and messaging across 
desktop web, mobile web, and iOS app.
www.allitebooks.com

	
44 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
They’re heavy
Digital magazines regularly weigh in at 150 MB or more, tak-
ing twenty minutes to download on a broadband connection. 
You could drive to the store and buy the print magazine in less 
time (http://bkaprt.com/csm/39).
They’re unsociable
Want to send one of your friends a link to an article? Copy 
and paste some of the text to quote on your blog? Heck, do 
you want to search the text? These basic digital functions are 
made cumbersome—or impossible—by the fact that what 
you’re looking at is a giant picture of the print magazine.
They’re gimmicky
The print editorial teams behind most iPad editions don’t 
want to seem like they’ve missed the interactive revolution. 
The content gets dressed up with unnecessary animations and 
glitzy transitions that don’t necessarily add value for the iPad 
reader. This problem is magnified because the effort that goes 
into creating these effects doesn’t benefit anyone else—they’re 
tablet only.
They’re not earning their keep
We could overlook this if digital magazines were delivering 
real value to readers and the business. They’re not. Let’s take 
Condé Nast’s Glamour magazine as an example. Glamour is 
known in the industry for being Condé’s most lucrative title. 
In the U.S. they sell more than two million annual print sub-
scriptions. glamour.com has an online monthly readership of 
about 1.2 million unique visitors. Yet in November 2010, they 
sold 2,775 copies of the iPad edition. Can you imagine being 
the beleaguered Glamour magazine staffer who has to stay up 
nights and work weekends after the print magazine has gone 
to bed, laying out two different versions of an iPad edition that 
sells fewer than 3,000 copies?

 	
Content Before Platform	 45	
The core problem here isn’t that sales are weak, or that 
iPad editions don’t live up to what we expect in digital. The 
problem is that Condé Nast has created much more work for 
themselves, and they aren’t seeing a return on that invest-
ment. Scott Dadich, Condé Nast’s Content Innovation VP—
and the architect of their iPad strategy—acknowledged that 
the problem is their workflow: “Bringing it all together into a 
cohesive workflow has been a real challenge for us. It’s been 
tough—there’s a lot more work” (http://bkaprt.com/csm/40).
NO FORKING WAY
The acrimony and the debates around mobile web vs. native 
apps, or responsive design vs. separate templates are missing 
the point. The challenge for most organizations in the long 
run won’t be figuring out a development approach for cross-
platform code—because these techniques will evolve and 
standardize. 
The challenge will be supporting a multi-channel editorial 
workflow, particularly if they want to prioritize content differ-
ently across platforms.
Any arguments about whether to deliver less content or dif-
ferent content to the mobile users need to consider the effort 
required to manage and maintain that content. If you’re going 
around suggesting that you want to provide a different experi-
ence for mobile users, or you want to cut content from the 
mobile website, be aware that this approach may doom you to 
content maintenance and governance headaches. Paying atten-
tion to this is the very essence of content strategy.
The root of the problem is in our internal processes, work-
flow, and tools. To avoid the problem of content forking we 
need a new approach to publishing content to multiple de-
vices. We need adaptive content.
THE FUTURE IS ADAPTIVE CONTENT
Let’s say we all agree on a glorious future, in which desk-
top and mobile users all get access to complete (or at least, 
equivalent) content, appropriately structured, designed, and 

	
46 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
formatted for their device. Whether we want to deliver ex-
actly the same content to everyone, or prioritize and feature 
content differently on different platforms, we have a process 
that helps us do that without wasted effort.
That future is adaptive content. Adaptive content is content 
that is flexible, so it can adapt to different screen sizes, and 
can be presented in different formats as appropriate for the 
device. What’s the secret to this flexibility? Why, it’s having 
more structure! Adaptive content has structure and metadata 
attached to it, which helps it figure out what to do when it 
winds up on all those different platforms and devices.
Adaptive content is composed of these five elements:
• Content that gets created with the goal of making it reus-
able, rather than by someone who imagines that it will 
“live” on a particular platform.
• Structured content that can be combined in different ways 
for different platforms.
• Presentation-independent content that hasn’t been styled 
and formatted for a single display.
• Metadata that will allow platforms to “query” the content 
and display the content elements best suited to a particular 
display.
• A CMS user interface that encourages writers to create con-
tent elements and variations within a package, instead of 
tying content to specific pages.
Understanding adaptive content is super important to de-
veloping your content strategy for mobile. Let’s dig into this 
topic in more detail in the next chapter.

 	
Adaptive Content	 47	
3
ADAPTIVE  
CONTENT
“Get your content ready to go anywhere because it’s going to  
go everywhere.” 
—Brad Frost (http://bkaprt.com/csm/41)
Adaptive content is more than just “mobile.” It means getting 
your content into a format so you can share and distribute it 
to any platform you want. It means you can get your content 
onto platforms you control—and platforms you don’t. It even 
means you’ll have a fighting shot at getting your content onto 
platforms that haven’t been invented yet.
Rich Ziade, CEO of Readability, told me that he thinks this 
problem is even bigger than mobile:
The mobile browser is no longer the sole destination of the 
hyperlink. Stuff opens inside of Twitter, Facebook, etc., and that 
means that content needs to be ready to go in all these new 
contexts. Content is being plucked and refitted everywhere. Take 
a look at most modern Twitter clients: they show Instagram 

	
48 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
photos and links to videos inline in the Tweet. That’s not a 
webpage anymore. It’s just the content in whatever context 
makes sense. This is one step beyond responsive design and form 
factors of devices. It is content reduced down to its essence then 
custom-tailored.
The magic trick we’re trying to perform is to get our con-
tent ready to go anywhere. Smartphones might be the most 
pressing multi-platform problem right now, but they’re not 
going to be the last one. Can you imagine your content show-
ing up on someone’s heads-up display, like Google Goggles? 
Being read aloud during someone’s commute to work? 
Appearing (and being readable) across the room, on someone’s 
giant-screen TV set?
Noz Urbina from Mekon, Ltd. told me he wonders whether 
our content is ready to go into the kitchen:
What happens when your cooktop functions like a giant 
iPad? Manufacturers are already making noise on the internet 
about data-enabling various household devices, and how 
resistant they will be to extremes of temperature and shock.  
Will your content be ready to go there?  It’s a great content 
consumption context.
What would it look like if you thought of your content 
as a service that could be accessed by a variety of different 
platforms, rather than as a substance that lives in a particular 
location?
CONTENT AS A SERVICE
NPR, America’s National Public Radio, has spent several years 
making their content accessible through an approach they call 
COPE, which stands for Create Once, Publish Everywhere. As 
a result, they have a clean base of well-structured content that 
they can display on many platforms. 
A book review that includes a headline, teaser content, 
body copy, audio, multiple images, topic categorization, 
and book metadata can be displayed on a wide variety of 

 	
Adaptive Content	 49	
platforms. Each platform can choose which content objects it 
wants to display, and how to format them (fig 3.1–3.5).
These examples from NPR illustrate two key aspects of 
adaptive content: multiple content structures and tailored vi-
sual presentation.
Multiple content structures
NPR writes a summary for each piece, which means that their 
story gets an appropriate introduction, wherever it might ap-
pear. While other publications might think they could just rely 
on the first sentence or two of the article to serve as a teaser, 
NPR takes the time to write a custom summary. They don’t 
just write one teaser, either: they write two! A short version 
Fig 3.1: The NPR.org website includes the headline, body text of the story, the audio file, 
one image, and book metadata (http://bkaprt.com/csm/42).

	
50 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
and a long version gives them extra flexibility, allowing each 
platform to decide how much space to devote to the summary.
Another interesting way that NPR uses multiple content 
structures is that they treat the body copy for the story and 
the audio file like they’re equal—neither is considered pri-
mary. Whether the platform is more text-focused (like a web-
site) or more audio-focused (like a player) each content pack-
age can be displayed for maximum effect. Each platform can 
choose the right mix of content objects—teasers, audio, and 
images can be combined in different ways based on what each 
platform needs and does well.
While NPR only creates one headline for each story, it’s 
possible that they could write more. If you’re thinking about 
creating multiple content structures, writing multiple head-
lines also offers more flexibility. You could write shorter and 
longer versions, some optimized for SEO, some for human 
consumption. (We’ll cover how to do this in the chapter on 
information architecture.)
Fig 3.2: The NPR.org audio player displays the headline, the short summary, and the audio 
file. Note that the audio player functionality looks and works differently in this version 
than on the main NPR.org website.

 	
Adaptive Content	 51	
Unique visual presentation
If you care about providing great design and a user experience 
that’s appropriate for a given platform, you need to be think-
ing about adaptive content.
NPR has the ability to make the same story look and func-
tion differently on each platform. The order, density, and pri-
ority of content is different. The typography is different. The 
use of images is different. The audio player is different. Even 
though each platform draws from the exact same content 
package, they all look and feel like their own unique experi-
ence. They can tailor the design to create the best experience 
for that platform.
This is possible because NPR focuses on creating struc-
tured content independent of visual presentation. They 
Fig 3.3: Here’s the exact same story as it appears in the iTunes desktop application. It 
shows the headline, the long summary, and the audio file.

	
52 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
permit and enable each delivery platform to make its own 
decisions about how to style the content, because formatting 
isn’t embedded in the content. They also create content for 
maximum flexibility, creating multiple sizes and versions for 
text, images, and audio formats. And, they make it possible for 
each platform to query the content to determine which con-
tent chunks to display. 
As a result, each platform can deliver a great user experi-
ence, tailored for the capabilities of each device. 
How do they do it?
How does this magic happen? And is it something you can do 
in your organization, even if you’re not a major publisher like 
NPR? You can, if you start thinking about creating adaptive 
content.
Getting there means you need to create content that em-
bodies the five key elements of adaptive content:
Fig 3.4: WBUR in Boston shows the same headline and body text, but they opt to  
show three images instead of just one. They also display their audio file in a completely 
different presentation.

 	
Adaptive Content	 53	
• Reusable content: content has been developed to maximize 
reuse across platforms; where that’s impossible, different 
formats or types of content are available.
• Structured content: discrete content chunks can be com-
bined in different ways for different platforms.
• Presentation-independent content: design decisions can be 
made by the platform, rather than having style and format 
imposed on the content.
• Meaningful metadata: category, tag, author, and date infor-
mation can be used to filter or highlight content, and meta-
data can be used to help platforms decide which content to 
display.
• Usable CMS interfaces: content management UI and 
workflow encourages people to create well-structured and 
metadata-enhanced content, without letting them fall back 
on making styling choices.
Let’s look at each of these in turn.
Fig 3.5: The NPR mobile app shows 
the same story and content elements, 
but with a very different presentation 
of the headline, long summary, audio 
file, body text, and images (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/42).
www.allitebooks.com

	
54 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
REUSABLE CONTENT
If you’re thinking of a specific context when you create con-
tent, your mind naturally wraps itself into the opportunities 
and constraints inherent in that medium. Imagining that your 
content can and will be reused in many ways poses its own set 
of limitations and benefits.
While many things need to change before organizations 
can start creating reusable content, the most fundamental 
challenge is a change in mindset. Content creators need to 
break free of imagining a single context where their content is 
going to “live” and instead plan for content reuse.
Written for reuse
Content written for one context often doesn’t make the leap 
to other places all that well. To give your content the best shot 
at making sense in whatever way the user wants or needs to 
consume it, you should do the following:
Write standalone headlines
Because you can use page titles in multiple places, write 
standalone headlines so that they can serve as page headers 
and links. If you’re only going to write one page title, then en-
sure that headline includes keywords to help the user decide 
whether she wants to click on the link, and determine if she’s 
in the right place.
The following headlines are used for both the article title 
and the link title on landing pages and in search engines. They 
offer keywords and an enticement to click (http://bkaprt.com/
csm/43):
• 15 Case Studies to Get Your Client on Board With Social 
Media (Mashable, http://bkaprt.com/csm/44)
• Scott Forstall, the Sorcerer’s Apprentice at Apple (Bloomberg 
Businessweek, http://bkaprt.com/csm/45)
• What Everyone Is Too Polite to Say About Steve Jobs 
(Gawker, http://bkaprt.com/csm/46)

 	
Adaptive Content	 55	
Write multiple headlines
Sometimes, it’s just not possible to write a single headline that 
works in every context. You may have to write multiple head-
line versions—some that work as page titles, some that work 
as links. (More about how to do this is coming up, in the chap-
ter on information architecture.) 
The following headlines offer a good balance—headlines 
that work as entertaining page titles aren’t expected to do dou-
ble-duty as links (http://bkaprt.com/csm/43). This approach 
provides extra value when combined in a one-two punch—
they could be combined into a longer headline or the link title 
could be used as a summary:
• Article Title: “What’s Eating the NYPD?”; link: Why the 
NYPD Is Turning on Ray Kelly (New York Magazine, http://
bkaprt.com/csm/47)
• Article Title: “Citizen Cain”; link: Herman Cain’s Unlikely 
Republican Rise (Newsweek, http://bkaprt.com/csm/48)
• Article Title: “When Is a Flip Not a Flop?”; link: The Fate 
of the Republicans Who Supported Gay Marriage (The New 
York Times Magazine, http://bkaprt.com/csm/49)
Don’t bury the lede
When you write for the web, put the most important infor-
mation up front. If you don’t grab your reader right from the 
start, they’re likely to wander off in search of something more 
interesting.
This adage is even more true when you’re writing content 
that may be reused in other contexts. If the first sentence/
paragraph contain meaty, useful information, you protect 
yourself if they ever need to be used as a navigation summary 
or if the rest of the text gets truncated. If the first sentence 
says nothing of interest, why would your reader want to tap 
for more information?
Similarly, you should focus on just one main idea in 
each chunk of text (whether that’s a paragraph or a section). 

	
56 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Readers are likely to scan headings and initial sentences, 
searching for words that they think will answer their ques-
tions. If you combine multiple ideas in a chunk with no visual 
separation or distinction between them, important informa-
tion will likely be overlooked.
Alternative content
One of the most frustrating parts of looking at content on 
mobile devices is discovering that useful or necessary content 
isn’t accessible because the content format didn’t translate 
well to a different screen size or platform capability. Whether 
it’s a video that’s only available in Flash, or an infographic that 
doesn’t scale for a smaller screen, some content just won’t 
work in other contexts. 
Creating reusable content means recognizing when content 
can’t be reused, and developing an alternative. Remember how 
NPR could publish the same story to a website and an audio 
player? Having both text and audio gives them more options. 
You might need to consider alternatives for the following:
Images
Scaling images and infographics across a tiny mobile phone 
and a giant Retina display just won’t work. You will need ad-
ditional image sizes cropped. If the image can’t be cropped or 
scaled without losing its meaning, then you will need an alter-
native: find another image or describe the image’s content in 
the body text or alt text.
Data visualizations
Interactive data visualizations can be engaging both on the 
desktop and on touchscreens, provided they’re built for reuse 
across platforms. In situations where the screen size or device 
capabilities won’t support their display, have a fallback mecha-
nism, like displaying a simple table of the data.

 	
Adaptive Content	 57	
Audio and video
Alternative formats (taking advantage of HTML5’s support for 
multiple video formats) will help ensure that everyone can ac-
cess these forms of media. Beyond that, providing a transcript 
or text summary for any audio or video content will make it 
more flexible for reuse (as well as more accessible to people 
with disabilities and friendly to search engines).
Managed reuse
Have you ever searched around in your email, Word docu-
ments, or website, looking for a snippet of content you’d 
previously created and wanted to reuse? Across a variety of 
different forms of professional communication—cover letters, 
business proposals, legal documents—it doesn’t make sense to 
keep creating and recreating the wheel. 
Most people handle this process opportunistically: they 
hunt around for the paragraph or graphic they want to repur-
pose, then copy and paste it into place. Others might handle 
it in a more organized fashion, maintaining a library of boiler-
plate documents that they can efficiently browse or search. 
But what most people don’t have is a system that manages 
content for planned reuse. Because you’re copying and past-
ing each content element uniquely, you’re creating different 
instances of the content. If you want to make a change to  
that content object, you’ll have to change it everywhere you 
used it. 
That might work for your individual publishing workflow, 
but it’s not going to fly when you’re planning for large-scale, 
multi-channel publishing. Effective content reuse across plat-
forms means you need a way to update content in one place 
and have the changes reflected everywhere. 
To support that, you’ll need the next aspect of adaptive 
content, which is structured content.

	
58 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
STRUCTURED CONTENT
“The more structure you put into content the freer it will become.”
—Rachel Lovinger, Content Strategy Director, Razorfish  
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/50; PDF)
The foundation of adaptive content is structured content: to 
make content flexible for reuse, you must structure it into 
meaningful chunks.
Structured content is fundamental to how we think about 
publishing on the internet. Instead of being fixed on paper, 
content is stored in a database. The structure we put into that 
database gives content more meaning, which means we can 
do more with it. If we break long stretches of content down 
into smaller chunks, we’re then free to combine and recom-
bine them in new ways. If we categorize our content consis-
tently—either by entering it into fields or marking it up with 
tags—then we can sort, filter, and prioritize it. 
None of this happens by magic. It takes human effort (and/
or really smart robots) to add the right structure to content. 
And because it takes effort, it’s easy to backslide. 
Chunks, not blobs
Many organizations insist their editing workflow requires a gi-
ant blob into which they can dump whatever they want—text, 
headings, images, tables, audio, videos—anything and every-
thing that can show up on a webpage. If your organization 
is using a blogging platform like WordPress as its CMS, you 
know what this looks like. Content creators get one big field 
for the body of their content, and it’s like their own personal 
playground (fig 3.6).
What happens to that giant blob of stuff (that’s the techni-
cal term) when it’s time to put it on another platform? Your 
content can’t be broken up into smaller pieces for display and 
reading on different screens. Your content can’t be targeted 
differently to different platforms—forget about an NPR-style 
COPE model, or even alternatives for unsupported content 

 	
Adaptive Content	 59	
types. Your content blob will gloppily resist any attempt to 
make it firm up.
If you want your content to be reusable, flexible, and adapt-
able to change, it needs structure.
Tumblr takes a totally different approach to a content edit-
ing workflow, guiding users to create appropriate chunks of 
content, rather than just giving them one big blob. Tumblr 
defines a set of content types: photos, quotes, chat transcripts, 
audio, video, and links, in addition to the generic text blob.
Different interfaces for each of these content types help 
guide users to structure their content. Because Tumblr took 
the time to figure out which fields and metadata would be re-
quired to support each content type, they can help users enter 
their information more easily. Done well, structured content 
makes for a better editing experience for content authors  
(fig 3.7–3.8).
The war of blobs vs. chunks comes down to having strong 
content structure. But how do you achieve that? In the same 
way that Tumblr defined a set of content types (photo, quote, 
audio) and defined the fields that would make up those types, 
you need to figure out how to structure your content.
This process of defining what your content is and how to 
chunk it up in your database is called content modeling.
Fig 3.6: WordPress was originally designed as a blogging platform. Its primary input 
mechanism is an unstructured blob.

	
60 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Content modeling
For most content management platforms, this means having 
properly “fielded” content chunks. Discrete content elements 
are broken out into different fields in the interface and the 
database, which means these chunks can be combined in dif-
ferent ways on different platforms.
The process by which these content chunks get defined 
is called content modeling. Modeling is the way you turn all 
your undifferentiated blobs of content into a defined, orga-
nized system of: 
• Content types: what kind of content is it? Is it an article, 
product spec, recipe, slideshow, etc.?
• Attributes: what fields or content elements can or must be 
entered? Does the content include headings, body text, im-
ages, audio files, author name, or author bio?
• Data limits: what limits are set on each attribute? Does the 
field require a specific numeric format, image specification, 
character limit, or date format?
Fig 3.7: A quote could be handled in a generic text blob. But by defining it as its own 
content type, with specific fields for the quote and the source, Tumblr can display quotes 
differently on the front-end.

 	
Adaptive Content	 61	
• Relationships: how are different content types connected? 
What attributes and data limits can be shared among differ-
ent content types?
Content modeling in action
Tech Guy Labs is a nationally-syndicated radio show call-in 
show. Their website (http://bkaprt.com/csm/51) was at one 
time based on a simple wiki. But because all their content—
names of guests, lists of questions, and episode videos—was 
stored in giant blobs, the site was nearly unusable. It couldn’t 
be searched. It was painful to use on mobile devices. And  
forget about trying to repurpose this valuable content in  
new ways.
A recent redesign reorganized the site around the episode 
as a central concept. The content model defined the episode 
as the primary content type, with different content types for 
Fig 3.8: Note that the input mechanism to upload a photo guides the user, whether she 
wants to choose a file, select a URL, or take a photo with her camera. Note also that 
Tumblr decided that a title field wasn’t necessary for the photo content type.

	
62 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Download links
Summary
Air date
Episode
Youtube URL
Ep. number
Caller name
Show segment
Question
Video timestamp
Caller location
Question
Answer
Photo
Title
Video timestamp
News
Transcript
Show segment
Photo
Transcript
Video timestamp
Guest Appearance
Topic
Show segment
Topic
Photo
Summary
Title
Sponsor link
Name
Photo
Guest
Links
Bio
Fig 3.9: This diagram shows the content types (in gray) and the content attributes (in 
white) for the radio call-in show, Tech Guy Labs. The primary content type is an episode, 
and each episode has segments. Segments all share information about topics.

 	
Adaptive Content	 63	
each segment of the show—a guest appearance has a different 
structure and different attributes from a question segment  
(fig 3.9).
This content model asks users to apply more structure than 
they did when using a wiki, but they get more value from the 
content. The website can be more easily browsed—adding 
metadata that calls out topics or guest names means that users 
can find what they’re looking for more easily.
Jeff Eaton, Senior Architect at Lullabot, who led the re-
design, told me that this content model’s value goes beyond 
making the website more browsable:
Now that they’ve bitten the bullet and migrated their content  
to a richer, more descriptive schema, a world of possibilities  
have opened for them. The idea of a custom smartphone 
application to listen to episodes was previously a pipe dream,  
but now it could pull from the same underlying stream of  
content as their website. Caller questions are now “geocoded” 
with location information, rather than simply having the name 
of a city floating somewhere in the text of the transcript—
allowing them to build interactive maps to show off their broad 
base of listeners. And highlighting “best questions of the week” 
and other promotional content is as simple as flagging one  
article or another, not an arduous exercise in creating entirely 
new material.
Content modeling in the CMS
Rather than just dumping all their content into one big blob, 
ask users to enter it into discrete fields in the CMS (fig 3.10).
But make no mistake: the content model is bigger than  
the CMS interface that supports it. The content model needs 
to reflect the needs and goals of the content authors who  
will create content (not to mention the people who will read 
the content).
Creating structured content within a content model means 
making a leap: you’re writing content for the chunk and not 
for the page.
www.allitebooks.com

	
64 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Packages, not pages
Your content strategy for mobile shouldn’t involve creat-
ing content that will live on only one platform. That doesn’t 
mean, however, that you must publish exactly the same con-
tent to every single platform. With adaptive content, your  
goal is to create a flexible base of content with a variety of 
structured content objects to cover a wide range of uses  
and contexts. 
So what’s the difference between creating content for each 
platform, and creating multiple content structures? In both 
cases, you’re writing more content, right?
The difference is that a content strategy for mobile means 
you’re creating content packages. If you’re thinking of develop-
ing multiple content structures within a single, discrete pack-
age, you’re planning ahead to make it easier to create, main-
tain, and govern content. Instead of having forked content and 
separate workflows, you manage and maintain a package of 
content all in one place.
Fig 3.10: Each content attribute in the content model shown in fig 3.9 is a field in the  
CMS interface.

 	
Adaptive Content	 65	
Do you need multiple versions of headlines? Shorter and 
longer summaries? Alternative versions of graphics, tables, or 
videos? Creating, managing, and maintaining all this content 
is much easier if you think of it as a single discrete package 
with a set of different content objects, rather than as separate 
workflows leading to separate websites.
Responsive content
The worst case scenario is to force mobile devices to load all 
the available content over expensive data plans, then hide it 
or truncate it to fit in the designs. Unfortunately, for most cur-
rent implementations of mobile content, that’s the best we can 
do when all we can control is the front-end.
Responsive web design advocates have jumped to advocat-
ing for responsive content: content that can automagically 
reformat itself for different screen sizes or platforms, dynami-
cally showing more or less content according to what the inter-
face, device capability, bandwidth, or user context can support.
Two things are required to deliver on this notion of re-
sponsive content. First, it has to be structured as we’re de-
scribing here: broken up into appropriate chunks, with mean-
ingful metadata and useful business rules attached. 
But structured content is only one aspect of responsive 
content. As Mark Boulton, Creative Director at Mark Boulton 
Design, explains, without the right design system to make 
sense of the content, the content is still just a static object 
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/52):
Content that travels around with a set of rules or metadata that 
will allow responsive design systems to make good use of them. 
But this does not make this content responsive. On its own, it’s 
pretty dumb: just floating around with additional information 
attached to it, until some smart design system grabs it and 
displays in the right context.
Unless both of those conditions are met, responsive con-
tent just isn’t a thing. If we agree that the ideal scenario is a 

	
66 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
world where we can display content differently according to 
different device needs or context constraints, then we have 
some work to do to get there. If that’s your goal, then it’s time 
to invest in developing structured content.
Structured content is the foundation of adaptive content. 
It goes hand-in-hand with a third attribute, which is that the 
content must be independent from its presentation.
PRESENTATION-INDEPENDENT CONTENT
“Metadata is the new art direction.”
—Ethan Resnick, design student at New York University (Quipped over a 
really interesting dinner conversation.)
Every platform is unique. What works for print doesn’t nec-
essarily carry over to the web. Mobile web and desktop web 
require different design conventions. User interface design for 
iOS isn’t the same as on Android. 
If you want to provide a great user experience for a given 
platform, you can’t just repurpose a design intended for an-
other platform. If your content inherits layout, formatting, 
and styling intended for one device, you’re going to have to 
strip it out and start over when you send your content to a 
different device. The problem is, those design choices tell you 
about the meaning of the content. 
A better way is to separate content from presentation right 
from the start, and ensure that the meaning of the content 
isn’t described only by how it looks.
Separation of content from form
On the web, everyone’s a designer. Content authors insist 
that they need to control how their content is styled. They 
demand the ability to alter the page layout, choose different 
fonts and colors, and choose the exact placement of images on 
the page. When they’re done, the page looks great—in the one 
and only one context they were imagining when they created 
it, which was the desktop web.

 	
Adaptive Content	 67	
This problem runs deep. Our legacy of print publishing 
gives us five hundred years of precedent that content and 
form are inextricably intertwined. It’s nearly impossible for 
some content authors to imagine what they want to say sepa-
rate from how it looks.
As a result, we’ve baked this assumption into our content 
management tools. Content creators demand the ability to 
style their text, and so we give it to them—at the expense of 
reusable content, says information architect Rick Yagodich 
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/53):
Too many CMSs provide rich text formatting—the ability for the 
author to identify presentation control directly within a block 
of text; the inclusion and placement of images; the styling of 
paragraphs; the specification of link targets—to have any claim 
to separating content from presentation. If an element of content 
is to be reusable—say rendered onto a website, into a print 
publication, through a mobile app, accessed via an API feed—it 
must exist in a form other than pre-formatted HTML. The 
element needs to be clean, a self-contained value.
You see rich text formatting in the familiar toolbar at the 
top of every content entry screen.
Beware the WYSIWYG toolbar
“Make it work just like Microsoft Word!” It’s a rallying cry 
to return to a simpler era, an attempt to make content on the 
web seem as controlled and predictable as putting ink on pa-
per (fig 3.11).
The best evidence that we’re crossing our fingers and hop-
ing we can make the web more like print is the WYSIWYG 
toolbar. “What you see is what you get” is a vestige of the 
desktop publishing revolution, made possible by having 
screen displays optimized for a particular type of output. For 
Microsoft Word and other desktop publishing tools, that’s 
the laser printer next to your desk. For your CMS, that’s your 
desktop website. Oops.

	
68 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
WYSIWYG is problematic because it encourages CMS us-
ers to embed formatting in with their content, allowing them 
to imagine that their designs will display beautifully—on the 
desktop. When it’s time to publish these pages onto mobile 
devices, all this extraneous formatting needs to be stripped out 
so the content displays appropriately on different screen sizes. 
All that effort, all that meaning encoded in visual styling—lost.
Trying to control layout and styling for a particular output 
is a thing of the past, says web developer Eoin Kelly (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/54):
The whole notion of WYSIWYG makes perfect sense if you are 
creating a document that is destined to be frozen as a PDF or 
on paper. However, on the web a WYSIWYG is a thin veneer 
of “Word Processor” sanity over HTML and CSS. Not only does 
HTML and CSS not make it easy to have precise, repeatable 
control over layout—they deliberately make it difficult. Why? It 
Fig 3.11: Saying your CMS offers a “Word-like” interface makes it seem like you think the 
web is print. What happens to all that formatting when you want to display this content  
on mobile?

 	
Adaptive Content	 69	
turns out that variable layout is generally a good thing. It defers 
decisions about how content should be presented to devices that 
are closer to the end user, the assumption being that the device 
knows better than we do how to present the content to the user.
Content structure expressed through styling
A related—but different—problem is that tools offered by a 
typical CMS conflate structure with styling. When we publish 
our content, what it means is often encoded by defining how it 
looks or where it lives. 
At the field level
Many times, we encode structural information merely 
through styling. Data like author names or movie titles or  
calendar dates get pasted into the body of the text, perhaps 
formatted in bold or italics. But just because those text ele-
ments have been styled visually doesn’t mean you can do 
anything with them. If that metadata were called out separate-
ly—stored in a unique field in the database, or marked up with 
semantic tags that describe what the content means (rather 
than just how it should be styled)—it would be more useful 
and more actionable.
In the late 1980s, TV Guide was the most popular maga-
zine in America. They might have patted themselves on the 
back, secure in their position as the most successful magazine 
publisher.
But they didn’t stop there. They realized that they weren’t 
in the magazine publishing business—they were in the content 
publishing business. They split the company in two: one divi-
sion to manage the magazine brand, and another division that 
owned the database of program content.
Then, they built a green-screen, mainframe application, 
and told their writers that going forward, they’d be enter-
ing all their content into this tool. Creating a database for 
their content gave it more value. Entering show titles and 
genres as separate fields in the database gave them valuable 

	
70 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
metadata— they could search and filter on those categories in 
a way that would be impossible in print (fig 3.12). They even 
asked their writers to develop three different summaries for 
each program, which gave them more flexibility in where that 
content could live in the future. 
In 2008, the assets of the division that owned the TV 
Guide magazine brand were sold for $1 (http://bkaprt.com/
csm/55). One dollar! Less than the cost of a single issue on the 
newsstand to purchase the entire publication’s assets. That’s 
because there was no value in the printed magazine. All the 
value in that company was contained in the structured con-
tent assets held in their database.
Fig 3.12: Show titles and categories aren’t just “bold” or “all caps” formatting—they’re 
valuable metadata. (Thanks to Dan Saffer for the example. http://bkaprt.com/csm/56)

 	
Adaptive Content	 71	
At the page level
Structural information also gets encoded through layout. 
When news editors want to communicate to readers which 
stories they think are most important, they make decisions 
about the layout of homepages and section fronts, making 
some stories more visible and others less prominent. A glance 
at any newspaper front page will give you a sense of the visual 
cues at our disposal: placement of the story; column inches 
devoted to the story; headline type size; use of bold, italics, or 
all caps; number of subheads; and the size of the images. 
Web editors, constrained by the templating system baked 
into their CMS, have fewer controls available—often, they en-
code the importance of the story solely through its placement 
on the page, and the style sheet takes care of choices about 
typography and sizing.
Defining structure and priority through visual styles and 
positioning works great when—say it with me now—you ex-
pect your content to live on one and only one platform. 
What happens to all that valuable editorial decision mak-
ing when the layout of the homepage changes? When editors 
rearrange their homepage, all that data, all that insight is lost. 
The judgement about the importance of a given story was at-
tached to the layout of the homepage, not to the story itself. 
Update the page layout, lose the editorial perspective.
The Guardian recognized that all the valuable editorial 
judgement that went into laying out the print edition was be-
ing lost on other platforms. How could they preserve that so 
it could inform the iPad version? Robots to the rescue! They 
developed an algorithm that reads the original InDesign files 
from the print edition, studying the size and placement of 
each article to calculate the article’s priority. The iPad version 
uses that data to make its own decisions about where to place 
articles within the app (http://bkaprt.com/csm/57; fig 3.13).
Now, not every organization will be able to write complex 
algorithms that read their print layouts—an innovative ap-
proach by The Guardian isn’t a long-term solution for most 

	
72 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Fig 3.13: The Guardian developed an 
algorithm to read the print homepage 
and turn its layout into metadata that 
the iPad uses to automatically generate 
its own layout.

 	
Adaptive Content	 73	
organizations. The lesson to take away from this example isn’t 
that robots will rescue us from print-centric styling. Rather, 
you should think about how best to encode your content with 
meaning, rather than just styling.
So, if we can’t encode what the content means through 
visual presentation, how do we do it? That brings us to the 
fourth aspect of adaptive content, meaningful metadata.
MEANINGFUL METADATA
“Metadata is a love note to the future.”
—Jason Scott, Archivist and owner of textfiles.com  
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/58)
True confessions time: I’m intimidated by metadata. When the 
conversation at a cocktail party inevitably turns to metadata 
frameworks, semantic markup, and the pros and cons of vari-
ous flavors of XML standards, my eyes start to wander over to 
the bar. And I’ve been a practicing information architect for 
more than fifteen years!
I don’t tell you this to call into question my professional 
standing in the realm of library science. Instead, I want to re-
assure you: everyone, even people who live and breathe this 
stuff, can sometimes feel a bit out of their league when meta-
data comes up. I’ve discovered that people tend to glaze over 
when we talk about metadata, and that’s unfortunate. More 
people—business owners, content creators, and production 
managers—need to wrap their heads around the benefits of 
having more and better metadata attached to their content.
I think people are put off because we tend to jump right 
into discussing how to create and deploy metadata before ex-
plaining why.
Why before how
Why should content creators have to enter content into sepa-
rate fields in the CMS (or mark it up with semantic tags) even 
though that’s not as easy or straightforward as simply enter-
ing it into a big blob? Because those fields and tags represent 

	
74 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
metadata—they provide more information about what the 
content is and how it can be used.
Why should content creators have to enter additional infor-
mation about their content—expiration date, content priority, 
keywords, and tags—when they don’t always know how that 
data will be used? Because having that information makes the 
content more flexible (and thus more valuable) in the future.
Metadata is the foundation that allows you to achieve many 
of the other goals of adaptive content. If you’re convinced that 
it’s important to create reusable content, structured content, 
or presentation-independent content, then what that implies 
is you need to add more metadata:
• Content reuse: if you want your content to be able to live 
in many different places, if you want to target individual 
fields or content objects to different platforms, then you 
need metadata so each platform knows what to do.
• Structured content: when we talk about content models, 
content packages, and content chunks, we’re really talking 
about metadata. When you define the fields your content 
will be chunked into, the labels attached to those fields, and 
the limits you assign to the data types that can be entered 
into those fields, you’re defining the metadata that sur-
rounds your content.
• Presentation-independence: think about all the cues we 
communicate through visual styling. We communicate the 
priority, hierarchy, and value of content to the reader by 
the weight and size of typography, or the layout and place-
ment on the page. If we want truly platform-independent 
content, we can’t rely on visual styling developed with a 
single platform in mind to retain this information. Instead, 
we need to develop ways to encode that meaning in our 
content—through metadata that tells us what the content 
means, not just how it should look.
And that’s why we have content management technology.

 	
Adaptive Content	 75	
Why we invented robots
Too often, people wind up fulfilling the technology’s needs, 
as servants of their content management system, rather 
than having the tool support and facilitate their needs. We 
force people to conform to the system’s needs as they fight 
their way through fields and dropdowns, rather than have 
the technology do what it does best: handle routine tasks 
automatically.
This is the whole reason we invented robots! Let’s reclaim 
our right as humans to bend them to our will. As Rachel 
Lovinger explains (http://bkaprt.com/csm/50):
Content management tools that incorporate a wide range of 
structure and metadata capabilities will allow producers to create 
content that is more flexible, and encoded with meaningful 
metadata and semantic markup, without needing to understand 
all the underlying code. Content with “baked-in” semantic 
markup makes it faster, easier, and cheaper to bring new content 
products to market.
Our content management tools should make it as easy as 
possible for humans to create structured, presentation-inde-
pendent content that has the appropriate metadata so it can be 
flexibly reused. In fact, that’s why the last attribute of adaptive 
content is having a usable content management system.
USABLE CMS
A good user experience in a CMS depends on having a well-
defined authoring and publishing workflow:
• Technology is designed to facilitate user needs and goals, 
and users aren’t expected to bend themselves to fit the sys-
tem’s requirements (this is user experience 101).
• Usability is evaluated on the overall workflow, not for  
individual screens. A particular form might be easy to fill 
out, but cumbersome when viewed in the context of the 
overall process.

	
76 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
• Organizations recognize that “content management” is big-
ger than just the CMS. The tool is there to facilitate and 
manage human processes and tasks, some of which by defi-
nition happen outside the system.
Fortunately, we have all kinds of techniques from the 
world of user experience design to help us create a more us-
able CMS. So whether you’re researching new CMS products 
to implement an entirely new platform, or making changes 
to an existing CMS like WordPress or ExpressionEngine, you 
can evaluate and make changes to the CMS to provide a better 
user experience for your content authors.
CMS is the enterprise software that UX forgot
Many content management systems look like a database got 
drunk and vomited all over the interface (fig 3.14).
Fields are scattered across the screen, with no rhyme or 
reason as to their placement. Field labels appear to have been 
assigned by a random word generator. Inconsistent labeling 
from screen to screen suggests they were assigned by some-
one with amnesia. Creating or editing a single piece of content 
forces content creators to bounce from screen to screen, a 
process requiring patience, attention to detail, and intestinal 
fortitude.
This is because, as Jeff Eaton of Lullabot explained to me, 
“Most CMSs were designed to provide an interface to a data 
model rather than to provide a user experience that helps 
content creators complete their tasks.” In other words, the 
interface provides a window to the database fields, rather than 
a workflow designed to support user goals.
As a result, content creators complain about the CMS. They 
refuse to fill out more than the absolute bare minimum of 
fields, even though creating additional content chunks would 
make the content more flexible and more reusable. They  
demand a single blob of a field, into which they can dump 
anything they want—text, images, tables, Flash files—and  
then format and style them any way they want using a 
WYSIWYG toolbar. 

 	
Adaptive Content	 77	
The solution here isn’t to give in to their demands for a 
blob of text. The answer is that we need to improve the author 
experience in the CMS. The only way we’re going to support 
future-friendly content management—a model that allows for 
flexible content reuse—is if we give content creators usable 
interfaces, workflows, and tools to make that happen.
Content modeling is the first step in this process. Rather 
than accepting the default content model baked into the CMS, 
designers and developers need to question its utility. What 
are all those fields? Do they need to be there? Are they in the 
right place? Are they sequenced appropriately on the screen? 
Are they labeled so they’re meaningful to content authors?
Fig 3.14: What? We wanted to make the workflow simpler so we put all the fields on  
one screen!

	
78 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
For too long, we’ve abdicated responsibility for these 
choices to the CMS platform. If you’re the designer or a devel-
oper who creates the website’s authoring interface, then your 
job is to create a usable CMS. Don’t just settle for the out-of-
the-box interface—design a content authoring workflow that 
provides a good experience for your users.
Coupled vs. decoupled CMS
The problems with publishing content to mobile and other 
platforms go deep—way down to the depths of the server. If 
you want to deliver a great experience to mobile users, your 
CMS has to support it.
Bad news: your CMS probably doesn’t support it. This is 
because your CMS is designed to publish to the desktop web. 
These systems are called “coupled CMSs.” A coupled CMS 
doesn’t allow you to tailor the experience for desktop vs. mo-
bile users without significant custom development effort. If 
you’re imagining an NPR-style COPE model, where you can 
model individual content objects and target them differently 
based on platform, you need a CMS that gives you a fine-
grained level of control.
Most coupled CMSs don’t have the capability to target con-
tent elements to different platforms based on a set of business 
rules. That’s because, in a coupled CMS, the same monolithic 
system controls everything: 
• Creating and editing content.
• Storing content in a defined data model.
• Displaying content in the presentation layer.
• Publishing and delivering the content to the user.
Decoupled CMSs (typically larger enterprise platforms) 
handle these tasks with independent systems. By decoupling 
content authoring from content display, we make multi-chan-
nel publishing possible.
Dan Willis, Director of Mobile Experience Design at 
Marriott explains: “Traditional publishing and content 
management systems bind content to display and delivery 

 	
Adaptive Content	 79	
mechanisms, which forces a recycling approach for multi-
platform publishing.” Alternatively, in a decoupled system, “All 
display and workflow issues are addressed by delivery applica-
tions, rather than by a content management system earlier in 
the process,” (http://bkaprt.com/csm/59).
If we want to deliver an experience optimized for a given 
platform (desktop, mobile web, app, television, what have 
you) then the decisions about how to display the content need 
to happen further downstream. If we want to be able to select 
which content chunks appear on a given platform, then we 
need a CMS that will support that.
Beware the preview button
Most content management tools have a “preview” button so 
the person who’s editing content can see how it will look 
when it’s published. It’s one of the most requested features 
from content creators. When you click on that button, what 
does it show you?
Why, the desktop website, of course!
The fact that we can even offer a “preview” shows how 
tight the association is between content management and de-
livery. The content output is optimized for a particular display. 
There’s no sense within the system that this content might be 
published to lots of different places. There’s no way to show 
the content creators how their content might appear on a mo-
bile website or in an app. 
The existence of the preview button reinforces the notion 
that the desktop website is the “real” website and mobile is a 
satellite, an afterthought.
Showing a preview isn’t inherently wrong—anyone who’s 
ever printed out a letter for editing knows writers love to see 
their work in context. But from this point forward, assum-
ing that a preview is merely the desktop website is wrong. 
Offering a true preview in the future will require that we find 
a way to help content creators envision their content in many 
different settings. 
At this point in the history of mobile development, get-
ting an accurate preview (or being able to do QA on different 

	
80 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
devices) is a challenging problem. Presumably in the future, 
there will be better ways to preview and do QA without hav-
ing to buy dozens of different types of hardware. Most orga-
nizations can’t afford to build a test lab with all the latest and 
greatest devices. Some local communities have stepped up to 
make shared device labs accessible to more people. Your orga-
nization might also allocate a budget for device purchases and 
try to find used ones. (More information about how to set up 
a device lab is available in the resources section at the back of 
the book.)
ADAPTIVE CONTENT FIRST
Adaptive content is a way to think beyond the platform. It 
puts your content at the center of your strategy and publish-
ing process, right where it belongs. Instead of jumping right  
to worrying about the requirements and constraints of a par-
ticular platform or device, you’re investing in the future of 
your content.
One of the most heated debates in mobile publishing is 
figuring out the relationship between the desktop content 
mothership, and all the different mobile platforms and de-
vices. While publishing a small subset of content aimed at 
the “mobile use case” is the wrong strategy, does that mean 
organizations need to publish exactly the same content to the 
desktop and mobile? What happens if you need to structure 
content differently to accommodate different screen sizes and 
resolutions? How can you deal with content formats or sizes 
that simply won’t work on mobile devices?
Adaptive content answers how to approach this problem. 
It’s a path to content parity, where all users get a complete set 
of content—the exact same content when that’s appropriate, 
and equivalent alternatives when it’s not. Adaptive content 
gives you the flexibility to serve up different content intention-
ally to users, according to device, screen size, or context.
Adaptive content does this by creating well-structured, pre-
sentation-independent content. Content that was created from 

 	
Adaptive Content	 81	
the start with the intent that it would be used in a variety of 
places. Content that includes the right metadata to help com-
municate what it means. And content that was published by a 
content management system that works the way users expect 
it to. Content that has a creation and maintenance workflow 
that reduces duplicate effort and makes the author’s job easier.
One more thing: it was created with an adaptive content 
strategy process.
CONTENT STRATEGY FOR MOBILE: THE 
PROCESS
You want to be able to maintain a consistent base of con-
tent. You want to ensure you can communicate effectively in 
whichever channel your customer wants to consume your 
content. You might even need to stretch the same team and 
budget to do it.
So how do you make it happen? What needs to change? 
What stays the same about your current process, and in what 
ways will the way you work need to evolve?
In the following sections, we’ll discuss the content strategy 
process with a focus on supporting multi-channel publishing. 
The next four sections will cover the big things you’re going 
to need to do next:
1.	First, you’ll define your strategy and put a plan in place 
for how to get there. It’s okay if you’re not ready to jump in 
with both feet—but you do need to start planning now.
2.	You’ll audit your content and edit where necessary. 
Instead of imagining that you’re writing for a single platform, 
you’ll think about writing content so it can be reused. You 
may even create multiple versions for maximum reuse.
3.	You’ll add more structure to your content. Instead of 
writing pages of content, you’ll develop an information 
architecture of content chunks that you can recombine in 
different ways. 

	
82 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
4.	You’ll change the way your people and processes work. 
You’ll demand better tools and more streamlined, more ef-
fective workflows. And you’ll have the right people work-
ing together in the right organizational structure to manage 
your content across channels.
Ready to get started? Whether you’re ready to dive right in 
or just stick a toe in the water, you’ll be better off if you put a 
strategy in place first.

 	
Strategy and Planning	 83	
4
STRATEGY AND 
PLANNING
“Lofty ambitions,” you might be thinking, “but it will take 
a long time to make this happen.” If your organization is 
already challenged with maintaining and managing its web 
content, adding mobile into the mix can be daunting. The gap 
between where you are and where you want to be may feel 
insurmountable.
That’s why we call it strategy.
This isn’t about describing a vision for where you should 
be on mobile, and then feeling like a failure because you can’t 
get there tomorrow. The goal is to clearly articulate where you 
want to be, and then take meaningful steps in that direction. 
The only way you’ll get there is if you have a clear picture in 
mind of where you want to go.
But first, let’s talk about what you can do starting right now.
BABY STEPS IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION
Maybe you’re totally new to this whole mobile thing, and 
you’re not sure where to start. Maybe you don’t know enough 

	
84 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
about mobile to make good decisions about how to write, 
structure, and encode content. Maybe you understand it’s 
important to deliver content on mobile, but the rest of your 
organization hasn’t bought in yet.
Whatever is holding you back from developing your “of-
ficial” content strategy for mobile shouldn’t stop you from 
moving forward. 
Gather analytics data 
Many organizations have been spurred to develop a mobile 
website or app based on analysis of their log files and search 
analytics. If you’re developing a mobile site for the first time, 
or looking to develop a more robust mobile experience that 
includes more content and features, looking at your analytics 
data will give you insights you can use to figure out how to 
proceed.
You might wish to gather data about the following, and 
evaluate whether it’s time to make changes:
• Percentage of site visits that come from mobile browsers.
• Pages or sections of content being accessed on your desk-
top site from mobile browsers.
• Common search queries from mobile browsers.
• Search queries on mobile that get redirected to the mobile 
homepage, because the content doesn’t exist on mobile.
• Exit pages where mobile users abandon your mobile site 
for the desktop site.
One caveat to keep in mind: many analytics packages are 
based on JavaScript, which isn’t supported on many low-end 
mobile phones and older BlackBerry devices, which means 
the device doesn’t get counted. Make sure you’re getting an ac-
curate picture of your audience by using an analytics approach 
(like server-side code snippets on Google Analytics) that actu-
ally counts all mobile users (http://bkaprt.com/csm/60).

 	
Strategy and Planning	 85	
Conduct user research
Don’t think your current mobile analytics and research on to-
day’s mobile websites will give you the whole picture. Today’s 
crummy, crippled mobile experiences are inadequate environ-
ments to evaluate what people really want to do on mobile. To 
fully understand how people want to interact with your con-
tent on mobile, you must talk to them. If you’ve never done 
any user research or usability studies on how people interact 
with mobile devices, start now.
If your mobile site shows only a subset of content, and 
you’re expecting your users to tap a full desktop website link 
to access your content, then the doctor calls for a usability 
test. See if people can actually find, read, and make decisions 
about content that requires them to pinch and zoom their  
way around a screen designed for a much larger monitor.  
Your findings may persuade you to invest in developing a full 
mobile site.
If you’re ready to start putting together your mobile site  
or app, it’s time to prototype and conduct iterative testing. 
There are many tools to help you develop quick mockups you 
can put in front of users. How else are you going to see your 
content in action?
Developing your mobile strategy will also take some imagi-
nation—which might come from looking at what other orga-
nizations are doing.
Conduct a competitive review
If you want to educate yourself and your team about the 
state of mobile content, there’s no better way to see what’s 
out there than by conducting a competitive review. Doing 
research on mobile sites or apps from competitors who are 
doing it right (or wrong) will help your team understand what 
works and what doesn’t.
A word of warning: today’s mobile experiences can be pret-
ty lousy. Looking only at your competitors may not exactly 

	
86 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
inspire you to greatness. You’ll also want to go outside your 
competitive set to look at best-in-class examples of mobile 
websites and apps, regardless of industry. Look for examples 
from publishers, retailers, and universities. Look especially at 
large-scale content sites, such as encyclopedias, how-to sites, 
medical and healthcare resources, and other reference guides. 
Which devices to review
Given the state of the industry, it’s likely that the primary 
form factor you’ll want to review will be a smartphone, but 
it will be instructive to look at other devices as well. Some 
guidelines to help you prioritize which devices to review:
• If you’re looking only at mobile websites, you can get away 
with reviewing either iPhone or Android but you don’t 
need both. (This guidance applies because you’ll be focused 
on the content, and not on features or interactions. If you 
were looking at interactive applications with lots of func-
tionality, you might need to look at both.)
• If you’re looking at mobile apps on smartphones then you 
should look at both iPhone and Android.
• Given the dominance of the Apple iPad in the tablet mar-
ket, you should review content on this platform. One study 
reports that the iPad is responsible for 94.64 percent of all 
tablet web traffic (http://bkaprt.com/csm/61). Take special 
note of content that appears in apps optimized for the iPad; 
many of your competitors will likely rely on their desktop 
websites to support this form factor and may not have 
iPad-optimized mobile websites.
• If you have access to a Kindle Fire or Nexus 7, you should 
also look at content on a 7″ tablet, as this form factor is dis-
tinct from both smaller smartphones and larger tablets. As 
of February 2012 , the Kindle Fire had a 54.4 percent share 
of the Android market, making it the most popular Android 
tablet by a substantial margin (http://bkaprt.com/csm/62).
• Always cross-reference your review of the mobile sites and 
apps with the desktop site, so you can get a sense of how 
content is treated on each version. 

 	
Strategy and Planning	 87	
How to evaluate
Develop a list of heuristics against which you’ll evaluate each 
site. Potential dimensions on which you might evaluate com-
petitors include:
• Availability: how many of your competitors even have a 
mobile website or app? If they do, are they offering a bare 
minimum of content and features, or do they go beyond 
that? What content and features do they offer, if they only 
show a subset?
• Global navigation: how do they handle global navigation? 
Does it include the same major categories as the desktop 
site, or just a subset? Are navigation categories prioritized 
differently for mobile? How does the user access the global 
navigation from the homepage and other site pages?
• Wayfinding: how easily can users get to their content des-
tination? Do landing pages along the way offer meaningful 
navigation labels and useful teasers? Is the path to content 
quick and direct or does the user have to pogo-stick back 
and forth? How is section navigation presented in addition 
to global navigation?
• Reading experience: is the content easy to read on mobile? 
Is it written clearly? Is content that might appear on one 
page on the desktop split into multiple pages on mobile 
screens? If so, does that additional navigation make it easier 
or harder to read?
• Content formatting: is the content designed and formatted 
for mobile reading? Are content elements like tables, lists, 
and multi-column layouts appropriately transformed for a 
differently-sized screen? 
• Media: how are large images or infographics treated? What 
about video or other interactive features?
• Search: is there a search function available on mobile de-
vices? Do search results help or hinder the user in finding 
content? Can the user find content from an external search 
engine like Google, or does the search query just redirect to 
the mobile homepage?

	
88 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Convince your CEO
Aim all your initial strategy and planning at one goal: convinc-
ing your CEO and executive team to invest more in content 
strategy for mobile (assuming they’re not already on board). 
How you do that depends on your organization’s personality. 
Consider the following:
• Are they motivated by data? Make sure you have analytics 
reports from your organization—and statistics from outside 
your company too. Mobile might seem small right now  
as a percentage of total traffic, but those numbers aren’t  
going down. Demonstrate how mobile is poised to grow  
in the future.
• Are they motivated by growth? What company isn’t? 
Focus on showing the size of the opportunity—and the  
opportunities that may be missed by not developing a  
strategy now.
• Are they motivated by shame? Teach them what makes 
a great experience on mobile, and how your organiza-
tion isn’t measuring up. In particular, if your competitor 
is doing things right, you’ll likely be able to push all their 
buttons.
• Are they motivated by usability? (Lucky you.) Ask the 
executive team to give up their computers for a day or two 
and use only the mobile web. You might even direct them 
to try some common tasks using your website on mobile.
Don’t forget: mobile is new to most people. Even seasoned 
digital executives can feel like neophytes when asked to make 
decisions about this new medium. Other executives often feel 
“digital fatigue” at the pace of change in our space. Part of your 
role is to help them feel comfortable and confident making 
decisions—don’t make them feel like idiots who don’t get it.
GIANT STEPS IN THE WRONG DIRECTION?
There’s a difference between deciding to do something im-
perfectly in the short term, and believing that it’s a good 

 	
Strategy and Planning	 89	
long-term solution. Design is often about making tradeoffs, 
and sometimes you make the wrong choices for the right rea-
sons. As long as those decisions are conscious choices—made 
because of an immediate, short-term need to serve user ex-
pectations or meet business goals—there’s nothing inherently 
wrong with taking a little detour on your way to the end goal.
Just try not to get stuck at any of these way stations, okay?
Serve up a small subset of content and features
You might call this the “interim” mobile site. Or the “holy cats, 
we better get something up there quick!” mobile site. If look-
ing at your analytics data and your competitive set makes you 
realize that you’re way behind the curve, then by all means, 
don’t delay. Build a mobile landing page today!
Remember the early days of the web, where “coming soon” 
pages were speckled through everyone’s site navigation? 
Don’t do that. You should especially avoid including animated 
GIFs of construction workers digging.
Instead, a dead-simple site, with the bare minimum of 
content and features, may suffice while you plan the rest of 
your mobile strategy. But do it with an eye to the future! This 
might be a good time to start your content inventory, and 
begin stakeholder discussions on how you’ll evaluate your 
content. Perhaps you can start with an audit and analysis pro-
cess in which you jointly discuss the merits of which content 
deserves to be included in the interim site. This exercise arms 
you for future prioritization exercises, and should give you 
a sense of whether reviewing and deleting content will go 
smoothly or painfully.
Fork your content
Yes, yes, the whole first section of this book was devoted to 
explaining why forking your content is a disaster. And now 
you find out it’s okay! 
It can be okay… as a temporary solution.
Developing a separate mobile experience—one that forks 
your content because it’s not hooked up to your CMS—would 

	
90 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
be a maintenance nightmare in the long run. In the short-
term, however, it may be the least bad option. If your mobile 
traffic is spiking and you realize you’re losing business as a 
result, the cost of not developing a mobile website or app may 
be higher than the cost of building something with the intent 
of throwing it away.
But like a temporary dental crown or a spare automobile 
tire, don’t expect to depend on your throwaway site forever. 
Building an interim site while you’re working on a more ro-
bust solution is good! Forking your content and then thinking 
you’ve solved your mobile content strategy problem is bad. 
Got it?
Gerard Gober, Senior Director, Digital Experience at 
Comcast, explained to me in an interview why they devel-
oped a static mobile website to meet the immediate and 
growing demands users were making for content on mobile 
devices. They worked in parallel on a larger-scale solution that 
required changes to their CMS, knowing that they would re-
place the static site in the future:
We implemented a point solution knowing full well it was 
throwaway. In partnership with our leadership team, we had to 
make uncomfortable and difficult decisions that required quite 
a bit of courage. Ultimately, we’re in business to add value for 
shareholders.
Design a responsive site that doesn’t serve the desktop
Your future vision might include a single responsive website 
that will work across phones, tablets, and the desktop web. 
Designing and coding a responsive site might take a bit of 
time—even more time than it would take to develop a site for 
a single platform.
You know what might take even longer than that? 
Wrangling dozens of stakeholders to agree to make changes to 
the desktop site.
For better or for worse, within many organizations today, 
the desktop is still the “real” website, and mobile is a few 
people’s hobby. The downside is that many still struggle to 

 	
Strategy and Planning	 91	
convince stakeholders and executives that investing in mo-
bile is worth it. But the upside is that decisions about how to 
handle the mobile website aren’t so fraught.
Organizations that want to provide an adaptive, sustainable 
solution for smartphone and tablet users—but who know that 
proposing a redesign of the desktop website will be a non-
starter—might consider a responsive site for everything but 
the desktop. Who knows? The argument for extending the 
responsive design onto the desktop might come from users 
who say they prefer the cleaner, simpler, mobile experience.
Send people to the desktop site
Expecting mobile users to navigate your desktop site from 
their smartphone browser is not a long-term solution. It’s not 
always a great experience for tablet users either, especially 7″ 
tablets. It’s a total cop out to ask users to hunt around for the 
right content by pinching and zooming, and it’s ergonomic 
lunacy to expect users to accurately hit tap targets sized for a 
1024 pixel width screen. Just because we’re used to it doesn’t 
mean we should settle for it.
A link to the full desktop site on the mobile phone is ac-
ceptable only when it’s the least bad option—if your choice  
is displaying the content formatted for the desktop, or not  
displaying the content at all, then use the desktop as a tempo-
rary fallback.
Keep in mind, however, that if you’re delivering only a 
subset of your content optimized for mobile, and relying on 
a link to the full desktop website to show the remaining con-
tent, you’re likely going to break search. If the search engine 
can see the content on the desktop site, but the content isn’t 
available on the mobile site, the user gets unceremoniously 
dumped on the mobile homepage. Sure, that link to the desk-
top site is available, but you’re forcing the user to start from 
the desktop homepage and swim around in your site naviga-
tion, trying to find content she should be able to access with 
one click from the search results. So don’t redirect searches to 
your mobile site unless you provide all your content on mobile.

	
92 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Short-term tactics, long-term planning
Just because you know you’re building a temporary solution 
doesn’t mean it can’t have value for your long-term plans too. 
It may be that prioritizing and filtering your content for an 
“interim” site will help you plan for and focus on what you 
need to do for your “real” mobile content. Or it may be that 
the decisions you make for a responsive mobile version even-
tually carry over to the desktop site.
The way you get the most value from a short-term solution 
—even one that you know you’re going to throw away—is 
if you have articulated your overall content strategy and you 
know where you’re headed. That way, even if what you’re do-
ing in the immediate term isn’t the ideal, you can plan to make 
it a stepping stone along the way.
Gerard Gober of Comcast explains:
The biggest thing is, you have to have a content strategy in place. 
You have to know the end state you want.
THE DESIRED STATE
If you’re ready to start developing your content strategy for 
mobile, then your first job is to define where you want to go. 
I like to call this “putting a flag in the sand.” As you move 
forward in the months and years to come, you’ll have many 
decisions to make that will affect your mobile strategy and 
your content strategy. If your team can see the flag in the 
sand—even if it’s way off in the distance—they’ll at least know 
if their choices are moving them closer to or further away 
from the flag.
Your desired end state will be unique to your organization, 
but it might look something like the following:
• All of your content is available to users regardless of the 
platform they want to consume it on. You’ve achieved 
content parity: you provide the same content where it’s 
feasible, and equivalent content where it’s not.

 	
Strategy and Planning	 93	
• Your content is well-written and it all provides value to 
your reader. Mobile might provide a useful lens for doing 
the audit and analysis, but your goal isn’t just better content 
for the mobile site. Instead, you have a process in place to 
evaluate and remove content that’s not working—wherever 
it might appear.
• Your content is written and structured for maximum reuse. 
You’ve identified a system of reusable text elements writ-
ten for reading and navigation. You’ve also figured out how 
your images, tables, charts, videos, etc., will scale across 
different device resolutions.
• Your content management system has been tweaked—or 
completely overhauled—to support multi-channel publish-
ing. You’ve got a tool that provides a good user experience 
for your content authors, and supports them in developing 
the content structures needed. If you need to prioritize 
your content differently for mobile, or serve up alternative 
content for elements that won’t work on mobile, your CMS 
is technically robust enough to allow you to target content 
according to metadata and business rules.
• You’ve put a plan in place for doing qualitative and quan-
titative research to help you understand how people are 
using your mobile content, and how that might differ 
from the desktop. You’re analyzing data provided by your 
analytics package and search queries, and using it to make 
informed choices about how to prioritize. When there are 
questions you can’t answer just by looking at data, you talk 
to actual people.
• You recognize that a successful content strategy for mo-
bile comes from deep inside. You have internal processes 
and an editorial workflow in place to make sure that your 
content is updated when necessary, evaluated regularly to 
make sure it’s doing its job, and retired when its time is up. 
You have an organizational structure and incentive system 
that supports—even rewards—people for working together 
to develop an integrated and holistic approach to content 
across channels.

	
94 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Sound like content paradise? A totally unrealistic, Fantasy 
Island content nirvana? It’s not an unattainable dream. In  
the upcoming sections of this book, we’ll talk through each  
of these in more detail, describing what you need to do to  
get there.
WHAT’S NEXT
We’ve discussed how to start planning your content strategy 
for mobile—even if you’re just getting started and need to take 
baby steps. If you’re ready to plant your flag and start off on 
the path to creating better mobile content, here’s what’s in 
store for you next:
• Writing and editing: your mobile content strategy can be a 
catalyst to help you improve the quality of all your content.
• Information architecture: you don’t want to publish totally 
different content to mobile, but you may need to structure 
it or prioritize it differently. We’ll talk about how to make 
that happen without wasted effort.
• People and process: successful multi-channel publishing 
will require changes to the way you work. We’ll discuss 
how your leadership and workflow will need to evolve.
Let’s take a look at how mobile can help you pare down 
your content and write more effectively—wherever your con-
tent might appear.

 	
Writing and Editing	 95	
5
WRITING AND 
EDITING
Are we really going to talk about writing content for mo-
bile, after we’ve spent so much time explaining how you can’t 
create content for a single platform? Here’s a neat trick: we’re 
going to use mobile as a lens to make all our content better, 
regardless of platform. 
There is no “how to write for mobile.” There’s only good 
writing. Period.
That said, mobile gives us an opportunity to review our 
content within some tight constraints. Imagining how we’re 
going to take the vast expanses of content we’ve created for 
the desktop web (and in print) and squish it onto tiny screens 
will help us prioritize. Realizing that some of the dreck on our 
desktop sites doesn’t deserve to be on the mobile site will in-
spire us to edit it down—or remove it entirely.
How are we going to make this magic happen? We’re going 
to dip into our trusty bag of content strategy tricks, and follow 
the same processes and activities using the same tools and de-
liverables as we would for, say, a web content strategy project. 

	
96 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
But this time, we’re going to imagine that we’re doing them 
with the intent to put content onto a mobile website or app. 
“But isn’t the whole point to get our content ready to go 
anywhere?” you might wonder? It is. Mobile is the catalyst 
that will help people get there. So use it as a tool. Feel free to 
get your content owners and business stakeholders thinking 
about the challenges of the smartphone form factor. If neces-
sary, the fact that you’re using these exercises to improve all 
your content can be our little secret.
CONTENT INVENTORY AND AUDIT
“If it shouldn’t be on the mobile site, it shouldn’t be on the 
desktop site either!”
This rallying cry for “mobile first” offers a glimpse of a fit 
and friendly future, one where content owners and stake-
holders all agree to cut the fat out of a desktop website that’s 
grown too big for its pants. Once they imagine their bloated 
content squeezed onto a tiny screen, they’ll be motivated to 
trim it down.
Like any diet, it’s easier said than done. 
Kristina Halvorson, CEO of Brain Traffic, is fond of point-
ing out that there is no “magical database in the sky” that will 
spit out the content for your website. I’m here to tell you that 
there is also no magical liposuction machine in the sky that 
will reach down and vacuum out your flabby content. 
You’re going to have to do it yourself, the old-fashioned 
way: with a giant spreadsheet.
The basic tools for analyzing what you’ve got are the con-
tent inventory and the content audit—these don’t change 
just because you’re thinking about mobile. Looking at your 
content through the lens of mobile does provide some helpful 
perspective when you’re documenting the inventory and con-
ducting the audit. 
Inventory
When you take a content inventory, you take an objective 
look at the content assets you have to work with. Typically, 

 	
Writing and Editing	 97	
people conduct these when they’re redesigning a website and 
need to understand the size and scope of the project. You can 
follow a similar process when you think about getting your 
content ready to be displayed on a variety of mobile screens.
A content inventory is a quantitative assessment of your 
content. You’re not trying to judge the quality of the content 
yet (that comes later, in the content audit). You’re just trying to 
get your arms around what you’ve got. 
Standard inventory categories
In preparing a content inventory, you might expect to gather 
some of the following facts about your content. Think of 
these as the columns in your spreadsheet (fig 5.1):
• Unique ID number or code for each line in your inventory 
(numbers map to pages).
• Site section, or where it sits in the site hierarchy.
• Page title, including the main title and what appears in the 
meta <title> tag.
• Page URL.
• Content owner and/or person who last updated the page.
• Date the page was created and/or last updated.
• Expiration date assigned to the page, if any.
Fig 5.1: In a standard content inventory, determine which data you want to gather about 
your content and assign those categories to columns in your spreadsheet.

	
98 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
• Keywords that describe the page, or keywords used to in-
dex the page for search.
• Page rank or number of visits.
• Date the page was last visited, especially noting pages  
with no visits within a period of time (say, six months or 
one year).
• Content type or the CMS template used.
Because content inventories gather quantitative, objective 
data, it’s tempting to want to use an automated tool to crawl 
the site. Isn’t robotic work like this the thing machines are 
best at? Certainly, some of this data can be pulled directly 
from the CMS or gathered using a crawler, but there’s real val-
ue in the editorial insight you gain in systematically reviewing 
the pages, so think of automation as a supplement to human 
effort, rather than a replacement for it. (In general that mind-
set is what will protect us from our robot overlords.)
Mobile inventory categories
When you’re inventorying your content for a future life on 
mobile screens, there are other objective data you can gather.
Since getting content onto different screen sizes and resolu-
tions will often require breaking it into smaller chunks than 
the desktop page, you need to have an approach to inventory-
ing that tracks individual chunks or modules, not just pages. 
You might think of these as rows in an outline table (fig 5.2):
• Unique ID number or code for each content chunk in your 
inventory (letters map to chunks within pages).
• Character or word count for headlines, subheads, and page 
summaries.
• Character or word count for body copy.
• Image dimensions or standard crop ratios or cut sizes—es-
pecially note large infographics or other dense images that 
won’t scale well to smaller screens.
• Content styling, especially in columns, tables, or lists, that 
may need to be presented differently on smaller screens.

 	
Writing and Editing	 99	
• Content format, especially .pdf, .doc, .ppt, or other docu-
ment formats that won’t condense well on smaller screens.
• Content presented using Flash or any other technology 
that just won’t work on some mobile devices.
• Common modules reused across pages (for example, in the 
right column) which you may need to handle differently on 
smaller screens or even eliminate on less capable devices.
• Content chunks that may be stored in different database 
locations, which may affect how easily you can repurpose 
them (for example, user comments are often stored in a dif-
ferent database from managed content).
Inventorying at this level is something most automated 
systems aren’t set up to do easily. Make friends with your tech 
team—they’re the ones who can help you figure out things 
like character counts and database locations.
Fig 5.2: Because content inventories for mobile need to look at a finer grain of detail, you 
may need a more complex spreadsheet. One option is to use the Outline Table function in 
Excel to add sub-rows.

	
100 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Representative sampling
If you’re freaking out because your website is simply too big 
to inventory, don’t despair. Just like it wouldn’t be possible to 
survey every single person in your country, you don’t always 
need to look at every single page in your site. Instead, you can 
take a representative sample of pages. 
When inventorying, it’s most important to set up your 
approach to how you’ll tackle the problem. Before diving 
into your full inventory, do a quick pass through the site to 
determine:
• Breadth of your audit: do you need to look at every sec-
tion, or will it be sufficient to focus on a single section?
• Depth of your audit: do you need to dig into every level of 
the site, or can you stop at a certain point, say four or five 
levels down?
• Range of content types: it’s less important that you see ev-
ery unique page, and more important that you understand 
the different content types—a quick review can give you 
a sense of whether you’re dealing with many consistent 
pages (like article pages or product pages with a regular 
structure) or lots of one-offs.
Remember, your inventory isn’t a document you complete 
once and then stick on a shelf to gather dust. You can and 
should keep adding to it as you go through this process. 
Audit
By now, you understand that you’re not trying to create a 
totally separate mobile website, with a unique subset of con-
tent—right? Keeping in mind that your goal is to apply any 
improvements to all your content, you can still conduct this 
audit with mobile in mind.
You might imagine, then, that you’re trying to decide 
whether each piece of content is worthy of being migrated to 
a new mobile website. What if your stakeholders and content 
owners had to physically move each piece of content to its 
new home? Would it merit the effort?

 	
Writing and Editing	 101	
Audit criteria
To conduct your audit, you may wish to evaluate your content 
against criteria like the following:
• Subjectively, is each page or content chunk too long, too 
short, or just right? Length isn’t inherently a problem, but 
you’re trying to assess whether you can easily break longer 
pages into shorter chunks, or whether it makes sense to 
keep the whole document together.
• Is the text wordy or does it ramble? Is the language filled 
with jargon or marketing-speak? If you imagine a smaller 
screen, could you edit the text and clean up the wording 
without losing any meaning or value? 
• Does each page or content chunk get to the point? Are the 
main ideas presented quickly and succinctly—in the first 
paragraph or in the page summary? If you imagine a user 
glancing at a mobile screen, would she get the main mes-
sage right away?
• Is the content structured into chunks say, broken up  
with headings, or with teaser-sized chunks on landing  
pages? Does each chunk or paragraph present one and  
only one topic?
• Is the content up-to-date? Would anyone say “we don’t 
need to put that content on the mobile website, it’s too old”?
• Is the content useful and important? Would your stake-
holders say that each page or content chunk is a must-have 
or a nice-to-have on mobile?
ANALYSIS
The point of doing an inventory and an audit isn’t to create 
documentation—it’s to drive change within your organization. 
Once you’ve taken a deep dive into your content, you need 
to communicate your findings and recommendations to your 
stakeholders and get them to agree on next steps. A gap analy-
sis can help you figure out how to get from where you are to 
where you want to be.

	
102 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Gap analysis
By the time you’re done with your audit, you should have 
quite a bit of data to help inform your decisions about what to 
do with your content next. Based on your audit criteria, you 
have some decisions to make. 
Your job, then, is to use mobile as a filter, to persuade your 
stakeholders and subject matter experts to act on each and ev-
ery piece of content. Those actions  will be:
• Keep it as-is and include it on the mobile website.
• Revise and edit to tighten up the writing or to create a 
more mobile-friendly format.
• Delete it, because it’s irrelevant, not useful, or outdated.
• Create new content, perhaps to take advantage of new  
capabilities on mobile devices.
You’ll probably want to add a new set of columns to your 
spreadsheet—or even a new sheet to your workbook—to help 
you track all the decisions you’ve made and actions you need 
to take next.
Communicating findings and recommendations
Mobile isn’t magic. Simply waving a smartphone in a stake-
holder’s face and pointing to the smaller screen size won’t 
necessarily help you convince him that his precious content 
isn’t worthy of appearing on your mobile website. As with 
any evaluation process, the art of the content audit is the art 
of persuasion. 
Education
Many of your stakeholders will be unfamiliar with mobile best 
practices—even people who are intimately familiar with mak-
ing decisions about how the desktop web should function. 
As a result, you may encounter resistance and knee-jerk reac-
tions, which are usually rooted in fear of not understanding 

 	
Writing and Editing	 103	
how and why mobile is different. Use lots of best practice  
examples from other mobile websites and apps to make  
your point. 
Content recommendations
Your job in presenting your content audit is to convince your 
stakeholders that the content needs to change. Think about 
which formats will be most persuasive to them. Some organi-
zations value quantitative decision making. If that’s your com-
pany, then score all your content on a rating scale, and show 
them charts and graphs to illustrate your main points. Other 
companies will be persuaded if you show them usability eval-
uations, competitive reviews, or even your expert opinion. 
Tailor your approach to how you present your recommenda-
tions so it’s aligned with how people make decisions.
Desktop first!
Some of your constituents may still be imagining that you’re 
planning to create a mobile website that contains less or dif-
ferent content than the desktop. By using mobile as a way to 
force them to filter, you may have allowed them to keep be-
lieving that the desktop is going to stay the same. Now, you’ll 
need to get them on board with making edits to the content 
across the board. Emphasize the benefits of simplifying con-
tent for all users, and the pain of having to maintain multiple 
versions—enlist the CMS in your argument and explain that it 
prefers to serve one set of content.
EDITING
Imagine all you had was a mobile app or mobile website. No 
vast expanses of desktop screen real estate. No way to present 
every possible option on the screen at the same time, assum-
ing that the user would figure it out. No presumption that 
your reader was sitting, transfixed, poring over every word. 
With the limitations of a mobile screen as a guideline and a 
barrier, you’d naturally have to write differently. You’d get to 

	
104 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
the point. You’d put the most important information up front. 
You’d remove all the marketing jargon and fluff. You’d write 
short, declarative sentences. You wouldn’t use a long word 
when a short one would do. You’d make every word earn  
its place.
Writing this way isn’t just good writing for mobile. It’s 
good writing for everyone. Here’s how to use mobile to help 
edit your content.
Messaging
People have always tended to scan, rather than read, on the 
web. Desktop users skim their way through the text, alighting 
on headings and links and bullet points, searching for the in-
formation that matters to them.
Unless you’re completely focused on what you want to 
communicate, you can’t assume that your reader will get the 
message. Successful web writers know that they may only 
have a few seconds, a glance at the screen, to get the key idea 
across. Once they’ve grabbed the reader with a message that 
resonates, they might earn a bit more attention—but they 
can’t squander it. Additional information needs to answer the 
user’s follow-up questions and reinforce the main idea.
What was true on the web is even more true on mobile. It’s 
not that people won’t read on their mobile devices—it’s that 
you have to earn their attention more than ever. 
The limits of mobile provide a useful focusing device. 
When revising your content, use the constraints of a mobile 
screen as a guideline to help you hone your message and make 
sure it gets through (fig 5.3):
• Primary message: what’s the main idea you need to get 
across? Figure out what that is, and make sure readers  
can apprehend it in a glance at the screen. This primary 
message may come through in the headline, the summary, 
or the text’s first sentence or two. Ideally, the primary  
message for any given page reinforces your overall brand 
and mission.

 	
Writing and Editing	 105	
• Secondary message: assuming you’ve got their attention, 
what do you want them to know next? Once you’ve piqued 
your reader’s interest, you can assume she’ll be willing to 
read a bit more—maybe ten seconds or so, which is about 
the amount of time it would take to read the text on a stan-
dard mobile phone screen. (Assume a standard screen will 
fit approximately 100 words, give or take, depending on the 
design.) Answer her key questions: what is this, and why 
should I care? Remember, they’re still likely to scan the 
screen looking for keywords that meet their goals.
• Supporting messages: what’s next? What else do they need 
to know? Perhaps these points take the user to supplemen-
tary pages, or present related ideas in a list of bullet points. 
The key here (as always) is they’re concise, loaded with 
words the user is scanning for, and make the user feel con-
fident in her next tap.
Primary message, which can be 
apprehended at a glance. 
Possibly a headline or the first 
sentence or two of the page.
Primary message, which can be 
apprehended at a glance. 
Possibly a headline or the first 
sentence or two of the page.
Secondary message, which 
requires the reader to focus, but not 
for more than 10 seconds or so. 
The secondary message should 
take up about one screen of text. 
You might imagine that this would 
be about 100 words on a standard 
mobile phone screen. The 
secondary message should answer 
the big questions like “what is it” 
and “why should I care about it?” 
Assuming you’ve piqued your 
reader’s interest, she should be 
willing to read this much.
secondary message should answer 
the big questions like “what is it” 
and “why should I care about it?” 
Assuming you’ve piqued your 
reader’s interest, she should be 
willing to read this much.
Supporting Message
What else do you want your 
reader to know?
Supporting Message
What else do you want your 
reader to know?
Supporting Message
What else do you want your 
reader to know?
Supporting Message
What else do you want your 
reader to know?
>
>
>
>
Fig 5.3: Use the mobile screen’s constraints to help prioritize your primary message, 
secondary message, and supporting messages.

	
106 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Revisions
Here’s a summary of guidelines to use when you revise your 
content for mobile. Just remember: these recommendations 
apply regardless of platform or channel. Mobile is just a useful 
constraint:
• Plain language: use shorter, simpler words. Write short 
sentences and avoid convoluted sentence structure.
• Objective language: neutral language is easier to read and 
more credible than marketing fluff. Use words your user 
will know, not jargon.
• Be concise: aim to get your main point across on a single 
screen, which is approximately 100 words. Ruthlessly de-
lete unnecessary words. (That doesn’t mean all anyone will 
read is a single screen—but it provides a helpful editing 
guideline.)
• Write headings as links: assume that headings and sub-
heads could be repurposed as navigation. Make them ac-
tionable and fill them with trigger words—words that users 
themselves would say if asked to describe what they’re 
looking for.
• Write the first sentence as a summary: assume that the 
first line of the page or section could be repurposed as a 
navigation summary. Put the main idea and important key-
words in the first sentence.
• Inverted pyramid: don’t bury the lede. Start with the con-
clusion. Put the most important ideas first. Bottom line up 
front (BLUF).
• One topic per paragraph: when readers scan the page, they 
look at initial sentences for main ideas. If additional ideas 
are presented in a single paragraph, users are likely to skip 
over them.
• Highlight keywords: readers scan for hyperlinks in text, 
so this is a particularly effective way to highlight. You may 
also bold keywords, but avoid color variations or underlin-
ing words that aren’t hyperlinks.

 	
Writing and Editing	 107	
• Bulleted lists: use bullet points to make supporting ideas 
easy to scan. 
Take your cues from Comcast. They edited and simplified 
the page that explains your bill, reducing the length and com-
plexity of the language without losing any of the meaning  
(fig 5.4).
Fig 5.4: Comcast edited the page that 
helps you understand your bill, making 
it easier to read without losing the 
meaning.

	
108 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
COMING UP
By now, you should have a plan for how to move forward 
with your content strategy—or at least, be headed in the  
right direction. 
You’ll also have inventoried, audited, and analyzed your 
content so you know what needs to change. You’ve edited 
your content—or removed it entirely—so it provides maxi-
mum value.
Now, it’s time to look at how your content is structured. 
What specific changes do you need to make to the way you 
architect your content to support multi-channel publishing?
After that, we’ll look at what needs to change in your in-
ternal organization. How will your people and your processes 
need to adapt to adaptive content?

 	
Information Architecture	 109	
6
INFORMATION 
ARCHITECTURE
Print is so easy, right? You put the ink on the paper and 
you know it will stay there. You don’t have to worry about 
updating it all the time. Want to make changes, or release a 
new version? Better chop down some more trees. That’ll take 
some time, so you’ll have a chance to think carefully about 
your revisions.
Your iPad app isn’t print. Neither is your mobile website, 
your Android app, or any other mobile “version” you might 
want to publish. Neither is your desktop website. Digital con-
tent is dynamic, flexible, fluid, and always updated. 
Sound obvious? Unfortunately, we’re still trying to get there.
The legacy of print is still with us on the web. We’ve 
moved from imagining how our content will look and where 
it will live in a printed document to imagining how it will look 
and where it will live on a webpage. We treat the desktop web 
like a dynamic document—sure, we have the flexibility to up-
date it whenever we want, but it’s still the one and only place 
our content will ever “live.”
Those days are over. 

	
110 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
How do we take what we know about information archi-
tecture and navigation design for mouse pointers, and adapt 
and evolve those models so they will also work for meat 
pointers? If we recognize we have to create new, flexible 
structures in our content, how do we do that? If we want to 
stop thinking about “pages” and start thinking about “pack-
ages,” how does our editorial process need to change?
We’ve got work to do. Let’s look at some key content struc-
tures and talk about what needs to evolve.
WAYFINDING
The web is all about action verbs. We click. We search. We 
navigate. We select. On every screen, we present users with 
options and ask them to take an action. Successful content 
puts the user in the driver’s seat, helping guide them to where 
they want to go.
Jared Spool, CEO and Founding Principal of User Interface 
Engineering, often writes and speaks about the “scent of infor-
mation” and how to write links using “trigger words”—words 
that inspire users to act because they make it obvious what 
will happen when users click on them. He says, “It shouldn’t 
be news or a surprise to anyone in the world of website us-
ability that having clear links that describe what the user will 
find after clicking is a priority in the design process” (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/63).
What’s true for the desktop web is even more important 
when users navigate your content on mobile. Smaller screen 
sizes mean that the user may have to drill down further to  
get to the content. Slower connections (paid for by the mega-
byte) mean the cost-per-tap may be higher. And because users 
just aren’t as familiar with navigating on mobile, it will be 
easier for them to get lost. All the more reason to make sure  
that your wayfinding content—labels, summaries, and other  
microcopy—helps the user feel confident she’s on the  
right track.

 	
Information Architecture	 111	
Don’t rely on navigation labels alone
Tap. Refresh. Scan. Back. Tap. Refresh. Scan. Back.
How many times do you think your mobile user will do 
that before getting frustrated and give up? 
If you’re still imagining the mobile use case—the pressed 
for time, on-the-go, distracted mobile user—you’re not going 
to make that user’s life easier simply by putting location-based 
services on the home screen. Serving the mobile user means 
ensuring that she has enough context to quickly and easily 
find what she’s looking for, even if it’s several levels deep in 
the site. (Sounds a lot like what it means to deliver a good ex-
perience for the desktop user, doesn’t it?)
A couple of taps off the main screen is when most mobile 
experiences start to break down. The architecture and design 
attention that gets lavished on the homepage and the main 
navigation bar doesn’t make it to some of the more pedes-
trian screens, the way stations along the route to the content. 
Instead, users get a long list of links, many of which don’t make 
much sense. How do they know which one to tap (fig 6.1)?
Do provide a short teaser
“In its purest format, progressive disclosure is about offering a  
good teaser.”
—Frank Spillers (http://bkaprt.com/csm/64)
Progressive disclosure orients users in steps or stages that 
reveal more complex information as they go, helping them 
make good choices as they complete a task or navigate infor-
mation. It’s an old concept in human-computer interaction, 
first applied to early software interfaces in the 1980s. Its use-
fulness has been proven again and again on web-based inter-
faces, and it’s easy to see how it applies to the constraints of 
smaller mobile devices.
Writing a good teaser is one of the simplest things you 
can do to help your users orient themselves so they can find 

	
112 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Fig 6.1: Verizon presumably knows 
the difference between its “Backup 
Assistant,” “Backup Assistant Plus,”  
and “Backup AssistantSM.” Users 
won’t. A short teaser would provide 
more context.
Fig 6.2: Comcast writes a short teaser 
for each navigation option. Even a 
single sentence can help users decide if 
they’re in the right place and whether 
it’s worth it to keep tapping.

 	
Information Architecture	 113	
what they’re looking for. Unfortunately, it’s often one of the 
most overlooked. Write a sentence or two that describes each 
link. Fill that description with trigger words—words that us-
ers themselves would say if asked to describe what they’re 
looking for (fig 6.2). You’ll ensure that each tap adds value, 
and reduce the risk that users will ping-pong back and forth 
between screens.
Truncation is not a content strate…
Where are all those teasers going to come from? If they don’t 
exist already, then you’re going to have to write them (and 
make sure there’s a home for them inside your CMS). Don’t 
fall into the trap of thinking that you can simply display the first 
sentence or two of your body copy, then drop in an ellipsis.
Unless you intentionally wrote the text to be a great teaser, 
it probably won’t be. Crafting a teaser is an art—and it’s differ-
ent from writing the first sentence or two of your content. 
Amazon does an admirable job of making their vast prod-
uct catalog accessible on mobile devices, and they gain signifi-
cant business value by enabling shoppers to purchase from 
their smartphones. But they miss the mark in presenting navi-
gation teasers that entice users to take action. Why? They’re 
recycling content from the desktop site and truncating it for 
summaries (fig 6.3).
Not written for reuse
Taking text intended for use on the desktop site means you 
don’t know what you’ll get when it appears on a smaller mo-
bile screen. Information like the name of the product is dupli-
cated over and over, wasting space and providing little value 
to the user.
No trigger words
The whole point of writing a teaser is to stuff it full of the 
words your readers are thinking of when they describe what 
they’re looking for. The first sentence or two of Amazon’s 

	
114 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Fig 6.3: Copy that makes sense in the 
context of Amazon’s desktop product 
page makes for a lousy teaser. It lacks 
seductive trigger words, valuable space 
is wasted repeating the product name, 
and a bulleted list is just plain wrong 
for this context.

 	
Information Architecture	 115	
body copy wasn’t written with that goal in mind, which 
means that instead of tightly written navigation copy designed 
to get users to tap, they present fluffy marketing copy that 
doesn’t communicate anything.
Not formatted appropriately
Amazon has all kinds of formatting lurking in its big blob of 
body copy. The bulleted list shown here was never intended 
to be taken out of context and crammed into a tiny tap target. 
Same goes for subheadings, pull quotes, tables, and other for-
matted text.
PAGE TITLES AND HEADLINES
What’s in a page title? Would a page by any other name be just 
as findable?
Whether it’s a product page, an article, a blog post, or a 
support topic, what you call your page is crucial to helping 
users find it. 
Page titles don’t just appear at the top of the page. 
Headlines also appear in links that help users find that page. 
So, your page titles and headlines will now pop up in more 
and more places: links on homepages and landing pages (both 
desktop and mobile), lists of links in sidebars and other related 
content, search results (both internal and external), in social 
media like Twitter and Facebook, and, yes, in their rightful 
place at the top of the screen. Given all these variables for 
how and where page headings might appear, it’s helpful to 
think of them as a system.
Don’t truncate headlines
This should go without saying, right? Just because you can’t 
count on having a large screen size or high resolution display 
doesn’t give you license to chop off page titles or headlines 
wherever you feel like it. The Daily Beast commits a litany of 
abuses on their mobile site—truncating headlines (presumably 
because there isn’t enough space?) and then wasting space 

	
116 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Fig 6.4: Apparently The Daily Beast 
needed to save space so they could 
include a byline and then repeat the 
author’s name in the summary.

 	
Information Architecture	 117	
by repeating the author’s byline in two places (fig 6.4). Space 
may be at a premium, but use it wisely. 
But what if the constraints of your device context or screen 
real estate mean that your headline won’t fit? You will need to 
create multiple versions of headlines to support all these dif-
ferent uses. Before you freak out about all the extra work im-
plied by that, take a step back and think about how to create a 
system of headlines.
Do write a system of headlines
I get to look a lot of companies’ content management under-
pants. Peeking inside a CMS, I often find writers asked to cre-
ate some combination of the following:
• Article headline
• Teaser headline
• Homepage headline
• Landing page headline
• External SEO headline
• Internal search headline
• Facebook headline
• Twitter headline
• iPhone headline
• Android headline
Can I get a chorus here? Don’t create content for a specific 
context. Sing it! 
Instead, tell your writers to focus on writing a few headline 
types, and then have each platform show the one that best 
fits its constraints. By devising a system of headlines that will 
cover a range of possible options, you can publish the right 
headlines and page titles to all these different contexts, with-
out truncating the text. 
This all comes back to your content management system. 
You need a tool that encourages your writers to create just the 
right number of headlines—so that the right headlines can be 
served up to each platform, as needed. 
For starters, consider two major variables:

	
118 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Length
For Twitter, the most extreme example, you have only 60–100 
characters to work with, since you will also include a link  
to your website and potentially cite a source. A headline  
that’s short enough for Twitter could work well in mobile 
contexts too.
You might just write one short headline and use it every-
where, but why limit the capabilities of platforms that can 
show more? You can use longer versions (100–200 characters) 
to provide more information in platforms that can support it.
Tone and style
Who are you writing your headlines for: people or robots? Of 
course, you want to write a headline that’s meaningful—even 
delightful—for the humans who are looking at your content. 
But that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t also optimize for search 
engines. You can do both.
Write two different versions of your headline. One that’s 
designed for human readers, who appreciate style, humor, 
and even the occasional pun. Write a different headline that’s 
crammed full of SEO-friendly keywords, and let Google (and 
your internal search engine) chew it up and spit it back out.
Taken together, that gives you four possible options: 
1.	Short, colloquial
2.	Long, colloquial
3.	Short, SEO-optimized
4.	Long, SEO-optimized
You might not even need all four of these options, based on 
the constraints imposed by the channels you serve and your 
design templates. You might even work out a different system 
along different variables that works better for your needs. The 
point here is to write headlines that conform to general guide-
lines for length, tone, and style, and then send the right ver-
sions to the right platforms—don’t create a dozen headlines to 
serve every possible context.

 	
Information Architecture	 119	
Super combo 
Want extra flexibility in your headlines? Consider writing a 
super-header that can be displayed separately from your head-
line (say, called out in a different font or type size) or attached 
to your headline with a colon. Now you’ve got a short head-
line, a long headline, and perhaps even some category meta-
data. The New York Times employs this approach to great effect, 
giving them flexibility to show headlines in lots of places and 
contexts, achieving maximum variety with minimum effort 
(fig 6.5).
SUMMARIES
Call it a summary, a deck, a teaser, or a tout, you need a short 
description for every long page of content. Not sure where 
you’re going to use this summary? Once you’ve got it, you’ll 
find all kinds of uses for it. It will come in handy for naviga-
tion teasers, as previously discussed. You can also use it on 
landing pages, sidebars, search results and SEO meta-descrip-
tions, and in social media like Facebook or Pinterest. 
Here’s the secret: get in the habit of writing a summary 
whenever you create new content. It’s much easier to sum-
marize the text at the same time you create the content than it 
is to treat it like a separate process—or worse, have to go back 
and fill in summaries later, when you realize they’re necessary 
on a new platform like mobile.
Don’t truncate body text for summaries
Were you hoping you could just recycle your body text? Have 
your designer decide how much space your text will receive? 
Have your developer assign an arbitrary character count in 
your CMS? Drop in an ellipsis when you run out of room? 
It didn’t work for headlines and it didn’t work for naviga-
tion teasers. It’s not going to work here either.
Blockbuster has no systemic way to handle summaries 
for its desktop or mobile applications. Instead, they just cut 
the text off at an arbitrary break—and that cutoff point varies 

	
120 	 Content Strategy for Mobile

 	
Information Architecture	 121	
from platform to platform. It’s frustrating for the user not to 
be able to see the full summary—or to click for more informa-
tion, only to be rewarded with a paltry few additional words 
(fig 6.6).
Blockbuster recently filed for bankruptcy, largely due to 
competition from internet upstart Netflix. Netflix runs on 
over 400 different device types (http://bkaprt.com/csm/65). 
They offer different experiences tailored for each platform—
but only two different sizes of summaries. Each platform can 
choose which size of summary to display, and it doesn’t get 
truncated (fig 6.7).
Do write a system of summaries and teasers
The magic happens when you create a single “content  
package” to hold all the chunks associated with a particular 
content type. 
For example, don’t create an article and then treat its deck 
like a chunk of text that only “lives” on the homepage—you’ll 
lose the opportunity to reuse that deck in other contexts. 
Fig 6.5: The New York Times writes 
surprisingly few headlines, but they 
can be combined in different ways and 
presented in various contexts.

	
122 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Fig 6.6: Blockbuster truncates text at random. The length of summaries is dictated by  
the design (or by an arbitrary character count) rather than by a meaningfully defined  
chunk of content.

 	
Information Architecture	 123	
Fig 6.7: Netflix writes a short and long version of each summary, each of which appears in 
a variety of contexts—desktop, mobile website, mobile apps, tablet apps, and search.

	
124 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Don’t write a product description without also writing a sum-
mary (or two)—and ensure that the product “tout” that adver-
tises it on landing pages is attached to the product itself. If you 
need to write a “meta summary” for SEO purposes, treat that 
as part of the same system. 
See how this all keeps coming back to your content man-
agement infrastructure? Your CMS should encourage authors 
to create summaries—different versions of summaries as 
needed—guiding them through the process and explaining 
how each will be used. Your CMS then also needs to enable 
each platform to pull the proper summary for its purposes. 
Rather than creating one-off bits of content that live on differ-
ent pages or in separate websites, each with their own edito-
rial workflows, your CMS helps your content creators think 
about content packages (fig 6.8).
Fig 6.8: NPR writes two teasers—a standard size and a mini teaser—which means each 
platform can choose which one to display.

 	
Information Architecture	 125	
BODY TEXT
Multiple headlines: check! System of summaries: check! 
Content package in the CMS: check!
Whoa. What about all these long pages of content?
As discussed earlier in the section on writing and editing, 
there’s no such thing as writing for mobile. There’s only good 
writing. You should think about how to improve the quality  
of all your text. Once you’ve done so, there’s no need to 
change the substance or the style to make it more appropriate 
for mobile.
The challenge, then, is in how you structure your body 
text. This is where the proverbial rubber hits the road, as far 
as getting your content on mobile is concerned. What’s the 
right way to take a long article, document, product spec, or 
instruction manual, and display it on different screen sizes? 
How do you chunk your content so it’s easy to read, regard-
less of its visual presentation? When does it make sense to 
break up long pages, and when does it make sense to keep 
them together?
Don’t paginate unnecessarily
Truncating headlines is bad. Truncating navigation teasers is 
bad. Truncating  content summaries is bad. Truncating body 
copy is… 
Yes. Bad.
One of mobile’s most persistent myths is that content has 
to be short. Mobile users only want the fun-size candy bar 
version, preferring to save the full-size Snickers for when 
they’re back at their desk. This misguided mindset gets drilled 
into designers, and as a result they fear the long page. How 
to avoid having mobile users wade through long passages of 
text? Why, break it up into shorter screens!
It’s as true on mobile as it is on the desktop: scrolling is not 
bad. Scrolling is good! 
On a touchscreen device, scrolling is much easier than pag-
inating: a fluid swish of the thumb versus a carefully placed 
tap. Even if your user has to navigate with a four-way rocker, 

	
126 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
it’s still easier to scroll than to select the link for “next page.” 
If you’re aiming at a user who’s reading with one eye and 
navigating with one thumb, scrolling wins every time. So why 
force users to tap instead of scroll?
Advertising-supported desktop websites often include page 
breaks because additional page views drive revenue. If ad 
revenue is a motivation on mobile, then you may need to use 
a similar calculus to determine where page breaks should ap-
pear. How Stuff Works drops a page break in the middle of an 
article on their mobile website, even though the same article 
on the desktop can be read all on one page (fig 6.9).
For other types of mobile content, it doesn’t necessarily 
make sense to force a page break. If you do choose to break 
up text, do it for a good reason. Cooks Illustrated requires users 
to tap back and forth between the ingredients listing and the 
recipe instructions, even though it would be much simpler to 
have all that information on one page (fig 6.10).
Do make it easy to jump to a section
The joy of whizzing through a page of text with a quick 
thumb swipe quickly wears thin when you’re scanning for a 
specific piece of information you know is buried in the text. 
In the same way that it’s important to provide a good teaser 
when the user is navigating to find a page, it’s also important 
on mobile to make it easy to jump to a specific section of a 
page without scrolling.
Anchor links
Ancient hypertexts point to a good solution, one that would 
have worked just as well in 1995: anchor links. By pulling out 
headings and listing them at the top of the page, users can eas-
ily jump directly to a section without scrolling. Anchor links 
also serve as signposts for the main sections of a page, helping 
users figure out if they’re in the right place (fig 6.11).

 	
Information Architecture	 127	
Fig 6.9: How Stuff Works chillingly drops 
a page break right in the middle of a 
sentence. The suspense is killing me!

	
128 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Fig 6.10: Cooks Illustrated forces users to jump back and forth between the ingredients and 
the recipe by tapping with sticky, greasy fingers. One long scrolling page would be easier 
to navigate.
Fig 6.11: Yiibu.com uses anchor links so 
users can easily jump to a specific section 
without scrolling.
Fig 6.12: Wikipedia displays the full 
introduction to the article and the headers 
to each subsection. Users tap the heading 
to view the content within that section.

 	
Information Architecture	 129	
Show / hide
A similar solution puts each sub-section of content behind 
a control that can be expanded. This is particularly useful in 
situations where users are not likely to read the whole docu-
ment, but will instead pick and choose which sections to 
read. However, if there’s a chance users might like to read the 
whole thing, it would also be helpful to let them expand (and 
collapse) the entire page at once, so they don’t have to manu-
ally tap into every section (fig 6.12).
TABLES
Information arranged in tables presents one of the most 
vexing problems for presenting content on mobile devices. 
Tabular information is, by definition, intended to be presented 
at wider screen resolutions than many mobile devices will 
support. Without being able to count on a certain screen size, 
how is it possible to ensure that table information won’t get 
cut off?
Don’t lose table formatting
It’s revenge of the blobs: content formatted for reading in 
table cells that gets reflowed as a single column on mobile 
devices. Sure, the content is still accessible, but the desired 
reading experience is lost. For example, side-by-side statistics 
on two College Bowl teams on ESPN get rendered as one long 
page—losing the opportunity to compare them (fig 6.13).
This can be a difficult problem, especially if all that con-
tent is stored in a blob in the CMS, as finding these cases 
may elude all but the most manual, labor-intensive solutions. 
When you’re inventorying your content, look carefully for 
tables that may break when moved to mobile. Enlist the ro-
bots to help you do this—for example, use an automated tool 
to find places where table tags appear in the page body.
Dealing with this problem will undoubtedly require some 
changes in your CMS. Based on your inventory, you should 

	
130 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Fig 6.13: Content from ESPN that’s intended to be read side-by-side gets dumped into 
a single column on mobile. A better solution might be a slideshow presentation that 
compares two at a time.

 	
Information Architecture	 131	
determine if the number of tables is small enough that you can 
handle them as one-offs. If you have lots of tables, then you 
will probably need a new content type in the CMS to handle 
these situations. If you’re dealing with many tables, you’ll 
need a way to programmatically reformat them without hu-
man intervention—but that requires you to call them out as a 
separate content object from the start.
And be patient with yourself: it may not be possible to 
review every single page of content with a table in it before it 
goes live on your mobile site.  Consider offering mobile users 
a way to flag content that’s not working—an alert that says “I 
can’t read this table” gives the user a sense of control over a 
broken situation, and gives you useful pointers to what needs 
to be fixed. You’ve turned an ugly error into a win-win for 
both you and the user.
Do ensure tables are readable
It goes without saying, right? You can’t just smush a table 
designed for a much larger screen into a smaller space. Table 
columns will collapse to a point where they’re too small to 
contain the content within, or the text will shrink until it’s a 
meaningless blur (fig 6.14).
While horizontal formatting fits easily on a desktop screen, 
narrower mobile screens simply can’t display the full table 
width. Provide an alternate version where you present infor-
mation in a vertical list, or align the table vertically rather than 
horizontally. Again, this may require defining tables as a sepa-
rate content type in your CMS.
Do use progressive enhancement
Even if you’re not developing a mobile website using re-
sponsive design, you can borrow progressive enhancement 
techniques to make your tables adapt to different screen sizes. 
If it’s possible to choose which columns are most important, 
and which are less essential, then you can take a page from 
the progressive enhancement playbook and display only the 
critical columns on smaller screens. Users can tap to select 

	
132 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
additional columns if they want to see the full table. (This ap-
proach would work well for a table of financial information, 
but wouldn’t work for the garment size charts example, since 
in that case every column is equally important.)
The details of how to code this in markup are well beyond 
the scope of this book, but more information is available in 
the resources section in the back of the book. 
IMAGES AND INFOGRAPHICS
Did I say tables were one of the most vexing problems we  
face in presenting desktop content on mobile? Tables are a 
cakewalk compared to the truly formidable problem that  
images pose. 
The solution to this problem is complex, because it re-
quires changes on both the front-end and the back-end.  
We’ll need to crop different image sizes, which obviously 
means changes to our production workflow, and likely re-
quires changes to existing assets. What’s more, fixing this 
problem means we’ll need to change the way we handle  
images in HTML. 
How’s this going to work?
Fig 6.14: Shrink-to-fit might work 
for jeans, but it doesn’t work for the 
garment size charts on New York and 
Company’s mobile website (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/66).

 	
Information Architecture	 133	
Don’t shrink large images
“I’m just gonna take this giant image and crunch it down so it 
fits on a 320×240 screen, okay?” No, this is not okay.
First, the image will likely be unrecognizable when ren-
dered at a smaller size. Details that are crisp and clear in a 
large image may be a blur at a smaller resolution. And if it’s an 
infographic that includes text? Forget about it (fig 6.15). 
Second, the larger image requires more bandwidth to 
download over a cell connection. A heavy image that provides 
less value? Not a good content strategy.
Instead, you’ll need to prepare multiple versions of images 
(see below for more information about creating a system of 
image crops). The internet’s love affair with dense infograph-
ics may need to find a new outlet—consider breaking large 
infographics down into smaller chunks presented as a slide-
show. (Or, really, just quit it with the overly complex info-
graphics and present the data more simply, in text.)
Now, if you’re sitting on thousands or hundreds of thou-
sands of large images, re-cropping them all would be a mas-
sive undertaking. In the short term, if you’re forced to auto-
matically resize large images on mobile, at least make sure 
users can tap to get to the full-size image.
In all cases, make sure that the information shown in the 
image is also communicated in the text, either in the body 
copy, in alt text, or both. That’s not just good for mobile—it’s 
good for accessibility and SEO too.
Don’t truncate large images
“I’m just going to chop off the part of the image that won’t fit 
on a mobile screen, okay?” (fig 6.16)
Let’s not even dignify this one with a response.
Do create a system of image crops
It’s likely you will need to cut additional image sizes to sup-
port different screen sizes. As with all other content types, 
you should not plan to cut images for a specific context.  

	
134 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Fig 6.15: How does Adweek think we 
use our mobiles? Apparently not to 
read the data that’s rendered illegible 
in this infographic.

 	
Information Architecture	 135	
Fig 6.16: The percentage of people 
viewing news content on mobile 
phones is skyrocketing! At least, I 
assume that’s what the truncated 
infographic would have shown.

	
136 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Don’t cut one size that’s the perfect fit for your mobile web-
site, and a slightly different size for your iPhone app. That 
way lies madness.
Rather, your plan should be to develop a system of image 
crops. Cut the smallest number of image sizes that will serve 
the widest possible range of contexts and screen resolutions. 
Assuming you can scale images down somewhat (not a lot) to 
fit different screens, you should be able to get away with four 
to eight different sizes. Exact image dimensions will be based 
on your specific requirements.
Keep an eye on responsive images
You don’t have to go very far into responsive web design  
before you find very smart people banging on how to get 
HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to handle different image sizes. 
Covering the ins and outs of this lively debate is outside the 
scope of this book, but more information is available in the 
resources section.
YOU’RE ALMOST THERE
We’ve talked strategy and planning—you’ve figured out how 
to set a direction for where you need to go. We’ve discussed 
writing and editing, and your content should be simpler and 
easier to read. And we’ve gone over how your information 
architecture might change to adapt to new content structures.
Now, we need to look inside, at how your organization 
works. Developing a content strategy for mobile won’t work 
if all you look at is your content. You have to change your 
people and your process too.

 	
People and Process	 137	
Your content isn’t going to take care of itself. 
Multi-channel publishing will expose the cracks and fault 
lines in your organization. A publishing workflow that’s ade-
quate for your desktop site (at least, most of the time) will start 
to crack and crumble when you begin publishing adaptive 
content to other channels. 
You know what? That’s terrific. As with so many other 
aspects of content strategy outlined in this book, mobile can 
be a catalyst to make your entire publishing process more 
efficient and more effective. By forcing you to focus on how 
you’re going to get your content on mobile, you can make 
sure that all your content has clear ownership, is reviewed 
regularly, and is doing what it’s supposed to for your readers 
and your business.
If you want to deliver great content, on whichever device 
or platform your customer wants to consume it, then you’re 
going to need to clean house within your organization first. 
Here’s what needs to change:7
PEOPLE AND 
PROCESS

	
138 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
• People: defining leadership principles and clarifying 
people’s roles and responsibilities has way more influence 
on your content’s success than the technology you use for 
your CMS, or whether you deliver it via a mobile website 
or native app. Content touches every corner of your orga-
nization—mobile can force you to define who does what.
• Process: you’ll need new metrics and measurement pro-
cesses to evaluate whether your content is doing its job. 
Your review and approval processes will also need to 
change now that you’re publishing your content to differ-
ent platforms and devices. Don’t wait until you’re ready 
to launch a new mobile website or iPad app to define how 
those processes will work.
PEOPLE
Publishing to mobile means new tasks. New decisions to be 
accountable for. New problems to worry about.
Defining who does what, when, and why is the most im-
portant thing you can do to ensure your content delivers on 
every platform. 
Leadership
Remember the bad old days of the web, when everyone’s 
homepage and main navigation bar reflected the turf battles 
going on within the company? Your website structure 
shouldn’t map to your org chart—it should map to how users 
think about their tasks and goals.
That goes double for mobile. Your users don’t think they’ll 
get different content or functionality from you just because 
they’re using a mobile device. So don’t build that distinction 
into your org chart.
All change requires leadership from people who are aligned 
on the what, why, and how. Your leaders should be able to:
• Evangelize and promote why mobile is important to execu-
tives and business owners.

 	
People and Process	 139	
• Conduct research and analyze data about how your cus-
tomers use mobile—today, and in the future.
• Assemble cross-functional teams to tackle problems in mo-
bile content delivery.
• Assign budget for investing in new mobile initiatives.
• Break through inter-departmental conflicts in terms of who 
“gets credit” for mobile success or failure.
Organizational structure
While the org chart is not destiny, setting up silos within  
your company is a risk. When planning for how to staff and 
deliver your mobile initiatives, you should guard against  
giving people incentives to think of mobile as a totally sepa-
rate experience.
Your customer doesn’t expect your company to be different 
just because they visit you on a device with a smaller screen. 
They know you’re supposed to be all one company. So don’t 
build conflict between mobile and your other digital channels 
into your org chart. Instead, figure out how to encourage your 
teams to create a great experience for your customer—regard-
less of channel, platform, or device.
Make sure there are clear lines of responsibility and report-
ing relationships between the mobile team and the people 
responsible for the desktop web. Give your team incentives to 
think holistically about the experience.
Don’t tell your team to get a mobile site or app up quickly, 
without a plan for how to manage and maintain its content 
over time. If you do that, you run the risk of forking your con-
tent and creating an experience that’s distinct from the desk-
top, with no plan for how you’re going to keep it going.
Roles and responsibilities
Who is responsible for content in your organization? Truth 
be told, it’s lots of different people. Representatives from “the 
business,” IT, user experience, brand and marketing, legal, HR, 
PR, and communications all contribute to content on the web.

	
140 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Does adding in mobile mean a whole new set of people, 
roles, permissions, and responsibilities? Hopefully not. 
Instead, your goal should be to educate and empower every-
one in your organization who’s currently contributing content 
to understand and deliver great content for mobile.
If your organization is like most others, “everyone in your 
organization who’s currently contributing content” might be 
many people—even more than you expect. As with so many 
other examples in this book, mobile forces you to track these 
people down and have those conversations. If you have prod-
uct owners who describe the features and benefits of their 
product, marketers who ask for landing pages to support their 
latest campaign, or social media managers who promote your 
company on Facebook or Twitter, then you need to align all 
these content creators around what you’re doing on mobile. 
After all—if everyone is working together, everyone’s job  
is easier.
Defining roles and responsibilities around mobile may re-
quire you to look at some or all of the following:
Content package creation
If you’re planning to develop new content structures so you 
have more flexibility in mobile, someone needs to create 
them. What works for many companies is to have business 
content owners contribute product or marketing content as 
they always have—often, this is an offline process managed 
via Word documents, PDFs, and email. Then a dedicated  
editor or content strategist goes in to write new headlines, 
summaries, and navigation text. Mobile makes it even more 
critical to have an editor with a birds-eye view go over all the 
content systematically. In some organizations, a separate con-
tent producer is responsible for entering the content into  
the CMS. 
Taxonomy and metadata
You need someone in your organization to maintain and re-
view the taxonomy, tags, and other metadata used to power 

 	
People and Process	 141	
the site. Any changes you make can have a ripple effect across 
platforms, and so someone needs to understand the entire 
puzzle. Many organizations find that having one person to 
oversee the entire taxonomy and metadata means that content 
becomes easier to search and browse.
Media production
If you will need additional crop sizes for photos and graphics, 
that may be a large undertaking. Your organization will most 
likely need to define a project to do that, and task your cre-
ative services team (or freelancers) with getting it done. 
Same goes for other media types, like Flash data visualiza-
tions or videos—someone within your team must develop 
fallbacks for different media types. That person or persons’ 
role should also include making sure all your content creators 
know which formats they should avoid since they’ll require 
duplicate effort for mobile.
Mobile editor
If you have a separate mobile website, or you get to the point 
where you want to feature or prioritize different content on 
mobile, consider creating a mobile editor role within your  
organization who programs mobile content. Keep in mind  
this person will also need to have different permissions with 
your CMS.
Having this role defined is especially important if you ever 
publish emergency content, or you have content that must be 
updated for legal reasons. In a crisis situation, the last thing 
you need is to have someone forget to update the mobile site.
PROCESS
The ongoing care and feeding of your content may get more 
complicated, as you’ve got more moving pieces. Let’s take a 
look at some content aspects that you’ll need to monitor as 
part of a regular oversight process.

	
142 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Analytics
You can’t do mobile content strategy correctly until you  
define how you’re going to measure and optimize perfor-
mance. Marko Hurst of Content Analytics told me this re-
quires two things. First, you need to choose the right metrics 
and key performance indicators (KPIs) to measure. Second, 
you need the right process for getting this data—and using it 
to make decisions.
Measurement
You know you want to use data to inform your decisions 
about what to do on mobile. But which data? At the basic 
level, you need to track observable changes in how people  
are using your content on mobile. But there are lots of chang-
es you can track, and not everything you can measure is actu-
ally useful. 
Figure out what you can measure that actually reflects a 
change in your users’ behavior—a change in behavior that 
would tell you to do something different within your busi-
ness. At this point in your mobile content strategy, you’re 
probably looking for changes in the way people interact with 
your content on both the desktop and mobile devices:
• Do you see an increase in the number of users accessing 
your site through mobile devices? Have you seen a corre-
sponding decrease in visits from the desktop? This can  
help you determine if your customers are using mobile and 
the desktop interchangeably, or if you’re reaching mobile-
mostly users.
• Examine how your device and platform usage may vary by 
time of day, level of engagement, time on site, and other 
usage metrics. Some businesses believe that they should 
prioritize content differently on different platforms, or  
at different times of day—this data can help inform  
those decisions.

 	
People and Process	 143	
• Similarly, look at what type of content people are search-
ing or browsing for from different devices. Don’t rush to 
judgement here—make sure you have a large enough base 
of content and users on different devices before you make 
conclusions about what people want and how it varies  
by platform.
• Review search queries (both internal searches and external 
referrers) that come from mobile browsers. Focus particu-
larly on search queries on mobile that get redirected to the 
mobile homepage, if you haven’t optimized that content  
for mobile.
• If you offer a “full desktop website” link, look at exit pages 
where mobile users abandon your mobile site for the desk-
top site.
These examples are only general guidelines for what you 
might want to track. You need to figure out which measure-
ments are unique to your business. Jared Spool says, “Generic 
KPIs produce generic results. If we really want something that 
touches the core of what makes our business special, it should 
be a metric that only applies to what we're doing,” (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/67).
Decision-making process
Marko Hurst told me that having the right process to evaluate 
the data and use it to make decisions within your organization 
is crucial to success. There’s no point in gathering data if it 
doesn’t help you actually do something different on mobile.
The right metrics are essential, but are only a part of the 
solution. You need a proven, repeatable, and rigorous process 
for collecting, analyzing, and acting on the data, which will 
allow for constant success, not random chance. Even with 
the right metrics, if you don't follow and refine your process 
for success, your “right metrics” won't matter and your level of 
success will be limited to little more than luck.

	
144 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Too often, data like page views or unique visitors doesn’t 
tell you anything that you can act on—this is true on the desk-
top web, and it’s true for mobile too. Even “engagement met-
rics” like time on page or page bounces don’t necessarily tell 
you anything, unless you’ve figured out what changes in this 
measurement mean to your business, and how you’ll act on it 
when it does change.
Finally, don’t think your analytics data will answer all of 
your questions about what people want and expect from mo-
bile. Make sure your content governance includes a plan for 
user research too.
SEO
About thirty percent of global search queries come from mo-
bile devices, and analysts estimate that by 2016, a majority of 
searches will be mobile searches (http://bkaprt.com/csm/68). 
Your content strategy for mobile needs to include search en-
gine optimization.
But how? Standards and practices for publishing content to 
the mobile web are still relatively young, and SEO for mobile 
is still in its infancy. How should your content governance 
and SEO practices change?
Not at all
One compelling strategy is not to change your strategy at all. 
(Hooray for laziness!) Like with other recommendations in 
this book, it’s not wise to jump into doing anything different 
for mobile until you understand the parameters better. Instead 
of trying to develop a different approach for mobile search, 
it’s totally okay to treat desktop and mobile the same.
In fact, this seems to be the approach that Google prefers. 
They’ve indicated their preference for using responsive web 
design to serve the same content to all users (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/69). A content strategy for mobile that doesn’t dis-
tinguish between desktop content, mobile content, and tablet 
content—it’s all just your content—may be the best SEO  
strategy, too.

 	
People and Process	 145	
Mobile ≠ local
If you’re bugging out in disbelief that you shouldn’t optimize 
mobile searches differently, remember one key point: just be-
cause a search is from mobile doesn’t mean it’s a local search. 
Local searches may disproportionately come from mobile de-
vices, but one doesn’t necessarily imply the other.
You may need to focus on optimizing your search queries 
for searches that include location information, but that ap-
proach would still benefit both mobile and desktop users.
Keyword research
As part of your ongoing maintenance and governance process-
es, you can start evaluating whether mobile search queries use 
different keywords from other searches. For example:
• Are mobile searches shorter than desktop searches?
• Do mobile searches have more typos and errors than desk-
top searches?
• Are mobile users searching for different keywords or using 
different search terms?
Mobile users may use language differently. Understanding 
how their keyword and search term use changes might tell 
you that you need to assign different SEO keywords, or even 
modify the labels and ordering within your navigation system. 
As with everything else, those decisions are best made with 
actual data.
Approval processes
Approval processes are the “hard review” steps—the approv-
als built into the system that must take place before content 
can go live. The approval workflow needs to balance security 
with usability. As Jeff Eaton told me, “Everyone wants one-
click publish, no one wants one-click embarrassment.”

	
146 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Legal review
Adaptive content creates all kinds of new challenges for legal 
review. Is your legal team looking at a PDF screenshot of the 
desktop page (or worse, a print-out) as part of their review 
and commenting system? What happens when they need 
to consider different content objects appearing in different 
channels?
Jeff Gladchun, J.D., Director, Digital Design Review at 
Fidelity Investments, told me in an email that legal review 
needs to move away from looking at the final presentation and 
into the CMS:
For many financial services firms, adaptive content poses unique 
and novel issues with respect to legal review standards and 
processes. In the broker-dealer context, regulations generally 
assume that electronic advertising can be reduced to singular 
communication and packaged neatly as a blob—typically 
a web or mobile screenshot (in PDF format, please)—for 
review, approval, and record keeping. Legal review systems are 
structured around this framework.
Adaptive content challenges the status quo, enabling the blob 
to fragment into chunks which can be consumed not only by your 
computer or mobile device, but by your car, your refrigerator, 
your whatever. How do I take a screenshot of your refrigerator? I 
can't. So in the future, the legal review process will need to move 
upstream to the CMS, where the chunks can be captured in their 
captive state in the form of metadata before they are unleashed 
for public consumption.
Business preview and QA
Many content creation processes rely on the preview function 
in the CMS to show the work in context. It won’t be enough 
to rely on previewing the desktop site in the future, so put a 
plan in place now for how your team can preview and  per-
form a QA review on your content in different form factors. 

 	
People and Process	 147	
Will it be possible to review every possible device, screen size, 
and platform out there? No way. But you can identify a few 
of the most popular ones. Your tech team may be able to help 
manage this process—keep in mind that it’s going to add some 
extra steps beyond just clicking that preview button.

	
148 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
CONCLUSION: IT CAN BE DONE
Are you looking dubiously at your desktop web content (not 
to mention all your content stored in PDFs, Flash videos, and 
hieroglyphic scrolls) and wondering if it will ever be possible 
to get it all on mobile?
You can. And you will. Because one day you’ll realize it’s 
not a nice-to-have. It’s a necessity.
Cancer.org did it
The American Cancer Society (ACS) publishes cancer.org, a 
website aimed at helping people prevent cancer, detect cancer 
early, get support and treatment, and contribute to the fight 
against cancer.
If ACS were like most organizations, they might have 
thought the following:
“Not that many people are visiting cancer.org from their 
mobile browser.” Or, “Surely the desktop website works well 
enough for mobile users.” And maybe, “Let’s just focus on the 
mobile use case, for the on-the-go cancer patient.”
ACS thought something different. David Balcom, Managing 
Director, Digital Platforms told me in an interview, “We felt 
it was a life-saving imperative to have all of our content on 
mobile.”
ACS decided against publishing a subset of their mobile 
content for a couple of reasons. First, they reviewed their 
analytics data and realized that people were using the desktop 
site from mobile browsers. This made them wonder if they 
needed to deliver all their content on mobile, instead of just  
a subset.
Then, they compared data about Americans who were 
more likely to use mobile devices to access the internet with 
data about people who are less likely to be screened for can-
cer. African Americans, Hispanics, and low-income Americans 
are less likely to have access to early cancer detection—and 
they’re also more likely to use mobile phones to access the 

 	
Conclusion: It Can Be Done	 149	
web (http://bkaprt.com/csm/70). ACS concluded that some of 
the most important people they needed to reach might not be 
able to see their content unless it was optimized for mobile. 
ACS realized they needed to act. They worked quickly to 
get their mobile website up, working along with development 
partner Moovweb. But ACS had to overcome some challenges 
to get their content on mobile. According to Balcom, “Your 
CMS, your content, and your UX all have to line up.”
Like many organizations, they weren’t blessed with a nim-
ble CMS that would easily facilitate everything they wanted 
to do on mobile. They explored the possibility of  building 
additional publishing workflows into their CMS to give them 
more editorial control over which content was published to 
mobile, but concluded it would slow them down too much. 
Balcom said, “If we had created a separate workflow, it would 
have added a year to the process.” Instead, they chose to have 
a single publishing workflow, with decisions about which 
content to show or hide happening at the server level, which 
reduced their time to market significantly.
Similarly, they faced technical challenges that precluded 
implementing a responsive design, focusing instead on creat-
ing separate templates for mobile. Balcom says they found 
that “responsive would have added significant time to the 
project,” and they felt they were better off focusing on provid-
ing a great experience for smartphone users. While that deci-
sion was right for ACS, other organizations might find that 
a responsive design solution would be faster—it just goes to 
show that there’s no one-size-fits-all strategy when it comes to 
mobile publishing.
ACS had at least one important thing in their favor: they’re 
known for having clear, concise, credible content. Because 
their desktop web content was already well written, they 
were able to easily translate it to the mobile screen without 
rewriting or restructuring it. Balcom says, “It’s not that it was 
designed and written for mobile, it’s just good content.” Other 
organizations can take this to heart: even if you’re just getting 
started on your mobile strategy, improving your content now 
will benefit you in the long run.

	
150 	 Content Strategy for Mobile

 	
Conclusion: It Can Be Done	 151	
Fig 8.1: Cancer.org shows all their 
desktop content in a mobile-optimized 
website too.

	
152 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Because they’ve been able to deliver a satisfying mobile 
experience, ACS has nearly doubled the number of people vis-
iting the site from a mobile device. The increase in visits from 
mobile browsers shows that there was pent-up demand for 
better mobile content. By optimizing their content for mobile, 
they’re getting valuable—even life-saving—information into 
the hands of the people who need it (fig 8.1).
The secret to delivering a great experience on mobile is 
something every organization can do, starting right now. It’s 
content strategy. Balcom concludes:
You have to get it into the bloodstream of the organization. 
You cannot be successful without thinking mobile from the 
beginning. It’s not as expensive or hard as people think it is. More 
important: it is our future. It all starts with recognizing a gap 
and figuring out how to close it. It starts with a strategy.
YOU CAN DO IT TOO
Remember: you are not in the magazine publishing business, 
or the brochure publishing business, or the binder publishing 
business. You are not in the webpage publishing business. You 
are not in the mobile app publishing business.
You are in the content publishing business. It is your 
mission to get your content out, on whichever platform, in 
whichever format your audience wants to consume it. Your 
users get to decide how, when, and where they want to read 
your content. It is your challenge and your responsibility to 
deliver a good experience to them.
To provide a great experience on mobile—one that delivers 
the information users want, and can be maintained internal-
ly—you need a content strategy for mobile. 
Think it can’t be done? Why, it’s just these ten simple steps:
1.	Quit thinking you can just guess what subset of content a 
“mobile user” wants. You’re going to guess wrong.
2.	Do your research, look at competitors, and evaluate your 
analytics data. Figure out how to convince your CEO and  

 	
Conclusion: It Can Be Done	 153	
your executive team (in other words, people with money) 
that you need a content strategy for mobile.
3.	Before jumping into imagining new mobile products, figure 
out how you can achieve content parity across platforms. 
You don’t have to show exactly the same content on every 
device, but you should provide an equivalent experience.
4.	Use mobile as a catalyst to remove content that isn’t provid-
ing value. Inventory and audit your content to find what’s 
outdated, badly-written, or unnecessary. When you edit 
or delete it, do it to make the experience better for all your 
users—desktop and mobile.
5.	Don’t create content for a specific context or platform. It’s 
not your desktop web content, your mobile web content, 
your tablet content, your email content, your social con-
tent, or even your print content. It’s just your content.
6.	Instead, create content packages: a flexible system of con-
tent elements that cover a range of possible places where 
your content might get used. Then manage and maintain 
those content elements all in one place.
7.	Develop a process and workflow that will support and en-
able maximum content reuse with minimum additional 
effort. That’s adaptive content: structured content that’s cre-
ated so that it can be reused. 
8.	Separate content from form and create presentation-inde-
pendent content. Don’t encode meaning through visual 
styling—you’ll have to strip it out when you move to an-
other platform. Instead, add structure and metadata to  
your content.
9.	Ensure that your content management tools make it easy—
and possible—for your content creators to develop the con-
tent structures needed to support adaptive content. This is 
a user experience problem for CMS design.
10.	Invest in CMS frameworks that support multi-channel pub-
lishing. If you’re imagining a future where you have finer 
control over which content you publish to mobile, desktop, 
and everything in-between, then you’ve got work to do to 
make sure your tools, processes, and workflow will sup-
port that.

	
154 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Still think it’s daunting? It is. It’s also a huge opportunity—
maybe the best we’ll see in our careers—to change the way 
we create, manage, and maintain our content. And it’s a big 
chance to create a better user experience by improving the 
quality of our content. Let’s not waste it.


	
156 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
RESOURCES
Progressive enhancement for tables
Presenting complex, multi-column data on small screens is 
both a design and a content strategy challenge. These resourc-
es provide some background on the magnitude of the chal-
lenge and show prototypes that offer concrete workarounds.
• A Responsive Design Approach for Complex, Multicolumn 
Data Tables, Filament Group (http://bkaprt.com/csm/71)
• Responsive Tables Demo, Simon Elvery (http://bkaprt.com/
csm/72)
• A New Take on Responsive Tables, ZURBlog (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/73)
• Responsive Data Table Roundup, CSS-Tricks (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/74)
Responsive images
Handling different sizes and formats of images is a content 
strategy problem, a front-end problem, a back-end problem...
well, just a big problem. These resources explain why images 
are so difficult to handle, and offer some solutions (and poten-
tial future solutions).
• Responsive images: what's the problem, and how do we fix 
it?, Dev.Opera (http://bkaprt.com/csm/75)
• Responsive Images: How they Almost Worked and What 
We Need, Mat Marquis (http://bkaprt.com/csm/76)
• Which responsive images solution should you use?,  
CSS-Tricks (http://bkaprt.com/csm/77)
• Picturefill, Scott Jehl (http://bkaprt.com/csm/78)
Research and testing on mobile
Even if you’re familiar with conducting user research and 
usability tests of desktop websites, you may find that mobile 

 	
Resources	 157	
presents a whole new set of challenges. Make sure you’re test-
ing with the right people, the right methods, in the right con-
text, and with the right devices with these resources.
• Mobile user research methods, Lorraine Paterson (http://
bkaprt.com/csm/79)
• 10 Tips for Mobile Usability Testing, Trent Mankelow 
(http://bkaprt.com/csm/80)
• How to Build a Device Lab, Dave Olsen (http://bkaprt.com/
csm/81)
• Mobile Device Testing: The Gear, Bagcheck (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/82)
Mobile SEO
Like so many other topics in this space, search engine optimi-
zation for mobile is a rapidly changing landscape. And, as with 
so much of search engine optimization, the topic is subject to 
hype and fierce debates. These resources attempt to sort out 
what we know about what users (and search engines) want.
• Google Finally Takes A Clear Stance On Mobile SEO 
Practices, Barry Schwartz (http://bkaprt.com/csm/83)
• Mobile SEO is a Myth, Ryan Jones (http://bkaprt.com/
csm/84)
• Mobile SEO Best Practices, MobiThinking (http://bkaprt.
com/csm/85)

	
158 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
REFERENCES
Shortened URLs are numbered sequentially; the related long 
URLs are listed below for reference.  
Chapter 1
	 1	 http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/double-vision-global-
trends-in-tablet-and-smartphone-use-while-watching-tv/
	 2	 http://mobithinking.com/mobile-marketing-tools/latest-mobile-stats/
d#mobile-search
	 3	 http://www.ljs.com/images/docs/smart_phones_create_smart_shoppers.
pdf
	 4	 http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/In-store-mobile-commerce/
Findings.aspx
	 5	 http://www.tealeaf.com/news/news-releases/2011//Tealeaf-Announces-
New-Mobile-Research.php
	 6	 http://www.acquitygroup.com/News-And-Ideas/News/Acquity-Group-
Mobile-Audit-Reports-210--Increase-i
	 7	 http://static.googleusercontent.com/external_content/untrusted_dlcp/
www.google.com/en/us/events/thinkmobile2011/pdfs/time-for-mobile-is-
now.pdf
	 8	 http://www.scribd.com/webrazzi/d/82693519-ComScore-2012-Mobile-
Future-in-Focus
	 9	 http://pewinternet.org/Commentary/2010/September/The-Power-of-
Mobile.aspx
 	10	 http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/survey-new-u-s-
smartphone-growth-by-age-and-income/
 	11	 http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Smartphones/Section-2/
Smartphones-as-an-internet-appliance.aspx
 	12	 http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Teens-and-smartphones/Cell-
phone-ownership/Smartphones.aspx
 	13	 https://twitter.com/wilto/statuses/63284673723375616
 	14	 http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2011/08/overdone.
single.html
 	15	 https://twitter.com/cennydd/status/61004881011539968
 	16	 http://blog.securecube.com/web-apps/browser-display-statistics/
 	17	 http://mobithinking.com/mobile-marketing-tools/latest-mobile-stats/a

 	
References	 159	
 	18	 http://mobithinking.com/blog/china-top-mobile-market
 	19	 http://mobithinking.com/mobile-research-casestudy
	 20	 http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Cell-Internet-Use-2012.aspx
 	21	 http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Digital-differences/Main-
Report/The-power-of-mobile.aspx
 	22	 http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Digital-differences/Main-Report/
Internet-adoption-over-time.aspx
 	23	 http://pewinternet.org/Commentary/2012/February/Pew-Internet-Mobile.
aspx
 	24	 http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/two-thirds-of-new-
mobile-buyers-now-opting-for-smartphones/
 	25	 http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23028711
	 26	 http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2011/feb/09/ken-olsen-obituary
 	27	 http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Just-in-time/Main-Report/
Findings.aspx
 	28	 http://venturebeat.com/2012/07/31/facebook-mobile-maus/
 	29	 http://www.netmagazine.com/features/10-must-see-sessions-sxsw-
interactive
 	30	 http://blogs.msdn.com/b/jensenh/archive/2006/03/31/565877.aspx
 	31	 https://twitter.com/#!/grigs/status/200577176314191872
Chapter 2
	 32	 http://www.useit.com/alertbox/mobile-vs-full-sites.html
 	33	 http://www.netmagazine.com/news/designers-respond-nielsen-
mobile-121892
 	34	 http://www.netmagazine.com/opinions/nielsen-wrong-mobile
 	35	 http://www.usa.gov/webreform/state-of-the-web.pdf
 	36	 http://www.netmagazine.com/interviews/nielsen-responds-mobile-
criticism
 	37	 http://www.modelmetrics.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/iPadSurvey-
May10.pdf
 	38	 http://www.observer.com/2011/07/scott-dadich-ipad-conde-nast/
 	39	 http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/02/04/a-race-between-digital-and-
print-magazines/?pagewanted=all
	 40	 http://paidcontent.org/2012/02/22/419-conde-nast-aims-to-unify-tablet-
and-mobile-magazine-production/

	
160 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
Chapter 3
	 41	 http://bradfrostweb.com/blog/web/for-a-future-friendly-web/
	 42	 http://www.slideshare.net/danieljacobson/npr-examples-of-cope
	 43	 http://mashable.com/2012/05/08/google-seo-headlines/
	 44	 http://mashable.com/2011/08/29/social-media-case-studies/
	 45	 http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/scott-forstall-the-sorcerers-
apprentice-at-apple-10122011.html
	 46	 http://gawker.com/5847344
	 47	 http://nymag.com/news/features/nypd-2012-4/
	 48	 http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2011/10/16/herman-cain-s-
unlikely-republican-rise.html
	 49	 http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/15/magazine/republicans-who-
supported-gay-marriage.html?pagewanted=all
	 50	 http://nimble.razorfish.com/
	 51	 http://techguylabs.com/
	 52	 http://www.markboulton.co.uk/journal/comments/responsive-content-is-
not-a-thing
	 53	 http://think-info.com/2012/03/26/separating-content-from-presentation/
	 54	 http://groups.google.com/group/contentstrategy/browse_thread/thread/5c
1770a39994b55a/05964588b922a0b6?lnk=gst&q=eoin#05964588b922a0b6
	 55	 http://adage.com/article/media/sale-tv-guide-1-a-shock-a-surprise/131849/
	 56	 http://bunchedundies.blogspot.com/2011/11/tv-guide-september-14-1985.
html
	 57	 http://www.markporter.com/notebook/?p=1080
	 58	 https://twitter.com/textfiles/status/119403173436850176
	 59	 http://dswillis.com/uxcrank/?p=378
Chapter 4
	 60	 https://developers.google.com/analytics/devguides/collection/other/
mobileWebsites
	 61	 http://insights.chitika.com/2012/study-apple-ipad-accounts-for-94-64-of-
all-tablet-web-traffic/
	 62	 http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/2012/4/Kindle_
Fire_Captures_more_than_Half_of_Android_Tablet_Market

 	
References	 161	
Chapter 6
	 63	 http://www.uie.com/brainsparks/2008/09/27/journal-of-usability-studies-
articles-lacking-in-usability/
	 64	 http://www.interaction-design.org/encyclopedia/progressive_disclosure.
html
	 65	 http://www.lukew.com/ff/entry.asp?1339
	 66	 http://wtfmobileweb.com/post/21777271474/completely-unreadable-
garment-size-charts-on-new
Chapter 7
	 67	 http://www.uie.com/articles/power_of_ux_kpi/
	 68	 http://allthingsd.com/20120210/heres-what-apple-and-google-are-fighting-
over-search-goes-mobile-by-2016/
	 69	 http://searchengineland.com/google-finally-takes-a-clear-stance-on-mobile-
seo-practices-123543
Conclusion
	 70	 http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Cell-Internet-Use-2012/Main-
Findings/Cell-Internet-Use.aspx
Resources
	 71	 http://filamentgroup.com/lab/responsive_design_approach_for_complex_
multicolumn_data_tables/
	 72	 http://elvery.net/demo/responsive-tables/
	 73	 http://www.zurb.com/article/982/a-new-take-on-responsive-tables
	 74	 http://css-tricks.com/responsive-data-table-roundup/
	 75	 http://dev.opera.com/articles/view/responsive-images-problem/
	 76	 http://www.alistapart.com/articles/responsive-images-how-they-almost-
worked-and-what-we-need/
	 77	 http://css-tricks.com/which-responsive-images-solution-should-you-use/
	 78	 https://github.com/scottjehl/picturefill
	 79	 http://lorrainepaterson.wordpress.com/2011/02/22/mobile-user-research-
methods/

	
162 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
	 80	 http://www.optimalusability.com/2012/01/10-tips-for-mobile-usability-
testing/
	 81	 http://www.dmolsen.com/mobile-in-higher-ed/2012/06/26/how-to-build-a-
device-lab-part-1/
	 82	 https://bagcheck.com/blog/22-mobile-device-testing-the-gear
	 83	 http://searchengineland.com/google-finally-takes-a-clear-stance-on-mobile-
seo-practices-123543
	 84	 http://www.searchenginejournal.com/mobile-seo-is-a-myth/35012/
	 85	 http://mobithinking.com/best-practices/mobile-seo-best-practices/


	
164 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I’ve been blessed by the support of so many colleagues and 
friends over the course of my career, but never more so than 
during the writing of this book. No one would be holding this 
book in their hands right now if it weren’t for these people.
To Jeffrey Zeldman, Eric Meyer, Toby Malina, Marci 
Eversole, and the entire team at An Event Apart, thank you for 
inviting me to speak at so many of your events—and for en-
couraging me to expand one of my talks into this book. I’m a 
better speaker and writer because I’ve held myself to the high 
standards you set.
To Mandy Brown, Max Fenton, Casson Rosenblatt, Jason 
Santa Maria, Krista Stevens, and Rob Weychert—all the won-
derful people at A Book Apart who make these great books 
happen—thank you for making this process go so smoothly, 
and for making my ideas look and sound better than I ever 
could on my own. You make a hard job look so easy.
To Paul Ford, thank you for writing the foreword to this 
book. It would be an honor just to have my name alongside 
yours on some scrap of paper, like a receipt or a Post-It note. 
Seeing your name on the cover of this book is an endless 
source of delight.
To Travis Harwood and Diana Turner, thank you for your 
enthusiasm and commitment to helping to research what we 
thought was going to be a whitepaper or report. If it weren’t 
for your focus and attention to this project, this book would 
have never happened. And to everyone I’ve worked with over 
the years at Bond Art + Science, especially Jenny Ng, Michael 
Dekker, and Jon Greacen, thank you for making me so much 
smarter about how the web works.
To David Balcom, Gerard Gober, Marko Hurst, Jeffrey 
Gladchun, Noz Urbina, and Rich Ziade, thank you for agree-
ing to be interviewed in support of my research for this book, 
and for being patient with my many questions. It’s because of 
your thoughtful and innovative approach to your work that 
our field is evolving so quickly, and for the better.  

 	
Acknowledgements	 165	
To Jeff Eaton, Rachel Lovinger, Stephen Turbek, and Luke 
Wroblewski, thank you for taking the time to read a draft of 
this book and provide your feedback. I knew I could count on 
you to push me to tighten my arguments and perfect my ex-
amples. I’m not sure whether I’m more proud to consider you 
all esteemed colleagues or trusted friends.
To my mother Gerry, my father Mike, and my step-father 
John, thank you for teaching me a sense of humor and the 
ability to write and communicate well. It’s really been the 
whole foundation of my success in life, and the best heirloom 
I could have received.
And especially to Randy Bender, Bill DeRouchey, Joe Fusco, 
Kristina Halvorson, Amanda Neville, Victor Preuninger, Paula 
Riley, Steve Schneider, Jai Sen, Alex Snell, Samantha Soma, 
and Carolyn Wood, thank you for your kindness, generosity, 
loyalty, and compassion during the parts of writing and  
editing this book that were the most painful for me. In small 
ways and large, each of you showed me what it means to be a 
true friend. 
V413HAV

	
166 	 Content Strategy for Mobile
A
academic websites  15
adaptive content  45, 47
advertising  8
Adweek  134
Amazon  113
American Cancer Society  148
American Eagle  42
analytics data  84, 142
app development  39
B
Balcom, David  148
Bank of America  13
banking websites  12
Blockbuster  119, 122
Boulton, Mark  65
Bowles, Cennydd  18
C
Comcast  107, 112
competitive reviews  85
content as a service  48
content inventories  96
	
representative sampling  100
content management systems  36, 75
	
coupled CMSs  78
	
infrastructure  124
content modeling  60
content parity  32, 80
Cooks Illustrated  126, 128
Create Once, Publish Everywhere 
(COPE)  48
D
Dadich, Scott  45
Daily Beast, The  115
designing for context  28
Digital Equipment Corporation  23
E
Eaton, Jeff  63, 76, 145
editing  103, 141
ESPN  130
G
Gap, The  40
gap analysis  102
Gass, William  6
Gladchun, Jeff  146
Gober, Gerard  90, 92
Google  144
Grigsby, Jason  30
Guardian, The  28, 71
H
Halvorson, Kristina  96
headlines  50, 54, 115
health information websites  13
How Stuff Works  126, 127
Hurst, Marko  142, 143
I
IKEA  11
images  132
iPad editions  42
K
Kelly, Eoin  68
L
leadership  138
legal issues  146
Lovinger, Rachel  58, 75
M
Manjoo, Farhad  17
Marlboro  14
Marquis, Mat  16
metadata  53, 69, 73, 140
mobile browsers  10
Mobile First  26
mobile-only users  20, 31
	
demography  21
INDEX

 	
Index	 167	
N
National Public Radio (NPR)  48, 124
Netflix  121, 123
New York and Company  132
New York Times, The  119
Nielsen, Jakob  34, 36
P
page titles See headlines
Pepsi  9
Perlis, Alan J.  5
Pew Internet Project reports  21
R
Readability  11, 47
reading on mobile devices  11, 125
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute  16
Resnick, Ethan  66
responsive content  65
responsive design  38
restaurant websites  17
retail websites  10
reusable content  54, 74
	
content alternatives  56
S
Scott, Jason  73
search engine optimization (SEO)  144
search functionality  91
sharing content  27
smartphone usage statistics  9, 10, 19, 
20, 26
Southwest Airlines  26
Spillers, Frank  111
Spool, Jared  110, 143
structured content  58
T
table formatting  129
tailored content  28
task-based functionality  24
Tech Guy Labs  61
Tumblr  59
TV Guide  69
U
United Airlines  24
Urbina, Noz  35, 48
user research  85
V
Verizon  112
W
wayfinding  110
Wikipedia  128
Y
Yagodich, Rick  67
Yiibu.com  128
Z
Ziade, Rich  11, 47

ABOUT A BOOK APART
Web design is about multi-disciplinary mastery and laser  
focus, and that’s the thinking behind our brief books for  
people who make websites. We cover the emerging and  
essential topics in web design and development with style, 
clarity, and, above all, brevity—because working designer-
developers can’t afford to waste time.
The goal of every title in our catalog is to shed clear light 
on a tricky subject, and do it fast, so you can get back to work. 
Thank you for supporting our mission to provide profession-
als with the tools they need to move the web forward. 
COLOPHON
The text is set in FF Yoga and its companion, FF Yoga Sans, 
both by Xavier Dupré. Headlines and cover are set in Titling 
Gothic by David Berlow.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
If the internet is more awesome 
than it was in 1995, Karen would 
like to claim a very tiny piece of the 
credit. For more than fifteen years 
Karen has helped create more us-
able digital products through the 
power of user experience design 
and content strategy. She founded 
Bond Art + Science in 2006, and has 
led content strategy and informa-
tion architecture engagements for The Atlantic, Fast Company, 
Franklin Templeton, and Fidelity.
Previously, Karen helped build the User Experience prac-
tice at Razorfish, hired as the very first information architect 
and leaving as the VP and national lead for user experience. 
There she led major design initiatives for The New York Times, 
Condé Nast, Disney, and Citibank, and managed a diverse 
team of information architects, content strategists, and user 
researchers.
Karen teaches Design Management in the MFA in 
Interaction Design program at the School of Visual Arts in 
New York, which aims to give students the skills they need 
to run successful projects, teams, and businesses. She is also 
VP of digital for consulting and venture capital firm Ignite 
Venture Partners.
Karen’s only professional experience is in content strategy 
and user experience design, work she pursued after receiv-
ing an M.S. in Technical Communication from Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute, where she focused her research on in-
terface design and usability.
Photo by Alison Grippo


