

 
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING METHODS AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTINUOUS PROCESS  
DYNAMICS, STABILITY, CONTROL 
AND AUTOMATION 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

 
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING METHODS  
AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova‟s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova‟s website  
under the e-book tab. 
 

 
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING METHODS AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTINUOUS PROCESS  
DYNAMICS, STABILITY, CONTROL 
AND AUTOMATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KAL RENGANATHAN SHARMA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

  
Copyright © 2015 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
For permission to use material from this book please contact us: 
nova.main@novapublishers.com 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No 
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of 
information contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, 
consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers‟ use of, or 
reliance upon, this material. Any parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated 
and copyright is claimed for those parts to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in 
this book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage 
to persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise 
contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the 
subject matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not 
engaged in rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A 
DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE 
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
 
Continuous process dynamics, stability, control and automation / editors, Kal Renganathan Sharma. 
       pages cm. --  (Chemical engineering methods and technology) 
  Includes index. 
 1.  Chemical process control.  I. Sharma, Kal Renganathan.  
  TP155.75.C665 2014 
  660'.2815--dc23 
  2014044403 
 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
ISBN: 978-1-63463-638-4 (eBook)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To my eldest son, R. Hari Subrahmanyan Sharma (alias Ramkishan)  
who turned thirteen on August 13th 2014


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
ix 
About the Author 
xvii 
Book Description 
xix 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1 
Chapter 2 
Continuous Polymerization  Process Technology 
33 
Chapter 3 
Mathematical Process Models 
59 
Chapter 4 
Continuous Process Dynamics 
249 
Chapter 5 
Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative  
Feedback Control 
323 
Chapter 6 
Frequency Response Analysis 
369 
Chapter 7 
Advanced Control Methods 
393 
Chapter 8 
Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
487 
Chapter 9 
Instruments 
527 
Chapter 10 
Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
545 
Index 
 
577 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
Automation came about after mechanization. Chemical process control is a subset of the 
field of automation theory and practice. AIChE, American Institute of Chemical Engineers, 
New York, NY recently celebrated their centennial or 100th anniversary in 2008. Both the CPI 
and the industrial controls market size is increasing. Process Control as a required course in 
the chemical engineering degree plan in a number of US universities came out in the late 60s 
or 70s. I instruct CHEG 4033 Process Dynamics and Control, MCEG 3073 Automatic 
Controls and MCEG 3193 Introduction to Robotics, CHEG 3043 Equilibrium Staged 
Separations, ELMT 2043 Industrial Electronics etc. I have served as the chairman of 
Continuous Mass Club: Technical Community of Monstanto Minichapter between 1990-
1993. This book is a natural outgrowth of these scholarly and research activities. A modern 
textbook is proposed that keeps pace with the progress in personal computing resources 
available to the student these days. Emphasis is placed on industrial application over rosy 
predictions. For instance, ideal PID control, proportional integral derivative control is not 
physically realizable. The competition of this book has a entire chapter devoted to PID 
control. Filters have to be added and then it is longer PID, it becomes FPID, filtered PID 
control! Discussions on overshoot is in excess of its occurrence in real applications. A careful 
scrutiny of overshoot can lead to the conclusion that it is more a mathematical artifact and 
less a engineering possibility It can be shown that overshoot per se violates second law of 
thermodynamics.. This book is more focused on the applications rather than on tuning and 
elloborate algebra. Calculus, Laplace transforms and other mathematical methods are used 
when necessary. A entire chapter is devoted to pharmacokinetic studies. Discussions on life 
systems draws the student attention more than hypothetical mathematical exercises. A entire 
chapter is devoted to control of robots. Advances made in nanorobots are also discussed in a 
separate chapter. Separate Chapters are devoted to mathematical models and process 
dynamics.  
Lessons in control are drawn from Trommsdorf effect, thermal wear design, 2 arm 
manipulator, Fukushima earthquake and deepwater horizon oil spill.  
Mathematical models can be used where pilot plant data is not available for scale-up. 
trouble shooting and in globalization. Process models can be classified as: A. Simulations 
from the Computer; B. Semi-Empirical Models; C. Mechanistic Models; D. Shell Balance 
Models; E. State Space Models; F. Dimensionless groups; G. Stochastic Models; H. 
Thermodynamic Analysis; I. Optimization Studies; J. Engineering Analysis and; K. 
Molecular Basis for Consitutive Laws. State space models can be used to describe a set of 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
x
variables in vector form in terms of matrix equations. The stability of the system can be 
studied using Eigenvalues and Eigenvector analysis. A scheme of 7 simultaneous simple 
irreversible reactions were considered. The state space model to describe this system is given 
by Eq. (2.90). This system can be viewed as an integrating system since all but Eigenvalues 
are negative with 4 Eigenvalues 0 The composition of a copolymer as a function of 
comonomer composition, reactivity ratios and reactor choice were derived from the kinetics 
of free radical initiation, propagation and termination reactions. The copolymerization 
equation is obtained using the QSSA quasi-steady-state approximation. As an example, 
copolymer composition with 4 monomers as a function of monomer composition made in 
CSTR is illustrated 1 The copolymer composition is sensitive to reactivity ratios to a 
considerable extent. The copolymer composition equation for a multi-component copolymer 
with n monomers were derived. This methodology was generalized for n monomers. The 
general form of the equation was represented in the matrix form using linear algebra. The rate 
matrix and rate equation are given. The QSSA can be written in the vector notation. When the 
Eigen values of the rate equation become imaginary the monomer concentration can be 
expected to undergo subcritical damped oscillations as a function of time. 
The occurrence of multiplicity in model solutions was illustrated by calculation of launch 
angle of stream of water during firefighting and elbow-up and elbow down solutions in the 
solution of inverse kinematics of a 3 arm manipulator with end effector (robot) and for a 
copolymer for certain values of reactivity ratios. 
Use and significance of dimensionless groups such as Reynolds number, Prandtl number, 
Biot number, Nusselt number, Mach number, Fourier number, Fick number, Newton number, 
Maxwell number (mass), Venrnotte number, Sharma number (mass), Maxwell number 
(momentum), Sherwood number, Shcmidt number, storage number/Sharma number (heat), 
Peclect number were discussed. Weiner-Hopf integral equation can be used to estimate the 
effects of mixing in a CSTR, contiuous stirred tank reactor. This can be done by estimating 
the degree of mixedness from the variance in SPC, statistical process control charts. The 
compositional distribution of AN in copolymer can be used as input. J is minimized with 
respect to  and the Weiner-Hopf integral equation is obtained. Groot and Warren developed 
a mesoscopic simulation tool. Molecules are treated as spherical objects that can obey the 
Newton‟s laws of motion. Physical properties and EOS of polymeric substances were 
obtained from this analysis. Conservative, dissipative and random forces were taken into 
account. In the canonical ensemble, the Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution can seen to be the 
solution to the Fokker Planck equation. 
The transient conversion in a PFR, plug flow reactor was derived. For a reaction of first 
order assuming that the conversion is analytic in space and time the governing equation can 
be shown to be of the hyperbolic type. For the zeroth order reaction the governing equation 
was found to be a wave equation! The hyperbolic PDEs can be solved for using the methods 
of relativistic transformation of coordinates leading to modified Bessel composite function 
solution, method of separation of variables and method of Laplace transforms. Numerical 
solution procedures can be used when the equations become nonlinear such as in the case of 
free radical polymerization reactions.  
Transient analysis of Denbeigh scheme of reactions, first order reversible reactions, 
autocatalytic reactions, second order reversible reactions, reactions in series, Michaelis and 
Menten kinetics, reactions in circle kinetics are discussed in detail. The transient 
concentration of oxygen during diffusion and reaction in islets of Langerhaans are also 

Preface 
xi
discussed in detail. The conditions where the concentration can undergo underdamped 
oscillations were derived. The use of final time condition and physically reasonable energy 
balance considerations can lead to solutions that are bounded and within the scope of the 
second law of thermodynamics. The temperature profile in a PFR is also obtained. Energy 
balance under transient conditions are used in the analysis  
Transient dynamics of concentration, temperature separately and concentration and 
temperature both in a CSTR were discussed. The dimensionless group called Damkohler 
number in addition to conversion, dimensionless time, residence time were used to describe 
the transient output response from a CSTR. The hydrolysis reaction of ethylene oxide to 
ethylene glycol was considered in a CSTR. For incompressible flow and for a constant 
volume system the steady state and transient conversion were derived. The transient model 
solution is given. The conversion of ethylene oxide as a function of dimensionless time 
contoured at various values of Damkohler number are displayed CSTR with recycle was 
considered. 
The transient temperature in a mixing tank that is heated is given. A fourth order Runge-
Kutta method was used for numerical integration of the ODE, ordinary differential equation. 
Temperature vs. Time in reactor as response to a step change in input is obtained and 
displayed. A state space model was developed to describe a jacketed CSTR. The output 
variables of interest are dimensionless conversion, dimensionless temperature and is give. If 
all of the Eigenvalues of the state space A matrix are negative then the system is expected to 
be stable. A system with one Eigenvalue zero and one Eigenvalue negative is called an 
integrating system. If the Eigenvalues are complex conjugates the system is considerd 
oscillatory. Sometimes the oscillatory output response may be subcritical and damped, 
underdamped or critically damped. The stability type and characterization of stability for 
each of these cases are given in Table 4.3. 
The transient concentration of initiator and monomer during free radical polymerization 
in a CSTR was obtained. DaI, Damkohler number (initiator) and DaM, Damkohler number 
(monomer) were introduced. The steady state conversions were obtained as a function of the 
Damkohler number. Equation used to describe the transient conversion of monomer is non-
linear. The conversion of initiator and monomer as a function of time is displayed in Figure 
4.9. Multiplicity was found in model solution of conversion of monomer. Conversion of 
initiator was monotonic. It can be seen from Figure 4.9 for the parameters used in the 
simulation study the transient conversion of monomers undergoes a maximum value. 
The general form of prototypical first order and prototypical second order system were 
provided. The first order process is characterized by process gain constant, kp and process 
time constant, p. The second order process is characterized by the process gain, kp, damping 
coefficient,  and process time constant, p. When the damping coefficient,  > 1 the system is 
overdamped, when  = 1 the system is said to be critically damped and when  < 1 the system 
is expected to undergo a overshoot and is said to be underdamped oscillatory. 
The use of on-off controller in CHP, combined heat and power system was discussed in 
detail. On-off controllers are used to shut down the system when output variable is greater 
than the desired limit. The system is turned back on when the output variable is lower than 
desired limits. Control action that is proportional to the error measured is called P only, 
proportional only controllers. Off-set is seen in P only controllers. PI, proportional integral 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
xii 
control is devised to get rid of the offset. The control action is proportional to the integral of 
the error generated from initial time to a given instant in time.  
In Example 5.1, the PI control action for prototypical first order process was discussed. 
The output function to a step change in input was obtained by inversion of Laplace transform 
expressions. A closed loop transfer function GCL(s) was derived for the combined system. The 
conditions when the system will exhibit an overshoot are derived. In Example 5.2 the closed 
loop transfer function of a hybridized feed forward and feedback control loop was obtained. 
How the blocks in a control block diagram can be simplified was illustrated. In Example 5.3, 
PI control of voltage supplied to automatic washing machine was discussed. A Toshiba patent 
discussed such a machine. Although the model equation predicts the relation between the 
rotor speeds with the applied torque, there is no model available for applied voltage on the 
motor and the applied torque. The controller will have to increase the voltage or decrease the 
voltage, check the angular speed against set point sp and adjust the voltage again till that set 
point angular speed is attained. PI controller was used. The closed loop transfer function 
GCL(s) was derived. Conditions for instability was when Gp(s)Gc(s) >> -1. The conditions for 
underdamped oscillatory conditions to arise during PI control of prototypical first order 
process were when;  
Where I is the time constant of PI controller, p is the time constant of prototypical first 
order process, kc is the controller gain constant and kp is the process gain constant. 
During PD control, proportional derivative control, the action taken is proportional to the 
derivative of the error between the measurement and set point.  
Ideal PID control is not realizable due to the numerator dynamics. The order of the 
polynomial P(s) is greater than the order of the polynomial in the denominator Q(s) in the 
controller transfer function. As will be discussed later, a filter of nth order can be added to 
make the PID controller physically realizable. 
The PI control of concentration during hydrolysis of ethylene oxide was discussed in 
Example 5.4. The output transfer function y(s) is given by Eq. (5.73). The conditions for 
underdamped response can be seen to be;  
The output transfer function for a system with PD control of prototypical first order 
process is given by Eq. (5.79). The output function, y(t) is given by Eq. (5.84). For any value 
of the tie constants and gains of the process and controller the output is stable and has a 
monotonic exponential decay. In Example 5.5 the PD control of concentration during the 
formation of ethylene glycol in a CSTR by hydrolysis process was discussed. The conditions 
for underdamped response are given by Eq. (4.93). 
PI control of concentration during formation of intermediate during reactions in series 
was discussed in Example 5.6. The stability of this system of PI control of intermediate 
product yield of chloroform, CHCl3 can be determined from the poles of Eq. (5.74). As the 
order of the polynomial in the denominator is increased beyond quadratic, cubic closed form 
analytical solutions are not possible. Numerical solutions are needed to obtain a solution of 
the polynomial of higher degrees. Routh stability criteria can be used to analyze the stability 
of systems such as the one encountered here. Conditions for instability were derived and 
displayed. 
Tyreus-Luyben oscillation based tuning was found to make the system less oscillatory for 
the parameters chosen. There are three important tuning parameters in PID control action. 
These are: (i) the control gain constant, kc; (ii) integral time constant, I; (iii) derivative time 

Preface 
xiii 
constant, D. An algorithmic or trial and error approach can be used for obtaining optimal 
results from tuning the controller. The tuning of PID control was developed by Ziegler and 
Nichols [5]. This method is not widely used in the industry because the closed loop behavior 
tends to be oscillatory and sensitive to errors. The Tyreus-Luyben tuning parameters for PI 
and PID control are given in Table 5.1. 
Closed loop stability analysis is discussed for a number of systems such as: (i) PI control 
of prototypical first order process; (ii) PI control of prototypical second order underdamped 
and overdamped processes; (iii) PI control of prototypical third order process; (iv) PI control 
of Integrating Stable Systems; (v) PI control of marginally stable systems; (vi) PI control of 
systems that make a center and/or saddle pointl (vii) Best control strategy for systems with 
inverse response; (viii) P, PD, PI control for jacketed exothermic CSTR; (ix) P, PD, PI 
control for exothermic PFR; (x) P control of polymerization kettle; (xi) P control of CSTR 
with recyle and PFR with recyle; (xii) Best Control Strategy for Systems with Dead Time; 
(xiii) Feedback control during semiconductor processing; (xiii) Systems with periodic 
disturbance; (xiv) Optimization and control of intermediate product in reactions in series with 
first first order and second zeroth order, first with zeroth order and second with first order, 
both first and second first order; (xv) PI control of intermediate species in Denbeigh scheme 
of reactions; (xvi) Best control strategy for PCR, polymerase chain reactions; (xvii) Best 
control strategy for systems that obey Michaelis and Menten kinetics; (xviii) Best control 
strategy for systems that obey reactions in circle kinetics.  
The mathematical models, experimental trials and computer simulations that are 
undertaken to study the change of concentration of drug or other compounds of interest with 
time in the human physiology is called Pharmacokinetics. Application of pharmacokinetics 
allows for the processes of liberation, absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion to be 
characterized mathematically. The absorption of drug can be affected by 14 different 
methods. The change with time of the concentration of the drug can be by three different 
types as shown in Figure 8.1: i) Slow absorption (A); ii) maxima and rapud bolus (B); iii) 
constant rate delivery (C). Pharmacokinetics studies can be performed by 5 different methods 
including compartment methods. The five different methods are non-compartment method, 
compartment 
method, 
bioanalytical 
method, 
mass 
spectrometry 
and 
population 
pharmacokinetic methods. 
The factors that affect how a particular drug is distributed throughout the anatomy are: i) 
rate of blood perfusion; ii) permeability of capillary; iii) biological affinity of drug; iv) rate of 
metabolism of drug and; v) rate of renal extraction. Drugs may bind to proteins sometimes. 
Single compartment models were developed for:  
i) first-order absorption with elimination; ii) fourth order absorption with elimination; 
(iii) second order absorption with elimination; iv) Michaelis-Menten absorption with 
elimination and; v) Reactions in circle Absorption with elimination. A system of n simple 
reactions in circle was considered. The conditions when subcritical damped oscillations can 
be expected are derived. A model was developed for cases when absorption kinetics exhibit 
subcritical damped oscillations can be expected. The solution was developed by the method 
of Laplace transforms. The solution for dimensionless concentration of the drug in single 
compartment for different values of rate constants and dimensionless frequency are shown in 
Figures 8.10 – Figures 8.14. The drug profile reaches a maximum and drops to zero 
concentration after a said time. The fluctuations in concentration depends on the 
dimensionless frequency resulting from the subcritical damped oscillations during absorption. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
xiv
At low frequencies the fluctuations are absent. As the frequency is increased the fluctuations 
in concentration are pronounced. The frequency of fluctuations were found to increase with 
increase in frequency of oscillations during absorption.  
A two-compartment model for absortion with elimination is shown in Figure 7.15. The 
concentration that has diffused to the tissue region in the human anatomy is also accounted 
for in addition to the concentration of drug in the blood plasma. The model equation for 
concentration of drug in the tissue is found to be a ODE of the second order with constant 
coefficients (8.79). The model solution is given in Eq. (8.81) and obtained by the method of 
complementary function and particular integral. 
Software has been developed for rhe implementation of the pharmacokinetic models on 
the personal computer. 
Ratio control is used in keeping the reactor adiabatic during the manufacture of flue gas. 
Heat of reactions from Boudard reaction and oxidation of carbon reactions are made to cancel 
out each other by control of the ratio of the CO2/air mixture. SPC, statistical process control 
methods are discussed including Deming‟s quality principles, QIT, quality improvement 
teams. IMC, internal model control uses the mathematical model developed for the process. 
Perfect control is achieved when model transfer function, M(s) is the reciprocal of process 
transfer function, Gp(s). A filter has to be added to make the system realizable. This keeps the 
numerator of the transfer function of the combined system at a lower degree of polynomial 
compared with the degree of the polynomial of the denominator of the transfer function of the 
system. Inversion of a process model alone may not be sufficient for good control. In order 
for the controller to be stable and realizable the process transfer function must be factorized. 
Examples are given. In order to make M(s) proper the order of the filter in some cases is 
increased.  
A lead/lag controller was considered by use of a model based transfer function as given. 
Inverse response is expected for the process. A first order filter was added to make the system 
more „proper‟. The order of the filter was increased to two. Feedforward control is different 
from feedback control. During feedforward control the load or disturbance is measured or 
gauged from other considerations and control action taken accordingly. Carrier corporation 
has patented [11] a feedforward control system for absorption chillers. The feedforward 
control method comprise of the following steps; (i) determine the disturbance transfer 
function; (ii) determine the capacity valve transfer function; (iii) measure the occurred 
disturbance; (iv) implement the feedforward control function. The block diagram for 
feedforward control of absorption chillers is shown in Figure 7.11. An example of 
feedforward controller for a resulation of fuel supply to a furnace was discussed. 
Estimation and control of polymerization reactors was discussed. Control of 
polymerization of reactors is a difficult task because of the exothermic nature of the 
polymerization reactions and higher viscosities of monomer/polymer syrups encountered in 
the reactor. The objective of the reactor control is to obtain superior product quality. Quality 
is characterized by different parameters. Good structure-property relations are needed for 
devising control strategies based on measurement of end-use property values. Technical 
hurdles during the development of mathematical models for polymerization reactors are the 
nonlinear equations encountered, sensitivity to impurities etc. Feedback control of a variable 
is not possible if the parameter cannot be measured or estimated. In Figure 8.13 is shown the 
scheme for possible feedback control configurations. The scheme comprises of state-model, 
subsystem 1, subsystem 2 and the measurement equations. State estimation techniques have 

Preface 
xv
been developed to provide estimates of the state variables even in cases where they cannot be 
obtained by direct measurement. Estimation techniques such as Kalman filter, Weiner filter 
and extended Kalman filter may be used. In non-linear estimation problems the objective may 
be to minimize the average squared errors in the initial estimate in the process model and in 
measurement device. 
Neural networks can be used to approximate any reasonable function to any degree of 
required precision. Three different architectures for ANNs, artificial neural networks are 
possible. The behavior of each unit in time can be described using either differential 
equations or discrete update equations. The use of ANNs to control a distillation column is 
discussed. Robotics is introduced. Mathematics used to describe positions and orientations in 
3 dimensional space is reviewed. Kinematics of mechanical manipulators are discussed. 
Forces, velocities and moments are discussed. Inverse kinematics of the manipulator with 
both the geometric and algebraic methods of solution is outlines. Trajectory analysis of end 
effector and control strategy for robots are outlined.  
Submarine nanorobots are being developed for use in branchy therapy, spinal surgery, 
cancer therapy, etc. Nanoparticles have been developed for use in drug delivery systems and 
for cure in eye disorders and for use in early diagnosis. Research in nanomedicine is under 
way in development of diagnostics for rapid monitoring, targeted cancer therapies, localized 
drug delivery, and improved cell material interactions, scaffolds for tissue engineering and 
gene delivery systems. Novel therapeutic formulations have been developed using PLGA 
based nanoparticles. Nanorobots can be used in targeted therapy and in repair work of DNA. 
Drexler and Smalley debated whether „molecular assemblers‟ that are devices capable of 
positioning atoms and molecules for precisely defined reactions in any environment is 
possible or not. Feynman‟s vision of miniaturization is being realized. Smalley sought 
agreement that precision picking and placing of individual atoms through the use of „Smalley-
fingers‟ is an impossibility. Fullerenes, C60, are the third allotropic form of carbon. Soccer 
ball structured, C60, with a surface filled with hexagons and pentagons satisfy the Euler‟s law. 
Fullerenes can be prepared by different methods such as: (i) first and second generation 
combustion synthesis; (ii) chemical route by synthesis of corannulene from naphthalene. 
Rings are fused and the sheet that is formed is rolled into hemisphere and stitched together; 
(iii) electric arc method. Different nanostructuring methods are discussed. These include: (1) 
sputtering of molecular ions;(2) gas evaporation; (3) process to make ultrafine magnetic 
magnetic powder; (4) triangulation and formation of nanoprisms by light irradiation ; (5) 
nanorod production using condensed phase synthesis method; subtractive methods such as; 
(6) lithography; (7) etching; (8) galvanic fabrication; (9) lift-off process for IC circuit 
fabrication; (10) nanotips and nanorods formation by CMOS process; (11) patterning Iridium 
Oxide nanostructures; (12) dip pen lithography; (13) SAM, self assembled monolayers; (14) 
hot embossing; (15) nanoimprint lithography; (16) electron beam lithography; (17) dry 
etching; (18) reactive ion etching; (19) quantum dots and thin films generation by; (20) sol 
gel; (21) solid state precipitation; (22) molecular beam epitaxy; (23) chemical vapor 
deposition; (24) CVD; (25) lithography; (26) nucleation and growth; (27) thin film formation 
from surface instabilities; (28) thin film formation by spin coating;(29) cryogenic milling for 
preparation of 100-300 nm sized titanium; (30) atomic lithography methods to generated 
structures less than 50 nm; (31) electrode position method to prepare nanocomposite; (32) 
plasma compaction methods; (33) direct write lithography; (34) nanofluids by dispersion. 
Thermodynamic miscibility of nanocomposites can be calculated from the free energy of 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
xvi
mixing. The four thermodynamically stable forms of Carbon are diamond, graphite, C60, 
Buckminster Fullerene and Carbon Nanotube. 5 different methods of preparation of CNTs, 
carbon nanotubes were discussed. Thermodynamically stable dispersion of nanoparticles into 
a polymeric liquid is enhanced for systems where the radius of gyration of the linear polymer 
is greater than the radius of the nanoparticle. Tiny magnetically-driven spinning screws were 
developed. Molecular machines are molecules that can with an appropriate stimulus be 
temporarily lifted out of equilibrium and can return to equilibrium in the observable 
macroscopic properties of the system. Molecular shuttle, molecular switches, molecular 
muscle, molecular rotors, molecular nanovalves are discussed. Supramolecular materials 
offers alternative to top-down miniaturization and bottom-up fabrication. Self-organization 
principles holds the key. Gene expression studies can be carried out in biochips. CNRs are a 
new generation of self-organizing collectives of intelligent nanorobots. This new technology 
includes procedures for interactions between objects with their environment resulting in 
solutions of critical problems at the nanoscopic level. Biomimetic materials are designed to 
mimic a natural biological material. Characterization methods of nanostructures include 
SAXS, small angle X-ray scattering, TEM, transmission electron microscopy, SEM, scanning 
electron microscopy, SPM, scanning probe microscope, Raman microscope, AFM atomic 
force miscroscopy, HeIM helium ion microscopy. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
 
 
Dr. Kal Renganathan Sharma received his B.Tech. in chemical engineering from Indian 
Institute of Technology, Chennai, India in1985 and MS and PhD in chemical engineering 
from West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV in 1987 and 1990 respectively. He 
underwent post doctoral research training at the lifesciences and microgravity space lab, 
Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY under the guidance of former chair and Prof. R. Shankar 
Subramanian. He completed an industrial post doctoral research training with Monsanto 
Plastics Technology, Indian Orchad, MA. There he was told that he was on their “fast track” 
to become a research fellow. He has obtained cash prizes for exemplary work from Monsanto 
Plastics, Indian Orchad, MA, SASTRA University, Thanjavur, India and Prairie View A & M 
University, Prairie View TX.  As a naturalized US citizen he obtained a ministry of human 
resources and development permit to serve as Professor at deemed universities in India. 
He is sole author of 15 books and 7 book-chapters. Author of 53 Refereed Journal 
Articles, 553 Conference papers and 113 other presentations. He has instructed 2930 students 
in 109 courses. Service at HBCUs in this country, United States and deemed universities in 
India. Editorial Board Member of 7 journals. Fellow of Indian Chemical Society. Who‟s Who 
in America. Paper cited more than 300 times searcable by Google Scholar. Reviewed more 
than 60 journal articles. Developed new course and books in emerging areas. One article on 
“reactions in circle” in the open domain has been downloaded more than 1031 times and 
another article on nanorobots has been downloaded more than 980 times. 
In recent years, he has been instructing  courses in the Houston, TX area at Texas 
Southern University, Houston, TX, Lone Star College, North Harris, Houston, TX, Prairie 
View A & M University, Prairie View, TX. Prior to that he served at SASTRA University, 
Thanjavur, India, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India, George Mason University, 
Faifax, VA and West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV. Titles held include Adjunct 
Professor, Professor, Head, etc.  He has a linked in profile at  http://www.linkedin. 
com/pub/kal-sharma/48/b69/466.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOOK DESCRIPTION 
 
 
Continuous Process Dynamics, Stability, Control and Automation is a modern first 
course on process control, instruments, process dynamics and stability. MS Excel 
spreadsheets are used in order to obtain solutions to non-linear equations when needed and 
closed form analytical solutions where possible are obtained using Laplace transforms and 
other methods. The solutions are presented in 210 figures and the book has 1319 equations. 
With a industrial controls market size of about 150 billion dollars and a chemical process 
industry market size of 3 trillion dollars the practioners can use this book to master techniques 
of P, proportional, PI, Proportional Integral, PD, Proportional Derivative feedback control, 
feedforword control, hybrid control, adaptive control, internal model control, ratio control, 
filtered real proportional integral derivative control, ANNs, artificial neural networks, SPC, 
statistical process control. 
Control block diagrams are developed using MS Paint. Flavor for what is a continuous 
process is given using 18 process flow diagrams. Be it a feedback control of temperature in a 
mixing tank or a neural network design for a distillation column, the details and the big 
picture are both given. Pioneers who made this area possible such as Maxwell, Galileo, 
Sherwood, Levenspiel, Kalman, Laplace, Fermat, Damkholer, Newton, Fourier, Fick, 
Michaelis, Menten, Monod, Staudinger, Ziegler, Natta, Flory, Peclect, Bode, Nyquist, Biot, 
Bessel, Bernoulli (both father and son!), Euler, Stokes, Mach, Reynolds, Prandtl, Nusselt, 
Weiner, Hopf, Clapeyron, Clausius, Lorenz, Krebs mentioned where their theories were used 
in the analysis. 
Coverage Includes: 
 
 
Separate Chapters are devoted to Continuous Polymerization Process Tech nology, 
Mathematical 
Models, 
Continuous 
Process 
Dynamics, 
Pharmacokinetics, 
Instruments and Nanorobots 
 
Multiplicity in Model solutions discussed with Examples 
 
Eleven different modeling approaches are discussed: Computer Simulations, Semi-
Empirical; Shell Balance; State Space Models; Dimensionless Groups; Stochastic; 
Thermodynamic Analysis; Optimization Routines; Engineering Analysis and 
Derivation of Constitutive Laws 
 
Copolymer Composition with n monomers derived using State Space Models 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
xx
 
Control Lessons are drawn from Tormsdorff Effect, Regulation of Human 
Anatomical Temperature, 3 arm mechanical manipulator, centralized heating and 
cooling, Fukushima Earthquake, Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill 
 
Side by Side Comparison of Reactor Dynamics of Initiatiated and Thermal 
Polymerization 
 
Side by Side Comparison of Reactor Dynamics of CSTRs in Series and CSTR 
 
Dynamics of PFR and Wave Equation 
 
Continuous Mass Polymerization Process for Polystyrene, HIPS, High Impact 
Polystyrene, SAN, Styrene Acrylonitrile Copolymers, ABS, Acrylonirile, Butadiene 
and Styrene, PMMA, Poly Methyl Methacrylate, SMA, Styrene Maleic Anhyride, 
Condensation Processes for Nylon 6,6, Polyamide, Polyesters Gas Phase Catalytic 
Processes for Polyolefins and Ethylene Propylene Copolymer described as 
background 
 
Selectivity in Yield of Biodiesel over Glycerol in Consecutive-Competitive 
Reactions 
 
Computer Simulation of Centrifugal Separation of High Volume Oil and Water 
 
Control of Intermediate Yield of Chloroform during Chlorination Reactions in Series 
 
Supply Chain Robotics, Camera Drones  
 
Mathematical Artefact vs. Physically Reasonable Solution 
 
Overshoot Phenomena 
 
Frequency Analysis of Damped Wave Condution and Fourier Condution Equations 
 
Reactions in Circle Kinetics 
 
Michaelis and Menten Kinetics 
 
Nanorobots in Photodynamic Therapy of Alzheimers Disease 
 
Microwave Temperature Sensors, MEMS  
 
9 different Viscometers 
 
Pharmacokinetics of Styrene in Rats, Alchohol in Brain, Paclitaxel in cancer patients, 
Single Compartment and Two Compartment Models 
 
Subcritical Damped Oscillations 
 
Taylor Series Solution, Runge Kutta Method, Closed Form Solutions 
 
Intraocular Pressure  
 
Control Example in Toshiba Washing Machine 
 
Solar Aided Combined Cycle Power Plant 
 
Continuous Pharmaceutical Production 
 
Annular Plug flow Reactor for Single Layer Graphene Sheet Production 
 
Kalman Estimation and Control of Polymerization Reactor 
 
Bioartifical Pancreas 
 
20 Different Specifications in Binary Distillation and Desktop Computer 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1.1. INDUSTRIAL CONTROLS - MARKETS  
 
The size of the worldwide market for industrial controls is expected to reach 150 billion 
dollars by the year 2019. Continuous processes have been selected over batch operations. 
Good reasons are lower cost, better product uniformity and sometimes result in less pollution 
to the environment. Process dynamics can be studied using desktop computers. Proactive 
process solutions can be offered. Stability analysis using a pencil and paper can lead to better 
perspectives on the range of operation of the process variables. Control and automation have 
grown tremendously with the advent of computers and programmable logic controllers, PLCs. 
More attention is paid by the lead engineer to the Plant start-up and Plant shut-down 
operations compared with steady-state operations of the plant. Transient analysis is not well 
studied. Transient behavior of chemical reactors, distillation columns, absorption towers, 
adsorption beds, extraction units and other unit operations needs to be better studied. 
Collegiate education methods have to keep pace with the developments in the field of 
industrial controls. Moore‟s law states that computing speed of microprocessors double every 
18 months. Biological databanks double in size every 10 months. Mathematical methods for 
model development have been refined over centuries. The methods and means available to the 
engineer need be better utilized. Computer simulation and model development can be an 
integral part of an engineer‟s endeavors. The days when the effect of professionals who do 
mathematical modeling and computer simulation on the bottom line of the enterprise is only 
indirect are over. In the coming era the PW, Present Worth of chemical plants shall be higher 
because of the value added by an army of engineers and Ph.D. scholars who perform process 
dynamics studies and develop process models. They also develop control block diagrams, 
instrument the chemical plant with sensors and connect the sensor output using data 
acquisition to the desktop computer. 
 
 
1.1.2. Chemical Process Industry 
 
Over 70,000 different products are manufactured in the chemical process industry. Be it 
batch or continuous process for production the CPI is in constant need for control engineers, 
specialists who understand the dynamics, stability of different unit operations and processes. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
2
Automation is an identified goal in recent years. The size of CPI is estimated at 3 trillion US 
dollars. Depending on the boom and bust cycles of the economy the growth rate of CPI is a 
fraction of the GDP. The fraction is about 0.87. The first product made since industrial 
revolution was sulfuric acid. The lead chambers process was the industrial standard for two 
centuries. The largest volume product made today is polyethylene. The CPI is a science based 
industry.  
The performance of the CPI in a given year depends on a number of factors. In 2013, 
cheap shale gas and a robust economy gave chemical producers a lift in terms of raw 
materials costs, utility costs, labor costs, tax and tariffs and interest on debt payments. 
President has urged Congress to increase the minimum wage rate for labor to $10.10 per hour. 
In Table 1.1 is listed the top 20 chemical producers in United States ranked by sales. Their 
assets are also provided. The products from the CPI include inorganic chemicals, plastics and 
petrochemicals, drugs and pharmaceuticals, soaps and detergents, paints and allied products, 
organic chemicals and phosphates, agricultural chemicals and miscellaneous chemicals.  
 
 
1.2. EXAMPLES OF CONTROL APPLICATIONS 
 
Here are some examples of why continuous process dynamics, stability, control and 
automation are important.  
 
 
1.2.1. Supply Chain Robots 
 
By the year 2019, the industrial controls market and industrial robotics market is 
expected to reach $147.7 billion worldwide. According to the market report prepared by 
Transparency market research in 2012 the size of the market is $102.2 billion. This would 
mean a compound annual growth rate of the industry, CGAR of 5.6% between 2013-2019. 
The largest end user is the automotive followed by the semi-conductor industry. The 
shipments of industrial robots in North America in the year 2000 were close to $1.02 billion. 
The discrepancy in the amount from $1.02 billion to $102.2 billion may be because of; (i) 
rapid growth rate and; (ii) differences in which machines that counts as robots amongst 
different regions of the world. Japan for example counts some machines as robots that in 
other parts of the world they do not. 
Industrial robot was recognized as a unique device in the 1960s. CAD. Computer-aided 
design, computer aided manufacturing, CAM systems, sensors, controllers hooked to 
computers using data acquisition are emerging trends in industrial automation. The definition 
of an industrial robot according to Information Standards Organization (ISO) in standard 
ISO/TR/8373-2.3 is the following: 
 
A robot is an automatically controlled, reprogrammable, multipurpose, manipulating 
machine with several programmable axes, which may be either fixed in place or mobile for 
use in industrial automation applications. 
 
 

Introduction 
 
 
3
Table 1.1. Top 20 by Chemical Sales in this Country, United States 
 
Rank 
Company 
Chemical 
Sales  
(Billions of 
US $) 
Assets of 
the  
Company 
(Billions of 
US $) 
1 
Dow Chemical, Midland, MI 
57.1 
69.5 
2 
ExxonMobil, Irving, TX 
39.0 
27.5 
3 
DuPont, Wilmington, DE 
31.0 
18.1 
4 
PPG Industries, Pittsburgh, PA 
14.0 
11.9 
5 
Chevron Phillips, The Woodlands, TX 
13.1 
10.5 
6 
Praxair, Danbury, CT 
11.9 
20.3 
7 
Huntsman, Salt Lake City, UT 
11.1 
9.2 
8 
Mosaic, Plymouth, MN 
10.0 
18.1 
9 
Air Products, Allentown, PA 
9.7 
16.2 
10 
Eastman Chemical, Kingsport, TN 
9.4 
11.8 
11 
Honeywell, Morristown, NJ 
6.8 
6.8 
12 
Celanese, Irving, TX 
6.5 
9.0 
13 
Ecolab, St. Paul, MN 
6.5 
19.6 
14 
Lubrizol, Wickliffe, OH 
6.4 
10.0 
15 
Ashland, Covington, KY 
5.8 
9.3 
16 
Dow Corning, Midland, MI 
5.7 
12.3 
17 
CF Industries, Deerfield, IL 
5.5 
10.7 
18 
Trinseo, Berwyn, PA 
5.3 
2.6 
19 
Momentive Specialty Chemicals, Columbus, OH 
4.9 
2.9 
20 
Occidental Petroleum, Los Angeles, CA 
4.6 
3.9 
 
Per the Robotic Institute Association an industrial robot system is identified as the 
following: 
 
An industrial robot system includes the robot(s) (hardware and software) consisting of 
the manipulator, power supply, and controller; the end-effector(s); any equipment, devices, 
and sensors required for the robot to perform its task; and any communications interface that 
is operating and monitoring the robot, equipment and sensors. 
 
Robots can be programmed to move objects through the entire 3D, three dimensional 
workspace. The mechanical manipulator has a certain number of links, joints and end 
effector. The pitch, roll and yaw of the wrist can be controlled. Robots can be used to cause 
changes similar to what can be done using the motor skills of the human arm. The study of 
this field of study is called robotics. Stanford University developed a book used as textbook 
in collegiate course on Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics & Control, J. J. Craig since 1983. 
Robotics comprises of four major areas: 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
4
(i) Mechanical Manipulation;  
(ii) Locomotion;  
(iii) Computer Vision and;  
(iv) Artificial Intelligence.  
 
Artificial intelligence development in the form of software is an attempt to synthesize 
human intelligence by computer programming and execution. Mechanical manipulation is an 
amalgamation of engineering mechanics, control theory and computer science. Progress made 
in robot programming languages can lead to more user friendly robots. Often times the 
interface between human and robot is the programming language. This is an important 
consideration in the design and operation of industrial robots. Library of robot-specific 
subroutines can be added. JARS, written in Pascal at NASA‟s Jet Propulsion Laboratory is an 
example. RAPID is a general-purpose language and software developed by ABB Robotics. 
The user is allowed to command specific sub-tasks of the goal directly. Manipulator 
programming takes some trial and error. Objects can be moved through 3D, three dimensional 
space using programming. VAL was written by Unimation in order to control robots. IBM 
developed AML. KAREl was developed by GMF robotics. Cartesian and interpolated 
motions can be affected. Vision systems can be used to specify the coordinates of an object of 
interest. Interaction with sensors is important. Some difficulties in programming robots are 
the congruence of model predictions and real time experience. This can lead to poor grasping 
of objects and collisions. Accuracy of manipulator is another worry. Force strategies needs to 
be developed for constrained motion. Manipulator programs are sensitive to initial conditions. 
Trajectory and velocity of arm depends on the initial conditions. Program segments need be 
tuned in a bottom-up programming approach. Changes in configuration can cause large arm 
motions. Errors in object location can also be causative in problems. Singularities can be 
identified by writing the Jacobian that can be used to relate the joint velocities to Cartesian 
velocities of the tip of the arm. For example, say the end effector is required to move with a 
certain velocity in Cartesian space. Inverse Jacobian can be used to calculate the joint rates 
from the Cartesian rates. For some values of the vector of joint angles, the jacobian becomes 
singular. Singularities in the boundaries can be found for most manipulators and have a loci 
of singularities inside the workspace.  
 
 
1.2.2. Robotics as Collegiate Course 
 
Industrial robots came about in the 1960s. The adoption of robotic equipment came about 
in the 1980s. In the late 1980s there was a pullback in the use of robots. Use of industrial 
robots has been found to be cheaper than manual labor. More sophisticated robots are 
emerging. Nanorobot drug delivery systems can be one such robot. 78% of the robots 
installed in the year 2000 were welding and material-handling robots. The Adept 6 
manipulator had 6 rotational joints. The most important form of the industrial robot is the 
mechanical manipulator. The mechanics and control of the mechanical manipulator is 
described in detail in introductory robotics courses [Craig 2005]. The programmability of the 
device is a salient consideration. The math needed to describe the spatial motions and other  
 

Introduction 
 
 
5
attributes of the manipulators is provided in the course. The tools needed for design and 
evaluation of algorithms to realize desired motions or force applications are provided by 
control theory. Design of sensors and interfaces for industrial robots is also an important task. 
Robotics is also concerned with the location of objects in three dimensional space such as its: 
(i) position and orientation; (ii) coordinate system and frames of reference such as tool frame 
and base frames; (iii) transformation from one coordinate system to another by rotations and 
translations.  
Kinematics is the science of motion that treats motion without regard to the forces that 
cause it. In particular, attention is paid to velocity, acceleration of joints and acceleration of 
the end effector. The geometrical and time based properties of the motion are studied. 
Manipulators consist of rigid links that are connected by joints that allow relative motion of 
neighboring links. Joints are instrumented with position sensors which allow the relative 
motion of neighboring links to be measured. In case of rotary or revolute joints these 
developments are called joint offset. The number of independent position variables that would 
have to be specified in order to locate all parts of the mechanism is the number of degrees of 
freedom.  
End effector is at the end of the chain of links that make up of the manipulator. This can 
be a gripper, a welding torch, an electromagnet, etc. Inverse kinematics is the calculation of 
all possible sets of joint angles that could be used to attain the given position and orientation 
of the end-effector of the manipulator. For industrial robots the inverse kinematic algorithm 
equations are non-linear. Solution to these equations is not possible in closed form. The 
analysis of manipulators in motion in the workspace of a given manipulator includes the 
development of the Jacobean matrix of the manipulator. Mapping from velocities in joint 
space to velocities in Cartesian space is specified by the Jacobean. The nature of mapping 
changes with configuration. The mapping is not invertible at points called singularities.  
Dynamics is the study of actuator torque functions of motion of manipulator. State space 
form of the Newton-Euler equations can be used. Simulation is used to reformulate the 
dynamic equations such that the acceleration is computed as a function of actuator torque. 
One way to effect manipulator motion from here to there in a specified smooth fashion is to 
cause each joint to move as specified by a smooth function of time. To ensure proper 
coordination, each and every joint starts and stops motion at the same time. The computation 
of these functions is the problem of trajectory generation. A spline is a smooth function that 
passes through a set or via points. End effector can be made to travel in a rectilinear manner. 
This is called Cartesian trajectory generation.  
The issues that ought to be considered during the mechanical design of manipulator are 
cost, size, speed, load capability, number of joints, geometric arrangement, transmission 
systems, choice and location of actuators, internal position and sensors. The more joints a 
robot arm contain the more dexterous and capable it will be. But it will also be harder to build 
and be more expensive. Specialized robots are developed to perform specified tasks and 
universal robots are capable of performing wide variety of tasks. Three joints allow for the 
hand to reach any position in three dimensional spaces. Stepper motors or other actuators can 
be used to execute a desired trajectory directly. This is called the linear positional control. 
Kinetic energy of the manipulator links can be calculated using the Langrangian formulation. 
Both the linear kinetic energy and rotational kinetic energies can be tracked.  
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
6
Table 1.2. State of Art in Robots over a 40 Year Period  
 
Year 
Product 
1974 
World‟s First Microcomputer controlled Electric Industrial Robot, IRB6 from ASEA was 
delivered to a small mechanical engineering company in Southern Sweden. 
1975 
IRB6 – First Robot for Arc Welding  
1977 
First Robots installed in France and Italy 
1979 
IRB 60 – First Electrical Robot for Spot Welding; First Robot installed in Spain 
1982 
Robots introduced in Japan 
1983 
S2, New Control System. Outstanding, HMI, Menu Programming, TCP (Tool Center 
Point) and the Joy Stick introduced. Allows control of several axes. 
1986 
ASEA bought Trallfa Robot operations, Bryne, Norway. Trallfa launched the world‟s First 
Painting Robot in 1969. Sales boomed in the mid 1980s when the automotive industry 
started to paint bumpers and other plastic parts. 
IRB2000 – 10 Kg Robot. First to be driven by AC motors. Large working range. Great 
accuracy. 
1990/ 
1991 
ABB acquired Cincinnati Milacron, USA, Graco, USA (robotic painting), Rarsburg 
Automotive (electrostatic painting atomizers). 
IRB 6000 – 200 kg Robot introduced. First Modular Robot that is the fastest and most 
accurate spot welding robot on the market. 
Unique hollow wrist introduced on Painting Robots. Allows faster and more agile motion. 
1994 
S4 – Breakthrough in user friendliness, dynamic models, gives outstanding performance. 
Flexible rapid language. 
1996 
Integrated Arc Welding Power Source in Robot Cabinet. 
1998 
Launch of Flex Picker Robot, the World‟s fastest Pick and Place Robot. 
Robot Studio – First simulation tool based on virtual controller identical to the real one 
revolutionize off-line programming. 
2000 
Pick and Place Software Pick Master introduced. 
2001 
IRB7000 – First Industrial Robot to handle 500 kg. 
2002 
ABB – First company in World to sell 100,000 Robots 
Virtual Arc – True arc welding simulation tool that gives robot welding engineers full „off-
line‟ control of the MIG/MAG process. 
IRB 6000 – Power Robot with bend over backwards flexibility.  
2004 
IRC5- Robot Controller. Windows interface unit. 
2005 
Launch of 55 new products and robot functions included with 4 new robots: IRB 660, IRB 
4450, IRB1600, and IRB260. 
 
The evolution of robots can be studied from the market experience of one leading 
manufacturer of robots for example, ABB robotics, Zurich, Switzerland. This shall be used 
later to place in perspective the increased interest in use of nanorobots in the hospital for drug 
delivery. The different products from ABB Robotics during a 30 year period are given below 
in Table 1.2. 
 
 
1.2.3. Infeasibility of “Molecular Assemblers” 
 
R.E. Smalley and K.E. Drexler debated on whether “molecular assemblers,” which are 
devices capable of positioning atoms and molecules for precisely defined reactions in any 
environment, are possible. In his book Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of 

Introduction 
 
 
7
Nanotechnology, Drexler envisioned a world ubiquitous with molecular assemblers. These 
would provide immortality and lead to the colonization of the solar system. He received a 
Ph.D. from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1991. He is also the CEO of 
Foresight Institute, Palo Alto, California. Smalley, a recipient of the Nobel Prize in chemistry 
in 1996 for his work on fullerenes, outlined his objections based on science to the molecular 
assembler idea and called it the “fat fingers” problem” or the “sticky fingers problem.” He 
was also worried about funding for nanotechnology due to the portrayed darker side of it. In 
Chemical and Engineering News, “Point–Counterpoint” column, an open letter from Drexler 
to Smalley was posted challenging Smalley to clarify the “fat fingers problem,” with a 
response from Smalley and three letters with Drexler countering and Smalley concluding the 
exchange. 
Drexler sought clarification from Smalley on the fat fingers problem. He felt that like 
enzymes and ribosomes, the proposed molecular assemblers neither have nor need the 
“Smalley Fingers.” Drexler alluded to the long-term goal of molecular manufacturing and its 
consequences, which can pose opportunities and dangers to long-term security of the United 
States and the world. Theoretical studies and implementation capabilities are akin to the pre-
Sputnik studies of spaceflight or the pre-Manhattan project calculations regarding nuclear 
chain reactions and are of more than academic interest. He referred to his 20-year history of 
technical publications in the area of chemical synthesis of complex structures by 
mechanically positioning reactive molecules and not by manipulating individual atoms. 
The proposal was successfully defended in the doctoral thesis on Nanosystems: 
Molecular Machinery, Manufacturing, and Computation and is based on well-established 
physical principles. Smalley responded with an apology should he have offended Drexler in 
his article in Scientific American in 2001. His call for using “Smalley Fingers” is impossible. 
A “Smalley Finger” type of molecular assembler tool will never work. Smalley pointed out 
the infeasibility of tiny fingers placing one atom at a time. This is also applicable to placing 
larger, more complex building blocks. As each incoming reactive molecule building block has 
multiple atoms to control during the reaction, more fingers are needed to ensure they do not 
go astray. Computer-controlled fingers will be too fat and too sticky for providing the control 
needed. Fingers cannot perform the chemistry necessary. He called attention to the mention of 
enzymes and ribosomes needed in the reaction medium. He quarreled with the vision of self-
replicating nanobot. Is there a living cell inside the nanobot that cranks these out? Water is 
needed inside the nanobot with the necessary nutrients for life. How do the nanobot pick the 
right enzyme and join in the right fashion? How do the nanobot perform error detection and 
error correction? He worried about the scope of the chemistry that the nanobot could perform. 
Enzymes and ribosomes need water to be effective. He mentioned that although biology is 
wondrous, a crystal of silicon, steel, copper, aluminum, titanium, and other key materials of 
technology could not be produced by biology. Therefore, without these materials how could a 
nanobot manufacture a laser, ultrafast memory and other salient components of modern 
society? 
Drexler applauded Smalley‟s goal of debunking nonsense in nanotechnology. He 
sketched the fundamental concepts of molecular manufacturing. He referred to Feynman‟s 
after-dinner visionary talk in 1959, discussed in Sec. 1.2, and nanomachines building 
atomically precise products. Feynman‟s nanomachines were largely mechanical and not 
biological. In order to understand how a nanofactory system could work, he considered a 
conventional factory system. Some of Smalley‟s questions reach beyond chemistry to systems 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
8
engineering and to problems of control, transport, error rates, and component failure and to 
answers from computers, conveyors, noise margins, and failure-tolerant redundancy. 
Nanofactories contain no enzymes, no living cells, and no replicating nanobots, but they do 
use computers for precise control, conveyors for parts transport, and positioning devices of 
assorted sizes to assemble small parts into large parts when building macroscopic products. 
The smallest devices position molecular parts to assemble structures through mechano-
synthesis or machine-based chemistry. Conveyors and positioners bring reactants together 
unlike solvents and thermal motion. Positional control enables a strong catalytic effect by 
aligning reactants for repeated collisions in optimal geometries at vibrational frequencies 
greater than terahertz. Positional control can lead to voiding unwanted side reactions. From 
transition state theory, for suitably chosen reactants, positional control will enable synthetic 
steps at megahertz frequencies with reliability approaching that of digital switching 
operations in a computer. When molecules come together and react, their atoms, being sticky, 
stay bonded to neighbors and thus do not need sticky fingers to hold them. Direct positional 
control of reactants is revolutionary and achievable. Mechanosynthetic reactions and its field 
have parallels in the field of computational chemistry. The flourishing of nanotechnology in 
2003 suggests a bottom-up strategy using self-assembly. It used to be scaling down 
microscopic machines in 1959.  
Progress toward molecular manufacturing is achieved by research in computational 
chemistry, organic synthesis, protein engineering, supramolecular chemistry, and scanning 
probe manipulation of atoms and molecules. Scaling down moving parts by a factor of one 
million results in multiplication of their frequency of operation by the same factor. Progress 
in the United States on molecular manufacturing has been impeded because of the illusion 
that it is infeasible. He called for augmentation of nanoscale research with systems 
engineering effort and achievement of the grand vision articulated by Richard Feynman. 
Smalley concluded by observing that Drexler left the talk about real chemistry and went to 
the mechanical world. He felt that precise chemistry could not be made to happen as desired 
between two molecular objects with simple mechanical motion along a few degrees of 
freedom in the assembler fixed frame of reference. It was agreed that a reaction would be 
obtained when a robot arm pushes the molecules together but it may not be the reaction 
desired. More control is needed than mentioned about molecular assemblers. A molecular 
chaperone is needed that serves as catalyst. Some agent such as an enzyme is needed. A liquid 
medium such as water is needed to complete the desired chemical reactions. Smalley recalled 
a talk on nanotechnology he gave to 700 middle and high school students. The students were 
asked to write an essay on “Why I am a Nanogeek.” Smalley read the top 30 essays and he 
picked his favorite five. Half assumed that self-replicating nanobots were possible. What if 
the self-replicating nanobots fill the world, was the worry of some. However, they have been 
misinformed. 
 
 
1.2.4. Trends in Industrial Robots 
 
Industrial robots are increasingly used. According to Prof. D. Rus, director of MIT‟s 
computer science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory a tipping point in the field of robotics 
has been reached. There is a paradigm shift from robots as job terminators to robots as job 
creators. Companies report more productivity per worker with more usage of robots. 

Introduction 
 
 
9
Universal robot, specialized robots, numerically controlled milling machines are increasingly 
used. Electronics industry is reaching the trillion dollar mark rapidly. Automotive and 
semiconductor industries increasingly use the robots. Robots can be used in miniaturization 
operations. Nanotechnology products are expected to have a market size of 3 trillion dollars 
by the year 2015. Microarrayer and nanoarrayers are expected to be increasingly used in 
genome sequencing and making biochips. Mechanical micro spotting and ink jet printing use 
principles of robotics and automation. 
Apple is planning on investing $10.5 billion in supply chain robotics and lasers and new 
technology ranging from assembly robots to milling machines. These machines are used for 
mass production of iphones, ipads, and smart phones. Amazon has recently announced the 
development of drones for rapid door delivery of ordered items. With a service called „Prime 
Air‟, by 2015 drones are expected to be used in order to deliver packages less than 30 
minutes. Pizza deliveries are also expected. Internet access is expected to be delivered by 
drones to remote areas. Robots have been made with a spectrum of capabilities. Researcher at 
University of California at Berkeley has developed a robot for drying and folding clothes 
from the laundry. In 2000, 78% of installed robots were used for welding or material 
handling. Samsung, Hewlett Packard, Apple and other competitors use robots for spray 
painting. Robotic Equipment is used to polish new iPhone and carve plastic MacBook‟s 
aluminum body. Other consumer electronics investments are $ 22 billion by Samsung, $3.7 
billion by Hewlett Packard and $3.95 billion by Sony Corp. Apple has hired robot experts and 
engineers to oversee operation of high-end manufacturing equipment. 
When the baby-boomers reach the retirement age in the near future there is a shortage 
expected in skilled workers. Developments like Baxter that can be used to perform tasks of 
two workers can increase the usage of robots. Robots can be used to unassemble pipe from 
conveyor. Marlin steel use robots in order to produce wire baskets and sell it to car makers 
and pharmaceutical firms. Lear a major auto-parts maker near Detroit, MI, with nearly $15 
billion in annual revenue uses robots developed by Universal Robotics to help screw together 
seats and put together electronics dashboards. Sensors, instrumentation and industrial 
automation are expected to be a tidy addition to modern chemical plants. Key Competitors 
identified in the market report by Transparency Market Research are: (i) Denso Wave Inc; (ii) 
FANUC Corp.; (iii) KUKA AG; (iv) Yaskawa Electric Corp; (v) Toshiba Machine Corp; (vi) 
Yogakoaw Electric Corp; (vi) ABB Ltd. (vii) Honeywell Intl.; (viii) Emerson Electric; (ix) 
General Electric; (x) Invensys PLS; (xi) Mitsubishi Electric; (xii) Rockwell Automation; 
(xiii) Siemens; (xiv) Omron Corp; (xv) Schneider Electric; (xvi) Kawasaki Robotics. 
 
 
1.2.5. Drones 
 
Robo-roo is a robot built by engineers in Germany that can be made to hop like a 
kangaroo. The kangaroo's jump is unique and contains a mechanism where the jump speed 
can be controlled in an efficient manner. The Achilles tendon stretches from the kangaroo's 
head to its calf. Festo scientists in Germany have devised an elastic spring that can be used in 
order to enable the robo-roo's functionality much like the real Achilles tendon. The kinetic 
energy of the kangaroo is absorbed by the elastic spring when the robo-roo lands. The next 
jump is powered by the energy released from the spring. Electronic circuitry are being 
developed to store and release energy in a more efficient and controlled manner. The robo-roo 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
10
is powered using rechargeable batteries. Bionics is an emerging field of using things found in 
nature as vision for designing objects with similar functionality. With two feet and tail when 
the robo-roo touches the floor there is provided a stable three point contact. Two motors are 
used to control the robots legs. The motors are placed in between the "hip" and "thigh" of the 
robo-roo. The spring is made of rubber. The jump is cushioned by the elastic spring which is 
intended to provide the same functionality as provided by the Achilles tendon. The robo-roo 
is built to provide more bounce.  
Drones are unmanned aerial vehicles that can be used for various purposes. It can be used 
to snap high-definition photos of apple orchad from up above from the skies. The acquired 
photos are processed using software and the health of the crops is analyzed. Corners of the 
field where insects are attacking the apples are identified. Drone turns its path and heads to 
that area. Pesticides are dispensed from the wings of the drones. The insects that harming the 
trees are killed. Drone is back on its patrol. This is but one example in an emerging field of 
precision agriculture. The farms can be as large as 10,000 acres. The farmers can use this 
technology in order to keep an eye on their crops. For now, the satellite pictures are used. 
Resolution of satellite pictures to the 6th coordinate is tedious! Drones may be used by the 
farmers every day and lead to use of less water, less fertilizer and optimal use of pesticides.  
Drones can be made to perform 'door-delivery'. The customer calls the apple warehouse 
and orders the apple for door delivery. One half hour later the drone lands at your doorstep 
with the apple. The buzz of the drone can act as a door-bell. The apple is left at the doorstep 
and the drone levitates away into the sky. Drones can be used in conjunction with other police 
activity. Crimes as they are committed can be spotted and if possible changed into acceptable 
activities. Parking tickets can be issued using drones. Life saving medicines can be supplied 
to hospitals using drones during medical emergencies. Drones may be used to fight fires. 
Drones can be used in warfare amongst nations. One in three American military aircraft are 
drones. They come in various sizes. The MQ-9 Reaper can be used in order to carry about 
3000 pounds of weaponry. In this country Unites States, drones are used to combat terrorism. 
Al Qaeda and the Taliban in Pakisthan and Afghanisthan are targets. The perpetrator of the 
9/11 bombings Osama Bin Laden is now dead by a commando mission viewed by the White 
House. Drones are operated from remote locations. Hence it is a case in automation! Drones 
seldom appear in man vs. machine controversies.  
Drones were first built in the early 1900s. Hollywood finds some use for drones. 
Filmmakers like Steve Spielberg, Richard Attenborough for example capture footage using 
“camera drones” that would otherwise be dangerous and expensive to shoot. Action scenes 
that were shot using helicopters in films were Gemini Ganesan was the hero in India are now 
taken by camera drones. Helicopters are expensive and the pilots have to perform maneuvers 
in order to fly low to get a better shot. The costs can be as high as $10,000 per day. Camera 
drones can be less expensive and can be sent close to the action without causing danger. The 
cost of a camera drone is $25,000 and can be used over and over again. Sporting events can 
be filmed using camera drones. Flight control is affected using software to determine if the 
motor needs more or less power in order to keep the drone steady. Radio control is used to let 
controllers say to the drone what to do such as „fly faster‟, „begin descent‟, etc. Navigation is 
accomplished using GPS and a barometer. The atmospheric pressure is measured using the 
barometer. Flight control software receives as input the location of the drone and path it can 
take in order to return home.  

Introduction 
 
 
11
Camera drones is a solution that came from a $ 5 million research grant study conducted 
by WWF, world wildlife fund to the wildlife crime problem in Africa and Asia. $5 million 
grant was received from Google. The University of Minnesota Uninhabited Aerial Vehicle 
Laboratory estimates that most farmers will use camera drones in the next five years. Animal 
conservation group uses camera drones to “animal-sit” rhinos, elephants and tigers. Scientists 
can track down poachers who kill the endangered animals and without impunity sell their 
horns, tusks and eyes to be used in Chinese medicines.  
 
 
1.2.6. Runaway Reactions in Polymerization Kettles 
 
An interesting challenge in modeling and control of mass polymerization reactors is the 
runaway polymerization under certain conditions. This is called the Trommsdorff effect. 
Manufacturing plants that use suspension polymerization plant has encountered a problem 
during operation where the reactor was “Set-up”. During free-radical polymerizations there 
are three important sets of reactions: (i) Initiation; (ii) Propagation and; (iii) Termination. As 
the polymerization reaction proceeds in suspension kettles, the viscosity of the polymer mass 
increases. The termination reactions are hindered. The polymer chain grows unbounded in 
size. This has “set-up” the reactor. This effect is also called auto-acceleration effect. It can be 
considered as a runaway reaction. The action taken to prevent such occurrences during 
continuous polymerization of styrene or copolymer of styrene and acrylonitrile a solvent is 
added. 
A viscometer may be added to measure the viscosity of the reaction mass. The control 
action taken can be to decrease the flow of the monomer supply or decreasing the reactor 
temperature or decreasing the reactor pressure, should the viscosity of the mass remain high. 
The termination reactions during the gel effect do not take place on account of diffusion 
limitations. The growing chains have to diffuse and meet in order for the chain recombination 
mechanism for termination to take place. When the monomer conversion is high in the reactor 
and there is no solvent or diluent, the viscosity of the reaction mass will be high. Studies have 
shown an exponential increase in viscosity with conversion. The diffusion process in higher 
viscous paths will take a lot longer. Without termination the molecular weight grows in an 
unchecked manner. This causes the gel effect. 
Gharaghani et al. [2012] developed a control strategy for a two-stage bulk styrene 
polymerization. They conducted dynamic simulation in order to predict the performance of 
auto-refrigerated CSTR and tubular reactors. The PFR has temperature controlled jacket 
zones. In one control strategy they used the jacket temperature and in another strategy the 
reactor temperature at the exit of each section was used as the controlled variable. GA, 
genetic algorithm was used in order to obtain the set points for polymer grade transition after 
optimization. Optimization goals were; (i) higher monomer conversion; (ii) final number 
averaged molecular weight of the polymer and; (iii) narrower molecular weight distribution. 
High heats of reaction are associated with mass polymerization of styrene. High viscosity 
and hence laminar flow are also other features of mass polymerization of styrene. PFR, plug 
flow reactor with recycle or CSTRS, continuous stirred tank reactors are used for industrial 
styrene homopolymerization and copolymerization. Dynamic simulation studies of a two-
stage continuous bulk polymerization process was undertaken. The first stage was auto- 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
12
refrigerated CSTR and the second stage was a tubular reactor. The tubular reactor was 
subdivided into three temperature-control jacket zones. Monomer conversions, X, number 
and weight averaged molecular weights and PDI poly dispersity index can be predicted using 
the mathematical model. 
The simulation of Chen [1994] is for a basis of production of polystyrene at 5682 kg/h. 
Conversion in the auto-refrigerated CSTR was 65-75% and that in the second tubular reactor 
was at 90%. The gel effect/auto acceleration phenomena were modeled by Hui and Hamielec 
[1972]. The model can be written as follows, neglecting chain transfer effects; 
 
 
kt = kt0exp[-2(A1X + A2X2 + A3X3)] 
(1) 
 
 
kt0 = 1.225 x 106 exp(-844/T) 
(2) 
 
 
A1 = 2.57 – 5.05 x 10-3T 
(3) 
 
 
A2 = 9.56 – 1.76 x 10-2T 
(4) 
 
 
A3 = -3.03 + 7.85 x 10-3T 
(5) 
 
The termination rate constant as a function of conversion is given by Eq. (1) during the 
auto acceleration period. It can be seen to decrease exponentially with conversion. The 
temperature dependence of the preexponential factor is given by Eq. (2). Eqs. (3-5) can be 
used to obtain the temperature dependence of the conversion dependence of the termination 
rate constant. The thermal initiation rate constant is given by; 
 
 
kh = 0.219exp(-13910/T) 
(6) 
 
The propagation rate constant is given by; 
 
 
kp = 1.051x104exp(-3557/T) 
(7) 
 
The density of monomer as a function of temperature is given by; 
 

m = 924 – 0.918(T-273.1) 
(8) 
 
The number average molecular weight is later derived in Chapter 4.0 for thermal 
polymerization of styrene as; 
 
 
Mn = kp/SQRT(ktkhCM) 
(9) 
 
The number averaged molecular weight was obtained at different conversions and plotted 
in Figure 1.0. Microsoft Excel 2010 was used for the simulations. The temperature of the 
reactor chosen was 100 0C. The results are shown in Table 1.3 below; 
 
 
 

Introduction 
 
 
13
Table 1.3. Molecular Weight Building during „Runaway Condition‟ 
 
 
C 
 K 
 
C0 
 
 
T 
100 0 C 
373 0K 
 
m3/mol/s 
 
mol/lit 
 
 
 
X 
kt 
Mn 
CM 
A1 
0.6677 
 
0 
1.275E+05 
2.011E+05 
8.003 
A2 
2.9952 
 
0.05 
1.175E+05 
2.149E+05 
7.603 
A3 
-0.0833 
 
0.1 
1.051E+05 
2.335E+05 
7.203 
kt0 
1.27E+05 
m3/mol/s 
0.15 
9.123E+04 
2.578E+05 
6.802 
 
 
 
0.2 
7.691E+04 
2.895E+05 
6.402 
kh 
1.3952E-17 
m6/mol2/s 
0.25 
6.295E+04 
3.305E+05 
6.002 
kp 
0.759 
m3/mol/s 
0.3 
5.003E+04 
3.837E+05 
5.602 
Density of Styrene 
832.3 
kg/cu.m 
0.35 
3.862E+04 
4.532E+05 
5.202 
CA0 
8.00 
mol/lit 
0.4 
2.896E+04 
5.447E+05 
4.802 
 
 
 
0.45 
2.110E+04 
6.666E+05 
4.402 
 
 
 
0.5 
1.493E+04 
8.310E+05 
4.001 
 
 
 
0.55 
1.027E+04 
1.056E+06 
3.601 
 
 
 
0.6 
6.863E+03 
1.370E+06 
3.201 
 
 
 
0.65 
4.458E+03 
1.818E+06 
2.801 
 
 
 
0.7 
2.815E+03 
2.471E+06 
2.401 
 
 
 
0.75 
1.728E+03 
3.454E+06 
2.001 
 
 
 
0.8 
1.032E+03 
4.999E+06 
1.601 
 
 
 
0.85 
5.988E+02 
7.577E+06 
1.200 
 
 
 
0.9 
3.380E+02 
1.235E+07 
0.800 
 
 
 
0.95 
1.856E+02 
2.357E+07 
0.400 
 
Development of control strategy for a process such as shown in Figure 1.0 is a challenge. 
Solvent can be used to keep the diffusion paths of growing free radicals short, allowing for 
termination reactions to proceed with recombination. Online viscometers can be used to 
check the viscosity of the batch. When the viscosity is very high jacket cooling of cooling by 
vaporization of solvent/monomer can be called for. 
 
 
1.2.7. Electric Motor Controls 
 
In United States, $50 billion is spent every year on electricity for electric-motor driven 
systems. Department of Energy estimates an energy savings of about $250 million per year by 
using motor drives in the past decade. Motors are made in a manner that the motor speed and 
torque developed needs to be controlled depending on the objectives at a given time. Motor 
direction, speed and acceleration or negative acceleration times can be controlled. Motors can 
be powered by AC alternating current or DC direct current. In AC motors work is produced in 
order to drive a load using a rotating shaft. The amount of work that is produced varies as a 
function of the amount of torque that can be developed using the designed shaft and the  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
14
angular speed in RPM, revolutions per minute of the shaft. Motor drives can be used to 
control the speed and torque of a motor. Motor drive is built using solid-state components and 
is an electronic unit. It can be used to control the speed of a motor. These drives are used in 
HVAC, heating ventilation and air conditioning systems. Motor control functions include 
speed control, acceleration, negative acceleration, motor-start boosting, fault tolerating, 
programming speeds, different pause methods and several other control functions. 
Due to the complex dependence of the operation of motors for different loads under 
different conditions, no one mathematical model can be used to describe any possible 
conceivable scenario of operation. Therefore reliable measurements are needed to achieve the 
control objectives. Motor current, motor voltage, drive temperature and other operating 
conditions are parameters that needs to be monitored. Safety considerations leads to a 
mechanism of power shut-off when there is an apparent problem. Conditions and faults are 
allowed in some designs to be displayed. A PLC, personal logic controller or PC personal 
computer can be used to include additional specialty functions to be sent to the drive through 
on-board communication. 
 
 
Figure 1.0. Gel Effect as Seen in Molecular Weight Increase with Conversion. 

Introduction 
 
 
15
The speed of an AC motor is controlled by tweaking the frequency in Hz input into the 
motor. The frequency range can be from 0 – 100s of hertz. They are programmed to operate 
at a minimum and a maximum operating speed in order to proactively avoid damage to the 
load or internal contents of the motor. Operation at more than 10% of the rated capacity in the 
name plate can lead to damage. Volts per hertz (V/Hz) is a ratio of the voltage and frequency 
found in a motor during its operations [Rockis and Mazur, 2009]. The motor torque can be 
controlled using the V/Hz ratio that is applied to the motor. The motor is allowed to develop 
the rated torque when the V/Hz ratio is maintained. During the acceleration phase, constant 
torque is delivered as voltage is increased at the same rate as the frequency is increased. After 
a certain frequency the voltage remains a constant for further increased in frequency. The 
normal operating speed zone lies at frequencies less than the frequency cut-off. At 
frequencies greater than this cut-off value the motor is operating at an above normal rating. At 
the cut-off frequency the motor is said to deliver the full motor voltage. Torque is constant in 
the linear range of operation. At frequencies higher than the cut-off the motor drive is in a 
regime of constant output horse power. PWM, pule width modulation can be used in order to 
control the amount of voltage sent to the motor. The amount of voltage produced has to be 
controlled in order to control the speed and torque of the motor.  
Motors can be turned ON or OFF using magnetic starters. They can be used to provide 
overload protection. Voltage control can be accomplished by using resistances in series to the 
motor windings. Current control can be accomplished by shunting resistance in parallel to the 
motor windings. The intensity of the magnetic field can be checked for peak operation. The 
cost of control is roughly the same when the starter or drive is used. It is more a function of 
the hp rating of the motor. A potentiometer can be used to control the speed of a motor. The 
resistance of the potentiometer can be from 5 k- 10 k. Most drives allow a voltage or 
current input in order to control the speed of the motor. 0 – 10 Volt of direct current supply 
voltage can be connected to the input terminals of the motor. At 5 V, the motor runs at 50% 
of the rated speed, and at 7.5 V, the motor runs at 75% speed. 4 mA – 20 mA direct current 
supply can be connected to the input terminals of the motor drive. The motor runs at 50% 
speed at 8 mA and 75% speed at 12 mA. Standard control-circuit power is supplied in the 0 – 
10 V and 4mA – 20 mA range. Switches are placed in certain positions and the motor control 
and drive functions are set using programming. Keypad is located on the drive and may be 
removable. Motor drives can contain up to 30 – 100 parameters. Some of the parameters that 
can be displayed are; (i) drive output frequency; (ii) motor current draw; (iii) drive output 
voltage; (iv) drive DC bus voltage; (v) drive internal temperature; (vi) motor fault; (vii) drive 
elapsed operating time; and (viii) motor operating speed.  
 
 
1.2.8. Centralized Heating and Cooling 
 
The modern homes are equipped with a thermostat to set the desired temperature of the 
residence (Tsp). Valves to the furnace and air conditioner can be controlled by using 
measurement of temperature in the residence (Tm ). When the measured temperature, Tm < Tsp 
the furnace is turned on and the cooling is shut-off. When Tm > Tsp the furnace is shut-off and 
the air conditioner is turned on. Such a control method is called feedback control. This shall 
be discussed in more detail later. The block diagram for such control action is shown below in 
Figure 2.0. Air from the blower is heated by the furnace or cooled by the air-conditioner as 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
16
the case may be. The heating or cooling action depends on the error signal and whether the 
measured temperature, Tm is lower or higher compared with the set point temperature, Tsp. 
Thermocouples are used to measure the temperature in the room. Comparison of measured 
room temperature to set-point is performed by a comparator. The feedback step is the 
measurement of actual room temperature using temperature sensor (output) with the input 
(set-point). Figure 2.0 contains the essential elements of a block flow diagram. These are; 
 
 
Comparators 
 
Blocks 
 
Reference sensor 
 
Output sensor 
 
Controller 
 
Input/reference signals 
 
Plant operating system 
 
Feedback loop 
 
Disturbance signal 
 
Output signal 
 
 
1.2.9. Regulation of Human Anatomical Temperature 
 
The body temperature in humans can be seen to be held in dynamic balance by; 
 
(i) the generation of heat by metabolic activities within the human anatomy and 
(ii) by transfer of heat outside the human anatomy to the surroundings.  
(iii) The heat gain, heat storage and heat transfer mechanism coexist in human anatomy. 
As can be seen from Figure 3.0 there are five layers between the surroundings and 
the blood [Sharma, 2010]. 
 
The thermophysical properties of the blood, skin, fat and bone are different from each 
other. The modes of heat transfer can be molecular heat conduction, heat convection, heat 
radiation and by a fourth mode of heat transfer called damped wave conduction. Metabolism 
in one word includes all the chemical reactions taking place within the human anatomy. 
Energy is liberated from chemical reactions that are exothermic. This is used to sustain life 
and to perform the various functions, basic and chosen. Work is done by human anatomy.  
The minimal rate of metabolism needed to sustain life is referred to as basic rate of 
metabolism. This rate is obtained while the patient is awake and resting and is at a stress-less 
state. Digestive activities should cease, the external hot weather does not cause any heat 
exchange or thermoregulation. There is enough energy generated at this state for the heart to 
pump blood throughout the human anatomy, retain normal electrical activity in the nervous 
system, and generate calories of energy. The basic rate of metabolism can be measured using 
the rate at which oxygen is consumed and the energy generated from metabolism of oxygen. 
Some work done by human anatomy is allowed. The energy needed for metabolic activity is 
obtained from chemical reactions that get coupled resulting in a net decrease in free energy. 
The basic rate of metabolism in a average patient is roughly, 75 watts. The major organs such 

Introduction 
 
 
17
as brain, skeletal muscle, liver, heart, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, lungs, etc, participate in 
the base metabolism. The muscles in the human skeleton requires less energy at the rest state 
compared with the state of exercise. When the patient is asleep the metabolic rate falls below 
the basic rate of metabolism. The metabolic rate at all other activities such as walking, sitting, 
mating, eating, cooking, growing, etc are higher than the basic rate of metabolism. The rate of 
metabolic rate can exceed the basic rate of metabolism by a factor of 10-20 during strenuous 
exercise. 
 
 
Figure 2.0. Centralized Heating and Cooling System in Homes using Feedback Control. 
 
 
Figure 3.0. Heat Conduction through Skin, Fat, Muscle and Bone Layers from Surroundings to Blood 
Flow in Human Anatomy. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
18
The basic rate of metabolism in homo sapiens varies with the body mass m, as 
0.75
m
. The 
relationship between the basic rate of metabolism and human anatomical parameters can be 
expressed in terms of the surface to volume ratio of the patient as 
1.5
S
V
. 
Within the human anatomy, mechanisms are in place that will take effect to cool the 
anatomy when the average temperature reaches 350 C. The average temperature within the 
human anatomy is usually, 370 C. Au contrairie, when the skin temperature reaches below 
22.5 0 C, cellular mechanisms will take effect that will result in generation of heat. The core 
human anatomical temperature is maintained within a narrow range by use of insulation and 
heat production.  
Two mechanisms that can cause cooling within the human anatomy are: i) vasodilation 
and; ii) evaporative cooling affected by sweat. After sternous exercise, on account of 
vasodilation, the skin exterior appears a bit reddish. The blood near the skin surface gets 
refrigerated and flows back to the veins and arteries thereby affecting energy transfer. The 
human anatomy reduces heat loss in the temperature range of 24 – 32 0 C by reduced blood 
flow to the dermis. Below 24 0 C, vasoconstriction mechanism is not sufficient and the heat 
production is by shivering or physical activity. There appears a set point in thermoregulation. 
Regulatory process is a bit more complicated than a first order feedforward control process. 
Transient receptor potential ion channels are sensitive to hot and cold temperatures. TRP 
channels get activated upon control action from the hypothalamus and stimulate the nerves. 
Nerve signals and harmone signals result in vasodilation/vasoconstriction or blood flow 
regulation and changes in metabolism and heat generation. Block flow diagram of regulation 
of human anatomical temperature is shown in Figure 4.0. 
The thermophysical properties of the biological tissues and other materials are provided 
in Sharma (2010). The role of fat under the skin in the human anatomy as an insulator can be 
evaluated using the thermophysical properties provided. Consider thicknesses of skin, fat, 
muscle and bone of 2.5 mm, 10 mm, 20 mm and 7.5 mm respectively. The thermal 
conductivity of the muscle and bone are 0.5 W/m/K and 0.6 W/m/K respectively. The effect 
of the layer of fat on the heat flux from the human anatomy can be evaluated as follows. The 
governing equation for steady state temperature in the composite assembly of skin, fat, 
muscle and bone can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
0
d T
dz
 
(10) 
 
The temperature profile can be seen to be linear with respect to the space coordinate. The 
heat flux can be seen to be a constant throughout the composite assembly. The effective 
thermal conductivity of the composite assembly can be written as; 
 
 
fat
skin
muscle
bone
eff
skin
fat
muscle
bone
L
L
L
L
L
k
k
k
k
k
 
(11) 
 
 

Introduction 
 
 
19
 
Figure 4.0. Regulation of Human Anatomical Temperature seen as Feedforward Control. 
 
Where kskin, kfat, kmuscle and kbone are the thermal conductivities of the skin, fat, muscle and 
bone respectively. Examples of insulators of heat used to cover the human anatomy are fur, 
hair and sweat. The effective thermal conductivity of layer of hair on the human skull can 
becalculated from the idealized model where the hair was reduced to a composite of 
cylindrical fibers aligned parallel to the axis parallel to the flow of air. Let the thermal 
conductivity of fiber and air be taken as kfiber, kair respectively. The effective thermal 
conductivity of composite assembly of hair and air was shown to be (Sharma, 2010); 
 
 
,
1
eff zz
fiber
air
air
air
k
k
k
k
k
 
(12) 
 
,
4
8
2
1
0.30584
0.013363
.....
eff xx
air
fiber
air
fiber
air
fiber
air
fiber
air
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
 
(13) 
 
Where  is the volume fraction of the fibers. The above expressions tend to capture the 
role of fat and hair on the heat insulation process.  
 
 
1.2.10. Feedback Control of 3 Arm Robotic Manipular with End Effector 
 
Consider a 3 arm robotic manipulator with end effector. This can be programmed to 
perform tasks such as to pick a bolt from the table as shown in Figure 5.0. The manipulator is  
instrumented with sensors at each joint to measure the joint angle. The joints are revolute 
[Craig, 2005]. Each joint has an actuator that can be made to apply a torque on the 
neighbouring link. Each joint has a position sensor. Velocity sensors or tachometers are also 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
20
present at these joints. The manipulator joints follow a prescribed position trajectory. The 
actuators are commanded in terms of torque. A feedback control system can be deployed. The 
appropriate actuator commands that will realize the desired motion can be given. The 
feedback from the sensors in the joints is used to accomplish this task. The torque required is 
computed. This feedback control loop is shown in Figure 5.0 
A vector of joint torques, , is given as input into the robot from the control system. The 
sensors from the joints measure the joint angles, , and joint velocities. ‟. This is sent as 
signal to the control box. The number of parameters sent as a vector depends on the number 
of joints, N in the system. The torque is calculated in the control box from the information 
input from the trajectory generator and by comparison with the measurements received from 
the sensors in the joints. A dynamic model can be used if necessary. The feedback is used to 
detect any servo error. The control action taken has to be in such a fashion that the robotic 
system is stable. 
 
 
1.2.11. Lessons in Modeling and Control from Fukushima Earthquake 
 
On March 11th 2011, the earth shook for more than 2 minutues in Iwaki, Japan. 
Skyscrapers began to oscillate and buildings collapsed. Tsunami came in. Earthquake of the 
order of 8.9 on the Richter scale is the most severe earthquake Japan has suffered in seismic 
history. The ocean floors heaved and the water came all the way into the living areas. Floods 
and fires came about. Four tectonic plates are near the island nation of Japan. This tsunami 
was even of a bigger magnitude compared with the one in Indian Ocean in 2004. Electric 
power was completely cut off.  
The Fukushima nuclear power plant (Figure 7.0) was damaged during the earthquake. 
Seawater was directed onto the fuel during the meltdown of the nuclear power plants. There 
was no better control action in place. Called The Fukushima 50 the firefighters were risking 
death and were braving 250 millisieverts of radioactivity. This is five times more than the 
permissible dose. The damaged nuclear reactors spewed radiation. There are no controls in 
place although that geographical area is prone to earthquakes. 
 
 
Figure 5.0. 3 Arm Manipulator with End Effector Picking a Bolt from Table. 

Introduction 
 
 
21
 
Figure 6.0. Block Diagram of Feedback Control of Robot Picking a Bolt. 
 
 
Figure 7.0. Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant. 
 
The nuclear energy may be the way to go for power plant needs in the future when oil 
reserves are depleted. Less pollution is caused on account of nuclear power plants. Safety 
issues remain after the 3 mile island, Chernobyl and Fukushima accidents. The Fukushima 
disaster included damage of three units of BWRs, boiling water reactors. The heat transfer 
from core to outside was lost. Nuclear plants are equipped with earthquake recognition 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
22
systems. Chain reaction shut down or emergency shut down procedures are outlined in cases 
of earth quake. The reactor is switched off and the runaway reactions are stopped. In 
Fukushima plant only three of the six reactors were functioning at the time of the earthquake. 
The generators were flooded. The cooling system lost power supply. The heat generated 
increased in the reactor core. The zirconium fuel rod cladding reacted with the steam and 
oxygen and hydrogen were produced. This may have caused the explosion with release of 
steam polluted with radioactive isotopes into the atmosphere. A massive volume of smoke 
spread the radioactive particles throughout the European Union. People evacuated within a 30 
km radius of the power plants. The evening television news showed people traveling overseas 
on account of the tsunami and with the yen being strong. 
133Cs, 137Cs and 131I radioisotopes dosage received by the animals close to the accident 
were high. The implications of the accident in future design, operation and control of similar 
power plants are several. First a better project site can be selected with water, land and other 
requirements needed for a viable and profitable operation of a project. The structures needs to 
be strengthened against natural disasters. The environmental damage from the accident was 
infected clouds and leakage of radioactive particles on soil. Entire Xeon gases, 60% of Iodine, 
40% of Caesium, 10% of Tellurium and 5% of reminder of the radioactive particles were 
released to the atmosphere. The amount of radiation released was 8 x 1015 Bq. 
 
 
1.2.12. Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill 
 
The disaster that changed the price at the gasoline pumps in summer of 2010 was in part 
beacause they did not have better control and sensors in place than they did. The explosion of 
the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig claimed 11 lives. The Gulf region lost its economic engine 
and left thousands with mental and physical problems due to stress and pollution. Five million 
barrels of oil gushed into the ocean for 86 days. Tourism dropped in the Gulf of Mexico. Off-
shore drilling can be better instrumented and have alarms in place and better controlled. 
Deepwater Horizon was a semi-submersible, ultra-deepwater offshore oil drilling rig built 
in 2001 by Hyandai Heavy Industries, South Korea. The rig was used to drill the deepest oil 
well in history at a vertical depth of 10,683 m in Gulf of Mexico 250 miles southeast of 
Houston, TX. An explotion on the rig caused by a blowout ignited a fireball visible from a 
distance of 56 km. The fire was inextinguishable and the Deepwater Horizon sank. The oil 
well was gushing at the sea floor and caused the largest offshore oil spill in the history of 
United States. The oil spill causes a lot of damage to the environment and fisheries industry. 
Transocean received an early partial settlement of $401 million for the loss of Deepwater 
Horizon. The gushing of oil was at about 62,000 barrels per day on the average and 162,000 
barrels a day on the worst case. The spewing went on for three months. The gush rate 
decreased as the oil reservoir was depleted. The amount of Lousiana shoreline affected by oil 
grew to 510 km by Nov‟ 2010. The oil spill amounted to about 4.9 million barrels. The blow-
out preventer valves were not closed. Remotely operated underwater vehicles were used to 
attempt to close the blowout preventer valves on the well head. A containment dome that was 
125 tons in weight was tried and failed when gas leaking from the pipe combined with cold 
water formed methane hydrate crystals that blocked the opening at the top of the dome. The 
“top kill” was a procedure where heavy drilling fluids were pumped into the blowout  
 

Introduction 
 
 
23
preventer in order to restrict the gushing of oil before sealing it for ever with cement. This 
also failed. The gushing could have been averted by better control, alarm and shut down 
systems. “Fail-closed” valves could have averted the gushing even after the sinking of the oil 
rig. 
 
 
1.3. CONTROL STRATEGY  
 
The main components of a control system are as follows; 
 
(i) Process or Physico-chemical System that needs to be Controlled 
(ii) Control Objectives 
(iii) Set Points and Error Bands 
(iv) Sensors and Measuring Elements 
(v) Input Variables, Manipulatable 
(vi) Disturbance or Load Variables 
(vii) Output Variables 
(viii) Constraints 
(ix) Operational Characteristics such as Batch, Continuous, Semi-batch 
(x) Safety, Environmental and Economic Considerations 
(xi) Control Type: Feedback, Feedforward, Adaptive, Multivariable, IMC, Filter 
Cascaded etc 
 
As can be seen from the examples in section 1.2 the control objectives can be clearly 
identified for each process. In the polymer kettle in Example 1.2.6 in order to avoid the gel-
effect the viscosity of the reactor mass has to be set as the control objective. Control action 
can be taken upon finding out should the viscosity be too high or too low for operation of the 
kettle. Input variables can be initial concentration of the reactant, inlet flow rate to the reactor, 
jacket temperature, inlet fluid temperature into the reactor, etc. Disturbance variable is one 
that gets perturbed in an unexpected manner in the reactor for example.  
Output variables are for example the unconverted monomer conversion in the outlet of 
reactor. The temperature of the reactor in the case of CSTR may be an output variable. The 
reactant and product concentrations in a CSTR may be treated as output variables. Constraints 
can arise from product quality considerations. For example the color of a SAN copolymer 
cannot be more than certain degree of yellowness. This imposes an upper limit on the AN 
composition in the copolymer and/or an upper limit on the time-temperature history of the 
product. In this example, with sufficient time and temperature exposure the product can turn 
yellow and blue black specifications may arise in the product.  
Better automation and control leads to operations closer to “optimal” conditions. 
Optimization of the process can result in millions of dollars of cost savings for the 
manufacturing division. Materials and energy can be better used. What a dollar can buy can 
be stretched a bit. Safer and less hazardous a process needs to be more expensive the process 
can become. “Fail-safe” concept is a salient consideration in the development of 
instrumentation. In order to change the flow rate using control valves energy needs to be  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
24
supplied. The stem of the valve is moved upon receipt of a signal. When the signal is lost the 
stem will go to the position with the lowest value of pressure range of operation. Should the 
valve be made air-to-open the loss of air would lead to closure of the valve? Such a valve is 
called as failed-safe valve. The valve can be air-to-close. In this case when instrument air is 
lost the valve will be at its open state. This is referred to as fail-safe-open valve. 
 
 
1.4. CONTROL TYPES  
 
There can be different types of control action sought. These are as follows; 
 
 
1.4.1. Feedback Control 
 
Examples of feedback control was shown in Example 1-2.9, Example 1.2.11. During 
feedback control the output variable is measured. The measured signal is compared against a 
set point using comparators. The error signal forms the input into the controller. Control 
action depends on the air. For example, as will be discussed in the later chapter, a P only 
controller is made in a manner that the control action is directly proportional to the error. In 
Chapter 5.0, feedback control of single-input or manipulated variable and single output or 
measured variable is discussed in greater detail. The feedback control structure is arrived at 
by selection of manipulated variable and increased or decreased to control the measured 
output variable. The desired value of the measured process output is also called as setpoint.  
Later control gain and control time constant would be decreased. In a similar manner, the 
process also can be characterized with a process gain and process time constant. The gain is 
the rate of change of the output to the rate of change of input. This can provide a measure of 
the sensitivity of the process or controller. The gain can be positive or negative. Negative 
gains leads to inverse response. This is one kind of instability as will be discussed in chapter 
3.0 and chapter 4.0. A control algorithm can be constructed and control parameters can be 
identified. These control parameters can be tuned in order to obtain better performance. The 
feedback control can further be of different types. These are as follows; 
 
a. On-off Controller 
b. P, Proportional only Controller 
c. PI, Proportional Integral Controller 
d. PD, Proportional Derivative Controller 
e. PID, Proportional, Integral and Derivative Controller 
 
 
1.4.2. Feedforward Control 
 
An example of feedforward control is discussed in Example 1-2.9. Vasodilation and 
evaporative cooling/sweat formation happens immediately after a change in surroundings. 
This kind of control action is different from the control action described in feedback control  
 

Introduction 
 
 
25
above. The disturbance variable is measured and control action is taken proactively. An 
estimate is made on the effect of the control action on the output variable. Output variable is 
not measured directly. Therefore the control action can work well when there are reliable 
models that can relate the process output to the manipulated variables. Further the measured 
disturbance need to be the only aberration in the scheme of things. 
 
 
1.4.3. Hybrid Feed forward and Feedback Control 
 
The feedback and feedforward schemes can be hybridized. In such cases the engineer has 
more things on his hands to adjust. (see Example 5.2). 
 
 
1.4.4. Internal Model Control, IMC 
 
IMC, internal model control action uses the knowledge about the process that is being 
controlled. This is different from the black-box approach of feedback control of single output 
variable by tweaking the inpuit variable based on measurements of output variable. The 
model developed for the mixing tank heated by the hot fluid in the jacket in Figure 7.4 can be 
used to design an internal model controller. A good knowledge of when the process is stable 
and when the process is underdamped oscillatory unstable can lead to better control action. 
Control action of unstable systems may result in unsatisfactory results. In general the model-
based controller can be added as shown in Figure 7.8. Filters can be added to make the 
controller more realizable. The transfer function of the output has to be proper. The Laplace 
transform expression of the transfer function can be represented by; 
 
 
( )
( )
P s
Q s  
(14) 
 
When the order of the polynomial of Q(s) in the denominator of Eq. (14) is greater than 
the order of polynomial P(s) in the numerator then the transfer function is said to be proper. 
When the order of the polynomial in the numerator P(s) is the same as the order of the 
polynomial in the denominator Q(s) then the transfer function is said to be semi-proper. 
 
 
1.4.5. Ratio Control 
 
Ratio controllers are used where ratio of the reactant mixture is of increased significance. 
For example when flue gas is needed the ratio of air to CO2, is controlled in such a manner 
that the heat of reactions from the Boudard reaction and heat of reaction from the oxidation 
reaction “cancel” each other rendering the reactor at a adiabatic state. One or more valves are 
used in a split range control. More on ratio control is discussed in section 7.1. Ratio control 
can be used in distillation columns where the reflux ratio is an important design variable. 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
26
1.4.6. Statistical Process Control, SPC 
 
SPC is discussed in greater detail in section 7.2. SPC is used to control the output 
variable within certain specifications. Control charts are used to better understand the errors 
between measured and set point values. Attributable causes are assigned to variations. Noise 
is delineated from a disturbance. Control action is taken according to a 3 sigma or a 6 sigma 
limit. The statistical measures of mean and variance are only used. This approach falls 
intermediate between feedback control of a process in a black-box and an IMC, internal 
model control where the process models are clearly known.  
 
 
1.4.7. Estimation and Control of Polymerization Reactors 
 
The high viscosities and exothermic nature of the polymerization reactions make the 
control of polymerization reactors an ardous task. The control objectives need to be specified. 
The process dynamics is non linear. Some of the control strategies that were discussed when 
the process can conform to a prototypical first order or prototypical second order process for 
linear systems cannot be applied to systems that are governed by equations that are nonlinear. 
Measurement of polymer structure is by no means a done deal. Estimation techniques such as 
Kalman filter and Weiner filter are needed to obtain parameters that are difficult to measure. 
 
 
1.4.8. Neural Networks 
 
ANNs, artificial neural networks may be used in control of distillation columns where the 
number of output variables is in the hundreds and the relation to the input variables are 
governed by equations that are nonlinear. ANNs comprise of a number of computing 
elements which resemble neurons and synapses of a human brain in a network. NNs can be 
used to approximate any mathematical function to a desired level of accuracy. In supervised 
learning, a network is given an input along with its desired output. On the other hand, a 
network in unsupervised learning is given only an input. After each presentation of an input, 
the performance is measured to tell how the network is doing. A network is expected to self-
organize information by using the performance measure as guidance. 
 
 
1.4.9. Multivariable Process Control 
 
Most control schemes discussed is single variable input and single variable output, SISO 
systems. MIMO systems are multiple variable input and multiple variable output systems. 
Interaction effects of variables in MIMO systems are often important. A disturbance at any 
input causes a response in some or all of the outputs. Control and stability analysis of MIMO 
systems are more tedious compared with analysis of SISO systems. The control system can be 
decoupled so that control of some output variables may be affected. Cross controllers [Marlin, 
2000] in addition to principal controllers may be used to accomplish the control objectives. 
The number of controllers needed for the operation increases ponentially with the number of 

Introduction 
 
 
27
inputs and outputs. 4 controllers are needed for a system of two inputs and two outputs. 9 
controllers are needed for systems of 3 inputs and 3 outputs. The characteristic equation for a 
MIMI system can be examined for stability from its roots.  
 
 
1.4.10. Adaptive Control 
 
Rather than a black box approach to control action taken or use of a process model 
adaptive control is based on observations made at discrete intervals of time, updation of 
model based on the observations and then control action taken.  
 
 
1.12. GLOSSARY 
 
Batch Process – Product is made from raw materials batch by batch. The raw materials 
and catalyst are charged into the reaction vessel. The reaction vessel is operated at the 
selected temperature and pressure. The product is removed after the reaction and separated 
from the unreacted raw materials. The vessel may be stirred at the set RPM, revolutions per 
minute. 
Continuous Process – Product is recovered at certain lb/hr from the process plant. Raw 
materials are fed continuously into the reactors. Reactors are operated at the set temperature, 
pressure, degree of intensity (agitator RPM). The product is separated from the unreacted raw 
materials in a suitable unit operation such as devolatilizer, distillation column, centrifuge, etc. 
Industrial Controls Market – This includes all the elements of the control process: (i) 
Measurement; (ii) Comparisons; (iii) Computations and; (iv) Corrective Actions. Sensors, 
comparators, desktop computers dedicated to control action and actuators, signal transmitters 
form the industrial controls market. Detectors, transducers, transmitters and controllers are all 
part of the industrial controls market. 
Process Dynamics – Study of the response of the different unit operations in the process 
to a step change or some other perturbation given to the system. 
PLC – Programmable Logic Controller. A computer dedicated to automation of 
electromechanical processes. 
Automation – Operation of a device or process with minimal human input.  
Runaway Reaction – Conversion of the reactant increases in an uncontrolled manner. 
Heat is given out in exothermic reactions. The heat generated, if not removed, increases the 
reaction temperature. Often reaction rate doubles with every 10 0C increase in temperature. 
This further increases the reaction rate followed by more heat generation. Lack of heat 
removal causes a runaway condition. 
Transient Study – Study of physical quantities that have not reached steady state yet. 
Block Diagrams - Boxes are used to denote functions and lines are used to show the 
relations between the functions. 
Data Acquisition – Enables measurements at different time intervals from the equipment 
to be converted to digital format to be stored in the computer. A/D analog to digital converter 
can be used to convert transducer voltages to digital values in the desktop computer. 
Robot – Programmable, automatic machine that is multi-purpose and manipulatable.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
28
Free Radical Polymerization – Method of polymerization where the initiation, 
propagation and termination reactions take place by the free radical mechanism. Free radicals 
are formed from initiators and monomer and propagating species is a free radical. 
Supply Chain Robotics – Use of robots in the distribution and supply of goods 
PW, Present Worth – Money value of a stream of cash payments of receipts and costs 
projected in the future in terms of today‟s dollars include capital, interest, tax and tariff, labor, 
utilities, materials, overhead, revenue from sales, salvage value over the life of the plant. 
Artificial Intelligence – Synthesize intelligence using computer software programming 
and execution. 
Kinematics – Science of motion without worry about the forces that causes it. 
3 Arm Mechanical Manipulator Device with three rigid lengths and two joints. The 
third arm is usually the end effector. 
Inverse Kinematics The science of understanding the set of joint angles that should 
correspond to the position and orientation of the end effector 
Dynamics study of torque functions of the motion of the manipulator 
Molecular Assemblers – hypothetical device that be used to assemble atoms/molecules 
at will 
Trajectory Generation – Set of mathematical functions that specifies where the joints 
needs to be present in order for the manipulator to go from here to there 
Spline smooth mathematical function that passes through a set of given points 
Cartesian Trajectory when the end effector is specified to move in a straight line 
 
 
1.13. SUMMARY 
 
Simulation, modeling, instrumentation and control of chemical processes are important in 
the manufacture of products at the lowest cost, good quality in an environmentally safe 
manner. The industrial controls market and chemical process industry market size are 
discussed. Supply chain robots are increasingly used. Camera drones are expected to be used 
in the future for interesting applications ranging from fighting fires to precision agriculture. 
Infeasibility of molecular assemblers is discussed. Robots as a collegiate course are outlined. 
Nanorobots are possible as envisioned in the movie fantastic voyage. Transient analysis of 
unit operations and reactors are used in start-up and shut down operations. Real industrial 
world happenings were cited to better motivate the discipline: (i) Trommsdorff effect during 
free radical polymerization is when the reactor gets “setup” due to runaway polymerization. 
Causes are attributed to viscosity increase in the monomer/polymer mass and the termination 
reactions cease on account of difficulty with diffusion; (ii) centralized heating and cooling in 
modern homes using feedback control of air from the furnance or air conditioner using a 
thermostat; (iii) feedforward control of human body temperature. Heat conduction through 
five layers, i.e., skin, fat, muscle, bone and blood are considered. Vasodilation and 
evaporative cooling are the two mechanisms of cooling effect within the human anatomy; (iv) 
feedback control of 3 arm robotic manipulator with end effector. Sensors are used to measure 
the joint angles and joint velocities. Torques needed is calculated from trajectory generator. 
Feedback is used to detect any servo error. Control action is taken based on deviations; (v) 

Introduction 
 
 
29
nuclear meltdown in Fukushima nuclear power plant after the tsunami and earthquake in 
2011; (vi) deepwater horizon oil spill of 2010. 
11 main components of a control system was discussed including control ojectives, set 
points, measuring elements, input, disturbance and output variables and control types. Better 
automation and control leads to closer to optimal operation of the plant. Process is operated in 
a less hazardous and safer manner without increasing the cost.  
Feedback control action is taken based on the error generated during operation of a 
process. The output variable is measured and compared against the set point. The difference is 
the error. Different feedback controllers used are on-off, P, proportional only control, PI, 
proportional integral control, PD, proportional derivative control and PID, proportional 
integral and derivative control. Feed forward control action is taken upon direct measurement 
of the disturbance variable. The control action is in anticipation of the changes expected in the 
output variable. Often times success of this type control action depends on availability of 
reliable mathematical models between the process output variables and control variables and 
effect of perturbations. Internal Model Control, IMC IMC, internal model control action uses 
the knowledge about the process that is being controlled. Filters can be added to make the 
controller more realizable. The transfer function of the output has to be proper. Ratio control 
is used to control ratios of reactant mixtures, reflux rate in a distillation column etc. Statistical 
process control, SPC is used to control the output variable within certain limits. Control 
charts are used to better understand the errors between measured and set point values. 
Attributable causes are assigned to variations. Noise is delineated from a disturbance. Control 
action is taken according to a 3 sigma or 6 sigma control limit. Estimation and control of 
polymerization reactors is an ardous task due to exothermic nature of the reaction, high 
viscosity etc. Some of the desirable parameters are not easty to measure. Estimation 
techniques such as Kalman filter and Weiner filter are beginning to be used in order to obtain 
parameters that are difficult to measure. The dynamic equations in polymerization reactors 
are non-linear. They are linearized and made similar to other existing systems. ANNs, 
artificial neural networks may be used in control of distillation columns where the number of 
output variables is in the hundreds and the relation to the input variables are governed by 
equations that are nonlinear. NNs can be used to approximate any mathematical function to a 
desired level of accuracy. Most control schemes discussed is single variable input and single 
variable output, SISO systems. MIMO systems are multiple variable input and multiple 
variable output systems. Interaction effects of variables in MIMO systems are often 
important. Cross controllers in addition to principal controllers may be used to accomplish the 
control objectives. During adaptive control observations made at discrete intervals of time are 
used to update the mathematical model for the process. This is used in the control action 
taken. 
 
 
1.14. FURTHER READING 
 
Chen, C. C. (1994). “A Continuous Bulk Polymerization Process for Crystal Polystyrene”, 
Polym. Plast. Technology Eng., Vol 33, 55-58. 
Chen, C. (2000). “Continuous Production of Solid Polystyrene in Back-Mixed and Linear-
Flow Reactors”, Polym. Eng. Sci., Vol. 40, 441-464. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
30
Coughanowr, D. R. & LeBlanc, S. E. (2009). Process Systems Analysis and Control, McGraw 
Hill Professional, New York, NY. Sources 
Craig, J. (2005). An Introduction to Robotics and Control-Mechanics and Control, Prentice 
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deepwater_Horizon. 
Gharaghani, M., Adedini, H. & Parvazinia, M. (2012). “Dynamic Simulation and Control of 
Auto- Refrigerated CSTR and Tubular Reactor for Bulk Styrene Polymerization”, 
Chemical Engineering Research and Design, Vol. 90, 1540-1552.  
Hui, A. W. & Hamielec, A. E. (1972). “Thermal Polymerization of Styrene at High 
Conversions and Temperatures: An Experimental Study”, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., Vol 16, 
749-769. 
Internet – Market Report, “Industrial Controls and Robotics Market – Global Industry, 
Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends and Forecast 2013-2019”, Transparency Market 
Research,  
Kang, C. (March 7th 2013). “New Robots in the Workplace: Job Creators or Job 
Terminators?” Washington Post.  
Kruse, R. L. (1990). Tormsdorff effect, Private Communication, Monsanto Plastics 
Technology, Indian Orchad, MA. 
Marlin, T. E. (2000). Process Control:Designing Processes and Control Systems for Dynamic 
Performance, McGraw Hill, 345-349. 
Newsweek, Issue Dated March 28th & April 4th 2011, with cover Story Apocalypse Now  
Rehg, J. A. & Sartori, (J. G. J.). Industrial Electronics, Prentice Hall.  
Rockis, G. J. & Mazur, G. A. (2009). Electrical Motor Controls for Integrated Systems, 
American Technical Publishers, Inc., Homewood, IL.  
Satariano, A. (November 24th 2013). “Apple Fortifies its Own Supply Chain – Building 
Robots and Lasers”, Washington Post. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). Transport Phenomena in Biomedical Engineering: Artificial Organ 
Design and Development and Tissue Design, McGraw Hill Professional, New York, NY. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). Nanostructuring Operations in Nanoscale Science and Engineering, 
McGraw Hill Professional, New York. 
Sharma, K. R. (2013). “On Photodynamic Therapy of Alzheimer‟s Disease Using Intrathecal 
Nanorobot Drug Delivery of Curcuma Longa for Enhanced Bioavailability”, Journal of 
Scientific Research and Reports, Vol. 2, 1, 206-227. 
Yokota, T. Newsweek, Issue Dated March 21st 2011, with cover Story Earthquake 8.9. 
 
 
1.15. EXERCISES 
 
1.0. Why is dynamics an important consideration during plant start-up and plant shut 
down? 
2.0. What are the differences between computer simulation and mathematical model? 
3.0. What causes the Trommsdorf effect? 
4.0. What is meant by reaction run away? 
5.0. What are the differences between feedback control and feedforward control? 
6.0. What are the differences in function between comparator and controller? 
7.0. In which type of control is measurement of the output variable part of the operation? 

Introduction 
 
 
31
8.0. In which type of control is measurement of the disturbance part of the operation? 
9.0. Airline pilot is sent a signal from the airport about the weather conditions in the 
arrival location. On account of snowstorm he delays arrival at Minneapolis, MN. 
What kind can this control action are classified as. 
 
Classify as Feedforward or Feedback Control (Exercises 10-30); 
 
10.0. Steering Action in Cars. The direction of the wheels is the output variable. 
Direction of the steering wheel is the signal. 
11.0. Control of Speed of Car by pushing the gas pedal or brake pedal. 
12.0. Marathon athlete drinking lemonade to cool off. 
13.0. Sun Tracker in a solar power plant. 
14.0. Agitator speed control in a CSTR at a continuous polymerization plant. 
15.0. Temperature control of a devolatilizer at a continous polymerization plant. 
16.0. Level control of a devolatilizer at a continuous polymerization plant. 
17.0. Reactor pressure control at a continuous polymerization plant. 
18.0. Homogeneity control in rubber dissolver in monomers at a continuous 
polymerization Plant. 
19.0. Time Watering the Lawn in modern house based on lawncare conditions. 
20.0. Control of the trajectory of the end effector of a 2 arm manipulator..  
21.0. Inlet Temperature of Gas turbine in Combined Cycle Power Plant. 
22.0. Vibration s of a Nuclear Reactor during Earth Quake. 
23.0. Temperature of a Kettle in Continuous Pharmaceutical Produ ction. 
24.0. Solar Cell Temperature in Solar Aided Combined Cycle Power Plant. 
25.0. Temperature of Catalytic Oxidation Reactor of Sulfur Dioxide. 
26.0. Bubble Size in a Plate Pulsed Column. 
27.0. Volume Fraction in a Fiber Reinforced Composite. 
28.0. Vicosity in a Blender of Polyethylene and Nylon. 
29.0. Temperature of a Polymerization Reactor for PMMA, Poly Methyl Methacrylate. 
30.0. Pressure of a Devolatilizer during Terpolymer Manufacture. 
31.0What is the difference between “fail-safe” and “fail-open” valves? 
32.0. What are the differences between adaptive control and ratio control? 
33.0. What are the differences between IMC, internal model control and control action 
using neural networks? 
34.0. What are the differences between SPC, statistical process control and use of 
Kalman filter during control in polymerization reactors? 
34a.0. What are the nuances to multivariate process control? 
35.0. What is the radioactive damage to the environment on account of Fukushima earth 
quake? 
36.0. What was the role of the cooling break-down in the Fukushima disaster? 
37.0. Can motor speed and motor torque be predicted using a mathematical model? 
38.0. What is meant by “Constant torque” mode of operation? 
39.0. When is the output hp of a motor constant? 
40.0. Why is the work done by the fluid in the motor not predictable? 
41.0. What happens to the termination rate constant when the temperature of the reactor 
is increased? Why? 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
32
42.0. At which temperature, higher or lower is the reactor more prone to the “gel effect”? 
43.0. What is the role of the addition of solvent to the “gel effect”? 
44.0. Can the molecular weight that is high in Figure 1.0 be relied on for scale-up 
purposes? 
45.0. How does the “gel effect” confirm the termination by combination mechanism and 
not the other mechanisms such as disproportination? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
CONTINUOUS POLYMERIZATION  
PROCESS TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
2.1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Often times the choice of technology with continuous mode of operation in order to 
manufacture commodity and engineering polymer products in large scale, is made compared 
with batch mode. Continuous mode is usually the lowest cost, safer and environmentally 
friendlier, better product quality with less batch to batch variability. Batch processes require 
several hours, in some cases greater than eight hours, to feed the reactants, including 
monomer or monomers into the reactor, conduct the polymerization reaction, cool the 
resulting polymer, remove the polymer, and clean the reactor. The equipment required for 
batch processes typically includes reactors which can hold up to 75,000 liters and may cost 
more than $1,000,000 per reactor. To improve the deficiencies of the batch processes, 
continuous polymerization processes have been developed. Continuous polymerization 
processes are potentially more efficient than a batch process. In a continuous process, 
monomer and other reactants are continuously fed into and through the reactor while, at the 
same time, polymer is continuously removed from the reactor. The unreacted monomers are 
separated from the polymer product and recycled back to the reactors. A continuous process 
may produce more products per day with a typical plant operated at 15,000 pph, utilizing 
smaller, less expensive reactors. Continuous processes utilizing continuous stirred tank 
reactors or tubular reactors are two types of continuous processes. 
The three methods of making polymers are emulsion, suspension and solution or bulk 
polymerization. A good number of the emulsion and suspension processes are operated in the 
batch mode. The solution polymerization or continuous mass polymerization has been the 
choice of the manufacturers of; 
 
(i) 
Polystyrene 
(ii) 
HIPS, rubber modified polystyrene 
(iii) 
SAN, styrene acrylonitrile copolymer 
(iv) 
ABS, Acrylonitrile Butadiene and Styrene engineering thermoplastic 
(v) 
Polymethyl methacrylate 
(vi) 
Formaldehyde dioxolane semi-batch copolymerization 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
34
(vii)  Continuous process for high quality anhydrosugar alcohols etc, polycarbonate.  
 
Other than the free radical mechanism of polymerization other mechanisms such 
Zeigler Natta coordination covalent process for making polypropylene and 
polyethylene can be used in the continuous mode of plant operation. Examples of 
processes with continuous mode of operation are; 
(viii)  The condensation and step growth polymerization can be performed continuously.  
(ix)  A variety of compounding processes such as polymer polymer miscible blends that 
mix at a molecular level and compatible blends with product property 
improvement such as the making of the extra tough polyacetal resin by 
compounding with polyurethane and viscosity and color, colorability modifications 
of polymers etc are operated in the continuous mode.  
(x) 
Some emulsion processes are evaluated to be operated in the continuous fashion. 
(xi) 
Waste tires can be devulcanized and polybutadiene reclaimed in a continuous 
manner 
 
 
2.2. OVERVIEW OF MONSANTO 2 CSTR CONTINUOUS MASS 
POLYMERIZATION PROCESS FOR ABS 
 
A need for a continuous mass polymerization process for ABS polymers with high 
conversion rates and low energy requirements was identified by leading companies such as 
Monsanto Plastics (currently Bayer), Indian Orchad, MA, Dow Chemical Company, Midland, 
MI, and General Electric, Pittsfield, MA. High polymerization efficiency for ABS polymers 
having superior properties was sought and the process needed to be robust enough to handle 
high conversion on a large scale. 
ABS polymers comprise of a matrix phase copolymer of styrene and acrylonitrile and a 
dispersed phase of a conjugated polybutadiene rubber grafted with the SAN chains. Various 
processes have been utilized for the manufacture of such polymers including emulsion, 
suspension and mass polymerization techniques and combinations of the three. Although 
mass polymerized products exhibit desirable properties, this technique has a practical 
limitation upon the maximum degree of conversion of monomers to polymer which can be 
effected because of the high viscosities and accompanying power and equipment 
requirements, which are encountered when the reactions are carried at high conversion 
[Kruse, 1983]. 
In a typical ABS mass polymerization process styrene and acrylonitrile are 
copolymerized in the presence of a diene-based rubber [Sharma, 1997]. Initially the rubber is 
dissolved in the monomers and a continuous homogeneous phase prevails. When 
polymerization begins, the monomers are simultaneously copolymerized alone and also as a 
graft on the rubber backbone. As the monomers polymerize two phases appear: the polymer 
dissolved in monomer and the rubber dissolved in monomer. Initially the latter phase 
predominates and the smaller "polymer in monomer" phase is dispersed in the larger "rubber 
in monomer" phase. However as polymerization progresses the "polymer in monomer" phase 
becomes greater in volume. At this point the phenomenon of phase inversion occurs and the 
"rubber in monomer" phase becomes dispersed as discrete particles in a matrix of the 
"polymer in monomer" phase. Usually in a mass polymerization process, the rubber will 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
35
contain occlusions of polymer/monomer which serve to swell the volume of the rubber 
particle. As polymerization progresses, monomer is converted to polymer, the viscosity of the 
mixture increases and greater power is needed to maintain temperature and compositional 
uniformity throughout the polymerization.  
Another limitation of previous attempts at the process, is that production of polymers 
with a high proportion of acrylonitrile as well as high rubber volume fraction is not possible. 
This is because although rubber dissolves readily in styrene, its solubility in a mixture of 
styrene and acrylonitrile monomers decreases with the increase in concentration of 
acrylonitrile. It is found for example that styrene monomer can dissolve about 20% of its 
weight of a diene rubber whereas a monomer mixture containing 58% styrene and 42% 
acrylonitrile can dissolve less than 10% of its weight of the same rubber. Thus the amount of 
rubber that can be added in solution in the monomer mixture is restricted by the proportion of 
acrylonitrile monomer. However for many purposes such as solvent resistance and toughness 
it is desirable to have a proportion of acrylonitrile as high as 40% or more by weight. Kruse 
[1983] described a continuous mass polymerization process for preparing an ABS polymer 
having a matrix phase comprising a copolymer of SAN and a dispersed phase comprising 
rubber particles having a weight average particle size of about 0.1-10 microns. The process 
consists of feeding a solution of polybutadiene rubber dissolved in styrene to the first CSTR. 
The composition of the dissolved polybutadiene was from 3 - 33% by weight.  
By a second feed stream, acrylonitrile was charged simultaneously and continuously to 
the stirred reactor. The conversion and solids level in the first reactor was maintained at a 
point above that at which phase inversion is expected to occur, i.e., up to 70% by weight 
based on the weight of the polymerization mixture. The mixture is continuously polymerized 
while maintaining stirring such that the polymerizing mixture has a substantially uniform 
composition and such that the rubber is dispersed in the polymerizing mixture as rubber 
particles. The ABS polymer is continuously separated from the partially polymerized mixture. 
Operation at such a polymer solids content ensures that upon addition, the rubber immediately 
forms small particles containing a monomer component, dispersed in the partially 
polymerized reaction mixture.  
It was found that, using this technique the monomer content (all species) remaining is 
less than 0.5 % and substantially all monomer is removed within 30 seconds such that 
polymerization is not significantly advanced during the polymer separation. What remains is 
polymeric and the percentage of the sample weight that this represents is the polymer solids 
of the polymerizing mixture at that time. Because acrylonitrile is separately but 
simultaneously fed and because the point of phase inversion for the system has been passed 
such that the rubber disperses as particles as it enters the reaction mixture, the process has the 
capability of employing high rubber concentrations while still realizing a high acrylonitrile 
concentration in the final ABS composition. Preferred ABS molding compositions have high 
gloss and an average rubber particle size less than about 500 nm and most preferably 200 – 
400 nm. Conventional ABS polymers having rubber particles this small however lack 
toughness. Raising the acrylonitrile content of such ABS polymers from the conventional 
24% to the range of about 27 to 40% permits these small rubber particles effectively to 
toughen such an ABS polymer to an unexpected degree.  
The polymer conversion at which the reaction is conducted is limited by two practical 
considerations. At the lower end of the range, (as has been indicated above), it is important 
that the polymer solids level in the reactor, (or the initial reactor where a series of reactors is 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
36
used), to which the monomer streams are added be such that the polymer/monomer phase has 
a greater volume than the rubber/monomer phase such that the rubber/monomer immediately 
forms a dispersed phase. In practice this implies a monomer to polymer conversion level of 
about 35%. At the upper level, the practical constraints of power requirements for the reactor 
agitator place a limit of about 70% solids. This does not necessarily imply a similar 
conversion level since up to 50% and from 10 to 30% by weight of a suifigure solvent, (based 
on the weight of the monomers fed to the reaction), can be used to dilute the reaction mixture 
to a point at which, even with up to 99% monomer to polymer conversion, the power 
requirements are not excessive. 
Some or all of the diluent can be introduced with the rubber in styrene stream either as an 
added component or by the use of a rubber which is already dissolved in a suitable solvent 
such as hexane or cyclohexane. The diluents used are ethyl benzene or methyl ethyl ketone.  
Those ABS polymers having a rubber particle size, of from about 100 -500 nm; 
acrylonitrile monomer content of about 27 to 40; a rubber content of about 14 to 25%; and a 
graft level of 150 to 200% generally require a lower molecular weight matrix phase 
copolymer to ensure proper flow properties, e.g., a molecular weight of about 3,000-60,000 
(Mn) or approximately 5,000-50,000 (Mv). After polymerization has progressed to the desired 
conversion level, the residual monomer is stripped from the polymer. This operation, which is 
the same whether a single reactor or a series of reactors is employed in the polymerization 
stage, is conventionally done in a separate device such as a wiped film devolatilizer or a 
falling strand devolatilizer. 
Wu and Virkler [2001] have patented a continuous mass polymerization method in order 
to manufacture ABS for refrigerator liners. Polybutadiene with Mw, weight averaged 
molecular weight ~ 80,000-250,000 was used in the two reactor and devolatilizer process. 
Peroxy initiator was used in the first reactor and no initiator was used in the second reactor. 
The matrix SAN molecular weight was ~ 65,000 – 70,000 gm.mole-1. The first reactor feed 
comprises of PBd rubber dissolved in styrene and mixed with acrylonitrile, diluent. Chemical 
initiator was also used. Reactor 1 was operated at 20-30% steady state monomer conversion 
to polymer forming 20-30% solids. As polymerization takes place the initiator radicals form 
grafting sites at the vinyl bonds of PBd. Graft chains of SAN grow to a larger size. The rubber 
phase is formed with grafted SAN chains. It precipitates into a solid phase. This step is 
similar to “crystallization” kinetics from a supersaturated solution with swing in solvent 
composition. The rubber phase was found to have a weight averaged particle size of Dw ~0.3 
– 0.7 m. As the graft molecular weight is greater than PBd molecular weight the grafted 
chain provides the surface coverage of formed rubber particles. SAN chains lower in length 
than a critical length leads to the formation of occlusions within the particle. The PBd chains 
can cross-link during the consecutive-competitive reactions. Cross-linking reactions may be 
responsible for formation of particles with cell morphology. Some cross-linking offers better 
gloss of the final product. It was found,serendipitously, that higher the volume of occlusion 
within the rubber particle the more efficiently the rubber phase is used in toughening the 
polymer. The grafted chains stabilize the formed rubber particles. The second reactor is well 
stirred and conversions of 50-90% are achieved here. The polymer solids formed in the 
second reactor is ~ 75%. The temperature in the first reactor was held constant for isothermal 
operation at ~ 75-85 0C. The temperature in the second reactor was held constant for 
isothermal operation at 130 – 155 0C. No chemical initiator was added to the second reactor. 
The heat released from the exothermic polymerization reactions is cooled by vaporization of 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
37
some monomer from the reacting mass. SAN chains that form by thermal initiation form the 
matrix of the ABS blend. Jacket cooling is also available. The devolatilization is conducted in 
WFD, wiped film devolatilizer, FSD, falling strand devolatilizer or Extruder. The DV 
temperatures are ~ 200 – 280 0C, operating pressures of 0.01 – 700 mm Hg. Residual 
monomer and oligomer levels are about 2000 ppm. The particle size distribution of rubber 
phase was characterized by a Dw/Dn = 2.5. The rubber level in the ABS product is ~10-16%. 
The impact strength, notched Izod of the sample was 25 KJ.m-2 and tensile modulus was 2.2 
GPa. 
 
 
2.3. THE DOW PROCESS TO PREPARE MAGNUM ABS 
 
Polybutadiene was dissolved in a feed stream of styrene, acrylonitrile, and ethyl benzene 
to form a mixture. The mixture was polymerized in a continuous process under agitation. The 
polymerization occurred in a three stage reactor system over an increasing temperature 
profile [Bredewig, 1980]. During the polymerization process, some of the forming copolymer 
grafts to the rubber particles while some of it does not graft, but, instead, forms matrix 
copolymer. The resulting polymerization product was then devolatilized, extruded, and 
pelletized. Different rubber particle sizes in the final polymer product are achieved by 
changing certain process parameters. These process parameters and how they must be 
changed to produce rubber particles of a desired size include the degree of agitation, 
temperature, initiator level and type, chain transfer agents and amounts, and diluent type and 
concentration. 
Immediately after the polymerization reaction commences, the rubbery material in the 
monomer mixture separates into two phases, of which the former, consisting of a solution of 
the rubber in the monomer mixture, initially forms the continuous phase, whereas the latter, 
consisting of a solution of the resultant copolymer in the monomer mixture, remains 
dispersed in form of droplets in the continuous phase. As polymerization and hence 
conversion proceed the quantity of the latter phase increases. As soon as the volume of the 
SAN matrix phase equals that of the rubber dispersed phase with grafted SAN a phase change 
occurs, generally known as phase inversion. When this phase inversion takes place, droplets 
of rubber solution form in the polymer solution. These rubber solution droplets incorporate by 
themselves small droplets of what has now become the continuous polymer phase. During the 
process, grafting of the polymer chains on the rubber takes place, too.  
Generally, the polymerization is carried out in several stages. In the first polymerization 
stage, known as prepolymerization, the solution of the rubber in the monomer mixture is 
polymerized until phase inversion is reached. Polymerization is then continued up to the 
desired conversion. Mass polymerization offers rubber-modified SAN or ABS copolymers 
with a good balance of physical and mechanical properties, however the surface gloss of such 
copolymers is not always quite satisfactory. The polymerization is conducted in one or more 
substantially linear, stratified flow or so-called "plug-flow" type reactor which may or may 
not be recirculated as shown in Figure 1.0. The temperatures at which polymerization is most 
advantageously conducted are dependent on a variety of factors including the specific initiator 
and type and concentration of rubber, comonomers and reaction diluent, if any, employed. In 
general, polymerization temperatures from 60-160 0C are employed prior to phase inversion 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
38
with temperatures from 100-190 0C being employed subsequent to phase inversion. Mass 
polymerization at such elevated temperatures is continued until the desired conversion of 
monomers to polymer is obtained. Generally, conversion of from 65-90% of the monomers 
added to the polymerization system (i.e., monomer added in the feed and any additional 
stream, including any recycle stream) to polymer is desired. 
Following conversion of a desired amount of monomer to polymer, the polymerization 
mixture is then subjected to conditions sufficient to cross-link the rubber and remove any 
unreacted monomer. Such cross-linking and removal of unreacted monomer, as well as 
reaction of diluent, if employed, and other volatile materials is advantageously conducted 
employing conventional devolatilization techniques, such as introducing the polymerization 
mixture into a devolatilizing chamber, flashing off the monomer and other volatiles at 
elevated temperatures, e.g., from 200-300 0C., under vacuum and removing them from the 
chamber. The rubber-modified aromatic copolymer composition is thermoplastic. When 
softened or melted by the application of heat, the compositions of this invention can be 
formed or molded using conventional techniques such as compression molding, injection 
molding, gas assisted injection molding, calendaring, vacuum forming, thermoforming, 
extrusion and/or blow molding. 
Surface gloss is very dependent upon molding conditions, i.e., for injection molding, 
machine parameters such as barrel and mold temperatures, injection and holding 
speed/pressure/times, etc., and method of testing gloss can dramatically affect the gloss value 
for a given material. The gloss value for materials molded under unfavorable conditions is 
referred to as intrinsic gloss. Unfavorable conditions generally are those which limit or reduce 
the flow of the material during molding. For example, it is well known that surface gloss is 
reduced when during injection molding lower melt temperature, lower mold temperature, 
lower injection pressure, slower injection speed, lower holding pressure, etc., are applied. 
Conversely, conditions which enhance the flow of the material will improve gloss. Materials 
with an intrinsic gloss less than 70 percent can, when molded under favorable or ideal 
conditions, demonstrate higher gloss (e.g., 70 percent or higher). 
The mass polymerized rubber-modified ABS copolymer compositions can also be 
formed, spun, or drawn into films, fibers, multi-layer laminates or extruded sheets, or can be 
compounded with one or more organic or inorganic substances, on any machine suitable for 
such purpose. Some of the fabricated articles include household appliances, toys, automotive 
parts, extruded pipe, profiles and sheet for sanitary applications. These compositions can even 
find use in instrument housings such as for power tools or information technology equipment 
such as telephones, computers, copiers, etc. 
 
 
Figure 1.0. Reactor Configuration in the Dow Process for Magnum ABS. 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
39
2.4. THE PLUG FLOW MULTIZONE PROCESS 
 
Multizone plug flow bulk processes include a series of polymerization towers, 
consecutively connected to each other, providing multiple reaction zones. Stereospecific 
polybutadiene rubber is dissolved in styrene or in styrene/acrylonitrile monomers mixture, 
and the rubber solution is then fed into the reaction system. The polymerization can be 
thermally or chemically initiated, and viscosity of the reaction mixture will gradually 
increase. During the reaction course, the rubber will be grafted with grafted SAN copolymer 
and, in the rubber solution, matrix phase SAN is also being formed. At a point where the free, 
ungrafted SAN cannot be "held" in one single, continuous "phase" of rubber solution, it 
begins to form domains of SAN phase. The polymerization mixture now is a two-phase 
system. As polymerization proceeds, more and freer SAN is formed, and the rubber phase 
starts to disperse itself as particles in the matrix of the ever-growing free SAN. Eventually, 
the free SAN becomes a continuous phase. This is actually a formation of an oil-in-oil 
emulsion system. Some matrix SAN is occluded inside the rubber particles as well. This stage 
is usually given a name of phase inversion. Pre-phase inversion means that the rubber is a 
continuous phase and that no rubber particles are formed, and post phase inversion means that 
substantially all of the rubber phase has converted to rubber particles and there is a 
continuous SAN phase. Following the phase inversion, more matrix SAN (free SAN) is 
formed and, possibly, the rubber particles gain more grafted SAN. When a desirable 
monomer conversion level and a matrix SAN of desired molecular weight distribution is 
obtained, the reaction mixture is "cooked" at a higher temperature than that of previous 
polymerization. Finally, bulk ABS pellets are obtained from a pelletizer, after devolatilization 
where volatile residuals are removed. 
A continuous bulk ABS process was described by GE Plastics [Sue et al. 1996] that 
provides controllable molecular weight distribution and micro gel particle size using a "three-
stage" reactor system, for extrusion grade ABS polymers. In the first reactor, the rubber 
solution is charged into the reaction mixture under high agitation to precipitate discrete 
rubber particle uniformly throughout the reactor mass before appreciable cross-linking can 
occur. Solids levels of the first, the second, and the third reactor are carefully controlled to a 
desired molecular weight. The process flow diagram is shown in Figure 2.0. 
Different processes of ABS manufacturing give different properties to the final ABS 
products. One of these properties is the surface gloss of the end products, and technology 
development to produce ABS materials that could meet with different gloss requirements is 
still an on-going task for the ABS industry. The gloss of an ABS product is partially the result 
of molding conditions under which the product is manufactured. However, for a given 
molding condition, the rubber particle size (diameter) of the ABS material is a major 
contributing factor to the gloss. In general but not always, ABS materials from emulsion 
processes produce rubber particles of small sizes (from about 0.05 to about 0.3 microns). 
Therefore, high gloss products are often made from emulsion ABS materials. On the other 
hand, ABS materials from mass processes usually form rubber particles of large sizes (from 
about 0.5 to 5 microns). Therefore, low gloss products are often made using the bulk ABS 
materials. Although it is possible to produce small particles using bulk processes, the gloss 
and impact resistance balance will be difficult to reach. Overall, current technology described  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
40
above has not been able to produce, by a bulk process alone, ABS materials of rubber 
particles of "cell" morphology with monomodal particle size distributions and with average 
particle sizes less than 0.3 microns of number average diameter, without compromising 
impact resistance properties. To synthesize ABS polymers with high performance by bulk 
processes, three aspects are important;. These three aspects; 
 
1) grafting of the rubber substrate prior to phase inversion,  
2) particle formation during phase inversion,  
3) and cross-linking of the rubber particle at the completion point of the bulk ABS 
polymerization.  
 
However bulk ABS processes discussed above, are somehow deficient by different 
degrees in controlling and in adjusting the grafting, the phase inversion, and the cross- 
linking. Accordingly, technologists attempted to develop the continuous mass polymerization 
process which yields the desired rubber morphology and maximizes grafting thereby allowing 
a minimization of rubber use for a given level of property performance. Additionally, there is 
a desire to provide a bulk process capable for producing ABS resins of low gloss as well as 
high gloss. 
The products can have the particle sizes that are corresponding to a low gloss 
characteristic or can have small particle sizes that are corresponding to a high gloss 
characteristic. One of the preferred products has a number average particle size of less than 
0.3 microns, a monomodal particle size distribution, and particles of "cell" morphology, and 
exhibits high gloss, high impact resistance properties. The "cell" morphology may also be 
described as a rubber membrane network of spherical surface with the occluded rigid polymer 
(SAN) filled in the interior spaces. Furthermore, with the "cell" morphology, the grafted rigid 
polymer (SAN) is grafted on both sides of the rubber membranes, i.e., exterior or interior of 
the rubber particle. The materials produced are generally not transparent in nature, but rather 
are generally opaque. However, the opacity of the material is, in most cases, relatively lower 
than that of emulsion ABS. One of the preferred products of this process can provide high 
gloss and high impact resistance ABS by producing rubber particles of "cell" morphology 
with small particle sizes of less than 0.3 microns number average diameter and monomodal 
size distributions. That is, the present invention offers technology to produce rubber particles 
with sizes close to those of emulsion particles and with sufficient grafted and occluded vinyl 
aromatic-unsaturated nitrile (SAN) polymers by a bulk process, leading to high surface gloss 
and good impact resistance for the bulk vinyl aromatic-unsaturated nitrile-alkadiene (ABS) 
materials. 
 
 
2.5. PROCESS FOR HIGH IMPACT POLYSTYRENE (HIPS) 
 
High impact polystyrene polyblends (HIPS) comprises of polystyrene matrix having a 
rubber phase dispersed within the continuous phase, as cross-linked rubber particles. These 
have been manufactured and marketed. Historically, mechanical blends were prepared by 
melt blending polystyrene with raw rubber which was incompatible and dispersed as cross- 
 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
41
linked rubber particles to reinforce and toughen the polymeric polyblend. More recently, 
HIPS polyblends have been prepared by mass polymerizing solutions of diene rubber 
dissolved in styrene monomer in batch reactors wherein the rubber molecules were grafted 
with styrene monomer forming polystyrene polymer grafts on the rubber along with 
polystyrene polymer in situ in the monomer. As the polystyrene-monomer phase increases 
during polymerization the grafted rubber phase inverts readily as rubber particles comprising 
grafted rubber and occluded polystyrene contained therein with said particles cross-linked to 
maintain the rubber particles as discrete particles dispersed in the polystyrene which forms a 
matrix phase of the HIPS polyblend. 
Analysis reveals that the novel polyblends comprise rubber particles structured in new 
morphological forms comprising rubber fibers or rubber sheets and mixtures. The novel 
rubber particle structure has been found to provide the HIPS polyblends with a more efficient 
rubber particle providing improved physical properties for the polyblend such as gloss, 
impact strength, melt flow and falling dart impact strength. By contrast, HIPS polyblends 
previously attempted have rubber particles structured with relatively large amounts of 
occluded polystyrene contained in a network of continuous rubber membranes as the only 
morphological structure. HIPS polyblends containing such particles only, have lower 
reinforcing ability for the polyblend and are relatively deficient in flow and gloss. 
Hitachi [1983] developed a continuous process to produce high impact polystyrene, 
HIPS. Rubber and styrene form the feed to a multi-stage, horizontal dissolving tank where the 
polybutadiene is dissolved in styrene monomer by stirring. Heat released is allowed to 
increase the temperature of the solution. Grafting reactions are facilitated in the first reactor 
and the phase inversion from rubber as continuous phase to rubber as dispersed phase is 
affected. The subsequent reactors in the process are used to complete the bulk polymerization 
of polystyrene. Heat generated from exothermic reactions is removed. The unreacted 
monomers are separated from the polymer product in a separator and recycled back to the 
reactor. The process flow diagram is shown in Figure 3.0.  
 
 
Figure 2.0. GE Continuous Mass Three Stage Polymerization Process with a Prepolymerizer and 
Finisher to Manufacture ABS.  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
42
 
Figure 3.0. Hitachi Process for Continuous Polymerization Process for HIPS. 
 
During the production of HIPS, it is important to remove heat generated from the 
exothermic polymerization reactions and heat of agitation. The temperature of the reactor has 
to be controlled as specified. The viscosity of the polymerized syrup increases as the reaction 
proceeds. The heat removal is considered difficult. Addition of solvent or diluent such as 
ethyl benzene can soak up the heat released. The presence of diluent will obviate the runaway 
polymerization condition, i.e., the Tormsdorff effect that was discussed in Chapter 1.0. 
Partially filled reactor kettles can allow vaporization of monomers and diluent. During the 
vaporization of the liquid heat is consumed. This provides for ease of temperature control of 
the reactor. Foaming can be avoided. Polybutadiene and styrene are brought in contact with 
each other in the dissolving tank that is agitated.  
The dissolving step is stage wise and the tank is operated at atmospheric pressure. The 
temperatures are raised stepwise from room temperature for the first stage up to the 
polymerization temperature for the final stage. The temperature policy is 20 – 40 0C for the 
first stage, 40 – 60 0C for the second stage and 80 – 110 0C for the third stage. The residence 
time for each stage is about 1- 2 hrs. Four or 5 stages may be used for this step.  
The first reactor is operated at temperatures 100 – 130 0C under atmospheric pressure. 
The initiator can be added as desired. The phase inversion of the rubber phase from 
continuous to disperse is allowed to happen in this reactor. The outlet of the first reactor is 
about 25 – 40% solids. Heat removal from the reactor is by external jacket. The second 
reactor has a rotary shaft with number of disk blades. The reactor operating temperatures are 
~ 100-150 0C under reduced pressure. The reaction conversion is allowed to go as high as 
60% at the outlet of the second reactor. The finisher has mechanism for heating and cooling. 
The finisher can be hotter than the second reactor and the conversion can be 70-85%. Heating 
type monomer separator is used in order to separate the polymerized product from the 
unreacted monomers which can be returned to the rubber tank or feed line. Shearing elements, 
flash heater, rotary shaft, close clearance helical blades are present in the separator. Vacuum 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
43
pressures of 0.5 – 200 torr can be achieved in the separator. Temperature of the separator is 
about 230 0C. The product with 4% rubber content can be made. The residence time in the 
reactor is 4.3 hrs. and that in the finisher is 3.8 hrs. Vents and traps are provided for rapid 
volatiles to be captured. Condensers, vacuum pumps, monomer tanks, pumps can be seen in 
Figure 3.0. Once separated the tanks are used to store the monomers. Die head, cooling bath, 
chip cutter are used to receive the polymer strands and make them into pellets. 
 
 
2.6. BASELL GAS PHASE POLYMERIZATION PROCESS  
FOR POLYOLEFIN 
 
Basell polyolefin practices a process for the gas-phase fluidized bed catalytic 
polymerization of olefins. Two or more interconnected polymerization zones are used to feed 
the monomers and collect the product polymer. The development of olefin polymerization 
catalysts with high activity and selectivity, particularly of the Ziegler-Natta type and, more 
recently, of the metallocene type, has led to the widespread use on an industrial scale of 
processes in which the polymerization of olefins is carried out in a gaseous medium in the 
presence of a solid catalyst. Basell was formed in October 2000. It is owned equally by BASF 
and Shell. It develops, produces, and markets polypropylene, polyethylene, advanced 
polyolefin materials and polyolefin catalysts and also develops and licenses polyolefin 
processes. It serves customers in more than 120 countries with materials produced in eighteen 
countries. 
A widely used technology for gas-phase polymerization processes is the fluidized-bed 
technology. In fluidized-bed gas-phase processes, the polymer is confined in a vertical 
cylindrical zone. The reaction gases exiting the reactor are taken up by a compressor, cooled 
and sent back, together with make-up monomers and appropriate quantities of hydrogen, to 
the bottom of the bed through a distributor. Entrainment of solid in the gas is limited by an 
appropriate dimensioning of the upper part of the reactor (freeboard, i.e. the space between 
the bed surface and the gas exit point), where the gas velocity is reduced, and, in some 
designs, by the interposition of cyclones in the exit gas line. The flow rate of the circulating 
gas is set so as to assure a velocity within an adequate range above the minimum fluidization 
velocity and below the "transport velocity". The heat of reaction is removed exclusively by 
cooling the circulating gas. The catalyst components may be fed in continuously into the 
polymerization vessel. The composition of the gas-phase controls the composition of the 
polymer. The reactor is operated at constant pressure, normally in the range 1-3 MPa. The 
reaction kinetics is controlled by the addition of inert gases.  
A significant contribution to the reliability of the fluidized-bed reactor technology in the 
polymerization of olefins was made by the introduction of suitably pre-treated spheroidal 
catalyst of controlled dimensions and by the use of propane as diluent. Since fluidized-bed 
reactors approximate very closely the ideal behavior of a "continuous stirred-tank reactor" 
(CSTR), it is very difficult to obtain products which are a homogeneous mixture of different 
types of polymeric chains. In fact, the composition of the gaseous mixture that is in contact 
with the growing polymer particle is essentially the same for all the residence time of the 
particle in the reactor. As an example, one of the major limits of fluidized-bed processes is the 
difficulty of broadening the molecular weight distribution of the obtained polymers. It is 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
44
generally known that, in the continuous polymerization of olefins in a single stirred stage 
(which also involves steady composition of the monomers and of the chain transfer agent, 
normally hydrogen) with Ti-based catalysts of the Ziegler-Natta type; polyolefin having a 
relatively narrow molecular weight distribution are obtained. This characteristic is even more 
emphasized when metallocene catalysts are used. The breadth of the molecular weight 
distribution has an influence both on the rheological behavior of the polymer (and hence the 
processability of the melt) and on the final mechanical properties of the product, and is a 
characteristic which is particularly important for the (co)polymers of ethylene. It is possible to 
broaden the molecular weight distribution of polymers without affecting their homogeneity 
by means of a gas-phase process performed in a loop reactor. The gas-phase polymerization is 
carried out in two interconnected polymerization zones to which one or more monomers are 
fed in the presence of a catalyst under reaction conditions and from which the polymer 
produced is discharged.  
The process is characterized in that the growing polymer particles flow through the first 
of the polymerization zones under fast fluidization conditions, leave the first polymerization 
zone and enter the second polymerization zone, through which they flow in a densified form 
under the action of gravity, leave the second polymerization zone arid are reintroduced into 
the first polymerization zone, thus establishing a circulation of polymer between the two 
polymerization zones. It is possible to broaden the molecular weight distribution of the 
polymers simply by properly balancing the gas-phase compositions and the residence times in 
the two polymerization zones of the gas-phase loop reactor. This is due to the fact that, while 
the polymer moves forward in the second polymerization zone flowing downward in a plug-
flow mode, owing to the monomer consumption, it finds gas-phase compositions richer in 
molecular weight regulator. Consequently, the molecular weights of the forming polymer 
decrease along the axis of this polymerization zone. This effect is also enhanced by the 
temperature increase due to the polymerization reaction. 
Only a limited control of the molecular weight distribution is possible. In fact, even if 
hindered by the packed polymer, the diffusion of the gas within the polymerization zone in 
which the polymer particles flow in a densified form makes it difficult to establish substantial 
differences in the gas compositions at different heights of that zone. Moreover, it is not easy 
to achieve an effective balance of the residence times in the two different polymerization 
zones of the reactor. Sometimes means are provided which are capable of totally or partially 
preventing the gas mixture present in the riser from entering the down comer, and a gas 
and/or liquid mixture having a composition different from the gas mixture present in the riser 
is introduced into the down comer. 
The introduction into the down comer of the gas and/or liquid mixture having a 
composition different from the gas mixture present in the riser is effective in preventing the 
latter mixture from entering the down comer. The state of fast fluidization is obtained when 
the velocity of the fluidizing gas is higher than the transport velocity, and it is characterized in 
that the pressure gradient along the direction of transport is a monotonic function of the 
quantity of injected solid, for equal flow rate and density of the fluidizing gas. Generally, in 
the down comer the growing polymer particles flow downward in a more or less densified 
form. Thus, high values of density of the solid can be reached (density of the solid =kg of 
polymer per cu.m of reactor occupied by polymer), which can approach the bulk density of 
the polymer. A positive gain in pressure can thus be obtained along the direction of flow, so 
that it becomes possible to reintroduce the polymer into the riser without the help of special 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
45
mechanical means. In this way, a "loop" circulation is set up, which is defined by the balance 
of pressures between the two polymerization zones and by the head losses introduced into the 
system. The gas mixtures involved in the process of the invention can contain entrained 
droplets of liquid composed of liquefied gas, as it is customary when operating in the so-
called "condensing mode". The introduction of the gas and/or liquid mixture of different 
composition into the down comer are such to establish a net gas flow upward at the upper 
limit of the down comer. The established flow of gas upward has the effect of preventing the 
gas mixture present in the riser from entering the down comer. 
Basell‟s Spheripol process is the most licensed technology ever developed for the 
production of polypropylene. Since 1982, proof of its enduring success is the number of 
leading polypropylene producers choosing this technology. This includes Exxon, Dow, 
Borealis, Showa Denko, Hyundai and Sinopec to name a few. Spheripol process is the result 
of 40 years of quality improvement. In the 1960s, polypropylene processes employed first 
generation low yield catalysts (< 1000 Kg PP/kg catalyst) in mechanically stirred reactors 
filled with an inert hydrocarbon diluent. Polymer produced with these catalysts had 
unacceptably high residual metals, and contained 10% a tactic polypropylene which required 
separation. Removal of catalyst residues and a tactic PP involved treatment of the polymer 
with alcohol, multiple organic and/or water washings, multistage drying and elaborate 
solvent, amorphous and catalyst separation systems. These processes were costly and difficult 
to operate and also required extensive water treatment facilities and catalyst residue disposal 
systems. In the 1970s the discovery of second generation high yield catalysts (6000 kg PP/kg 
catalyst) eliminated the need for catalyst residue removal but a tactic was still unacceptably 
high. This simplified the washing but did not eliminate the tactic recovery steps. In the 1980s 
the third generation high yields, high selectivity catalysts (30,000 kg PP/kg catalyst) 
eliminated the need for catalyst and a tactic removal. This further simplified the process and 
improved product quality. Other breakthroughs occurred in the process design, through the 
refinement of gas-phase and bulk polymerization reactors that lead to the development of 
Spheripol technology in 1982. Current catalyst generation has the ability to produce new 
families of reactor-based products with improved properties. They offer even greater control 
over morphology, isotacticity and molecular weight. Polypropylene is the world‟s fastest 
growing thermoplastic.  
The safety record of Basel technologies is among the best in the world. They achieved 
nearly 7 million operating hours without any major incident. Spheripol technology includes 
features that reduce both resource consumption and emissions from the process. These 
include use of high yield highly stereospecific catalysts the absence of solvents in the process 
to suspend the polymer (the suspension agent is the monomer itself, recovery and recycling of 
unreacted monomers and the absence of undesired by-products from the reaction. At the end 
of 2002 a year-on-year analysis of operating records from over 80 spheripol process plants 
worldwide showed the average overall operability rate is about 98%. Of an average 2% 
downtime, less than 1% is due to process features. Spheripol process is versatile and offers a 
wide range of homopolymers, random copolymers and terpolymers as well as heterophasic 
impact and specially impact copolymers covering all PP application fields. The continuous 
process offers good quality product with minimum property variation due to excellent process 
stability and consistency of Basel‟s catalysts performance. A range of single line capacities 
from 40 – 450 kilotons/annum are available for homopolymer, random copolymer, either 
using polymer or chemical grade monomer. They have a modular plant installation whereby 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
46
easy adaptation to new business opportunities is effected. Capital costs for spheripol process 
are competitive with other used PP processes. It offers the lowest operating costs and 
excellent plant reliability and transition efficiency. The sheripol process using high yield and 
high selectivity catalysts supplied by Basel has unique ability to produce polymer spheres 
directly in the reactor. Spherical PP differs considerably from the small irregularly shaped 
granular particles produced with some other technologies and provides significant advantages 
in terms of process reliability. It consists of the following unit operations (Figure 4.0); 
 
a) Catalyst Feeding 
b) Polymerization 
 
bulk polymerization (homopolymer, random copolymer and terpolymer) 
 
Gas-phase polymerization (heterophasic impact and specialty copolymer. Can be 
added at a later stage without affecting initial plant configuration) 
c) Finishing 
 
Tubular loop reactors are used to conduct the bulk polymerization. These are filled with 
liquid propylene to produce homopolymer or random copolymer or terpolymer. The catalyst, 
liquid polypropylene and hydrogen for molecular weight control are continuously fed into the 
loop reactor. Residence time in the reactor is lower compared with other technologies. This is 
due to the high monomer density and increased catalyst activity. The loop reactor is used 
because it is low cost, exhibits good heat transfer characteristics and maintains uniform 
temperature, pressure and catalyst distribution. The low residence time also results in short 
transitions during grade changes. The complete filling of the reactors results in low 
contamination between different grades. 
 
 
Figure 4.0. Spheripol Process Schematic to Manufacture Spherical Polypropylene Homopolymer, 
Random Copolymer and Terpolymer. 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
47
A homogeneous mixture of polypropylene spheres is circulated inside the reactor loop. If 
the production of random copolymer or terpolymer is desired, ethylene and/or butene-1 are 
introduced in small quantities into the loop reactor. This process achieves very high solid 
concentration (>50% by weight), excellent heat removal (by water circulation in the reactor 
jacket) and temperature control (no hot spots). The resulting polymer is continuously 
discharged from the reactor through a flash heater into a first-stage de-gassing cyclone. 
Unreacted propylene from the cyclone is recovered, condensed and pumped back into the 
loop reactor. 
For the production of impact and specialty impact copolymers, polymer from the first 
reactor is fed to a gas-phase fluidized bed reactor that operates in series with the loop reactor 
(this gas-phase reactor is bypassed when homopolymer or random copolymer is produced). In 
this reactor, an elastomer (ethylene/propylene rubber) formed by the introduction of ethylene 
is allowed to polymerize within the homopolymer matrix that resulted from the first reaction 
stage. The carefully developed pores inside the polymer particle allow the rubber phase to 
develop without the sticky nature of the rubber to disrupt the operation by forming 
agglomerates. Fluidization is maintained by adequate recirculation of reacting gas: reaction 
heat is removed from the recycled gas by a cooler, before the cooled gas is recycled back to 
the bottom of the gas-phase reactor for fluidization. This type of gas-phase reactor is efficient 
because it maintains a high degree of turbulence in order to enhance monomer diffusion and 
reaction rates, and offers an efficient heat removal system. Some specialty products, 
incorporating two different ethylene content copolymers, require a second gas phase reactor 
in series. In impact copolymer production, at least 60% of the final product is produced in the 
first-stage loop reactor. In addition, since ethylene is more reactive than propylene, the gas-
phase reactors are smaller than would be required if this design were to be used for 
homopolymer production. Spherical morphology ensures high reliability and elimination of 
fouling phenomena, which frequently disrupt other gas-phase systems. Polymer discharged 
from the reactors flows to a low-pressure separator and subsequently to a steam treatment 
vessel where catalyst residues are neutralized and the dissolved monomer is removed, 
recovered and recycled back to the reactor system. From the steamer, polymer is discharged 
into a small fluidized-bed dryer with a hot nitrogen closed loop system to remove the 
moisture. The final product is conveyed to an extrusion unit, where it is mixed with additives 
and extruded to pellets. 
 
Spheripol technology is designed to lower environmental impacts. The design of each 
Spheripol process plant includes a number of safety features, such as: 
 
 
Proprietary Catalyst Deactivation System, which immediately stops all reaction 
 
Computer controlled emergency shutdown systems 
 
Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) for computer control and critical 
instrumentation control 
 
Instrument air emergency buffer 
 
Emergency Blowdown System to empty the plant quickly, in the event of an 
emergency 
 
Gas detectors which instantly determine and highlight (on a graphic easy-to-read 
board) the source of any hydrocarbons in the event of leakage into the atmosphere 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
48
 
Automatic fire protection systems  
 
Depending upon the severity of the situation, the plant can be shut down manually in a 
step-by-step, controlled fashion, more rapidly by both manual and computer control, or by 
instant automatic shutdown. Spheripol process units are configured so that unreacted 
monomers are recovered and recycled. If necessary, other discontinuous hydrocarbon purges 
can be sent to "off-gas recovery” for use as a fuel supply or to a flare system. The Spheripol 
process does not use hydrocarbon diluents or contaminant chemicals and the only wastewater 
is released from the steaming/ drying section of the plant which contains steam condensate 
and a small amount of inert polymer fines, which are recovered by a separator. Polypropylene 
development has for many years been focused on the use of bimodality as well as increasing 
operating temperature to improve the product properties. Bimodality had always been reached 
by operating two reactors in series at different operating conditions, resulting in a polymer 
with the two different qualities mixed on "intra-particle” level. In the Spherizone process, 
bimodality is created within one single reactor operating at different conditions between the 
various zones inside the reactor, resulting in an intimate mixing of the various property-
determining phases at "macro-molecular” level.  
Spherizone technology was brought from lab scale through two scale-ups of pilot plants 
to commercial size in 2002, when the very first Spheripol process plant in Brindisi was 
upgraded by the installation of the Multi-Zone Circulating Reactor, replacing the two slurry 
loop reactors and the flash line with the new reactor module. The plant has been running well 
as of the start-up, and is delivering products with excellent quality. The development of the 
manufacturing platform and the catalysts used will further continue, and with new 
investments in Spherizone process plants planned, Spherizone technology will become the 
new standard in PP industry. In the spherizone process (Figure 5.0) catalyst is continuously 
fed to the multi-zone circulating reactor. In this specially designed loop-reactor consisting of 
two reaction zones, the growing polymeric granules are circulated between the two different 
zones. In the so-called "riser” the polymer particles are entrained upward in a fast fluidization 
regime by the monomer gas flow from a blower. Then, in the top of the reactor the polymer 
particles enter the so-called "down comer”. Then there is a downward dense-phase plug-flow 
regime under gravity. At the bottom of the reactor the polymer particles are again fed to the 
"riser” section. 
The reactor can be operated in different conditions with regard to hydrogen (as chain 
transfer agent) and comonomer concentration in the two sections, allowing for the 
development of a bimodal (MFR, comonomer concentration/type) polymer structure at 
macro-molecular level. This split between the reaction conditions is achieved by injection of a 
monomer stream with different composition than in the riser-section at the transition (barrier) 
section between the riser- and down comer-section. The reactor can also yield monomodal 
homopolymer and random copolymer products by operating the sections in equal conditions. 
From the top of the reactor, unreacted monomer is withdrawn and then enters a monomer 
recovery section.  
Product is continuously withdrawn from the reactor and solid polymer is separated from 
the unreacted monomer gas at intermediate pressure. The gas is recycled back to the MZCR. 
As an option, the polymer can be fed to a fluidized bed gas-phase reactor that is operated in 
series to the MZCR; here additional copolymerization can take place to yield high-impact 
copolymer PP. This gas-phase reactor can be bypassed when homopolymer or random 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
49
copolymer is produced. In the reactor, an elastomer (ethylene/propylene rubber) formed by 
the introduction of ethylene is allowed to polymerize within the homopolymer matrix that 
resulted from the first reaction stage. The carefully developed pores inside the polymer 
particle allow the rubber phase to develop without the sticky nature of the rubber to upset 
operation by forming agglomerates. Fluidization is maintained through adequate re-
circulation of reacting gas; reaction heat is removed from the recycle gas by a cooler before 
the cooled gas is recycled back to the bottom of the gas-phase reactor for fluidization. This 
type of gas-phase reactor is efficient because it maintains a high degree of turbulence in order 
to enhance monomer diffusion and reaction rates while also offering an efficient heat removal 
system. Depending on the configuration, from the intermediate separator or the fluidized bed 
reactor the product is discharged to a receiver; from there the unreacted monomer gas is 
recovered and the polymer is sent to a vessel for monomer removal and neutralization of 
residual active catalyst by steam stripping. The removed residual hydrocarbons are recovered 
and can be sent back to the reactor system, while the polymer is dried by a closed-loop 
nitrogen system in small fluidized bed drier. 
 
 
2.7. CONTINUOUS MASS POLYMERIZATION ROUTE FOR PMMA 
 
Mitsubishi Gas Chemical Co. has patented a process [Hieda et al., 1998] for preparation 
of high quality PMMA, poly methyl methacrylate at high product rates. Initiated, solution 
polymerization in the presence of solvent was used in a continuous manner. The polymer 
product was discharged into a vented extruder. PMMA has interesting properties such as 
transparency, weather resistance, and surface appearance. Batch suspension methods have 
usually been deployed for making PMMA. Casting material and low molecular PMMA as 
coating has been reported using solution polymerization. Gel effect has been seen when 
higher conversions were attempted during preparation of PMMA. At low conversions the 
energy needed at the devolatilizer is high in order to separate the unreacted monomers from 
the product. Addition of solvent prevents the runaway polymerization condition.  
The thermal decomposition resistance deteriorates during solution polymerization of 
PMMA. Zipper decomposition begins at a C-C single bond that is found adjacent to a 
terminal double bond in the temperature range of 230 0C – 270 0C. At polymerization 
temperatures less than 100 0C thermally extremely weak head-head bond that is found to 
cleave at 200 0C remains. The deterioration of decomposition resistance can be decreased by 
decreasing the zipper decomposition and the head-head bond cleavage. This is accomplished 
by decreasing the concentration of terminal double bonds in the polymer and the reaction 
temperature is increased above 100 0C.  
Methanol solvent, MMA, methyl methacrylate monomer, free radical initiator, CTA, 
chain transfer agent is added continuously into two agitated reactors connected in series. The 
conversion achieved is ~ 55-93 % by mole fraction at polymerization temperatures of 100 0C 
– 180 0C. The polymerized mass is discharged into screw extruder that is vented in a 
continuous manner. The devolatilizer is operated at temperatures of 170 0C – 270 0C. The 
volatiles are collected at the vents. Vacuum of 1 – 400 mm Hg downstream is used to reduce 
the residuals in the polymer further. PMMA with Mw, weight averaged molecular weight of 
80,000 – 200,000 were prepared. The thermal decomposition is only 3 wt%.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
50
  
Figure 5.0. Spherizone Process to Manufacture Spherical Polypropylene. 
 
Some more examples of continuous polymerization technology can be found in the patent 
literature. The flow diagrams with labels for the important unit operations are given in the 
Figures below. The reactor configuration for solution polymerization of polyglycolide is 
shown in Figure 8.0. SAN styrene and acrylonitrile can be prepared in a continuous manner. 
The devolatilizer used will depend on the composition of AN in the polymer. In Figure 6.0 is 
shown two CSTRs in series and wiped film devolatilizer process in order to make SAN 
copolymer. The kinetics of SAN copolymerization is obtained from experimental study. The 
reaction rate reaches a maxima as the AN concentration is increased. The sequence 
distribution of SAN copolymerization is discussed in Sharma (2011). More monomers can be 
added as termonomer or tetra monomer as the product need arises. The process equipment 
can be used as retrofit. Thermal polymerization of styrene can be used. In chapter 3.0 is 
discussed a method to calculate the polymer composition from monomer composition using 
state space representation during free radical multi-component copolymerization in CSTR. 
Numerical solutions are needed if made in a PFR. BASF uses a tube bundle reactor to make 
SAN (Figure 7.0). At azeotropic composition of AN = 25 wt % the monomer and polymer 
composition will be the same. PFR can be used for more productivity. When operated at the 
azeotrope monomer-polymer composition in the copolymer is readily calculable. In Figure 
9.0 is shown a continuous mass polymerization process for polystyrene. SMA, styrene maleic 
anhydride copolymer can be prepared in a continuous manner as shown in Figures 10.0 and 
11.0. Examples of condensation polymerization process for production of polyamide and 
nylon 6,6 are shown in Figures 12.0 and 13.0. Gas phase polymerization process is shown in 
Figure 14.0. Solution copolymerization process developed by Exxon Mobil Corp. is shown in 
Figure 15.0. Esterification processes are shown in Figures 16.0 – 17.0. Poly tri methylene 
terephthalate can be prepared as shown by du Pont. Shell has a process for preparation of 
polyester as shown in Figure 18.0. 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
51
 
1 Monomer Storage Tank; 2 Flow Control Valve 
3,4 - 2 CSTRs in Series 
6,9 - Decanters 
8 – Pump; 5 – Static Mixer 
Figure 6.0. LG Continuous Mass Polymerization Process for Preparing Styrene-Acrylonitrile 
Copolymer. 
 
 
1 – Tube bundle reactor 
2,3 – intermeshing static mixers 
4 – Circulating pump; 5 – feed mixture inlet; 6 – outlet 
7 – Degassing extruder 
8 – Fresh monomer; 9 – volatile content 
Figure 7.0. BASF Continuous Mass Polymerization Process for SAN. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
52
 
Figure 8.0. Reactor Configurations in the Continuous Solution Process for Biodegradable 
Polyglycolide. 
 
 
I – Circulating Line; II – Main Polymerization Line 
1- Plunger pump; 5,10,13 – Gear pump 
2,3,4,6,7,8,9 – Tubular Reactors in Series 
11 – Preheater; 12 – Devolatilization Chamber 
Figure 9.0. Continuous Bulk Polymerization of Styrene. 
 
 
1 – Maleic Anhydride Feed;  
2 – Styrene Feed 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
53
3 – First Stage Reactor; 4 – Pump; 7 - shaft 
5 – 1 Shaft Horizontal Reactor 
6 – 2 Shaft Horizontal Reactor 
Figure 10.0. Continuous Mass Polymerization of Styrene Maleic Anhydride Copolymer. 
 
 
Figure 11.0. Bayer Continuous Mass Polymerization Process for Styrene Copolymer. 
 
 
Figure 12.0. Continuous Preparation of Polyamide. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
54
 
Figure 13.0. Continuous Process for Nylon 6,6 from Hexamethylene Diamine and Adipic Acid. 
 
 
1,2 – Fluidized Bed Reactor; 3 – Distributor 
5, 21 – Separator; 6,7, 22 – Discharge Pipe 
8 – heat exchanger;  
9 – 10, 23 – Compressor; 11 – Feed Pipe 
Figure 14.0. Continuous Gas Phase Copolymerization Process with a Fluidized Bed Reactor. 
 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
55
 
8 – CSTR; 2,4,58 – pressurized feed 
14,34,40 – separation of solvent, unreacted monomer 
20 – lean phase; 22 – concentrated 
3 – high capacity, low viscosity pump 
18 – pressure reducing means; 12 – heating stage 
10 – catalyst feed; 24 – final cooler 
32 – drier; 3 – pump 
Figure 15.0. ExxonMobil Continuous Solution Copolymerization of Ethylene and Propylene. 
 
 
12 – Prepolymerizer; 20 – preheater; 22 – tray; 24 - dome 
14 – Finisher 
10- Direct Esterification Reactor 
Figure 16.0. Du Pont Continuous Polymerization Process to Manufacture Polytrimethylene 
Terepthalate. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
56
 
2 - Esterification Reactor 
6 – Prepolymerization Column 
10 – Finisher 
20 - Glycol Recovery System 
26 - Adsorption Bed 
32 - Horizontal Agitated Cylindrical Vessel 
Figure 17.0. Du Pont Continuous Production Process for Polyesters. 
 
 
2.8. SUMMARY 
 
18 process flow diagrams are reviewed to discuss continuous processes to manufacture 
ABS, Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene engineering thermoplastic, SAN, Styrene – 
Acrylonitrile Copolymer, PS, Polystyrene, Nylon, PMMA, Poly Methyl Methacrylate, SMA, 
Styrene Maleic Anhydride and Polyolefins. The Dow process, GE process and Bayer process 
are compared side by side. The tower process of Dow and the three stage process with a 
finisher used by GE and the two CSTR process of Bayer are reviewed from a process 
performance and cost view point. The spheripol process and spherizone process 
commercialized by Basell polyolefins is discussed. The use of the circulating fluidized bed 
and the combination of the liquid pressurized process and gas phase Ziegler Natta catalyzed 
process is reviewed. The spherical polypropylene is manufactured in one of them. The 
continuous mass polymerization process to manufacture PMMA by the Rohm and Haas 
 

Continuous Polymerization Process Technology 
 
 
57
process is discussed. The azeotropic distillation separation method for separation of the 
unreacted monomer from the polymerized product and the helical ribbon agitated 
polymerization reactor is evaluated. The use of the decanter for separation of the unreacted 
monomers from the product is highlighted in the LG 2 CSTR process to manufacture SAN. 
The use of tube bundle reactor and degasing extruder to prepare SAN by BASF is compared 
with the LG process. The reactor configuration to prepare polyglycolide is elloborated. The 
use of tubular reactor series for the manufacture of polystyrene is discussed. The use of a 
multistage rubber dissolver and a multistage reactor can be seen in the Hitachi process to 
prepare HIPS. Shaft horizontal reactors are used in the preparation of SMA copolymer in a 
continuous fashion. The continuous kettles for the preparation of nylon from hexamethylene 
diamine and adipic acid and directly from aminonitrile are reviewed. The ethylene propylene 
copolymer preparation by continuous solution process developed by ExxonMobil is sketched. 
Some issues in developing a styrenic copolymer using the Bayer continuous process is 
discussed. 
 
 
Figure 18.0. Shell Continuous Reactors in Series Polymerization Process to Manufacture Polyester. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
58
2.9. FURTHER READING 
 
Aliberti, V. A., Kruse, R. L., Valcarce, E. M. (1983). “Mass Polymerization Process for ABS 
Polyblends”, US Patent 4, 417.030, Monsanto Co., St. Louis, Mo. 
Bredeweg, C. J. (1980). “Process for the Polymerization of Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene 
Resins”, US Patent 4, 239,863, The Dow Chemical Company, Midland, MI. 
Fukumoto, C., Furukawa, T. & Oda, C. (1983). “Process for Continuous Production of High 
Impact Polystyrene”, US Patent 4,419,488, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan. 
Hieda, S., Kurokawa, M., Higuchi, Y. & Kawahara, S. (1998). “Process for Preparing 
Polymer”, US Patent 5,804,676, Mitsubishi Gas Chemical Co., Tokyo, Japan. 
Sharma, K. R. (1997). “A Statistical Design to Design the Process Capability of Continuous 
Mass Polymerization of ABS at the Pilot Plant”, 214th American Chemical Society 
National Meeting, Las Vegas, NV, September. 
Sharma, K. R. (2011). “Polymer Thermodynamics: Blends, Copolymers and Reversible 
Polymerization”, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 
Sue, C. Y., Koch, R., Pace, J. E. & Prince, G. R. (1996). “Grafting, Phase-Inversion and 
Cross-Linking Controlled Multi-Stage Bulk Process for Making ABS Graft Copolymers”, 
US Patent 5,569,709, General Electric Company, Pittsfield, MA. 
Virkler, T. L. & Wu, W. C. (2001). “Process for Preparing Extrusion Grade ABS Polymer”, 
US Patent 2001/0031827A1, Bayer Corp., Pittsburgh, PA. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
MATHEMATICAL PROCESS MODELS 
 
 
3.0. OVERVIEW 
 
Mathematical models are used for scale-up of novel chemistry recently invented in the 
laboratory to the manufacturing plants. Pilot plant studies often times are understaffed and 
have a heavy backlog of experimental trials that needs to be performed. Mathematical models 
can be used where pilot plant data is not available for scale-up. Sir Albert Einstein said: 
 
"How can it be that mathematics, a product of human thought independent of 
experience, is so admirably adapted to the objects of reality?"  
 
Chemical process models are developed for a variety of reasons. The overall objective is 
to gain better understanding of the process. This in turn would help the team of engineers to 
manufacture new products at the lowest cost, in large scale, with high quality. Better process 
understanding of the process can also lead to more safe operations. The recent BP Americas 
spill called Deep Water Horizon [Telegraph, 2010] and the nuclear power plant disasters in 
Japan that followed the earthquake with a magnitude of 8.9 on the Richter scale in March 
2011 are cases in point that poor project planning can lead to unsafe operations. Proactive 
solutions are needed. It is better to be safe than sorry. The choice of the location of the 
nuclear power plants near the “ring of fire” that is prone to earthquakes was poor. Good 
process models can lead to more efficient process operations with less pollution to the 
environment. The ecosystem needs to be preserved. Dynamic process models can be used to 
train operators, to design processes, in safety analysis, in process control, in project trouble 
shooting and in globalization of an enterprise, etc. There are different kinds of process 
models. These are as follows; 
 
(i) Empirical Models 
(ii) Semi-Empirical Models 
(iii) Mechanistic Models 
(iv) Models from Shell Balance and Applications of Equations of Continuity, Energy, 
Momentum, Mass and Charge. 
(v) Supercomputer based models such as the one used for weather prediction 
(vi) Simulation on the Computer 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
60
(vii) Mesoscopic and Stochastic Models 
(viii) Monte Carlo Trials  
 
 
A. SIMULATIONS ON COMPUTER 
 
3.1. CONSECUTIVE-COMPETITIVE REACTIONS DURING  
BIODIESEL PRODUCTION 
 
3.1.1. Selectivity of Biodiesel over Glycerol during Transesterification 
 
Oil reserves are expected to be depleted by the year 2050 at the current levels of 
production. The crude oil reserves are estimated at 4.16 trillion liters worldwide [Podolski et 
al., 2008]. Global consumption is 84.6 million barrels/day. Earth‟s entire oil reserves 
according to one estimate are 1.2 trillion barrels without oil sands and 3.74 trillion barrels 
with oil sands. At the present rate of consumption the oil reserves will be depleted in the next 
38.8 – 122.2 years. Search is on for alternative oil finds. Per geological survey 3-4.5 billion 
barrels was found in Montana and North Dakota. If oil shale can be used as source of oil the 
reserves can last for 110 more years. Oil finds have been found in Russia, Columbia and 
Africa. According to the big rollover theory global oil production is already past its peak 
production. M. K. Hubert, Shell Oil Co., Houston, TX, studied the exhaustion of oil fields. 
Initial oil find, exploitation and exhaustion phases were identified. This followed the bell 
curve. He concluded that United States would peak in its oil production in 1970 
[Congressional Record, 2005]. The curve is called the Hubert curve. The peak is also called 
the rollover. Oil experts note that the peak production has been reached. Every year since 
1970, we have found less oil and pumped less oil than we consume.  
Largest known reserves of crude oil are located in the Middle East, along the equator and 
in Russia and its neighbors. Transportation of crude oil has not been without spills. In 1989 
the Exxon Valdez dumped 11 million gallons of oil into the waters and onto the shores of 
Alaska. 85 million gallons of oil onto previously pristine Arctic tundra was spewed because 
of a rupture in 1994 in a pipeline in Russia. In 1994 Exxon was ordered to pay $5 billion for 
Alaskan oil spill. 206 million gallons of oil was spilled in the recent deep water horizon oil 
spill in the Gulf of Mexico by BP Americas in 2010. This was the worst environmental 
disaster ever in the history of technology. This was attributed to a rig explosion. The gusher 
was from the ocean floor. Wars have been fought to prevent monopoly of oil supply. 
Analogous to how in the history of mankind Stone Age gave way to Iron Age, oil age may be 
eclipsed by sustainable energy. Man dropped the use of stones when he learnt the use of iron. 
Air pollution has been found as a result of continued and increased use of petroleum. Global 
warming has been concluded as a problem because of significant increase in concentration of 
CO2 in the earth‟s atmosphere. 
The principles of Sustainable Engineering were developed at the Sandestin Conference of 
2003 [Abraham and Nguyen, 2005]. This ought to set the direction of engineers who work on 
developing sustainable alternatives to current engineering practices. Energy is considered a 
primary component of sustainable engineering. This is because of;  
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
61
(i) the pollution problems that arise from current methods of consumption of energy 
such as acid rain formation from emission of oxides of sulfur and nitrogen and; 
(ii) the depleting reserves of fossil fuel such as bituminous coal, petroleum, peat, lignite, 
Anthracite, oil shale, natural gas, etc. In most formulations of sustainability the use 
of renewable energy resources is desirable. The Sandestin principle states that, 
“Minimize depletion of natural resources”.  
 
Renewable energy resources may be viewed as fuels that are produced at rates equal to or 
greater than the rates at which they are consumed. Thus there is no “net depletion” of the 
resources with the passage of time. For example, biomass production rates may jeopardize 
food supplies and hence have biomass fall out of the column of renewable resources and into 
the column of non-renewable energy resource. Sandestin principle of life cycle analysis may 
be applicable for evaluation of biomass as energy resource. 
 
 
3.1.2. Biodiesel 
 
Biodiesel is an interesting choice for use as alternate energy. Biodiesel is a mixture of 
FAME, fatty acid methyl esters. It is an EPA, Environmental Protection Agency designated 
advanced biofuel. It can be derived from vegetable oil or animal fats. It can be used from a 
spectrum of resources that include waste fats, greases and agricultural oils. Biodiesel can save 
money for the consumer. For example, Ray Mabus, secretary of the Navy testified in Capitol 
Hill that by purchasing 20% biodiesel blend, savings of 13 cents a gallon and ~ $30,000 total 
in winter in heating oil costs were realized. Renewable Fuel standard makes good policy as it 
preserves the ecosystem from the advantages of life cycle use. Biodiesel is nontoxic. It has 
low emission profiles and is environmentally benign [Krawczyk, 1996]. A century ago R. 
Diesel successfully used vegetable oil as fuel for his engine. Prior to WW II vegetable oils 
were blended with diesel fuels time and again. 
It is recommended for use as a substitute for petroleum-based diesel because it is 
renewable and biodegradable. One of the methods of preparation of biodiesel is the trans 
esterification of triacylglycerides in vegetable oil or animal fat with an alcohol such as 
methanol in the presence of an alkali or acid catalyst. The products are FAME (s) and are 
called biodiesel. Glycerin is formed as byproduct. Alkali catalysts used are NaOH or KOH. 
 
 
Triglyceride + CH3OH  3R-COOCH3 + C3H5(OH)3 
(3.1) 
 
 
(methanol) (FAME)  
(Glycerin) 
 
Three synthesis methods are reported for commercial manufacture of biodiesel. These 
are: 
 
Type I: Trans esterification of Vegetable Oil 
Raw oil was mixed with methanol in the presence of catalyst such as sodium methylate in 
order to produce the FAME. Glycerin is formed as a by-product. A two or three stage process 
of reaction and centrifugal separation is used. Centrifugal separation is used to separate the 
glycerin and biodiesel layers by gravity differences. More degree of separation can be  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
62
achieved by increased torque of the rotor [Sharma, 2012a]. A trade-off is seen between utility 
cost for rotor speed and purity level. Optimal operation of rotor can be derived at for 
maximum revenue. At end of the second stage [Connemann, 1994] with 99.2 – 99.6% 
conversion the mixture is passed through a vacuum distillation tower in order to separate the 
unreacted methanol, recover the sodium methylate catalyst and recycle the unreacted oil. B & 
P Process patented a process [Martin et al., 2011] to make biodiesel with less equipment, 
more yield and at a higher purity. They use a higher temperature than the boiling point of 
methanol and increased pressure of the reactor in order to keep the methanol from boiling. 
The centrifugal separator was made with perforated concentric cylinders. The separation 
process was affected in a counter-current manner. This makes the throughput higher and use 
less floor space. The glycerin passes through the rims and the biodiesel separates out through 
the axial region of the separator. The reaction is between the triglycerides present in the oil 
and methanol. Spectrum of different feedstock types have been used for the vegetable oil. 
This ranges from waste cooking oil to jatorpa crop cultivated with a targeted purpose of 
generating fuel. Feedstock types used are: (i) Soybean oil; (ii) Rapseed Oil; (iii) Sun flower 
oil; (iv) Coconut Oil; (v) Palm Oil ; (vi) Tung Oil. The catalyst used can be alkali, acid or 
enzyme. When the FFA, free fatty acid content is greater than 1% the acid catalyst would be 
better [Kulkrani and Dalai, 2006]. Alkaline catalyst is used in commercial plants. Alkaline 
catalysts are preferred when the FFA, free fatty acid content in the feedstock is less than 0.5 
wt %. Process is sensitive to water and FFA. Saponification of ester may occur in presence of 
water. 
 
Type 2: Pyrolysis/Thermal Cracking of Vegetable Oil 
Since WWI, World War I, many investigators have studied the pyrolysis of vegetable oils 
in order to obtain biodiesel. Thermal cracking of Tung oil calcium soaps were reported in 
1947. Tung oil was sapponified with lime and then thermally cracked in order to yield a crude 
oil. Pyrolysis methods have been found to result in more bio gasoline compared with 
biodiesel [Ma, 1999]. Pyrolysis usually involves heating in the absence of oxygen. Soybean 
oil was thermally decomposed and separated by distillation. About 75% of the distillate was 
hydrocarbons such as alkanes and alkenes. Vegetable oils can be catalytically cracked into 
useful fuels. Catalyst used are silica/alumina and palm and copra oils were used. Condensed 
organic phase can be fractionated into bio gasoline and biodiesel. 
 
Type 3: Physical Blending and Emulsification Process 
The alternate to use fuel for food has been discussed [Ma, 1999]. During the oil embargo 
Caterpillar Brazil in South Africa used pre-combustion chamber engines with a blend of 10% 
vegetable oil in order to maintain total power without any alterations to the engine. 20% 
vegetable oil and 80% diesel fuel blends were successfully tested. 50/50 blends were also 
tested. Diesel fleet was powered with filtered frying oil at 95/5 blend with diesel. 
Polymerization of polyunsaturated vegetable oil lead to viscosity increase and was 
problematic. Vegetable oil has 80% of calorific value of diesel fuel. After prolonged 
operation of direct-injection engines problems such as coking, trumpet formation on injectors, 
carbon deposits, oil ring sticking and thickening and gelling were found. 1:2 and 1:1 blends of 
degummed soybean oil and diesel fuel were tested for engine performance in a 6 cylinder, 6.6 
liter displacement, direct-injection, turbocharged prime mover made from John Deere for 60 
hours. Incomplete combustion, unwanted polymerization and gum formation were noted 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
63
when using vegetable oil directly as fuel. Micro emulsions of vegetable oil with solvents such 
as methanol were studied. Micro emulsion was defined as a dispersion of optically isotropic 
fluid microstructures in 1-150 nm size range in colloidal equilibrium when two normally 
immiscible liquids and amphiphiles are mixed. Micelle formation leads to improvements in 
spraying.  
 
 
3.1.3. Forecast of Biodiesel Production  
 
Over the past decade the world production of biodiesel has gone up from 15,200 barrels 
per day in the year 2000 to 300,000 barrels per day in 2010. In terms of volume this is about 5 
billion gallons in 2010. In the past two years, biodiesel production has exceeded targets. 
Production plants are present in nearly every state. 1000s of jobs are created. The sigmoidal 
growth of the biodiesel volume is seen from 2006. Biodiesel is designated by ASTM D 6751. 
New laws and mandates on biodiesel came about in Brazil, China, United States, and 
Argentina. Germany and Brazil are the world's leading biodiesel producers. Federal excise tax 
credits are provided for producers and distributors of agro-biodiesel at $1 for every gallon of 
biodiesel they blend with regular diesel. Forecasts of global dynamics of biodiesel production 
are available for 2015-2020 by feedstock used such as vegetable oil feed stocks, jatorpa oil, 
algae biodiesel and cellulose. The expected growth rate of biodiesel production in the world is 
about 6% between 2009-2018 according to OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development. By 2017 biodiesel production is expected at 25 billion liters. European 
biodiesel board estimated that the production of biodiesel in EU is about 9.6 million tons in 
2010. By the year 2022, biofuel production is projected to consume a significant amount of 
total world production of sugar cane (28%), vegetable oils (15%) and coarse grains (12%) 
[Sharma, 2011]. 
In India, the former President of India, ABJ Abdul Kalam during his address to the nation 
on National Science Day, Feb' 28th 2006 [The Hindu, 2006] called for an increase in output 
of biodiesel from jatorphha crop from current levels of 2 tons per hectare to 4-6 tons per 
hectare. The oil content of most jatorpha varieties range from 25-35 %. Research in selection, 
intra-specific, inter-specific hybridization and mutation breeding is needed to develop 
varieties with more than 45% oil content so that a recovery of 35% under mechanical 
expelling. Stebbins investigated the technical and economic feasibility of producing biodiesel 
and livestock feed from Vermont oilseeds at a farm scale and commercial scale. Commercial 
scale biodiesel facility in Vermont was found to be more profitable as oil prices rose in the 
simulation models used. India has 60 million hectares of wasteland of which 30 million 
hectares are available for energy crops such as jatorpha. Cars that can run on biodiesel need 
be developed and encouraged. The Indian Railways runs passenger trains with diesel engine 
with 5% blend of biodiesel. 15 million jatorpha saplings are planted in Railways' land. 
President B. Obama as a senator endorsed the budding biodiesel industry at a new biodiesel 
plant in Cairo, IL in 2006 [Moran, 2006]. The Renewable Energy group announced that it 
would build a 60 million gallon per year refinery and had raised $100 million in financing. 
Bunge Ltd., a major food processor and other venture capital firms were the contributors. 
About 76 biodiesel plants were in production in 2006, up from 22 in 2004. A biodiesel plant 
on an average costs up to $20 million to build and yields 30 million gallons per year of fuel. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
64
Biodiesel serves an important need of meeting the energy security of United States and the 
developing countries in the world.  
 
 
3.1.4. Process Analysis 
 
The electrical utility costs increases in a non-linear manner with increase in rotor speed in 
centrifuge used to separate glycerol from FAME. More separation is achieved with more 
utility costs but with more revenue. A point of optimal operation can be arrived at for 
maximum revenue. This may vary depending on the price of gasoline at the pump at a given 
time. The reactions in the reactor during biodiesel production may be modeled as scheme of 
multiple reactions of the consecutive-competitive/series-parallel type [Levenspiel, 1999]. The 
methanol can be assumed to be in excess. Hence the reactions shown below can be assumed 
to obey the pseudo first order kinetics. The concentration of methanol can be lumped with the 
intrinsic second order reaction rate constant to give a pseudo first order lumped rate constant. 
The catalytic effect is also captured here. The reactions are modeled as follows; 
 
 
1
2
3
k
k
k
A B
P
R
R
B
P
S
S
B
P
T
 
(3.2) 
 
Where A - triglyceride, B - Methanol (CH3OH), R-1,2 and 1,3 diglyceride, S – mono 
glyceride, P – (FAME), T – Glycerol.  
It may be assumed that once the product P is formed it does not participate in the reaction 
any further. The FAME is harvested from the kettle. As glycerol (T) can be sold for profit this 
scheme is of more interest. This reaction set is applicable for successive attacks of a 
compound by a reactive material. In this case the reactive material is methanol and the 
compound is triglyceride. The kinetics of the reactions can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
1
2
2
3
3
0
A
A
R
A
R
S
R
S
T
S
P
A
R
S
T
A
dC
k C
dt
dC
k C
k C
dt
dC
k C
k C
dt
dC
k C
dt
C
C
C
C
C
C
 
(3.3) 
 
It is assumed that the initial concentration of triglycerides is CA0 and that of diglycerides, 
monoglycerides, glycerol is zero at time zero. The four ordinary differential equations in Eq. 
(2) can be written in the state space form as follows; 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
65
 
1
1
2
2
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
A
A
R
R
S
S
T
T
k
C
C
k
k
C
C
d
k
k
C
C
dt
k
C
C
 
(3.4) 
 
The eigenvalues of the rate matrix in Eq. (3.4) can be seen to be –k1, -k2, -k3 and 0. Since 
three Eigen values are negative and one is zero the system can be seen to be of the integrating 
type [Sharma, 2012c]. This is an example of three-step reaction where the final T, glycerol 
and P (FAME) are desired. The addition policy of methanol along the length in case of PFR, 
plug flow reactor and the timings in the case of CSTR can influence the product mix. The 
method of mixing the reactants such as slow mixing of A to B, slow mixing of B to A and 
rapid mixing of A and B may be important design criteria. In order to obtain more yield of P 
the points where R and S will reach a maxima need be avoided as operating points 
 
 
3.1.5. Economic Analysis 
 
The cost of raw materials is a critical factor in the profitability of biodiesel manufacture. 
Twelve reports were reviewed [Bender, 1999;Weber, 1993] on economic feasibility of 
biodiesel production using different feed stocks and scales of operation. The production costs 
for conversion to biodiesel from different feed stocks are given in Table 3.1. At the time of 
the study in 1999 the projected costs for biodiesel from oilseed or animal fats have a range 
from 30 cents – 69 cents per liter. The estimates include the soymeal and glycerin credits 
expected. Crushing and esterification facility is by retrofit of existing tallow facility. Cost of 
biodiesel from vegetable oil and waste grease are 54 – 62 cents per liter. When the pre-tax 
price of diesel is 18 cents per liter the biodiesel venture is not profitable.  
Significant factors that contribute to the bottom line of the biodiesel production were 
identified in [Nelson and Shrock, 1993]. These include the cost of raw materials, plant size, 
credit received for glycerin as by-product sales. When waste cooking oil was used the 
material costs went down. Restaurant greases cost less than food-grade canola and soybean 
oils. The first factory that produced biodiesel at 300 tons per year from waste cooking oil was 
started in Chiayi county of Taiwan in October of 2004. About 700 garbage trucks were fueled 
from biodiesel in 2005 in Taiwan. 
 
Table 3.1. Review of 12 Different Routes to Biodiesel 
 
  
 
Feedstock 
(Type) 
Per Liter  
Production Cost 
1 
Soybean Oil 
30 cents 
2 
Animal Fats 
32-37 cents 
3 
Canola Oil, Sunflower Oil 
40-63 cents 
4 
Rapeseed Oil 
69 cents 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
66
3.1.6. Annual Worth, AW of a Bio-Diesel Plant in Taiwan [You et al., 2008 ] 
 
Biodiesel is produced by Trans esterification reactions. Triglycerides present in virgin 
soybean oil are reacted with anhydrous alcohol such as methanol, ethanol, proponal etc. to 
form FAME, fattyacid methyl esters, or biodiesel and glycerol. The alkali catalyst used was 
sodium hydroxide, NaOH. It can potentially be used as an alternate fuel to the ones currently 
in vogue that tend to cause pollution problems such as global warming, acid rain, greenhouse 
gas emissions, etc. Biodiesel is an attractive fuel due to the environmental benefits that comes 
with its operation. It is prepared from renewable energy resources such as vegetable oil. 
Using the information provided in Table 3.2 annualized worth AW of the biodiesel plant is 
calculated. The plant is expected to last for 20 years. The interest rate for equivalence 
calculations can be taken as 3.0%. The main cost [Turton et al., 1998] in these plants are the 
raw material costs. The AW analysis is completed using a MS Excel spreadsheet as shown in 
Table 3.2. The capital cost is obtained by using the SUM command from cells D4 to D10. 
These are the costs of Reactors, Washing Column, Distillation Column, Heat Exchangers, 
Pumps, Vacuum Systems. The capital cost of $765,000 is amortized over 20 year period by 
using the capital recovery factor. The capital recovery factor is obtained from Table A-7 in 
Appendix A in [Sharma, 2011] for (A/P,3%,20). 
This was found to be 0.067216. The materials costs include the soybean oil, methanol, 
catalyst and solvent. The Annual costs are obtained by adding the Materials Cost, Labor 
Costs, Utility Costs and Overhead Costs. The annual revenue is obtained by adding the sales 
of biodiesel and glycerin. The AW was calculated. The AW is about $1.915 million. Thus it is 
profitable to operate the biodiesel plant as described in Taiwan. 
 
 
3.1.7. Economic Evaluation of Biodiesel Production from Waste Cooking Oil  
 
The study of alternate fuel sources to gasoline and coal is of national importance given 
the supply and demand characteristics of fuels that are used extensively. Biodiesel is derived 
from vegetable oil or animal fats. It is recommended for use as a substitute for petroleum-
based diesel because it is renewable and biodegradable. The common method of preparation 
of biodiesel is the Trans esterification of triacylglycerol in vegetable oil or animal fat with an 
alcohol such as methanol in the presence of an alkali or acid catalyst. The products are 
FAME, s and are called biodiesel. Glycerin is formed as a byproduct. Sodium hydroxide or 
potassium hydroxide is used as alkali catalyst. A student for his masters thesis, [Weber, 1993] 
evaluated the economic feasibility of a manufacturing plant producing approximately 22 
million pounds per year of biodiesel. Tallow was Trans esterified with methanol in the 
presence of an alkali catalyst. A second plant is based on canola seed used as the raw 
material. A by-product credit can be awarded for glycerin produced from seed crushing. A 
summary of the capital investment, process cost, revenue accrued of the three different plants 
are shown in Table 3.0. The capital cost can be assumed to paid off over a 30 year period at 
an interest charge of 6% per year. 
 
 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
67
Table 3.2. Cost and Revenue Data for Biodiesel Production in Taiwan 
 
 
Description 
Cost 
A. 
Material Costs (~6.8 million) 
 
A1 
Soybean Feedstock 
$6,234,000 
A2 
Methanol, Catalyst and Solvent 
$564,000 
B. 
Capital Equipment (per year) 
$765,000 
 
Reactors, Distillation Column, 
 
 
Heat Exchangers, Separators, Pumps 
 
C. 
Labor Costs 
$564,000 
D. 
Utilities 
$124,000 
E. 
Overhead 
$431,000 
 
Revenue from Biodiesel 
$6,845,000 
 
Glycerin Credit 
$3,038,000 
 
Table 3.3. Economic Evaluations for Biodiesel Production Plants 
 
 
Plant I Alkali 
Catalyzed  
Continuous 
Process 
Plant II Alkali- 
Catalyzed Batch 
Process 
Plant III Alkali- 
Catalyzed 
Continuous 
Process 
Plant Capacity 
22 million lbs./year 
1.7 million lbs./year 
2.2 million lbs./year 
Raw Material Used 
Beef Tallow 
Canola Oilseed 
Animal Fats 
Total Capital Cost 
$ 12 million 
$1 million 
$3.12 million 
Total Manufacturing 
Cost 
$34 million 
$5.95 million 
$3.4 million 
Glycerin Credit 
$6 million 
$0.9 million 
$1.2 million 
Price 
$ 2 /lb. 
$4/lb. 
$3/lb. 
 
Which process is the most profitable ? 
It is assumed that the capital cost is amortized at an interest rate of 6% per year for 30 
years. 
 
Plant I 
(A/P, 6%, 30) from Table A-10 in [Sharma, 2011] the capital recovery factor can be seen 
to be 0.072649 
 
 
Profit = 2*22 – 12*(A/P, 6%,30) – 34 + 6 = 15.128 million 
 
Revenue – capital recovery – cost of production + by-product credit = profit  
(3.5) 
 
Plant II 
(A/P, 6%, 30) from Table A-10 in [15] the capital recovery factor can be seen to be 
0.072649 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
68
 
Profit = 4*1.7 – 1*(A/P, 6%,30) – 5.95 + 0.9 = 1.68 million 
 
Revenue – capital recovery – cost of production + by-product credit = profit  
(3.6) 
 
Plant III 
(A/P, 6%, 30) from Table A-10 in [15] the capital recovery factor can be seen to be 
0.072649 
 
 
Profit = 3*2.2 – 3.12*(A/P, 6%,30) – 3.4 + 1.2 = 4.17 million 
 
Revenue – capital recovery – cost of production + by-product credit = profit (3.7) 
 
So Plant I is the most profitable followed by Plant III and then Plant II. 
 
 
3.1.8. Selectivity Improvement 
 
It can be seen from the economic analysis the yield of biodiesel compared with other by-
products such as glycerin can be a critical design criteria in making these plants more 
profitable. The reaction sequence for formation of FAME, fatty acid methyl ester from 
triglycerides found in palm oil and other feedstock involve the formation of diglycerides, 
monoglycerides and glycerin in sequence with FAME produced in each intermediate step 
(Darnoko and Cheryan, 2000]. The reaction scheme can be represented as shown in Figure 
1.0. The reactions are catalyzed. The catalyst type depends on the FFA content in the 
feedstock. The triglycerides species is represented with symbol A, diglycerides with R, 
monoglycerides with S and glycerin with T. The product FAME formed in each step is given 
by P and the methanol used is given as B.  
 
 
Figure 1.0. Trans esterification Catalyzed Reactions from Triglycerides to Glycerin and FAME. 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
69
The scheme of reactions can be modeled as shown in Eq. (3.2) as a consecutive-
competitive type [Levenspiel, 1999]. The reaction rate expressions in Eq. (3.3) or Eq. (3.4) 
can be written in dimensionless form as follows after making the following substitutions; 
 
 
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
1
3
1
A
A
A
A
R
R
A
S
S
A
T
T
A
P
P
A
C
C
X
C
C
X
C
C
X
C
C
X
C
C
X
C
k t
k
k
k
k
 
(3.8) 
 
In dimensionless form the rate expressions given in Eq. (2) can be seen to become; 
 
 
1
A
A
dX
X
d
 
(3.9) 
 
 
1
R
A
R
dX
X
X
d
 
(3.10) 
 
 
S
R
S
dX
X
X
d
 
(3.11) 
 
 
T
S
dX
X
d
 
(3.12) 
 
The rate expression for the product, FAME can be obtained by adding the contributions 
from the methanolysis of triglyceride, diglyceride and monoglyceride steps and can be seen to 
be; 
 
 
1
P
A
R
S
dX
X
X
X
d
 
(3.13) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
70
In order to evaluate the selectivity of the FAME product P over the by-product, glycerin, 
T solution to Eq. (3.9-3-12) were obtained by the method of Laplace transforms. The 
solutions are as follows; 
 
 
1
1
1
A
A
X
s
s s
X
e
 
(3.14) 
 
 
1
1
1
1
R
R
X
s
s
s
X
e
e
 
(3.15) 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
S
S
X
s
s
s
s
X
e
e
e
 
(3.16) 
 
 
1
1
(1
)
1
(1
)
(1
)
1
1
T
T
X
s
s
s
s
s
X
e
e
e
 
(3.17) 
 
The product yield can be found by difference as; 
 
 
p
A
R
S
T
X
X
X
X
X  
(3.18) 
 
Model solutions given by Eqs. (13-17) were plotted in Microsoft Excel 2010 for 
Windows 7.0 on a Hewlett Packard Compaq Elite 8300 desktop computer with Intel Core i7 
processor with 3.9 GHz speed. The results for the product distribution is shown in Figures 2.0 
– Figures 5.0. The simulations were conducted for values of reaction rate constant ratios  < 1 
and  < 1 and further for  < . 
It can be seen from the Figures 2-5.0 that the conversion of species A, XA increases in in 
a monotonic manner as predicted in Eq. (13). The monoglyceride and diglyceride yields go 
through a maxima. A change in curvature from convex to concave can be seen in the product 
yields of FAME and glycerin. There is a rate increase later in time in the formation of 
glycerin. The selectivity of FAME can be poor compared with glycerin formation as can be 
seen in Figure 4.0. FAME yield can be high as shown in Figure 2.0, 3.0. There can also be 
cross-over from higher selectivity of FAME to lower selectivity of FAME compared with 
glycerin as can be seen in Figure 5.0. In such cases, CSTR can be used with residence times 
less than the cross-over point in order to obtain higher yield of FAME. The convexo-concave 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
71
curvature in the product yields is consistent with experimental studies such as that reported by 
[Jaya and Ethirajulu, 2011]. 
 
 
3.1.9. Conclusions 
 
Alternate energy sources are sought after in order to preserve the energy security of the 
nation and that of the world. This is because the oil reserves are being depleted. Further the 
increased use of petroleum causes global warming and increased pollution. Biodiesel is a 
renewable fuel. One of the methods of preparation of biodiesel is the Trans esterification of 
triacylglycerol in vegetable oil or animal fat with an alcohol such as methanol in the presence 
of an alkali or acid catalyst. The products are FAME (s) and are called biodiesel. Glycerin is 
formed as byproduct. Alkali catalysts used are NaOH or KOH. 
 
 
Figure 2.0. Triglyceride (A), Diglyceride (R), Monoglyceride (S), Glycerin (T) and FAME (P) Product 
Distribution in Progressive Methanolysis at  = 0.75 and  = 0.4. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
72
 
Figure 3.0. Trigylceride (A), Diglyceride (R), Monoglyceride (S), Glycerin (T) and FAME (P) Product 
Distribution in Progressive Methanolysis at  = 0.75 and  = 0.6. 
 
Three synthesis methods are reported for commercial manufacture of biodiesel. These 
are: (i) trans esterification of vegetable oil; (ii) Pyrolysis of vegetable oil and; (iii) Physical 
blending and emulsification. Spectrum of different feedstock types have been used for the 
vegetable oil. This ranges from waste cooking oil to jatorpa crop cultivated with a targeted 
purpose of generating fuel. Feedstock types used are: (i) Soybean oil; (ii) Rapeseed Oil; (iii) 
Sun flower oil; (iv) Coconut Oil; (v) Palm Oil; (vi) Tung Oil. FAME, are produced upon 
Trans esterification of vegetable oil. A two or three stage process of reaction and centrifugal 
separation is used. Centrifugal separation is used to separate the glycerin and biodiesel layers 
by gravity differences. More degree of separation can be achieved by increased torque of the 
rotor (Sharma 2012a). 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
73
 
Figure 4.0. Trigylceride (A), Diglyceride (R), Monoglyceride (S), Glycerin (T) and FAME (P) Product 
Distribution in Progressive Methanolysis at  = 0.75 and  = 0.25. 
 
Pyrolysis usually involves heating in the absence of oxygen. Soybean oil was thermally 
decomposed and separated by distillation. About 75% of the distillate were hydrocarbons 
such as alkanes and alkenes. Vegetable oils can be catalytically cracked into useful fuels. 
Catalyst used are silica/alumina and palm and copra oils were used. Condensed organic phase 
can be fractionated into bio gasoline and biodiesel. Micro emulsions of vegetable oil with 
solvents such as methanol were studied. Micro emulsion was defined as a dispersion of 
optically isotropic fluid microstructures in 1-150 nm size range in colloidal equilibrium when 
two normally immiscible liquids and amphiphiles are mixed. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
74
 
Figure 5.0. Trigylceride (A), Diglyceride (R), Monoglyceride (S), Glycerin (T) and FAME (P) Product 
Distribution in Progressive Methanolysis at  = 0.75 and  = 0.35. 
 
The expected growth rate of biodiesel production in the world is about 6% between 2009-
2018. This is according to OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 
By 2017, the biodiesel production is expected to reach 25 billion liters. European biodiesel 
board estimated that the production of biodiesel in EU is about 9.6 million tons in 2010. 
President of India has called for crops with increased yield of biodiesel. President B. Obama 
has endorsed the biodiesel fuel industry by offering tax credits to the farmers and suppliers. 
The reactions in the reactor during biodiesel production may be modeled as scheme of 
multiple reactions of the consecutive-competitive/series-parallel type [Levenspiel, 1999]. The 
methanol can be assumed to be in excess. The scheme of reactions are shown in Figure 1.0. 
The four ordinary differential equations in Eq. (3.2) can be written in the state space form 
(Eq. (3.3)). The system can be seen to be of the integrating type given the values of the 
eigenvalues. This is an example of three-step reaction where the product P for (FAME) and 
by-product, T for glycerol are desired. The addition policy of methanol along the length in 
case of PFR and the timings in the case of CSTR, continuous stirred tank reactor can 
influence the product mix. The method of mixing the reactants such as slow mixing of A to B,  
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
75
slow mixing of B to A and rapid mixing of A and B may be important design criteria. In 
order to obtain more yield of P the points where R and S will reach a maxima need be avoided 
as operating points. 
The cost of raw materials is a critical factor in the profitability of biodiesel manufacture. 
The AW analysis of a biodiesel factory in Taiwan operated in 2004 is completed using a MS 
Excel spreadsheet as shown in Table 2.0. It can be seen that the material cost and by-product 
credit are critical to the profitability of biodiesel. A summary of the capital investment, 
process cost, revenue accrued of the three different plants are shown in Table 3.0. These 
plants have been operated in the batch and continuous mode. Careful evaluation of batch vs. 
continuous mode has not been done. Plant I has been found to be more profitable compared 
with Plant II and Plant III. It I s not clear whether this is because of the larger size and 
continuous production [Shiva Prasad and Sharma, 2012b]. 
The selectivity of FAME over glycerin was obtained from model solutions by method of 
Laplace 
Transforms. 
Product 
distribution 
curves 
for 
triglycerides, 
diglycerides, 
monoglycerides, glycerin and FAME are presented in Table 2-5.0. Formation of FAME is 
after competition for feed A with glycerin formation. Reactor choice, residence time, 
temperature can be arrived at in order to obtain higher yield of FAME compared with 
glycerin. This may increase the profitability of biodiesel production. 
 
 
3.2. TRANSIENT DRAG EFFECTS ON PROJECTILE MOTION OF 
SPHERICAL OBJECTS IN AIR 
 
 
3.2.1. Introduction 
 
Projectile motion was discussed by Galileo in his essay de motu in 1592. Later he 
identified that the trajectory of a projectile as parabolic. Galileo asserted differently from the 
observations of Aristotle around 343 BC that among falling objects the more earthy one will 
reach the earth sooner than the less heavier object. Galileo stated that both objects will fall at 
the same acceleration and when air resistance is not a factor both objects will fall in the same 
duration to ground from a higher location such as the Leaning tower of Pisa. Astronaut David 
Scott (1971) demonstrated this in moon during the Apollo 15 Mission to the moon. The 
heavier hammer and lighter feather reached the ground at the same time when Scott dropped 
them at the same time. Air resistance is an important factor depending on the material of the 
object and the shape of the object in motion. Halloun and Hestenes (1985) surveyed common 
sense beliefs of college students about motion and its causes. According to their study many 
students have some notion of parabolic motion. Few of them recognized it as caused by a 
constant force. 66% of pretested students were able to identify the correct parabolic path for 
the projectile of assigned task. Some students believe that a projectile‟s motion is not only 
determined by its initial velocity but also how that velocity was imparted. Some students said 
the ball will move in horizontal path when launched in air from hand, airplane and table. The 
ball will begin to fall and follow a curvilinear path which is parabolic when there is no air 
resistance.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
76
This study is to further explore the effects of transient drag on projectile motion. Parker 
(1977) considered two dimensional motion of a projectile experiencing a constant 
gravitational force and a constant fluid drag force. The quadratic force said to vary as the 
square of the velocity of the object. The drag coefficient was considered to be constant 
throughout the entire trajectory of the object and taken as approximately (CD = 0.5). The drag 
force in the horizontal and vertical directions were given in terms of the absolute velocity.  
 
 
2
2
2
8
p
D
x
x
y
x
d C
v
v
v
F
 
(3.19) 
 
 
2
2
2
8
p
D
y
x
y
y
d C
v
v
v
F
 
(3.20) 
 
The governing equations were coupled non-linear equations. They presented short and 
long time solutions. In this study, it is realized that the drag force can be resolved into vertical 
and horizontal components. Resolution of drag forces in horizontal and vertical directions 
results in decoupling of the non-linear equations. The drag coefficient variation with 
Reynolds number is also taken into account. The drag forces in horizontal and vertical 
directions can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
8
p
D
x
x
d C
v
F
 
(3.21) 
 
 
2
2
8
p
D
y
y
d C
v
F
 
(3.22) 
 
The use of Eqs. (3.21,3.22) in place of Eqs. (3.19,3.20) is based on the realization that the 
vertical and horizontal components of the velocity and acceleration of the object in motion is 
independent of each other. This is captured mathematically in Eq. (3.21,3.22). The form of 
drag force seen in Eqs. (3.21,3.22) was first introduced by Lord Raleigh. The area of circle is 
used for the projected area for a sphere. The projection is orthographic. The drag force can be 
realized using stream function representation of flow past a sphere. Form and friction drag 
can be realized from viscous flow past a sphere (Bird, Stewart and Lightfoot, 2007, Bachelor, 
1967, Landau and Lifshitz, 1959). The drag coefficient varies as a function of velocity. 
Deakin and Troup (1998) suggested that trajectories of projectile motion with air resistance 
can be approximated by cubic curves. Shipman et al. (2013) discuss projectile motion in their 
textbook for students in their introductory physical science course. The equations that can be 
used to projectile motion are not discussed. Symmetry of path, same range at complementary 
angles are discussed. Illustrations with and without air resistance are shown. Examples from 
Olympic track and field events such as the event Javelin Throw, Basketball, Football are 
discussed. Air resistance is suspected as causing asymmetry in the trajectory of the projectile.  
Longer range appears to be associated with a launch angle of 38 0 compared with a launch 
angle of 45 0 for a projectile when air resistance was taken into account. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
77
In this study the variation of drag coefficient with velocity is taken into account. The 5 
constant expression suggested for steady state drag coefficient at terminal settling velocity as 
a function of Reynolds number by Turton and Levenspiel (1989) is used in this study. The 
equation used is given below as; 
 
 
0.657
1.09
24
0.413
1
0.173Re
Re
1 16300Re
Dt
t
t
t
C
 
(3.23) 
 
Wake separation effects are taken into account in Eq. (3.23) at large Reynolds‟ number. It 
spans a wide range of Reynolds number from 1 at Stokes regime at low Reynolds‟ numbers 
through transition flow to turbulent flow at large Reynolds number up to 200,000. Eq. (3.23) 
is shown in Figure 6.0. Renganathan et al. (1989) calculated the vertical distance travelled by 
geometric and spherical particles in a fluid up to 90% of its terminal settling velocity using 
computer simulations. This study was extended to two dimensions for design of 
sedimentation tanks, (Sharma, 2012c). The variation of drag coefficient as given in Eq. (5) 
was taken into account in this study. Chabra (1993) presented an analytical solution for 
acceleration motion of a spherical particle in an unbounded Newtonian fluid. The drag 
coefficient used was of the following form; 
 
 
2
Re
D
A
C
B
 
(3.24) 
 
They use a Re = p2 substitution. Eq. (6) is good for Re < 6000. Should the system under 
consideration fall within a Reynolds number of 6000 during the entire trajectory then Eq. (6) 
may be selected. Eq. (5) spans a wider range. During the launch and final phases of examples 
considered below such as spin less golf ball the Reynolds number of surrounding air that 
spans the example is 136-122,690. 
 
 
 
3.2.2. Theory - Equations of Motion 
 
Consider a spherical or geometric object in projectile motion in an unbounded fluid. The 
object will traverse a trajectory in two dimensions. The equation of motion in the vertical and 
horizontal directions can be written as follows (Clift et al.(1978), Renganathan et al. (1989); 
 
 
3
3
2
2
6
6
8
s
p
y
s
p
p
D
y
d
dv
d g
d C
v
dt
 
(3.25) 
 
 
3
2
2
6
8
s
p
p
D
x
x
d
d C
v
dv
dt
 
(3.26) 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
78
 
Figure 6.0. Drag Coefficient, CD as a function of Reynolds‟ Number for Range 1 ≤ Re ≤ 200,000. 
 
Subramanian et al. (2001) have studied motion of bubbles and drops in microgravity 
conditions. In this study the earth‟s gravitational field was considered. The terminal settling 
velocity of the object in the vertical direction can be obtained by setting the RHS, right hand 
side of Eq. (3.25) to 0. The terminal settling velocity of the object can be seen to be; 
 
 
4
3
s
p
yt
Dt
d g
v
C
 
(3.27) 
 
The equations of motion in the horizontal and vertical direction can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
3
1
1
4
3
4
y
D
y
p
x
D
x
p
dv
C
v
gdt
gd
dv
C
v
d
d
 
(3.28) 
 
Eqs. (3.28) was integrated numerically using the 5th order Runge-Kutta method. The 
simulations were performed in MS Excel 2007 for Windows. The Butcher‟s method (1964) as 
described in Chapra and Canale (2006) was used. The recurrence relations used is given in 
Sharma (2012b). The variation of drag coefficient as a function of velocity in horizontal and 
vertical directions was assumed to be of the same form as in Eq. (3.23) developed for 
particles in terminal settling spheres in fluids. The recurrence relations used for the solution 
of 
( , )
dy
f x y
dx
is given below as; 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
79
 
1
1
3
4
5
6
1
2
1
3
1
3
4
2
3
1
4
5
3
5
1
2
4
6
7
32
12
32
7
90
(
,
)
0.25 ,
0.125
0.25 ,
0.125 (
)
0.5 ,
0.5
3
9
0.75 ,
16
16
12
8
3
2
12
,
7
7
7
7
7
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
h
y
y
k
k
k
k
k
k
f x y
k
f x
h y
k h
k
f x
h y
h k
k
k
f x
h y
k h
k h
k h
k h
k
f
x
h y
k
k
k
k
k
k
f
x
h y
h
 
(3.29) 
 
 
3.2.3. Results 
 
The terminal settling velocity of the object is first obtained by trial and error between Eq. 
(3.27) and Eq. (3.23). From the launch velocity, an determination can be made as to whether 
during motion will the velocity of the object in either direction exceed that of the terminal 
settling velocity ? If that is the case then the trajectory of the object would become rectilinear 
in the direction where it reaches terminal settling velocity. Accelerating particles can be 
expected to have a curvilinear trajectory. 
 
Example 1.0 
A golf ball is made of nanocomposite with a density of 2600 kg.m-3. The diameter of the 
ball is 6.7 cm. The viscosity of the air at a temperature of 20 0 C is 1.8 E-5 Pa.s. The density 
of air assuming ideal gas was calculated to be 1.307 kg.m-3. The terminal settling velocity of 
the golf ball in air was calculated by trial and error between Eq. (3.27) and the 5 constant 
correlation for drag coefficient given by Eq. (3.23) for spheres. The values found were; 
 
 
61.4
tV
 m.s-1 
(3.30) 
 
 
0.461
Dt
C
 
(3.31) 
 
The Reynolds number at terminal settling velocity was found to be 298,812. Equations 
for vx and vy given in Eqs. (3.28) was integrated numerically on MS Excel spreadsheet for 
Windows using the 5th order Runge and Kutte method as shown by Butcher in Chapra and 
Canale. The step size used for 0.01 s. The variation of drag coefficient as a function of 
velocity in horizontal and vertical directions was assumed to be of the same form as in Eq. 
(3.23) developed for particles in terminal settling spheres in fluids. The case without air 
resistance for a launch angle of 30 0 and launch velocity of 32 m.s-1 was calculated and plotted 
in Figure 2.0. The point where maximum height was recognized in the spreadsheet. The  
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
80
descent portion of the projectile had a different equation of motion in the vertical direction. 
This is given below; 
 
 
2
2
3
1
1
4
3
4
y
D
y
p
x
D
x
p
dv
C
v
gdt
gd
dv
C
v
d
d
 
(3.32)
 
 
In both the ascend and descend phases of the trajectory of the golf ball the air drag force 
is in opposition to the motion. The vertical and horizontal displacements of the gold ball (x,y) 
at a given instant t was recovered from the integrated instantaneous vx and vy values. Average 
values in two cells were multiplied by the step size and added with the previous displacement. 
The resulting trajectory of the golf ball is shown side-side by side in Figure 7.0 along with the 
case without the air drag holding everything else the same. It can be seen that the air drag has 
caused a reduction in the range and maximum height reached by the golf ball. The trajectory 
of the golf ball with the air drag can be seen to be asymmetrical. The horizontal displacement 
of the golf ball during its ascend is greater than the horizontal displacement of the golf ball 
during its descend for the case when the air drag was accounted for. For the case without the 
air drag the horizontal displacement of the ball during the ascend and descend were equal to 
each other. The equations that describe the vy and vx for the case without the air drag are 
given as follows; 
 
 
0
0
0
2
0
cos
sin
cos
sin
2
x
y
v
v
v
v
gt
x
v
t
gt
y
v
t
 
(3.33) 
 
The golf ball was found to reach the ground after 3.21 seconds for the case with the air 
drag. The case without the air resistance took 3.26 seconds. The time to descend was found to 
be 1.6 s for the case with the air resistance and 1.63 s for the case without the air drag. The 
maximum height of the gold ball was reached after 1.6 s for the case with the air drag and 
1.63 s for the case without the air drag. 
The trajectories of the golf with a launch angle of 45 0 and launch velocity of 32 m.s-1 are 
shown in Figure 8.0. The range can be seen to be reduced from 104.3 m for the case without 
the air resistance to 89.8 m for the case with the air drag. This is a reduction of 16.1%. The 
time to ascend to maximum height of the golf ball with the air resistance was 2.29 s and the 
time of descent to ground was 2.20 s. The case without the air resistance was symmetrical at 
2.3 s. The effect of air resistance was pronounced during the descend and not during ascend. 
The numerical integration was completed successfully. At some cells when the ball was at the 
maximum height a number error was found at low Reynolds number.  
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
81
 
Figure 7.0. Effect of Air Drag during Projectile Motion of Golf Ball at a Launch Angle of 300 and 
Launch Velocity of 32 m.s-1. 
 
 
Figure 8.0. Effect of Air Drag during Projectile Motion of Golf Ball at a Launch Angle of 450 and 
Launch Velocity of 32 m.s-1. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
82
Example 2.0 A launch angle of 38 0 was used in this example. All other parameters were 
the same as used in Example 1.0.  
The variation of drag coefficient as a function of velocity in horizontal and vertical 
directions was assumed to be of the same form as in Eq. (3.23) developed for particles in 
terminal settling spheres in fluids. A separate case where the drag coefficient was taken as 
constant in the equations of motion given in Eq. (3.32) was calculated. The drag coefficient 
was taken as 0.2. The results are plotted in Figure 9.0. Fifth Order Runge Kutte method were 
used in both cases. The step size used in the case of the use of Eq. (3.23) for CD vs. Re was 
t = 0.01 s and the step size used for the case of constant drag coefficient, CD = 0.2 was t = 
0.05s. It can be seen that the trajectory of the projectile when air resistance was taken into 
account was asymmetrical. The displacements in x and y direction for the case of varying CD 
is closer to the case without air resistance than the displacements in x and y direction for the 
case of constant CD compared with the case without the air resistance. 
 
 
Figure 9.0. Effect of Air Drag during Projectile Motion of Golf Ball at a Launch Angle of 380 and 
Launch Velocity of 32 m.s-1. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
83
3.2.4. Conclusions 
 
Projectile motion is an interesting topic for discussion in introductory physics courses. 
Air resistance effects on projectile motion was studied. A 5 constant expression for variation 
of CD vs. Reynolds‟ number was used and the variation of air resistance with velocity was 
taken into account. The air resistance force was the most (about 11.9%) in the initial and final 
stages of the projectile. Closer to the maximum height the drag force is near zero. The 
projectile motion with the air resistance was asymmetrical. The effect of drag coefficient 
variation with velocity was found as shown in Figure 4.0. Greater range (97 m) was found for 
the case of launch angle of 38 0 for the example considered compared with launch angles of 
45 0 and 30 0 with air resistance. Maximum range of projectile without the air resistance can 
be expected at a launch angle of 45 0. 
The use of Eq. (3.23) may be better than the use of a constant value for CD during the 
entire trajectory. Studies are underway to include the Magnus effect when there is circulation 
around the object. The case of geometric particles are also being studied.  
 
 
3.3. TRAJECTORY OF ACCELERATING PARTICLES IN 
SEDIMENTATION TANKS 
 
Symbols Used in Section 3.3 
 
Ap 
Projected Area of Particle (m2)  
As 
Cross-Sectional Area of Rectangular Tank (m2)  
CD 
Instantaneous Drag Coefficient  
CDt 
Drag Coefficient at Terminal Settling Velocity of Particle  
dp 
Particle Size (m)  
g 
Acceleration Due to Gravity (m.s-2)  
h 
Step Size used in Numerical Integration in Independent Variable Y  
H 
Height of Sedimentation Tank (m)  
kj  
Weighting Factors used in Fifth Order Runge-Kutta Method  
L 
Length of Sedimentation Tank (m)  
mp  
Mass of Particle (kg)  
∆P 
Pressure Drop (N.m-2)  
Q 
Discharge Rate (m3.s-1)  
Re 
Reynolds‟ Number, 









p
vd
Re
  
t 
Time (s)  
t
px
v
 
Terminal Settling Velocity of Particle (Vertical) (m.s-1)  
t
py
v
 
Terminal Settling Velocity of Particle(Horizontal) (m.s-1)  
vy 
Velocity of the Fluid in direction as a function of x (m.s-1)  
<vy> 
Average Velocity of the Fluid in y Direction (m.s-1)  
Vp 
Volume of Particle (m3)  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
84
W  
Width of Sedimentation Tank (m)  
X 
Dimensionless Distance (Vertical) 
p
d
x
X


  
Y 
Dimensionless Velocitry of Particle (Vertical) 









t
px
px
v
v
Y
  
Z 
Dimensionless Velocity of Particle (Horizontal) 









t
py
py
v
v
X
 
Greek 
 
Density Ratio 
s



 
 
Viscosity of Water (kg.m-1s-1)  
 
Density of Fluid (kg.m-1s-1)  
s 
Density of Particle (kg.m-3)  
xy 
Tangential Shear Stress (N.m-2)  
 
Residence Time (s)  
 
Dimensionless Distance (Horizontal) 
p
d
y
X


 
 
 
3.3.1. Overview of Sedimentation Tank Design 
 
Type I sedimentation is characterized by particles that settle discretely and do so at a 
constant terminal settling velocity. Individual particles are assumed not to flocculate. 
Sedimentation is a gravity settling method to remove suspended solids (Reynolds and 
Richards, 1996). Sedimentation is used in waste water and water treatment for removal of 
sludge. In manufacturing plants this method is used for removal of iron and manganese. Coe 
and Clavenger (1916) came up with the four types of settling. In Type I the settling particles 
are assumed to sink relative to fluid in motion free of interference from other particles. 
Attempts have been made to describe sedimentation of particles using Mason-Weaver 
equation (1924). This attempt also takes into account the diffusion down a concentration 
gradient using Fick‟s law of diffusion (1855). Sharma (2005) has pointed out eight reasons to 
seek a generalized Fick‟s law of diffusion for use in transient applications. Camp‟s theory 
(1936) (in Davis, 2011) was based on the principle that in order for a particle to be removed 
from the flowing stream of fluid the particle must have a settling velocity, vpx
t sufficiently 
large so that it can reach the bottom of the tank during the time available, i.e., during the 
residence time, 
, of the fluid in the tank. The residence time of the fluid in the tank can be 
estimated from the discharge rate Q and volume of the tank: 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
85
 
WHL
Q
 
(3.34) 
 
 
Where W, H and L are the width, height and length of the reactangular sedimentation 
tank and Q is the discharge rate in (m3.s-1). In terms of the terminal settling velocity of the 
particle; 
 
 
t
px
Q
v
WL  
(3.35) 
 
The overflow rate v0 needs to be set at the terminal settling velicity of the particle as 
given by Eq. (3.35) as given by Camp (1946). The flow is assumed to be of plug flow type. 
Most real applications the flow is of the laminar type and a parabolic velocity profile can be 
expected. In this method the particle removal efficiency is independent of the depth of the 
tank H and the residence time of the fluid 
. Stokes law (1822) is assumed for estimation of 
the terminal settling velocity of the particle in Camp‟s method. Stokes law is applicable at 
low Reynolds number of fluid around the particle. i.e., Re < 200. In this study the flow of 
fluid in transition and turbulent flow is also included. The effect of height of the tank is 
examined by introduction of the viscous effects of the fluid around the particle. A parabolic 
velocity profile with maximum velocity at the top of the tank (when lid is open) and zero 
velocity at the sludge zone is derived from the Hagen (1839) and Poiseulle (1841) law for 
circular conduits applied to a rectangular chamber. 
The results from an earlier study (Renganathan et al., 1989) for acceleration motion of 
geometric and spherical particles in a stationary Newtonian fluid is extended to two 
dimensions in this study. In the earlier study, the vertical distance travelled by a spherical 
particle prior to reaching 90% of its terminal settling velocity was found from the results of 
computer experiments to be; 
 
 
0.93
1.27
p
Dt
x
X
d
C
 
(3.36) 
 
Based on Eq. (3.36) a iron particle with a particle size of 2.5 cm would travel 49.9 cm 
prior to reaching 90% of its terminal settling velocity. This falls in the range of 25-50% of the 
depths used in current standard designs of settling tanks. By trial and error, the Reynolds 
number and drag coefficient at terminal settling velocity of the particle can be calcualted from 
the 5 constant expression proposed by Turton and Levenspiel (1989); 
 
 
0.657
1.09
24
0.413
1
0.173Re
Re
1 16300Re
Dt
t
t
t
C
 
(3.37) 
 
Eq. (3.37) is capable of exhibiting a minimum (Figure 6.0) unlike other predictions in the 
literature. This can be used for predictions spanning a spectrum of fluid flow conditions 
ranging from laminar to transition to turbulent flow. This expression was found to correlate 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
86
well with experimental data over a wide range of Reynolds number from 1 – 200,000. This 
expression reverts to the Stokes‟ expression at low Reynolds number.  
For the iron particle under consideration, the Reynolds number turns out to be 54,250 and 
the corresponding drag coefficient turns out to be 0.47. Stokes regime at this Reynolds 
number is not a reasonable assumption. For such cases Camp‟s assumption that the overflow 
velocity of the sedimentation tank is independent of the height is a poor one. 
Since the work of Camp (1936, 1946) a number of advances have been made in the 
prediction of the drag coefficient at steady state. Raleigh (1883) was a pioneer in expressing 
drag coefficient as a function of Reynolds number (1883). Clift et al. (1978) have provided a 
review of available empirical correlations for drag coefficient of the particle at terminal 
settling velocity of the particle, CDt vs. Ret, Reynolds number of the fluid at terminal settling 
velocity of the particle. Chabra (1993) presented an analytical solution for acceleration 
motion of a spherical particle in a unbounded Newtonian fluid. The drag coefficient used was 
of the following form; 
 
 
2
Re
D
A
C
B
 
(3.38) 
 
They suggest a Re = p2 substitution.  
In this study, Eq. (3.37) was used for the drag coefficient of the particle in transient state. 
Numerical simulations were conducted on the desktop computer using the 5th order Runge-
Kutta method using MS Excel 2007 Spreadsheet for Windows software. The results from 
these computer experiments are used to recommend modifications to the design procedure 
laid out in Camp (1936). In Camp‟s procedure the sedimenting particles were assumed to be 
spherical. In this study particle of other shapes are also included. Sphericities of geometric 
particles such as disks, isometric particles are used in Eq. (3.37) in a manner explained ny 
Haider and Levenspiel (1989). There are little reports in the literature on two dimensional 
trajectory of sedimenting particles relative to the moving fluid. Lapple and Shepherd (1940) 
wrote equations for calculating paths taken by bodies in accelerated motion taking into 
account fluid friction. Since the work of Lapple and Shepherd advances have been made in 
description of drag coefficient as well as in numerical integration techniques using the 
computer. A continuous, rectangular, gravity sedimentation tank with viscous, Newtonian 
fluid such as water is considered in this study. 
 
 
3.3.2. Theory and Simulation 
 
Consider continuous flow of Newtonian fluid in a prototypical horizontal ideal 
sedimentation tank with a sectional view as shown in Figure 10.0. W, H and L are width, 
height and length of the rectangular tank. A sludge zone is allowed to form at the bottom of 
the tank where the particles are captured during their residence time, 
. Flow of fluid in 
vertical direction is neglected. Flow is assumed to be in the horizontal direction only. This is a 
reasonable assumption for large and deep tanks and for inlet and outlet flow through weirs 
near the top of the tank. The fluid in the „bulk‟ portion of the tank tends to be pseudo-
stationary. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
87
 
 
Figure 10.0. Horizontal Ideal Sedimentation Tank Fluid. 
 
A momentum balance on a slice W∆x∆y of fluid (Bird, Stewart and Lightfoot, 2007) at 
steady state can be written as follows; 
 
 
y
y
y
xy
xy
x
x
x
W x P
P
W y
 
(3.39) 
 
Momentum transfer from flowing layers of fluid happens from the pressure drop in the 
fluid into kinetic energy of layers of fluid below the flowing layer via tangential shear stress. 
In the limits of ∆x and ∆y tend to zero, Eq. (3.39) becomes; 
 
 
xy
P
y
x
 
(3.40) 
 
It is assumed that the pressure drop in the fluid is linear in the horizontal direction; 
 
 
xy
P
P
y
x
L
 
(3.41) 
 
Eq. (3.41) can be integrated to yield; 
 
 
1
xy
P x
c
L
 
(3.42) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
88
c1 can be seen to be 0 by noting that the velocity profile is maximum at x = 0. The 
Newton‟s law of viscosity may in order to express the shear stress as a function of velocity 
gradient and viscosity of the fluid. Eq. (3.42) can be rewritten as; 
 
 
yv
P x
x
L
 
(3.43) 
 
The velocity vy can be obtained by integrating Eq. (10) as; 
 
 
2
2
2
y
P
v
x
c
L
 
(3.44) 
 
c2 can be evaluated by noting that the velocity vy at the sludge zone is 0. Thus; 
 
 
2
2
1
2
y
PH
x
v
L
H
 
(3.45) 
 
The average velocity of the fluid <vy> can be obtained by integration of Eq. (3.45) 
between the defenite limits of 0 and H and can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
3
y
PH
v
L
 
(3.46) 
 
In terms of residence time; 
 
 
2
2
3
y
y
HWL
L
L
v
WH
v
PH
 
(3.47) 
 
Eq. (3.47) may be used to include viscous effects in design considerations of 
sedimentation tanks. 
 
 
3.3.3. Single Particle – Vertical Direction 
 
Consider the relative motion of a spherical particle that is settling towards the sludge 
zone in the vertical direction. A force balance on the particle can be written taking into 
account the gravity, Archimedes‟ buoyancy and drag forces as follows; 
 
 
2
2
px
D
p
fx
p
s
p
v
C A v
m
V g
t
 
(3.48) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
89
The fluid velocity, vxf surrounding the particle with a vertical velocity of vxp will be equal 
to each other. Defining the following dimensionless variables; 
 
 
;
;
px
t
s
p
px
v
x
Y
X
d
v
 
(3.49) 
 
It was shown in Renganathan et al. (1989) that Eq. (3.48) can be written in dimensionless 
form. By rendering time variable implicit by use of “adx = vxdvx”Eq. (3.48) can be written as 
follows; 
 
 
2
0.75
Dt
D
YdY
dX
C
Y C
 
(3.50) 
 
The expression for the drag coefficient of the particle at terminal settling velocity, CDt 
can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
4
3
p
s
Dt
t
px
gd
C
v
 
(3.51) 
 
Eq. (3.50) was integrated using numerical integration on the computer. The form of Eq. 
(17) used was found to be less error prone compared to the second order form of the equation 
using explicit expression of time variable. The drag coefficient CD in the accelerating phase 
of the particle was assumed to be given by Eq. (3.37) as given by Turton and Levenspiel 
(1989) for drag coefficient at terminal settling velocity phase. The equations that are explicit 
in time are a orderh higher than the one given by Eq. (17). The numerical integration method 
used was the 5th order Runge-Kutte method using MS Excel 2007 Spreadsheet for Windows. 
The Butcher‟s method (1964) as described in Chapra and Canale (2006) was used. The 
recurrence relations used are as follows; 
 
 
 
1
1
3
4
5
6
1
2
1
3
1
2
4
2
3
1
4
5
3
5
1
2
4
6
7
32
12
32
7
90
,
0.25 ,
0.125
0.25 ,
0.125
0.125
0.5 ,
0.5
3
9
0.75 ,
16
16
12
8
3
2
12
,
7
7
7
7
7
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
h
y
y
k
k
k
k
k
k
f x y
k
f x
h y
k h
k
f x
h y
k h
k h
k
f x
h y
k h
k h
k h
k h
k
f
x
h y
k
k
k
k
k
k
f
x
h y
h
 
(3.52) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
90
Where h is the increment in the independant varibale, Y. The simulations were run till the 
particle reached 95% of its terminal settling velocity. 
 
 
3.3.4. Single Particle – Horizontal Direction 
 
The governing equations for relative motion of the particle in the horizontal direction can 
be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
py
p
D
p
fy
p
v
PxA
C A v
m
t
L
 
(3.53) 
 
The fluid velocity, vyf surrounding the particle with a horizontal velocity vyp will become 
equal to each other at the terminal settling stage. The following dimensionless variables are 
defined as follows; 
 
 
;
;
py
t
s
p
py
v
y
Z
d
v
 
(3.54) 
 
Where vpy
t is the terminal settling velocity of the particle in the horizontal direction. Eq. 
(3.53) is made dimensionless using the substitutions in Eq. (3.54). Further the time variable is 
made implicit by use of the expression for acceleration in terms of velocity of the particle, 
i.e., “ady = vydvy” and Eq. (3.53) can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
0.75
Dt
D
ZdZ
d
C
Z C
 
(3.55) 
 
The expression for the drag coefficient of the particle at terminal settling velocity, CDt 
can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
3
y
Dt
t
s
py
Px
C
Lv
 
(3.56) 
 
Eq. (3.55) was integrated using numerical integration on the computer. The form of Eq. 
(3.55) used was found to be less error prone compared to the second order form of the 
equation using explicit expression of time variable. The drag coefficient CD in the 
accelerating phase of the particle was assumed to be given by Eq. (3.37) as given by Turton 
and Levenspiel (1989) for drag coefficient at terminal settling velocity phase. The equations 
that are explicit in time are a order higher than the one given by Eq. (3.52). The numerical 
integration method used was the 5th order Runge-Kutte method using MS Excel 2007 
Spreadsheet for Windows. The Butcher‟s method (1964) as described in Chapra and Canale 
(2006) was used. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
91
3.3.5. Results 
 
A 2.5 cm iron particle was considered. The water rate was million gallons per day 
delivered from the sedimentation tank. The weir area was 0.001 m2 and the pressure drop 
allowed was 50 N.m-2. The trajectory of the iron particle as obtained from the computer 
simulations is shown in Figure 11.0. 
It can be seen that 66% of the terminal settling velocity of the particle is reached when 
the iron particle reaches the sludge zone. Thus the particle is still accelerating. It has travelled 
75 cm in the vertical direction and 29 cm in the horizontal direction. The acceleration zone 
ought to be a small fraction of the depth of the tank in a modern design of sedimentation tank. 
The sedimentation tank has to be made deeper. The current procedure overestimates the 
velocity of the sedimenting particle. Only in deeper tanks the design overflow velocity based 
upon the settling velocity of the particle will result in the estimated separation efficiency. 
Other wise the separation efficiency realized would be lower. It can be seen from Eq. (3.48) 
that during the trajectory of the particle, it can be expected to face an “increasing force”. This 
is because of the velocity profile as shown in Figure 11.0. The drag force will oppose the 
motion of the particle in the y direction as described in Eq. (3.48) and rise to meet the applied 
kinetic force at the terminal settling stage of the particle in the horizontal direction. Recent 
designs of horizontal gravity sedimentation tanks provide a slope or taper to minimize motion 
of particles in horizontal direction in the sludge zone.  
 
 
Figure 11.0. Trajectory of 2.5 cm Iron Particle in Horizontal Sedimentation Tank. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
92
Trajectory of the iron particle at higher pressure drop (100 N.m-2) and deeper tank, H = 2 
m is shown in Figure 12.0. At the sludge zone the particle was found to have reached 93% of 
the terminal settling velocity of the particle.  
 
 
Figure 12.0. Trajectory of 2.5 cm Iron Particle at a Pressure drop of 100 N.m-2. 
 
 
Figure 13.0. Trajectories of Accelerating and Settled 2.5 cm Sand Particles. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
93
A sand particle with a particle size of 2.5 cm was considered. The trajectory of the 
accelerating sand particle was compared with a trajectory of the sand particle if it was at 
terminal settling velocity of the particle from the entrance of the particle to the tank. The 
trajectory of the accelerating particle was found to be curvilinear and the trajectory of the 
steady particle was found to be rectilinear (Figure 13.0). 
 
 
3.3.6. Conclusion 
 
The following conclusions were drawn from the study; 
 
1. Trajectory of sedimenting particles can be simulated using desktop computers and 
numerical integration. 
2. Viscous effects of the fluid can be accounted for the in the design considerations of 
rectangular sedimentation tanks. 
3. Drag correlations with Reynolds number for spherical and geometric particles under 
laminar to transition to turbulent flow were used in the computer simulations. 
4. By writing the acceleration term in terms of velocity the time variabe is rendered 
implicit and an order reduction is achieved in governing equation. 
5. Fifth order Runge Kutta method was used with success. 
6. Iron and sand particles were simulated. Trajectories are shown as Figures. 
7. Sedimentation tanks needs to be made deeper to allow for accelerating phase. 
8. Overflow rate is no longer independent of the tank height. 
9. Trade-offs between pressure drop (pumping costs), separation efficiency achived and 
throughput (capital costs) can be seen. Total cost can be optimized. 
10. Shape of the trajectory is plateau in the initial stages and a sharper fall later. 
11. Trajectory of accelerating particles are found to be curvilinear as opposed to linear 
for settled particles. 
12. Expression for terminal settling velocity of the partilce in horizontal direction is now 
given by Eq. (3.56). 
13. Acceleration zone was found to be shorter for geometric particles. 
 
 
B. SEMI-EMPIRICAL MODELS 
 
3.4. MESOSCOPIC CORRELATION 
 
Semi-empirical models are used to correlate experimental data using dimensionless 
groups that stem from first principle based models. Sharma and Turton [1998] presented 
mesoscopic correlations for heat transfer coefficients between gas-solid fluidized beds and 
immersed surfaces with a dimensionless group called frequency number. 756 sets of pressure 
signals were measured simultaneously along with measurements of local, time-averaged bed-
to-surface heat transfer coefficients. 13 different powders with average particle size in the 
range of 20 m – 1.789 mm were tested in a 5 cm transparent walled fluidized bed over a 
wide range of fluidization velocities ( < 2.4 m/s). Fast Fourier transform analysis were 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
94
performed and the dominant frequency of pressure fluctuations was noted. This frequency in 
the dimensionless form is the frequency number. As can be seen in Figure 13.0 the 
experimental measurements correlated well with the frequency number. The lines in Figure 
13.0 were obtained by scaling first principle mechanistic models into the correlation form of 
the chart. Figure 13.0 is an example of semi-empirical correlations. 
Mickley and Fairbanks [1955] proposed a packet theory to predict heat transfer 
coefficients between gas-solid fluidized beds to immersed surfaces. Packets of solids with 
interstitial gas resides in the surface and the surface gets renewed by fresh packets. The 
contact times of the packets of various sizes form an exponential distribution. During the time 
the packet was in contact with the surface the heat transfer between the surface and packet is 
unsteady. The temperature profile in the packet can be derived by using a Boltzmann 
transformation [Bird et al., 2007] and can be shown to be given by an error function. The 
packet is assumed to be a semi-infinite medium. Let the surface temperature of the fresh 
packet arriving at a hot surface and that of the temperature of the surface be Ts. The packet is 
assumed to be at an uniform initial temperature of T0. The Fourier conduction based 
governing equation for temperature in the packet can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
e
T
T
t
x
 
(3.57) 
 
Where, e is the thermal diffusivity of the emulsion packet residing at the surface. The 
mathematical problem is one of a partial differential equation, PDE, in two variables, space 
and time. The PDE is second order in space and first order in time. One time condition and 
two space conditions are needed to completely describe the problem. These conditions are 
provided from the initial time condition and two space conditions and are as follows; 
 
 
0
0
0,
0,
,
s
t
T
T
x
T
T
x
T
T
 
(3.58) 
 
The temperature is made dimensionless by defining a u such that; 
 
 
0
0
s
T
T
u
T
T
 
(3.59) 
 
Eq. (3.57) in terms of u can be written now as; 
 
 
2
2
e
u
u
t
x
 
(3.60) 
 
Eq. (3.58) in terms of u can be written as; 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
95
 
0,
1
,
0
u
u
 
(3.61) 
 
The Boltzmann transformation can be used to convert the PDE in two variables given in 
Eq. (3.60) into an ODE, ordinary differential equation in one variable, i.e., the transformation 
variable, . The transformation variable, , can be defined based on similarity observations at 
infinite space and initial time. At infinite space, x =  and at initial time, t = 0 the temperature 
u is the same at u = 0. This can be tapped into. 
 
t
x
e


4

 
(3.62) 
 
Eq. (3.60) in terms of the transformation variable now can be written as; 
 
 












2
2
4
2





u
t
t
u
e
e
 
(3.63) 
 
Or, 
0
2
2
2















u
u
 
(3.64) 
Eq. (3.64) can be integrated as follows. Let, 




u
p
. Then Eq. (3.58) can be written in 
terms of p as follows; 
 


p
p
2




 
(3.65) 
 
Separating the variables p and  and integration of both sides would yield; 
 
 

c
p



2
ln
2

 
(3.66) 
 
Where c is the integration constant. 
 
Or,  
2
2
'






e
c
u
 
(3.67) 
 
Eq. (3.67) can be integrated to give the solution for dimensionless transient temperature 
as; 
 
 
1
2
u
c
c erf
 
(3.68) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
96
The integration constants c1 and c2 can be solved for from the boundary conditions given 
by Eq. (2.5). The temperature profile in the packet can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
0
0
2
1
1
4
s
T
T
x
u
erf
e
d
T
T
t
 
(3.69) 
 
The wall heat flux can be calculated from; 
 
 
0
0
e
s
x
e
x
e
k
T
T
T
q
k
x
t
 
(3.70) 
 
The instantaneous, local heat transfer coefficient between the bed and the gas-solid 
fluidized bed can be seen to be; 
 
 
e
e
pe
i
k
C
h
t
 
(3.71) 
 
Eq. (3.71) can be integrated with an exponential distribution for the packet contact time at 
the surface and the time averaged local heat transfer coefficient between the bed and surface 
can be seen to be; 
 
 
_
_
_
0
t
t
e
e
pe
bs
i
k
C
e
h
h
dt
t
t
 
(3.72) 
 
Eq. (3.72) is the model solution for the Mickley and Fairbanks‟ packet theory. It is an 
example of an mechanistic model as discussed below in section 2.3. Sharma and Turton 
[1998] scaled the model solution given by Eq. (3.72) into a dimensionless correlation of the 
form of Nusselt number, Nu, vs. frequency number, Nf. The frequency number, Nf is defined 
as; 
 
 
2
p
f
e
fd
N
 
(3.73) 
 
Where f is the dominant frequency of pressure fluctuations, dp is the average size of the 
particle that is fluidized. Eq. (3.72) scales to; 
 
 
f
Nu
N
 
(3.74) 
 
Eq. (3.74) in the log-log plot appears as a straight line as shown in Figure 13.0. In a 
similar manner, Sharma and Turton [1998] scaled mathematical models presented in the 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
97
literature into correlations. These models are due to finite length of packet with variable 
thermal properties by Chandran and Chen [1982], gas gap between the packet and wall by 
Baskakov [1973] and finite speed conduction by Renganathan and Turton [1989]. These 
correlations are also shown in Figure 13.0.  
 
 
C. MECHANISTIC MODELS 
 
3.5. WHICH IS THE DOMINANT MECHANISM – FOURIER 
CONDUCTION OR GAS CONVECTION?  
 
Consider the combined effects of particle conduction and gas convection during transient 
heat transfer between gas solid flow past a surface. The packet is assumed to possess constant 
thermo physical properties, ke, (sCps(1-), thermal conductivity, thermal mass, i.e., the 
product of density and heat capacity. The governing equation that includes conduction into 
the packet in the x direction and convection in the azimuthal, z direction can be written using 
the Fourier parabolic model as follows. The azimuthal velocity of the gas phase is assumed to 
be constant and equal to U.  
 
 
2
2
T
T
T
U
t
z
x
 
(3.75) 
 
 
Figure 13.0. Theoretical Correlation Between Nusselt Number and Frequency Number (Sharma and 
Turton [1998]) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
98
The dimensionless form of the equation can be obtained as follows; 
 
 
2
2
u
u
u
Pe Z
X
 
(3.76) 
Where,  
0
0
(
) ;
;
;
;
(
)
/
s
r
r
r
r
T
T
t
x
z
U
u
X
Z
Pe
T
T
  
(3.77) 
 
It is known that Boltzmann transformation can lead to an error function solution for the 
parabolic heat conduction equations. Hence the convective term is also lumped along with the 
accumulation term as follows. Let, 
 
 
 = Z+Pe 
 
Eq. (3.76) becomes, 
 
 
2
2
2
u
u
Pe
X
  
(3.78) 
 
The Boltzmann transformation can be used to convert Eq. (3.78) from a second order 
PDE to an ODE in one variable of the second order as follows. Let, 
 
 
2
X
  
 
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
u
X
u
u
u
Pe
or
Pe
  
(3.79) 
 
The solution to the ODE in  can be seen to be; 
 
 
1/2
1
(
)
2(
Pe
X
u
erf
Z
Pe
  
(3.80) 
 
The conductive portion of the heat flux and hence the conductive component of the heat 
transfer coefficient between the gas-solid fluidized beds and immersed surfaces can be seen to 
be from q*=-u/X; 
 
 
*
(
)(1
)
1
/
(
)
e
s
ps
c
r
r
k
C
U
h
Z
Pe
 
(3.81) 
 
The azimuthal distance Z can be set to zero for the conductive component. It does vary 
with Z! 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
99
The convective component can be obtained by differentiating Eq. (6) wrt. Z and 
evaluated at X = ndp. 
 
 
2
3/2
(
)exp(
)
2
2(
) (2(
)
)
g
g
pg
conv
rg
k
C
X
Pe
Pe
X
h
Z
Pe
Z
Pe
 
(3.82) 
 
The maximum convective heat transfer coefficient can be obtained when  =0 and  
 
 
2
3/2
(
)exp(
)
2
2( )
2( )
g
g
pg
conv
rg
k
C
X
Pe
Pe
X
h
Z
Z
  
(3.83) 
 
 
3.5.2. Evaluation of Dominant Mechanism – Non-Fourier Conduction or 
Convection during Heat Transfer in Circulating Fluidized Beds  
 
Circulating Fluidized Bed, CFB technology was developed by Foster Wheeler, Babcock 
& Wilcox, Pyro power, Keeler Dorr-Oliver, Tennessee Valley Authority, Westinghouse and 
Combustion Engineering. Heat transfer between gas-solid fluidized beds and surfaces have 
been reviewed by Saxena, Grewal et al., [1978]. Very little has been reported on convective 
heat transfer in CFB to a horizontal tube. During short time scales the system may be far from 
equilibrium and the high rate unsteady state transient processes cannot be fully described 
using Fourier‟s heat conduction law. The Cattaneo and Vernote non-Fourier equation, for heat 
conduction which was shown to be the only mathematical modification (Boley [1964]) that 
can remove the singularity in surface flux is: 
 
 
r
T
q
q
k
x
t  
(3.84) 
 
Combined with the energy equation this was solved for the semi-infinite medium case by 
the method of Laplace Transforms and method of relativistic coordinate transformation 
presented earlier. The velocity of heat is given by  (/ r ). A study was conducted with the 
Cattaneo and Vernotte non-Fourier heat conduction equation used in the energy balance in 1 
dimension along with the convection term. Consider the flow of gas solid suspension past a 
horizontal tube in a CFB. Two cases can be identified; 
 
Case 1: Flow Away from Tube of Gas – Solid Suspension  
The governing equation from an energy balance may be written after obtaining the 
dimensionless variables as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
u
u
u
u
Pe
Y
Y
Y
 
(3.85) 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
100 
Case 2: Flow of Gas – Solid Suspension Toward the Horizontal Tube 
The governing equation for flow toward the horizontal tube from an energy balance after 
obtaining the dimensionless variables may be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
u
u
u
u
Pe
Y
Y
Y
  
(3.86)  
 
The minus sign indicates the relative velocity of the suspension with respect to the 
direction of heat conduction path. For the bottom of the tube the y axis is selected as bottom 
direction is positive. Where y is the direction of flow of gas and solid, T the temperature, t the 
time and q the flux.  
 
 
0
1
0
;
;
r
y
r
r
T
T
t
u
T
T
U
y
Y
Pe
 
(3.87) 
 
The Peclet number, Pe represents the ratio of the gas velocity to the velocity of heat by 
conduction. When Pe is 0, Eqs. (3.86,3.85) reduce to the hyperbolic heat wave propagative 
equation by conduction alone which was solved for and presented earlier for the semi-infinite 
medium case under CWT. Obtaining the Laplace transform of Eqs.(3.85,3.86) the second 
order ODEs result; 
 
 
2
2
( )
( )
( )
1
1
d u s
du s
u s
s
s
Pe s
dY
dY
 
(3.88) 
 
(top of tube) 
 
 
 
2
2
( )
( )
( )
1
1
d u s
du s
u s
s
s
Pe s
dY
dY
 
(3.89) 
 
(bottom of tube)  
Solving for the ordinary differential equation given by Eq.(3.88), Eq. (3.89); 
 
 
2
1
2
4
1 1
1
1
,
2
s
Pe s
Pe
s
r r
  
(3.90) 
 
 
Y
r
Y
r
e
c
e
c
s
u
3
1
2
1
)
(



 
(3.91) 
 
At Y = , u = 0 and Y = 0, u = 1 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
101 
 
2
0
1
4
2
1
Y
s s
u
s
Pe
Pe
Y
s
 
(3.92) 
 
The heat transfer coefficient obtained in the Laplace domain may be written as; 
 
 
*
1
2
4
1
1
2
1
y
Pe
s
h
L
s
s
Pe
 
(3.93) 
 
(top of tube)  
 
Where, 
*
y
y
p
r
h
h
k C
 
For the case of bottom of tube, the axes is drawn in a manner that y is positive in the 
bottom direction and; 
 
 
*
1
2
4
1
1
2
1
y
Pe
s
h
L
s
s
Pe
 
(3.94) 
 
(bottom of tube)  
Inverting the Laplace domain after expanding the square root using the binomial theorem 
we have; 
 
 
2
3
5
1
2 1
2
......
2!
p
r
h
e
e
e
Pe
k C
Pe
Pe
 
(3.95) 
 
(top of tube)  
 
 
2
3
5
1
2 1
2
......
2!
p
r
h
e
e
e
Pe
k C
Pe
Pe
Pe
 
(3.96) 
 
(bottom of tube)   
 
This expansion is good for large Peclet numbers. The terms in the series were inverted by 
the residue theorem by Heaviside expansion as shown by Mickley, Sherwood and Reed 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
102 
[1957] and by expressing the term as P(s)/Q(s) and finding the poles and writing the 
inversion. The results are presented in Table 2.1. The results are shown in Figure 5.1 for three 
different Peclect numbers. It can be seen that at short contact times, the micro scale 
conduction effects become a dominant contribution to the heat transfer coefficient. At large 
contact times, the heat transfer coefficient becomes independent of the contact time and is 
found to be function of the Peclect number. 
The difference in values between top and bottom of the tube gives the twice the 
convective contribution. The driving force for heat transfer as the suspension moves towards 
the tube is away from the tube leading to a minus sign in the convective contribution in the 
governing equation. As the suspension moves away from the tube the heat transfer driving 
force and the velocity of the suspension are in the same direction. Hence the conduction and 
convection have to be added to obtain the total heat transfer. In the case of the bottom of the 
tube the convection contribution has to be subtracted from the conduction contribution to 
obtain the net heat transfer coefficient. Thus when the difference between the values from the 
top and bottom of the tube is obtained the contribution to convection alone will result and 
when the values from top and bottom are added the twice the conduction contribution will 
result. Hence Eq. [3.98-3.97] and normalizing for direction the convective contribution may 
be seen to be Pe/2. The conductive contribution is the addition of Eqs. [3.97,3.98] and 
dividing by 2 to give after converting heat transfer coefficient to a dimensionless Nusselt 
number, 
 
 
1
2
3
3
5
1
....
h
A
A
A
Nu
Max
Pe
Pe
Pe
 
(3.97) 
 
(top of tube) 
 
 
1
2
3
3
5
1
....
2
h
A
A
A
Pe
Nu
Max
Pe
Pe
Pe
  
(3.98) 
 
(bottom of tube)  
As   0, in the short time limit the transient solution for top of the tube becomes; 
 
 
3
5
1
1
1
2
....
h
Nu
Max
Pe
Pe
Pe
  
(3.99) 
 
Where Maxwell Number (heat), Maxh = 
2
r
D
 
For very large Peclet numbers, the transient portion of the solution drops out and the 
portion that results is invariant with time. In the absence of convection, conduction alone is 
the mechanism of heat transfer. Here the open interval solution developed earlier can be used. 
(Uy = 0) and is given for both the bottom and top of the tube by; 
 
 
hy* = exp(-/2) I0 (/2)  
(3.100) 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
103 
Table 3.4. Term by Term Inverse Laplace Transform of the Infinite Series 
 
Term 
# 















!
1
....
1
2
1
m
A
A
A
e
A
m
m
m






1
1
1



k
k
s
cs
L
 
1 
e- 

1
1

s
2 





1
e
 


2
1


s
s
3 


2
5.0
2
1
2






e
 


3
2
1
2


s
s
4 











3
5.1
3
1
5
3
2




e


4
3
1
5


s
s
 
5 











!4
3
2
3
4
1
14
4
3
2





e


5
4
1
14


s
s
 
6 













!5
!4
5
3
5
5
5
1
42
5
4
3
2






e


3
5
1
42


s
s
 
7 













!6
!5
6
!4
15
!3
20
!2
15
6
1
132
6
5
4
3
2







e
 


7
6
1
132


s
s
8 















!7
!6
7
!5
21
!4
35
!3
35
!2
21
7
1
429
7
6
5
4
3
2








e
 


8
7
1
429


s
s
9 















!8
!7
8
!6
28
!5
56
!4
70
!3
56
14
8
1
1430
8
7
6
5
4
3
2









e
 


9
8
1
1430


s
s
10 























!9
!8
9
!7
36
!6
84
!5
126
!4
126
!3
84
!2
36
9
1
4862
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2










e


10
9
1
4862


s
s
 
11 























!
10
!9
10
!8
45
!7
120
!6
210
!5
126
!4
210
!3
120
!2
45
10
1
16796
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2











e
10
11
16796
1
s
s
 
 
When the relaxation time becomes infinite as in the insulator of heat, the D‟Alambert‟s 
wave solution results. A aliter would be to invert Eq. [3.101] the case for bottom of tube, 
from the Laplace domain as follows; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
104 
 
*
1
1
2
4
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
y
Pe
s
Pe
A s
B
h
L
L
s
s
s
Pe
s s
 
(3.101) 
 
Where, 
 
2
4
A
Pe ; 
2
2
4
Pe
B
Pe
 
(3.102) 
 
1
1
2
*
2
0
0
1
1
1
1
(
(
1)
2
2
2
1
2
2
B
B
y
B
B
B
Pe
Ae
AB
h
I
e
I
I
B
 (3.103) 
 
The inversions can be read from the tables provided in Mickley, Sherwood and Reed 
[1957]. Eq. [3.104] is the exact solution and it includes modified Bessel function of the first 
kind and zeroth order. For the special case when Pe = 1,  
 
 
*
0.6
0.6
0
0
1
0.5 1.118
0.4
0.373
(
0.4
0.4
1)
yh
e
I
e
I
I
 
(3.104) 
 
 
3.5.3. Representative Experimental Data 
 
The key parameter in using the model is the contact time of the suspension with the tube 
wall and the dimensionless Peclet. This may be a function of the operating parameters. In 
addition to this the physical properties of the suspension is required and the relaxation time of 
the suspension is an added intrinsic parameter of the system. Some experimental data was 
available for comparison from Sundaresan and Kolar [2002]. They used silica at 3 mean sizes 
between 143 – 263 m, air velocity 4 – 8 m/s, suspension density of 9-25 kg/m3, 0.5 – 1.0 m 
high U horizontal tubes, 5.5 m CFB, solid circulation flux, 13-80 kg/m2/s and reported heat 
transfer coefficients between 30 – 105 W/m2/K in their core heat transfer studies in a CFB. A 
uniform distribution of the suspension packets with the wall tube is assumed as a first 
approximation and the Nusselt number calculated as  
 
 
(Nu = (h D/k) = 105 * .05/0.04 = 131).  
 
Where the diameter of the tube is taken as 2 inches and the effective thermal conductivity 
of the suspension calculated from a simple average with the voidage as the weight from the 
values of air and silica as 0.04 w/m K. Taking the effective thermal diffusivity of the 
suspension as 3 E-6 m2/s.  
 
(Pe = Uy/  (/r ). = 8/(3 E-6/1E-3) = 146; el = (r / D2 ) = 3E-6 * 1 E-3/.052;  
Short Time Limit: Nu = (1/Rel) ( 1/Pe + …) = 6.25). 
 
The relaxation time can be estimated from an analogy to the speed of molecules. The 
Maxwellian distribution for the speed of the molecules was used to get the root mean square 
velocity of the molecule and by analogy to heat transfer the velocity of heat transfer was 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
105 
estimated. The relaxation time was obtained from this estimate given the thermal diffusivity 
of the suspension. The convective contribution is thus Pe/2 = 146/2 = 73. The conductive 
contribution to the Nusselt number is then given a typical contact time of the suspension with 
the tube as 5 milliseconds  
 
 
(Nu = 73 + exp(-5)/73 - exp(-5)*(-4)/733 … = 73). 
 
 
Experimental validation of the model will require contact time of the solids in the wall 
information, preferably the statistical distribution of their residence times at the surfaces. The 
relaxation time is another intrinsic property of matter and needs measurement prior to an 
elaborate study of experimental data. Thus, the Cattaneo and Vernotte non-Fourier heat 
conduction equation is used to model the mesoscale conduction effects in convection 
dominated heat transfer in CFB to a horizontal tube. Hence the exact solution is obtained for 
the dimensionless heat transfer coefficient by conduction and convection and found to be  
 
 
1
1
2
*
2
0
0
1
1
1
1
(
(
1)
2
2
2
1
2
2
B
B
y
B
B
B
Pe
Ae
AB
h
I
e
I
I
B
 (3.105) 
 
for the case of bottom of tube. This can be used especially for Peclet numbers close to 1. 
Two cases were identified, i.e., one for suspension flow toward the tube and the other for 
flow of suspension away from the tube. The Peclet number that gives the ratio of the 
convective fluid velocity to the velocity of heat conduction and the relaxation number that is 
the inverse of the Fourier number with the relaxation time substituted for time are important 
parameters for predicting the Nusselt number based upon the tube diameter. The convective 
contribution is given by Pe/2 = Uy/(/r)/2.  
A more usable form is obtained by expansion of the Laplace domain using binomial 
infinite series and upon obtaining the inversion by the method of residues. 13 terms in the 
binomial series for the case of bottom of tube is taken and results of the inversion presented in 
Table 1. This is useful at large Peclet numbers. 
 
 
1
2
3
3
5
1
....
2
h
A
A
A
Pe
Nu
Max
Pe
Pe
Pe
 
(3.106) 
 
The representative data available was used to show how the model can be applied to data 
from the experimental measurements from the CFB. In the short time limit the transient 
solution for top of the tube becomes; 
 
 
3
5
1
1
1
2
....
h
Nu
Max
Pe
Pe
Pe
 
(3.107) 
 
For very large Peclet numbers the transient portion of the solution drops out and the 
portion that results is invariant with time. In the absence of convection, conduction alone is 
the mechanism of heat transfer. Here the open interval solution developed earlier can be used. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
106 
(Uy = 0). When the relaxation time becomes zero as in the insulator of heat, the D‟Alambert‟s 
wave solution was developed as presented earlier.  
 
 
3.6. EVAPORATIVE COOLER 
 
There are some humidification operations where heat exchange is necessary from an 
external source. For example, consider an evaporative cooler. Air is blown past the water on 
the outside of the tube. The heat is carried away from the tube-side fluid. The fluid is cooled 
when it flows through the tube. Water is sprayed on the outside of the tube and flows as a 
film. A large heat is released when the sprayed water evaporates into the air stream. The 
schematic of an evaporative cooler is shown in Figure 14.0 The tube banks are shown in 
Figure 14.0. The temperature and enthalpy profiles are shown in Figure 14.0. The bulk water 
is at the temperature, tL corresponds to a saturation gas enthalpy, H1‟*. The overall heat 
transfer coefficient U0 based on the outside tube surface from tube fluid to bulk water is then 
given by [Treybal, 1980]; 
 
 
0
0
'
0
1
1
m
i T
av m
L
d
d z
U
d h
d k
h
 
(3.108) 
 
The overall coefficient KY for use with gas enthalpies, from H1
‟* to H‟, is; 
 
 
0
1
1
Y
Y
L
m
K
k
h
 
(3.109) 
 
which m is the slope of the equilibrium line near the operating region in Figure  
 
 
'
'*
i
L
i
H
H
m
t
t
 
(3.110) 
 
Strictly speaking, m is the slope of the enthalpy and temperature diagram, 
 
 
'*
L
dH
m
dt
 
(3.111) 
 
If A0 is the outside surface of all the tubes, A0x is the area from the bottom to the level 
where the bulk-water temperature is tL. Here x is the fraction of the heat transfer surface to 
that level. For a differential portion of the exchanger the heat loss by the tube-side fluid is; 
 
 
wTCTdtL = U0A0dx (tT - tL) 
(3.112) 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
107 
 
Figure 14.0. Schematic of an Evaporative Cooler. 
 
 
Figure 15.0. Schematic of Tube-Side Fluid Flow of an Evaporative Cooler. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
108 
 
0
0
T
T
L
T
T
U A
dt
t
t
dx
w C
 
(3.113) 
 
The heat lost by the cooling water is; 
 
 
WALCALdtL = KYA0dx(H‟* - H‟) - U0A0dx(tT - tL) 
(3.114) 
 




L
T
AL
AL
AL
AL
Y
L
t
t
C
w
A
U
H
H
C
w
A
K
dx
dt






















0
0
'*
0
'
 
 
Heat gained in in the air is written as; 
 
 
WsdH‟ = KYA0dx(H‟* - H‟) 
(3.115) 
 

'
'*
0
'
H
H
w
A
K
dx
dH
s
Y














 
 
Subtracting Eq. (3.114) from Eq. (3.111); 
 
 
'*
'
1
1
0
T
L
T
L
d t
t
t
t
H
H
dx
 
(3.116) 
 
 
0
0
0
1
O
T
T
AL
AL
U A
U A
w C
w
C
 
(3.117) 
 
 
0
0
2
T
T
mU A
w C
 
(3.118) 
 
 
0
1
Y
AL
AL
K A
W
C
 
(3.119) 
 
 
0
0
2
Y
Y
AL
AL
s
mK A
K A
w
C
w
 
(3.120) 
 
Eqs. (3.116) and Eq.(3.115) can be combined into a second order differential equation 
with constant coefficients. The auxiliary equation which is a quadratic can be examined to 
realize that the roots of the equation are real and hence the solution will not undergo any 
pulsations. The solution is given in terms of the integration constants. The enthalpy is related 
to temperature difference by Eq. (3.110); 
 
 
1
2
1
2
r x
r x
TL
t
c e
c e
  
(3.121) 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
109 
 
Figure 15.0. Temperature and Enthalpy Profile and Resistances in Evaporative Cooler. 
 
 
1
2
'*
1
2
'
r x
r x
H
H
d e
d e
 
(3.122) 
 
 
H‟* - H‟ = d1exp(r1x) + d2exp(r2x) 
 
 
Where,  
 
 
1
1
j
j
j
c
r
d
 
(3.123) 
 
The design of the evaporative cooler needs values of the transfer coefficients. Some of 
this data availability is scarce. Correlations for the Nusselt number and Sherwood for the 
given geometry needs to be looked up [Treybal, 1980]. 
 
 
3.7. TRANSIENT DIFFUSION OF OXYGEN IN ISLETS OF 
LANGERHAANS: PARABOLIC AND HYPERBOLIC MODELS 
 
3.7.1. Overview of Gas Transport 
 
Diffusion of oxygen in pancreatic islets in an important consideration during the 
development of models for the functioning of the islets of Langerhans (Figure 16.0). Islets of 
Langerhans are spheroidal aggregate of cells located in pancreas. They secrete hormones such 
as insulin during glucose metabolism. These islets are transplanted in order to effect cure for 
Type I diabetes and are often encapsulated in devices. Islets that are removed from pancreas 
lose their internal vascularization. The cure is depends on diffusion of oxygen from external 
environment.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
110 
 
Figure 16.0. Islets of Langerhans. 
 
Avgoustiniatos et al. [2007] and Colton et al. [2011] developed a method for estimation 
of maximum oxygen consumption rate and the oxygen permeability in the tissue in a 
suspension of spherical aggregates from measurements of partial pressure of oxygen in batch 
experiments. A simultaneous reaction and diffusion model was used. Williams et al. [2012] 
discusses a dramatic diffusion barrier that leads to core cell death during islet transplantation 
as cure for Type I diabetes. They attempted to measure the diffusion barrier in intact human 
islets and determine its role in cessation of insulin secretion. They monitored impeded 
diffusion into islets using fluorescent dextran beads. They linked the poor diffusion properties 
with necrosis and not apoptosis. The Fick diffusion model was used in the analysis of 
[Sharma, 2005, 2012].  
Sharma [2005, 2010] has shown that non-Fick damped wave diffusion effects can 
become significant at short time scales. Bounded solutions from hyperbolic models can be 
obtained when final time condition and physically reasonable initial time rate of change 
conditions are used. In this study, damped wave diffusion effects during the diffusion of 
oxygen in islets of Langerhans is accounted for in detail 
The metabolic process becomes diffusion limited. Oxygen availability becomes limited in 
some regions of the tissue. The metabolic rate in the cells and demand for oxygen is greater 
than the oxygen that has diffused to that region. Growth of multicellular systems over 100 m 
cease to happen. A condition called hypoxia has been observed in Brockman bodies in fish. 
During islet transplantation, lack of oxygen supply may restrict graft function especially when 
encapsulated tissue is used.  
Oxygen partial pressure was measured in the islet organs of Osphronemus gorami 
(Brackman bodies) placed in culture. A microelectrode was used to detect oxygen partial 
pressure in the surrounding region of the islet organ that is 800 m in diameter and within the 
cells. This was achieved in a radial track. Within a distance of 100 m for the case of no 
convection (Schrezenmeir et al. [1994]), 
2
O
p
is close to zero. A condition called necrosis is 
reached where the cells begin to die without sufficient oxygen supply. The experiments with 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
111 
convection showed increased 
2
O
p
at the surface and core regions of the islet. The experiments 
were conducted in a thermostatically controlled measuring chamber at 37 0C.  
Oxygen supply in addition to diffusion also comes about by the circulatory system and by 
hemoglobin molecule. Oxygen is carried in the blood by convection to capillaries by the 
circulatory system. Islets of Langerhans (Figure 16.0) are spheroidal aggregates of cells that 
are located in the pancreas. The metabolic requirement of the cells requires oxygen to diffuse 
from the external environment and through the oxygen-consuming islet tissue. The oxygen 
supply is a critical limiting factor for the functionality and feasibility of islets that are 
encapsulated, placed in devices for implantation, cultured, used in anaerobic conditions. 
Theoretical models are needed to describe the oxygen diffusion. The parameters of the model 
require knowledge of the consumption rate of oxygen, oxygen solubility, effective diffusion 
coefficient to oxygen in the tissue.  
 
 
3.7.2. Theory 
 
Avgoustiniatos et al. [2007] developed an oxygen reaction and diffusion model. They 
assumed that the islet preparation is a suspension of tissue spheres that can be divided into m 
groups. Each sphere in group i has the same equivalent radius, Ri that varies from group to 
group. The tissue is assumed to be uniform with constant physical properties that is invariant 
in space. The governing equation for oxygen diffusion and reaction in spherical coordinates 
with azimuthal symmetry accounting for Fick‟s diffusion can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
1
O
O
E
O
T
M
O
C
C
C
C
D
r
t
r
r
C
C
r
 
(3.124) 
 
Where DT is the diffusion coefficient in the tissue, CE0 is the total enzyme or 
complexation species concentration including the rate constant kE0 and CM is the Michaelis 
constant. The oxygen consumption rate is assumed to obey the Michaelis-Menten kinetics. 
The interplay of transient diffusion and metabolic consumption of oxygen in the tissue in 
spherical coordinates is given by Eq. (3.124). The concentration of oxygen 
2
O
C
can be 
expressed in terms of its partial pressure,
2
O
p
 This is obtained by using the Bunsen solubility 
coefficient, t such that; 
 
 
2
2
O
t
O
C
p
  
(3.125) 
 
Substituting Eq. (3.125) in Eq. (1), Eq. (3.124) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
'
1
O
O
E
O
t
t
T
M
O
p
p
C
p
D
r
t
r
r
r
C
p
 
(3.126) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
112 
The product tDT can be seen to the product of solubility and diffusivity and hence is the 
permeability of oxygen in the tissue. The Michaelis constant CM, is also modified, C‟M 
expressed in units of mm Hg. The initial condition can be written as; 
 
 
2
20
O
O
p
p
, t = 0 
(3.127) 
 
From symmetry at the center of the sphere; 
 
 
2
0
O
p
r
 
(3.128) 
 
At the surface the oxygen diffusive transport from within the sphere must be equal to the 
oxygen transport by convection across the boundary layer surrounding each sphere; 
 
 
2
2
2
(
(
))
m
O
i
i
m
O
O
i
t
T
p
J
k
p
p
R
D
r  
(3.129) 
 
Where the partial pressure of oxygen at the surface is given by 
2
O
p
(Ri), the mass transfer 
coefficient between the surrounding space and the surface of the sphere is given by ki and the 
oxygen solubility in the surrounding space is given by m. Total rate of oxygen transfer N 
from the surrounding space to all of the spheres can be summed up as; 
 
 
2
1
(4
)
m
m
i
i
s i
m
m
i
p
N
J
R
n f
V
t  
(3.130) 
 
Where the volume of the surrounding space is given by Vm, the total number of spheres is 
ns and the fraction of spheres in group i is given by fi. The initial condition for surrounding 
space is; 
 
 
2
2 (0)
m
m
O
O
p
p
, t = 0 
(3.131) 
 
The mass transfer coefficient can be obtained from suitable Sherwood number 
correlations. For instance the mass transfer coefficient for spherical particles in an agitated 
tank in the islet size range of 100-300 m can be written as; 
 
 
0.15
1/3
3
4
3
tan
2
imp
i
i
i
i
m
m
k
d
k d
d
Sh
f
D
D
d
 
(3.132) 
 
Where  is the power input per unit fluid mass, f is the function that has to be obtained 
from experimental data. Numerical methods are needed to obtain the solution to Eq. (3.126). 
This is because of the nonlinearity of Michaelis-Meten kinetics.  
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
113 
3.7.3. Asymptotic Limits of Michaelis-Menten Kinetics 
 
Closed formed analytical solutions to Eq. (3.126) can be obtained in the asymptotic limits 
of;  
 
i) 
High concentration of oxygen, the rate is independent of 
2
O
p
(zeroth order) 
ii) Low concentration of oxygen, the rate is first order with respect to 
2
O
p
 
 
The reasons for choosing the asymptotic limits is elucidated in Figure 17.0. It can be seen 
that at low reactant concentrations the rate is linear [Levenspiel, 1999]. At high enzyme or 
complexing agent concentration the rate is invariant with respect to concentration. Hence a 
zeroth order can be assumed at high concentrations and first order at low reactant 
concentrations. 
Thus, at high reactant concentrations Eq. (3.126) becomes,  
 
 
2
2
2
max
2
1
O
O
t
t
T
p
p
D
r
r
t
r
r
r
 
(3.133) 
 
Eq. (3.133) can be non-dimensionalized as follows; 
Let,  
 
 
2
2
20
2
20
2
2
*
max
max
2 ;
;
;
m
m
m
T
O
O
i
T
O
O
i
i
O
O
t
p
p
r
R
D t
r
u
X
r
p
p
R
R
p
p
D
 
(3.134)  
 
Eq. (3.135) becomes; 
 
 
2
*
max
2
1
u
u
X
r
X
X
X
 
(3.135) 
 
 
3.7.4. Parabolic Fick Diffusion and Reaction Model 
 
The zeroth order reaction at high concentrations of oxygen is a heterogeneity in the 
partial differential equation. Systems such as this can be solved for by assuming that the 
solution consists of a steady state part and a transient part; 
 
Let,  
 
 
u = uss + ut 
(3.136) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
114 
 
Figure 17.0. Rate-Concentration Curve Obeying Michaelis-Menten Kinetics. 
 
Substituting Eq. (3.136) in Eq. (3.135), Eq. (3.135) becomes; 
 
 
2
*
max
2
1
(
)
t
t
ss
u
u
u
X
r
X
X
X
 
(3.137) 
 
Eq. (3.136) holds good when, 
 
 
*
2
max
2
1
ss
u
r
X
X
X
X
 
(3.138) 
 
and  
2
2
1
t
t
u
u
X
X
X
X
 
(3.139) 
 
Eq. (3.138) can be integrated twice and the boundary condition given by Eq. (3.128) 
applied to yield; 
 
 
2 *
max
6
ss
X r
u
d   
(3.140) 
 
In order to obtain the solution of the integration constant d in Eq. (3.140), the boundary 
condition given by Eq. (3.127, 3.129) needs to be modified. Assuming that after attainment of 
steady state, the surface concentration of the sphere would have reached the surrounding 
space concentration, d can be solved for the solution for the 
2
O
p
at steady state written as; 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
115 
 
2
2
*
max
2
6
i
ss
i
R
r
r
u
R
 
(3.141) 
 
The solution to Eq. (3.139) may be obtained by separation of variables as follows; 
Let ut = V()g(X). Then Eq. (3.139) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
'
1
'(
)
(
)
n
V
X g X
V
X
g X X
 
(3.142) 
 
Hence,  
2
n
V
ce
 
(3.143) 
 
 
2
2
2
"(
)
2
'(
)
(
)
0
n
X g
X
Xg X
X
g X
 
(3.144) 
 
Comparing Eq. (3.144) with the generalized Bessel function [Varma and Morbidelli, 
1997]; 
 
 
a=2; c=0; s= 1; d = 
2
n ; p = 1/2; 
 
The solution to Eq. (3.144) can be seen to be; 
 
 
1/2
1/2
1
1
(
)
(
)
(
)
n
n
J
X
J
X
g X
c
d
X
X
 
(3.145) 
 
From the boundary condition given by Eq. (3.129,3.128), it can be seen that d1 can be set 
to 0 and, 
 
 
1/2
1
(
)
(
)
n
J
X
g X
c
X
. 
(3.146) 
 
The eigenvalues n can be solved for from the boundary condition given by Eq. (3.129); 
In the dimensionless form Eq. (3.129) may be written as; 
 
 
m
i
i
t
T
k R
u
u
D
X , r = Ri 
(3.147) 
 
Where 
i
i
m
T
k R
Bi
D
, the Biot number (mass). This represents the ratio of mass transfer 
from the surrounding space and the diffusion within the sphere. To simplify matters from a 
mathematical standpoint, Eq. (3.146) can be written in terms of elementary trigonometric 
functions as; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
116 
 
1
(
)
2
(
)
n
n
Sin
X
g X
c
X
 
(3.148) 
 
The Eigenvalues can be obtained from the solution of the following transcendental 
equation; 
 
 
tan(
)
1
n
n
m
m
t
X
X
Bi X
 
(3.149) 
 
The general solution for the dimensionless 
2
O
p
can be written as; 
 
 
2
1/2
0
n
n
n
J
X
u
c e
X
 
(3.150) 
 
The Eigen values are given by Eq. (3.149). The cn can be solved for from the initial 
condition given by Eq. (3.127) using the principle of orthogonality and; 
 
 
1/2
0
2
1/2
0
(
)
(
)
i
i
R
n
n
R
n
J
X dX
X
c
J
X dX
X
 
(3.151) 
 
Thus the oxygen concentration profile at high oxygen concentration is obtained. At low 
concentration of oxygen the rate of consumption of oxygen is first order. The governing 
equation, Eq. (3.126) can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
1
O
O
t
t
T
p
O
p
p
D
r
k p
t
r
r
r
 
(3.152) 
 
Obtaining the dimensionless form of Eq. (29); 
 
 
2
2
2
1
u
u
X
u
X
X
X
 
(3.153) 
 
Where, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
;
;
;
m
O
p
i
T
O
i
t
T
i
p
k R
D t
r
u
X
p
R
D
R
 
(3.154) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
117 
It can be recognized that  is the Thiele modulus. Eq. (3.153) can be solved for by the 
method of separation of variables. Let u =V()g(X). 
 
 
2
2
2
2
'
1
(
)
n
V
g
X
V
X
X
gX
 
(3.155) 
 
The solution in time domain can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
(
)
n
V
ce
 
(3.156) 
 
The solution in space domain can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
"(
)
2
'(
)
(
) (
)
0
n
X g
X
Xg X
X
g X
 
(3.157) 
 
Comparing Eq. (3.157) with the generalized Bessel function [Varma and Morbidelli, 
1997]; 
 
 
a=2; c=0; s= 1; d = (2+
2
n ); p = 1/2; 
 
The solution to Eq. (34) can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1/2
1/2
1
1
(
)
(
)
(
)
n
n
J
X
J
g X
c
d
X
X
 
(3.158) 
 
From the boundary condition given by Eq. (3.128), it can be seen that d1 can be set to 0 
and, 
  
 
2
2
1/2
1
(
)
(
)
n
J
X
g X
c
X
. 
(3.159) 
 
The Eigenvalues n can be solved for from the boundary condition given by Eq. (3.129); 
In the dimensionless form Eq. (3.147) may be written as; 
 
 
m
i
i
t
T
k R
u
u
D
X , r = Ri 
(3.160) 
 
Where 
i
i
m
T
k R
Bi
D
, the Biot number (mass). This represents the ratio of mass transfer 
from the surrounding space of the diffusion within the sphere. To simplify matters from a 
mathematical standpoint, Eq. (3.158) can be written in terms of elementary trigonometric 
functions as; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
118 
 
2
2
1
2
2
(
)
2
(
)
n
n
Sin
X
g X
c
X
 
(3.161)  
 
The eigenvalues can be obtained from the solution of the following transcendental 
equation; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
tan(
)
1
n
n
m
m
t
X
X
Bi X
 
(3.162) 
 
The general solution for the dimensionless 
2
O
p
can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1/2
(
)
0
n
n
n
J
X
u
c e
X
 
(3.163) 
 
The Eigen values are given by Eq. (39). The cn can be solved for from the initial 
condition given by Eq. (3.127) using the principle of orthogonality and; 
 
 
2
2
1/2
0
2
2
2
1/2
0
(
)
(
)
i
i
R
n
n
R
n
J
X dX
X
c
J
X dX
X
 
(3.164) 
 
Thus the oxygen concentration profile at low oxygen concentration is obtained. 
 
 
3.7.5. Damped Wave Diffusion and Reaction Hyperbolic Model 
 
The times associated with oxygen consumption are low. Oxidation reactions are fast. 
Recent experimental reports of relaxation times in biological materials by Mitra et al. [1995] 
is in the order of 16 seconds. Hence in times associated with the oxygen consumption (~10-3 – 
1s) the finite speed of diffusion effects cannot be ignored. The damped wave diffusion and 
relaxation effects may be included in the following manner. At low oxygen concentration a 
first order rate of reaction can be assumed. A semi-infinite medium of tissue is considered. A 
step change in concentration is given at the surface. At times zero the concentration of oxygen 
is at an initial value. At infinite distances the concentration of oxygen would be unchanged at 
the initial value. The mass balance equation for oxygen can be written as; 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
119 
 
2
2
2
O
O
O
J
C
kC
x
t
 
(3.165) 
 
where k is the lumped first order reaction rate constant. Combining Eq. (3.165) with the 
damped wave diffusion and relaxation equation given below in Eq. (3.166); 
 
 
2
2
2
O
O
O
T
mr
C
J
J
D
x
t
 
(3.166) 
 
the governing equation is obtained.mr is the mass relaxation time. When it is zero Eq. (3.146) 
reverts to the Fick‟s law of diffusion. When the rate of mass flux is greater than an 
exponential rise the wave regime would be more dominant mechanism of transport compared 
with the Fick regime. Eq. (3.166) is differentiated by x and Eq. (3.165) is differentiated by t 
and the cross term 
2J
t x  eliminated between the two equations and the governing equation 
obtained as follows; 
 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
O
O
O
T
mr
mr
O
C
C
C
D
k
kC
t
x
t
 
(3.167) 
 
 
The governing equation for oxygen concentration in the tissue is obtained in the 
dimensionless form by the following substitutions; 
 
 
2
2
*
;
;
;
m
O
mr
O
mr
T
mr
C
t
x
k
k
u
X
C
D
 
(3.168) 
 
 
The governing equation is a partial differential equation of the hyperbolic type. It is 
second order with respect to time and second order with respect to space. 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
*
*
u
u
u
k
k
u
X
 
(3.169) 
 
The Eq. (3.169) can be solved by a recently developed method given in Sharma [2005] 
called relativistic transformation of coordinates. The expression for the transient temperature 
during damped wave conduction and relaxation developed by Baumeister and Hamill [1971] 
by the method of Laplace transforms was further integrated in Sharma [2009]. A Chebyshev 
polynomial approximation was used for the integrand with a modified Bessel composite 
function in space and time. A telescoping power series leads to a more useful expression for 
the transient temperature. By the method of relativistic transformation, the transient 
temperature during damped wave conduction and relaxation was developed. There are four 
regimes to the solution. These include: 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
120 
(i) A regime comprising a Bessel composite function in space and time, 
(ii) Another regime comprising a modified Bessel composite function in space and time; 
(iii) The temperature solution at the wave front was also developed separately, and; 
(iv) The fourth regime at a given location X in the medium is at times less than the 
inertial thermal lag time. In this regime, the temperature was found to be unchanged 
at the initial condition.  
 
The solution for the transient temperature from the method of relativistic transformation 
is compared side by side with the solution for the transient temperature from the method of 
Chebyshev economization. Both solutions are within 12% of each other. For conditions close 
to the wave front, the solution from the Chebyshev economization is expected to be close to 
the exact solution and was found to be within 2% of the solution from the method of 
relativistic transformation. Far from the wave front, i.e., close to the surface, the numerical 
error from the method of Chebyshev economization is expected to be significant and verified 
by a specific example. The solution for transient surface heat flux from the parabolic Fourier 
heart conduction model and the hyperbolic damped wave conduction and relaxation models 
are compared with each other. For τ > 1/2 the parabolic and hyperbolic solutions are within 
10% of each other. The parabolic model has a “blow-up” as τ → 0, and the hyperbolic model 
is devoid of singularities. The transient temperature from the Chebyshev economization is 
within an average of 25% of the error function solution for the parabolic Fourier heat 
conduction model. A penetration distance beyond which there is no effect of the step change 
in the boundary is predicted using the relativistic transformation model.  
The method of relativistic transformation of coordinated has been shown [Sharma, 2009] 
to bounded solutions close to the integrated expression of exact solution presented by other 
investigators. This method of analysis is used in this study, The damping term is first 
removed by multiplying Eq. (3.169) by en. Choosing 
1
*
2
k
n
 and let W = uen Eq. (3.169) 
becomes; 
 
 


4
*
1
2
2
2
2
2
k
W
W
X
W








 
(3.170) 
 
The significance of W is it that this can be recognized as the wave concentration. During 
the transformation of Eq. (3.169) to Eq. (3.170) the damping term has vanished. Now let us 
define a spatio-temporal symmetric substitution (relativistic transformation); 
 
 
 = 2 – X2 for  > X 
(3.171) 
 
Eq. (3.170) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
*
0
16
k
W
W
 
(3.172) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
121 
Comparing Eq. (3.172) with the generalized Bessel equation [Varma and Morbidelli, 
1997] 
 
 
a = 1; b = 0; c = 0; s = ½; 
2
1
*
16
k
d
. The order p = 0.  
 
d
s = ½ i(1 – k*) and is imaginary. Hence the solution is; 
 
 






















2
*
1
2
*
1
2
2
0
2
2
2
0
1
X
k
K
c
X
k
I
c
W


 
(3.173) 
 
c2 can be seen to be zero from the condition that at  = 0 W is finite. 
 
 
 
2
2
1 0
1
*
2
k
X
W
c I
 
(3.174) 
 
From the boundary condition at X = 0, 
 
 
(1
*)
2
1 0
1
*
1
2
k
k
e
c I
 
(3.175) 
 
c1 can be eliminated between Eqs. (51-52) in order to yield; 
 
 
2
2
0
0
1
1
*
2
1
*
2
I
X
k
u
I
k
 
(3.176) 
 
This is valid for  > X, k*  1. For X > , 
 
 
2
2
0
0
1
1
*
2
1
*
2
J
X
k
u
I
k
 
(3.177) 
 
At the wave front,  = X,  
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
122 
 
(1
*)
(1
*)
2
2
k
k
X
u
e
e
 
(3.178) 
 
 
3.7.6. Results 
 
The mass inertia can be calculated from the first zero of the Bessel function at 2.4048. 
Thus, 
 
 
2
2
23.1323
1
*
p
inertia
X
k
 
(3.179) 
 
A de no vo dimensionless group called Sharma Number (Mass) was introduced [Sharma, 
2010]. This can be written as follows; 
 
 
i r
k
Sha
a
 
(3.180) 
 
It is the ratio of mass transfer rate to the transport taking place by damped wave 
diffusion. This can be seen to a product of Maxwell number and Sherwood number.  
 
 
2
i r
D
Max
a
 
(3.181) 
 
Maxwell number (mass) as given by Eq. (3.181) can be seen to be the Fick number with 
the relaxation time substituted for time, t. This gives the ratio of the square of the speed of 
mass (vm = 
i
r
D
 ) by damped wave diffusion divided by the square of a characteristic 
speed (a/r). The Sherwood number, Sh can be written as; 
 
 
i
i
k a
Sh
D
 
(3.182) 
 
The product of Maxwell number (mass) and Sherwood number can be seen to yield the 
Sharma number (mass) as follows; 
 
 
2
*
i r
i r
i
i
k
D
k a
Sha
Max Sh
a
D
a
 
(3.183) 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
123 
Sharma number (mass) may be used in evaluating the importance of the damped wave 
diffusion process in relation to other processes such as convection, Fick steady diffusion in 
the given application. 
The concentration at an interior point in the semi-infinite medium is shown in Figure 3.0 
Four regimes can be identified. These are; 
 
i) 
Zero Transfer Inertial Regime, 0 0
inertia  
ii) Times greater than inertial regime and less than at the wave front, Xp> 
iii) Wave front,  = Xp 
iv) Open Interval, of times Greater than at the wave front,  > Xp 
 
During the first regime of mass inertia there is no transfer of mass up to a certain 
threshold time at the interior point Xp = 10. The second regime is given by Eq. (3.177) 
represented by a Bessel composite function of the first kind and zeroth order. The rise in 
dimensionless concentration proceeds from the dimensionless time 2.733 up to the wave front 
at Xp = 10.0. The third regime is at the wave front. The dimensionless concentration is 
described by Eq. (3.178). The fourth regime is described by Eq. (3.176) and represents the 
decay in time of the dimensionless concentration. It is given by the modified Bessel 
composite function of the first kind and zeroth order. In Figure 4.0 is shown the three regimes 
of the concentration when k* = 2.0. It can be seen from Figure 4.0 that the mass inertia time 
has increased to 8.767. The rise is nearly a jump in concentration at the interior point Xp = 
10.0. When k* = 0.25 as shown in Figure 5.0 the inertia time is 7.673. In Figure 6.0, the three 
regimes for the case when k* = 0.0 is plotted. In Table 1.0 the mass inertia time for various 
values of k* for the interior point Xp = 10.0 is shown. k* needs to be sufficiently far from 1 to 
keep the inertia time positive. 
 
Table 3.5. Mass Inertia Time vs k* for Interior Point Xp = 10.0 
 
S.No. 
k* (k”‟mr) 
Mass Inertia Time (t/mr)  
1. 
0.01 
8.741 
2. 
0.1 
8.452 
3. 
0.25 
7.673 
4. 
0.3 
7.266 
5. 
0.4 
5.979 
6. 
0.5 
2.733 
7. 
1.75 
7.673 
8. 
2.0 
8.767 
9. 
4.0 
9.871 
10. 
8.0 
9.976 
11. 
25.0 
9.998 
12. 
10.0 
10.0 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
124 
 
Figure 18.0. Dimensionless Concentration at an Interior Point Xp = 10 in a Semi-infinite Medium 
during Simultaneous Reaction and Diffusion. k* = 0.5. 
 
 
Figure 19.0. 
 
 
Figure 20.0. Dimensionless Concentration at an Interior Point Xp = 10 in a Semi-infinite Medium 
during Simultaneous Reaction and Diffusion. k* = 0.25. 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
5
10
15
20
Dimensionless Time 
Dimensionless Concentration 
(C/Cs)
Xp = 10
"k* = 0.5

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
125 
 
Figure 21.0. Dimensionless Concentration in a Semi-infinite Medium during Simultaneous Reaction 
and Diffusion. k* = 0.0. 
 
The steady state solution for Eq. (46) can be written as; 
 
 
uss = exp(-(k*)1/2 X) 
(3.183a) 
 
 
3.7.7. Conclusion 
 
1) Diffusion and Reaction in Islets of Langerhans was studied using Parabolic and 
Hyperbolic Models. This is needed to better treat Type I diabetes by the 
transplantation method. 
2) Sharma Number can be used to evaluate when the wave term becomes important in 
the application. It represents the ratio of Mass Transfer in Bulk to Relaxation 
Transfer. 
3) Sharma number (mass) may be used in evaluating the importance of the damped 
wave diffusion process in relation to other processes such as convection, Fick steady 
diffusion in the given application. 
4) Four regimes can be identified in the solution of hyperbolic damped wave diffusion 
model. These are; i) Zero Transfer Inertial Regime, 0 0
inertia ; (ii) Rising 
Regime during times greater than inertial regime and less than at the wave front, Xp > 
; (iii) at Wave front,  = Xp; (iv) Falling Regime in Open Interval, of times greater 
than at the wave front,  > Xp. 
5) Method of superposition of steady state concentration and transient concentration 
used in both solutions of parabolic and hyperbolic models. 
6) Expression for steady state concentration developed. 
7) Closed form analytic model solutions developed in asymptotic limits of Michaelis 
and Menten kinetic at zeroth order and first order. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
126 
8) Expression for Penetration Length Derived – Hypoxia Explained 
9) Expression for Inertial Lag Time Derived 
10) Solution within bounds of Second Law of Thermodynamics 
11) No Overshoot Phenomena Observed. 
 
 
D. MATHEMATICAL MODELS FROM SHELL BALANCE AND 
EQUATIONS OF MOMENTUM, ENERGY AND CONTINUITY  
 
3.8. HIGH VOLUME CENTRIFUGAL SEPARATION OF OIL/WATER 
 
 
3.8.1. Background 
 
Oil spills such as the recent one in the Gulf of Mexico called the Deepwater Horizon 
[Telegraph, 2010] needs to be cleaned-up. During development of technology and 
advancement of human mankind, it is not sufficient to discover a new gadget. The 
technological device has to be used in a safe manner and benignant to the environment. The 
psyche of the general public would be boosted when appropriate methods for handling these 
spills are in place. Five oil spills are listed in Table 3.6. The Deepwater Horizon in 2010, and 
the Exxon Valdez in 1989 were at a monetary loss of close to $ 0.5 billion in lost revenue 
from the crude oil. The largest one is the one in California in 1911. The other two spill are at 
the Persian Gulf and Mexico. When more than one country is involved oil spills may cause 
friction among otherwise friendly neighbors. One method for cleaning the oil from the sea 
water is the use of a centrifuge. 
A typical CINC centrifugal liquid-liquid separator can be obtained from the CINC 
Processing Equipment, Inc. The CINC Liquid-Liquid Centrifugal Separator utilizes the force 
generated by rotating an object about a central axis. By spinning two fluids of different 
densities within a rotating container or rotor the heavier fluid is forced to the wall at the inside 
of the rotor while the lighter fluid is forced toward the center of the rotor. A cut-away view of 
such a centrifugal separator may be viewed at the internet webpage http:///www. 
cincmfg.com/How_our_Centrifuges_Work_s/108.htm. 
 
Table 3.6. Some Illustrative Oil Spills 
 
# 
Oil Spill 
Date 
Amount 
1.0 
Deepwater Horizon, Gulf of Mexico 
04-10-10 to 07-15-10 
175 million gallons 
2.0 
Lakeview Gusher, Kern County, CA 
05-14-10 to 09-1911 
378 million gallons 
3.0 
Gulf War Oil Spill (Iraq, Persian Gulf 
and Kuwait) 
01-19-1991 – 01-28-
1991 
275 million gallons 
4.0 
Ixtoc I, Gulf of Mexico, Mexico  
06-1979 – 03-1980 
150 million gallons 
5.0 
Exxon Valdez, Alaska 
March 24th 1989 
30 million gallons 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
127 
The theory for separation used currently is the Stokes settling of oil droplets. For high 
volume separation such as the oil that can be recovered from the oil spills a centrifuge such as 
the one described in this study may be used. Here layers form with one layer that is oil rich 
and another layer that is water rich. The peripheral layer is water rich and may be collected 
from a port at the outer centrifugal bowl (Figure 22.0) and the oil rich layer may be collected 
from the inner rotor wall that is rotating. There is not much discussion in the literature for the 
theory of centrifugal separation of layered flow. In this study the velocity profiles of the oil 
rich layer and water rich layer are derived from the equations of continuity and motion. The 
thickness of the interface of the oil and water is calculated from a component mass balance of 
the oil in the inlet and outlet streams of the continuous centrifuge. Numerical simulations are 
run on a desktop computer for a given angular speed of rotor,  (RPM) and density ratio of 
the fluids and viscosities of the fluids. A set of four simultaneous equations and simultaneous 
unknowns are solved for using the MINVERSE command in Microsoft Excel for Windows 
2007. These constants are used to obtain the power draw at the rotor from the torque required. 
A log-log plot is developed form the simulations for the power draw at the rotor that may be 
used in the design of such systems. 
 
 
3.8.2. Theory 
 
Consider a centrifuge with an outer bowl radius of R (m) and an inner rotor radius of R 
(m). The inner rotor is allowed to rotate at an angular velocity of  RPM. The feed has high 
concentration of oil about 33% mass fraction oil (xF). It is desired to achieve a separation 
efficiency of 97.9%. The outlet oil stream is from the inner rotor and the outlet water stream 
is from the periphery of the bowl. The density ratio of the oil and water is . Viscous flows 
are considered at steady state. 
Consider a thin shell of fluid with thickness r and at a distance r from the center of the 
centrifuge as shown in Figure 1.0. It is assumed that the momentum transfer is predominantly 
in the radial direction. The tangential velocity assumes a profile that varies with the distance r 
from the center of the centrifuge. It is assumed that for high volume oil and water feeds such 
as the one that can be expected from the clean-up of the recent Oil Spill of BP Americas 
[Telegraph, 2010] two layers are formed, i.e., one rich in oil and the second layer rich in 
water. As the tangential force from the rotor is increased the species with the higher specific 
gravity will gain more momentum and move to the periphery of the centrifuge.  
The species with the lower specific gravity will remain in the inner layer close to the 
rotor. The density of the crude oil was assumed to be “heavy” and was taken as 900 kg. m3 
and the density of the water was taken as 1000 kg.m3. For such a pair, the peripheral layer 
would be water rich and the inner layer would be oil rich. Earlier discussions in the literature 
have been largely on droplet formation of oil and layer formation or “slick” formation is not 
discussed much. Let the radius of the outer centrifugal bowl that is held stationary be R (m) 
and that of the inner rotor be R (m). The inner rotor is allowed to rotate at an angular 
velocity of  RPM (revolutions per minute). The water is collected by a port at the periphery 
of the bowl and the oil is collected through the port in the inner rotor. The feed is introduced 
from the top of the centrifuge.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
128 
  
Figure 22.0. Cross-Sectional View of Centrifugal Separator of Oil and Water. 
 
The feed location has not been optimized in the study. The equation of continuity and 
motion for v and the equation of motion for shear stress, r can be written from the 
Appendix in Bird, Stewart and Lightfoot [2007] as follows; 
 
 
2
2
1
0
r
r
r
r
  
(3.184) 
 
Integrating Eq. (2.64); 
 
 
1
2
r
c
r
 
(3.185) 
 
The Newton‟s law of viscosity for the shear rate is given by; 
 
 
r
r
v
r r
r
 
(3.186) 
 
For the oil rich inner layer (Figure 22.0) combining Eq. (3.186) and Eq. (3.184); 
 
 
1
3
oil
v
c
r
r
r
 
(3.187) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
129 
Integrating Eq. (3.187) twice; 
 
 
1
2
2
2
oil
v
c
c
r
r
 
(3.188) 
 
Eq. (3.188) is valid for, R  r  R. 
For the water rich peripheral layer (Figure 22.0), in a similar manner the tangential 
velocity of the fluid can be written as follows; 
 
 
3
4
2
2
water
v
c
c
r
r
 
(3.189) 
 
Eq. (3.189) is valid for, R  r  R. 
The boundary conditions can be seen to be; 
 
at the outer stationary wall, 
r = R, v = 0 
(3.190) 
 
Substituting Eq. (3.190) in Eq. (3.189); 
 
 
1
2
2
0
2
oil
c
c
R
 
(3.191) 
 
at the inner rotor wall,  
r = R, v = R 
(3.192) 
 
Substituting Eq. (3.192) in Eq. (3.189); 
 
 
1
2
2
2
2
oil
v
c
c
R
R
 
(3.193) 
 
at the interface of oil rich and water rich layer, 
Interface is assumed to be without any accumulation of forces; 
 
 
1
2
2
2
2
2
(
)
(
)
r
r
oil
water
c
c
R
R
 
(3.194) 
 
The velocity across the interface of oil rich and water rich layer is assumed to be 
continuous; 
 
 
3
1
2
4
2
2
2
2
2
oil
water
v
c
c
c
c
R
R
R
 
(3.195) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
130 
In this study, Eqs. (3.193-3.195) were used to solve for the integration constants, c1, c2, c3 
and c4 using the MINVERSE function in Microsoft Excel for Windows 2007. The set of 
equations Eq. (3.193-3.195) that are needed to obtain the integration constants are given in 
the matrix form as follows; 
 
 
2
1
2
2
2
3
4
2
2
2
2
1
0
0
1
2
0
1
1
0
0
2
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
2
2
water
oil
oil
water
R
c
c
R
c
c
R
R
 
(3.196) 
 
Eq. (3.196) is a set of four simultaneous equations and four unknowns. The vector of 
constants can be obtained as follows; 
 
 
1
2
1
2
2
2
3
4
2
2
2
2
1
0
0
1
2
0
1
1
0
0
2
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
2
2
water
oil
oil
water
R
c
c
R
c
c
R
R
 
(3.197) 
 
The layer thickness ratio,  can be estimated as follows. A component balance on the oil 
in the feed stream, peripheral water stream and inner rotor oil stream would yield; 
 
 
xFv = (v - vrot)xper + vrotxrot 
(3.198) 
 
or, 
F
per
rot
rot
per
x
x
v
v
x
x
 
(3.199) 
 
Let the residence time of the fluid in the continuous centrifuge be  (hr). Then; 
 
 
vrot = R2(2-2)H 
(3.200) 
 
and, 
v = R2(1 -2)H 
(3.201) 
 
Dividing Eq. (3.200) by Eq. (3.201) and Equating with Eq. (3.199); 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
131 
 
2
2
1
F
per
rot
per
x
x
x
x
 
(3.202) 
 
 
3.8.3. Results 
 
Simulations were run on the desktop computer using Microsoft Excel for Windows, 
2007. An example calculation is shown below; 
The calculations were performed for a rotor speed of 1000 RPM. The separation 
efficiency is about 97.9%. The values in bold face are obtained by using the MINVERSE 
command in Microsoft Excel for Windows 2007. The results are the inverse of the matrix as 
described in Eq. (3.197). Simulations were repeated for 29 different values of angular speeds 
of rotor. Each of the torque values were recorded in another column in the spreadsheet. The 
torque is calculated from the shear stress the rotor wall multiplied with the surface area of the 
rotor and the moment arm distance, R, and multiplied with the angular speed  in RPM. The 
results of these simulations are shown in Figure 23.0 on a log-log plot. The relationship is 
found to be linear in the log-log plot. For the example run as shown in Table 3.3 the 
separation efficiency is about 37%. In order to achieve more separation more stages need be 
considered. 
The set of simulations were repeated for a higher viscosity of oil, oil (5000 Pa.s). The 
power draw at the rotor is also shown in Figure 23.0 in the log log plot. The increase in power 
draw corresponding to an increase in viscosity of oil was not high. 
 
 
Figure 23.0. Power Draw as a Function of Rotor Speed for  = 0.74. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
132 
Table 3.7. Calculations for a Given Set of Oil and Water Viscosities and  = 10 RPM 
 
Oil Water Separation by Centrifugation 
Feed 
Outlet  
(Oil) 
Outlet (Water) 
 
 
  
 
xoil 
0.33 
0.99 
0.01 
 
w 
0.001 
Pa.S 
xw 
0.67 
0.01 
0.99 
 
oil 
1000 
Pa.S 
vrotor 
13.3877551 
 
 
 

0.74 
 
vper 
27.6122449 
  
 
 

0.4524 
 
Separation  
0.979591837 
0.326531 
Ratio 
 

0.83386 
 
Efficiency 
 
 
 
 
R 
5 
10000 
Gallons 
V 
 
 
 
oil
900 
kg.m3 
Ft 
H 
0.522028 
m 
 
water
1000 
kg.m3 
 
 
 
 
 
 res 
1 
hr 
 
 
 
 
 
v 
41 
m3.h-1 
 
 
 
 
 

0.9 
 
0 
0 
0.00002 
1 
 

0.83386 
 
3.6523E-05 
1 
0 
0 
 
 
 
 
1 
0 
-1 
0 
 
 
 
 
2.87636E-05 
1 
-28.7636 
-1 
 
c1 
34.76614 
 
-0.034766137 
0.034766137 
1 
-0.034766137 
0 
c2 
999.9987 
 
1.26976E-06 
0.99999873 
-3.7E-05 
1.26976E-06 
1000 
c3 
34.76614 
 
-0.034766137 
0.034766137 
-2.7E-07 
-0.034766137 
0 
c4 
-0.0007 
 
1.000000695 
-6.9532E-07 
5.4E-12 
6.95323E-07 
0 
 
RPM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T 


Torque 
 
 
 
 
199 
1000 
0.83386 
42.32546536 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.8.4. Discussions 
 
It has been reported in the literature that when the angular speed reaches a critical value, 
crit secondary flow will develop. The secondary flow is periodic in axial direction and gets 
superimposed on the tangential flow. Toroidal vortices named Taylor vortices will form. 
When the angular velocity is increased further travelling waves form and then the turbulent 
regime is reached. The Rayleigh regime [Taylor, 1923], doubly periodic flow regimes, etc. 
have been developed for a single fluid. The system under consideration has two components, 
i.e., oil and water. The Taylor vortex flow, Rayleigh flow regimes can be avoided during the 
operation of the centrifuge. By running the centrifuge shallow or deep the velocity can be 
kept close to the laminar regime. The requirements for layer formation are not clear. The 
transition from a drop regime to a layer regime can be expected to depend on the surface 
tension of the oil and water. The Marangoni instability [Coles, 1965] may also be an issue. 
The centrifuge may be the solution to high volume oil and water mixtures that needs to be 
separated. 
A computer solution procedure was developed to evaluate centrifugal separation of oil 
and water. At high volumes, oil rich and water rich layers may be expected to form. 
Expressions for the interlayer thickness ratio,  was developed from component material 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
133 
balance on the inlet and outlet streams of the continuous centrifuge. The equations of motion 
and continuity for the tangential velocity, v were derived for the oil rich and water rich 
layers. The water is recovered from the outlet at the periphery of the centrifugal bowl that is 
held stationary and the oil is recovered from the inner rotor that is rotating. The four 
integration constants in the velocity profile is solved for by use of the MINVERSE operation 
in Microsoft Excel for Windows 2007. For each RPM and set of parameters the power drawn 
at the rotor is calculated. The power draw would to be linear with the angular speed of the 
rotor on a log-log plot. When the density ratios of the two fluid streams,  approach 1 this 
method may not be efficient. In a similar manner when the feed contains only small quantity 
of oil other methods such as molecular sieve adsorption may be considered. Centrifugal 
separation of high volume oil and water may be designed using the methods shown in this 
study. 
 
 
3.9. WARM/COOL FEELING AND THERMAL WEAR 
 
The effect of damped wave conduction and relaxation on warm/cool feeling of the human 
skin was studied by Sharma [2010]. In this study a two layer mathematical model was 
developed to study the transient heat conduction of the human skin and thermal fabric layer 
during use to protect the human body from cold winter outdoors.  
A schematic of the relevant aspects from a cross-section of human skin near a finger pad 
is shown in Figure 24.0. Many kinds of receptors in human skin are known to transmit 
information about the surroundings to the central nervous system. The role of these receptors 
in generating sensations caused by stimulus from the surroundings is analyzed. The response 
in the receptors is physico-chemical in nature. The correlation between mechanical stimulus 
and sensation of touch from a neurophysiological standpoint was studied experimentally by 
earlier investigators. They discuss the relation between the surface roughness of fabric and 
human sensory feel. “Krause‟s end bulb” is the receptor attributed with the cool feeling and 
“Ruffini‟s ending” is the receptor that is responsible for warm feeling. The transient heat 
conduction in the neighborhood of these receptors as the outside temperature plummets to 
low levels as typical of winter in the northern part of USA needs to be modeled. The skin 
layer and the thermal layer assembly are approximated as shown in Figure 24-0. The blood 
flow in the vessels results in a constant temperature environment at x = b at T = Tbl, where Tbl 
is the blood temperature. The origin is taken at the interface between the winter surroundings 
and outer surface of the thermal wear used to protect the skin from the winter cold weather. 
The thickness of the thermal fabric is „a‟ and the interface of the thermal wear and human 
skin occurs at x = a. Let the ambient temperature be Tamb. In winter this can be expected to be 
much lower than the blood temperature, i.e., Tamb << Tbl. The temperature difference between 
the blood vessels and the cold surroundings drives the problem. Let the dimensionless 
temperature time and penetration distance be defined with respect to the human skin 
parameters as follows; 
 
 
amb
bl
amb
T
T
T
T
u



; 
rs
t


; 
s rs
x
X
 
(3.203) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
134 
 
Figure 24.0. Transient Heat Conduction in Human Skin and Thermal Wear in Winter. 
 
 
3.9.1. Steady State 
 
At steady state the governing equation for temperature in the skin layer can be written as 
follows. A heat source in the skin layer generates heat to provide the warm feeling that comes 
in winter. Let this heat source be dependent on temperature difference with the ambient 
temperature. The energy balance on a thin slice with thickness x and cross-sectional area A 
can be written as; 
 
 
'"(
)
0
x
amb
q
U
T
T
x
 
(3.204) 
 
Where U”” is the temperature difference dependent heat source. Writing the Fourier‟s 
law of heat conduction for the heat flux, qx, in the dimensionless form Eq. (9.232) may be 
written as; 
 
 
2
2
*
u
U
u
X
 
(3.205) 
 
Where 
"'
*
;
s
ps
rs
C
U
U
S
S
 
The solution for Eq. (9.233) can be written as; 
 
 
u = A Sin(U* X) + B Cos(U* X) 
(3.206) 
 
The boundary conditions at the interface of the skin tissue layer and the blood vessels can 
be written as; 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
135 
 
At, X = Xb = 
s
rs
b
, u = 1 since the T = Tbl 
(3.207) 
 
Further it can be assumed that there is no heat transfer from the skin layer to the blood 
vessels or vice versa. Thus, 
 
 
At, X = Xb = 
rs
s
b


, 
0
u
X
 
(3.208) 
 
Applying these boundary conditions given above the integration constants A and B can 
be solved for and found to be Sin(U*Xb ) and Cos(U*Xa) and Eq. (3.234) can be seen to 
be; 
 
 
u = 
*(
)
b
Cos
U
X
X
 
(3.209) 
 
In a similar fashion the governing equation for the temperature in the thermal wear layer, 
i.e., for 0  x  a, or in terms of dimensionless distance, 0  X  Xa can be written in the 
dimensionless form at steady state as follows; 
 
 
2
2
0
u
X
 
(3.210) 
 
The solution to Eq. (8) can be seen to be; 
 
 
u = CX + D 
(3.211) 
 
The boundary conditions for the temperature in the thermal wear layer can be written as; 
 
 
X = 0, u = 0 
(3.212) 
 
 
X = Xa, u (thermal wear) = u(skin) = Cos(Xb-Xa) 
(3.213) 
 
Thus C and D in Eq. (9) can be solved for using the boundary conditions given by Eq. 
(3.240) and Eq. (9.241). Thus, 
 
 
u = 
*(
)
b
a
xCos
U
X
X
a
 
(3.214) 
 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
136 
3.9.2. Transient State in Human Skin Layer 
 
The energy balance equation in the skin layer during transient state can be written as; 
 
"'(
)
(
)
bl
s
ps
q
T
U
T
T
C
x
t  
(3.215) 
 
Combining Eq. (13) with the damped wave conduction and relaxation equation given by; 
 
 
s
rs
T
q
q
k
x
t  
(3.216) 
 
and making the terms dimensionless the following governing equation can be written for the 
skin layer undergoing transient heat conduction. 
 
 
2
2
2
2
(1
*)
*
u
u
u
U
uU
X
 
(3.217) 
 
where u, , U* and X are defined by Eq. (3.231). It can be seen that the boundary conditions 
are not homogeneous. Hence the solution is assumed to take the form; 
 
 
u = ut + us 
(3.218) 
 
where ut is the transient temperature and us = steady state temperature. The solution for us was 
solved for in the case 1 above and given by Eq. (3.242). The rest of the problem is obtaining 
the solution of the transient temperature subject to the following time and space conditions.  
 
 
2
2
2
2
(1
*)
*
t
t
t
t
u
u
u
U
u U
X
 
(3.219) 
 
The initial and final time and space conditions can be written as; 
 
 
at  = 0, ut = 1 
(3.220) 
 
 
at  = , ut = 0 
(3.221) 
 
 
at X = Xb, ut = 0 
(3.222) 
 
 
at X = Xa = ut = u - us  
(3.223) 
 
Assuming that equilibrium is established rapidly at the interface, u – us in the RHS of Eq. 
(21) can be taken as zero. Hence the boundary condition at X = Xa, ut = 0. The transient 
temperature, ut, can be expected to have an exponential decaying component or the damping 
component in the Eq. (3.247) can be removed by the following substitution, ut = wexp(-n). 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
137 
For n = (1-U*)/2, Eq. (3.247) is transformed into a governing equation of the wave 
temperature, w, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
(1
*)
4
w
w
U
w
X
 
(3.224) 
 
Eq. (3.252) can be solved for by the method of separation of variables. Let w = V()(X). 
Then the terms in Eq. (3.252) can be separated into two equations, one in space and another in 
time domain. 
 
 
2
2
"
"
(1
*)
4
n
V
U
V
 
(3.225) 
 
The general solution in the space domain to the second order ODE with constant 
coefficient can be seen to be; 
 
 
 = c1Sin(nX) + c2Cos(nX) 
(3.226) 
 
The boundary conditions given by Eq. (3.250) and Eq. (3.251) are applied to Eq. (3.254). 
Thus  
 
 
c2 = -c1Tan(nXb) 
(3.227) 
 
 
n = 
2
(
)
b
a
n
X
X
, n=1,2,3,…… 
(3.228) 
 
The time domain portion of the solution to the second order ODE with constant 
coefficients can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
3
2
2
4
(1
*)
exp(
)
4
(1
*)
exp(
)
4
n
n
U
V
c
U
c
  
(3.229) 
 
From the final condition given by Eq. (3.249) at  = , w = utexp(+n) = 0*=0. Hence, 
c3 can be seen to be zero. The general solution for the transient temperature can be written; 
 
 
2
2
(1
*)
(1
*)
4
2
1
(
(
)(
(
)
(
))
n
U
U
n
n
b
n
n
n
u
c e
e
Tan
X
Sin
X
Cos
X
 
(3.230) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
138 
n is given by Eq. (3.256). cn can be solved for from the initial condition given by Eq. 
(3.248) and using the principle of orthogonality. cn is found to be; 
 
 
2
2
2(1
( 1) )(
)
(
)
n
b
a
n
n
b
X
X
c
n
Tan
X
 
(3.231) 
 
 
3.9.3. Transient State in Thermal Fabric Layer 
 
In a similar fashion the transient temperature in the thermal wear layer can be calculated 
as follows. The governing equation for transient temperature in the thermal fabric layer can 
be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
u
u
u
X
 
(3.232) 
 
Where  = 
f
s
;  = 
fr
sr
 and u,  and X are the same as defined in Eq. (3.231).  
It can be seen that the boundary conditions are not homogeneous. Hence the solution is 
assumed to take the form; 
 
 
u = ut + us 
(3.233) 
 
where ut is the transient temperature and us = steady state temperature. The solution for us was 
solved for in the section on steady state above and given by Eq. (3.242). The rest of the 
problem is obtaining the solution of the transient temperature subject to the following time 
and space conditions.  
 
 
2
2
2
2
t
t
t
u
u
u
X
 
(3.234) 
 
The initial and final time and space conditions can be written as; 
 
 
at  = 0, ut = 1 
(3.235) 
 
 
at  = , ut = 0 
(3.236) 
 
 
at X = 0, ut = 0 
(3.237) 
 
 
at X = Xa = ut = u - us  
(3.238) 
 
Assuming that equilibrium is established rapidly at the interface, u – us in the RHS of Eq. 
(3.238) can be taken as zero. Hence the boundary condition at X = Xa, ut = 0. The transient 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
139 
temperature, ut, can be expected to have an exponential decaying component or the damping 
component in the Eq. (3.262) can be removed by the following substitution, ut = wexp(-n). For 
1
2
n
, Eq. (3.262) is transformed into a governing equation of the wave temperature, w, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
4
w
w
w
X
 
(3.239) 
 
Eq. (3.267) can be solved for by the method of separation of variables. Let w = ()g (X). 
Then the terms in Eq. (3.267) can be separated into two equations, one in space and another in 
time domain. 
 
 
2
"
"
1
4
m
g
g
 
(3.240) 
 
The general solution in the space domain to the second order ODE with constant 
coefficient can be seen to be; 
 
 
g = c1Sin(mX) + c2Cos(mX) 
(3.241) 
 
The boundary conditions given by Eq. (3.265) and Eq. (3.266) are applied to Eq. (3.269). 
Thus  
 
 
c2 = 0 
(3.242) 
 
 
m = 
a
m
X
, m=1,2,3,…… 
(3.243) 
 
The time domain portion of the solution to the second order ODE with constant 
coefficients can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
5
6
2
2
1
1
exp(
)
exp(
)
4
4
m
m
c
c
  
(3.244) 
 
From the final condition given by Eq. (3.264) at  = , w = utexp(+n) = 0*=0. Hence, 
c5 can be seen to be zero. The general solution for the transient temperature can be written; 
 
 
2
2
1
4
2
1
(
)
m
n
m
n
u
d e
e
Sin
X  
(3.245) 
 
m is given by Eq. (3.271). dn can be solved for from the initial condition given by Eq. 
(3.263) and using the principle of orthogonality. dn is found to be; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
140 
 
2
2
2(1
( 1) )
n
n
d
m
, n = 1,2,3,…. 
(3.246) 
 
The solution to the transient heat conduction in the human skin layer and the thermal 
fabric layer including the damped wave conduction and relaxation effects were derived using 
the method of separation of variables. The use of the final condition in time leads to well 
bounded, physically realistic solutions within the bounds of Clausius‟s inequality. The 
transient temperature in the two layers at steady state is shown in Figure 25.0 The nature of 
the temperature profile is cosinous in the human skin layer and linear in the thermal fabric 
layer. The parameters the profile is derived for are, Xa = 3, Xb = 5 and U* = 2.0. The heat flux 
at steady state for the human skin layer and the thermal fabric layer is shown in Figure 3-0 for 
the parameters, Xa = 3, Xb = 5, kf/ks = 5.0. and U* = 2.0. It can be seen from Figure 3.20 the 
interface heat flux undergoes a maxima. For the heat flux in dimensionless form with respect 
to the skin thermo physical properties to be continuous the ratio of the thermal conductivities 
of the thermal fabric layer and skin layer have to be a certain value and cannot be specified 
independently. This can be deduced from model solutions. The maximum heat flux at the 
interface of the two layers may be related to the heat flux reported by Yoneda and Kawabata 
(14). It can be seen from the model solutions that the transient temperature will undergo 
subcritical damped oscillations under certain conditions. These conditions are for large 
relaxation times of the skin and for large relaxation times for the thermal fabric layer. Thus 
for,  
Thus for large relaxation time values of the skin, i.e., rs > 
2
2
2
(1
*) (
)
16
s
U
b
a
, it can be 
seen that the temperature in the skin layer can be expected to exhibit oscillations. The nature 
of the oscillations will depend on the strength of the heat source which is a function of the 
temperature difference with the ambient cold winter temperature. For heat source, U* > 1 
oscillations that grows with time may be expected. For heat source, U* < 1 subcritical 
damped oscillations can be expected. The solution for these materials is then given by; 
 
 
(1
*)
2
2
2
1
(1
*)
(
)
4
(
(
)(
(
)
(
))
U
n
n
n
n
b
n
n
U
u
c e
Cos
Tan
X
Sin
X
Cos
X
 
(3.247) 
 
 
Figure 25.0. Steady State Temperature in Human Skin Layer and Thermal Fabric Layer for Xa = 3.0 
and Xb = 4.0 and U* = 2.0. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
141 
 
Figure 26.0. Steady State Temperature in Human Skin Layer and Thermal Fabric Layer for Xa = 3.0, Xb 
= 4, kf/ks = 5 and U* = 2.0. 
 
 
Figure 27.0. Transient Temperature at X = 3.1, in Human Skin Layer for Large Relaxation Time 
Values, U* = 2.0. 
 
Where, n and cn are given by Eq. (26) and Eq. (29) respectively. 
Eight terms in the infinite series in Eq. (3.275) were taken in a Microsoft Excel 
Spreadsheet and the dimensionless temperature is plotted as a function of dimensionless time 
in Figure 28.0. It can be seen that for human skin materials with large relaxation times as 
discussed above the dimensionless temperature exhibits growing oscillations at a heat source 
of U* = 2.0. The general solution is given by Eq. (3.275). In a similar fashion, under certain 
conditions the temperature in the thermal fabric layer can be expected to undergo subcritical 
damped oscillations. Thus for, 
 
 
rf > 
2
2
4
s
a
 
(3.248) 
 
the transient temperature in the thermal fabric layer can expect to undergo subcritical damped 
oscillations. Under these conditions the transient temperature in the thermal fabric layer is 
given by; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
142 
 
2
2
2
1
1
(
)
(
)
4
n
n
m
n
u
d e
Cos
Sin
X  
(3.249) 
 
where, dn and m is given by Eq. (3.274) and Eq. (3.271) respectively.  
Six terms in the infinite series given by Eq. (3.277) were taken and the dimensionless 
temperature was plotted against dimensionless time in the thermal layer for fabric materials 
with large relaxation times and shown in Figure 28.0. The  chosen for the study was 0.15 and 
the temperature at X = 1.1 was obtained for a Xa = 3.0. It can be seen that the temperature 
undergoes subcritical damped oscillations.  
 
Table 3.8. Characterization of Stability Types 
 
Eigen values 
Characterization of Stability 
Stability Type 
2 < 1 < 0 
Asymptotically Stable 
Improper  
Node 
2 > 1 > 0 
Unstable 
Improper  
Node 
2 =1 =  
Asymptotically Stable if  < 0, Unstable if  > 0 
Proper or Improper Node 
1  0   
Unstable 
Saddle 
Point 
 = a  ib 
Stable if a < 0 
Unstable if a > 0 
Focus or 
Spiral 
 =  ib 
Marginally 
Stable 
Center 
 
 
Figure 28.0. Transient Temperature in the Thermal Fabric Layer for Large Relaxation Times at X = 1.1. 
 
 
Figure 29.0. Scheme of 7 Simultaneous Reactions. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
143 
E. STATE SPACE MODELS 
 
State space models can be used to describe a set of variables in vector form in terms of 
matrix equations. A state space variables used in order to describe more than one variable at a 
given instant in time. Vector form for several variables are used. A set of n differential 
equations is represented by one equation in matrices and vectors. The coefficient matrix and 
input and output vectors are used. Output vector can be solved for by matrix manipulations. 
This would form the output response of the system. The stability of the system can be studied 
by looking at the Eigenvalues of the coefficient of the matrix. The different instabilities that 
may arise and the conditions under which they would arise is given in Table 3.3. 
 
 
3.10. KINETICS OF SIMULTANEOUS REACTIONS IN  
STATE SPACE FORM 
 
As an example a state space model is developed to describe the kinetics of the following 
set of reactions in series and in parallel as suggested in Levenspiel [1999]: 
The kinetics of the 7 simultaneous reactions shown in Figure 7.0 are given below as 
follows; 
 
 
1
2
A
A
A
dC
k C
k C
dt
 
(3.250) 
 
 
1
3
4
R
A
R
R
dC
k C
k C
k C
dt
 
(3.251) 
 
 
3
5
6
S
R
S
S
dC
k C
k C
k C
dt
 
(3.252) 
 
 
S
T
C
k
dt
dC
5

 
(3.253) 
 
 
A
U
C
k
dt
dC
2

 
(3.254) 
 
 
R
V
C
k
dt
dC
4

 
(3.255) 
 
 
S
W
C
k
dt
dC
6

 
(3.256) 
 
Eqs. (3.250 – 3.256) can be represented in the state space form in one line as follows; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
144 
 






1
2
1
3
4
3
5
6
5
2
4
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
A
A
R
R
S
S
T
T
U
U
V
V
W
W
C
C
k
k
C
C
k
k
k
C
C
k
k
k
d
C
C
k
dt C
C
k
C
C
k
C
C
k








































































 (3.257) 
 
Or, 
 
 
dC
KxC
dt 
 
(3.258) 
 
The stability of the system of reactions can be studied by obtaining the Eigenvalues of the 
K matrix. The eigenvalues of the K matrix are obtained from the roots of the characteristic 
polynomial 
 
 
Det(I-K) = 0 
(3.259) 
 
The K matrix is sparse. Eq. (2.92) can be seen to be; 
 
 




4
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
k
k
k
k
k
k











 
(3.260) 
 
The 7 eigenvalues are 0 repeated 4 time and –(k1+k2), -(k3+k4) and –(k5+ k6). This system 
can be viewed as an integrating system since all but Eigenvalues are negative with 4 
Eigenvalues 0. 
 
 
3.11. COMPOSITION OF COPLYMER WITH N MONOMERS  
FROM STATE SPACE REPRESENTATION 
 
There is significant interest in obtaining copolymer product via free radical 
polymerization reactions from more than one starting monomers. SAN, styrene/acrylonitrile 
copolymer is an example of product manufactured profitably with two starting comonomers, 
styrene and acrylonitrile. Terpolymers are those with 3 starting monomers. Tetrapolymers are 
product made from four starting monomers getting into the polymer. Consider n monomer 
repeat units entering a polymer backbone chain in a CSTR [Sharma, 2012]. There are n2 
propagation reactions that can be involved in the multi-component copolymerization. Thus 
for tetra polymerization there would be 16 propagation reactions involved. These reactions 
are listed  
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
145 
 
11
12
13
14
1
21
22
23
24
*
*
1
1
1
1
*
*
1
2
1
2
*
*
1
3
1
3
*
*
1
4
1
4
*
*
1
1
*
*
2
1
2
1
*
*
2
2
2
2
*
*
2
3
2
3
*
*
2
4
2
4
*
2
..............................
..............................
n
k
k
k
k
k
n
n
k
k
k
k
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M



















2
31
32
33
34
3
*
2
*
*
3
1
3
1
*
*
3
2
3
2
*
*
3
3
3
3
*
*
3
4
3
4
*
*
3
3
..............................
n
n
k
n
n
k
k
k
k
k
n
n
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M M











 
(3.261) 
 
 
The rate of irreversible reactions can be written as; 
 
 












1
*
*
*
*
11
1
1
21
1
2
31
1
3
1
1
2
*
*
*
*
22
2
2
12
2
1
32
2
3
2
2
[
][
]
....
[
][
]
[
][
]
....
[
][
]
..........................................................................
n
n
n
n
d M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
dt
d M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
dt


























*
*
*
*
*
1
1
2
2
1
1
.............................................
[
]
[
][
]
[
][
]
[
][
]
.......
[
][
]
n
nn
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
d M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
dt







 
(131) 
The free radical species formed may be assumed to be highly reactive and can assumed to 
be consumed as rapidly as formed. This is referred to as the quasi-steady state assumption, 
QSSA. Thus; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
146 
 








*
1
*
*
*
*
11
1
1
12
1
2
13
1
3
1
1
*
2
*
*
*
*
22
2
2
21
2
1
23
2
3
2
2
[
][
]
... .
[
][
]
[
][
]
...
[
][
]
.................................................................
n
n
n
n
d M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
dt
d M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
dt


































*
*
*
*
1
1
1
1
..................................................
[
]
[
][
]
[
][
]
..........................
[
][
]
n
nn
n
n
nn
n
n
n
n
d M
k
M
M
k
M
M
k
M
M
dt






 (3.262) 
 
 








*
1
1
*
11
1
1
*
1
2
*
12
2
1
*
*
1
3
13
3
1
*
*
1
1
1
*
2
1
*
21
1
2
*
2
2
*
22
2
2
*
2
3
23
[
]
[
][
]
........................................
[
]
[
][
]
[
]
n
n
n
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
dt







































*
3
2
*
*
2
2
2
*
*
3
1
31
1
3
*
*
3
2
32
2
3
[
][
]
..........................................
[
]
[
][
]
[
]
[
][
]
[
]
[
][
]
n
n
n
M
M
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt



 
(3.263) 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
147 
 
*
*
3
3
33
3
3
*
*
3
3
3
*
*
1
1
1
*
*
2
2
2
*
*
3
3
3
[
]
[
][
]
..........................................
[
]
[
][
]
.........................................
[
]
[
][
]
[
]
[
][
]
[
]
[
][
]
..
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt
d M M
k
M
M
dt





*
*
.......................................
[
]
[
][
]
n
n
nn
n
n
d M M
k
M
M
dt

 
 
By QSSA 
*
*
*
*
*
1
1
2
1
3
1
1
1
*
*
*
*
*
1
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
*
*
*
*
*
3
1
3
2
3
3
3
3
[
]
[
]
[
]
....
0
[
]
[
]
[
]
.....
0
[
]
[
]
[
]
[
]
[
]
........
0
..........
n
n
n
d M M
d M M
d M M
d M M
d M
dt
dt
dt
dt
dt
d M M
d M M
d M M
d M M
d M
dt
dt
dt
dt
dt
d M
d M M
d M M
d M M
d M M
dt
dt
dt
dt
dt


































*
*
*
*
*
1
2
3
..............................................................................................
[
]
[
]
[
]
[
]
[
]
.......
0
n
n
n
n
n
n
d M
d M M
d M M
d M M
d M M
dt
dt
dt
dt
dt






 
(3.264) 
 
Let the n monomer concentrations be represented by the vector M and n free radical 
concentrations by represented by vector M* as; 
 
 
1
2
3
.....
n
M
M
M
M














M
 
*
1
*
2
*
3
*
*
.....
n
M
M
M
M
















M
 
(3.265) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
148 
The multicomponent copolymerization rate constants can be represented by a rate matrix 
as follows; 
 
 
33
22
11
21
31
1
11
21
31
1
33
11
22
22
12
32
21
12
22
32
2
13
23
33
3
33
11
22
33
13
23
3
1
2
3
33
11
22
1
2
3
...
...
...
...
..
...
.....
...
..
...
..
...
...
...
..
...
...
...
nn
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
nn
n
n
n
n
k
k
k
k
r
r
r
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
r
r
r
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
r
r
r
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
r
r
r
















K
n




























 
(3.266) 
 
The rate matrix for multi-component copolymerization can thus be also be expressed in 
terms of the homopolymerization propagation rate constants of the n monomers respectively 
and reactivity ratios as defined in a similar manner to Eq. (3.264). The set of 
copolymerization rate equations given by Eq. (3.264) can be given in the matrix form as 
follows (Sharma [2012]); 
 
 
~
(
*
)
T
d
dt K
M
M M
 
(3.267) 
 
Where,  
1
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
..
..
..
..
..
0
0
0
0
n
M
M
M
M















~
M 
 
Only the diagonal elements of the resulting matrix from the RHS, right hand side of Eq. 
(3.262) is of interest. The rate equations that represent the radical generation and consumption 
during propagation can be given in the matrix form as; 
 
 
*
(
* )
)
T
d
dt


T
K
~
T
M
MM
K(M*M
 
(3.268) 
 
Eqs. (3.267) and (3.268) form a set of autonomous systems. For certain values of the rate 
propagation matrix using Eigenvectors and stability analysis it can be shown that periodic 
solutions may result. The initial conditions of the monomers can be represented by; 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
149 
 
M (t=0) = M0 
(3.269) 
 
By the QSSA, quasi-steady state assumption, i.e., the radical species are highly reactive, 
Eq. (3.269) can be set to zero. Or, 
 
 
(
* )
)
T 
T
K
T
MM
K(M*M
 
(3.270) 
 
For a given set of reactivity ratios, homopolymer propagation constants and initial 
condition of multi-component comonomers, M* can be solved for using Eq. (3.270) and then 
substituted in Eq. (3.267). Then the monomer concentrations with time as well as the polymer 
composition can be calculated from Eq. (3.270). Observing Eq. (3.270) can be solved for by 
the method of Eigenvectors [Varma and Morbidelli, 1997]. It can be seen that non-trivial 
equations to the set of ordinary differential equations with constant coefficients represented 
by Eq. (3.267) exist only for certain specific values of  called Eigenvalues. These are the 
solutions to; 
 
 
0


I-K
 
(3.271) 
 
Eq. (3.271) upon expansion may lead to a polynomial degree of n in; 
 
 
Pn() = 0 
(3.272) 
 
In order to obtain numerical values for  the expansion of Eq. (3.272) is considered 
obtained by Laplace development of the determinant; 
 
 


1
2
1
2
1
( )
1
......
0
n
n
n
n
n
n
P
s
s
s















K
 
(3.273) 
 
Where, 
 
 
sj=(-1)n-j(sum of all principal minors of order j of K) 
(3.274) 
 
where j = 1,2,3,….., (n-1). 
The copolymer composition can be obtained using the trace of the matrix defined in Eq. 
(2.102). Trace is a sum of all the diagonal elements of a matrix. Thus; 
 
 
1
~
2
~
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
...
...
...
....
...
0
0
0
0
n
F
d
F
dt
F
tr
F
























M
F
M
~
d
dt
 
(3.275) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
150 
The corresponding monomer compositions in the CSTR for n monomers entering the 
copolymer backbone chain can be written as; 
 
 
1
~
2
~
3
~
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
...
...
...
....
...
0
0
0
0
n
f
f
f
tr
f
























M
f
M
 
(3.276) 
 
Eq. (3.276) can be differentiated with respect to time and combined with Eq(3.267) to 
obtain the relation between the multi-component copolymer composition and CSTR 
monomer compositions. It can be realized that trace of a square matrix is a scalar quantity. 
Eq. (3.267) is in terms of MT and diagonal matrix 
~
M . During copolymerization from the 
QSSA as given by Eq. (3.270) it can be seen that; 
 
 
*
*
12
1
2
21
1
2
k
M
M
k
M
M
 
(3.277) 
 
Substituting Eq. (3.277) in the set of copolymerization rate equations the rate matrix can 
be rewritten as; 
 
 
*
T
d
dt
~
M
KM
M  
(3.278) 
 
i.e.,  
*
1
11
21
1
1
*
2
12
22
2
2
0
0
T
M
k
k
M
M
d
M
k
k
M
dt
M
 
 
Eq. (3.277) is a reasonable assumption for multi-component copolymerization for the 
general case of n monomers as well. This implies that the rate of copolymerization 
propagation of MiMj
* equals the formation of MjMi
* radical. When this is applied to all 
possible pairs of monomers in n monomers the QSSA holds as the net production of radicals 
equals the consumption during the copolymerization propagation itself. Nothing about the 
termination reactions are brought forward into this analysis. Thus for n monomers, 
 
 
*
1
1
11
21
31
1
1
*
2
12
22
32
2
2
2
*
3
13
23
33
3
3
3
*
1
2
3
0
0
0
0
...
..
0
0
0
0
...
0
0
0
0
...
...
..
...
..
...
...
0
0
0
...
0
...
0
0
0
0
T
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
nn
n
M
M
k
k
k
k
M
M
k
k
k
k
M
M
d
M
k
k
k
k
M
M
dt
M
k
k
k
k
M
n
M
 (3.279) 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
151 
The solution to Eq. (3.279) can be obtained by the method of Eigenvectors. 
Assume that the solution to Eq. (3.279) has the form; 
 
 
t
e
M
Z
  
(3.280) 
 
Where Z is the unknown vector of constants and  are the Eigenvalues. Substituting Eq. 
(3.280) in Eq. (3.2782); 
 
 
*
T
~
M
KM
Z  
(3.281) 
 
Eq. (3.281) requires that et  0. Assuming Eq. (3.281) as the form of the solution to the 
set of ordinary differential equations with constant coefficients requires that Z  0. It can be 
seen from Eq. (3.281) that  is an Eigenvalue of the rate matrix modified with the free radical 
concentrations. The free radical concentrations can be obtained from Eq. (3.281). The 
modified rate matrix transposed, is a square matrix of nxn. Therefore n Eigenvalues can be 
expected. 
 
Example Composition of Tetra polymer made in CSTR 
Develop the monomer/polymer composition equations for a tetra polymer made from the 
monomers; 
(1) Styrene (STY) 
(2) Acrylonitrile (AN)  
(3) Alphamethylstyrene (AMS) 
(4) Methacrylonitrile (MAN) 
 
*
11
21
31
41
*
12
22
32
42
*
13
23
33
43
*
14
24
34
44
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
...
0
0
0
T
Sty
k
k
k
k
Sty
Sty
k
k
k
k
AN
AN
AN
d
k
k
k
k
AMS
AMS
dt
AMS
k
k
k
k
MAN
MAN
MAN
 (3.282) 
 
 
33
22
44
11
21
31
41
33
11
21
31
41
11
44
22
12
32
12
22
32
42
42
13
23
33
43
11
22
44
33
14
24
34
44
13
23
43
33
11
22
44
14
24
34
k
k
k
k
r
r
r
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
r
r
k
k
k
k
r
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
r
r
r
k
k
k
k
r
r
r
K
 
(3.283) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
152 
Eq. (3.278) can be solved for by the method of Eigenvectors [Varma and Morbidelli, 
1997].  
The reactivity ratios for the 4 monomer system considered are follows [Sharma [2012]}; 
r12 = 0.29; r21 = 0.02; r42 = 0.84; r24 = 1.5; r32 = 0.03; r23 = 0.14; r13 =1.2; r31 = 0.14; 
r14 = 0.25; r41 = 0.25;r34 =10; r43 =10  
 
 
11
21
31
41
11
22
33
44
12
22
32
42
11
22
33
44
13
23
33
43
11
22
33
44
14
24
34
44
11
22
33
44
50
7.14
4
3.4
33.3
1.2
0.83
7.1
0.1
4
0.67
0.1
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
K
 
(3.284) 
 
The free radical concentrations can be solved for from; 
 
 
)
)
*
(
T
M
*
K(M
MM

T
T
K
 
 
*
*
*
*
1
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
11
11
11
11
*
*
*
*
2
1
2
2
2
3
2
4
22
22
22
22
*
*
*
*
33
33
33
33
3
1
3
2
3
3
3
4
*
*
*
*
44
44
44
44
4
1
4
2
4
3
4
4
11
22
3.4
0.83
4
50
7.1
0.67
7.14
33.3
0.1
4
1.2
0.1
50
7
M M
M M
M M
M M
k
k
k
k
M M
M M
M M
M M
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
M M
M M
M M
M M
k
k
k
k
M M
M M
M M
M M
k
k
*
*
*
*
1
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
33
44
*
*
*
*
11
22
33
44
2
1
2
2
2
3
2
4
*
*
*
*
11
22
33
44
3
1
3
2
3
3
3
4
*
*
*
*
11
22
33
44
4
1
4
2
4
3
4
4
.14
4
3.4
33.3
1.2
0.83
7.1
0.1
4
0.67
0.1
M M
M M
M M
M M
k
k
k
k
k
k
M M
M M
M M
M M
k
k
k
k
M M
M M
M M
M M
k
k
k
k
M M
M M
M M
M M
(3.285) 
 
Although there are 16 simultaneous algebraic equations generated from Eq. (3.285) it can 
be realized that M1M1
* radical and M1
*M1 radical can be both treated as M1
* radical. The 
same for the other three radicals M2
*, M3
* and M4
*. Thus four unique equations will be 
generated from the matrix multiplication in Eq. (3.285). The 4 simultaneous algebraic 
equations can be solved for four unknown radical concentrations, M1
*, M2
*, M3
* and M4
*. 
These can then be substituted in Eq. (3.282). The radical concentrations can be obtained in 
terms of the monomer compositions, M1, M2, M3 and M4 and using the homopolymerization 
propagation rate constants, k11, k22, k33 and k44. Eq. (3.282) can then be solved for in terms of 
the concentrations of the four monomers as a function of time. Four simultaneous equations 
and 4 unknowns, M1
*, M2
*, M3
* and M4
* can be obtained by multiplying the jth row and jth 
column on both sides of Eq. (3.285). i.e., the first row and first column, second row and 
second column, third row and third column and fourth row and fourth column. The (j,j) cell 
on both sides of the matrix equation can be seen to vanish. The equations are then; 
 
 
*
*
*
*
3
2
4
11
1
22
2
33
3
44
4
1
1
1
3.4
0.88
4
50
7.14
4
0
M
M
M
k M
k M
k M
k M
M
M
M
 (3.286) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
153 
 
*
*
*
*
3
1
4
22
2
11
1
33
3
44
4
2
2
2
50
7.1
0.67
3.4
33.3
1.2
0
M
M
M
k M
k M
k M
k M
M
M
M
  (3.287) 
 
 
*
*
1
2
4
33
3
11
1
3
3
2
*
*
22
2
44
4
7.14
33.33
0.1
0.833
7.1
0.1
0
M
M
M
k M
k M
M
M
M
k M
k M
 
(3.288) 
 
 
*
*
1
2
4
33
3
11
1
3
3
2
*
*
22
2
44
4
7.14
33.33
0.1
0.833
7.1
0.1
0
M
M
M
k M
k M
M
M
M
k M
k M
 
(3.289) 
 
Given the monomer compositions in the CSTR, M1, M2, M3 and M4 the radical 
concentrations M1
*, M2
*, M3
* and M4
* can be solved from the solution of the four equations 
Eq. (3.286-3.289). The composition of the tetra polymer can be obtained by obtaining the 
incremental rate of addition of the monomer of interest into the copolymer. These are given 
by Eqs. (3.275) and (3.276). The stability of the system of reactions can be studied by 
obtaining the eigenvalues of the K matrix in Eq. (3.283). Should the eigenvalues be all 
negative, then the system is stable. If all but one values are negative then it is an integrating 
system. Should the eigenvalues be positive it is an unstable system. Should the eigenvalues be 
complex conjugates then the system is considered to be oscillatory. This is expected to be 
subcritical and damped. 
 
 
3.12. MULTIPLICITY IN MODEL SOLUTIONS 
 
Sometimes when mathematical models are developed and the solution for the desired 
variable is sought more than one value for the solution can arise. This kind of occurrence is 
called multiplicity. Although mathematically correct often times other considerations may 
have to be used to sift whether or which of these multiple values from the solution of 
equations is most appropriate for the given problem. 
 
 
3.12.1. Launch Angle of Stream of Water during Fire-Fighting 
 
Consider the fire-fighting task during a fire in a nuclear power plant. As shown in Figure 
30.0 a fire truck is directing a stream of water to enter the top of the nuclear reactor that has 
caught fire. If the initial speed of the jet of water is 40 m/s is there a value of launch angle  
of the issuing jet of water that will get the job done? If so what should  be? A model is 
developed for the projectile motion of the stream of water. The stream of water is assumed to 
comprise of discrete particles. The coordinate system is as shown in Figure 30.0. Let (x,y) be 
the coordinates of the particle during its projectile motion at any instant in time t. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
154 
  
Figure 30.0. Fires in a Nuclear Power Plant. 
 
The velocity of the particle at any instant in time t can be resolved into two components, 
(vx, vy). 
During the trajectory of the projectile motion the particle reaches a maximum height H. It 
climbs from the launch point to a maximum height H, and then descends. The two phases of 
the motion can be modeled as follows; 
 
 
2
sin( )
2
i
gt
y
y
v
t
 
(3.290) 
 
Eq. (2.124) is third law of kinematics [Hibbler, 2010] written for the climb from launch 
to the maximum height. During the descent it can be shown the same equation is applicable as 
follows. Let the time taken to reach the maximum height be given by; 
 
 
sin( )
c
v
t
g
 
(3.291) 
 
During the descend the acceleration changes from –g to + g. Hence, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
sin
(
)
2
2
2
2
sin
sin
2
sin
,(
)
sin
2
2
2
2
2
c
i
m
c
c
i
v
g t
t
g
y
y
y
t
t
tt
g
v
v
tgv
gt
gt
or
y
y
v
t
g
g
g
 (3.292) 
 
Eq. (3.292) is identical with Eq.(3.290)! 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
155 
For the stream of water in Figure 30.0, Eq. (3.292) can be written assuming the height of 
the fire truck as 1 m as; 
 
 
2
2
5
1
40sin( )
4.9
,1
10sin
1.225
t
t
or
t
t
 
(3.293) 
 
The horizontal component of the velocity vx remains the same during the projectile 
motion. In the time elapsed t the distance it has moved is 11 m from Figure 30.0. Another 
equation can be written as follows; 
 
 
40cos( )
11
0.275
,
cos
t
or t
 
(3.294) 
 
Substituting Eq. (3.294) in Eq. (3.293); 
 
 
2
2
2
0.337
1
10tan
10tan
0.337 1
tan
cos
,0
0.337tan
10tan
1.337
0
or
 
(3.295) 
 
Eq. (3.295) is a quadratic equation in tan(). The solution for tan() can be seen to be; 
 
 
tan
29.5,0.134  
(3.296) 
 
Two launch angles result as the model solution. These angles for  are 88.10 and 7.650. In 
order to check whether both these angles are possible or whether only one or none of these 
two angles are suitable the maximum height reached by the stream of water can be inspected. 
This is given by Eq. (3.297); 
 
 
2
2
40 sin ( )
1
82.45
2.44
29.81
m
y
and
m  
(3.297) 
 
The times these would occur can be calculated as; 
 
 
40sin( )
4.07
0.543
ct
and
s
g
 
(3.298) 
 
The x displacement corresponding to these two times are then seen to be; 
 
 
x
40cos( )
5.52
21.52
c
c
x
t
and
m  
(3.299) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
156 
21.52 m is greater than the distance of the reactor from the fire truck, i.e., 21.52 > 11 m. 
Hence the  corresponding to this value, 7.650 is not acceptable. The launch angle of 88.10 is 
another possible angle that would hit the top of the reactor during the descend of the stream as 
shown in Figure 30.0. However, the maximum height reached is 82.45 m. This is 16 times the 
height of the reactor. Hence although this is theoretically possible this is not practically 
realizable. 
 
 
3.12.2. Elbow-Up and Elbow Down Solutions of Inverse Kinematics of 
Manipulator 
 
The study of robotics involves the synthesis of some aspects of human function by the 
use of mechanisms, sensors, actuators and computers. Robotics consists of four major areas: 
mechanical manipulation, locomotion, computer vision and artificial intelligence [Craig, 
2005]. Mechanical manipulation in turn comprises of mechanics, control theory and computer 
science. Mathematical models are needed to describe the positions and orientations in three 
dimensional space. For example, the robot arm picking a bolt or placing a knife needs to be 
predicted in space and time coordinates. Kinematics deals with the geometry of mechanical 
manipulators. The study of motion without regard to forces that cause it is considered here. 
The forward kinematics of a manipulator involves the calculation of the space and time given 
the joint angles and link distances. The problem of inverse kinematics of the manipulator 
deals with obtaining the joint angles given the location of the finger tip of the robot in space 
and time. 
 
 
Figure 31.0. Three Arm Manipulator with End Effector. 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
157 
Table 3.8. Denavit Hartenberg Parameters for 3 Arm Planar Manipulator in Figure 2.9 
 
I 
i-1 
ai-1 
di 
i 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
2 
0 
2 
0 
2  
3 
0 
1 
0 
3 
 
Consider a 3 arm planar manipulator with end-effector as shown in Figure 31.0. The 
Denavit-Hartenberg table for this manipulator is given below in table 3.8. 
Given the value of the homogeneous transform from the reference frame of the end 
effector [Craig, 2005], 3
0T, the problem of finding the joint angles 1, 2 and 3 is called the 
inverse kinematics of the manipulator. The reachable workspace of the end effector would be 
a doughnut of outer radius 3.5 m and inner radius 0.5 m. This is provided the joints are 
revolute and can rotate 360 0. Multiplicity of solutions can be expected for the joint angles. 
The physical significance can be a “elbow-up” and “elbow-down” solution or a “reflection” 
solution.  
 
 
1
1
2
2
3
3
1
1
2
2
3
3
0
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
0
0
0
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
c
s
c
s
c
s
s
c
s
c
s
c
T
T T T
 (3.300) 
 
Eq. (3.300) can be written as 
123
123
1
12
123
123
1
12
0
3
0
2
0
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
c
s
c
c
s
c
s
s
T
 
(3.301) 
 
Given that; 
 
 
0
3
0.707
0.707
0
1.8
0.707
0.707
0
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
T
 
(3.302) 
 
Comparing Eq. (3.302) and Eq. (3.301); 
 
 
c123 = 0.707 
(3.303) 
 
 
s123 = 0.707 
(3.304) 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
158 
 
2c1 + c12 = 1.8 
(3.305) 
 
 
2s1 + s12 = 2 
(3.306) 
 
 
0
1
2
3
45  
(3.307) 
 
Squaring and adding Eq. (3.303) and Eq. (3.304) and realizing that  
 
 
c12 = c1c2 – s1s2 & s12 = c1s2 + s1c2 
(3.308) 
 
Thus, 
2
2
2
1.8
2
4
1
0.56
4
c
 
(3.309) 
 
Eq. (3.309) can also be obtained from the geometry of Figure 31.0 by use of law of 
cosines. 
Thus, 2 = 560, 304.10. 560 corresponds to an “elbow-down” solution and 304.1 0 
corresponds to a “elbow-up” solution. Thus although multiplicity is seen both numbers have 
physical significance. 
 
Let  
 = ATAN(0.9) = 420. 
(3.310) 
 
From the geometry of Figure 31.0 and applying the law of cosines to the triangle about 
the angle 1 and 3; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
2cos
42 (2) 1.8
2
4
4 1.8
r  
(3.311) 
 
 
2
2
2
1
1
0.5
2(1)(0.5)cos 45
56
r  
(3.312) 
 
Combining Eq. (3.312) and Eq. (3.310); 
 
 
1
1
9.74
7.02cos
7.39sin
 
(3.313) 
 
Eq. (3.313) can be solved for by using numerical technique such as Newton and Raphson 
technique. MS Excel for Windows 2007 was used on the desktop computer and the solution 
to joint angle 1 is found to be 0.5 radian or 29.30 and 69.60. The convergence was rapid and 
obtained after 2. The result was not sensitive to the initial guess. 3 can then be seen to be 
285.4 0. The 8 different possibilities of the solution to the joint angles can be examined from 
other considerations to detect any infeasibility. 
 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
159 
F. DIMENSIONLESS GROUPS 
 
3.13.1. Reynolds Number 
 
Osborn Reynolds [1883] presented his experimental investigation that lead to the 
introduction of the dimensionless group Reynolds number. His paper on the circumstances 
which determine whether the motion of water shall be direct or sinuous and of the laws of 
resistance in parallel channels was presented to the Royal society 122 years ago.  
 
 
Re
vd
 
(3.314) 
 
Reynolds number is used extensively in industrial practice. It gives the ratio of the inertia 
forces and viscous forces and is used to delineate laminar flow from turbulent flow. 56 
different flow types have been reviewed in Sharma [2010]. A glass tube was mounted 
horizontally with one end in a tank and a valve on the opposite end. A smooth bell mouth 
entrance was attached to the upstream end with a dye jet so arranged that a fine stream of dye 
could be injected at any point in front of the bell mouth. Reynolds supposed the average 
velocity of the fluid, V, as characteristic velocity and the diameter of tube as the characteristic 
length. At small flow rates, the dye stream moved as a straight line through the tube, 
indicating that the flow was laminar. The flow rate was increased, holding d, diameter of the 
tube, , density of fluid and , the viscosity of the fluid. The Reynolds‟ number according to 
Eq. (3.314) also increased with the increase in velocity of the fluid. As discharge rates were 
further increased, a condition was reached at which the dye stream wavered, and then 
suddenly broke up, and was diffused throughout the tube. The nature of flow had changed to 
turbulent flow with its violent interchange of momentum. The orderly movement of laminar 
flow had been completely disrupted. By careful manipulation of variables, Reynolds was able 
to obtain a threshold or cut-off value of Re = 12,000 before turbulence sets in. Later 
investigators obtained the value of 40,000 for the cut-off value using the original equipment 
used by Reynolds. They let the water stand in the tank for several days before the experiments 
and by taking precautions to avoid vibration of the water or equipment. These numbers are 
referred to as the upper critical Reynolds number. Starting with turbulent flow in glass tube, 
Reynolds found that it was always laminar when the velocity is reduced to enable Re < 2000. 
This is the lower critical Reynolds number. With the usual piping installation the flow will 
change from laminar to turbulent in the range of Reynolds numbers from 2000- 4000. 
Reynolds number may be interpreted as the ratio of the bulk transfer of momentum to the 
momentum by shear stress. The physical significance of Reynolds number can be seen to be 
the ratio of the inertial forces to that of the viscous forces.  
 
 
Re
inertial
vd
forces
viscous
force
 
(3.315) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
160 
The higher the viscous forces the momentum transfer is by shear stress and by dragging 
of fresh fluid by moving adjacent layers of fluid. The flow under these circumstances are 
orderly and laminar. When the inertial forces are high, the flow becomes plug. When inertial 
forces are high all the elements in the fluid attempts to move. As the elements are unhindered 
they collide and become wavy or erratic. This is when turbulent flow sets in. 
 
 
3.13.2. Prandtl Number 
 
In 1904, Prandtl [1952] presented the concept of the boundary layer. It provides the 
important link between ideal fluid flow and real fluid flow. For fluids with low viscosity, the 
effect of internal friction in a fluid is appreciable only in a narrow domain surrounding the 
fluid boundaries. From this premise, the flow outside the narrow domain near the solid 
boundaries may be considered as ideal flow or potential flow. Relations within the boundary 
layer region can be computed from the general equation for viscous fluid. The momentum 
equation permits the developing of approximate equation for boundary layer growth and drag. 
When motion is started in a fluid having small viscosity the flow is irrotational initially. The 
fluid at the boundaries has zero velocity relative to the boundaries. As a result, there is a steep 
velocity gradient from the boundary into the flow. The velocity gradient in a real fluid sets up 
near the boundary shear forces that reduce the flow relative to the boundary. That fluid layer 
which has had its velocity affected by the boundary shear is called the boundary layer.  
The velocity in the boundary layer approaches the velocity in the main flow 
asymptotically. The boundary layer is very thin at the upstream end of a streamlined body at 
rest in an otherwise uniform flow. As this layer moves along the body, the continual action of 
shear stress tends to slow down additional fluid particles, causing the thickness of the 
boundary layer to increase with distance from the upstream point. The fluid in the layer is 
also subjected to a pressure gradient determined from the potential flow, that increased the 
momentum of the layer if the pressure decreases downstream and decreases its momentum if 
the pressure increases downstream (adverse pressure gradient). The flow outside the boundary 
layer may also bring momentum into this layer. For smooth upstream boundaries, the 
boundary layer starts out as a laminar boundary layer in which the fluid particles move in 
smooth layers. As the laminar boundary layer increases in thickness, it becomes unstable and 
finally transforms into a turbulent region in which the fluid particles move in zig zag paths 
although their velocity has been reduced by the action of viscosity at the boundary. Where the 
boundary layer has become turbulent, there is still a very thin layer next to the boundary that 
has laminar motion. It is called laminar sub layer. The Prandtl number is given by Eq. 
(3.316); 
 
 
Pr
p
p
C
C
k
k
 
(3.316) 
 
The physical significance of the Prandtl number can be viewed as the ratio of the viscous 
diffusion rate given by the kinematic viscosity,  to the thermal diffusion rate given by the  
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
161 
thermal diffusivity, . Schmidt number is the dimensionless number that is analogous to 
Prandtl number in mass transfer. 
 
 
AB
AB
Sc
D
D
 
(3.317) 
 
 
3.13.3. Biot Number (Heat) and Nusselt Number 
 
The Biot number (heat) is defined by Eq. (3.318); 
 
 
tan
(int
)
(
)
1
tan
(
)
(
)
g
s
s
g
resis
ce
ernal
a
h a
k
conduction
Bi
k
resis
ce
h
external
convection
 
(3.318) 
 
Consider a cold slab at a constant temperature T0, thermal conductivity, ks (W.m-1.K-1), 
width 2a. Let the slab be heated by blowing hot air past the slab as shown in Figure 32.0. Let 
the temperature of the hot air be Tair, such that Tair > T0. The heat transfer rate at given instant 
in time from the hot air to the slab can be written as; 
 
 
"
g
air
s
q
h
T
T
 
(3.319) 
 
Where, q” is the heat flux with units of W.m-2.K-1. The rate of convection from the 
external air to the internal rate of conduction would be equal to each other. This would be the 
case as long as there is no accumulation of heat at the surface. Thus, 
 
 


a
T
T
k
x
T
k
T
T
h
q
c
s
s
s
s
air
g
)
(
"








 
(3.320) 
 
An overall transfer coefficient, U can be obtained as follows; 
 
 
)
air
s
s
c
T
T
T
T
T
 
(3.321) 
 
U is defined as follows; 
 
 
q” = UT 
(3.322) 
 
Eq. (3.322) can be written in combination with Eq. (3.321) as follows; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
162 
 
"
"
"
s
s
q
q
q a
U
h
k
 
(3.323) 
 
Or, 
1
1
s
s
a
U
h
k  
(3.324) 
 
Eq. (3.324) is an expression for the overall heat transfer coefficient as a sum of the 
convective and conductive resistances encountered in its path for heat transfer. Biot number 
(heat) is defined by Eq. (3.318) and gives the ratio of external convective resistance to 
internal conductive resistance. Nusselt number is defined as follows; 
 
 
g
g
h a
Nu
k
 
(3.325) 
 
Although Biot number (heat) and Nusselt number may appear to have similar expression 
of product of heat transfer coefficient and characteristic length and divided by thermal 
conductivity they mean completely different quantities. Nusselt number is the heat transfer 
coefficient made non-dimensionless by the thermal conductivity of the gas and the 
characteristic length. Nusselt number is the ratio of the thermal gradient at the wall divided by 
the average temperature gradient across the entire slab. From the film theory of mass transfer, 
by analogy should all the temperature drop from the gas to solid interface happen within a 
film,  thickness then; 
 
 
g
k
h
 
(3.326) 
 
Combining Eq. (3.326) and Eq. (3.325); 
 
 
a
Nu
 
(3.327) 
 
The Nusselt number is the ratio of the half-width and the film thickness, . By analogy in 
mass transfer, Biot number (mass) and Sherwood numbers can be written as follows; 
 
 
g
As
k a
Bi mass
D
 
(3.328) 
 
 
g
Ag
k a
Sh
D
 
(3.329) 
 
Where DAs and DAg are the binary diffusivities of species A in solid and gas respectively. 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
163 
3.13.4. Mach Number 
 
A supersonic flight record was set by Boeing‟s X-51A Waverider by flying at Mach 5 
speeds at an altitude of 70,000 feet in the skies off the southern California coast in May, 2010 
(33.0). Mach number is a dimensionless group that is obtained by taking the ratio of the 
considered speed and the speed of sound. The unmanned flight lasted for three and half 
minutes. T. von Karman developed the theory of supersonic flight and is affectionately called 
father of supersonic flight. His work on stability of laminar flow, turbulence, airfoils at steady 
state and at transient state, boundary layer flow and supersonic aerodynamics got him a 
citation from the late President J. F. Kennedy. Human flown aircraft at a speed greater than 
that of the speed of sound was achieved for the first time in October, 1947. Bell X-1 research 
rocket plane was piloted by C. Yeager. 
de Laval nozzles are used in steam turbines and rocket engines. It is a convergent-
divergent tube that is hourglass in shape in the lateral direction. A pressurized gas is 
accelerated passing through at supersonic speed and upon expansion exits as exhaust flow. 
The heat energy driving flow is converted into kinetic energy. Design and operation of de 
Laval nozzles need physical property information of gases at subsonic and supersonic speeds. 
The gas flow through a de Laval nozzle as will be discussed in a later chapter is said to be 
isentropic. At subsonic speed the gas is compressible and sound propagates as a small 
pressure wave. At the throat where the cross-sectional area of the pipe is minimal the gas 
velocity attains a sonic state locally. This condition at a Mach number of 1 is said to be 
choked flow [Anderson, 2003]. As the nozzle cross-sectional area increases along the path of 
fluid flow, the gas expands and velocity of fluid reaches supersonic velocity. Here the sound 
wave will not back propagate. The theory underlying analysis of isentropic flow is discussed 
later in this book. 
 
 
Figure 33.0. U.S. Air Force‟s Graphic of X-51A Wave rider. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
164 
3.13.4.1. Speed of Sound 
Sound is known to travel as vibrations in the form of pressure waves in an elastic 
medium. Supersonic speeds are those that are greater than 1,440 m/s. Supersonic fracture is 
motion of cracks that propagate in a solid at speeds greater than that of the speed of sound. 
Fighter aircraft used during wartime are supersonic. Firearm bullets travel at supersonic 
speeds. Space shuttle during portions of reentry travel at supersonic speeds. Wave travelling 
through a bull whip can attain supersonic speed. 
The US Navy F/A-18 at a speed close to that of sound is shown in Figure 34.0. The wake 
region that is denser is formed by condensed water droplets. This can be seen to be as a result 
of shredding of shockwave from the aircraft. This can be explained by phenomena among 
others that are discussed in this book called Prandtl-Galuert singularity. This is also called as 
vapor cone or shock collar. A point in the wake region of the airfoil undergoes a drop in 
pressure. Under certain weather conditions this causes a visible condensation cloud to appear 
in the wake of an aircraft while travelling at transonic speeds. The air pressure in the wake of 
the aircraft can be called as “N-wave”. The transient pressure plot as a function of time 
resembles the English alphabet “N”. The pressure profile of the wave comprises of a leading 
compression component, followed by pressure descent along the diagonal of the letter “N” 
followed by a subsequent return to the normal pressure. These compression clouds can be 
seen during space shuttle launches. About 25 – 40 seconds after the launch the vehicle is 
travelling at transonic speeds and this phenomena happens then. A similar event was observed 
during nuclear tests and the name Wilson cloud came about in the literature. The pressure 
change process is adiabatic.  
Compressibility effects can be seen to be taken into account in the design of supersonic 
aircraft. Rounded nose and straight wings are used for vehicles designed for low speed flight. 
Swept wings, tail surfaces are used for aircraft designed for higher speeds. Sharp nose and 
highly swept wings are used for aircraft designed for very high speed flight. Design of high 
speed aircraft is an important application of compressible flow. The design of gas turbines 
such as flow along the blades and nozzles involves the use of theory and methods of 
compressible flow. Flow in nozzles and blades in steam turbines are another example of 
hypersonic flow. The flow of gases through the valves and in the intake and exhaust systems 
of reciprocating engines can be treated as compressible. Flow through natural gas 
transmission lines cannot be taken as incompressible. Design and optimal operation of 
combustion chambers needs knowledge in compressible flow. 
 
3.13.4.2. Flow Regimes 
Consider flow past an airfoil. Airfoil is a shape given to bodies such as wings of an 
airplane or blades of a turbine. As an airfoil shaped body moves through a fluid an 
aerodynamic force is produced. A component of this force that is normal to the direction of 
motion is called the lift force. The component of the force generated in the surrounding fluid 
that is lateral to the direction of motion is called the drag force. The lift force on the airfoil is 
function of the angle of attack. The lift force can be related to the average velocity of the fluid 
by the theory of circulation and use of Kutta-Joukowski theorem. Mean chamber line is the 
locus of points midway between the upper and lower surfaces of the airfoil. The chord line is 
a straight line connecting the leading and trailing edges of the airfoil. The chord is the length 
of the chord line and is the characteristic dimension of the airfoil section. The maximum 
thickness and the location of the maximum thickness are expressed as a percentage of the 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
165 
chord. In symmetrical coils, both mean chamber line and chord line pass from the center of 
gravity of the airfoil. Aerodynamic center is the chord wise length about which the pitching 
moment is independent of the lift coefficient and the angle of attack. The center of pressure is 
the chord wise location about which the pitching moment is zero. The characteristic shape of 
airfoil consists of a rounded leading edge, followed by a sharp trailing edge and with 
asymmetric chamber. Different flow regimes can be identified as shown in Figure 35.0 and 
Figure 36.0. In order to quantitatively delineate different flow regimes identified qualitatively, 
the dimensionless group Mach number is defined. 
 
 
u
Ma
a  
(3.330) 
 
Where, u is the speed of the fluid and a is the speed of sound. 
 
 
Figure 34.0. Condensation Cloud Due to Prandtl Glauert Singularity. 
 
 
Figure 35.0. Transonic Flows and Bow Shock Formation. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
166 
 
Figure 36.0. Supersonic Flows and Oblique Shock Formation. 
 
The flow is said to be subsonic when the Mach number of the free stream fluid 
approaching the airfoil, M < 0.8. The fluid flows past the airfoil is streamlines at a Mach 
number less than 1. When the Mach number of free stream fluid approaching the airfoil is 0.8 
< 0.8 < M < 1.0 the flow is said to be transonic. As can be seen in Figure 35.0 local regions 
above the airfoil or “pockets” of heterogeneity terminates with a shock wave. Across the 
shock wave there can be seen severe change in properties. The flow is discontinuous across 
the shock wave. When M is slightly greater than 1, shock pattern moves to the trailing edge 
of the airfoil and a second shock wave appears at the leading edge. The second shock wave is 
called the bow shock. After crossing the Bow shock the flow is subsonic. 
When the free stream approach velocity of the fluid, M > 1 the flow is said to be 
supersonic. As can be seen from Figure 36.0, an oblique shock wave is formed and attached 
to the sharp nose of the wedge. Across this shock wave, the streamline direction changes in a 
discontinuous manner. Ahead of the shock, streamlines are straight and parallel and 
horizontal. These are not forewarned about the presence of the body. Theoretical analysis 
about such flow regimes will ensue in a later chapter. 
When M becomes greater than 5 the flow is said to be hypersonic. The temperature, T, 
pressure, p and molar volume, v increase almost explosively across the shock wave. The 
oblique shock that is formed moves closer to the surface. The shock layer becomes very hot. 
It reaches temperatures hot enough to become dissociated from the wedge. Some ionization of 
the gas may also occur. Chemically reacting flows pose a complex flow problem.  
 
 
3.13.5. Fourier, Fick and Newton Numbers 
 
During transient heat conduction, transient mass diffusion and transfer momentum 
transfer the temperature profile, concentration profile and velocity profile varies with time 
and space. These profiles for different geometries and different boundary conditions with the 
governing equation obtained from energy balance, mass balance and momentum balance and 
Fourier‟s law of heat conduction, Fick‟s law of mass diffusion and Newton‟s law of viscosity 
are given in graduate textbooks such as Bird, Stewart and Lightfoot [2006]. The transient 
temperature profile, concentration profile and velocity profile for standard geometries and  
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
167 
boundary conditions derived from the governing equations from energy balance, mass 
balance and momentum balance and damped wave conduction and relaxation equation, 
damped wave diffusion and relaxation equation and damped wave kinematic diffusion and 
relaxation are given in Sharma [2005]. The transient temperature, concentration and velocity 
profiles from Fourier‟s law of heat conduction, Fick‟s law of mass diffusion and Newton‟s 
law of viscosity are described in dimensionless form by use of Fourier number, Fick number 
and Newton numbers. These can be calculated by; 
 
 
2
2
p
t
kt
Fo
d
C d
 
(3.331) 
 
where Fo is the Fourier number,  is the thermal diffusivity (m2.s-1), d the characteristic 
length (m), k the thermal conductivity (W.m-1.K-1),  the density (kg.m-3), Cp the heat 
capacity, (J.kg-1K-1). The physical significance of Fourier number is the ratio of the square of 
penetration distance of heat disturbance at the surface (t)0.5 to the square of the characteristic 
length of the object or medium considered. 
 
 
2
AB
D
t
Fi
d
 
(3.332) 
 
Where Fi is the Fick number, DAB is the binary diffusivity (m2.s-1). The physical 
significance of Fick number is the ratio of the square of penetration distance of mass 
disturbance at the surface (DABt)0.5 to the square of the characteristic length of the object or 
medium considered. 
 
2
t
Ne
d
 
(3.333) 
 
Where Ne is the Newton number,  is the kinematic viscosity (m2.s-1). The physical 
significance of Newton is the ratio of the square of penetration distance of velocity 
disturbance at the surface (t)0.5 to the square of the characteristic length of the object or 
medium considered. 
In addition to the Fourier number, Fick number and Newton number, Vernotte number or 
Maxwell number (heat), Maxwell number (mass), Maxwell number (momentum) are needed to 
characterize the transient temperature, concentration and momentum profiles obtained from 
damped wave transport and relaxation equations. These equations generalize the Fourier‟s 
law of heat conduction, Fick‟s law of mass diffusion and Newton‟s law of viscosity aimed for 
wider applicability. These are defined as follows; 
 
 
2
r
Ve
d
 
(3.334) 
 
Where Ve is the Vernotte number (Cattaneo and Vernotte independently in 1948 and 
1958 postulated the constitutive relation for heat conduction that may be used to generalize  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
168 
Fourier‟s law of heat conduction with wider applicability), r, is the relaxation time (s). The 
relaxation time has been shown by Sharma [2006] to be a third of the collision time of 
electrons in the free electron theory when the acceleration of the electron is accounted for. It 
is also shown to describe the speed of heat propagation or speed of mass propagation or speed 
of momentum propagation as follows; 
 
 
;
; ;
AB
h
m
mom
r
r
r
D
v
v
v
 
(3.335) 
 
Where, vh, vm and vmom are the velocity of heat propagation, velocity of mass propagation 
and velocity of momentum propagation. The velocity of mass propagation was shown related 
to the root mean square velocity of molecule from Stokes-Einstein formulation of diffusion 
and kinetic representation of pressure by Sharma [2007]. The Vernotte number can be 
rewritten as follows; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
h
r
r
v
Ve
d
v
 
(3.336) 
 
The physical significance of Vernotte number is that it represents the heat velocity in the 
dimensionless form. In the asymptotic limit of the heat velocity reaching infinity the 
relaxation time, r would reach zero and the damped wave conduction and relaxation equation 
would revert to the Fourier‟s law of heat conduction. The Vernotte number can also be seen 
as the ratio of the square of the velocity of heat to the square of another characteristic velocity 
 
 
 
2
AB r
m
D
Max
d
 
(3.337) 
 
Maxm given by Eq. (2.145) is Maxwell number (mass). It is the analogous group of 
Vernotte number in heat to damped wave diffusion and relaxation. The physical significance 
of Maxm (mass) is mass diffusion velocity in dimensionless form. 
 
 
2
AB r
mom
D
Max
d
 
(3.338) 
 
Maxmom is given by Eq. (2.146) is Maxwell number (momentum). It is analogous to the 
Vernotte number in heat to damped wave momentum transfer and relaxation. The physical 
significance of Maxmom is that it represents the kinematic viscous momentum transfer velocity 
in dimensionless form. It is the ratio of the diffusional speed to the relaxation/ballistic speed 
in the process. It can be used to gauge how significant is the relaxation phenomena in a given 
application. 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
169 
3.13.6. Sharma Number (MASS) 
 
Mathematical theories have been developed to explain the way the mass transfer 
coefficients correlates with the Reynolds number and Schmidt number. In the film theory, an 
effective film thickness is assumed over which the concentration changes happen. When a 
fluid flows past a surface a certain concentration profile will be established. Upon observation 
of the concentration change with distance it can be inferred that most of the drop in 
concentration can be attributed to a short region that can be denoted as a “effective film 
thickness”. The mass transfer coefficient can be calculated as; 
 
 
"
AB
li
lb
li
lb
D
C
C
N
k C
C
  
(3.339)  
 
Or, 
AB
D
k
 
(3.340) 
 
The penetration theory was developed by Higbie [1935], 7 decades ago. Higbie pointed 
out that in most mass transfer applications the contact time is short that during the transfer the 
process is transient. Consider a semi-infinite medium at a uniform initial concentration of C0. 
At times greater than zero one of the surfaces is maintained at a constant surface 
concentration Cs. By the Fick‟s second law of mass diffusion the governing equation can be 
written as; 
 
 
2
2
AB
u
u
D
t
z
 
(3.341) 
 
Where, 
0
0
A
A
As
A
C
C
u
C
C
 
(3.342) 
 
 
The governing equation given in Eq. (2.130) can be solved using the Boltzmann 
transformation such as
4
AB
z
D
t
. Eq. (2.130) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
u
u  
(3.343) 
 
The dimensionless concentration profile can be shown to be; 
 
 
1
4
AB
z
u
erf
D
t
 
(3.344) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
170 
The mass transfer coefficient can be calculated from Eq. (2.133). The surface flux can be 
written as; 
 
 
0
0
4
AB
As
A
s
As
A
AB
D
C
C
J
k C
C
D
t
 
(3.345) 
 
Thus,  
4
AB
D
k
t
 
(3.346) 
 
Higbie assumed a constant time of exposure for all the eddies of fluid at the interface. 
Instead of the Fick‟s second law of diffusion when the generalized Fick‟s law of diffusion and 
relaxation is used, it was shown in Sharma [2007] that for the semi-infinite medium subject to 
constant wall concentration the surface flux by the method of Laplace transforms can be 
given by; 
 
 
*
2 0 2
J
e
I
 
(3.347) 
 
The mass transfer coefficient can then be seen to be; 
 
 
2 0
2
AB
r
D
k
e
I
 
(3.348) 
 
Where, 
c
r
t
 
Dankwerts [1955] developed the surface renewal theories. Here he derived the mass 
transfer coefficient for the general case where the eddies stay at the surface for varying 
lengths of time and Higbie‟s penetration theory is a particular case where the contact times of 
the eddies is constant. 
 
 
k = (DABS)0.5 
(3.349) 
 
where s is the surface renewal rate. Dobbins [1964] noted that whereas the film theory 
assumes that the concentration profile has reached steady state in the time of mass transfer 
and the Higbie and Dankwerts theories account for the transient nature of diffusion during the 
eddy contact time, they use a semi-infinite boundary condition for zero transfer. Dobbins used 
a finite length boundary condition and modified Eq. (3.349) as; 
 
 
2
coth
b
AB
AB
sz
k
D
s
D
 
(3.350) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
171 
A revisit of Dobbins set of boundary conditions to the governing equation derived by 
using the generalized Fick‟s law of diffusion for finite width can result in the solution given 
earlier in Sharma [3007]. The dimensionless concentration when the relaxation times are 
large can be found as; 
 
 
2
2
1
cos
0.25
cos
n
n
n
u
c e
X  
(3.351) 
 
From a mass balance on a slice of thickness x in the time increment t, and in the limit 
of t and x 0, the following equation results; 
 
 
*
u
J
X  
(3.352) 
 
Eq. (3.352) relates the accumulation of concentration to the rate of change of flux in 
space. 
 
2
2
2
1
2
2
(
0.25
sin
0.25
cos
0.5
cos(
0.25 )cos
)
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
u
c e
X
c e
X
 
(3.353) 
 
Eq. (3.353) was obtained by differentiating Eq. (3.351) with respect to time. Substituting 
Eq. (3.353) in Eq. (3.352) and integrating the dimensionless mass flux can be obtained; 
 
 
2
2
2
1
2
2
*
'
(
0.25
sin
0.25
sin
0.5
cos(
0.25 )sin
)
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
c
J
c
e
X
c e
X
 
(3.354) 
 
Where,  
1
2
1
4
1
;
2
1
2
n
AB r
n
n
w
n
D
c
n
a
 
 
From the final condition,  
c‟ = 0 
(3.355) 
 
The mass transfer coefficient, k can be calculated from the flux at the surface, J*; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
172 
 
2
2
2
1
2
2
*
(
0.25
sin
0.25
sin
0.5
cos(
0.25 )sin
)
n
n
n
n
n
AB
r
n
n
n
n
c
k
J
e
X
D
c e
X
 
(3.356) 
 
Taking only the first term in the infinite series 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
8
cos
0.25
4
0.25
sin
0.25
4
4
4
2
AB r
AB r
AB r
w
w
w
w
W
AB
AB r
r
D
D
D
a e
a
e
a
a
a
k
D
D
 
 
Or, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
cos
0.25
2
0.25
sin
0.25
4
4
4
AB r
AB r
AB r
w
w
W
r
w
D
D
D
e
e
a
a
a
k
Sha
a
 (3.357) 
 
Where Sha is the Sharma number. 
In the short time limit at 0, 
 
 
2
4
0.41
r
w
k
Sha
a
 
(3.358) 
 
Thus the dimensionless group Sharma number is arrived at. Sharma Number can be 
written in terms of Sherwood number, Sh and Maxwell number (mass), Maxm. 
 
 
w
AB
ka
Sh
D
 
(3.359) 
 
 
2
AB r
m
W
D
Max
a
 
(3.360) 
 
The Maxwell number (mass) is the Fick number (analogous to Fourier number) evaluated 
at time t equal to the relaxation time, r. 
 
 
2
*
w
AB r
r
m
AB
w
w
ka
D
k
Sh Max
Sha
D
a
a
 
(3.361) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
173 
Thus Sharma number is the product of Sherwood number and Maxwell number (mass). 
The physical significance of Sharma number gives the ratio of the bulk mass transfer rate and 
the relaxation transfer rate. Maxm is the Maxwell number (mass) and gives the ratio of the 
diffusion rate and relaxation rate. The Sherwood number gives the ratio of the mass transfer 
rate in bulk compared with the diffusion rate. At large relaxation times when the above 
correlation is expected to hold well, it can be seen that the dimensionless mass transfer rate 
becomes independent of the diffusivity. By analogy between mass diffusion and heat 
conduction, Sharma number (heat) can be seen to be; 
 
 
r
p
w
w
h
h
Sha
C a
Sa
 
(3.362) 
 
Where h is the heat transfer coefficient (W.m-2K-1). S is the storage coefficient. Storage 
coefficient has been used in analysis of damped wave conduction and relaxation in Sharma 
[2005]. The storage number is the ratio of thermal mass to that of the relaxation time. It is a 
measure of how much heat that is accumulated per cycle of the propagation of the heat wave. 
It would be interesting to see in an analogous manner to mass transfer whether the product of 
Nusselt number and Vernotte number would give the Sharma Number (heat); 
 
 
2
w
r
r
p
w
w
w
ha
h
h Sha
Nu Ve
k
C a
Sa
a
 
(3.363) 
 
It does! The product of Nusselt number and Vernotte number can be called Sharma 
Number (heat). The physical significance of the Sharma Number (heat) is that it is a measure 
of the ratio of the bulk convective heat transfer rate to the relaxation/ballistic transfer rate in 
the process. It can be seen that storage coefficient S, has units of W/m3/K, when thermal 
conductivity k has units of W/m/K and heat transfer coefficient, h has units of W/m2/K. S is 
volumetric, thermal conductivity is linear and heat transfer coefficient areal when heat 
resistances are calculated from them. The ratio of convection heat transfer to Fourier 
conduction heat transfer is given by Peclect number (heat). 
 
 
RePr
p
w
w
C
a u
ua
Pe
k
 
(3.364) 
 
Peclect number (heat) can be obtained as the product of Reynolds number and Prandtl 
number. The ratio of convection mass transfer to Fick molecular diffusion is given by Peclect 
number (mass). 
 
 
Re
w
w
AB
AB
a u
ua
Pe
Sc
D
D
 
(3.365) 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
174 
G. STOCHASTIC MODELS 
 
3.14. WEINER HOPF INTEGRAL EQUATION 
 
Weiner-Hopf integral equation can be used to estimate the effects of mixing in a CSTR, 
continuous stirred tank reactor. This can be done by estimating the degree of mixedness from 
the variance in SPC, statistical process control charts. For example, consider the manufacture 
of ABS, acrylonitrile butadiene and styrene, engineering thermoplastic using two or three 
CSTRs operated in series and a devolatilizer. The composition distribution of SAN, styrene 
acrylonitrile copolymer can be measured and monitored using data acquisition hooked to 
desktop computers. Often times, the RPPS, rubber phase particle size has to be maintained 
less than a threshold size. Sometimes bimodal distribution may be needed to obtain am 
optimal balance of properties: high gloss and high impact strength. Smaller the RPPS higher 
the gloss. Larger the size of the particle in a certain range higher is the notched Izod impact 
strength.  
In the patent literature and product brochures continuous polymerization of ABS 
engineering thermoplastic has been discussed. ABS with better balance of properties such as 
surface gloss, tensile strength, impact strength, processability, heat resistance with a bimodal 
distribution of particle size. Helical ribbon agitators are used in the CSTR to shear and blend 
well the high viscous, low Reynolds‟ number systems. The monomers and inert diluents used 
are pumped into the reactors with preformed rubber dissolved in the monomers and diluents 
along with the initiator, chain transfer agent, antioxidant, mineral oil, etc. The matrix and 
graft copolymer are formed in the two reactors and the unreacted monomers and diluent are 
removed from the product in the devolatilizer and recycled back to the reactors. The 
schematic of the two CSTR and DV, devolatilizer is shown in Sharma [1997]. 
It was found that the first reactor agitator speed had an effect of lowering the RPPS in 
product with improved gloss (Sharma, [1997]). The second reactor agitator speed was found 
to have an effect on the compositional heterogeneity in the second reactor. It is not clear 
whether the higher agitator speed lowered the mixing times and hence the superior product or 
by shear effect of anchor agitator resulted in a lower RPPS. Lower mixing times would result 
in better grafting which in turn has an effect of lowering the particle size in the product. A 
method is developed to evaluate the mixedness from compositional distribution data. 
Mixing effects can be expected to manifest as the broader variance in the composition 
data from SPC charts for SAN copolymer. The Weiner-Hopf integral equation can be used to 
estimate the degree of mixedness. This can delineate the blend-time mechanism and shear rate 
mechanisms. This can be done by filtering. This approach is in contrast to Atiqullah-Nauman 
model (). They obtain the copolymer composition distribution in CSTR with unmixed feed 
streams using lamellar stretch model that accounts for back mixing. Let the composition of 
copolymer AN be given by y(t) recorded in SPC charts. X is the derived signal. N is the noise 
that can be considered to predominantly arise from improper mixing and experimental error. 
The estimator can be introduced to derive this information. 
 
 
0
1
1,
t
t
t
x
A t
y
d
t
 
(3.366) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
175 
The rest of the problem is to find A(t1,) that would minimize the least squared error; 
 
 
1
1
T
t
J
E
x t
x
t
 
(3.367) 
 
Let A(t1,) = A0(t1,) + (t1,) 
Minimization of J with respect to ; 
 
 
0
J
 
(3.368) 
 
 
0
0
0 0
1
1
1
1
t
t
t t
T
T
T
T
T
T
t
t
t t
J
tr E x t
x
t
E x t
y
A d
AE y
x
t
d
AE y
y
A d d
 (3.369) 
 
J is minimized with respect to  and the Weiner-Hopf integral equation is obtained. 
 
 
0
0
1
t
T
T
t
A E y
y
d
E x t
y
 
(3.370) 
 
 
1
1
{
}
0
T
t
E
x
x t
y
t
 
(3.371) 
 
The error is orthogonal to all data in the set. 
 
 
~
1
0
T
t
E x
y
t
 
(3.372) 
 
 
t0    t  
(3.373) 
 
The degree of mixedness can be estimated from SPC charts of AN composition. 
 
 
3.15. MESOSCOPIC MODELS - DISSIPATIVE  
PARTICLE DYNAMICS  
 
Groot and Warren [1997] reviewed dissipative particle dynamics, DPD as a mesocopic 
simulation tool. They have established useful parameter ranges for simulations. They consider 
atoms as a set of interacting particles. The time evolution of the ensemble is governed by 
Newton‟s equation of motion. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
176 
 
i
i
i
i
dr
v
dt
dv
f
dt
 
(3.374) 
 
They have developed an EOS, equation of state of DPD fluid applicable for polymeric 
systems. EOS for polymeric systems are discussed in more detail in Sharma [19]. EOS of 
DPD fluid is essentially quadratic in density. De Groot and Warren [34] have established 
useful parameter ranges for simulations. These parameters were linked to  interaction 
parameters in Flory-Huggins type models. The link opens the ways to perform large scale 
simulations effectively describing millions of atoms. The molecular fragments are simulated 
first. All atomistic details are retained to yield the  parameters. These results are input into a 
DPD simulation. These simulations are used to study the formation of micelles, networks, 
mesophases and other related phenomena. An illustrative application, they [Groot and 
Warren, 1997] have calculated the interfacial tension, , between homopolymer melts as a 
function of interaction parameter,  and N and found a universal scaling collapse when 
04
B
k T
 is plotted against N for N >1. The use of DPD to simulate the dynamics of 
mesoscopic systems was discussed and a possible problem with the timescale separation 
between particle diffusion, and momentum diffusion (viscosity) was indicated. An example of 
soft condensed matter was given. They are neither completely solid nor completely liquid. 
The relevant length scale is between the atomistic scale and the macroscopic scale. For 
example, in polymer gels, this length-scale is set by the distance between the cross-links in 
the gel. Phase diagrams of polymer and its rheology was studied using a simple bead-and-
spring model. This model can be used to predict linear viscoelastic behavior. No 
hydrodynamic interactions were considered. For polymer-gels, the nature of the chemistry is 
not as important as the life-time structure of the polymer connections are. 
Three methods used to describe polymers confined to lattice conformations: Monte Carlo 
methods of lattice polymers, self-consistent field theory and dynamic density functionality 
theory are not well suited for branched polymers. The full connection from atomistic to the 
macroscopic world cannot be made. DPD, discrete particle dynamics simulation technique 
was introduced by Hoogerbruge and Koelman. The simulation of soft spheres was performed 
whose motion is governed by certain collision rules.  
The force acting on a “particle” consists of three parts each of which is pairwise additive. 
The three forces are as follows: 
 
 
FC (conservative force) 
(3.375) 
 
 
FD (dissipative force 
(3.376) 
 
 
Fk (random force 
(3.377) 
 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
177 
They showed that the dissipative force and the random force have to satisfy a certain 
relation. 
 
 
C
D
R
i
ij
ij
ij
j i
f
F
F
F
 
(3.378) 
 
where the sum runs over all other particles within a certain cut-off radius rc. Here the cut-off 
radius, rc was taken as 1. The conservative force is a soft repulsion acting along the line of 
centers and is given by; 
 
 
^
1
C
ij
ij
ij
ij
F
a
r
r (rij < 1) 
(3.379) 
 
0
C
ij
F
 (rij  1) 
 
aij is a maximum repulsion between particle i and particle j; 
 
 
^
ij
i
j
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
 
(3.380) 
 
The remaining two forces are a dissipative or drag force and a random force. They are 
given by; 
 
 
^
^
D
D
ij
ij
ij
ij
ij
F
r
r
v
r  
(3.381) 
 
 
^
R
R
ij
ij
ij
ij
F
r
r  
(3.382) 
 
Where D and R are r –dependent weight functions vanishing for r > rc =1.  
where, vij = vi – vj 
ij (t) – random fluctuating variable using Gaussian statistics. 
 
 
( )
0
'
'
ij
ij
kl
ik
jl
il
jk
t
t
t
t
t
 
(3.383) 
 
These forces also act along the line of centers and conserve linear and angular 
momentum. An independent random function for each pair of particles can be associated  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
178 
with. One weight function can be chosen arbitrarily and the other is then fixed. A relation 
between the amplitudes and kBT exist. 
 
 
2
2
2
(1
) ,(
1),0,
0
2
D
R
B
r
r
r
r
r
k T
 
(3.384) 
Euler-type algorithm was used to advance the set of positions and velocities; 
 
 
,
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
r t
t
r t
tv t
v t
t
v t
tf t
f t
t
f
r t
t
v t
t
 
(3.385) 
 
Random force becomes; 
 
 
^
1/2
R
R
ij
ij
ij
ij
r
t
r  
(3.386) 
 
Where, ij is a random number with zero mean and unit variance, chosen independently 
for each pair of interacting particles and at each time step. In the context of DPD, a modified 
version of the velocity-Verlet algorithm is as follows; 
 
 
2
~
~
2
,
2
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
t f t
r t
t
r t
tv t
v t
t
v t
tf t
f t
t
f
r t
t
v t
t
t
v t
t
v t
f t
f t
t
 
(3.387) 
 
It can be seen from Eq. (3.387) that the force varies with the velocity. If there is no 
random or dissipative force present this algorithm would be exact to 
2
O
t
 at  = ½. The 
order of algorithm is not clear because of the stochastic nature of the process. The stochastic 
differential equations can be integrated and the random force can be interpreted as a Weiner 
process. They considered the motion of a particle in a liquid. On account of collisions with 
other particles a random force can be seen to be exerted on the particle. The mean force acting 
on the particle is 0 but the variance of the force is finite. The force uncorrelated between time 
steps; 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
179 
 
2
1
2
0
2
2
2 2
2
1
'
'
N
i
i
F
f t dt
t
t
f
t t
N
N
 
(3.388) 
 
The Fokker-Planck equation can be written as; 
 
 
c
D
t
 
(3.389) 
 
Where, c and D are evolution operators that can be extracted from the time-evolution 
governing the motion of the particles. The Louisville operator of the Hamiltonian system 
interacted with conserved forces FC, the second operator D contains the dissipative and noise 
terms. The dissipative and random forces are set to zero. What is left is the Hamiltonian 
system. In the canonical ensemble, the Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution can be seen as the 
solution to the Fokker Planck equation. 
 
 
2
2
,
i
B
B
i
P
U
mk T
k T
eq
i
i
r P
e
 
(3.390) 
 
Eq. (3.390) is the solution of; 
 
 
0
eq
c
eq
t
 
(3.391) 
 
The time step size was chosen as a compromise between fast simulation the equilibrium 
condition. The repulsion parameter „a‟ in Eq. (3.197) need be chosen. For the thermodynamic 
state of an arbitrary liquid is to be described correctly by the soft sphere model, the 
fluctuations in the liquid should be described correctly. The EOS of the polymer is obtained 
from simulations: Pressure as a function of density for various repulsion parameters. The 
virial theorem pressure P is obtained. 
 
 
H. THERMODYNAMIC ANALYSIS 
 
3.16. ANALYSIS OF NTE MATERIALS 
 
3.16.1. Overview 
 
The volume expansivity of pure substances is defined as [Smith et al. 2005]; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
180 
 
1
P
V
V
T
 
(3.392) 
 
It is a parameter that is used to measure the volume expansivity of pure substances and is 
defined at constant pressure, P. In the field of materials science, the property of linear 
coefficient of thermal expansion is an important consideration in materials selection and 
design of products. This property is used to account for the change in volume when the 
temperature of the material is changed. The linear coefficient of thermal expansion is defined 
as; 
 
 
0
0
0
0
f
f
l
l
l
l
T
T
l
T
T
 
(3.393) 
 
For isotropic materials,  = 3. Instruments such as dilatometers, XRD, X-ray diffraction 
can be used to measure the thermal expansion coefficient. Typical values of volume 
expansivity for selected isotropic materials at room temperature is provided in Table 3.9. 
As can be seen from Table 3.9 the volume expansivity for pure substances are usually 
positive. Some cases it can be negative. Examples of materials given with negative values for 
volume expansivity in the literature are water in the temperature range of O – 4 K, honey, 
mononoclinic Sellenium, Se, Tellerium, Te, quartz glass, faujasite, cubic Zirconium 
Tungstate, ZrW2O8 [Jakubinek et al. 2008] in the temperature range of 0.3 – 1050 K. 
ZerodourTM [Askeland and Fulay, 2006] is a glass-ceramic material that can be controlled to 
have zero or slightly negative thermal coefficient of expansion and was developed by Schott 
Glass Technologies. It consists of a 70-80 wt % crystalline phase with high-quartz structure. 
The rest of the material is a glassy phase. The negative thermal expansion coefficient of the 
glassy phase and the positive thermal expansion coefficient of the crystalline phase are 
expected to cancel out each other leading to a zero thermal coefficient material. ZerodurTM 
has been used as the mirror substrate on the Hubble telescope and the Chandra X-ray 
telescope. A dense, optically transparent and zero-thermal expansion material is necessary in 
these applications since any changes in dimensions as a result of the changes in the 
temperature in space will make it difficult to focus the telescopes appropriately. Material 
scientists have developed ceramic materials based on sodium zirconium phosphate, NZP that 
have a near-zero-thermal-expansion coefficient.  
The occurrence of negative values of volume expansivity ab initio, is a violation of 
second law of thermodynamics according to some investigators such as Stepanov [2000]. 
They propose that the first law of thermodynamics be changed from dU = dQ – PdV to dU = 
dQ + PdV in order to work with materials with zero or negative coefficient of thermal 
expansion. In a famous problem such as the development of the theory of the velocity of 
sound such a change from defining an isothermal compressibility to isentropic 
compressibility brought the experimental observations closer to theory [Anderson, 2003]. The 
proposal from this study is in part motivated by the work of Laplace (see II. Historical Note 
below).  
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
181 
Table 3.9. Volume Expansivity of Selected Materials at Room Temperature 
 
# 
Material 
, Volume Expansivity (*10-6 K-1) 
1 
Aluminum 
75.0 
2 
Copper 
49.8 
3 
Iron 
36.0 
4 
Silicon 
9.0 
5 
1020 Steel 
36.0 
6 
Stainless Steel 
51.9 
7 
Epoxy 
165.0 
8 
Nylon 6,6 
240 
9 
Polyethylene 
300.0 
10 
Polystyrene 
210 
11 
Partially Stabilized ZrO2 
31.8 
12 
Soda-Lime Glass 
27.0 
13 
Zirconium Tungstate ZrW2O8 
-27.0 
14 
Faujasite 
-12.0 
15 
Water (0 – 4 K) 
Negative 
16 
Honey 
Negative 
 
 
3.16.2. Historical Note 
 
By 17th century it was realized that sound propagates through air at some finite velocity. 
Artillery tests has indicated that the speed of sound was approximately 1140 ft/s. These tests 
were performed by standing a known large distance away from a cannon, and noting the time 
delay between the light flash from the muzzle and the sound of the discharge. In proposition 
50, Book II of his Principia Newton [1687] theorized that the speed of sound was related to 
the elasticity of the air and can be given by the reciprocal of the compressibility. He assumed 
that the sound wave propagation was an isothermal process. He proposed the following 
expression for the speed of sound; 
 
 
1
T
c
  
(3.394) 
 
Where the isothermal compressibility is given by; 
 
 
1
T
T
V
V
P
 
(3.395) 
 
Newton calculated a value of 979 ft/s from this expression to interpret the artillery test 
results. The value was 15% lower than the gunshot data. He attributed the difference between 
experiment and theory to existence of dust particles and moisture in the atmosphere. A  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
182 
century later Laplace [1787] corrected the theory by assuming that the sound wave 
propagation was isentropic and not isothermal. He derived the expression used to this day to 
instruct senior level students in Gas Dynamics [Anderson, 2003] for the speed of sound as; 
 
 
1
s
c
 
(3.396) 
 
 
1
s
s
V
V
P
 
(3.397) 
 
By the demise of Napoleon the great the relation between propagation of sound in gas 
was better understood. 
 
 
3.16.3. Theoretical Analysis 
 
Clapeyron equation can be derived to obtain the lines of demarcation of solid phase from 
liquid phase, liquid phase from vapor phase and solid phase from vapor phase in a Pressure-
Temperature diagram for a pure substance. This can be done by considering a point in the 
demarcation line and a small segment in the demarcation line. At the point the free energy of 
the solid and liquid phases can be equated to each other at equilibrium. The enthalpy change 
during melting can be related to the entropy change of melting at a certain temperature of 
phase change. Along the segment the change in free energy dGs and dGl in the solid and 
liquid phases at equilibrium can be equated to each other. The combined two laws of 
thermodynamics are applied and an expression for dP/dT can be obtained. Sometimes when 
ideal gas can be assumed this expression can be integrated to obtain useful expressions that 
are used in undergraduate thermodynamics instruction. A similar analysis is considered here 
using Helmholz free energy. At the point and segment of the phase demarcation line of solid 
and liquid in a Pressure-Temperature diagram of a pure substance; 
 
 
s
L
s
L
A
A
dA
dA
 
(3.398) 
 
 
S
S
L
L
SL
SL
U
TS
U
TS
T S
U
 
(3.399) 
 
Applying the first and second law of thermodynamics to change in Helmholz free energy; 
 
 
dA
dU
TdS
PdV
SdT  
(3.400) 
 
For reversible changes at equilibrium; 
S
sat
s
sat
L
L
sat
L
sat
dA
P dV
S dT
dA
P dV
S dT
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
183 
 
sat
SL
SL
SL
SL
dV
S
U
dT
P
T P
 
(3.401) 
 
For physical changes Eq. (3.401) can be seen to be always positive. This is because of the 
lowering of pressure as solid becomes liquid and the internal energy change is positive 
resulting in a net positive sign in the RHS, right hand side of Eq. (3.401). No ideal gas law 
was assumed. Only the first two laws of thermodynamics was used and reversible changes 
were assumed in order to obtain Eq. (3.401). Thus reports of materials with negative thermal 
expansion coefficient is inconsistent with Eq. (3.401). What may be happening are chemical 
changes. Strong hydrogen bonded water in 0-4 0K shrinks upon heating due to chemical 
changes. This cannot be interpreted using laws that are developed to describe physical 
changes. In the example of faujasite may be lattice structure changes take place upon heating. 
What do you do ? For ideal gas, it is shown below that the volume expansivity can be related 
to the reciprocal of absolute temperature. Per the third law of thermodynamics the lowest 
achievable temperature is 0 0K. Hence volume expansivity is always positive for physical 
changes. From Eq. (3.392); 
 
 
1
P
V
V
V
T
 
 
 
From Maxwell Relations, 
 
 
P
T
V
S
T
P
 
(3.402) 
 
Eq. (3.402) can be seen to be the case as follows. The free energy G of pure substances is 
defined as; 
 
 
G
H
TS  
(3.403) 
 
Where, H is the enthalpy (J/mole), S is the entropy (J/mole/K)  
 
 
dG
d H
TS
dH
TdS
SdT  
(3.404) 
 
Combining Eq. (3.404) with the First Law of Thermodynamics, 
 
 
dG
TdS
VdP
TdS
SdT
VdP
SdT   
(3.405) 
 
It may be deduced from Eq. (14) that; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
184 
 
T
P
G
V
P
G
S
T
 
(3.406) 
 
(3.407) 
 
P
G
S
T
 
(3.408) 
 
The reciprocity relation can be used to obtain the corresponding Maxwell relation. The 
order of differentiation of the state property does not matter as long as the property is an 
analytic function of the two variables. Thus, 
 
 
2
2
G
G
P T
T P  
(3.409) 
 
Combining Eq. (3.409) with Eq. (3.406); 
 
 
P
T
V
S
T
P
  
(3.410) 
 
Thus Eq. (3.410) can be derived. Combining Eq. (3.392) and Eq. (3.410); 
 
 
T
S
V
P
 
(3.411) 
 
For a reversible process, the combined statement of 1st and 2nd laws [Smith et al., 2005] 
can be written as; 
 
 
dH
TdS
VdP  
(3.412) 
 
At constant temperature for reversible process for real substances; 
 
 
T
T
H
S
T
V
P
P
 
(3.413) 
 
Combining Eq. (21) and Eq. (19); 
 
 
1
1
T
H
T
V
P
 
(3.414) 
 
Or 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
185 
 
1
1
T
H
T
VT
P
 
(3.415) 
 
For ideal gases Eq. (3.415) would revert to the volume expansivity,  would equal the 
reciprocal of absolute temperature. This would mean that  can never be negative as 
temperature is always positive as stated by the third law of thermodynamics. So materials 
with negative values for  ab initio are in violation of the combined statement of the 1st and 
2nd laws of thermodynamics. Negative temperatures are not possible for vibrational and 
rotational degrees of freedom. A freely moving particle or a harmonic oscillator cannot have 
negative temperatures for there is no upper bound on their energies. Nuclear spin orientation 
in a magnetic field is needed for negative temperatures [Kittel, 1980]. This is not applicable 
for engineering applications. Enthalpy variation with pressure is weak and small for real 
substances. This has to be large to obtain a negative quantity in Eq. (3.415).  
 
 
3.16.4. Proposed Isentropic Expansivity 
 
Along similar lines to the improvement given by Laplace to the theory of the speed of 
sound as developed by Newton (as discussed in Section II Historical Note) a isentropic 
volume expansivity is proposed. 
 
 
1
s
S
V
V
T
 
(3.416) 
 
Using the rules of partial differential for three variables, any function f in variables 
(x,y,z) it can be seen that; 
 
 
z
y
z
x
f
f
f
y
x
x
y
x
 
(3.417) 
 
Thus, 
 
 
s
P
T
S
V
V
V
P
T
T
P
T
 
(3.418) 
 
Let, 
 
 
S
P
T
 
(3.419) 
 
Plugging Eq. (27) into Eq. (26); 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
186 
 
1
s
P
T
S
V
V
T
 
(3.420) 
 
At constant pressure, 
 
 
dH
dU
PdV   
(3.421) 
 
Eq. (3.421) comes from H = U + PV the definition of specific enthalpy in terms of 
specific internal energy, U, pressure and volume, P and V respectively. Eq. (3.421) can be 
written for ideal gas as; 
 
 
P
V
C
C
dT
PdV   
(3.422) 
 
It can be realized from Eq. (3.422) that; 
 
 
P
V
P
P
C
C
V
V
T
P
 
(3.423) 
 
Plugging Eq. (32) into Eq. (30); 
 
 
P
V
s
P
T
S
C
C
V
V
C
T
P
 
(3.424) 
 
Or, 
 
 
1
P
V
P
T
s
S
C
C
C
V
V
T
VP
V
 
(3.425) 
 
Eq. (3.425) can be written in another form as follows; 
 
 
2
2
P
p
T
s
T
T
VC
V
 
(3.426) 
 
The isobaric expansivity gets squared in Eq. (3.426). Even when negative values arise for 
this quantity the isentropic volume expansivity can be expected to be positive as long as; 
 
 
2
2
P
p T
T
VC
 
(3.427) 
 
 
For substances with negative coefficient of thermal expansion under the proposed 
definition of isentropic volume expansivity, s does not violate the laws of thermodynamics 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
187 
quid pro quo. Considering the thermal expansion process for pure substances in general and 
materials with negative coefficient of thermal expansion in particular, the process is not 
isobaric. Pressure can be shown to be related to the square of the velocity of the molecules.  
 
 
3.16.5. Measurments of Volume Expansivity Not Isobaric 
 
The process of measurement of volume expansivity cannot be isobaric in practice. When 
materials expand the root mean square velocity of the molecules increases. For the materials 
with negative coefficient of thermal coefficient the velocity of molecules are expected to 
decrease. In either case, forcing such a process as isobaric is not a good representation of 
theory with experiments. Such processes can even be reversible or isentropic. Experiments 
can be conducted in a reversible manner and the energy may be supplied or may be removed 
as the case may be. Hence it is proposed to define volume expansivity at constant entropy. 
This can keep the quantity per se from violation the laws of thermodynamics. 
 
 
3.16.6. Significance of Treatment of Materials with NTE 
 
Recently, Miller et al. [2009] presented a review article on materials that were observed 
to exhibit negative thermal expansion. Most materials demonstrate an expansion upon 
heating. Few materials are known to contract. These materials are expected to exhibit a NTE, 
negative thermal expansion coefficient. These materials include complex metal oxides, 
polymers and zeolites as shown in Table 3.10. These can be used to design composited with 
zero coefficient of thermal expansion. When the matrix has a positive thermal expansion 
coefficient and the filler material has a negative thermal expansion coefficient the net 
expansion coefficient of the composite can be dialed in to zero. They explore supramolecular 
mechanisms for exhibition of NTE. Examples of materials where reports indicate NTE with 
the references are as follows; 
 
Table 3.10. Materials that Possess NTE 
 
# 
Material 
Journal 
Reference 
1.0 
ZrW2O8, Zirconium Tungstate (cubic 
lattice) 
Acta 
Crystallography 
[Evans et al., 1999] 
2.0 
(ZrO)2VP2O7 
US Patent 
[Sleight, 1994] 
3.0 
HfW2O8, Halfnium Tungstate 
(orthorhombic) 
J. Appl. Phys. 
[Jorgensen et al., 
2001] 
4.0 
ZrMo2O8, Zirconium molybdate, 
(cubic) 
Chem. Mater. 
[Lind et al., 1998] 
5.0 
Silicalite-1 & Zirconium Silicalite-1 
Mater. Res. Bulletin 
[Bhange et al. 2005] 
6.0 
CuScO2 (delafossite structure) 
Chem. Mater. 
[Li et al., 2002] 
7.0 
Polydiacetylene Crystal 
J of Polym. Sci. 
[Baughman et al., 
1973] 
8.0 
Graphite Fiber Composites 
Proc. of Royal 
Society 
[Rupnowski et al., 
2005] 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
188 
A careful study of these materials under isentropic heating is suggested. The volume 
expansivity then will be within the predictions of the laws of thermodynamics. Further studies 
on chemical changes on heating for these materials are suggested. Strong hydrogen bonded 
systems may also be considered as strongly interacting systems. 
 
 
3.16.7. Conclusions 
 
For physical changes Eq. (3.401) can be seen to be always positive. This is because of the 
lowering of pressure as solid becomes liquid and the internal energy change is positive 
resulting in a net positive sign in the RHS, right hand side of Eq. (3.401). No ideal gas law 
was assumed. Only the first two laws of thermodynamics were used and reversible changes 
were assumed in order to obtain Eq. (3.401). Thus reports of materials with negative thermal 
expansion coefficient are inconsistent with Eq. (3.401).  
For ideal gases Eq. (3.415) would revert to the volume expansively,  would equal the 
reciprocal of absolute temperature. This would mean that  can never be negative as 
temperature is always positive as stated by the third law of thermodynamics. So materials 
with negative values for  ab initio are in violation of the combined statement of the 1st and 
2nd laws of thermodynamics. 
Along similar lines to the improvement given by Laplace to the theory of the speed of 
sound as developed by Newton (as discussed in Section II Historical Note) an isentropic 
volume expansivity is proposed by Eq. (3.416). This can be calculated using Eq. (3.426) from 
isobaric expansivity, isothermal compressibility and a parameter  that is a measure of 
isentropic change of pressure with temperature. Eq. (34) can be used to obtain the isentropic 
expansivity in terms of heat capacities at constant volume and constant pressure and 
isothermal compressibility at a given pressure and temperature of the material. 
Chemical changes have to be delineated from physical changes when heating the 
material.  
 
 
I. OPTIMIZATION STUDIES 
 
3.17. LIGHT TO ELECTRICITY CONVERSION –  
OPTIMAL TEMPERATURE 
 
The world‟s largest electric power generating system using CSP concentrated solar power 
technology has been commissioned by NRG solar along with Bright source energy in 2013. 
The capacity is 392 MW. CSP used a field of mirrors to concentrate sunlight onto thermal 
receivers mounted on top of towers. Lower cost of production and zero emissions are 
expected from use of solar power plants. The technology is low risk. The efficiency of 
conversion of sunlight to useful energy using photovoltaic cell technology hovers around 
15%. Photovoltaic efficiency of PV cells is 8% for solar cells made from amorphous silicon. 
Their efficiency has increased now to 14%. This can be further increased to 20% by use of 
thin films that contain small amounts of crystals of silicon. Single crystal silicon can be used 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
189 
to make the “most efficient” solar cells with 30% efficiency. These PV cells are more 
expensive. 
A team of researchers from North Carolina State University has fabricated a “super 
absorbing” design that can be used in order to maximize the light absorption efficiency of the 
thin film solar cells while minimizing the manufacturing costs, according to EE times – Asia 
dated March 3rd 2014. Their design can decrease the thickness of the semiconductor materials 
in thin film solar cells by an order of magnitude without compromising the capability of solar 
light absorption. 100 nm amorphous silicon layer is a requirement in state-of-the art solar cell 
design. 90% of incident solar beam can be absorbed using 10 nm thick layer of amorphous 
silicon. 
In Figure 32.0 is shown the design of the super absorbing solar cell. The core of the 
rectangular onion like configuration is made up of a semiconductor layer. This layer is coated 
by 3 layers of AR, anti-reflection coating that transmits light at a greater efficiency. The 
researchers first estimated the intrinsic light trapping efficiency of the semiconductor 
material. Then they devised a structure where the light absorption efficiency is equal to that of 
the intrinsic efficiency of the semiconductor material. 
A team of scientists from CIT, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 
developed flexible solar cells that enhance the absorption of sunlight and hence the 
photovoltaic efficiency using fraction of expensive semi-conductor material. According to 
Harry Atwater, director of Caltech‟s Resnick Institute that focuses on sustainability research, 
“these solar cells have, for the first time, surpassed conventional light-trapping limit for 
absorbing materials” (Anon., 2010). They built their solar cells using silicon wires embedded 
within a transparent, flexible polymer film. Black paint can absorb light well, but may not 
generate electricity. 
These solar cells convert most photons absorbed into electrical energy. These wires have 
what is called a near perfect internal quantum efficiency. A high-quality solar cell is built for 
high absorption of light and good conversion of photons to electric current. These wires are 
painted with anti-reflective coating prior to being embedded into the transparent polymer. 
Each wire is about 1 mm in diameter and 30-100 mm in length. 2% of the material is silicon 
and 98% polymer. This brings down the cost of the solar cell. These solar cells are also 
flexible. Photovoltaic cells respond only to a narrow part of the sun‟s spectrum. In order to 
circumvent the lower efficiency on account of absorption of narrow part of the spectrum some 
developers prepare layered materials. The efficiency goes up, but the material becomes 
expensive as well.  
 
 
Figure 37.0. Design of Super absorbing Solar Cell Design with Higher Light Absorption Efficiency. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
190 
Cloudy days may lower the efficiency. Scientists at Ohio State University developed a 
doped polymer, oligothiopene. The resulting substance was responsive to wavelengths from 
300 nm to 1000 nm. The spectrum of ultraviolet (UV) to near infra-red is spanned in this 
range. Traditional silicon cells, au contraire, function in the 600 nm to 900 nm range. This 
narrower range is between orange and red. The doped polymer both fluoresces and 
phosphoresces. Fluorescence emanates from electrons that get excited by incident rays of 
sunlight travel from a higher energy state and drop back to a lower energy state. Some light is 
emitted. The wavelength of the emitted light is in infrared range and not visible. This emitted 
light is seldom reused. Reuse of emitted light may improve the photovoltaic efficiency. These 
polymers are cheaper to produce compared with silicon. Hence they can be considered even if 
their photovoltaic efficiencies are lower. The relaxation time (Sharma, 2005) of these 
electrons during fluorescence of the doped polymer comes up from a few picoseconds in 
other solar materials to a few microseconds. 
A full spectrum solar cell that absorbs the full spectrum of sunlight from the near infrared 
and far ultraviolet to electric current can be prepared from an alloy of indium, gallium and 
nitrogen. This was made possible by a serendipitous observation by researchers at Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory interacting with the crystal-growing research team at Cornell 
University and Japan‟s Ritsumeikan University. This observation was that the band gap of the 
semiconductor indium nitride is not 2 eV as previously thought, but instead is a much lower 
0.7 eV. Solar cells made from this alloy would be the most efficient and can be lower in cost 
as well. 
The efficiency of photovoltaic cells is limited because of a number of factors. Some light 
energy that gets absorbed is rejected as waste heat. There exists a band gap in semi-conductor 
materials that the solar cells are made out of. Incoming photons of the right energy knock 
electrons loose and leave holes and migrate in the np junction to form an electric current. 
Photons with less energy than the band gap slip right through. Red light photons are not 
absorbed by high-band-gap semiconductors. Photons such as blue light photons that possess 
higher energy than the band gap are absorbed. Excess energy is dissipated as heat. There is a 
maximum efficiency limit for a solar cell made from a single material for converting light 
into electric power. This is about 30%. In practical applications it is about 25%. Stacks or 
layers of different materials are attempted in order to increase the efficiency. 
CIGS, CuInxGa1-xSe2 based photovoltaic thin films can deliver sunlight to electricity 
conversion performance greater than that of CdTe or silicon based thin films. Nanosolar 
(Contreras et al., 2006) has developed a process with high-throughput, high-yield printing of 
nanoparticles onto low-cost substrates and formation of solar cells. CIGS based PV thin films 
can deliver sunlight to electricity conversion efficiencies of 19.5% (Hegedus, 2006). NREL 
has certified the solar cell efficiency of 14% achieved by nanosolar with lower cost materials 
using nanotechnology. CIGS based thin films result in higher efficiencies. They are coated 
with a homogeneously mixed ink of nanoparticles using wet coating techniques. CIGS roll-
printing technology developed by nanosolar uses a combination of high-speed, high-yield, 
nonvacuum, wet coating of nanoparticles onto low cost per unit area of metal foil substrates 
with RTP (Rapid Thermal Processing) techniques. Nanosolar‟s rapid thermal processing of 
nanoparticle-based coatings resulted in solar-cell efficiencies confirmed by NREL (National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory) to be 14.5% which amounts to a world record for any 
printable solar cell. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
191 
New discoveries such as the CNT (carbon nanotubes) are expected to increase the 
photovoltaic efficiency of solar cells to over 40%. For now, in areas, where the population 
density is sparse, and sunlight is abundantly available for most of the year the solar power 
plants may be profitable. This can be seen by a positive PW (present worth) value. They end 
up using large area. The solar panels are not protected from birds and other forms of dust that 
degrade their operations. Lenses and mirrors can be used to concentrate the sunlight and 
energy storage devices can store the energy in useful chemical forms such as batteries for use 
at night and during rainy days. Someday technology in solar energy generation will be as 
technically efficient as that of the combined steam and gas cycle power plant. By use of both 
the steam and gas turbines the Carnot cycle efficiency has been increased from 30% to 50%. 
After nearly two centuries since the discovery of the steam engine by James Watt, from the 
point of view of thermodynamics that defines the limits of machines, what are the issues 
involved in solar power plant. 
How can a paradigm shift be effected from: “there is no such thing as a free lunch”. Can 
solar energy be used to power a robot that can be used for transportation? What happens when 
this goes out of control? What are the hidden safety hazards in solar technology? Solar energy 
may be tapped in three different ways; (i) Solar Thermal Power, (ii) Photovoltaic Panels, and 
(iii) solar heaters. In method (i) steam is generated in large boilers to turn turbines and 
generate electricity comparable in capacity to coal-fired boiler-based power plants. 
Photovoltaic panels can be used to convert directly the solar irradiance (w/m2) into electricity. 
This technology is used to meet peak load needs and distributed power needs. Small power 
plants of up to 50 MW can be built using panels. The capacity of the recently commissioned 
De Soto Solar Power Generation Center in Florida is 24 MW and is less than 50 MW. Solar 
irradiance (w/m2) is used to heat water or air and can be used for residential heating purposes. 
Solar power plant technology can be used to produce base-load, large-scale power at low 
technical risk. These can replace coal-fired boiler based power plants. Heat energy storage 
devices have been invented that can provide for uninterrupted services such as during the 
night hours, rainy days, etc. Lunar power can also be tapped into. Heat storage elements used 
are concrete, molten salts and pressurized water. The capital solar plant costs and the plant 
utilization factor continue to affect the bottom line. Spain has five such plants under 
development and two that have been already commissioned. Investments have been made in 
several countries across the globe to advance the design of solar mirrors and lenses. These are 
used to gather the sunlight and focus on a fuel source to generate of electricity. Full scale 
commercial operations of such power plants with capacities in the range of 20-200 MW are 
expected by 2011. The cost per kWh is continuing to be the main concern. Optimization 
strategies that are being developed at this writing could lead to significant cost reductions and 
may be expected to improve the overall output efficiency. Cost effective storage devices are 
also expected. 
 
Present worth (pw) of solar power plants: A rapidly declining cost curve is seen in the 
photovoltaic cell technology (Sharma, 2011). The price of solar modules is expected to fall 
from around $2/W today to $1 in the near future. The price per watt installed is likely to fall 
from $6.0-$8.0 to $3.0 per watt. Dominant in the costs are power electronics and installation. 
With current incentives in the United States and European Union the cost of electricity 
generation using solar technology is in the range of the IGCC (Integrated Gasification 
Combined Cycle) power generation plants. In the state of California the cost of electricity 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
192 
from solar power plants is about 14-15 cents per kWh. This is against the 8-10 cents per kWh 
cost of electricity from IGCC power plants. By 2013 with some incentives from the federal 
government the cost of electricity from solar power plant is expected to fall to 10-12 cents per 
kWh. The per kWh cost is sensitive to the capital cost and the cost of materials of 
construction of the plant. Sequestration related carbon credits at $30 t-1 of CO2 can affect a 
per kWh reduction of 3 cents. Government carbon tax, cost of capital are sensitivity 
parameters on the bottom line of solar power plants. 
Worldwide, the solar thermal power capacity can grow at least 30% per year from 2010 
to 2020 or 2030. 200 GW of new power plant capacity can be added each year. About 1-2 
GW per year could be added in 2012. Solar technology is relatively simpler. The NREL, 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, has identified potential for 6 TW (terra watts) of 
solar thermal power in the Southwestern US. 
The mass of the sun can be calculated from the period of the earth which is 365.25 days. 
The mass of the sun is ~ 2 x 1033 gm. The surface temperature of the sun is 5500 0C. Few 
things are known about the light to electricity conversion. The Carnot limit of efficiency of 
any man made machine is given by; 
 
 
carnot = (1 – T0/TH) 
(3.428) 
 
From the Planck‟s theorem, 
 
 
E = h = hc/ 
(3.429) 
 
The IV, current-voltage characteristics of a photodiode cannot be described using the 
Ohm‟s law of electricity. GaAs multijunction devices are the most efficient solar cells 
reaching a record high of 40.7%. 20-30 different semi-conductors are layered in series. AR, 
antireflection coatings can be used to minimize reflection from the top surface. The IV 
characteristics can be given by; 
 
 
I = I0(exp (qV/kBT) – 1) – qAG0(Lp+Ln) 
(3.430) 
 
33% of solar insolation is lost as waste heat. The temperature of operation of the 
photovoltaic module can be determined from energy balance as follows; 
 
 
IT = cIT + UL(Tc – Ta) 
(3.431) 
 
The physical significance of each term in Eq. (3.431) is as follows; The fraction of 
radiation incident on surface of solar cells is given by (IT), where  is the transmittance of 
any cover; The efficiency of conversion of incident radiation into current is given by (cIT); 
Radiation and convection losses from top and bottom is given by (UL(TC – Ta). Ta is the 
ambient temperature. The temperature of the solar cell, Tc can be obtained by rearranging Eq. 
(3.431); 
 
 
Tc = Ta +(IT/UL)(1- c/) 
(3.432) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
193 
It can be seen that as there exists an optimal working temperature of the solar cell. As the 
amount of concentrated solar flux is increased the absorption efficiency first increases and 
then decreases. As the working temperature increases the heat losses increase by radiation and 
convection. The Carnot thermal efficiency increases. The optimal temperature of operation 
for maximum efficiency can be arrived at. The heat losses vary as T4 and the efficiency 
increases linearly with the working temperature. /T = 0 and the working temperature 
solved for. The UL in Eq. (3.432), the overall transfer coefficient will vary with temperature. 
 
 
J. ENGINEERING ANALYSIS 
 
3.18. AMPACITY RISKS IN PCB INTERCONNECTIONS 
 
3.18.1. Introduction 
 
IHS, Information handling systems are used to process, compile, store and communicate 
data for business personnel or for similar purposes. The ampacity risks on PCB, printed 
circuit board interconnections need be better understood. Depending on the information 
handled the IHS may differ from one application to the other. They may differ as to what 
information is handled, how information is processed, stored, communicated and how soon 
and efficiently the information may be processes, stored or communicated. IHS may be 
configured for general use or for specific use such as passenger reservation in the airlines, 
railways, credit card transactions, global communications, enterprise data storage. Variety of 
hardware and software components may be configured to perform different tasks such as 
storage, communication, processing. It may include computer, data storage and networking 
systems.  
During the design and manufacture of HIS one salient consideration is the detection of 
areas of the system or circuit that are prone to certain risks. Corrective steps have to be taken 
in order to minimize these risks. One example is the ampacity risks on circuit boards. The 
circuit or interconnect may go back to the drawing board stage for rerouting. “Ampacity‟ is 
defined [Murugam et al., 2009] as the current in amperes that a conductor can carry 
continuously under the conditions of use without exceeding the temperature rating or fuse 
point. The simulation, analysis, validation to laboratory data the DC, direct current and short 
duration AC, alternating current transient pulse effects on the ampacity risks on PCB 
interconnectivity is needed. This would result in assessment of ampacity risks on PCB 
interconnections and improvement of the reliability of the operation of IHS. One critical 
aspect to this aspect is the computation of heat conduction at short times where non-Fourier 
effects can be expected. The damped wave conduction equation may be applicable here. The 
damped wave conduction and relaxation equation was sought over Fourier‟s law of heat 
conduction for eight reasons by Sharma [2005].  
The damped wave conduction and relaxation equation was originally suggested by 
Maxwell [1867], and postulated independently by Cattaneo [1948, 1958] and Vernotte 
[1958]. The damped wave conduction and relaxation equation in one dimension across 
constant area may be written as follows; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
194 
 
x
x
r
q
T
q
kA
A
x
t  
(3.433) 
 
 
Where qx is the heat transfer rate in x direction in (watts, w), A is the cross-sectional area 
across which the heat conduction occurs in (m2), k is the thermal conductivity of the material 
in (w.m-1.K-1), r is the relaxation time (s). 
Reviews of the use of this equation have been presented by Joseph and Preziosi [1989] 
and Ozisik and Tzou [1996]. Extensive theoretical treatment of the equation have been 
reported by Tzou [1996] and Sharma [2005]. Experimental measurement of relaxation times 
has been reported by Mitra et al. [1995] recently for biological materials. Taitel [1973] found 
a overshoot in his transient temperature solution for a finite slab subject to constant wall 
temperature boundary condition. Bai and Lavine [1995] was concerned about Eq. (3.433) 
violating the second law of thermodynamics. Zanchini [14], Barletta and Zanchini [2003], 
calculate a entropy production term and are concerned of a violation of Clausius‟ inequality. 
Al Nimir et al. [2000] discuss an “overshoot” and equilibrium entropy production. Haji Sheik 
et al. [2002] point out some anomalies in Eq. (3.433). Tzou [1996] has found Eq. (1) to be 
admissible within the framework of second law of thermodynamics. Sharma [2003, 
2006,2007,2005] have presented closed form analytical solutions for different geometries that 
are within the bounds of second law of thermodynamics. He has derived the damped wave 
equation by accounting for acceleration of the molecules in the Stokes-Einstein formulation. 
He has proved that when physically reasonable initial condition is used the overshoot 
disappears. Final condition in time was used and bounded solutions without violation of 
second law of thermodynamics were presented. Antaki [1998] has discussed some analytical 
solutions for convective boundary condition. In this study the damped wave conduction 
equation is studied in 3D, three dimensions and analytical solution derived. The solutions are 
in the form of Bessel composite function of the third order. The derived spatio-temporal 
temperature profiles can be used to gauge the ampacity risks in PCB interconnections. 
 
 
3.18.2. Theory 
 
The „defect‟region is modeled as a spherical shell with radius R0. An energy balance on 
the spherical shell at a distance r from the origin can be written and when combined with the 
damped wave conduction and relaxation equation can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
r
T
T
T
r
t
r
r
t
r
 
(3.434) 
 
Let; 
 
 
0
0
;
;
s
r
r
T
T
t
r
u
X
T
T
 
(3.435) 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
195 
Eq. (3.434) is made dimensionless by using the variables defined in Eq. (3.435). Eq. 
(3.434) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
u
u
u
X
X
X
X
 
(3.436) 
 
The time and space conditions can be written as; 
 
 
 = 0, u = 0 
(3.437) 
 
 
 = , u = 1 
(3.438) 
 
 
 > 0, X= XR0, u = 1 
(3.439) 
 
 
X = , u = 0 
(3.440) 
 
Consider the substitution, V = u/X. Eq. (4) becomes, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
V
V
V
V
V
X
X
X
X
 
(3.441) 
 
The damping term can be removed by a u = wexp(-n) substitution. As shown in the 
preceding sections for n = ½, Eq. (9) becomes; 
 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
W
W
W
W
W
X
X
X
X
 
(3.442) 
 
Let  = 2 – X2 
The term 2W/X2 can be neglected for large X. W is small for large r as u = Wexp(-/2)/r. 
For large X Eq. (10) can be modified as follows; 
Now,  
 
 
4
8
W
W
X
X
 
(3.443) 
 
 
2
2
4
12
0
4
W
W
W
 
(3.444)  
 
 
2
2
2
3
0
16
W
W
W
 
(3.445) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
196 
Comparing Eq. (13) with the generalized Bessel equation the solution is; 
 
 
a = 3; b = 0; c = 0; d = -1/16; s = ½  
 
 
The order p of the solution is then p = 2 sqrt(1) = 2 
 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
X
X
I
K
W
c
c
X
X
 
(3.446) 
 
c2 can be seen to be zero as W is finite and not infinitely large at  = 0.  
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
X
I
V
c e
X
 
(3.447) 
 
An approximate solution can be obtaining by eliminating c1 between the above equation 
and the equation from the boundary condition.  
 
 
2
2
0
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
2
1
R
R
R
X
I
c e
X
X
 
(3.448) 
 
Thus for  > X 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
0
0
2
2
1
2
R
R
R
X
I
X
V
X
X
X
I
 
(3.449) 
 
For X > , 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
0
0
2
2
2
R
R
R
X
J
X
X
u
X
X
X
I
 
(3.450) 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
197 
On examining Eq. (3.450) it can be seen that the Bessel function of the second order and 
first kind will go to zero at some value of . The first root of the Bessel function occurs when 
 
 
½(X2 - 2 )1/2 = 5.1356 
(3.451) 
 
Or  
X2 - 2 = 105.498 
(3.452) 
 
When an exterior point in the infinite sphere is considered a lag time can be calculated 
prior to which there is no heat transfer to that point. After the lag time there exists two 
regimes. One is described by Eq. (3.450) and the third regime is described by Eq.(3.449). 
Thus, 
 
 
lag = sqrt( Xp
2 - 105.498) 
 
 
All the three dimensions of the spherical coordinates are considered. The V = u/r 
substitution is used and the spatio-temporal temperature in the infinite sphere is derived as 
follows; 
The governing equation for the temperature is obtained when the energy balance equation 
and the constitutive damped wave diffusion and relaxation equation are combined. The 
equation is made dimensionless by using the substitutions in Eq. (3.435). 
Then the governing equation in three dimensions in spherical coordinates can be written 
as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
u
u
u
u
u
u
Cot
u
Sin
X
X
X
X
X
X
 
(3.453) 
 
 
Figure 38.0. Three Regimes of Dimensionless Temperature at a Exterior Point from the Defect. 
 
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0
10
20
30
40
Dimensionless Time
Concentration
 (C - Co)/(Cs - Co)
Xp = 11 (tou > X)"
 X > tou"

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
198 
Consider the substitution, V = u/X. Eq. (21), 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
1
1
1
1
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
Cot
V
Sin
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
 
(3.454) 
 
 
The damping term can be removed by a V = wexp(-n) substitution. As shown in the 
preceding sections for n = ½, Eq. (22) becomes. 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
1
1
1
4
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
Cot
W
Sin
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
 
(3.455) 
 
For small , 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
1
1
1
4
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
Sin
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
 (3.456) 
 
Let  = X,  
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
1
W
W
X
 
(3.457) 
 
 
 = XSin,  
 
Then,  
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
W
W
Sin
X
 
(3.458) 
 
Eq. (24 )then becomes for large X,  
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
1
4
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
X
X
X
 
(3.459) 
 
Consider the transformation,  = ( 2 – X2 - 2 - 2 
) 
 
As shown above in Eq. (3.445) the derivatives in Eq. (3.459) in four independent 
variables become converted into 1 independent variable,  and Eq. (3.459) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
4
18
0
4
W
W
W
 
(3.460) 
 
Or,  
2
2
2
9
0
2
16
W
W
W
 
(3.461) 
Comparing Eq. (29) with the generalized Bessel equation the solution is; 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
199 
 
a = 9/2; b = 0; c = 0; d = -1/16; s = ½  
 
 
The order p of the solution is then p = 7/2 
 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
7/2
7/2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
X
X
I
I
W
c
c
X
X
 
(3.462) 
 
c2 can be seen to be zero as W is finite and not infinitely large at  = 0. An approximate 
solution can be obtaining by eliminating c1 between the above equation and the equation from 
the boundary condition. The equation from the boundary condition can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
0
7/2
2
0
1
2
2
0
2
1
R
R
R
X
I
X
e
c
X
 
(3.463) 
 
Dividing Eq. (30) by Eq. (31) 
 
 
2
2
2
2
7/2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
7/2
2
2
R
R
R
X
I
X
X
u
X
X
X
I
 
(3.464) 
For small X, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
7/2
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
7/2
2
2
R
R
R
X
J
X
X
u
X
X
X
I
 
(3.465) 
 
In the creeping heat transfer limit Eq.(3.459) can be approximated as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
W
W
W
W
W
W
X
X
X
 
(3.466) 
 
After the transformation the PDE with 4 variables is converted to a Bessel equation in 1 
variable: 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
200 
 
2
2
2
4
0
16
W
W
W
 
(3.467) 
 
The order of the Bessel solution for Eq. (3.467) can be calculated by comparing Eq. 
(3.467) with the generalized Bessel equation and the solution is;  
a = 4; b = 0; c = 0; d = -1/16; s = ½. The order p of the solution is then p = 3 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
X
X
I
K
W
c
c
X
X
  
(3.468)  
 
 
c2 can be seen to be zero as W is finite and not infinitely large at  = 0. An approximate 
solution can be obtaining by eliminating c1 between the above equation and the equation from 
the boundary condition. The equation from the boundary condition can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
0
3
2
0
1
2
2
0
2
1
R
R
R
X
I
X
e
c
X
 
(3.469) 
 
Dividing Eq. (36) by Eq. (37), 
 
 
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
3
2
2
R
R
R
X
I
X
X
u
X
X
X
I
 
(3.470) 
For small X, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
3
2
2
R
R
R
X
J
X
X
u
X
X
X
I
 
(3.471) 
 
In the limit of zero radius of the defect; 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
201 
 
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
0
3
2
2
R
X
I
X
u
X
X
I
 
(3.472) 
 
For small X, 
 
 
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
0
3
2
2
R
X
J
X
u
X
X
I
 
(3.473) 
 
The solution is in terms of a Bessel composite function of the third order and first kind 
for small X and a modified Bessel composite function of the third order and first kind for 
times greater than X. The first root of the Bessel function of the third order was calculated by 
using 17 terms of the series expansion of the Bessel function in a Pentium IV microprocessor 
using a Microsoft Spreadsheet up to 4 decimal places. The root was found to be 6.3802. 
 
 
½(X2 + 2 + 2 - 2 )1/2 = 6.3802 
(3.474) 
 
Or  
X2 + 2 + 2 - 2 = 162.828 
(3.475) 
 
When an exterior point in the infinite sphere is considered a lag time can be calculated 
prior to which there is no heat transfer to that point. After the lag time there exists two 
regimes. One is described by Eq. (3.473) and the third regime is described by Eq.(3.472). 
Thus, 
 
 
2
2
2
162.828
lag
p
p
p
X
 
(3.476) 
 
 
 
K. MOLECULAR BASIS FOR CONSTITUTIVE LAWS 
 
3.19. NON-FOURIER CONDUCTION EQUATION A CAPITE AD  
CALCEM TEMPERATURE 
 
Not all materials behave in the same manner. Some materials do not behave in the same 
manner over all the conditions over which they are expected to be applied. For some 
applications when the experimental observations cannot be explained using theoretical 
models and for materials that have not been measured before constitutive equations that may 
be more relevant may have to be derived. For example Newton‟s law of viscosity may not be 
the best constitutive law for systems such as tomato puree or suspensions of gas and solid. 
Fourier‟s law of heat conduction may not be the best possible relation between the heat flux 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
202 
and temperature gradient for systems where the transfer of heat is transient. Phenomena were 
short time scales or short space scales or very high heat flux or very high temperature gradient 
have been found not be adequately represented by Fourier‟s law of heat conduction. 
 
 
3.19.1. Introduction 
 
Fourier‟s law of heat conduction [1822] and their analogs during; (i) mass diffusion - 
Fick‟s law of mass diffusion [1855]; (ii) viscous momentum transfer - Newton‟s law of 
Viscosity [1687]; (iii) electrical conduction - Ohm‟s law of electricity [1817]; (iv) convection 
– Netwon‟s law of cooling [1687] are laws derived used in engineering practice for nearly 
two centuries. These laws have been developed from empirical observations atsteady state. 
Certain times these laws are not sufficient to predict the experimental observations. There are 
some reasons to seek an alternate equation to Fourier‟s law of heat conduction (Sharma 
[2007]); 
 
i) 
the microscopic theory of reversibility of Onsager [1931] is violated; 
ii) neglects the time needed for the acceleration of heat flow by free electrons(Sharma, 
[2006]); 
iii) Singularities were found in a number of important industrial applications of the 
transient representation of temperature, concentration, velocity [2005]; 
iv) development of Fourier‟s law was from observations at steady state; 
v) Over prediction of theory to experiment have been found in a number of industrial 
applications [Renganathan, K., 1990, Sharma, 2003, Sharma, 2009]; 
vi) Landau and Lifshitz observed the contradiction of the infinite speed of propagation 
of heat with Einstein‟s light speed barrier [1987];  
vii) Fourier‟s law breaks down at the Casimir limit [1938].  
 
A non-Fourier heat conduction equation was postulated independently by Cattaneo 
[1948] and Vernotte [1958]. This equation was first suggested by Maxwell from 
considerations of kinetic theory of gases [1867]. Joseph and Preziosi[1989], Ozisik 
and Tzou [1996 ] have reviewed the work done investigating this equation. Sharma 
[2005, 2008a, 2008b, 2009, 2010] discussed several analytical solutions for transient 
temperature obtained by use of this equation along with the energy balance equation. 
He considered a semi-infinite medium at an initial temperature of T0 subject to a 
constant surface temperature boundary condition for times greater than zero. The 
hyperbolic PDE that forms the governing equation of heat conduction was solved for 
by a new method called relativistic transformation of coordinates. The hyperbolic 
PDE is multiplied by e/2and transformed into another PDE in wave temperature. 
This PDE is converted to an ODE by the transformation variable that is spatio-
temporal symmetric. The resulting ODE is seen to be a generalized Bessel 
differential equation. The solution from this approach is within 12% of the exact 
solution obtained by Baumeister and Hamill using the method of Laplace transforms. 
There are no singularities in the solution. There are three regimes to the solution: a) 
inertial regime; b) regime characterized by Bessel composite function of the zeroth 
order and first kind and; c) a regime characterized by modified Bessel composite 
function of the zeroth order and first kind. Expressions for penetration length and 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
203 
inertial lag time are developed. The comparison between the solution from the 
method of relativistic transformation of coordinates and the method of Laplace 
transforms was made by use of Chebyshev polynomial approximation and numerical 
integration. In a similar manner, the exact solution to the hyperbolic PDE is solved 
for by the method of relativistic transformation of coordinated for the infinite 
cylindrical and infinite spherical medium. For the case of heating a finite slab the 
Taitel paradox problem is revisited. Taitel [1972] found that when the hyperbolic 
PDE was solved for the interior temperature in the slab was found to exceed the wall 
temperature of the slab. This is in violation of the second law of thermodynamics 
[Bai, 1995, Zanchini, 1999, Barletta and Zanchini, 2003]. By use of the final 
condition in time at steady state the wave temperature was found to be become zero 
at steady state. This condition when mathematically posed as the 4th condition for 
the second order PDE leads to well bounded solutions within the bounds of second 
law of thermodynamics. For systems with large relaxation times, i.e., 
2
2
r
a
, subcritical damped oscillations can be seen in the temperature. In a 
similar manner the transient temperature for a finite sphere and finite cylinder are also 
derived. 
Nanoscale effects in time domain [Sharma, 2009] is as important, if not more as 
nanoscale phenomena in space domain in a number of applications. When the advances in 
microprocessor speed is approaching the limits of physical laws on gate width and 
miniaturization, there is incentive to re-examine the physical laws at a level of scrutiny never 
done before. In this study, the acceleration of the electron is accounted for in the formulation 
of free electron theory. The non-Fourier conduction equation that results is evaluated for use 
in prediction of transient temperature in a finite slab. 
 
 
3.19.2. Theoretical Development 
 
3.19.2.1. Free Electron Theory 
Ohm‟s law of electric conduction and Fourier‟s law of heat conduction can be derived 
from the free electron theory. The range of electrical resistivity of materials vary by 30 orders 
of magnitude. The range of thermal conductivity of materials vary by 5 order of magnitude. 
No one theory can predict the thermal and electrical conductivity of materials. The free 
electron model is used. The outermost electrons of the atom are assumed to take part in the 
conduction process. These electrons are not bound to the atom but are free to move through 
the entire solid. These electrons have been called free electron cloud, free electron gas, or the 
Fermi gas. Potential field due to the ion cores is assumed to be uniform throughout the solid. 
The free electrons possess the same free energy everywhere in the solid. Because of the 
electrostatic attraction between a free electron and the ion core this potential energy will be a 
finite negative value.  
Only energy differences are important and the constant potential can be taken to be zero. 
Then the only energy that has to be considered is the kinetic energy. The kinetic energy is 
substantially lower than that of the bound electrons in an isolated atom as the field of motion 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
204 
for the free electron is considerably enlarged in the solid as compared to the field around an 
isolated atom. The free electron theory can be used to better understand electrical conduction. 
By Lorenz analogy [1892] the heat conduction can also be predicted in a similar manner. 
The independent electron assumption was developed by Drude in [1905]. Some of the 
assumptions in the free electron theory claim that electrons are responsible for all of the 
conduction. The electrons behave like an ideal gas, occupy negligible volume, undergo 
collisions, and are perfectly elastic. Electrons are free to move in a constrained flat bottom 
well. Electron distribution of energy is a continuum. 
 
 
3.19.3. Derivation of Alternate Non-Fourier Conduction Equation 
 
Let the number of electrons per unit volume be given by n. This is the electron density in 
the material during the conduction process. From the Boltzmann equipartition energy theorem 
[1876] the microscopic temperature, T in (0K) can be given by; 
 
 
 
 
(3.477) 
 
Where kBis the Boltzmann constant, m is the mass of the electron in (kg) and ve is the 
velocity of the free electron in (m.s-1). The heat flux, qz in (W.m-2) is the rate of energy 
transfer across a cross-sectional area across the heat conduction path. The heat flux in terms 
of the properties of the moving electron can be written as follows; 
 
 
 
 
(3.477a) 
 
Eq. (3.477a) is the product of Eq.(3.4777) and nve. Currently, the rate of energy transfer 
across is estimated this way. This is sort of momentum flux of the electrons as well. The 
applied temperature gradient acts as a driving force for the motion of the electron. Let the 
collision time of the electron be given by τ in units of seconds. The applied force and 
frictional force can be written from free electron theory as follows; 
 
 
 
 
(3.478) 
 
 
  
(3.479) 
 
In this study, the acceleration of the electron is also taken into account. The derivations in 
the literature for the Fourier‟s law of heat conduction from free electron theory assume that 
the electron has attained a steady drift velocity. This assumption may be reasonable at steady 
state. But in transient applications, immediately after the application of the temperature 
gradient the electron would be in acceleration. This phase of the motion of the electron has 
not been well studied in the literature. In this study this is taken into account. The Newton‟s 
second law of motion may be applied to the moving electron(s) as follows; 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
205 
 
  
(3.480) 
 
Eliminating the velocity of the electron in Eq. (3.480) by using Eq. (3.477) leads to the 
damped wave conduction and relaxation equation as shown earlier (Sharma [2006]). Here Eq. 
(3.477) is differentiated with respect to time as; 
 
 
 
 
(3.481) 
 
Eliminating the acceleration of the electron term between Eq. (3.481) and Eq. (3.480) and 
plugging Eq. (3.477a) for heat flux in place of the velocity of the electron; 
 
 
 
(3.482) 
 
Multiplying thoughout Eq. (7) 
 by Eq. (7) becomes; 
 
 
 
  
(3.483) 
 
The expression for thermal conductivity of the material from derivation at steady state 
can be seen to be; 
 
 
  
(3.484) 
 
The coefficient to the rate of temperature variation with time term can be simplified as 
follows. 
The rate of temperature variation with time can henceforth be called as ballistic term. 
This term is unique to the acceleration of the electron and is expected to become significant in 
transient applications. The term” ballistic” can be used to denote acceleration effects. 
 
 
 
(3.485) 
 
In an earlier study (Sharma [2006]] the collision time of the electron was shown to be 
3rwhere ris the relaxation time of materials as defined by Cattaneo [1948] and Vernotte 
[1958]. The velocity of heat can be written as follows; 
 
 
 
(3.486) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
206 
In terms of properties of moving electrons Eq. (3.486) can be rewritten as follows. Heat 
capacity at constant volume, Cv by definition is the energy needed to raise one mole of a 
substance by 1 0K. For one molecule this would be 1.5kB as a corollary of the equi-partition 
energy theorem (Eq. (3.477)). The electron cloud is assumed to be ideal gas. It can be shown 
that for an ideal gas (Sharma [2006]); 
 
 
p
v
C
C
R  
(3.487) 
 
Eq. (3.487) is for one mole of the material. For one molecule of the material, Eq. (3.487) 
can be written as follows; 
 
 
2.5
p
v
B
B
C
C
k
k  
(3.488) 
 
 
5
2
B
p
k n
C
mn
mn
 
(3.489) 
 
Plugging Eq. (3.489), Eq. (9) and Eq. (3.477) into Eq. (3.486), Eq. (3.486) becomes; 
 
 
2
54
54
18
0.95
20
20
20
B
B
h
e
e
B
k nT
k T
v
v
v
mk n
m
 
(3.490) 
 
Thus it can be seen from Eq. (3.490) that the velocity of the electron, ve is approximately 
equal to the velocity of heat, vh. The velocity of heat is given in terms of the thermo physical 
properties of materials as given in Eq. (3.486). Eq. (3.485) may be simplified as; 
 
 
2
9
4
B
p
r
p
r
e
e
k nT
k
C k
C
mv
v
 
(3.491) 
 
Plugging Eq. (3.491) into Eq. (3.483), Eq. (3.483) becomes; 
 
 
z
p
r
T
T
q
k
C
z
t
 
(3.492) 
 
Eq. (3.491) is an alternate non-Fourier heat conduction equation compared with that 
postulated by Cattaneo [1948] and Vernotte [1958]. Eq. (3.492) for heat flux comprises of 
two parts: (i) one part that is the “Fourier part” that gives spatial gradient of temperature, both 
transient and steady states and; (ii) second part that is the “ballistic part” that gives the 
contribution of acceleration motion effects of the electron. 
Another way of viewing the “ballistic term” is in terms of accumulation effects in time of 
energy at the interfacial area through which the heat is travelling. In the kinetic representation 
of temperature in terms of square of the velocity of the molecules as given by Eq. (3.477) the 
heat flux across an interfacial area is defined as the energy of the molecules leaving the 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
207 
surface less the energy of the molecules that enters the surface per unit time. Accumulation of 
energy during the said time at the interfacial surface was neglected in the Fourier 
representation of heat flux with spatial temperature gradient [Sharma, 2005]. Here the 
accumulation of energy at the surface is also taken into account in the heat flux expression. 
This added term can also be viewed as a place to capture the acceleration effects of the 
moving electron under an applied temperature gradient/force. The postulated non-Fourier 
equation of Cattaneo [1948] and Vernotte [1958] is restated as; 
 
 
z
z
r
q
T
q
k
z
t
 
(3.493) 
 
 
3.19.4. Solution of Transient Temperature in a Finite Slab Using the 
Alternate Ballistic Transport Equation 
 
Consider a semi-infinite medium with homogenous thermo physical properties k, α as 
shown in Figure 39.0. 
The initial temperature of the semi-infinite medium is T0 for times less than 0. At time 0 
the surface of the semi-infinite medium are raised to a higher temperature Ts(Ts> T0) and 
maintained constant at Ts for all times t > 0. The initial time condition and the boundary 
conditions can be written as follows; 
 
 
t = 0, 0 < x < , T = T0 
(3.494) 
 
 
t > 0, x = 0, T = Ts 
(3.495) 
 
 
t > 0, x = , T = T0 
(3.496) 
 
The energy balance equation in 1D, one dimension can be written as follows; 
 
 
x
p
q
T
C
x
t
 
(3.497) 
 
 
Figure 39.0. Semi-Infinite Medium Subject to CWT, Constant Wall Temperature Boundary Condition. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
208 
The governing equation for temperature in 1D is obtained by combining Eq. (17) and Eq. 
(22) and can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
2
r
T
T
T
t
x t
x
 
(3.498) 
 
Eq. (3.498) may be made dimensionless by the following substitutions; 
 
 
0
0
;
;
r
s
r
T
T
x
t
Z
u
T
T
 
(3.499) 
 
Eq. (3.499) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
u
u
u
Z
Z
 
(3.500) 
 
The dimensionless distance Z can be rewritten as; 
 
 
 
r
h
r
x
Z
v
 
(3.501) 
 
The physical significance of dimensionless distance can be seen to be the ratio of the 
relaxation speed calculated for the disturbance to be seen at the considered point to the speed 
of composite heat transfer in the medium due to both Fourier diffusive and ballistic/relaxation 
mechanisms. The solution to Eq. (3.500) may be obtained by the method of Laplace 
transforms. The Laplace transformed Eq. (3.500) may be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
( )
( )
( )
d u s
du s
su s
s dZ
dZ
 
(3.502) 
 
The solution to the second order ODE given by Eq. (27) can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
( )
sZ
sZ
sZ
s
s
u s
e
c e
c e
 
(3.503) 
 
From the undisturbed temperature, at ad infinitum, as given by BC in Eq. (21), c1 can be 
seen to be zero. 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
209 
 
1
1
2
2
( )
sZ
sZ
s
u s
e
c e
 
(3.504) 
 
c2 is obtained from the constant wall temperature BC as given in Eq. (20) and seen to be 
given by (1/s). The solution for the dimensionless temperature in Laplace domain may be 
written as follows; 
 
 
1
2
1
( )
sZ
sZ
s
e
u s
e
s
 
(3.505) 
 
The lag property in Laplace transforms in invoked as follows; 
 
 
( )
s
Lf t
e
F s  
(3.505a) 
 
The binomial infinite series expansion is written for the power ponentiation as follows; 
 
 
2
3
4
1
1
1
1
5
1
1
.....
8
16
128
s
s
s
s
s
 
(3.506) 
Plugging Eq. (3.506) into Eq. (3.505), Eq. (3.506) becomes; 
 
 
2 ...
2
2
8
16
( )
sZ
Z
Z
Z
sZ
s
s
e
u s
e
s
 
(3.507) 
 
From the inversion tables of Laplace transforms in [Mickley et al., 1957]; 
 
 
1
0 2
k
s
e
I
kt
L
s
 
(3.508) 
 
By Eq. (33); 
 
 
8
1
0
2
Z
s
Z
e
I
L
s
 
(3.509) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
210 
 
2
3
2
2 3
3 5
1
1
8
2
4
6
1
...
....
8
96
5760
8
16
48
Z
s
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
Z
L
e
L
s
s
s
 (3.510) 
 
By invocation of the convolution property the analytical solution may be obtained to 
varying degrees of accuracy. An approximate solution by truncation of the 4th and higher 
order terms in Eq. (3.510) leads to the solution for transient temperature. Upon using the lag 
property as shown in Eq. (3.505a) the solution for transient temperature is given as follows; 
 
 
2
2
0
3
2
4
Z
Z
Z
u
e
I
 
(3.511) 
 
The solution to the transient temperature to with everything else such as the semi-infinite 
medium used, boundary and time conditions used remaining the same except that the Fourier 
model was used can be written as (Sharma, 2010) as follows; 
 
 
1
4
Z
u
erf
 
(3.512) 
 
The solution to the transient temperature to with everything else such as the semi-infinite 
medium used, boundary and time conditions used remaining the same except that the damped 
wave conduction and relaxation model was used can be written as (Sharma, 2010]) as 
follows; 
 
 
0.5
2
2
0
0
4
2
X
I
u
I
 
(3.513) 
 
Eq. (3.513) is applicable for conditions where  > X. For conditions where  < X the 
dimensionless temperature is given by; 
 
 
0.5
2
2
0
0
4
2
X
J
u
I
 
(3.514) 
 
For conditions where  = X, the dimensionless temperature is given by; 
 
 
2
2
X
u
e
e  
(3.515) 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
211 
 
Figure 40.0. Comparison of Transient Temperature from Fourier Model, Damped Wave Transport 
Model and Ballistic Transport Model. 
 
The predictions for transient temperature in a semi-infinite medium subject to CWT, 
constant wall temperature boundary condition from the; (i) Fourier model; (ii) Damped Wave 
Conduction and Relaxation Model and; (iii) Ballistic/Acceleration Model are plotted in 
Figure 40.0 side-by-side for the same set of parameters at  = 0.5. The theoretical predictions 
from ballistic model as given by (3.514) were found to be closer in numerical value to the 
theoretical prediction from Fourier model as given by Eq. (37) compared with that of the 
theoretical prediction from damped wave conduction and relaxation model given by Eq. (38). 
The transient temperature can be seen to be convex at short distances and change to concave 
at later distances in the damped wave conduction and relaxation model. The transient 
temperature from the ballistic model is also convex at shorter distances and changes to 
concave later as a function of distance. The Fourier parabolic model for transient temperature 
is concave as a function of distance. Eq. (3.511) is valid in the open interval,  > 1.5 for 
values of space and time when  < 1.5Z; 
 
 
2
2
0
3
4
2
Z
Z
Z
u
e
J
 
(3.516) 
 
When  = 1.5Z, the expression for transient temperature can be written as; 
 
 
3
2
Z
u
e
e
 
(3.517) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
212 
The first zero of the Bessel function J0(y) occurs at y = 2.4048. Thus the penetration 
distance Zpen can be estimated for a given instant of time,  as follows; 
 
 
2
3
2.4048
4
2
pen
pen
Z
Z
 
(3.518) 
 
 
3.19.5. Conclusions 
 
An alternate non-Fourier heat conduction equation is derived from consideration of 
translation motion of spin less electron under a driving force due to an applied temperature 
gradient. This equation is a capite ad calcem, temperature. Elimination of the rate of change 
of velocity with respect to time leads to a non-Fourier heat conduction equation with an 
accumulation of temperature or ballistic term in it. The new constitutive heat conduction 
equation is combined with the energy balance equation in 1 dimension. The governing 
equation for transient temperature a partial differential equation (Eq. (3.498)) is solved for by 
the method of Laplace transforms. The problem considered is the semi-infinite medium with 
constant thermo physical properties with constant wall temperature boundary condition. A 
closed form analytical expression for the transient temperature was obtained (Eq. (3.511)) 
after truncation of higher order terms in the infinite binomial series. This solution is compared 
with that obtained using the parabolic Fourier model and the damped wave model as 
presented in an earlier study. The predictions of Eq. (3.511) and Eq. (3.516) are closer to the 
Fourier model; further work on Eq. (3.492) is underway. 
 
 
Nomenclature 
 
A 
Helmholz free energy (J/mole)  
c 
Speed of Sound (m/s)  
 
CP 
Heat Capacity at Constant Pressure (J/kg/K)  
Cv 
Heat Capacity at Constant Volume (J/Kg/K)  
G 
Gibbs Free Energy (J/mole)  
H 
Specific Enthalpy (J/mole)  
l 
length of the box (m) 
m 
mass of molecule (kg)  
P 
Pressure (Nm-2)  
S 
Specific Entropy (J/mole/K)  
T 
Temperature (K)  
U 
Internal Energy (J/mole) 
 
v 
velocity of molecule (m/s)  
V 
Molar Volume (m3/mole) 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
213 
Greek 
 
 
Linear coefficient of thermal expansion (K-1)  
P  
Isobaric Volume Expansivity (K-1)  
s 
Isentropic Volume Expansivity (K-1) 
 
Elongational Strain  
T 
Isothermal Compressibility (ms2/mole)  
s 
Isentropic Compressibility (ms2/mole)  
 
molar density (mole/m3) 
 
 
Subscripts 
 
0 
Intial state  
f 
Final state 
T 
isothermal  
P 
isobaric  
S 
isentropic 
 
 
3.20. SUMMARY 
 
Mathematical models can be used where pilot plant data is not available for scale-up. 
Model development can lead to better understanding of the process. It can lead to better 
project planning and decrease pollution to the environment. Dynamic process models can be 
used to train operators, to design processes, to perform safety analysis, offer better process 
control strategies, in project trouble shooting and in globalization. Process models can be 
classified as: (i) Empirical Models; (ii) Semi-Empirical Models; (iii) Mechanistic Models; 
(iv) Models from shell balance and equations of energy, continuity, mass, momentum and 
charge; (v) supercomputer based models; (vi) computer simulations; (vii) mesoscopic models 
and; (viii) Monte Carlo trials. 
Biodiesel is a renewable fuel that can be made from vegetable oil and waste restaurant 
greases by catalysed transesterification reactions. Over 5 billion gallons of biodiesel was 
produced in 2010. The European Union and United States are seeing the sigmoidal portion of 
the growth curve in biodiesel production.. Economic analysis such as profitability and 
annualized worth (AW) of a biodiesel plant in Taiwan is presented. With the revenue from 
glycerine by-product recovery and with lower raw material costs, biodiesel may be profitable 
especially during days of higher gasoline prices. Multiple reactions of the consecutive-
competive type may be used to model the methonolysis of trigylcerides. The reaction rate 
constant ratios and residence time in the reactor are important parameters in determining 
higher selectivity of FAME, fatty acid methyl ester product yield over glycerol by-product 
production. Illustrations of higher FAME yield, higher glycerol yield and cross-over from  
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
214 
FAME to glycerol are shown for some values of reaction rate constant ratios  and . 
Reaction scheme from triglycerides, to diglycerides to monoglycerides to glycerol along with 
formation of FAME in each step by addition of methanol and catalyst are shown. Product 
distribution curves are presented in Figure 2.0 – 5.0 for different values or reaction rate 
constant ratios. 
Projectile motion is an interesting topic for discussion in introductory physics courses. 
Air resistance effects on projectile motion was studied. A 5 constant expression for variation 
of CD vs. Reynolds‟ number was used and the variation of air resistance with velocity was 
taken into account. The air resistance force was the most (about 11.9%) in the initial and final 
stages of the projectile. Closer to the maximum height the drag force is near zero. The 
projectile motion with the air resistance was assymetrical. The effect of drag coefficient 
variation with velocity was found as shown in Figure 4.0. Greater range was found for the 
case of launch angle of 380 for the example considered compared with launch angles of 450 
and 300 with air resistance. Maximum range of projectile without the air resistance can be 
expected at a launch angle of 450. The use of Eq. (5) may be better than the use of a constant 
value for CD during the entire trajectory. Studies are underway to include the Magnus effect 
when there is circulation around the object. The case of geometric particles are also being 
studied.  
Trajectory of sedimenting particles can be simulated using desktop computers and 
numerical integration. Viscous effects of the fluid can be accounted for the in the design 
considerations of rectangular sedimentation tanks. Drag correlations with Reynolds number 
for spherical and geometric particles uder laminar to transition to turbulent flow were used in 
the computer simulations. By writing the acceleration term in terms of velocity the time 
variabe is rendered implicit and an order reduction is achieved in governing equation. Fifth 
order Runge Kutta method was used with success. Iron and sand particles were simulated. 
Trajectories are shown as Figures. Sedimentation tanks needs to be made deeper to allow for 
accelerating phase. Overflow rate is no longer independent of the tank height. Trade-offs 
between pressure drop (pumping costs), separation efficiency achived and throughput (capital 
costs) can be seen. Total cost can be optimized. Shape of the trajectory is plateau in the initial 
stages and a sharper fall later. Trajectory of accelerating particles are found to be curvilinear 
as opposed to linear for settled particles. Expression for terminal settling velocity of the 
partilce in horizontal direction is now given by Eq. (24). Acceleration zone was found to be 
shorter for geometric particles. 
Sharma and Turton [1998] presented mesoscopic correlations between heat transfer 
coefficients between gas-solid fludized beds and immersed surfaces using a de no vo 
dimensionless group called frequency number. This is an example in semi-empirical models. 
The correlations were scaled from theories such as Mickley and Fairbanks packet theory 
[1955] and the theories that modify the packet theory. The experimental data was acquired in 
a 5 cm fluidized bed over a wide range of powder types and fluidization regimes. The 
correlations gave reasonable correspondence to experimental data given there was no 
empirical fit or use of adjustable parameters. 
Mechanistic models can be used to evaluate different mechanisms such as conduction or 
convection in industrially important systems such as CFB, circulating fluidized beds. The 
Peclect number is used to gauge the convective contributions. As the fluid flows away from 
the surface both convection and conduction act in series and as the fluid flows toward the 
surface the convection and conduction act with opposite effects. This can be used to obtain 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
215 
the convective and conductive contributions by adding and subtracting the heat transfer 
coefficients at the top and bottom of the tube. The convective contribution is given by Eq. 
(2.23) and conductive contribution is given by Eq. (2.22). The same analysis was repeated for 
accounting for damped wave conduction and relaxation effects. The method of Laplace 
transforms was used in order to obtain the solution. A binomial series expansion in the 
Laplace domain was used. Term by term inversion from Laplace domain to time domain for 
13 terms are given in Table 2.1. The model was compared with representative experimental 
data available in the literature.  
The use of mathematical model in operations such as evaporative cooler was shown. 
Humdification and heat exchange operations were modeled. The temperature and enthalpy 
profiles are calculated and shown in Figure 2.4. 
Diffusion and Reaction in Islets of Langerhans was studied using Parabolic and 
Hyperbolic Models. This is needed to better treat Type I diabetes by the transplantation 
method. Sharma Number can be used to evaluate when the wave term becomes important in 
the application. It represents the ratio of Mass Transfer in Bulk to Relaxational Transfer. 
Sharma number (mass) may be used in evaluating the importance of the damped wave 
diffusion process in relation to other processes such as convection, Fick steady diffusion in 
the given application. Four regimes can be identified in the solution of hyperbolic damped 
wave diffusion model. These are; i) Zero Transfer Inertial Regime, 0 0
inertia ; (ii) 
Rising Regime during times greater than inertial regime and less than at the wave front, Xp > 
; (iii) at Wave front,  = Xp; (iv) Falling Regime in Open Interval, of times greater than at the 
wave front,  > Xp. Method of superposition of steady state concentration and transient 
concentration used in both solutions of parabolic and hyperbolic models. Expression for 
steady state concentration developed. Closed form analytic model solutions developed in 
asymptotic limits of Michaelis and Menten kinetic at zeroth order and first order. Expression 
for Penetration Length Derived – Hypoxia Explained Expression for Inertial Lag Time 
Derived. Solution within bounds of Second Law of Thermodynamics. No Overshoot 
Phenomena Observed. 
Centrifugal separation of oil and water from streams that is concentrated with oil such as 
the ones from the oil spill disasters is investigated in this study. The existing theories are 
largely for Stokes settling of oil drops. In this study two layers, one rich in oil and another 
rich in water are allowed to spin in a centrifuge. The tangential velocity profile is derived 
from the equations of continuity and motion. The power drawn at the inner rotor is calculated 
for a set of parameters fo the system and a angular speed  RPM. Each simulation required 
the solution of four simultaneous equations and simultaneous unknowns. The power draw 
was found to be log linear with angular rotor speed on a log-log plot. The viscosity of the oil 
was increased five times to study the effect on the power draw. An expression of the 
interlayer thickness ratio,  was obtained by use of a component mass balance on oil streams 
that flow in and out of the continuous centrifuge.  was given in terms of , the ratio of the 
inner and outer radii of the centrifuge, the mole fraction of oil in feed, peripheral layer and 
inner layer. 
State space models can be used to describe a set of variables in vector form in terms of 
matrix equations. The stability of the system can be studied using Eigenvalues and 
Eigenvector analysis. A scheme of 7 simultaneous simple irreversible reactions were 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
216 
considered. The state space model to describe this system is given.. This system can be 
viewed as an integrating system since all but Eigenvalues are negative with 4 Eigenvalues 0. 
The composition of a copolymer as a function of comonomer composition, reactivity 
ratios and reactor choice were derived from the kinetics of free radical initiation, propagation 
and termination reactions. The copolymerization equation obtained using the QSSA quasi-
steady-state approximation is given. As an example, copolymer composition with 4 
monomers as a function of monomer composition is illustrated in Example 3.1 made in 
CSTR. The copolymer composition is sensitive to reactivity ratios to a considerable extent. 
The copolymer composition equation for a multi-component copolymer with n monomers 
were derived. This methodology was generalized for n monomers. The general form of the 
equation was represented in the matrix form using linear algebra. The rate matrix and rate 
equation is given.. The QSSA becomes in the vector notation; 
 
 
(
* )
)
T
T
K
T
MM
K(M*M
 
 
When the Eigen values of the rate equation become imaginary the monomer 
concentration can be expected to undergo subcritical damped oscillations as a function of 
time. 
The occurrence of multiplicity in model solutions was illustrated by calculation of launch 
angle of stream of water during firefighting and elbow-up and elbow down solutions in the 
solution of inverse kinematics of a 3 arm manipulator with end effector (robot). 
Use and significance of dimensionless groups such as Reynolds number, Prandtl number, 
Biot number, Nusselt number, Mach number, Fourier number, Fick number, Newton number, 
Maxwell number (mass), Venrnotte number, Sharma number (mass), Maxwell number 
(momentum), Sherwood number, Shcmidt number, storage number/Sharma number (heat), 
Peclect number were discussed. 
Weiner-Hopf integral equation can be used to estimate the effects of mixing in a CSTR, 
contiuous stirred tank reactor. This can be done by estimating the degree of mixedness from 
the variance in SPC, statistical process control charts. The compositional distribution of AN 
in copolymer can be used as input. J is minimized with respect to  and the Weiner-Hopf 
integral equation is obtained. 
Groot and Warren [1997] developed a mesoscopic simulation tool. Molecules are treated 
as spherical objects that can obey the Newton‟s laws of motion. Physical properties and EOS 
of polymeric substances were obtained from this analysis. Conservative, dissipative and 
random forces were taken into account. In the canonical ensemble, the Gibbs-Boltzmann 
distribution can seen to be the solution to the Fokker Planck equation. 
Damped wave conduction and relaxation equation is solved for in three dimensions in 
order to gauge the ampacity risks in PCB interconnections. V = u/r substitution is used and 
the temperature profile obtained in three dimensions and in 1 dimension. In the creeping 
transfer limit, the spatio-temporal profile is given as a modified Bessel composite function in 
space and time of the third order. Three regimes of solution are identified; (i) lag regime; (ii) 
rising regime given by Bessel composite function in space and time and; (iii) rising regime 
given by modified Bessel composite function in space and time. In the general case the order 
of the solution was found to be 7/2 and the order of the solution was found to be two in the 
case of one dimension. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
217 
Thermodynamic analysis of materials with negative thermal exmapnsion coefficient was 
performed., For physical changes the expression for internal energy change can be seen to be 
always positive. This is because of the lowering of pressure as solid becomes liquid and the 
internal energy change is positive resulting in a net positive sign in the RHS, right hand side 
of Eq. (3.401). No ideal gas law was assumed. Only the first two laws of thermodynamics 
was used and reversible changes were assumed in order to obtain Eq. (3.401). Thus reports of 
materials with negative thermal expansion coefficient is inconsistent with Eq. (3.401).  
For ideal gases Eq. (3.415) would revert to the volume expansivity,  would equal the 
reciprocal of absolute temperature. This would meanthat  can never be negative as 
temperature is always positive as stated by the third law of thermodynamics. So materials 
with negative values for  ab initio are in violation of the combined statement of the 1st and 
2nd laws of thermodynamics. 
Along similar lines to the improvement given by Laplace to the theory of the speed of 
sound as developed by Newton (as discussed in Section II Historical Note) a isentropic 
volume expansivity is proposed by Eq. (3.420). This can be calculated using expression from 
isobaric expansivity, isothermal compressibility and a parameter  that is a measure of 
isentropic change of pressure with temperature. Eq. (34) can be used to obtain the isentropic 
expansivity in terms of heat capacities at constant volume and constant pressure and 
isothermal compressibility at a given pressure and temperature of the material. 
Chemical changes have to be delineated from physical changes when heating the 
material.  
An alternate non-Fourier heat conduction equation is derived from consideration of 
translation motion of spinless electron under a driving force due to an applied temperature 
gradient. Thisequation is a capite ad calcem, temperature. Elimination of the rate of change of 
velocity with respect to time leads to a non-Fourier heat conduction equation with a 
accumulation oftemperature or ballistic term in it. The new constitutive heat conduction 
equation is combinedwith the energy balance equation in 1 dimension. The governing 
equation for transienttemperature a partial differential equation (Eq. (3.498)) is solved for by 
the method of Laplacetransforms. The problem considered is the semi-infinite medium with 
constant thermo physicalproperties with constant wall temperature boundary condition. A 
closed form analytical expression for the transient temperature was obtained (Eq. (3.511)) 
after truncation of higher order terms in the infinite binomial series. This solution is compared 
with that obtained using the parabolic Fourier model and the damped wave model as 
presented in an earlier study. The predictions of Eq. (3.511) and Eq. (3.516) are closer to the 
Fourier model, Further work on Eq. (3.492) is underway. 
 
 
3.21. NOMENCLATURE 
 
  
ratio of the interface radius with the centrifugal bowl radius  
R 
radius of the interface of oil and water  
c1, c2,c3, c4 integration constants in tangential velocity profile 

density ratio 
oil
water
  
H 
height of centrifuge (m) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
218 
 
ratio of inner rotor radius with the centrifugal bowl radius  
R 
radius of the inner rotor (m) 
oil 
viscosity of oil (Pa.S)  
water 
viscosity of water (Pa.s)  
P 
power draw at rotor (watts)  
r 
radial distance 
R 
radius of the centrifugal bowl (m)  
oil 
density of oil (kg.m-3) 
water 
density of water (kg.m-3)  
r 
tangential shear stress (N.m-2)  
T 
torque (N.m.s-1) 
 
residence time of fluid in centrifuge (hr)  
v 
tangential velocity of fluid (m/s) 
vrot 
volumetric flow rate of fluid out through the rotor (m3.hr-1) 
vper 
volumetric flow rate of fluid through the periphery (m3.hr-1) 
v 
volumetric flow rate of fluid into the centrifuge (m3.hr-1)  
V 
volume of centrifuge (m3)  
 
angular speed of rotor (rad.s-1)  
xF 
weight fraction of oil in feed  
xper 
weight fraction of oil in outlet stream through periphery  
xrot 
weight fraction of oil in outlet stream through inner rotor 
 
 
3.22. FURTHER READING 
 
Abraham, M. A. & Nguyen, N. (2005). “Results from the Sandestin Conference: Green 
Engineering: Defining Principle”, Environmental Progress, Vol. 22, 233-236. 
Al-Nimr, A. & Naji, M. (2000). “The Hyperbolic Heat Conduction Equation in an 
Anisotropic Material”, Int. J of Thermophysics, 21, 281-287.  
Al-Nimr, M. A. & Haddad, O. M. (2003). “The Dual-Phase-Lag Heat Conduction Model in 
Thin Slab under Fluctuating Thermal Disturbance”, Heat Transfer Engineering, 24, 5, 
47-54. 
Anderson, J. (2003). Modern Compressible Flow with Historical Perspective, McGraw Hill 
Professional, Third Edition, New York, NY. 
Antaki, P. J. (1998). Solution for non-Fourier Dual Phase Lag Heat Conduction in a Semi-
infinite Slab with Surface Heat Flux, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 
Vol. 41, (14), 2253-2258.  
Askleland, D. R. & Phule, P. P. (2006). The Science and Engineering of Materials, Thomson, 
Toronto, Ontorio, Canada. 
Avgoustiniatos, E. S., Dionne, K. E., Wilson, D. F., Yarmush, M. L. and Colton, C. K. 
(2007). “Measurements of the Effective Diffusion Coefficient of Oxygen in Pancreatic 
Islets”, IEC, Res., Vol. 46, 6157-6163.  
Bai, C. & Lavine, A. S. (1995). On Hyperbolic Heat Conduction and Second Law of 
Thermodynamics, J. Heat Transfer, 117, 2, 256-263. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
219 
Barletta, A. & Zanchini, E. (1997). Thermal-Wave Heat Conduction in a Solid Cylinder 
which undergoes a change of Boundary Temperature, Heat and Mass Transfer/ Warema-
und Stoffuebertragung, 32, 4, 285-291.  
Baskakov, A. P., Berg, B. V., Vitt, O. K., Filippovsky, N. F., Kirakosyan, V. A., Goldobin, J. 
M. & Maskaev, V. K. (1973). “Heat Transfer to Objects in Fluidized Beds”, Powder 
Technology, Vol. 8, 273-282, Vol. 22, 2005, 233-236. 
Batchelor, G. K. (1967). An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge University Press, 
233-234, Cambridge, UK. 
Baughman, R. H. & Turi, E. A. (1973). “Negative Thermal Expansion of a Polydiacetyelene 
Single Crystal”, Journal of Polym. Sci., Polymer Physics, Vol. 11, 2453-2466. 
Baumeister, K. J. & Hamill, T. D. (1971). “Hyperbolic Heat Conduction Equation – A 
Solution for the Semi-Infinite Body Problem”, ASME Journal of Heat Transfer, Vol. 93, 
1, 126-128. 
Bender, M. (1999). “Economic Feasibility Review for Communit-Scale Farmer Cooperatives 
for Biodiesel”, Bioresource Technology, Vol. 70. 1, 81-87. 
Bhange, D. S. & Veda. “Negative Thermal Expansion in Silicalite-1 and Zirconium Silicalite-
1 having MFI Structure, Materials Research Bulletin, Vol. 41, 1392-1402. 
Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E. & Lightfoot, E. N. (2007). Transport Phenomena, John Wiley & 
Sons, Second Edition, New York. 
Boley, A. K. (1964). Heat Transfer Structures and M]aterials, Pergamon, New York. 
Boltzmann, L. (1876). Über die Natur der Gasmoleküle (On the nature of gas molecules). 
WienerBerichte, 1876, 74, 553–560. 
Butcher, J. C. (1964). “On Runge-Kutta Processes of Higher Order”, J. Austral. Math. Soc., 
Vol. 4, 179. 
Camp, T. R. (1936). “A Study of the Rational Design of Settling Tanks”, Sewage Works 
Journal, Vol. 8, 9, 116-125. 
Camp, T. R. (1946). “Sedimentation and the Design of Settling Tanks”, Trans. of American 
Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 111, 895. 
Casimir, H. B. G. (1938). Note on the Conduction of Heat in Crystals, Physica, 5, 495 -500. 
Cattaneo, C. (1958). A Form of Heat Conduction which Eliminates the Paradox of 
InstantaneousPropagation, ComptesRendus, 247, 431-433. 
Cattaneo, C. (1948). Sulla Coduzione del Calone, Atti. Sem. Fis. Univ. Moderna, 3, 83.  
Chapra, S. C. & Canale R. P. (2006). Numerical Methods for Engineers, Mcgraw Hill 
Professional, New York. 
Chhabra, R. P. (1993). Bubbles, Drops and Particles in Non-Newtonian Fluids, CRC Press, 
Baco Raton, FL. 
Clift, R., Grace, J. R. & Weber, W. E. (1978). Bubbles, Drops and Particles, Academic Press, 
New York. 
Coe, H. S. & Clevenger, G. H. (1916). “Methods for Determining the Capacities of Slime-
Settling Tanks”, Trans. of the American Institute of Mininig and Metallurgical Engineers, 
vol. 55, 356. 
Chandran, R. & Chen, J. C. (1982). AIChE Journal, Vol. 29, (6), 907-913. 
Chapra, S. C. & Canale, R. P. (2006). Numerical Methods for Engineers, McGraw Hill 
Education, New York, NY. 
Chhabra, R. P. (1993). Bubbles, Drops and Particles in Non-Newtonian Fluids, CRC Press, 
Baco Raton, FL. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
220 
Clift, R., Grace, J. R. & Weber, W. E. (1978). Bubbles, Drops and Particles, Academic Press, 
New York. 
Coles, D. (1965). J. Fluid Mech., Vol. 21, 385-425. 
(2005). Congressional Record, Vol. 151 Part 4, 4544. 
Connemann, J., Krallmann, A. & Fischer, E. (1994). “Process for the Continuous Production 
of Lower Alkyl Esters of Higher Fatty Acids”, US Patent 5, 354, 878,  
Craig, J. J. (2005). Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and Control, Third Edition, Pearson 
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
D. Scott‟s Appollo 15 Mission to Moon, Galileo‟s Gravity Experiment in Moon: “The 
Hammer and the Feather”. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4mTsrRZEMwA 
Danckwerts, P. V. (1955). AIChE Journal, Vol. 1, 456. 
Darnoko, D. & Cheryan, M. (2000). “Continous Production of Palm Methyl Esters”, Journal 
of American Oil Chemists Society, Vol. 77, 12, 1269-1272. 
Davis, M. L. (2011). Water and Wastewater Engineeering: Design Principles and Practice, 
McGraw Hill Professional, New York. 
Deakin, M. A. B. & Troup, G. J. (1998). “Approximate Trajectories for Projectile Motion 
with Air Resistance”, Am. J. Phys., Vol. 66, 1, 34-37. 
Dobbins, W. E. (1964). Int. Conf. Water Pollution Res., Pergamon, New York, NY. 
Drude, P. (1900). ZurElektronentheorie der metalle. Annalen der Physik, 1900, 306 (3), 566. 
Evans, J. S. O., Davis, W. I. F. & Sleight, A. W. (1999). “Structural Investigation of the 
Negative- Thermal-Expansion Material ZrW2O8, Acta Crystallographica B, Vol. 55, 3, 
333-340. 
Fick, A. (1855). Ann Physik, Vol. 170, 59, Leipzig. 
Fourier, J. B. (1822). Theorieanalytique de la chaleur, English Translation by A. Freeman, 
1955, Dover Publications, New York; 1955. 
Galileo, G. Le Opera di Galileo Galilei, Edizione Nazionale, 20. Vols. 1590/1610 On Motion, 
Translated I. E. Drabkin, University of Wisconsin Press, Wisconsin. 
Geldart, D. (1973). “Types of Gas Fluidization”, Powder Technology, 7, 285-292. 
Groot, R. D. & Warren, P. B. (1997). “Dissipative Particle Dynamics: Bridging the Gap 
between Atomistic and Mesoscopic Simultion”, J. Chem. Phys., Vol. 107, 11, 4423-4435. 
Haider, A. & Levenspiel, O. (1989). “Drag Coefficient and Terminal Settling Velocity of 
Spherical and Nonspherical Particles”, Powder Technology, Vol. 58, 63-70. 
Hagen, G. H. L. (1839). “Uber die Bewegung des Wassers in Engen Cylindrischen Rohren”, 
Poggendorf’s Annalen der Physik and Chemie, Vol. 46, 423-442. 
Halloun, A. & Hestenes, D. (1985). “Common Sense Concepts about Motion”, Am. J. Phys., 
Vol. 53, 11, 1056-1065. 
Haji-Sheik, A. M., Minkowycz, W. J. & Sparrow, E. M. (2002). J. Heat Transfer, 124, 2, 
307-319.  
Hibbeler, R. C. (2010). Engineering Mechanics: Statics and Dynamics, Pearson Prentice 
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
The Hindu, Chennai, India, February 27th 2006. 
Higbie, R. (1935). Trans. AIChE Journal, Vol. 31, 365. 
Jakubinek, M. B., Whitman, C. A. & White, M. A. (2008). “Negative Thermal Expansion 
Materials: Thermal Properties and Implications for Composite Materials”, J Therm. Anal. 
Calorim., DOI 1.1007/s10973-009- 0458-9, Japan Symposium. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
221 
Jaya, N. & Ethirajulu, K. (2011). “Kinetic Modeling of Transesterification Reaction for 
Biodiesel Production using Heterogeneous Catalyst”, Int. J Engineering Science and 
Technology, Vol. 3, 4, 3463-3466. 
Johnson, A. S., O‟Sullivan, E., D‟Aoust, L. N., Omer, A., Bonner-Weir, S., Fisher, R. J., 
Weir, G. C. & Colton, C. K. (2011). “Tissue Engineering Part C: Methods”, Vol. 17, 4, 
435-449. 
Joseph, D. D. & Preziosi L. (1989). Heat Waves, Review of Modern Physics, 61, 41-73. 
Jukes, T. H. & Cantor, C. R. (1969). “Evolution of protein molecules” in H. N. Munro, ed. 
Mammalian Protein Metabolism., Academic Press, New York.  
Jorgensen, J. D., Human, Z. & Short, S. (2001). “Pressure-induced Cubic to Orthorhombic 
Phase Transformation in the Negative Thermal Expansion Material HfW2O8”, J of Appl. 
Phys., Vol. 89, 6, 3184-3188. 
Kimura, M. (1980). A Simple Method for Estimating Evolutionary Rate of Base Substitution 
through Comparative Studies of Nucleotide Sequences”, Journal of Molecular Evolution, 
Vol. 16, 111-120. 
Kittel, C. & Kroemer, H. (1980). Thermal Physics, Freeman & Co, Second Edition, New 
York, NY. 
Krawczyk, T. (1996). “Biodiesel – Alternative Fuel makes Inroads but Hurdles Remain”, 
INFORM, 1, Vol. 7, 801-829. 
Kreith, F., Manglik R. M. & Bohn, M. S. (2010). Principles of Heat Transfer, Brooks/Cole, 
Pacific Grove, CA. 
Kulkarni, M. G. & K. Dalai, A. (2006). “Waste Cooking Oil – An Economic Source for 
Biodiesel: A Review”, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry, Vol. 45, 9, 2901-2913. 
Landau, L. & Liftshitz, E. M. (1987). Fluid Mechanics, Pergamon, UK.  
de Laplace, P. S. M. (1816). “Sur la vitesse du son dans l‟aire et dan l‟eau”, Annales de 
Chimie et de Physique. 
Lapple C. E. & Shepherd C. B. (1940). “Calculation of Particle Trajectories”, Ind. and Eng. 
Chemistry, Vol. 32, 5, 605-617. 
Levenspiel, O. (1999). Chemical Reaction Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, Third Edition, 
New York, NY. 
Li, J., Yokochi, A., Amos, T. G. & Sleight, A. W. (2002). “Strong Negative Thermal 
Expansion along the O-Cu-O Linkage in CuScO2”, Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, 2602-2606. 
Lind, C., Wilkinson, A. P., Hu, Z., Short, S. & Jorgensen, J. D. (1998). “Synthesis and 
Properties of the Negative Thernal Expansion Material Cubic ZrMo2O8, Chem. Mater., 
Vol. 10, 2335-2337. 
Lord Raleigh. (1883). Phil. Transactions., 316. 
Lorentz, H. A. (1892a). at the Internet Archive", La Théorieelectromagnétique de Maxwell et 
sonapplication aux corps mouvants, Archives néerlandaises des sciences exactes et 
naturelles, 25, 363–552. 
Martin, A., Flynn, J. E. & Lange, H. (2011). “Biodiesel Production Method”, US Patent 
8,030,505, B & P Process Equipment and Systems, LLC, Saginaw, MI.  
Ma, F. & Hanna, M. A. (1999). “Biodiesel Production: A Review”, Bioresource Technology, 
Vol. 70, 1-15. 
Mason, M. & Weaver, W. (1924). “The Settling of Small Particles in a Fluid”, Physical 
Review, Vol. 23, 412-426. 
Maxwell, J. C. (1867). On the Dynamical Theory of Gases, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., 157, 49. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
222 
Mickley, H. S. & Fairbanks, D. F. (1955). “Mechanism of Heat Transfer to Fluidized Beds”, 
AIChE Journal, Vol. 1, n3, 374-384. 
Mickley, H. S., Sherwood, T. K. & Reid, C. E. (1957). Applied Mathematics in Chemical 
Engineering, McGraw Hill, New York, NY. 
Miller, W., Smith, C. W., Mackenzie, D. S. & Evans, K. E. (2009). “Negative Thermal 
Expansion: A Review”, Journal of Material Sci., Vol. 44, 5441-5451. 
Mitra, K., Kumar, S., Vedavarz, A. & Moallemi, M. K. (1995). Experimental Evidence of 
Hyperbolic Heat Conduction in Processed Meat, Journal of Heat Transfer, Vol. 117, 568-
573.  
Moran, S. (Sep‟ 12th 2006). “Biodiesel Comes of Age as the Demand Rises”, New York 
Times.  
Murugam, R. J. & Krishnan, S. (2009). “System and Method to Analyze and Determine 
Ampacity Risks on PCB Interconnections”, US Patent 7,596,482, Dell Products, Round 
Rock, TX. 
Nelson, R. G. & Shrock, M. G. (1993). “Energetic and Economic Feasibility associated with 
the Production, Processing and Conversion of Beef Tallow to Diesel Fuel”, in Proc. of 
First Biomass Conference of the Americas: Energy, Environment, Agriculture and 
Industry, Vol. 2, 848-862. NREL, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO. 
(1687). Sir Isaac Newton, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica.  
Ohm, G. S. (1817). Grundlinienzueinerzweckmäßigen Behandlung dereometriealshöheren 
BildungsmittelsanvorbereitendenLehranstalten/entworfen (Guidelines for an appropriate 
treatment of geometry in higher education at preparatory institutes/notes) Erlangen: Palm 
und Enke. 
“Oil Spills”, http://en.wikepedia.org. 
Onsager, L. (1931). Reciprocal Relations in Irreversible Processes, Phys. Review, 37,405-426. 
Ozisik, M. N. & Tzou D. Y. (1994). On the Wave Theory of Heat Conduction, ASME Journal 
of HeatTransfer, 116, 526-535. 
Podolski, W. F., Shmalzer, D. K., Conrad, V., Lowenhaupt, D. E., Winschel, R. A., Klunder, 
E. G., Mcllvried III, H. G., Ramezan, M., Stiegel, G. J., D.Srivastave, R., Winslow, J., 
Loftus, P. J., Benson, C. E., Wheeldon, J. M. & Krumpelt, M., Lee-Smith, F. (2008). 
Energy Resources, Conversion, and Utilization, Perry‟s Chemical Engineers‟ Handbook, 
Eds. D. W.Green, R. H. Perry, McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Poiseuille, J. L. (1841). “Recherches expérimentales sur le mouvement des liquides dans les 
tubes de très-petits diamètres”, Comptes Rendus, (1841) Académie des Sciences, Paris. 
Prandlt, L. (1952). Essentials of Fluid Dynamics, Harper, NY, USA, 105. 
Parker, G. W. (1977), “Projectile Motion with Air Resistance Quadratic in the Speed”, Am. J. 
Phys., Vol. 606, 606-610. 
Renganathan, K. (1990). Correlation of Heat Transfer with Pressure Fluctuations in Gas-Solid 
Fluidized Beds, Ph.D. Dissertation, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV. 
Renganathan, K., Turton, R. & Clark, N. N. (1989). “Accelerating Motion of Geometric 
and Spherical Particles in a Fluid”, Powder Technology, Vol. 58, 279-284. 
Renganathan, K. & Turton, R. (1989). Approximate Solution of Hyperbolic Heat Equation to 
Predict Heat Transfer in Fluidized Beds to Immersed Surfaces, 81st AIChE Annual 
Meeting, San Francisco, CA, USA, November. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
223 
Reynolds, O. (1883). “An Experimental Investigation of the Circumstances which Determine 
Whether the Motion of Water shall be Direct or Sinuous, and of the Law of Resistance in 
Parallel Channels”, Phil. Trans. of the Royal Society, Vol. 174, 935-982. 
Reynolds T. D. & Richards, P. A. (1996). Unit Operations and Processes in Environmental 
Engineering, PWS Publishing Co., Boston, MA. 
Rupnowski, P., Gentz, M., Sutter, J. K. & Kumosa, A. M. (2005). “An Evaluation of Elastic 
Properties and Coefficients of Thermal Expansion of Graphite Fibers from Macroscopicc 
Composite Input Data”, Proc. of Royal Society, A, 461, 347-369. 
Saxena, S. C., Grewal, N. S., Gabor, J. D., Zabrodsky, S. S. & Galerschtein, D. M. (1978). 
Advances in Heat Transfer, Vol. 14, 149. 
Schrezenmeir, J., Kirchgessner, J., Gero, L., Kuz, L. A., Beyer, J. & Mueller-Klieser, W. 
(1994). “Effect of Microencapsulation on Oxygen Distribution in Isets Organs”, 
Transplantation, Vol. 57, 9, 1308-1314. 
Sharma, K. R. (2014). “On Techno-Economic Evaluation of Biodiesel Production”, Advances 
in Energy Engineering, Vol. 2, 2, 23-30.  
Sharma, K. R. (2014). “On Bessel Composite Function of the Third Order and First Kind 
Solution to Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation in Arbitrary Direction”, Journal of 
Basic and Applied Physics, Vol. 3, 1, 26-34.  
Sharma, K. R. (2013). “On Thermodynamic Analysis of Materials with Negative Thermal 
Coefficient of Thermal Expansion”, Engineering, Vol 5, 11, 844-849.  
Sharma, K. R. (2013). “Is Overshoot a Mathematical Artefact”, JP Journal of Heat and Mass 
Transfer, Vol 7, 1, 35-64 
Sharma, K. R. (2012). “Power Draw of the Rotor during Centrifugal High Volume Separation 
of Oil and Water”, Journal of Mechanical Engineering Research, Vol. 4, 1, 10-16. 
Sharma, K. R. (2012). “On Two Dimensional Trajectory of Accelerating Particles in 
Rectangular Sedimentation Tanks”, Int. J Mech. Sys. Eng., Vol. 2, 3, 108-113. 
Sharma, K. R. (2012). Process Instrumentation, Dynamics and Control, Cognella, San Diego, 
CA. 
Sharma, K. R. (2012). Polymer Thermodynamics: Blends, Copolymers and Reversible 
Polymerization, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group, Baco Raton, FL. 
Sharma, K. R. (2011). Fundamentals of Engineering Economics, Cognella, San Diego, CA.  
Sharma, K. R. (2010). On Analytical Solutions during Damped Wave Conduction and 
Relaxation in a Finite Slab Subject to the Convective Boundary Condition, Int. J. 
Thermophysics, 31 ( 2). 430-443. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). Transport Phenomena in Biomedical Engineering: Artificial Organ 
Design and Development and Tissue Design, McGraw Hill Professional, New York, NY. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). “On Damped Wave Diffusion of Oxygen in Islets of Langerhans: Part 
I- Comparison of Parabolic and Hyperbolic Models in a Finite Slab”, 102nd AIChE 
Annual Meeting, Salt Lake City, UT, November. 
Sharma K. R. (2010). Nanostructuring Operations in Nanoscale Science and Engineering, 
McGraw Hill Professional, New York. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). "On Analytical Solutions during Damped Wave Conduction and 
Relaxation in a Finite Slab Subject to the Convective Boundary Condition", International 
Journal of Thermophysics, Vol. 31, 2, 430-443 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
224 
Sharma, K. R. (2009). “Comparison of Solutions from Parabolic and Hyperbolic Models for 
Transient Heat Conduction in Semi-Infinite Medium”, Int. J of Thermophysics, Vol. 20, 
5, 1671-1687. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). “On Damped Wave Diffusion of Oxygen in Islets of Langerhans: Part 
I- Comparison of Parabolic and Hyperbolic Models in a Finite Slab”, 102nd AIChE 
Annual Meeting, Salt Lake City, UT, November. 
Sharma, K. R. (2009). Bioinformatics: Sequence Alignment and Markov Models, McGraw 
Hill Professional, New Yor Sharma,  
Sharma, K. R. (2009). Comparison of Solutions from Parabolic and Hyperbolic Models for 
TransientHeat Conduction in Semi-Infinite Medium, In. J. Thermophysics, 30 (5), 1671-
1687. 
Sharma, K. R. (2008). Analytical Solution of Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation in a 
Finite Sphereand Cylinder, J. of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer, 22,( 4), 783-786. 
Sharma, K. R. (2008). On the Solution of Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation 
Equation in a Semi-Infinite Medium Subject to Constant Wall Flux, Int. J. Heat and 
Mass Transfer, 51, 25-26, 6024-6031. 
Sharma, K. R. (2008). Analytical Solution of Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation in a 
Finite Sphereand Cylinder, J. of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer, 22, (4), 783-786. 
Sharma, K. R. (2008). On the Solution of Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation 
Equation in a Semi-Infinite Medium Subject to Constant Wall Flux, Int. J. Heat and 
Mass Transfer, 51, 25-26, 6024-6031. 
Sharma, K. R. (2007). Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation in Cylindrical and 
SphericalCoordinates, J. Thermophysics. and Heat Transfer, 21, 4, 688-693. 
Sharma, K. R. (2007). Principles of Mass Transfer, Prentice Hall of India, N. Delhi, India. 
Sharma, K. R. (2006). A Fourth Mode of Heat Transfer called Damped Wave Conduction, 
42nd Annual Convention of Chemists Meeting, Santiniketan, India, February. 
Sharma, K. R. (March, 2003). Storage Coefficient of Substrate in a 2 GHz Microprocessor, 
225th ACSNational Meeting, New Orleans, LA. 
Sharma, K. R. (2009). Bioinformatics: Sequence Alignment and Markov Models, McGraw 
Hill, New York.  
Sharma, K. R. (March 26th – March 30th, 2006). Errors in Gel Acrylamide Electrophoresis 
Due to Effect of Charge, 231st ACS National Meeting, Atlanta, GA.  
Sharma, K. R. (March 2007). On the Derivation of an Expression for Relaxation Time from 
Stokes-Einstein Relation, 233rd ACS National Meeting, Chicago, IL, American Chemical 
Society, Washington, DC.  
Sharma, K. R. (2006). Manifestation of Acceleration during Transient Heat Conduction, 
Journal of Thermophysics and Heat Transfer, Vol. 20, 4, 799-808. 
Sharma, K. R. (2005). Damped Wave Transport and Relaxation, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands. 
Sharma, K. R. (November, 2001). Simulation of Instantaneous Local Heat Transfer 
Coeffficient in Fine Particle Fluidized Beds, IMECE, New York, NY. 
Sharma, K. R. (November, 2001). Simulation of Instantaneous Local Heat Transfer 
Coefficient in Slugging Fluidized Beds, IMECE, New York, NY. 
Sharma, K. R. (November, 2001). Simulation of Instantaneous Local Heat Transfer 
Coefficient in Intermediate Sized Particle Fluidized Beds, IMECE, New York, NY. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
225 
Sharma, K. R. (2001). Simulation of Local Heat Transfer Coefficient for Coarse Particle 
Fluidized Beds, IMECE, New York, NY, November. 
Sharma, K. R. (2000). “Thermal Terpolymerization of Alphamethylstyrene, Acrylonitrile and 
Styrene, Polymer, 1305-1308 
Sharma, K. R. & Turton, R. (1998). “Mesoscopic Approach to Correlate Surface Heat 
Transfer Coefficients with Pressure Fluctuations in Dense Gas-Solid Fluidized Beds”, 
Powder Technology, Vol. 99, 109-118. 
Sharma, K. R. (March, 1998). Mixing in Helical Ribbon Agitatorsin Continuous Mass 
Polymerization Reactor – Is it Stochastic?, 30th IEEE Southeastern Symposium on 
System Theory, Morgantown, WV, USA.  
Sharma, K. R. (September, 1997). A Statistical Design to Define the Process Capability of 
Continuous Mass Polymerization of ABS at the Pilot Plant, 214th ACS National Meeting, 
Las Vegas, NV.  
Shipman, J. T., Wilson, J. D. & Higgins, C. A. (2013). An Introduction to Physical Science, 
Cengage Learning, Mason, OH. 
Shiva Prasad, B. G. & Sharma, K. R. (2012). “Alternative Energy for Energy Sustainability”, 
Annals of Arid Zone, Special Issue, April, Jodhpur, India. 
Sleight, A. W. (1994). “Negative Thermal Expansion Material”, US Patent 5, 322, 559. 
Smith, J. M., Van Ness, H. C. & Abbott, M. M. (2005). Introduction to Chemical 
Engineering Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill Professional, 7th Edition, New York, NY. 
Stebbins, E. J. (2009). “Technical and Economic Feasibility of Biodiesel Production in 
Vermont: Evidence from a Farm-Scale Study and a Commercial Scale Simulation 
Analysis”, Masters Thesis, University of Vermont.  
Stepanov, L. A. (2000). “Thermodynamics of Substances with Negative Thermal Expansion 
Coefficient”, Computer Modelling & New Technologies, Vol. 4, 2, 72-74. 
Stokes, G. G. (1851). “On the Effect of the Internal Friction of Fluids on the Motion of 
Pendulums”, Trans. of Cambridge Philosophical Society, Vol. 9, 8. 
Subramanian, R. S. & Balasubramaniam, R. (2001). “The Motion of Bubbles and Drops in 
Reduced Gravity”, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Sundaresan, R. & Kolar, A. (2002). “Core Heat Transfer Studies in a Circulating Fluidized 
Bed”, Powder Technology, Vol. 124, 1-2, 138-151. 
Taitel, Y. (1972). On the Parabolic, Hyperbolic and Discrete Formulation of Heat Conduction 
Equation, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 15, 2, 369-371. 
Taylor, G. I. (1923). Phil. Trans. A223, 289-343. “BP leak the world‟s accidental oil spill” 
Telegraph, London, United Kingdon, 2010-08-03. 
The Hindu, „Science Day‟, February, 2006/ 
Treybal, R. E. (1980). Mass-Transfer Operations, McGraw Hill Professional, New York, 
NY. 
Turton, R., Bailie, R. C., Whiting, W. B. & Shaeiwitz, J. A. (1998). Analysis, Synthesis, and 
Design of Chemical Processes, Prentive Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
Turton, R. & Levenspiel, O. (1989). “A Short Note on the Drag Correlation for Spheres”, 
Powder Technology, Vol. 47, 83-86. 
Tzou, D. Y. (1996). Macro to Microscale Heat Transfer: The Lagging Behavior, CRC Press, 
New York.  
Varma, A. & Morbidelli, M. (1997). Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering, Oxford 
University Press, New York, NY. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
226 
Vernotte, P. (1958). Les Paradoxes de la Theorie Continue de l‟equation de la Chaleur, C. R. 
Hebd. Seanc. Acad. Sci. Paris, 246, 22, 3154-3155. 
Weber, J. A. (1993). “The Economic Feasibiloty of Community-Based Biodiesel Plants”, 
Master’s Thesis, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO. 
Williams, S. J., Schwasinger-Schmidt, T., Zamierowski, D. & Stehno-Bittel, L. (2012). 
“Diffusion into Human Islets in Limited to Molecules Below 10 kDa”, Tissue and Cell, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tice.2012.05.001 
You, Y. D., Shie, J. L., Chang, C. Y., Huang, S. H., Pai, C. Y., Yu, Y. H. & Chang, C. H. 
(2008). “Economic Cost Analysis of Biodiesel Production: Case in Soybean Oil,” Energy 
& Fuels, Vol.22, 182-189. 
Zanchini, E. (1999). Hyperbolic Heat Conduction Theories and non-Decreasing Entropy, Phy. 
Review B- Condensed Matter and Material Physics, Vol. 60, (2), 991-997. 
 
 
3.23. EXERCISES 
 
Review Questions 
 
1.0. How does the deepwater horizon spill provide impetus to study of dynamics and 
control ? 
2.0. What are the differences between empirical and semi-empirical models ? 
3.0. What are the differences between mechanistic models and shell balance models ? 
4.0. What are the differences between supercomputer based models and simulation 
studies on a personal computer. 
5.0. What are the differences between mesoscopic models and Monte Carol trials. 
6.0. What is th e physical significance of frequency number ? 
7.0. What is Brinkman number and what is the physical significance of this dimensionless 
group. 
Discuss the use and significance of the following dimensionless numbers (Exercise 8 
– 23.0) 
8.0. Froude Number 
9.0. Fanning Friction Factor 
10.0. Drag Coefficient 
11.0. Aeration Number 
12.0. Graetz Number 
13.0. Heat Transfer Factor 
14.0. Mass-Transfer Factor 
15.0. Sharma Number  
16.0. Storage Number 
17.0. Power Number 
18.0. Flow Number 
19.0. Peclect Number 
20.0. Condition Number 
21.0. Separation Number 
22.0. Schmidt Number 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
227 
23.0. Sherwood Number 
24.0. Maxwell Number (heat)/Vernotte Number 
25.0. Maxwell Number (mass) 
26.0. What is meant by “blow-up” in the model to predict heat transfer coefficient in 
fluidized beds to immersed surfaces ? 
27.0. What are the differences between convective contribution and conductive 
contribution during the heat transfer between flow of dispersed systems past a 
surface ? 
28.0. Can radiation effects play a role during heat transfer between the dispersed systems 
and surface in contact with ? 
29.0. What is the differences in heat transfer expectations when fluid flow towards a 
horizontal tube and when the fluid flow away from the tube ? 
30.0. What is the significane of the cross-derivative term, 
2u
Y  in Eq. (2.26) for 
temperature near a hot tube in a CFB, circulating fluidized bed. 
31.0. Under what range of conditions is the binomial expansion used in Eq. (2.36) a 
reasonable assumption to make ? 
32.0. What are the differences between overall mass transfer coefficient and local mass 
transfer coefficient as given in Eq. (2.49). 
33.0. What are the differences between overall heat transfer coefficient and local heat 
transfer coefficient as used in Eq. (2.48). 
34.0. Can the coupled governing equations for temperature and humidity in a evaporative 
cooler lead to instability under certain conditions ? Why not ? 
35.0. What are the two mechanism of heat removal designed in a evaporative cooler ? 
36.0. Rewrite the equations for the oil layer and water later during centrifugal separation 
under transient conditions. 
37.0. Guess the velocity profile of oil layer and water layer during transient conditions in 
the centrifuge. 
38.0. What is the significance of the separation efficiency in centrifugal separation as 
given by Eq. (2.82) ? 
39.0. What is the significance of a log-linear relation between power draw and rotor 
speed during centrifugal separation ? 
40.0. What is the signifance of toroidal vortice formation during centrifugal flow ? 
41.0. Rewrite the state space model for a scheme of 7 simultaneous reactions in 
series/parallel discussed in section 2.5.1 when the reactions are reversible. 
42.0. What would happen to the rate matrix when temperature is changes in Eq. (2.100). 
Assume that all rate constants obey a Arrhenius relationship. 
43.0. Can multiplicity occur in calculation of time calculations during fire fighting ? 
44.0. What are the differences between “elbow-up” and “elbow-down” solutions of the 
joint angles of a 3 arm manipulator with end effector ? 
45.0. What happens to the physical significance when a third dimensionless group is 
formed by multiplication of two existing dimensionless groups. 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
228 
Problems 
 
46.0. Effect of Bubble Residence Time at the Immersed Surface in a Fluidized Bed  
 
In section 2.2 the packet model developed by Mickley and Fairbanks [4] was 
discussed in detail. The model equation that provides an expression for the time 
averaged heat transfer coefficient between the fluidized bed and immersed surfaces 
was given by Eq. (2.13). Rather than a exponential distribution of residence times of 
the packets at the heat transfer surface consider an alternate bathing of solid rich 
packet and gas rich bubbles at the surface. A saw tooth pattern may be assumed as 
shown below in Figure 41.0. 
 
Assume that the particle contact times as shown in Figure 41.0, tp1, tp2, tp3 etc 
conform to a exponential distribution and the bubble contact times tb1, tb2, tb3 obey a 
uniform distribution. What would the time average heat transfer coefficient, <hbs> ? 
What happens to the “blow-up” at the asymptotical limit of zero contact time for the 
instantaneous heat transfer coefficient between the bed and the surface ? 
47.0. Simulation of Instantaneous Local Heat Transfer Coeffficient in Fine Particle 
 
Fluidized Beds [35] 
 
Fine particle fluidized beds in general can be characterized as Geldart A type 
fluidization [39]. These are bubbling fluidized beds. The mean particle size is small 
and density os less than 1.4 gm.cm-3. Beds in this group expand appreciably prior to 
commencement of bubbling. Bed collapse is slow on cut-off of air supply. Gross 
circulation of powder occurs even when few bubbles are present increasing the 
mixing process. Bubbles split and recoalesce often. Bubbles rise at a greater velocity 
compared with the interstitial gas velocity. Regardless of bubble size a maximum 
bubble velocity was found. The ratio of the bubble cloud volume to the bubble 
volume id negligible. The hydrodynamics of these beds are such that the bubble size 
grow to a maximum bubble size. The bed expands uniformly beyond the minimum 
fluidization bed height. The dominant frequency of pressure fluctuations can be 
corresponded with the bubble frequency at the surface. This frequency can be taken 
to be in the range of 1-6 Hz. Simulate a instantaneous heat transfer coefficient signal 
as a function of time. Use the Mickley and Fairbanks packet theory to estimate the 
packet heat transfer coefficient and Eq. (2.24) for the convective heat transfer when 
the bubble stays at the surface. Plot the instantaneous simulated heat transfer 
coefficient as a function of time. 
48.0. Simulation of Instantaneous Local Heat Transfer Coefficient in Slugging Fluidized 
Beds [36] 
 
Slugs are bubbles that are bounded only by the walls of the fluidized bed chamber. 
Slug frequencies may be taken to be about 2 Hz. During contact of the slugs and the 
heat transfer surface it may be assumed that the primary mode of heat transfer is by 
convection. Simulate a instantaneous heat transfer coefficient signal as a function of 
time. The transient heat transfer as described in Mickley & Fairbanks[4] for Fourier 
conduction or by Sharma [27] for damped wave conduction and relaxation can be 
used for obtaining heat transfer coefficients during the time the packets are in contact 
with the surface. A suitable statistical distribution such as exponential distribution for 
packet arrival times or Poisson distribution for slug residence times at the surface 
may be used for purposes of the simulation study. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
229 
49.0. Simulation of Instantaneous Local Heat Transfer Coefficient in Intermediate Sized 
Particle Fluidized Beds [37] 
 
Figure 41.0. Prototypical Trace of Instantaneous Heat Transfer Coefficient between Fluidized Bed and 
Immersed Surfaces. 
 
 
Fluidized beds with intermediate size particle size is classified under Geldart B type 
fluidization. The particle size lies in the range 40 m  dsv  500 m and instrinsic 
particle density lies in the range of 1.4 g.cm-3  s  4.0 g.cm-3. Bubbling is seen as 
soon as minimum fluidization velocity is reached. Bed expansion is small and the 
bed collapse is rapid when the air supply is cut-off. There was found no powder 
circulation in the absence of bubbles. Bubbles burst at the surface of the bed as 
discrete entities. Bubbles rise more rapidly compared with the interstitial gas velocity 
and bubble size increases linearly with both bed height and excess gas velocity (U-
Umf). Bubble coalsence is pronounced. There was found no maximum stable bubble 
size. Bubble sizes have been found to be independent of mean particle size or particle 
size distribution. Assume that the contributions from the particle conduction and gas 
convection would be equal to each other. Simulate a instantaneous heat transfer 
coefficient signal as a function of time. The transient heat transfer as described in 
Mickley & Fairbanks[4] for Fourier conduction or by Sharma [18] for damped wave 
conduction and relaxation can be used for obtaining heat transfer coefficients during 
the time the packets are in contact with the surface. A suitable statistical distribution 
such as exponential distribution for packet arrival times or Poisson distribution for 
slug residence times at the surface may be used for purposes of the simulation study. 
The gas convective contribution to the heat transfer coefficient can be given by Eq. 
(2.24). 
50.0. Simulation of Local Heat Transfer Coefficient for Coarse Particle Fluidized Beds 
[38] 
 
In coarse particle fluidized beds the thermal time constant of the particle [3] is larger 
compared with the residence time of the particle at the surface. In such cases the heat 
transfer coefficient from Fourier conduction through the particles can be neglected. 
The gas flow is at a higher rate. This can lead to even turbulent flow. The gas 
convective heat transfer contribution is more siginificant. Simulate a instantaneous 
heat transfer coefficient as a function of time for such systems. Allow for bubble 
contact with the surface. Choose an appropriate statistical distribution for the arrival 
of packets and bubbles at the surface. The gas velocity in the dense phase is high.  
51.0. Archimedes Number 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
230 
 
The dimensionless group called Archimedes number can be given by the following 
expression; 
 
 
3
2
p
s
s
f
gd
Ar
U
 
(3.519) 
 
 
 
Where g is the acceleration due to gravity, (m.s-2), dp particle size (m), U is the 
superficial velocity, m.s-1 and s and f are the densities of the solid particle and fluid 
respectively. Discuss the significance of Archimedes number. Can it be used to 
characterize fluidization behavior. Use Ref [39] if needed. 
52.0. Grashoff Number 
 
Discuss the use and significance of Grashoff number. How is Grashoff number used 
in free convection problems. Can Raleigh Bernard instability be predicted using 
Grashoff number analysis. Grashoff number can be calculated as follows; 
 
 
3
2
g
Tl
Gr
 
(3.520) 
 
 
Where l is the characteristic length (m) and  is the kinematic viscosity (m2.s-1),  is 
the volumetric thermal expansion coefficient, T is the temperature difference 
between the flat pate and surroundings far from the plate. 
53.0. Morton Number 
 
Discuss the use and significance of Morton number. How is Morton number used in 
characterization of bubble shape and bubble velocity. Morton number can be 
calculated as follows; 
 
 
4
3
g
M
 
(3.521) 
 
 
Where,  is the viscosity of the fluid (Kg.m-1.s-1) and  is the interfacial tension 
(N.m-1) between the dispersed and continuous phases. 
54.0. Eotvos Number 
 
Discuss the use and significance of Eotvos number. How is Eatvos number used in 
characterization of bubble shape and bubble velocity. Eatvos number can be 
calculated as follows; 
 
 
2
gd
E
 
(3.522) 
 
 
Where d is the volume equivalent diameter. 
55.0. Weber Number 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
231 
 
Discuss the use and significance of Weber number. How is Weber number used in 
characterization of bubble shape and bubble velocity. Weber number can be 
calculated as follows; 
 
 
2
U
d
W
 
(3.523) 
56.0. Anoxic Region in Trickle Bed Filter 
 
Develop the concentration profile of Oxygen at steady state in the aerobic region in 
Figure 42.0. Assume that the concentration of oxygen, at the interface of water and 
aerobic region is CO2i. The tank is impervious to diffusion of oxygen. The bed 
diameter if DT. Assume that the Michaelis Menten kinetics obeyed by the oxygen 
reaction with the microorganisms reaches an asymptotic zeroth order and a 
maximum reaction rate of Rmax. Show that the steady state concentration of Oxygen, 
CO2 as a function of x is a quadratic equation. Further calculate the xT is the distance 
beyond which there is no further diffusion of oxygen. 
57.0. Capillary Number 
 
Discuss the use and significance of Capillary number. How is capillary number used 
in description of thermocapillary migration of drops, bubbles and particles. Capillary 
number can be calculated as follows; 
 
 
T
T d
C
 
(3.524) 
 
Where the rate of interfacial tension gradient variation with temperature is given by 
T , (N.m-1.K-1) and d is the diameter of the drop, T is the temperature gradient 
(K.m-1). 
 
 
Figure 42.0. Anoxic Region in Trickle Bed Filter. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
232 
58.0. Marangoni Number 
 
Discuss the use and significane of Marangoni number. How is Marangoni number 
used in description of thermocapillary migration of drops, bubbles and particles in a 
vertical temperature gradient. Marangoni number can be calculated as follows; 
 
 
2
T
p
T
d C
Mar
k
 
(3.525) 
 
 
Where Cp is the heat capacity of the fluid, (J.Kg-1.K-1),  is the viscosity of the fluid, 
(kg.m-1.s-1) and k is the thermal conductivity of the fluid, (W.m-1.K-1). 
59.0. HMM, Hidden Markov Model – First Order 
 
HMMs are constructed using concepts of conditional probability. The yare 
increasingly used in bioinformatics applications (Sharma [40]). The sequence in 
DNA, deoxy ribonucleic acid molecule can be represented using HMM. Multiple 
alignments of protein sequence alignments can be achieved using HMMs. It can be 
protein structure modeling, gene finding, phylogenetic analysis, modeling time 
series, speech recognition, modeling coding and non-coding regions of DNA, protein 
subfamilies and machine learning techniques and other areas.  
 
A Markov chain is a sequence of random variables whose probabilities at a time 
interval depends upon the value of the number at the previous time or previous 
time(s). The controlling parameter in a Markov chain is the transition probability. 
This is a conditional probability for the system to go to a particular new state, given 
the current state of the system. In a kth order Markov chain the distribution of Xt 
depends on the k values immediately preceding it. 
 
Transition probability of Xt = P(Xt = X/Xt-k, Xt-k-1,…., Xt-1)   
 
The transition probabilities in a first order Markov model for Xt would only depend 
on one previous value, Xt-1.  
 
Given the sequence: 
 
T: TATATGCGTAACCGGTT 
 
Construct a first order HMM to represent the information in Sequence T. Show the 
transition probabilities would be as shown in the Figure 43.0 below. 
60.0. Second Order HMM 
 
Construct a second order HMM to represent the information in sequence S. 
 
S: ACGTTGACTGACTGTATACTGGTTAGTGT 
 
Show that the dyad probabilities can be given by the values tabulated below; 
S: ACGTTGACTGACTGACTGTATACTGGTTAGTGT 
61.0. Two Balls Crossing Each Other. 
 
A ball is thrown with an upward velocity of 3 m.s-1 from the top of a 10 m high 
building. Half a second later another ball is thrown vertically from the ground with a 
velocity of 7 m.s-1. Determine the height from the ground where the two balls pass 
each other. Which of the following is best applicable for the crossing of the two 
balls: 
(i) Ascend of A and Ascend of B 
(ii) Ascend of A and Descend of B 
(iii) Descend of A and Ascend of B 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
233 
(iv) Descend of A and Descend of B 
 
 
Figure 43.0. First Order Markov Model to Represent Sequence T: TATATGCGTAACCGGTT. 
 
Table 3.11. Second Order Markov Model to Represent Sequence  
 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
234 
62.0. Car’s Stopping Distance 
 
A car travels on a rectilinear stretch if road at constant speed vi = 85 mph. At si =0, 
the driver applies the brakes hard enough to cause the car to skid. Assume that the 
car keeps sliding until is stops. Assume that throughout this process the car‟s 
acceleration is given by  
 
 
a = -kg 
(3.526) 
 
 
where the coefficient of kinetic friction, k = 0.7 and g is the acceleration due to 
gravity. Estimate the car‟s stopping distance and time taken. 
63.0. Trajectory of Basketball 
 
The basketball is launched at a velocity of 5 m.s-1 at a launch angle of 40 0. What is 
the height of the basket should the ball fall into the basket after 1.5 secs. The height 
of the gentleman can be assumed to be 5 ft. 10”. What is the maximum height 
reached by the ball. The distance between the gentleman and the basket as measured 
on the ground is 6 m. 
64.0. Multiplicity 
 
Jack Taylor drove his pick-up truck down a dirt road with variable acceleration. The 
acceleration varies with displacement as follows; 
 
 
2
12
a
s
 
(3.527) 
 
 
 
The initial velocity of the truck is 8 m.s-1 (18 mph). A cheetah from the woods came 
across the path of Jack. Jack applied his brakes and the truck came to a halt after a 
certain distance. What is the distance ? Do you obtain more than one answer ? If so, 
which is the correct one ? 
 
Figure 44.0. Trajectory of Basketball. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
235 
  
Figure 45.0. Launch Angle during Fire-Fighting. 
 
65.0. Launch Angle during Firefighting 
 
Calculate the launch angle of the stream of water that emanates from the hose the 
fireman is holding in Figure 45.0. The height of the building where the fire is 
rampant is 2.4 m and the distance between the launch location to building is 6 m. Do 
you obtain more than one answer ? If so, what is the significance of the multiple 
results ? 
 
 
Figure 46.0. Belleville Spring Washers. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
236 
66.0. Belville Spring Washers 
 
The cylinder has a weight of 11 kg and is pushed against a series of Belleville spring 
Washers so that the compression in the spring is s = 1.8 cm (Figure 46.0). If the force 
in Newton, of the spring on the cylinder is;  
 
 
1
4
646
F
s
 
(3.528) 
 
 
Where s is given in m, determine the speed of the cylinder just after it moves away 
from the spring, i.e., at s = 0. 
67.0. Projectile Launched from Roof Top 
 
A projectile is launched with an initial velocity of 100 m/s from the rooftop of a 100 
m tall building (Figure 47.0) at a launch angle of . Determine launch angle  given 
that the distance from the building to the place the projectile strikes the ground, R‟ is 
259.8 m.  
68.0. Wedge Action 
 
The s, coefficient of static friction for all contact surfaces shown in Figure 48.0 is 
0.2.  
 
Does the 50 lb force move the block A up, hold it in equilibrium or is it too small to 
prevent A from coming down and B from moving out ? The 50-lb force is exerted at 
the midplane of the blocks so that it can be considered as a coplanar problem.  
 
 
Figure 47.0. Projectile Launched from a Rooftop. 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
237 
 
Figure 48.0. Do blocks move ?. 
 
69.0. Stopping Distance of Car during Rain on a Rough Road 
 
Heavy rains cause a particular stretch of road to have a coefficient of friction that 
changes as a function of location. Specifically, measurements indicate that the 
coefficient of kinetic friction has a 3% decrease per meter. Under these 
circumstances the acceleration of a car skidding while trying to stop can be 
approximated by; 
 
 
1
k
a
g
c s  
(3.529) 
 
 
Let k = 0.5, c1 = 0.015 m-1. The initial velocity of the car is 12.5 m/s. Determine the 
distance to complete stop or stopping distance. Compare the stopping distance in the 
rain with that obtained during dry conditions under which case the rate of friction 
decrement, c1 = 0. 
70.0. Multiplicity in Launch Angle Calculation 
 
The engine room of a freighter is on fire. A fire-fighting tuboat has drawn alongside 
and is directing a stream of water to enter the stack of freighter as shown in Figure 
49.0. If the initial velocity of the jet is 67 ft/sec find the value of the jet launch angle 
 that will get the job done. 
71.0. Spring-Mass System in a Inclined Plane 
 
Consider the spring-mass system in a inclined plane as shown in Figure 50.0. When s 
= 0.3 m the spring is unstretched and the 5 kg block has a speed of 2 m/s down the 
smooth plane. Determine the distance s when the block stops. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
238 
 
Figure 49.0. Fire in a Freighter and Jet of Water Directed from Fire-Fighting Tug Boat. 
 
 
Figure 50.0. Spring Mass System in Inclined Plane. 
 
72.0. Tension in Supporting Cables 
 
The uniform concrete slab has a weight of 5500 kg. Determine the tension in each of 
the three parallel supporting cables when the slab is held in the horizontal plane as 
shown in Figure 51.0. 
73.0. Time Taken for Elevator 
 
The elevator starts from rest and can accelerate at 3 m/s2 and then decelerate at 1 
m/s2. Determine the shortest time taken for the elevator to reach a floor 10 m above 
the ground.  
74.0. Variable Force 
 
The force F acting in a constant direction on a 20 kg block has a magnitude that 
varies with position s of the block as F = 50s. Determine how far the block slides 
befor its velocity beomes 5 m/s. When s = 0, the block is moving to the right at 2 
m/s. The coefficient of kinetic friction between the block and surfaces is 0.3. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
239 
  
Figure 51.0. Concrete Slab Supproted by Three Parallel Supporting Cables. 
 
75.0. Crane Boom 
 
Write the state space form of the equations of mechanical equilibrium of translation 
and rotation. Solve for the reaction forces at Pin A and tension in the cable BC 
(Figure 52.0). 
 
 
Figure 52.0. Crane Boom. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
240 
76.0. Jukes-Cantor Model [41] 
 
A phylogenetic tree is a representation of evolutionary relations among several 
species with a common ancestor. P(Data/tree) is the chance of the sequence 
occurring given the tree. P(tree/Data) is change of the tree occurring given the data. 
During the course of evolution several substitutions of residues and deletions and 
insertions may have occurred.  
 
Mathematical models to track deletions and insertions can be developed. P(b/a, t) is 
the probability of residue a being substituted by residue b iver a edge length t. 
 
 
,
,
u
u
x
x
P
t
P
t
y
y
 
(3.530) 
 
 
 
x, y are two aligned gapless sequences. u represent sites in the alignment. Different 
possibilities of P(b/a,t) for residues a and b are examined. A K x K matrix can be 
written for alphabet of size K. 
 
 
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
2
,
,
.
.
,
,
.
.
.
,
..
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
,
,
.
.
,
k
k
k
k
k
k
A
A
A
P
t
P
t
P
t
A
A
A
A
A
P
t
P
t
A
A
S t
A
A
A
P
t
P
t
P
t
A
A
A
 
(3.531) 
 
 
For families of substitution matrices; 
 
 
S t S s
S t
s  
(3.532) 
 
 
i.e., the family is multiplicative for all values of lengths s and t. 
 
 
,
,
,
a
b
a
P
t P
s
P
s
t
b
c
c
 
(3.533) 
 
 
For all a, c, s and t. 
 
The substitution process is Markovian and stationary. The probabilities are 
multiplicative. Jukes and Cantor [41] suggested a model for modeling DNA 
sequences. A matrix R that contain rate of substitution can be written as follows; 
 
 
3
3
3
3
 
(3.534) 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
241 
 
The rows and columns are for the nucleotides Adenine, A, Cytosine, C, Guanine, G 
and thymine, T. Nucleotides undergo transition at a constant rate . The substitution 
matrix for a small time interval s() is given after approximation as; 
 
 
s
I
R
 
(3.535) 
 
 
Where I is the identity matrix. By multiplicativity (I+R) becomes; 
 
 
s t
s t s
s t I
R
 
(3.536) 
 
 
In the limit of small ; 
 
 
s t
s t
Rs t
ds t
Rs t
dt
 
(3.537) 
 
 
Combining the above two equations; 
 
 
3
3
dr
r
s
dt
ds
s
r
dt
 
(3.538) 
 
 
Solve for these equations and obtain mathematical expressions for rt and st. Show 
that at infinite time the nucleotide equilibrium, frequencies can reach a limit of 0.25. 
77.0. Kimura’s Modification [42] 
 
The Jukes and Cantor model [30] does not capture some important features of 
nucleotide substitution such as transitions from purine to purine or from pyrimidine 
to pyrimidine substitutions are common. Transversions where the nucleotide type is 
changed is rare. Kimura [31] proposed a model with the rate matrix; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
 
(3.539) 
 
 
Obtain the model equations and obtain the solutions. Show that the solutions can be 
given by; 
 
 
4
0.25 1
t
ts
e
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
242 
 
2
4
0.25 1
2
t
t
tv
e
e
 
(3..540) 
 
 
rt = 1 – 2st - ut 
 
 
78.0. Copolymer Composition 
 
Discuss the Monomer – Copolymer Composition Curve for the system 
Methacrylonitrile-Betamethylstyrene formed in a CSTR. Let the monomer 1 be 
Methacrylontirle, MAN and monomer 2 be BMS, betamethyl styrene. The reactivity 
ratios r12 and r21 are 1.25 and 0.25 respectively. Compare the monomer and 
copolymer composition curve for MAN/BMS system the SAN system. The reactivity 
ratios for styrene and acrylonitrile are r12 = 0.29 and r21 = 0.02. 
79.0. Second Order Reaction in a PFR 
 
Consider a second order reaction in a PFR, plug-flow reactor as shown in Figure 
53.0. At steady state the mass balance across a slice z can be written as follows; 
 
(mass rate in) - (mass rate out) – (mass rate reacted) = 0 
 
 
 
The intrinsic reaction rate is second order and is; 
 
 
2
2
A
A
A
dC
k C
r
dt
 
(3.541) 
 
 
 
2
2
0
A
z
A
z
z
A
vC
vC
k C A z
 
(3.542) 
 
 
 
Divide Eq. (3.542) throughout by Az and obtain the limit as z  0. 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
2
0
0
2
0
1
1
1
1
1
A
A
L
A
A
o
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
v
k C
A
z
dC
k A
or
dz
v
C
k AL
k
C
C
v
C
k C
C
C
or C
k C
 
(3.543) 
 
 
Where L is the length of the PFR,  is the residence time in the reactor. Derive a 
similar performance equation when the rate of the reaction is of the third order ? 
 
Number of CSTRs that is Equivalent of PFR 
80.0. A graphical procedure can be developed to calculate the number of CSTRs needed 
to equal the performance of a PFR. 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
243 
 
Figure 53.0. Plug-Flow Reactor. 
 
 
Show that the Steps are as follows: 
 
Obtain a graph of the rate of disappearance of species A, (-rA) as a function of 
the species concentration, CA. 
 
Obtain the outlet concentration of the species A for a PFR for the stated 
residence time. 
 
Write the steady state mass balance for one CSTR and confirm that; 
 
 
0
1
A
A
A
C
C
r
 
(3.544) 
 
 
 
where CA1 is the exit concentration from reactor 1. The operating line is a 
straight line with a slope of -1/ as shown in Figure 54.0 in a (-rA) vs. CA graph. 
 
Write the steady state mass balance for a train of CSTRs and confirm that; 
 
 
1
Ai
Ai
Ai
C
C
r
 
(3.545) 
 
 
 
Note the intersection point between the operating line from the first CSTR to the 
(-rA) vs. CA curve. This is the exit concentration of species A from reactor 1. 
 
Construct the second operating line with the slope = -1/2 where 2 is the 
residence time in the second reactor. 
 
Repeat the procedure until the point in the graph representing the PFR 
performance is reached. 
 
Count the number of CSTRs needed in order to achieve this. 
81.0. Model for Site Utilization during Adsorption and Derivation of Langmuir’s 
Isotherm 
 
The Langmuir’s isotherm can be derived from a mass balance of the sites in the 
adsorbent that are available for adsorption. 
 
 
[Sitestotal] = [Sitesfilled] + [Sitesempty] 
(3.546) 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
244 
 
Figure 54.0. Graphical Solution for Number of CSTRs needed to Equal Performance of PFR. 
 
 
The adsorption of bulk solute onto the available sites can be viewed as a reversible 
reaction. 
 
 
bulk
Empty
Filled
Solute
Sites
Sites
 
(3.547) 
 
 












[
]
[
]
[
]
1
[
]
[
]
[
]
(1
filled
eq
bulk
Empty
eq
bulk
total
filled
filled
filled
eq
bulk
eq
bulk
total
filled
eq
bulk
total
e
Sites
K
Solute
Sites
K
Solute
Sites
Sites
Sites
Sites
K
Solute
K
Solute
Sites
Sites
K
Solute
Sites
K






















0
[
])
(
)
q
bulk
Solute
q y
q
K
y


 
(3.548)  

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
245 
 
where q is the amount adsorbed and is the concentration of [filled sites], y is the 
concentration of the bulk solute in the feed. K is a different constant from Keq the 
equilibrium constant as defined in Eq. (). Thus the Langmuir isotherm is derived. It 
relates the amount adsorbed onto solid adsorbents from the bulk solute in the feed. 
82.0 Derivation of van’t Hoff’s Law 
 
Show that the van‟t Hoff‟s law for osmotic pressure in terms of the solute 
concentration can be derived from a model of the equilibrium between the permeate 
and retentate. 
 
The phenomena of osmotic flow is the flow of solvent from a region of low solute 
concentration to a region of higher solute concentration across a semi-permeable 
membrane. At equilibrium across the semi-permeable membrane the fugacities of the 
solution and solute free solvent are equal. 
 
 
fw = fs 
(3.549) 
 
 
 
The fs, the fugacity of the solution can be written in terms of the pure component 
fugacity, fw using the Poynting correction factor. The Poynting correction factor 
corrects for the effect of pressure on the pure component fugacity. Let Vw be the 
molar volume in cc.mole-1. 
 
 
exp
w
w
s
w
w w w
V
P
P
f
x f
RT
 
(3.550) 
 
 
 
Where w is the activity coefficient, xw is the mole fraction of water, T is the 
temperature of operation. Let  = (Pw – Ps) 
 
Eq. (3.250) then becomes; 
 
 
ln(
)
w w
w
RT
x
V
 
(3.551) 
 
 
For ideal solution, activity coefficient, w can be taken as 1. By Taylor series 
representation of ln(1-xs) =-xs 
 
 
s
s
w
RTx
RTC
V
 
(3.552) 
 
Eq. (3.252) is the van‟t Hoff‟s law that can be used to calculate the osmotic pressure. 
83.0. Concentrator for Orange Juice 
 
You are hired by New Mexico freshly squeezed orange juice Corp. You have been 
asked to design a concentrator for orange juice. The concentration operation is based 
on osmotic flow of water from the orange juice side to a bath of brine solution. The 
orange juice is filled in transparent containers made of semi-permeable membrane 
from Toray, Japan. The juice contains 2% by weight sucrose. The containers are 
dropped in a bath containing brine solution. It can be assumed that the brine solution 
is 30% NaCl by weight and the rest predominantly water. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
246 
84.0. Batch Adsorption 
 
One thousand kilograms of a tinted solution must be clarified by adsorbing ninety-
nine  
 
Per cent of the tint on a carbon adsorbent. The tint concentration per kg is 0.96. The 
equilibrium relation a Freundlich isotherm, for this case is; 
 
 
0.6
275
q
y
 
(3.553) 
 
Where q and y are the adsorbent and solution concentrations respectively. If the 
carbon initially contains no tint, how much carbon is needed for batch adsorption? 
85.0. Rapid Sand Filter 
 
The rapid sand filter being designed for Laramie has the characteristics shown 
below.  
 
Determine the head loss for the clean filter bed in a stratified condition. The viscosity 
of water may be taken as 0.001 Pa.S. 
 
The depth of the filter is 75 cm and density of sand grains are 2,800 kg.m-3. The 
shape factor can be taken as 1.0 and bed porosity is 0.40 The equation developed by 
Rose in 1945 for head loss of through a clean-stratified sand filter with uniform 
porosity may be used. The filter loading rate is 250 m3.d-1.m-2. 
 
 
2
4
1.067 a
D
L
v D
C f
h
d
g
 
(3.554) 
 
 
The drag coefficient may be calculated from the 5 constant expression provided by 
Turton and Levenspiel (1989) applicable for Reynolds number 1 < Re < 200,000. 
 
 
0.657
1.09
24
0.413
1
0.173Re
Re
1 16300Re
D
C
 
 
86.0. Manufacture of Terpolymer in Two CSTRs in Series 
 
Two CSTRs of equal volumes are to be used in series to manufacture a terpolymer. 
The terpolymer consists of three monomers: (i) alphamethyl styrene, AMS; (ii) 
acrylonitrile, AN and; (iii) styrene, STY. Acrylonitrile is mildly soluble in water and 
needs to be separated prior to discharge as AN is a carcinogen at greater than 2 ppm. 
The product rate is 8000 pounds per hour. The conversion is a total of 55% from both 
reactors combined. The composition of the product is 50% AMS, 30% AN and 20% 
styrene (weight fraction). The monomer composition in equilibrium with the product, 
is 75% AMS, 10% AN and 15% Styrene. The reaction is kinetics were obtained 
using tube polymerization (K. R. Sharma, [43] in the temperature range 408-418 K 
can be given by; 
 
 
0.694
0.274
0.835
M
M
AN
Sty
r
C
f
f
 
(3.555) 
 
 

Mathematical Process Models 
 
 
247 
Table 3.12. Sieve Analysis 
 
Sieve No: 
d(microns) 
Mass % Retained 
16-20 
1000 m 
10.1 
20-30 
714 m 
44.5 
30-40 
505 m 
20.2 
 
 
Where rM is expressed as mol.lit-1h-1. The molecular weight of AMS = 118 gm.mole-1 
is gm.mole-1, AN = 53 gm.mole-1, STY = 104 gm.mole-1 Determine: 
(a) The mean residence time and volume for each of the two reactors. Express the 
volume as gallons. 
(b) The concentration of monomers in each reactor and their composition if 
applicable in each reactor and its effluent. Allow for addition of monomers into 
the second reactor to allow for the same composition of monomers in the second 
reactor. 
(c) The total mean residence time and total volume for the two reactors. Express 
volume as gallons. 
(d) The mean residence time and volume for a single CSTR having the same 
conversion of monomers to terpolymer. Express volume as gallons. Use graph 
paper attached if necessary. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
CONTINUOUS PROCESS DYNAMICS 
 
 
4.1. TRANSIENT ANALYSIS-OVERVIEW 
 
Most of the discussions in leading textbooks such as Levenspiel [1999], Froment and 
Bischoff [2011] on reaction engineering are at steady state. There is very little discussion 
about events under transient conditions. This can become important during plant start-up and 
shut down periods. Control scheme design without good understanding of the transient 
dynamics in the reactor or distillation column can lead to instability and other problems that 
are avoidable. The overall mass balance can be used to confirm that the velocity of the influx 
and efflux streams are equal to each other for incompressible flow and constant volume 
reactor. The component mass balance can be used to obtain the governing equation that can 
be used to describe the dynamics of the reactant, product and by-product species in the 
reactor. The reactor type can be CSTR, continuous stirred tank reactor or PFR, plug flow 
reactor. It can be seen from the worked examples below that in a CSTR the governing 
equation for a reactant species can be seen to be ODE, ordinary differential equation. They 
are seen to be linear for the case of irreversible reactions of the reaction order 1. The nature of 
the governing equation depends on the nature of the kinetics, order of the reaction etc. More 
than one species such as reactant, product, by-product can be tracked using state space model. 
The differential equation is seen to be nonlinear for the case when the kinetics of reaction is 
of the free radical polymerization scheme. The energy balance equation may be used to study 
the dynamics of the temperature in the reactor. In case of exothermic reactions the reactor 
may be jacketed with cooling water for removal of heat. The rate of heat removal may be 
described using an overall heat transfer coefficient, U. The combined dynamics of the 
reactant species and temperature in the reactor can be solved for using numerical methods 
such as Runge Kutta fourth order method. The numerical scheme can be implemented in a 
MS Excel 2007 for Windows on desktop computer. The results are sketched as output 
response as a function of time. Multiplicities can be looked for. Stability types such as stable, 
integrating unstable, underdamped oscillatory, inverse response, spiral response, saddle point 
response, wave form response can be studied from the simulated results. Some idea of the 
stability types can also be obtained by examining the governing equations. 
In case of a PFR, the governing equation to describe the reactant species that undergoes 
first order irreversible reaction can be shown to be a PDE, partial differential equation, of the  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
250 
hyperbolic type. Transient dynamics of the conversion of reacting species, temperature in the 
reactor and temperature in the jacket of a CSTR can be studied using numerical solution to 
differential equations, linear or non-linear. A fourth order Runge-Kutta method can be used 
for numerical integration. Conversion as a function of time for different values of Damkohler 
numbers can be obtained as output response. The temperature as a function of time in 
response to a step change in input temperature can be obtained. A state space model may be 
used to represent the conversion of the reacting species, yield of the by-product, yield of the 
product, temperature in the CSTR and temperature of the jacket.  
The output response to a step change in the input can be obtained by the method of 
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors. If all of the Eigen values of the state space A matrix are 
negative then the system is expected to be stable. A system with one Eigen value zero and 
one Eigen value negative is called an integrating system. If the Eigen values are complex 
conjugates the system is considered oscillatory. Sometimes the oscillatory output response 
may be subcritical and damped, underdamped or critically damped. The stability types can 
be: (i) improper node characterized as asymptotically stable when the eigenvalues are both 
less than zero and real; (ii) improper node characterized as unstable when the eigenvalues are 
both greater than zero and real; (iii) proper or improper node characterized as asymptotically 
stable when both Eigenvalues are both equal and less than 0, and characterized as unstable 
when both Eigenvalues are both equal and greater than 0; (iv) saddle point and characterized 
as unstable when one Eigenvalue is less than zero and the other Eigenvalue is greater than 0 
and real; (v) focus or spiral, when the Eigenvalues are complex and characterized as stable 
when a < 0, and characterized as unstable if a > 0; (vi) center and characterized as marginally 
stable when the Eigenvalues are complex and a = 0. (Varma and Morbidelli [1997]). 
The transient concentration of monomer when free radical polymerization reactions are 
conducted in a CSTR can be obtained. DaI, Damkholer number (initiator) and DaM, 
Damkohler number (monomer) are introduced. For thermal polymerization binomial infinite 
series expansion can be used as shown in the examples below to obtain the output response 
for a step change in input. For the initiated polymerization the equations are non-linear. 
Numerical solution can be sought to obtain the output response. A maximum in the 
conversion of the monomer is found. Multiplicity is found in some results as can be seen in 
the worked examples below.  
The general form of prototypical first order and prototypical second order system are 
provided below. The first order process is characterized by process gain constant, kp and 
process time constant, p. The second order process is characterized by the process gain, kp, 
damping coefficient,  and process time constant, p. When the damping coefficient,  > 1 the 
system is over damped, when  = 1 the system is said to be critically damped and when  < 1 
the system is expected to undergo an overshoot and is said to be underdamped oscillatory. 
Reports in the literature about occurrence of temperature overshoot upon use of non-Fourier 
heat conduction equation is revisited. The Taitel paradox is when the transient temperature in 
a finite slab heated by isothermal, hot walls, was obtained by the method of separation of 
variables using the hyperbolic PDE, partial differential equation, for certain values of the 
thermo physical properties of the finite slab the interior temperature of the slab was found to 
be greater than the wall temperature. This “overshoot” led investigators to abandon the non-
Fourier heat conduction equation stating that it violated second law of thermodynamics. A 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
251 
careful side by side study of this problem is presented below. The time condition 
T
t  was 
assumed to be 0 in Taitel [1972]. 
Consider a finite slab of width 2a, at an initial temperature of T0 heated by hot isothermal 
walls brought a temperature, Ts < T0 for times t > 0, greater than 0. As can be seen from 
Figure 4.1 below only the left hand limit of the rate of change of average temperature of the 
slab with respect to time is zero. A lumped analysis on the heating process leads to the 
expression for the rate of change of average temperature of the interior of the slab as shown in 
the ordinate of Figure 4.1. 
 
 
2
2
t
a
T
e
t
a
 
(4.1) 
 
The right hand limit, of the rate of change of average temperature in the finite slab is a 
maximum! With increase in time this decreases exponentially to an asymptotic zero at large 
times or upon attainment of steady state. 
The right hand limit was used in the analysis. For a material with large relaxation time 
the overshoot was found for the model results when initial accumulation time condition is 
taken as 0.. For the same set of material and parameters when a physically reasonable time 
accumulation condition was used the overshoot disappears. The transient temperature was 
subcritical damped oscillatory. A steady state temperature was attained after a said time. 
Lumped analysis was further explored. 
The average temperature in a finite slab subject to convective heating was obtained using: 
(i) Fourier parabolic model. The model solution rises monotonically to a constant asymptotic 
value. (ii) Hyperbolic model with the first derivative of temperature with respect to time set to 
zero as used by Taitel [1972] by the method of Laplace transforms. This model solution 
appears to have an overshoot; (iii) Hyperbolic model with the initial temperature at T0 and the 
additional constraint that the average transient temperature should obey the energy balance 
equation from a lumped analysis. The dimensionless temperature was expressed as a sum of a 
steady state temperature and a transient temperature. The transient temperature was expressed 
as a product of wave temperature and decaying exponential in time. The model solution was 
found to be; 
 
 
*
1
*
2
*
sin
1
S
t
S
u
e
S
 
(4.2) 
 
Where, S* is the dimensionless storage number. As shown in Figure 4.16-4.18 the model 
solution does not exhibit any overshoot. It appears that the damped wave conduction and 
relaxation equation can be applied to transient heat conduction problems without violation of 
the second law of thermodynamics. The storage number appears to be an important parameter 
in determination of the average transient temperature in a finite slab during damped wave 
conduction and relaxation. The time taken to attain steady state was found to be; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
252 
 
Figure 4.1. Rate of Change of Average Temperature in Interior of Finite Slab as a Function of Time, t. 
 
 
ss
 
(4.3) 
 
The maxima in the transient temperature were found to increase with decreasing S* 
starting with large values such as 10. A cross-over was found after S* became less than about 
2.2. Then the maxima in the average transient temperature was found to decrease with 
decrease in storage number, S*. The average transient temperature becomes zero in the 
infinite limit of S*. 
 
 
A. Damkohler Number  
 
The governing equation can be made dimensionless by introducing varaibles such as 
fractional conversion, dimensionless time and Damkohler number. The physical significane 
of the Damkholer number can be seen to be the the ratio of the residence time of the reactant 
in the reaction to the intrinsic time of reaction when performed in a test tube. It can also be 
viewed as the ratio of the reaction speed to the speed of the fluid by convection. The 
Damkohler number may vary with the reaction kinetics. For example, Da = k, for a first 
order irreversible reaction, where k is the reaction rate constant for first order and  is the 
residence time of the flow stream in the reactor. 
2
p D
I
t
k k C
Da
k
 for polymerization 
reactions of the free radical type, where kp is the propagation rate constant, kD is the rate 
constant of dissociation of the initiator and kt is the rate constant of the termination steps. 
 
 
B. Prototypical First Order Process  
 
Consider the hydrolysis of oxirane (ethylene oxide) to produce ethylene glycol by the 
following chemical reaction. 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
253 
 
 
Let the reaction be performed in a CSTR such as the one shown in Figure 4.2. For 
incompressible flow and constant volume reactor the component mass balance for oxirane or 
species A can be written as follows; 
 
 
A
Ai
A
A
dC
v C
C
VkC
V dt  
(4.4) 
 
The fractional conversion of oxirane and other dimensionless quantities are defined as 
follows; 
 
 
;
;
;
Ai
A
A
Ai
C
C
V
t
X
Da
k
C
v
 
(4.5) 
 
The governing equation for the dynamics of fractional conversion of oxirane in a CSTR 
given by Eq. (4.4) after introduction of the dimensionless variables as given in Eq. (4.5) 
becomes; 
 
 
1
A
A
A
dX
X
Da
X
d
 
(4.6) 
 
Eq. (4.6) can be rearranged into a form called the “prototypical first order process”. 
 
 
1
1
1
A
A
dX
Da
X
Da
d
Da  
(4.7) 
 
The general form of a prototypical first order process can be written as follows; 
 
 
p
p
dY
Y
k u
dt
 
(4.8) 
 
Where, p is the time constant, kp is the process gain and u is the input variable and Y(t) 
is the output variable. Thus the transient fractional conversion of oxirane is a first order 
process with a time constant of (1+Da)-1 and process gain of (Da/(1+Da)). Input variables are  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
254 
those that must be specified to completely define the problem. Without this the problem 
solution cannot be obtained. A number of processes conform to a a prototypical first order 
process. The Laplace transform of Eq. (4.8) with a initial condition of Y(0.) = 0 can be 
written as follows; 
 
 
( )
( )
1
p
p
k u s
Y s
s
 
(4.9) 
 
Eq. (4.9) can be used in block flow diagrams to show the process transfer function in the 
box allocated for process. 
 
 
C. Prototypical Higher Order Processes 
 
The general form of the “prototypical second order process” that is linear can be 
represented as follows (Bequette [2003], Golnaraghi and Kuo [2010]) and Coughanowr and 
LeBlanc [2009]); 
 
 
2
2
2
2
p
p
p
d Y
dY
Y
k u
dt
dt
 
(4.10) 
 
In addition to the process gain, kp, and time constant p there is third parameter  called 
the damping coefficient. The Laplace transform of prototypical second order process 
assuming an initial condition of y(0) = 0 and y‟(0) = 0 can be written as follows; 
 
 
2 2
( )
( )
2
1
p
p
p
k
Y s
u s
s
s
 
(4.11) 
 
For a step change in the input variable of u, the Laplace transform expression for the 
output variable can be written as follows; 
 
 
2 2
( )
2
1
p
p
p
k
u
y s
s
s
s
 
(4.12) 
 
Four cases can be recognized for the output variable y(t) for various values of the 
damping factor; 
 
Case 1: Over damped System 
For damping coefficient values,  > 1, the output variable in the time domain y(t) is found 
to be over damped. Eq. (4.12) can be inverted into the time domain.  p1 
and 
p2 
can 
be 
obtained as the roots of the quadratic equation in the denominator of Eq. (4.12). The poles of 
Eq. (4.12) are 0, -b and –c. The quadratic in the denominator is factorized as; 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
255 
 
2
2
2
1
2
1
p
p
p
p
y s
Y s
k
u
s
s
s
 
(4.13) 
 
Let  
2
2
2
1
p
p
s
b s
c
s
s
 
(4.14) 
 
The two factors a and b can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
1
p
c
 
(4.15) 
 
 
2
1
p
b
 
(4.16) 
 
The inverse of the Laplace transformed expression in Eq. (4.13) can be looked from 
tables [Mickley, Sherwood and Reid (1957)] as; 
 
 
2
1
1
1
( )
bt
ct
p
c
e
b
e
Y t
bc c
b
 
(4.17) 
 
The dimensionless output response Y(t) as given by Eq. (4.17) for a typical over damped 
second order system is shown in Figure 4.2 for different values of the damping coefficient. 
 
Case 2: Critically Damped System 
For damping coefficient value,  = 1, the output variable in the time domain y (t) is said 
to be critically damped. When the damping coefficient becomes 1 the “b” and “c” values 
given by Eqs. (4.15,4.16) become equal and found to be; 
 
 
b=
p
c
 
(4.18) 
 
Eq. (4.13) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
1
1
p
p
p
y s
Y s
k
u
s
s
 
(4.19) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
256 
The inverse of Laplace transformed expression Y(s) given by Eq. (4.19) can be obtained 
by invoking convolution theorem; 
 
 
2
0
1
( )
1
1
1
p
p
p
p
t
p
t
t
t
p
p
p
te
t
Y t
pe
dp
e
e
 
(4.20) 
 
The dimensionless output response for a critically damped system as given by Eq. (4.20) 
is shown in Figure 4.3. 
Case 3: Undamped System 
For damping coefficient values,  =0.., the output variable in the time domain y(t) is 
found to be undamped and oscillatory. Eq. (4.13) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
1
1
p
p
p
y s
Y s
k
u
s
s
 
(4.21) 
 
 
Figure 4.2. Output Response to Step Change in Input for an Over damped Second Order Process. 
 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
257 
 
Figure 4.3. Output Response to Step Change in Input for a Critically Damped Second Order Process.  
 
 
Figure 4.4. Output Response to Step Change in Input for a Undamped Second Order Process. 
 
The inverse of Laplace transformed expression Y(s) given by Eq. (4.19) can be obtained 
by invoking convolution theorem and the dummy variable p; 
 
 
























t
p
p
p
p
t
dp
p
t
Y
0
2
cos
1
sin
)
(




 
(4.22) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
258 
The dimensionless output response for an undamped system as given by Eq. (4.22) is 
shown in Figure 4.4. As can be seen the oscillations are pronounced and there is a maximal 
overshoot. There is no return to the set point of 1.0. 
 
Case 4: Underdamped System 
For damping factor values,  < 1, the output variable in the time domain y(t) is found to 
be underdamped. Some investigators find an “overshoot” for these systems. Upon further 
scrutiny of systems that are suspected to undergo an “overshoot” it has been found (Sharma 
(20.12)) that the “overshoot” sometimes can be a mathematical artifact. No real machine or 
device can undergo an entropic decrease in a spontaneous manner. Entropy always rises for 
real processes. A spontaneous “overshoot” in a real engineering system would be in violation 
of Clausius’ inequality. This is further illustrated in Example 4.1.  
When,  <1 Eq. (4.13-17) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
1
2
1
p
p
p
p
y s
Y s
k
u
s
s
s
 
(4.23) 
 
Let  
2
2
2
1
p
p
s
b s
c
s
s
 
(4.24) 
 
The two factors a and b can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
1
p
i
c
 
(4.25) 
 
 
2
1
p
i
b
 
(4.26) 
 
The inverse of the expression in Laplace domain in Eq. (4.23) can be obtained by use of 
Heaviside expansion. The poles of Eq. (4.23) are 0, -b and –c. The Laplace inverse of Eq. 
(4.23) can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
1
1
1
2
3
2
2
1
2
1
p
p
p
p
t
t
it
it
p
p
L
A e
e
A e
e
s
s
 
(4.27) 
 
Per the Heaviside expansion theorem; 
( )
( )
p s
Y s
q s
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
259 
 
2
2
2
1
( )
2
'( )
2
p
p
p
s
q s
s
q s
s










 
(4.28) 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
'(
)
p
p
p
p
i
i
q p
 
(4.29) 
 
 
2
2
2 1
p
i
A
 
(4.30) 
 
In a similar manner, 
 
 
3
2
2 1
p
i
A
 
(4.31) 
 
 
2
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
2 1
2 1
p
p
p
p
t
t
it
it
p
p
p
p
i
i
L
e
e
e
e
s
s
 
(4.32) 
 
The real part of the RHS right hand side of Eq. (4.32) can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
1
2sin
2 1
p
t
p
p
e
t
 
(4.33) 
 
Now, Y(t) is obtained by invoking the convolution theorem; 
 
 
2
2
0
1
( )
sin
1
p
p
t
p
p
e
p
Y t
 
(4.34) 
 
 
2
2
2
1
1
( )
1
sin
cos
1
p
t
p
p
Y t
e
t
t
 
(4.35) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
260 
 
Figure 4.5. Output Response to Step Change in Input for an Underdamped Second Order Process. 
 
The dimensionless output response Y(t) as given by Eq. (4.35) for a typical underdamped 
second order system is shown in Figure 4.5 for values of the damping coefficient less than 1. 
It can be seen that for small value of damping coefficient such as at  = 0.1, there can be seen 
an overshoot. There is no overshoot at  = 0.9. Sometimes the occurrence of overshoot is 
more a mathematical artifact than practical feasibility. In engineering applications such as 
heat transfer this can be a violation of second law of thermodynamics. The system has to be 
carefully scrutinized from other considerations as well before meaningful conclusions can be 
drawn. 
 
 
4.2. CHEMICAL REACTOR TYPE 
 
The performance of chemical reactions depends on the reactor type. Plug flow reactors, 
PFR often times result in better performance compared with performance of chemical 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
261 
reactions in a continuous stirred tank reactor, CSTR. A few CSTRs (three or more) in series 
are needed to match the performance in a PFR. Polymerization reactions have been conducted 
in industrial practice using both CSTRs and PFRs. Examples of products that have been 
produced in the plastics industry are polystyrene, PS, high impact polystyrene, HIPS, styrene-
acrylonitrile copolymer, SAN, polymethyl methacrylate, PMMA, acrylonitrile-butadiene-
styrene, ABS etc. Polypropylene, PP has been made in gas-solid fluidized bed catalytic 
reactors. The styrenics have been manufactured in liquid phase reactors. The liquid phase 
reactions lends itself well to assuming that the volume of the reactor is constant volume 
during the reaction and the flow is incompressible, etc. Denbigh [1951] has discussed the 
difference in performance between CSTR and PFR for polymers. The relative half-lives of the 
initiator and the active propagating species is the critical factor. If this is long relative to the 
residence time in the reactor, the MWD, molecular weight distribution of the polymer can be 
expected to be narrower in a PFR compared with that made in a CSTR. CSTRs can be 
operated in what is referred to as “perfectly mixed” mode.  
Often times during polymerization the viscosity of the contents of the reactor become 
high. The viscosity of the polymer solution rises exponentially as a function of the relative 
volume fraction of the polymer solids. Custom designed helical ribbon agitators or anchor 
helix reactors need be specially made for this purpose. The power draw from the agitators rise 
in a power ponentiated manner as a function of agitator RPM, revolution per minute. The gear 
box needs to be expanded. During operation of these reactors in a pilot plant increasing the 
agitator RPM gets the task accomplished. For instance during the manufacture of ABS 
thermoplastic well grafted and small rubber phase particle size is needed for better product 
performance. Increasing the agitator RPM from 30. to 100 gets the task accomplished. But itis 
not clear whether the particle size was made smaller on account of increased tip shear rate  
or because of lower mixing times compared with the reaction times. This can lead to 
better grafting of the SAN chains onto the polybutadiene chains. Scale-up of these reactions 
becomes arbitrary and delays time taken to introduce a new process/product line. According 
to the rules of Bischoff [2011] the product distribution which happens to be MWD, molecular 
weight distribution can be expected to be narrower in a PFR and broader in a CSTR when the 
half-live of the propagating free radical is larger compared with the residence time in the 
reactor. Attributable cause is the broader distribution of residence times in a CSTR. When the 
half live of the free radical that is critical in the free radical propagation reactions is much 
smaller compared with the residence time of the fluid in the reactor a narrower MWD can be 
achieved in A CSTR compared with a PFR! This is becaue when the residence time in the 
CSTR is increased to infinity the reactor behaves as a batch reactor. The MWD of the 
polymer in the batch reactor can be expected to be narrower because of the uniform residence 
time distribution of the different elements in the reactor.  
 
 
A. Transient Conversion in Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor, CSTR 
 
Example 4.1. Thermal Initiation Polymerization 
Monomers such as styrene can be polymerized using thermal initiation. At higher 
temperatures the styryl radical forms. This initiation is called thermal initiation. The rate of 
the initiation reaction is of the third order. There are reports in the literature to the formation 
of a Dields Alder mechanism. These reactions are important in the manufacture of 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
262 
polystyrene, HIPS, high impact polystyrene, SAN, styrene acrylonitrile copolymer, ABS, 
acrylonitrile, butadiene and styrene engineering thermoplastic etc. These reactions are 
allowed to be performed in a CSTR (Figure 4.6). Assuming that the flow is incompressible 
and the reactor is operated at constant volume, the transient monomer concentration in the 
CSTR can be obtained. The dimensionless groups Damkohler number, conversion, 
dimensionless time, are used when necessary. The free radical reactions of initiation, 
propagation and termination are given as follows; 
Thermal Initiation 
 
*
3
hk
M
M   
(4.36) 
 
Monomer Propagation 
 
 
1
2
3
*
*
2
*
*
2
3
*
*
3
4
*
*
1
...
p
p
p
pn
k
k
k
k
n
n
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
 
(4.37) 
 
Monomer Termination 
 
 
*
*
tk
n
m
M
M
P  
(4.38) 
 
 
Solutions 
From the assumptions of incompressible flow and constant volume reactor, it can be seen 
that  
 
 
0
i
dV
dt
 
(4.39) 
 
Hence, 
0
t
. Note that this is by inference from incompressible flow and not from 
steady state considerations. Therefore, 
iv
v . A component balance on the monomer that is 
polymerized in the CSTR can be written as follows; 
 
 
M
Mi
M
P
dC
v C
C
r V
V
dt
 
(4.40) 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
263 
 
Figure 4.6. Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor, CSTR Operated at Constant Volume, V. 
 
The rate of polymerization (rp) can be arrived at as follows; 
Rate of Initiation 
 
 
3
M
h
M
dC
k C
dt
 
(4.41) 
 
Rate of Propagation 
Assuming that the propagation reactions are fast that the rate coefficient is independent of 
the length of the radical chain; 
 
 
*
M
p
M
M
dC
k C C
dt
 
(4.42) 
 
Rate of Termination 
 
 
*2
p
t
M
dC
k C
dt
 
(4.43) 
 
The “pseudo-steady state” assumption can be used to obtain an expression for the radical 
concentration during polymerization. The radicals formed during propagation get consumed 
immediately in the next step. The net rate of production of radicals is zero. Hence the rate of 
initiation and rate of termination can be added to zero as follows; 
 
 
*2
3
0
t
M
h
M
k C
k C
 
(4.44) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
264 
The expression for the concentration of the free radicals is; 
 
 
*
1.5
h
M
M
t
k
C
C
k
 
(4.45) 
 
Consequently, the rate of polymerization, (rp) can be seen to be; 
 
 
2.5
h
M
p
p
M
t
k
dC
r
k C
dt
k
 
(4.46) 
 
The monomer component mass balance equation becomes; 
 
 
2.5
h
M
Mi
M
P
M
t
k
dC
C
C
k
C
k
dt
 
(4.47) 
 
Define the dimensionless groups as follows; 
Fractional Conversion, XM 
 
 
Mi
M
M
Mi
C
C
X
C
 
(4.48) 
 
Dimensionless time,  
 
 
t  
(4.49) 
 
Damkohler Number, DaM 
 
 
1.5
h
M
p
Mi
t
k
Da
k
C
k
 
(4.50) 
 
The dimensionless groups are introduced into Eq. (4.47), Eq. (4.47) can now be written 
as follows; 
 
 
 
2.5
1
M
M
M
M
dX
Da
X
X
d
 
(4.51) 
 
As the values of conversion of monomer, XM is less than 1, Binomial infinite series 
expansion can be a reasonable approximation for (1-XM)2.5. Higher order terms would be 
small. Truncation of terms higher than 
4
0.117
M
X
leads to; 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
265 
 
2
1
2.5
0.1875
0.3125
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
dX
Da
X
Da
Da
X
Da
X
d
 
(4.52) 
 
Eq. (4.52) can be solved for by the method of superposition of the transient and the 
steady state solutions. Let, 
 
 
XM = XMs + XM 
(4.53) 
 
Eq. (4.53) can be written as two separate equations: (i) one for the steady state 
component, XMs and; (ii) transient state component, XM. 
 
 
2
1
2.5
0.1875
0.3125
0
M
Ms
M
M
Ms
M
Ms
Da
X
Da
Da X
Da X
 
(4.54) 
 
 
2
1
2.5
0.1875
0.3125
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
dX
X
Da
Da
X
Da
X
d
 
(4.55) 
 
The equation for steady state conversion of monomer, Eq. (4.54) was solved for by the 
method of Newton Raphson (Chapra and Canale, [2006]) for finding the roots of the equation. 
The numerical solution was obtained using MS Excel 2007 for Windows on a desktop 
computer. Convergence for a considered Damkohler number was rapid. No multiplicity was 
found. The Damkohler number was varied and the results for each Damkohler number is 
shown in Table 4.1. This is also plotted in Figure 4.7. The steady state conversion XMs varies 
in a sigmoidal manner as a function of Damkohler number. For small Damkohler number the 
curvature is concave upward and changes to convex upward at large Damkohler numbers. 
 
 
Figure 4.7. Steady State Conversion as a Function of Damkohler Number. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
266 
 
Figure 4.8. Transient Conversion as a Function of Time at Da = 2.0. 
 
 
Figure 4.9. Transient Conversion as a Function of Time at Da = 10. 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
267 
Table 4.1. Steady State Conversion for Various Values of DaM 
 
DaM 
 XMs 
DaM 
XMs 
0.0 
0.0 
2 
0.336 
0.01 
0.0098 
5 
0.374 
0.05 
0.044 
10 
0.388 
0.1 
0.08 
20 
0.396 
0.2 
0.134 
30 
0.399 
0.3 
0.172 
100 
0.402 
0.5 
0.224 
 
 
1.0 
0.288 
 
 
 
Eq. (4.17) was integrated using fourth order Runge-Kutta method on a MS Excel 2007 
spreadsheet for Windows on a desktop computer. The weigths used were as given in Chapra 
and Canale [2006]. They are given here below: 
 
 
1
1
2
3
4
1
2
2
6
i
i
X
X
k
k
k
k
 
(4.56) 
 
Where, 
 
 
1
2
1
,
0.5
,
0.5
i
i
i
i
k
f
X
k
f
X
k
 
(4.57) 
 
 
3
2
0.5
,
0.5
i
i
k
f
X
k
 
(4.58) 
 
 
4
3
,
i
i
k
f
X
k
 
(4.59) 
 
The transient conversion of the monomer as a function of dimensionless time is plotted in 
Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.9 for Damkohler numbers of 2 and 10.0. No multiplicities were 
found. The output response was monotonic. The transient conversion rises to a asymptotic 
steady state limit. Larger the Damkohler number the the attainment of the asymptotic limit is 
rapid.  
 
 
B. Transient Conversion during Initiation Polymerization in CSTR 

Example 4.2. Initiation Polymerization in CSTR 
Consider a CSTR (Figure 4.6) used for polymerization of styrene using an initiator such 
as TBPO, tertiary butyl peroxide. The free radical reactions can be represented by the 
following equations; 
The polyrate of M is pseudo-first order and is given by; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
268 
Initiation 
 
 
I
D
I
dC
k C
dt
 
(4.60) 
 
Propagation 
 
 
*
M
p
M
M
dC
k C C
dt
 
(4.61) 
 
Termination 
 
 
*2
t
M
dP
k C
dt
 
(4.62) 
 
Assuming a pseudo-steady state, i.e. the initiator radicals will react as soon as they are 
formed; 
 
 
*
*2
M
I
t
M
D
I
dC
dC
k C
k C
dt
dt
 
(4.63) 
 
Or, 
*
D
I
M
t
k C
C
k
 
(4.64) 
 
 
Hence the rate of reactions can be written as one equation as; 
 
 
2
p D
I
M
M
t
k k C
dC
C
dt
k
 
(4.65) 
 
Obtain the model equations for the conversion of monomer, CM as a function of time with 
the given inlet monomer concentration of CM0 and initiator concentration. Assume that the 
flow is incompressible and the reactor volume remains a constant throughout the reaction. 
Discuss the transient behavior of the concentration of monomer in the kettle from the start-up 
of the reactor. Use the dimensionless group Damkohler number if necessary.  
 
Solutions 
The CSTR reactor volume is considered as the control volume. The component mass 
balances for the initiator concentration, CI can be written as follows; 
 
 
I
Ii
I
D
I
dC
v C
C
Vk C
V dt
 
(4.66) 
 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
269 
Let the conversion of the initiator be Y and dimensionless time by  and Damkohler 
number (dissociation) be DaD as given by;  
 
 
;
;
Ii
I
D
D
Ii
C
C
t
Y
Da
k
C
; 
(4.67)  
 
 
Where,  is the residence time of the reacting species in the reactor. Eq. (4.50) then 
becomes; 
 
 
1
D
D
dY
Da
Y
Da
d
 
(4.68) 
 
 
The component mass balances for the monomer concentration, CM can be written as 
follows; 
 
 
D
M
Mi
M
M
p
I
t
k
dC
v C
C
VC k
C
V
k
dt
 
(4.69) 
 
 
Let the conversion of the monomer be X and dimensionless time by  and Damkohler 
number (monomer) be DaM as given by;  
 
 
;
;
Mi
M
D
M
p
Mi
t
C
C
k
t
X
Da
k
C
k
;  
(4.70) 
 
Where,  is the residence time of the reacting species in the reactor. Eq. (4.53) then 
becomes; 
 
 
1
1
1
M
M
dX
Da
Y
X
Da
Y
d
 
(4.71) 
 
 
At steady state Eq. (4.52) and Eq. (4.55) becomes; 
 
 
1
0
1
D
D
D
ss
D
Da
Y
Da
Da
Y
Da
 
(4.72) 
 
 
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
M
M
M
ss
M
ss
M
ss
D
M
Da
Y
X
Da
Y
Da
Y
Da
X
Da
Y
Da
Da
 
(4.73) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
270 
There were no multiplicities found in the expression for steady state conversion of 
initiator and monomer. Eq. (4.36) is non-linear. Equation (4.33) can be integrated by 
separation of variables and the model solution seen to be; 
 
 
1
1
1
D
Da
D
D
Da
Y
e
Da
 
(4.74) 
 
Equation (4.71) was solved using the fourth order Runge Kutta Method [2]. The 
parameters used and calculated in the simulation are given in Table 4.2; 
 
 
Figure 4.10. Transient Conversion of Monomer X and Initiator Y. 
 
Table 4.2. Parameters used during Simulation of Monomer and Initiator 
 
Parameter 
Symbol 
Quantity 
Units 
Residence Time T 
 
1.8 
 hr 
Rate Constant, Initiator 
 kD 
3.0 
hr-1 
Half-Life Initiator 
t0.5 
13.86 
min 
Rate Constant, Propagation  
 kp 
8 
 hr-1 
Rate Constant, Termination 
 kt 
2.0 
hr-1 
Damkohler (Dissociation) 
 DaD 
 5.4 
dimensionless 
Damkohler (Monomer) 
 DaM 
17.6 
dimensionless 
Conversion, Steady State [I] 
Yss 
0.84 
dimensionless 
Conversion, Steady State [M] 
Xss 
0.875 
dimensionless 
Step Size 
 
1.5 
min 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
271 
The transient conversion of monomer was computed and plotted in Figure 4.10 along 
with the transient conversion of initiator from Eq. (4.58). It can be seen from Figure 4.10 for 
the parameters used in the simulation study the transient conversion of monomers undergoes 
a maximum value. Multiplicity can be seen in the transient conversion of monomer X, 
especially near the maxima. The simulation was conducted using a MS Excel 2007 for 
Windows on a desktop computer. 
The maximum transient conversion of monomer X for the parameters used in the 
simulation study was found to be 0.902. An example of multiplicity is at transient conversion 
of monomer X =0.88. There are two dimensionless times associated with this conversion. 
These can be seen from Figure 4.10 to be  = 0.19 and  = 0.8. The reason for the occurrence 
of maxima is not clear. The scheme of free radical reactions does not have a reversible step. 
There is a decrease in monomer conversion after a said time. 
 
 
C. Transient Conversion in Two Cstrs in Series 
 
Example 4.3. Initiation Polymerization in Two CSTRS in Series 
The initiation polymerization described in Example 4.2 is performed in two CSTRs in 
series. The volume of the two reactors is constant during the polymerization reaction and is 
V1 and V2. Monomers such as styrene, acrylonitrile. Methyl methacrylate etc. can be 
polymerization in this manner. Two initiators are used. Initiator type used is from the peroxy 
family. Examples are TBPO, tertiary butyl peroxide, TBPOND, tertiary butyl peroxy 
neodeconoate or TBPP, tertiary butyl peroxy pivalate. The two reactors are operated at 
different temperatures. The second reactor temperature is higher than the first reactor 
temperature. The initiator selected for use in second reactor is by calculation of half-live of 
the initiator at reactor temperature. The monomer concentrations at the exit of the two 
reactors R1 and R2 are CM1 and CM2 respectively. The initiator used in R1 is I1 and has an inlet 
concentration of CI1i and the efflux concentration of CI1. The initiator used in R2 is I2 and has 
an inlet concentration of CI2i and the efflux concentration of CI2. The two CSTRs are operated 
in series and are well agitated. In order to handle viscous polymer syrups the helical ribbon 
agitators are used as shown in Figure 4.11. Obtain the output response for the initiator and 
monomer from R1 and R2. 
The polyrate of M is pseudo-first order and is given by; 
Initiation (R1) 
 
 
1
1
1
I
D
I
dC
k
C
dt
 
(4.75) 
 
Initiation (R2) 
 
 
2
2
2
I
D
I
dC
k
C
dt
 
(4.76) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
272 
 
Figure 4.11. Initiation Polymerization Conducted in Two CSTRs in Series.  
 
Propagation 
 
 
*
M
M
p
M
C
C
k
dt
dC


 
(4.77) 
 
 
Termination 
 
 
2
*
M
tC
k
dt
dP 
 
(4.78) 
 
 
Assuming a pseudo-steady state, i.e. the initiator radicals will react as soon as they are 
formed; 
 
 
*
*2
1
1
M
I
t
M
D
I
dC
dC
k C
k
C
dt
dt
 
(4.79) 
 
 
Or, 
*
1
1
D
I
M
t
k
C
C
k
(R1) 
(4.80.). 
 
Hence the rate of reactions can be written as one equation as; 
 
 
2
1
1
p D
I
M
M
t
k k
C
dC
C
dt
k
 (R1) 
(4.81)  
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
273 
 
2
2
2
p D
I
M
M
t
k k
C
dC
C
dt
k
 (R2) 
(4.82) 
 
The CSTR reactor volume is considered as the control volume. The component mass 
balances for the initiator concentration, CI1 can be written as follows for the first CSTR, R1 
as; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
I
ii
I
D
I
dC
v C
C
V k
C
V
dt
 
(4.83) 
 
 
Let the conversion of the initiator be Y and dimensionless time by  and Damkohler 
number (dissociation) be DaD as given by;  
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
;
;
I i
I
D
D
I i
C
C
t
Y
Da
k
C
; 
(4.84) 
 
 
Where, 1 is the residence time of the reacting species in R1 Eq. (4.50) then becomes; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
D
D
dY
Da
Y
Da
d
 
(4.85) 
 
 
The component mass balances for the monomer concentration, CM can be written as 
follows; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
D
M
Mi
M
M
p
I
t
k
dC
v C
C
V C
k
C
V
k
dt
 
(4.86) 
 
 
Let the conversion of the monomer be X and dimensionless time by  and Damkohler 
number (monomer) be DaM as given by;  
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
;
;
Mi
M
D
Ii
M
p
Mi
t
C
C
k
C
t
X
Da
k
C
k
;  
(4.87) 
 
 
Where, 1 is the residence time of the reacting species in the reactor. Eq. ( 4.87) then 
becomes; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
M
M
dX
Da
Y
X
Da
Y
d
 
(4.88) 
 
 
The component balance for the initiator I2 into the second reactor and the monomer that 
is further converted in R2 can be written as follows; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
274 
 
2
2
2
2 2
2
2
I
I i
I
D
I
dC
v C
C
k
V C
V
dt
 
(4.89) 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
p D
I
M
M
M
M
t
k k
C
dC
v C
C
V
C
V
k
dt
 
(4.90) 
 
The dimensionless variables and parameters as follows; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
;
;
;
p D
I
Mi
M
I i
I
M
Mi
I i
t
k k
C
C
C
C
C
V
X
Y
Da
C
C
v
k
 
(4.91) 
 
Eq. (4.54) and (4.55) becomes on dimensionalization; 
 
 
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
D
D
dY
Da
Y
Da
d
 
(4.92) 
 
 
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
M
M
dX
Da
Y
X
Da
Y
X
d
 
(4.93) 
 
At steady state Eq. (4.57) and Eq. (4.58) becomes; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
D
D
ss
D
D
Da
Y
Da
Da
Y
Da
 
(4.94) 
 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
M
M
ss
M
ss
ss
M
Da
Y
X
Da
Y
Da
Y
X
Da
Y
 
(4.95) 
 
 
2
2
2
1
ss
D
D
Da
Y
Da
 
(4.96) 
 
 
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
ss
ss
M
ss
ss
ss
M
M
Da
Y
X
X
Da
Y
Da
Y
 
(4.97) 
 
Integrating Eq. (4.57) upon separation of variables; 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
275 
 
2 1
2
1
2
2 1
2
2
1
2
1
1
D
Da
D
D
D
Da
c e
Y
Da
Da
 
(4.98) 
 
The integration constant c1 can be solved for from the initial condition; 
 
 
t = 0, Y2 = 0; 
1
2
1
2
D
Da
c
 
(4.99) 
 
Eq. (4.63) becomes; 
 
 
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
D
k
D
D
Da
Y
e
Da
 
(4.100) 
 
Eqs. (4.88,4.93) were integrated using Runge Kutta fourth order method. The equations 
are non-linear. The weights used are given in Eq. (4.21-4.24). The numerical integration was 
carried forward using MS Excel 2007 for Windows in a desktop computer. The results are 
shown in Figure 4.12. The parameters used in the simulation are listed in Table 4.. As can be 
been from Figure 4.12 multiplicity can be seen in conversion of monomer in R2. No 
multiplicity can be seen in conversion fo monomer in R1. The initiator response in R2 was 
slower than the the initiator response in R1. The conversion achived in R1 was lower 
compared with the set of conditions seen in Example 4.2. 
 
 
Figure 4.12. Output Response from R1 and R2.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
276 
Table 4.3. Parameters used during Simulation of Monomer and Initiator  
in 2 CSTRs in Series 
 
Parameter 
Symbol 
R1 
Units 
R2 
Residence Time T 
 
2.0 
hr 
4.0 
Rate Constant, Initiator 
kD 
2.5 
hr-1 
2.5 
Half-Life Initiator 
t0.5 
8.32 
min 
4.15 
Damkohler (Dissociation) 
DaD 
5.0 
dimensionless 
10.0 
Damkohler (Monomer) 
DaM 
1.0 
dimensionless 
5.0 
Conversion, Steady State [I] 
Yss 
0.83 
dimensionless 
0.91 
Conversion, Steady State M] 
Xss 
0.29 
dimensionless 
0.72 
Conversion Maximum [M] 
Xmax 
0.29 
dimensionless 
0.81 
Step Size 
 
1.5 
min 
 
 
 
D. Reactor Type – Plug Flow Reactor, PFR 
 
The composition of the fluid in a PFR, plug flow reactor, varies from point to point along 
a flow path. The mass balance on the reacting species need be made over a differential 
volume Az as shown in Figure 4.13. A is the cross-sectional area of the PFR and z is the 
incremental length of the slice considered in Figure 4.13. This is different from a CSTR 
where the mass balance on the reacting species is performed over the volume of the CSTR. 
For a reacting species A with a inlet composition of CAi(mol.m-3) and v is the superficial 
velocity of the fluid (m.s-1) the mass balance over the slice Az = dV can be written as 
follows; 
 
 
(
)
tan
tan
tan
tan
inf
rate
rate
disappearence
rate
of
of
of reac
t
accumulation
reac
t
reac
t
reaction
reac
t
lux
efflux
 
(4.10.1). 
 
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
A
A z
A z
z
A
A z
C
AvC
AvC
A zkC
t







 
(4.102) 
 
 
Figure 4.13. Transient Dynamics in a Plug Flow Reactor, PFR. 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
277 
Dividing Eq. (4.67) throughout by Az and obtaining the limit as z0 Eq. (4.67) 
becomes; 
 
 
A
A
A
C
C
v
kC
z
t  
(4.103) 
 
Eq. (4.68) can be made dimensionless as follows; 
 
 
;
;
;
Ai
A
A
Ai
C
C
kL
z
vt
X
Da
Z
C
v
L
L  
(4.104) 
 
The Damkohler number (PFR) can be seen to be the ratio of the reaction speed divided by 
the supeficial speed of the reactant/product.  
Upon substitution of Eq. (4.69) in Eq. (4.68); 
 
 
A
A
A
X
X
DaX
Da
Z
 
(4.105) 
 
Differentiating Eq. (4.70) with respect to dimensionless time; 
 
 
2
2
2
A
A
A
X
X
X
Da
Z
 
(4.106) 
 
Differentiating Eq. (4.70) with respect to dimensionless distance; 
 
 
2
2
2
A
A
A
X
X
X
Da
Z
Z
Z
 
(4.107) 
 
Conversion XA can be assumed to be analytic in the space and time (Z,). The order of 
the differentialion does not matter. i.e.,  
 
 
2
2
A
A
X
X
Z
Z  
(4.108) 
 
Adding Eq. (4.71) and Eq. (4.72) and realization of Eq. (4.73) leads to; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
A
A
A
A
X
X
X
X
Da
Da
Z
Z
 
(4.109) 
 
Eq. (4.74) is a hyperbolic PDE, partial differential equation that is second order with 
respect to space and second order with respect to time. The exact form analytical solution to 
Eq (4.74) can be obtained as follows. Eq. (4.74) is multiplied by en. Eq. (4.74) becomes; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
278 
 
2
2
2
2
n
n
A
A
n
n
A
A
e
X
e
X
X
X
Da
Dae
e
Z
Z
 
(4.110) 
 
The term (enXA) can be seen to group and can be called as the wave concentration 
(Sharma, 2005) such that; 
 
 
n
A
W
e
X  
(4.111) 
 
Now, 
 
 
n
n
A
A
n
A
X
W
ne
X
e
or
X
W
e
nW
 
(4.112) 
 
Differentiating Eq. (4.77) again with respect to time,   
 
2
2
2
2
2
n
A
X
W
W
W
e
n W
n
n
 
(4.113) 
 
Plugging Eq. (4.78), Eq. (4.77) and Eq. (4.76) in Eq. (4.75) 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
W
W
W
W
Da
nDa
n
W
Da
n
Z
Z
 
(4.114) 
 
For n = Da/2, Eq. (4.79) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
4
W
W
W
Da W
Da
Z
Z
 
(4.115) 
 
The steady state conversion can be obtained from Eq. (4.105) as follows; 
 
 
(1
)
s
A
s
A
X
Da Z
X




 
(4.116) 
 
Integration of both sides of Eq. (4.81) yields; 
 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
279 
 
ln 1
"
1
"'
s
A
s
DaZ
A
X
DaZ
c
X
c e
 
(4.117) 
 
At Z = 0, XA = 0 
So, c”‟ = 1. Eq (4.82) becomes; 
 
 
1
s
DaZ
A
X
e
 
(4.118) 
 
It can be seen that at steady state the conversion varies as a f(e-z). Eq. (4.80) can be 
multiplied throughout by emZ. The term (emXA) can be seen to group and can be called as ; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
4
m
m
W
W
e
e
Z
Z
 
(4.119) 
 
Now,  
m
W
e
m
Z
Z
 
(4.120) 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
m
W
e
m
m Z
Z
Z
 
(4.121) 
 
Substituting Eq. (4.120-4.121) in Eq. (4.119), Eq. (4.119) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
Da
Da
m
mDa
m
Z
Z
 
(4.122) 
 
For m = Da/2, Eq. (4.87) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
Da
Da
Z
or
Z
 
(4.123) 
 
Eq. (4.123) is the wave equation. In the dimensional form of independent variables; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
v
z
t
 
(4.124) 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
280 
It can be seen that the solution to Eq. (4.124) can be written as (Bird, Stewart and 
Lightfoot (1961); 
 
 
0
0
2
1
sin
z
vt
 
(4.125) 
 
where  is the wavelength of a harmonic wave with amplitude (00) traveling in the z 
direction at a speed v. The solution for the transient conversion can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
0
0
2
1
sin
Da
ZDa
A
X
e
e
z
vt
 
(4.126) 
 
The Dankwert‟s boundary condition at z = L can be applied as; 
 
 
0
A
X
z
 
(4.127) 
 
 
0
0
1
2
2
0
1
sin
cos
2
L
vt
L
vt
 
(4.128) 
 
At the wave front, L = vt, Eq. (4.93) becomes; 
 
 
0
1
 
(4.129) 
 
 
2
2
0
2
1
sin
zk
kt
v
A
X
e
e
z
vt
 
(4.130) 
 
At the entrance of the reactor, the initial reaction rate is given by; 
 
 
A
dX
k
dt
 
(4.131) 
 
Differentiating Eq. (4.95) with respect to t, 
 
 
0
0
0
2
1
2
2
4
A
X
v
v
k
t
L
k L
v
L
 
(4.132) 
 
 
2
2
2
1 sin
4
zk vkt
v
A
Da
X
e
z
vt
L
 
(4.133) 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
281 
 
Figure 4.14. Conversion XA in PFR for Damkohler Number, Da =6.75, v = 0..55 m.s-1, L = 1.5 m;  = 
2.7 hr, k = 2.5 hr-1,  = 0.33 m. 
 
 
4.3. CONTINUOUS PROCESS OUTPUT RESPONSE  
– PARTICULAR CASES 
 
The output response from a process depends on a number of factors such as the order of 
the process, process gain, process time constant, process damping factor and nature of process 
input. In the above section multiplicity was found in some solutions to the process output 
response. There are other instances where conclusions cannot be drawn from the output 
response in a unequivocal manner as can be expected from mathematical analysis. Other 
considerations have to go into the interpretation of these cases. In the following section, 
particular cases are discussed in detail where the interpretation cannot be conclusive.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
282 
A. Overshoot and Taitel Paradox 
 
A.1. Background  
The damped wave conduction and relaxation equation was sought over Fourier‟s law of 
heat conduction for eight reasons by Sharma [2007]. These reasons include: (i) contradiction 
with the principle of microscopic reversibility by Nobel laureate, Onsager, [1931]); (ii) 
neglects the time needed for the acceleration of heat flow by free electrons; (iii) occurrence of 
“blow-up” in the solutions obtained using Fourier parabolic model for industrially important 
systems such fluidized bed heat transfer, CPU overheating, (Sharma [2003]), gel 
electrophoresis, (Sharma, [2009]) restriction mapping, adsorption, nuclear fuel rod and drug 
delivery systems (Sharma, [2005, 2006,]; (iv) heat transfer in the Casimir limit [1938] or 
nanoscale systems cannot be described using Fourier‟s model; (v) basis for Fourier‟s law was 
from empirical observations at steady state; (vi) oscillatory discharge of heat in good thermal 
conductors at low temperature as pointed out by Nobel laureate, Nernst [1917]; (vii) delayed 
ignition of solid propellant, ultrafast laser heating of metals cannot be explained using 
Fourier‟s model; (viii) speed of heat cannot be greater than the speed of light as discussed by 
Nobel laureate Landau and Lifshitz, [1987]. 
The damped wave conduction and relaxation equation was originally suggested by 
Maxwell [1867], and postulated independently by Cattaneo [1948] and Vernotte [1958]. The 
damped wave conduction and relaxation equation in one dimension across constant area may 
be written as follows; 
 
 
x
x
r
q
T
q
kA
A
x
t  
(4.134) 
 
 
Reviews of the use of this equation have been presented by Joseph and Preziosi [1989] 
and Ozisik and Tzou [1991]. Extensive theoretical treatment of the equation has been reported 
by Tzou [1997] and Sharma [2005]. Experimental measurement of relaxation times has been 
reported by Mitra et al. [1995] recently for biological materials. Taitel [1972] found an 
overshoot in his transient temperature solution for a finite slab subject to constant wall 
temperature boundary condition. Bai and Lavine [1995] was concerned about Eq. (3.68) 
violating the second law of thermodynamics. Barletta and Zanchini [2003], calculate an 
entropy production term and are concerned of a violation of Clausius‟ inequality. Al Nimir et 
al. [2003] discusses an “overshoot” and equilibrium entropy production. Haji Sheik et al. 
[2002] point out some anomalies in Eq. (4.68). Tzou [1996] has found Eq. (4.68) to be 
admissible within the framework of second law of thermodynamics. Sharma [2005] have 
presented closed form analytical solutions for different geometries that are within the bounds 
of second law of thermodynamics. Antaki [1998] has discussed some analytical solutions for 
convective boundary condition. 
How the “overshoot” manifests in such systems from the model development and 
implications on the physical insight to the phenomena are discussed in the following 
subsection. How the use of physically realizable time condition such as obeyance of 
hyperbolic transient temperature to the energy balance equation from a lumped analysis 
approach can lead to the disappearance of the overshoot is also shown. The time condition 
used in this analysis is de novo. 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
283 
 
Figure 4.15. Finite Slab with Half-Width a Subject to Convective Heating. 
 
Consider a finite slab with width 2a at an initial hot temperature Th. This hot slab part of 
which is shown in Figure 4.15 is subject to a sudden cooling by convection by the fluid blown 
from the fan as shown in Figure 4.15 for times t > 0.. The fluid temperature is at Tf where 
Tf.< Th. Both sides of the slab are cooled by the fluid. The transient temperature as a function 
of space and time need be obtained. The two time and two space conditions are given as 
follows; 
 
 
t = 0, -a  x  +a, T = Th 
(4.135) 
 
 
 
t > 0, x= 0, 
0
T
x
 
(4.136) 
 
 
 
t  0, x =  a, 
f
T
k
h T
T
x
 
(4.137) 
 
 
In one dimension the energy balance equation on a thin slice of thickness x can be 
written as; 
 
 
p
q
T
C
x
t  
(4.138) 
 
 
Combining Eq. (4.138) with the damped wave heat conduction and relaxation equation 
the governing equation can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
u
u
u
X
  
(4.139) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
284 
where,  
(
) ;
;
(
)
h
f
h
r
r
T
T
t
x
u
X
T
T
 
(4.140) 
 
The time and space conditions are as follows; 
 
 
 = 0, u = 0 
(4.141) 
 
 
X = 0, 
0
u
X
 
 
 
 
*
1
r
a
X
u
h
u
X
 
(4.142) 
 
 
It can be noted that the heat transfer coefficient is defined with respect to the average 
temperature in the slab <T>. The energy balance on a thin spherical shell at x with thickness 
x is written. The governing equation can be obtained after eliminating q between the energy 
balance equation and the derivative with respect to x of the flux equation and introducing the 
dimensionless variables; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
u
u
u
X
  
(4.143) 
 
 
Eq. (4.143) is integrated between –Xa and +Xa and give; 
 
 
2
*
2
(
1)
u
u
S
u
 
(4.144) 
 
 
Where the storage number S* is defined as 
*
h
S
Sa  
 
 
A.2. Fourier Parabolic Model Near Steady State 
 
Eq. (4.144) in the limit of zero relaxation time reverts to the Fourier parabolic model and 
the governing equation becomes; 
 
 
*
1)
u
S
u
 
(4.145) 
 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
285 
Obtaining the Laplace transforms of Eq. (4.144)  
 
 
*
1
( )
0
( )
s
u
s
S
u
s
s  
(4.146) 
 
or, 
*
1
( )
u
s
s s
S
 
(4.147) 
 
Obtaining the inverse Laplace transform of Eq. (4.147); 
 
 
0
1
p
ht
hS p
C a
a
u
e
dp
e
 
(4.148) 
 
Eq. (4.148) is the average temperature of the finite slab in response to a step change in 
convective cooling at both sides of the finite slab. Eq. (4.148) is not a function of the 
relaxation time and is a function of the heat transfer coefficient, h, density, , and heat 
capacity, Cp, and half-width of the finite slab, a. 
 
 
A.3. Initial Accumulation Condition Zero 
 
For the hyperbolic model other investigators such as Taitel [1973] use the following 
initial condition; 
 
 
 = 0, 
0
u
u
 
(4.149) 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transform of Eq. (4.144) realizing the initial condition from Eq. 
(4.149)) the Laplace domain expression for <u> (s) can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
*
*
1
( )
1
u
s
s
s
s
S
S
 
(4.150) 
 
Where, 
*
h
S
Sa
 
 
Eq. (4.150) can be compared with the prototypical second order systems with a step input 
(Eq. (4.12) as discussed above in section 4.1C. For underdamped systems, i.e., when the 
damping factor,  < 1 the time response to Eq. (4.150) can be seen to exhibit an “overshoot” 
as shown in Figure 4.5. Without any heat sources the internal temperature greater than the  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
286 
boundary temperature can be a violation of second law of thermodynamics. When the 
damping coefficient, 
 
 
2
*
1
p
S
 
(4.151) 
 
 
*
*
1
1
2
S
S
 
(4.152) 
 
So, the damping factor is; 
 
 
*
1
2 S
 
 
For large values of the dimensionless ratio, S*, the damping coefficient will become less 
than one and the output response appears to have a overshoot. This can be expected for 
materials with large relaxation time,  
 
 
p
r
C a
h
 
(4.153) 
 
 
A.4. Physically Realizable Steady State/Final Time Condition 
 
The boundary condition used during convective cooling is a constant value for the heat 
flux rate from the air flowing past the finite slab as given in Eq. (4.137). The governing 
equation (6) is the damped wave conduction and relaxation equation taking into account the 
effect of acceleration of electrons. A boundary condition that includes the wave term, i.e., 
air
r
q
t  would be a better representation of transient events at the air solid interface. Thus. 
Eq. (4.137) need be modified as; 
 
 
*
*
1
air
r
rs
u
u
h
u
h
X
 
(4.154) 
 
Eq. (4.154) is integrated with respect to X and the governing equation written in terms of 
the average temperature in the slab <u> as follows; 
 
 
2
*
*
*
2
1
u
u
S
S
u
S  
(4.155) 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
287 
Where, 
air
r
rs
 the ratio of the relaxation time in the air and the relaxation time in 
the solid. Let the <u> be expressed as a sum of transient temperature and steady state 
temperature.  is the ratio of relaxation times of the air and that of the solid. 
 
 
ss
t
u
u
u
 
(4.156) 
 
Substituting Eq. (4.156) into Eq. (4.155); 
 
 
2
*
*
*
2
1
(1
)
0
t
t
t
ss
u
u
S
S
u
u
S
 
(4.157) 
 
Eq. (4.157) is valid when the following two equations are valid; 
 
 
2
*
*
2
1
0
t
t
t
u
u
S
S
u
 
(4.158) 
 
 
*(
1)
0
ss
S
u
 
(4.159) 
 
The steady state temperature can be seen to be; 
 
 
1
ss
u
 
(4.160) 
 
Eq.(4.159) is a second order differential equation that has been made homogeneous. Eq. 
(4.158) is multiplied by en throughout. The terms group such that, 
 
 
t
n
t
W
e
u
 
(4.161) 
 
and for 
*
1
2
S
n
 Eq. (4.158) can be seen to become; 
 
 
2
2
*
2
1
t
t
W
W
S
 
(4.161) 
 
The solution to Eq. (4.161) can be seen to be; 
 
 
1
2
cos
sin
t
W
c
c
 
(4.162) 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
288 
Where 
*
1
S
  
Two time conditions are needed to fully describe the problem. The accumulation 
condition equal to zero appears to be physically unreasonable. When a slab with an initial 
temperature is immersed in a hot fluid with convective heat transfer coefficient the 
temperature in the slab would increase, rapidly in the beginning of the process and can be 
expected to slow down with the passage of time. At steady state the temperature would be 
steady and invariant with time. From the initial condition given by Eq. (4.141) the integration 
constants in Eq. (4.162) can be seen to be; 
 
 
c1 =0 
(4.163) 
 
Then Eq.(4.162) becomes; 
 
 
*
1
2
2 sin
S
t
u
e
c
 
(4.164)  
 
The transient average temperature <u>t also has to obey the following equation that can 
be obtained from a lumped analysis of the finite slab from energy balance; 
 
 
*
*
(1
)
1
t
t
u
S
S
u
 
(4.165) 
 
Eq. (4.165) at zero time, or =0, can be seen to be! 
 
 
 
*
*
1
t
u
S
S
 
(4.166) 
 
The integration constant c2 can be obtained by applying Eq. (4.166) to Eq. (4.167). 
 
 
*
*
1
2
2
2
2
1
sin
cos
2
t
S
c
S
u
e
c
e
 
(4.167) 
 
and c2 seen to be; 
 
 
*
2
*
1
S
c
S
 
(4.168) 
 
The average transient temperature in the slab is then written as; 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
289 
 
*
1
*
2
*
sin
1
S
t
S
u
e
S
 
(4.169) 
 
Eq. (4.169) is plotted in Figures 4.16 – 4.18, for different values of S* and . The time 
taken for the slab to reach steady state is finite and can be calculated when (ss ) becomes  
in Eq. (4.169). This happens when; 
 
 
ss
 
(4.170) 
 
 
Figure 4.16. Transient Average Temperature in Finite Slab from Damped Wave Conduction and 
Relaxation ( =0..2). 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
290 
For the special case when S* = 1, Eq. (4.161) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
1
2
0
t
t
W
W
c
c
 
(4.171) 
 
Or, 
1
2
2
1
t
u
e
c
c
 
(4.172) 
 
 
From the initial condition given by Eq.(8), c2 = 0. c1 can be solved for the energy balance 
equation given by Eq. (4.166) at  
 
 = 0,  
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
2
t
c
u
c  
(4.173) 
 
 
 
1
1
1
c
. 
(4.174) 
 
Thus for the special case when S*=1, 
 
 
1
2
1
t
u
e
 
(4.175) 
 
Reports in the literature about appearance of an “overshoot” in the transient temperature 
for a finite slab were analyzed for the case of convective boundary condition with the wave 
term. The solution from Fourier parabolic model given by Eq. (17) predicts a monotonic rise 
in temperature with an asymptote of <u>ss = 1 at steady state. The solution from the 
hyperbolic damped wave conduction and relaxation for average temperature of the finite slab 
was solved for by method of Laplace transforms for the time conditions such as the first 
derivative of temperature in time equal to zero at time zero as used by other investigators in 
similar problems with constant wall temperature boundary condition. The Laplace domain 
expression compares from this model compares well with the expression for prototypical 
second order systems as discussed in a process dynamics and control textbooks. This 
expression when inverted has an overshoot.  
The temperature in a finite slab subject to convective boundary condition was assumed to 
comprise of a transient component and steady state component. The steady state component 
temperature was obtained and given by Eq. (4.160.). The governing equation for transient 
temperature is rendered homogeneous upon obtaining the solution of steady state temperature. 
The transient temperature was expressed as a product of decaying exponential and wave 
temperature. The governing equation for the wave temperature (Eq. (4.161) was solved for. 
The integration constants were obtained from the initial temperature condition of <u>t = 0 at 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
291 
zero time. The second integration constant was calculated by verifying that the model solution 
obeys the energy balance equation for average transient temperature. This leads to a solution 
for transient temperature that has a decaying exponential term and a cosinuous term with a 
phase lag, . Eq. (4.169) does not result in any overshoot as shown in Figures 4.16– 5.18 for 
various values of frequency and ratio of thermal relaxation times between air and the solid. It 
was found that the dimensionless storage number given by 
*
h
S
Sa is a significant 
parameter in the analysis. Expression for time taken to steady state was found and given by 
Eq. (4.160).  
 
 
Figure 4.17. Transient Average Temperature in the Finite Slab Subject to Convective Boundary 
Condition with Wave Term ( = 0..01). 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
292 
 
Figure 4.18. Transient Average Temperature in the Finite Slab Subject to Convective Boundary 
Condition with Wave Term ( = 2.0). 
 
No overshoot was found when the wave term was taken into account in the boundary 
condition even for small values of , the ratio of the relaxation time of air with that of the 
solid. This is an indication that the fundamental phenomena such as “acceleration of free 
electron” as discussed before [Sharma, 2006] can be used to model transient heat conduction 
at short times and be within the second law of thermodynamics. The maxima in the transient 
temperature were found to increase with decreasing S* starting with large values such as 10. 
A cross-over was found after S* became less than about 2.2. Then the maxima in the average 
transient temperature was found to decrease with decrease in storage number, S*. Eq. (4.169) 
can be seen to go to zero in the asymptotic limits of infinite storage number, S*  .  
 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
293 
B. Delineation of Maxima and Steady State  
 
Consider the mixing tank in Figure 4.19 with a jacket provided for heating the tank.  
The governing equations for the temperature in the reactor and the temperature of the 
coolant in the jacket are obtained from an energy balance on the control volume of the 
contents of the reactor and can be seen to be; 
 
Reactor: 
i
j
p
dT
v
UA
T
T
T
T
dt
V
VC
 
(4.176) 
 
Jacket: 
j
j
jin
j
j
j
j
j
pj
dT
v
UA
T
T
T
T
dt
V
V C
 
 
At Steady State 
 
 
1
3
1
0
50
125
150
125
10
61.3(10)
(3)(61.3)
183.9
.
UA
UA
Btu F
ft
 
(4.177) 
 
 
  
Figure 4.19. Mixing Tank Heated by hot Fluid in Jacket. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
294 
 
3
1
183.9
0
200
150
150
125
2.5
61.3 2.5
75
1.5
.min
50
j
j
v
v
ft
 
(4.178) 
 
The model equations are represented in state space form as follows; 
 
 
0.4
0.3
5
1.2
1.8
120
j
j
dT
T
dt
T
dT
dt
 
(4.179) 
 
The model solutions were obtained using fourth Order Runge-Kutta Method for 
Integration of ODE in MS Excel Spreadsheet 20.07 for Windows. The classical fourth-order 
RK method was used. The recurrence formula as given in (S. C. Chapra and R. P. Canale, 
(2006) was used. The recurrence relations used are as follows; 
 
 
1
1
2
3
4
2
2
6
l
l
h
T
T
k
k
k
k
 
(4.180) 
 
 
 
'
'
'
'
1
1
2
3
4
2
2
6
jl
jl
h
T
T
k
k
k
k
 
(4.181) 
 
Where, 
 
 
k1 = f(ti,Ti) 
(4.182) 
 
 
k2 = f(ti+0.5h, yi+0.5k1h) 
(4.183) 
 
 
k3 = f(ti+0.5h,Ti+0.5k2h) 
(4.184) 
 
 
k4 = f(ti+h, Ti+k3h) 
(4.185) 
 
 
From Eq. (4.176), f(t,T) = 
i
i
v T
T
Q
V
 
 
Integration was performed using a MS Excel spreadsheet. The key results are shown in 
Figure 4.20 and Table 4.4. The step size used was h = 0.01 min. 
From the last row of Table 4.4 it appears that the steady state temperature values, Tis = 
152.2 and Tjs = 199.7 F. The values from solution in (a) are Tis = 150 F and Tjs = 150 F. 
 
 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
295 
 
Figure 4.20. Transient Reactor Temperature and Jacket Temperature vs. Time. 
 
Table 4.4. Temperature in the Reactor, Jacket vs. Time 
 
t 
T 
Tj 
0 
50.000 
200 
0.1 
54.263 
189.145 
0.2 
58.066 
180.2475 
0.3 
58.066 
180.2475 
0.4 
64.567 
167.0994 
0.5 
67.374 
162.3572 
0.6 
69.946 
158.5734 
0.7 
72.316 
155.5905 
0.8 
74.514 
153.2766 
0.9 
76.566 
151.5209 
1 
78.492 
150.2307 
2 
93.615 
150.7255 
3 
105.150 
158.6955 
4 
114.938 
166.9491 
5 
123.438 
174.3797 
6 
130.854 
180.9078 
7 
137.329 
186.6161 
8 
142.985 
191.6031 
9 
147.925 
195.9591 
10 
152.240 
199.7639 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
296 
 
Figure 4.20. Transient Reactor Temperature and Jacket Temperature vs. Time. 
 
(a) Large Step Change in Jacket Flow Rate: 10 times to 15 ft3.min-1 
 
 
Figure 4.21. Transient Reactor Temperature and Jacket Temperature vs. Time Response to a Big Step 
Change in Jacket Flow Rate by 10. Times. 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
297 
(b) Small Step Change in Jacket Flow Rate: 10% Change to 1.65 ft3.min-1 
 
 
Figure 4.22. Transient Reactor Temperature and Jacket Temperature vs. Time Response to a Small Step 
Change in Jacket Flow Rate by 10.%. 
 
(b) Larger Vessel 
 
v = 10 ft3.min-1; V = 100 ft3 
 
 
1
3
10
0
50
125
150
125
100
61.3(100)
7.5(4)(61.3)
73.56
.
25
UA
UA
Btu F
ft
 
(4.186) 
 
(c)  
10
73.56
0
50
125
125
100
100(61.3)
7.5 1.5
750
0.012
js
js
T
T
F
 
(4.187) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
298 
 
3
1
73.56
0
200
750
750
125
2.5
61.3 2.5
220
0.733
.min
300
j
j
v
v
ft
 
(4.188) 
(d) 
 
0.112
0.012
5
0.046
0.779
5.864
j
j
dT
T
dt
T
dT
dt
 
(4.189) 
 
Eigenvalues of the A matrix 
Characteristic second degree polynomial equation 
 
 
2
0.112
0.779
0.000552
0.891
0.0867
0  
(4.190)) 
 
Eigenvalues are 1 = -0.78; 2 = -0.11 
Both eigenvalues are negative. Hence the system is stable. It can be seen from Figure 
4.20 that the transient temperature of the reactor goes through a minima. Both at minima as 
well as at steady state; 
 
 
0
dT
dt
 
(4.191) 
 
Use of Eq. (4.191) merely is not sufficient to identify the minima or steady steady state 
value. They may have to be obtained as shown in the above example by other means. 
 
 
4.4. OTHER KINETIC TYPES 
 
A. Denbeigh Scheme of Reactions 
 
Consider the Denbigh scheme of reactions performed in the CSTR shown in Figure 4.23. 
A scheme of reactions as shown in Figure 4.23 was discussed in Levenspiel [1999] as a 
special case of Denbigh reactions. A state space model that can be developed to describe the 
dynamics of the 5 species, CA, CR, CT, CB and CS. The assumptions are that the inlet stream 
contains species A and B at a concentration of CAi and CBi and the initial concentrations of the 
other species are zero. The kinetics of the simple irreversible reactions shown in Figure 4.23 
can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
3
A
A
dC
k
k
C
dt
 
(4.192) 
 
 
4
B
B
dC
k C
dt
 
(4.193) 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
299 
 
Figure 4.23. Denbigh Scheme of Reactions. 
 
 
4
3
5
S
B
A
S
dC
k C
k C
k C
dt
 
(4.194) 
 
 
1
2
R
A
R
dC
k C
k C
dt
 
(4.195) 
 
 
2
5
T
R
S
dC
k C
k C
dt
 
(4.196) 
 
The reactions are considered to be performed in the CSTR similar to the one shown in 
Figure 4.6. Component mass balances on each of the species assuming incompressible flow 
and constant volume reactor can be written as follows; 
 
Species A 
 
 
1
3
1
A
Ai
A
dC
C
C
Da
Da
d
 
(4.197) 
 
Where 
1
1
3
3
;
;
;
;
t
V
Da
k
Da
k
v ,  with units of (hr.) is the residence time of 
the species in the reactor, V is the volume of the reactor, (liter) and v is the volumetric flow 
rate (lit.hr-1) in and out of the reactor. 
 
Species B 
 
 
4
1
B
Bi
B
dC
C
C
Da
d
 
(4.198) 
 
Where Da4 = (k4) 
 
Species S 
 
 
5
4
3
1
S
S
B
A
dC
C
Da
Da C
Da C
d
 
(4.199) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
300 
Species R 
 
 
2
1
1
R
R
A
dC
C
Da
Da C
d
 
(4.200) 
. 
 
Species T 
 
 
2
5
T
T
R
S
dC
C
Da C
Da C
d
 
(4.201) 
 
The model equations that can be used to describe the dynamics of the 5 reactant/product 
species in a CSTR can be written in the state space form as follows; 
 
 
1
3
4
3
4
5
1
2
5
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
A
A
Ai
B
B
Bi
S
S
R
R
T
T
C
C
C
Da
Da
C
C
C
Da
d
C
C
Da
Da
Da
dt C
C
Da
Da
C
C
Da
Da
 
(4.202) 
 
The stability of the dynamics of the 5 reactants/products in the Denbigh scheme 
performed a CSTR can be studied by obtaining the eigenvalues of the rate matrix. The 
characteristic equation for the eigenvalues is obtained by evaluation of the following 
determinant; 
 
1
3
4
3
4
5
1
2
5
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
det
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
 
 
 
1
3
4
5
2
1
1
1
1
1
0
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
 
(4.203) 
 
 
The 5 eigenvalues are negative when Damkohler numbers are greater than zero. When 
eigenvalues are all negative the system is considered to be stable. 
The Laplace transform of the model equations developed in order to describe the 
transient dynamics (Eqs. 4.194 – 4.201) for the 5 species in the Denbigh scheme in a CSTR 
can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
3
1
Ai
A
C
C
s
s
s
Da
Da
 
(4.204) 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
301 
 
4
( )
1
Bi
B
C
C
s
s
s
Da
  
(4.205) 
 
 
3
4
4
5
1
3
5
1
1
1
1
Ai
Bi
S
Da C
Da C
C
s
s s
Da
s
Da
s
s
Da
Da
s
Da
  4.206) 
 
 
1
2
1
3
1
1
Ai
R
Da C
C
s
s
Da
s
s
Da
Da
 
(4.207)  
 
 












5
3
4
5
1
2
1
3
5
4
5
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Ai
Bi
Ai
T
Da Da C
Da Da C
Da Da C
C
s
s s
s
Da
Da
s
Da
s
Da
s
Da
s
Da
s
Da
Da


























 
(4.208) 
 
 
The inverse Laplace transform of Eq. (4.204) can be obtained by invocation of the 
convolution theorem. The expression for transient concentration of species A can be written 
as; 
 
 
1
3
1
1
3
1
1
1
Da
Da
A
Ai
C
t
e
C
Da
Da
 
(4.209) 
 
The inverse Laplace transform of Eq. (4.205) can be obtained by use of the time shift 
property. The transient concentration of species B can be seen to be; 
 
 
4
1
4
1
1
1
Da
B
Bi
C
t
e
C
Da
 
(4.210) 
 
The inverse Laplace transform of Eq. (4.207) can be obtained by look-up of Laplace 
inversion Tables in Mickley, Sherwood and Reed [1939]. The transient concentration of 
species R can be seen to be; 
 
 
1
3
2
1
1
2
2
1
3
1
3
2
1
3
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
Da
Da
Da
R
Ai
e
e
C
t
C
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
 (4.211) 
 
The inverse Laplace transform of Eq. (4.206) can be obtained by look-up of Laplace 
inversion Tables in Mickley, Sherwood and Reed [1939. The transient concentration of 
species S can be seen to be; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
302 
 
5
4
5
1
3
1
1
4
4
5
4
5
4
4
5
5
1
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
1
3
5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Da
Da
S
Bi
Ai
Ai
Da
Da
Da
C
t
Da C
e
e
C
C
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
e
e
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
 (4.212) 
 
The transient concentration of species T can be obtained from the Laplace inversion of 
Eq. (4.208)  
 
 
B. Michaelis and Menten Kinetics 
 
The production of monosaccharides from starch, aspartame found in Nutrasweet and 
other sweeteners from phenyl amine, acrylamide from acrylonitrile, penicillin, high fructose 
corn syrup from starch slurry, fructose from glucose, acetone-butanol from cheese whey, 
pentose sugar from lignocellulosics etc can be catalyzed using enzymes. Biological processes 
can be classified as: (i) fermentations; (ii) metabolic processes/functional genomics or 
metabolomics; (iii) by action of living cells. Fermentations can be further sub-classified into 
processes as those that are promoted by microorganisms such as yeast, algae, bacteria, 
protozoa and those that are catalyzed by enzymes. Stem cell research advances also can lead 
to useful products. The kinetics of the microbe promoted reactions and enzyme catalyzed 
reactions can be written as follows; 
 
 
0
E
A
A
A
M
A
C
C
dC
r
k
dt
C
C
  
(4.213) 
 
Where the enzyme concentration is CE0, CM is a Michaelis constant. Eq. (4.213) is 
referred to the equation describing Michaelis and Menten kinetics. At high concentrations, of 
the reactant, CA the rate expression in Eq. (4.213) becomes; 
 
 
0
0
1
A
A
E
E
A
C
C
M
M
A
C
kC
Lt r
Lt k
C
C
C
 
(4.214) 
 
The reaction rate at the asymptotic limit of infinite concentration of reactant, CA can be 
seen to become zeroth order rate (Eq. (4.214). At the asymptotic limit of zero reactant 
concentration Eq. (4.213) can be seen to become a first order reaction rate; 
 
 
0
0
A
E
A
A
C
M
C
C
Lt r
k
C
 
(4.215) 
 
 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
303 
The Monod type of kinetics can be used to quantitate the production of cells and can be 
given by the rate expression; 
 
 
'
C
A
c
obs
A
M
C C
r
k
C
C
 
(4.216) 
 
The reaction scheme for which Eq. (4.216) is applicable is given in Figure 4.24. 
 
 
C
A
C
R  
(4.217) 
 
Where C is the microbe acting, CM
‟ is the Monod constant and A is the food for the 
microbe and R is the waste material generated. More microbes are produced when food is 
supplied to the microbes. The waste product R can inhibit the production of product by 
phenomena called product poisoning. Activated sludge treatment of waste water is an 
example of bioprocess that is devoid of product poisoning. When Monod kinetics is in effect 
the cells reproduce the substrate is built and the waste R that can be poisonous to the product 
form. An induction period, sigmoidal growth period, stationary period and lysis/death of cell 
period. The product P can be obtained by cell rupture of cells C using centrifugation and 
separation of product P from the waste material R and unreacted reactant A and the disrupted 
cells using downstream processing methods. 
Consider the reactions described by Michaelis and Menten kinetics performed in the 
CSTR shown in Figure 4.24. Component mass balances on each of the species assuming 
incompressible flow and constant volume reactor can be written as follows; 
 
Species A 
 
 
0
E
A
A
Ai
A
A
M
DaC
C
dC
C
C
C
C
dt  
(4.218) 
 
Eq. (4.218) is made dimensionless as follows; 
 
Let  
0
;
;
;
Ai
A
E
M
A
M
Ai
Ai
Ai
C
C
kC
C
t
X
Da
C
C
C
 
(4.219) 
 
Substituting Eq. (4.219) in Eq. (4.218), Eq. (4.218) can be seen to become; 
 
 
1
1
A
A
A
M
A
Da
X
dX
X
d
X
 
(4.220) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
304 
 
Figure 4.24. Reaction Scheme that can be represented by Monod Kinetics. 
 
The variables XA and  in Eq. (4.220) can be separated and integrated as follows; 
 
 
2
0
0
1
1
A
X
A
M
A
A
A
M
dX
X
d
X
X
Da
Da
 
(4.221) 
 
Eq. (4.221) can be solved for by using a substitution such as; 
 
 
1
2
A
M
y
X
q
Da
q
 
(4.222) 
 
The integral in Eq. (4.221) then becomes; 
 
 
0
0
2
2
2
2
1
2
y
y
M
y
y
Da
dy
ydy
y
Da
q
y
Da
q
 
(4.223) 
 
The integrals in the LHS can be obtained by a (y2+Da-q2 =z2) substitution and found to 
be; 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
ln
ln
2
4
A
M
A
A
A
Da
q
X
q
q
Da
Da
q
Da
X
qX
Da
q
Da
Da
q
X
q
q
Da
 
(4.224) 
 
Eq. (4.224) is the closed form analytical solution to Eq. (4.220). Eq. (4.220) is not 
explicit in conversion as a function of time. For a given time in order to obtain the 
corresponding conversion a transcendental equation needs to be solved. There is no guarantee 
that the solution is monovalued. Multiplicity in solution may arise (Ramkrishna et, al,  
 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
305 
[1982]). A Taylor series expansion may be written for the conversion as follows near the 
initial condition at  = 0. 
 
 
2
3
4
'"'
(0)
'(0)
"(0)
"'(0)
.
0
........
2!
3!
4!
A
A
A
A
A
A
X
X
X
X
X
X
 
(4.225) 
 
From the initial condition,  
 
 
0
0
A
X
 
(4.226) 
 
From Eq. (4.220) at =0, 
 
 
' 0
1
A
M
Da
X
 
(4.227) 
 
 
2
"
3
2
0
1
1
M
A
M
M
Da
Da
X
 
(4.228) 
 
 
"
'
'
'
"
"'
0
0
2
2
0
1
A
A
A
A
A
A
M
X
X
q
X
X
X
X
 
(4.229) 
 
 
2
3
4
5
2
2
3
2
1
1
M
M
M
M
qDa
Da
 
(4.230) 
 
Truncation of fourth and higher order terms in Eq. (4.226) and substitution of Eqs. 
(4.226-4.230) in Eq. (4.225) would yield; 
 
 
2
2
3
2
3
3
4
5
2
2
2
3
2
.
........
1
2!
1
3!
1
1
1
M
M
M
A
M
M
M
M
M
Da
qDa
Da
Da
Da
X
 
(4.231) 
 
Eq. (4.231) is plotted in Figure 4.25 for dimensionless Michaelis constant of M = 4.0 at 
three different Damkohler numbers, Da = 1, 4 and 8 respectively. It can be seen from the 
graph that the transient concentration undergoes a maxima at larger Damkohler numbers. The 
steady state conversion can be obtained from Eq. (4.220.) as follows;. 
 
 
1
0
1
s
A
s
A
s
M
A
Da
X
X
X
 
(4.232) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
306 
The quadratic equation that needs to be solved for in order to obtain the steady state 
conversion, XA
s can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
2
0
s
s
A
A
s
A
X
qX
Da
X
q
q
Da
 
(4.233) 
 
Where q is given by Eq. (4.222). Since Eq. (4.233) is a quadratic there can be multiple 
values for the steady state conversion. In such cases other considerations may have to go into 
arriving at the residence time and other operating parameters for the desired output 
performance. 
 
 
Figure 4.25. Transient Conversion XA in CSTR for Nutrients that obey Michaelis and Menten Kinetics 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
307 
C. Gel Effect – Runaway Polymerization Reactions 
 
Free radical polymerization reactions are used to prepare useful polymers from 
monomers that can be manufactured by separating crude naphtha in distillation columns and 
by catalytic conversions. For example catalytic dehydrogenation of ethyl benzene can lead to 
the formation of styrene. Ammonia and propylene can be contacted in a fluidized bed reactor 
and in the presence of catalyst acrylonitrile can be made in an economically profitable 
manner. Switching one of the reactors to iso-propylene as feed material can lead to the 
manufacture of methacrylonitrile. Isomerization acid catalyst can be used to prepare alpha 
methyl styrene from ethyl benzene. Beta methyl styrene formation requires a suitable catalyst. 
Free radical reactions consists of three important phases: (i) initiation by appropriate 
initiators such as peroxy free radical provider or azoisobutyrontirle, AIBN or by thermal or by 
photolytic or by other means; (ii) propagation reactions and growth of backbone polymer and; 
(iii) termination reactions by combination or by chain transfer or by other mechanisms. 
During high conversion and when little diluent is used some times the growing chains do not 
diffuse and combine and participate in termination reactions. This can lead to a diffusion 
limited “gel effect” or runaway reaction condition. Control of such reactions if allowed to 
take place may be difficult and sometimes needs granite to separate the set mass. One time in 
Muscatine, IA the suspension kettle was “set-up” due to “gel effect” as touched upon in 
Chapter 1.0. 
 
 
4.5. SUMMARY 
 
The transient conversion in a PFR, plug flow reactor was derived. For a reaction of first 
order assuming that the conversion is analytic in space and time the governing equation can 
be shown to be of the hyperbolic type. For the zeroth order reaction the governing equation 
was found to be a wave equation! The hyperbolic PDEs can be solved for using the methods 
of relativistic transformation of coordinates leading to modified Bessel composite function 
solution, method of separation of variables and method of Laplace transforms. Numerical 
solution procedures can be used when the equations become nonlinear such as in the case of 
free radical polymerization reactions.  
Transient analysis of first order reversible reactions, reactions in series-parallel, reactions 
that obey the Michaelis and Menten kinetics are discussed in detail. The use of final time 
condition and physically reasonable energy balance considerations can lead to solutions that 
are bounded and within the scope of the second law of thermodynamics for problems that can 
be described using non-Fourier conduction equation. The temperature profile in a PFR is also 
obtained. Energy balance under transient conditions is used in the analysis. The case of two 
interacting and non-interacting tanks is discussed as exercises. 
Transient dynamics of concentration, temperature separately and concentration and 
temperature both in a PFR and CSTR were discussed. The dimensionless group called 
Damkohler number in addition to conversion, dimensionless time, and residence time was 
used to describe the transient output response from a CSTR. The hydrolysis reaction of 
ethylene oxide to ethylene glycol was considered in a CSTR. For incompressible flow and for 
a constant volume system the steady state and transient conversion were derived. The 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
308 
transient model solution is given as equation. CSTR with recycle was considered in Example 
4-6. 
The transient temperature in a mixing tank that is heated is given. A fourth order Runge-
Kutta method was used for numerical integration of the ODE, ordinary differential equation. 
Temperature vs. Time in reactor as response to a step change in input is obtained and 
displayed in Figure 4.20. A state space model was developed to describe a jacketed CSTR. 
The output variables of interest are dimensionless conversion, dimensionless temperature and 
is given in Eq. (4.41).. If all of the Eigenvalues of the state space A matrix are negative then 
the system is expected to be stable. A system with one Eigenvalue zero and one Eigenvalue 
negative is called an integrating system. If the Eigenvalues are complex conjugates the system 
is considered oscillatory. Sometimes the oscillatory output response may be subcritical and 
damped, underdamped or critically damped. The stability type and characterization of 
stability for each of these cases are given in Table 4.3. 
The transient concentration of initiator and monomer during free radical polymerization 
in a CSTR was obtained in Example 4.4. DaI, Damkohler number (initiator) and DaM, 
Damkohler number (monomer) were introduced. The steady state conversions were obtained 
as a function of the Damkohler number. Eq. (4.58) that is used to describe the transient 
conversion of monomer is non-linear. The conversion of initiator and monomer as a function 
of time is displayed in Figure 4.10. Multiplicity was found in model solution of conversion of 
monomer. Conversion of initiator was monotonic. It can be seen from Figure 4.10 for the 
parameters used in the simulation study the transient conversion of monomers undergoes a 
maximum value. 
The general form of prototypical first order and prototypical second order system were 
provided. The first order process is characterized by process gain constant, kp and process 
time constant, tp. The second order process is characterized by the process gain, kp, damping 
coefficient,  and process time constant, tp. When the damping coefficient, z > 1 the system is 
over damped, when z = 1 the system is said to be critically damped and when z < 1 the system 
is expected to undergo a overshoot and is said to be underdamped oscillatory. 
 
 
4.6. GLOSSARY 
 
Damkohler number is the ratio of the residence time of the reactants and other species 
in the reactor compared with the intrinsic reaction time depending on the chemistry. 
Denbigh Scheme of Reactions 
PFR plug flow reactor is a contacting scheme where the velocity of the fluid is constant 
throughout the tube, the conversion varies along the length of the tube and is one of the best 
performing reactor type. 
CSTR continuous stirred tank reactor. 
CSTRs in Series number of CSTRS are operated in series or other configuration. 3 or 
more CSTRs are needed to provide an equivalent performance in a PFR. 
free radical polymerization mechanism of polymerization reactions by free radical 
propagation of initiation, propagation and termination. 
thermal initiation polymerization, mechanism of initiation of free radical propagation 
reactions during polymerization by heat rather than initiator. 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
309 
polyrate, rate of polymer formation per unit time or rate of monomer consumption per 
unit time. 
time constant, p parameter that can be used to characterize exponential rise and 
exponential decay in transient applications for first and higher order systems. A system with 
large time constant would give a sluggish response and one with a smaller time constant 
would provide a quicker response. 
process gain, kp parameter used to characterize input-output relation in first and higher 
order systems 
fractional conversion, Xj amount of species that has been reacted compared with the 
initial concentration of the species 
thermal conductivity, k, proportionality constant in Fourier‟s law of heat conduction. 
Material property. 
heat capacity, Cp. thermo physical property of  
material. Amount of energy in kilojoules needed to  
raise on gram of a material by 1 degree K. 
relaxation time, r, thermo physical property of  
material. Measure of velocity of heat. Materials with  
larger relaxation time will allow slower speeds of heat. 
residence time,  the time the reacting and product species stays in the reactor. 
 
 
4.7. FUTHER READINGS 
 
Agrawal, P., Lee, C., Lim, H. C. & Ramkrishna, D. (1982). Vol. 37, 3, 453-452, Chemical 
Engineering Science. 
Al-Nimr, M., Naji, M. & Al-Wardat, S. (2003). Vol. 42, 8, 5383-5386, Japanese Journal of 
Applied Physics, Part I: Regular Papers and Short Notes & Review Papers. 
Antaki, P. J. (1998). Vol. 41, 14, 2253-2258, Int. J. of Heat Mass Transfer. 
ASME Transactions, Heat Transfer Division,  
Bai, C. & Lavine, A. S. (1995). Vol. 117, 256-263, J. Heat Transfer. 
Barletta, A. & Zanchini, E. (2003). Vol. 32, 8, 5383-5386, Heat Mass Transfer/Warema-und 
Stoffuebertragung. 
Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E. & Lightfoot, E. N. (1960). Transport Phenomena, Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Casimir, H. B. G. (1938). Vol. 5, 495-500, Physica. 
Cattaneo, C. (1948). Sulla conduzione del Calore Syracuse, Societa Tipograpfica Moderne 
Chapra, S. C. & Canale R. P. (2006). Numerical Methods for Engineers, New York: McGraw 
Hill Professional. 
Coughabowr, D. R. & LeBlanc, S. E. (2009). Process Systems Analysis and Control, New 
York: McGraw Hill Professional.  
Froment, G. F., Bischoff, K. B. & De Wilde, J. (2011). Chemical Reactor Analysis and 
Design, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Golnaraghi, F., Kuo, B. C. (2010). Automatic Control Systems, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
310 
Haji-Sheik, A. M., Minkowycz, W. J. & Sparrow, E. M. (2002). Vol. 124, 2, 307-319, J. Heat 
Transfer.  
Joseph, D. D. & Preziosi, L. (1989). Vol. 61, 41-73, Review of Modern Physics. 
Landau, L. & Liftshitz, E. M. (1987). Fluid Mechanics, Pergamon, United Kingdom. 
Levenspiel, O. (1996). Chemical Reactor Omnibook, Corwallis, OR: 1989. 
Levenspiel, O. (1999). Chemical Reaction Engineering. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.  
Maxwell, J. C. (1867). Vol. 157, 49, Phil. Trans. Roy.  
Michaelis, L. & Menten, M. L. (1913). Vol. 49, 333, Biochem Z. 
Mitra, K., Kumar, S., Vedavarz A. & Moallemi, M. K. (1995). Vol. 117, 568-573, J. Heat 
Transfer. 
Monod, J. (1949). Vol. 3, 371, Ann. Rev. Microbiology. 
Nernst, W. (1917). Die Theoretician Grundalgen des n Warmestatzes, Knapp Hall, Frankfurt, 
Germany. 
Onsager, L. (1931). Vol. 37, 405-426, Phys. Review. 
Ozisik, M. N. & Tzou, D. Y. (1994). Vol. 116, 526-535, ASME Journal of Heat Transfer. 
Qiu, T. Q. & Tien, C. L. (1992). Vol. 196, 41-49. 
Renganathan, K. (1990). “Correlation of Heat Transfer with Pressure Fluctuations”, Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Morgantown, WV: West Virginia University. 
Sharma, K. R. (2005). Damped Wave Transport and Relaxation, Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
Elsevier. 
Sharma, K. R. (2006). “Errors in Gel Acrylamide Electrophoresis Due to Effect of Charge”, 
March Atlanta, GA: 231st ACS National Meeting. 
Sharma, K. R. (2009). Bioinformatics: Sequence Alignment and Markov Models, New York: 
McGraw Hill Professional. 
Sharma, K. R. (April, 2006). “Finite Speed Diffusion and Delivery of Drugs and Response to 
Pulse Decay”, Easton, PA: 32nd Northeast Bioengineering Conference. 
Sharma, K. R. (February 2006). “A Fourth Mode of Heat Transfer called Damped Wave 
Conduction”, Santiniketan, India: 42nd Annual Convention of Chemists. 
Sharma, K. R. (March, 2003). “Storage Coefficient of Substrate in a 2 GHz Microprocessor”, 
New Orleans, LA: 225th ACS National Meeting, 
Sharma, K. R. (March/April 2003). “Critical Radii Neither Greater than the Shape Limit nor 
Less than Cycling Limit”, New Orleans, LA: AIChE Spring National Meeting. 
Shuler, M. L. & Kargi, F. (2002). Bioprocess Engineering Basic Concepts, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Taitel, Y. (1972). Vol. 15, 2, 369-371, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer. 
Tzou, D. Y. (1996). Macro to Microscale Heat Transfer: The Lagging Behavior, New York, 
CRC Press. 
Varma, A. & Morbidelli, M. (1997). Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering, 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Vernotte, P. (1958). Paris, Vol. 246, 22, 3154-3155, C. R. Hebd. Seanc. Acad. Sci  
Wayne Bequette, B. (2003). Process Control: Modeling, Design and Simulation. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Xie, Y. S., Yuan, Y. X. & Zhang, X. B. (2006). Vol. 27, 24-28, Bimggmg Xuebao/Acta 
Aramamentarii. 
Zanchini, E. (1999). Vol. 60, 2, 991-997, Phys. Review B – Condensed Matter and Material 
Physics. 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
311 
4.8. EXERCISES 
 
1. CSTR with Recycle 
 
Consider the operation of a CSTR with provisions for recycle as shown in Figure 
4.26. 
 
Obtain the model equations for transient conversion as a function of dimensionless 
time. The r CSTR is operated at constant volume V. The reaction performed in the 
CSTR obeys the first order reaction kinetics. Part of the effluent (v-w) from the 
CSTR is recycled back to the feed as shown in Figure 4.26. The feed is v moles/liter 
at a initial concentration of reactant A at CA0.. The reaction is a first order reaction;. 
 
 
rA = 
1
A
A
dC
k C
dt
  
(4.234) 
 
 
Where k1 is the first order rate constant with units of hr-1 and CA is the concentration 
of reactant A (mol.lit-1). The residence time in the CSTR be given by  (hr) and 
recycle ratio R is given by; 
 
 
v
w
R
w
 
(4.235) 
 
 
 
Show that the governing equation for conversion of A, 
0
0
A
A
A
A
C
C
X
C
 can be 
expressed as a function of the (Da = k1) and recycle ratio, R as follows; 
 
 
(
)
1
1
1
A
A
A
A
dX
R
X
X
Da
X
R
d
 
(4.236) 
 
 
1
1
1
A
A
dX
R
Da
X
Da
R
R
d
 
(4.238) 
 
 
Show that Eq. (4.238) can be integrated by separation of variables and the solution 
can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
(
1)
Da
R
A
R Da
Da
X
e
Da R
 
(4.239) 
 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
312 
 
Figure 4.26. Dynamics of CSTR with Recycle. 
 
What happens when the reflux ratio R  0, and R ,  
2.0. Reversible Reaction Performed in a CSTR 
 
Consider a CSTR with a single reversible reaction.  
 
 
f
b
k
k
A
P  
(4.240) 
 
The reaction rate of A is first order in the forward and reverse direction and is given 
by; 
 
 
0
0
(
)
A
f
A
b
P
P
A
A
A
f
b
A
b
A
dC
k C
k C
dt
C
C
C
dC
k
k
C
k C
dt
 
(4.241) 
 
 
 
Where kf, and kb are the forward and reverse reaction rate constants with units of 
(sec-1). Develop the model equation for conversion of reactant A. Use the 
dimensionless group of Damkohler number and conversion X if necessary. Obtain 
the model solution for the dynamics of reactant A. 
3.0. Toricelli’s Theorem Applied to Drainage from a Storage Tank 
 
 
The inlet velocity of the fluid to a storage tank as shown in Figure 4.27 is v1 (m3.s-1). 
v1 can be given by 1v
g h , where h is the instantaneous height of the fluid in the 
tank. The height of the tank, h(t) varies with time, t. (a) Develop an mathematical 
expression for the efflux velocity v2. (b) Calculate the drainage time of the tank in 
Figure 4.27. At time t = 0, assume that the initial height of the fluid in tank is H0. 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
313 
Aorifice is the cross-sectional are of the outlet orifice and Atank is the cross-sectional 
area of the tank. Assume that the fluid is incompressible during flow.  
 
Figure 4.27. Drainage of Tank of Fluid. 
 
4.0. Zeroth Order Reaction in a CSTR. 
 
Consider a single reaction performed in a CSTR with a volume of the reactor V 
liters.  
 
 
A  P 
(4.242) 
 
 
The reaction rate is given by; 
 
 
0
A
dC
k
dt
 
(4.243) 
 
 
 
Where k0 is the zeroth order rate constant with units of (mol/(litsec)-1). 
 
Develop the model equation for conversion of reactant A as a function of 
dimensionless time. Assume that the flow is incompressible and the reactor is 
operated at constant volume throughout the reaction. Use the dimensionless group of 
Damkohler number if necessary and discuss the transient behavior of conversion 
from start-up of the reactor to the time it reaches steady state. What happens after 
steady state is reached ? 
5.0. Transient PFR with Zeroth Order Reaction in a PFR 
 
Consider a PFR, plug flow reactor as shown in Figure 4.13. The concentration varies 
along the length of the reactor. The performance of the reactor is expected to be 
better than that in a CSTR. Assume that the flow is incompressible and the velocity is 
in a state of “plug flow” i.e., velocity of the fluid across the cross-section of the tube 
is the same. Develop the model equations for the transient conversion of species A 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
314 
that obeys the zeroth order kinetics. As the flow is incompressible the velocity of the 
fluid is same throughout the length of the reactor and is v (m3.s-1). Let z be the 
distance from the entrance of the reactor. Show that the governing equation can be 
given by; 
 
 
0
A
A
C
C
v
k
A
z
t
  
(4.244) 
 
 
Where k0 is the zeroth order rate constant with units of (mol/(litsec)-1). The zeroth 
order reaction rate for species A can be written as follows; 
 
 
0
A
dC
k
dt
 
(4.245) 
 
 
Discuss the transient behavior of conversion from start-up of the reactor to the time it 
reaches steady state. What happens after steady state is reached ? The dimensionless 
variables of conversion, XA, dimensionless time,  and Damkohler number Da are 
defined as follows; 
 
 
0
;
;
Ai
A
A
Ai
Ai
C
C
t
X
C
k
z
Z
Da
l
C
 
(4.246) 
 
 
Show that the governing equation for concentration of species A becomes; 
 
 
A
A
X
X
Da
Z
 
(4.247) 
 
 
 
Differentiating the above equation with respect to Z and with respect to  separately 
and subtracting one from the other the governing equation can be seen to take the 
form of the wave equation;  
 
 
2
2
2
2
A
A
X
X
Z
 
(4.248) 
 
6.0. Hydrolysis of Ethylene Oxide in Two CSTRs in Series 
 
Consider performing the hydrolysis of ethylene oxide in Example 4.1 in two CSTRs 
in series as shown in Figure 4.28. 
 
Assume incompressible flow and first order reaction reaction for species A, i.e., 
ethylene oxide. Develop the model equations that can be used to describe transient 
dynamics of hydrolysis of ethylene oxide in Example 4.1 in two CSTRs in series as 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
315 
shown in Figure 4.28. The volumes of the two reactors are V1 and V2 respectively. 
The volumes of the two reactors may be assumed to be a constant during the course 
of the reaction. Show that the transfer functions of conversion of species A (ethylene 
oxide) at the outlet of CSTR 2 can be given by; 
 
 
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
1
1 1
1
p
Da
Da
g
s
s
Da
Da
s
Da
s
 
(4.249) 
 
 
Where Da1 = (k1); Da2 = (k2); 1 is the residence time in CSTR 1 and 2 is the 
residence time in CSTR 2. Sketch the conversion of species A from CSTR 1 and 
CSTR 2 as a function of time. From the final value theorem show that at steady state 
the conversion from the exit of CSTR 2 would be; 
 
 
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
A s
Da
Da
X
Da
Da
 
(4.250) 
 
7.0. Underdamped Oscillatory Response in Two CSTRs in Series. 
 
For a step input of 
1
r s
s  to the system in exercise 6.0 show that the output 
transfer function is given by; 
 
 
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
A
Da
Da
X
s
s
Da
s
s
s
s
Da
Da
Da
 (4.251) 
 
 
 
Figure 4.28. Transient Dynamics during Hydrolysis of Ethylene Oxide in Two CSTRS in Series. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
316 
 
Show that the first term in the RHS, right hand side of Eq. (4.194) can be seen to be 
of the form of prototypical second order process of the form; 
 
 
2
2
( )
2
1
p
p
p
k
u
y s
s
s
s
 
(4.252) 
 
 
 
Show that the gain, kp, time constant, p and damping coefficient,  of the 
prototypical second order process can be seen to be; 
 
 
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
p
p
Da
k
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
 
(4.253) 
 
 
Can the damping coefficient  < 1 ? What are the ramifications of this ? 
8.0. Show that the space equation for the two conversions, XA1, XA2 from the two CSTRs 
in Exercise 16.0 can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
0
1
A
A
Da
X
Da
d
X
Da
dt
Da
 
(4.254) 
 
 
Show that the eigenvalues are –(1+Da1) and 
1
2
2
Da
. Confirm that negative 
eigenvalues indicate a stable system for any value of the Damkohler number and 
residence times in the reactors. 
9.0. Sutro Weir 
 
Consider the tank that is filled and depleted at different rates. The height in the tank 
varies with time and is given by the function h(t). A mass balance on the control 
volume of the fluid in the tank can be written as follows; 
 
 
0
i
dh
v t
v
t
A dt  
(4.255) 
 
 
Where A is the cross-section area of the tank. Incompressible flow is assumed. The 
discharge rate v0(t) in lit.sec-1 can be written in terms of the height in the tank by 
invoking the linear flow-head relation as found in Sutro weir. This relation is; 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
317 
 
Figure 4.29. Level in Tank. 
 
 
0
( )
h t
v
t
R  
(4.256) 
 
 
Where R is the resistance to flow. 
 
Plugging. Eq. (4.256) in Eq. (4.255) and obtaining the Laplace transfer function and 
assuming that the initial height in the tank is zero show that the transfer function can 
be given by; 
 
 
1
i
h s
R
v s
sRA
 
(4.257) 
 
10.0. Non-Interacting Tanks. 
 
Consider two tanks in series as shown in Figure 4.30. These can be considered to be 
“non-interacting”. The discharge from the first tank is through the atmosphere to the 
second tank. The height in the first tank does not depend on the happenings in the 
second tank. From mass balance show that the governing equations for h1(t) and h2(t) 
can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
i
h
dh
v t
A
R
dt
h
h
dh
A
R
R
dt
 
(4.258) 
 
 
Where A1 and A2 are the cross-sectional areas of the two tanks in Figure 4.30. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
318 
 
Figure 4.30. Two Non-Interacting Tanks. 
 
 
Show that the transfer function can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1 1
1
1
i
h
s
R
v s
sA R
sA R
 
(4.259) 
 
 
 
Further consider a step change of 
1
( )
r s
s . Confirm that for any positive value of 
resistances and cross-sectional areas the output response is monotonically stable. 
11.0. Two Interacting Tanks 
 
Consider two tanks in series as shown in Figure 4.31. These can be considered to be 
“interacting”. The discharge from the first tank feeds directly into the second tank. 
The height in the first tank does depend on the happenings in the second tank. From 
mass balance show that the governing equations for h1(t) and h2(t) can be written as 
follows; 
 
 
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
2
i
h
h
dh
v t
A
R
R
dt
h
h
dh
A
R
R
dt
 
(4.260) 
 
 
Where A1 and A2 are the cross-sectional areas of the two tanks in Figure 4.31. 
 
Show that the transfer function for the heights in the tanks, h1(s) and h2(s) can be 
written as follows; 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
319 
 
Figure 4.31. Two Interacting Tanks. 
 
 
 
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1 1
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
i
R sA R
h s
v s
A A R R
A R
A R
s
s
R
R
 
(4.261) 
 
 
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
h
s
R
h s
R
sA R
 
(4.262) 
 
12.0. Underdamped Oscillatory System 
 
Consider a step change to the height in tank 1 in Figure 4.31 Confirm that the 
transfer function for level in tank 1, h1(s) conforms to a prototypical second order 
system. Under what conditions of the cross-sectional areas of the tanks and the 
resistances to flow in the two tanks would there be a underdamped oscillatory 
response ? Where does the fluid come from for causing the “overshoot “ ? 
13.0. Average Concentration of Oxygen in Islets of Langerhans during Parabolic  
 
Fick Diffusion 
 
Oxygen availability becomes limited in some regions of the tissue [55]. An oxygen 
reaction and diffusion model was developed by Colton [56]. The transient diffusion 
of oxygen in blood plasma and tissue that undergoes simultaneous reaction by 
Michaelis-Menten kinetics is modeled. At the asymptotic limit of high reactant 
concentration the reaction rate becomes zero order. The model solution consists of a 
steady state and transient part. This removes the heterogeneity in the governing 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
320 
equation. The governing equation for oxygen diffusion and reaction in Cartesian 
coordinates in one dimension accounting for Fick‟s diffusion can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
O
O
E
O
T
M
O
C
C
kC
C
D
t
C
C
z
 
(4.263) 
 
 
 
Where DT is the diffusion coefficient in the tissue, CE0 is the total enzyme or 
complexation species concentration and CM is the Michaelis constant and k is the rate 
constant. The oxygen consumption rate is assumed to obey the Michaelis-Menten 
kinetics. The governing equation describes the interplay of transient diffusion and 
metabolic consumption of oxygen in the tissue. The concentration of oxygen, 
2
O
C
can be expressed in terms of its partial pressure,
2
O
p
. This is obtained by using the 
Bunsen solubility coefficient, t such that; 
 
 
2
2
O
t
O
C
p
  
(4.264) 
 
 
Substituting Eq. (4.206) in Eq. (5.195), Eq. (4.205) becomes; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
0
2
'
O
O
E
O
t
t
T
M
O
p
p
kC
p
D
t
z
C
p
 
(4.265) 
 
 
 
The product tDT can be seen to the product of solubility and diffusivity and hence is 
the permeability of oxygen in the tissue. The Michaelis constant CM, is also 
modified, C‟M expressed in units of mm Hg. The initial condition can be written as; 
 
 
2
20
O
O
p
p
, t = 0 
(4.266) 
 
 
 
 
 
From symmetry at the center of the slab; 
 
 
2
0
O
p
z
 
(4.267) 
 
 
 
At the surface,(z=a) the oxygen diffusive transport from within the tissue must be 
equal to the oxygen transport by convection across the boundary layer surrounding 
each tissue; 
 
 
2
2
2
(
(
))
m
O
i
i
m
O
O
i
t
T
z a
p
J
k
p
p
R
D
z
 
(4.268) 
 
 
 
An average partial pressure of oxygen in the tissue or slab can be defined as; 
 

Continuous Process Dynamics 
 
 
321 
 
2
2
1
2
a
O
O
a
p
p
dz
a
 
(4.269) 
 
 
 
 
Integrating Eq. (4.265) with respect to z between the finite limits of –a and +a and 
substituting Eq. (4.269) in the resulting equation; 
 
 
2
2
2
0
m
O
t
i
t
O
O
E
p
k
p
p
kC
t
 
(4.270) 
 
 
Eq. (3.112) is valid at the asymptotic limit of high oxygen concentration. 
 
Obtain the transient average partial pressure of oxygen in the finite slab as a function 
of time. Obtain the transient average concentration for oxygen in a finite slab at the 
asymptotic limit of low oxygen concentration. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
PROPORTIONAL, PROPORTIONAL INTEGRAL, 
PROPORTIONAL DERIVATIVE FEEDBACK CONTROL  
 
 
5.1. CONTROL SYSTEMS 
 
The field of controls is an interdisciplinary one. It is a confluence of mathematics and 
engineering. Electrical, mechanical, chemical and computer are branches of engineering that 
have courses where students learn control theory. Dynamics of a system is of primary 
importance in this field. It all began when the scholar J. C. Maxwell investigated the 
dynamics of the centrifugal governor in an 18th century Boulton and Watt engine. He looked 
at self-oscillations and how the lags in the system results in overcompensation that leads to an 
unstable system. The conditions when a system can be expected to undergo underdamped 
oscillations was discussed in Chapter 4.0. Mathematical modeling of the process is an 
important task in the analysis and design of control systems. When the dynamics of the 
system modeled can be converted to Laplace domain they can also be represented in block 
diagram format. The control system may be linear or non-linear. Analysis of non-linear 
systems need numerical solutions. Closed form analytical solutions may be obtained for linear 
systems. Sometimes when multiplicity in solution is seen, another criterion is needed to select 
the correct solution from the results obtained.  
Different components such as mechanical, thermal, fluid, chemical/concentration of 
reacting species, pneumatic and electrical, sensors, robotic manipulators, actuators, and 
computers can be part of a control system. The governing equations for these systems are 
represented by differential equations, originating from Newton‟s second law of motion of 
particle, Kirchoff‟s law of circuits. The results obtained from these models are only good for 
the assumptions made in deriving the model. A number of problems can be represented by 
ordinary differential equations.  
 
 
5.1.1. On-Off Control 
 
On-off controllers are used in centralized heating and air conditioning in modern homes, 
control of level in a tank used as a process vessel, remote control of Christmas tree lighting 
etc. For example, consider a CHP, combined heat and power system. This technology is also 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
324 
called as cogeneration. A gas turbine is used to drive an electrical generator and the heat from 
the exhaust of the turbine is used to produce thermal energy in the form of steam, hot water or 
hot air. In Figure 5.1 is shown an on-off control strategy for a typical CHP system,[Mackay, 
2003]. Gas turbine ratings can vary between 500 kw to 30 kw in cases of micro turbines.  
Control system is needed to safeguard the system from spikes in loads as various 
appliances are used. Comfort heating and domestic water heating units cycle ON and OFF. 
The CHP system is operated using a sub atmospheric Brayton cycle. A heating system is 
designed to operate in cyclical fashion. For example, a commercial water heater or a furnace 
operates in the full ON or full OFF mode. When heating system is required and turned ON the 
system starts and provides the heat using the rejected heat from the gas turbine. Electricity is 
produced in parallel. When the TT, temperature transmitter in Figure 5.1 detects a 
temperature when compared with the set point temperature Tsp calls for heating, a signal is 
sent to the ON/OFF fuel valve enabling it but not opening it. In a similar manner the PT, 
pressure transmitter detects the pressure and this value is compared with the set point 
pressure, Psp in the PC, pressure controller. A signal is sent to the ON/OFF fuel valve. Thus 
On-Off controller is used to shut down the system when no more heat is required. This can be 
found when Tm > Tsp, i.e., when the measured temperature exceeds the set point temperature 
by a threshold amount, . 
 
 
5.2. PROPORTIONAL CONTROL 
 
A control action that is taken that is proportional to the error detected is called as 
Proportional Control. The equations that can be written to capture such control actions are as 
follows; 
 
 
Figure 5.1. On-off Control of Gas Turbine Operated Power Plant. 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
325 
 
Pv1 = b1 + kc1(Tsp – Tm) 
(5.1) 
 
 
Pv2 = b2 + kc2(Psp – Pm) 
(5.2) 
 
Where the error in temperature and pressure can be written as follows; 
 
 
e1 = Tap - Tm 
(5.3) 
 
 
e2 = Psp - Pm 
(5.4) 
 
b1 and b2 in Eq. (5.1) and Eq. (5.2) are the bias terms. At steady state when the error e1(t) and 
e2(t) becomes zero the bias terms are equal to the steady state temperature Tss and steady state 
pressure, Pss. kc1 and kc2 are the proportional gain of the temperature controller and pressure 
controller respectively. 
 
 
5.3. CONTROL BLOCK DIAGRAMS 
 
A controller transfer function can be developed for every control action taken. Consider, 
for example the proportional control action illustrated in section 5.2. The proportional control 
law for temperature and pressure can be written by substituting the steady state pressure and 
steady state temperature in the bias terms in Eqs. (5,1. 5.2) as follows; 
 
 
Pv1 - Tss = kc1(Tsp – Tm) 
(5.5) 
 
 
Pv2 -Pss = kc2(Psp – Pm) 
(5.6) 
 
The errors e1(t) and e2(t) can be written as; 
 
 
e1(t) = Tap - Tm(t) 
(5.7) 
 
 
e2(t) = Psp - Pm(t) 
(5.8) 
 
The controller outputs can be written as c1(s) and c2(s) in the Laplace domain as follows; 
 
 
c1(s) = kc1 e1(s) = gc1(s)e1(s) 
(5.9) 
 
 
c2(s) = kc2 e2(s) = gc2(s)e2(s) 
(5.10) 
 
Eq. (5.5) and Eq. (5.6) is the transfer function form for a proportional only controller. 
This can be shown as a block diagram as shown in Figure 5-2. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
326 
 
Figure 5.2. Block Diagram Relation for Transfer Function for Temperature Controller and Pressure 
Controller as Shown in Figure 5.1 for CHP Systems. 
 
In a similar manner block diagram relation for valve and the process system under 
consideration can be constructed. In addition a transfer function may be written for 
disturbance or load and measurement or sensor. A control block diagram for the temperature 
and pressure control as shown in Figure 5.1 for a CHP, combined heating and power system 
can be constructed. This is shown in Figure 5.3. 
 
 
Figure 5.3. Control Block Diagram for Pressure, Temperature Control for CHP System. 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
327 
The pressure and temperature in the gas in the compressor are measured using 
temperature and pressure sensors. The sensor location is such the combined effect of process 
and the load are captured in the measurement. The error signal is generated in the controller 
by comparisons with the set point temperature, Tsp and set point pressure. The control action 
taken is proportional to the error or on-off as the case may be. In any case the control transfer 
function is shown as a block in Figure 5.3. The valve transfer function also is an important 
link to the process. The process transfer function can also be shown in the box. It can be a 
prototypical first order or second order process as discussed in the previous chapter. This kind 
of control action is called as feedback control. The temperature and pressure measurements 
were used in the control action taken. 
 
Gains can be defined as the ratio of steady state change in output in response to a steady 
state change in input variable. This can be defined for the valve, process, controller etc. 
Valve Gain:Valve gain may be defined as; 
 
 
1
v
v
v
k
P  
(5.11) 
 
Where v is the change in flow rate and Pv1 is the change in valve top pressure. An 
example of on-off control action using valve can be seen in end of chapter exercise 2.0. The 
gain is said to be positive when the flow rate increases with increase in the valve top pressure. 
The gain is said to be negative when the flow rate decreases with increase in valve top 
pressure.  
Process Gain: Process gain may be defined as; 
 
 
1
1
p
v
V
k
P  
(5.12) 
 
For example in exercise 2.0 at the end of chapter the process gain is the change in the 
volume of the CSTR in response to a change in valve top pressure. For a positive gain the 
volume of the reactor contents increases and for a negative gain the volume of the reactor 
contents decreases when the valve top pressure is increased. The controller gain is kc as 
defined in Eq. (5.5) and Eq. (5.6). 
 
 
5.4. OFFSET USING PROPORTIONAL ONLY CONTROLLERS 
 
Consider a simplified block flow diagram of a proportional controller for a prototypical 
first order process. Although Figure 5.4 is for PI controller it can be used for illustration of 
proportional controller only as well.  
 
 
( )
1
( )
p
p
p
c
c
k
g
s
s
g
s
k
 
(5.13) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
328 
 
r(s) = gCL(s) y(s) 
(5.14) 
 
A closed loop transfer function gCL(s) is defined as shown in Eq. (5.10). This can be seen 
from simplification of the transfer functions in the block diagram in Figure 5.4 to be; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
CL
p
c
g
s g
s
g
s
g
s g
s  
(5.15) 
 
Substituting Eq. (5.9) in Eq. (5.11); 
 
 
1
( )
1
1
1
1
c
p
p
CL
CL
c
p
CL
c
p
p
k k
s
k
g
s
k k
s
k k
s
 
(5.16) 
 
Where, 
1
1
c
p
CL
c
p
p
CL
c
p
k k
k
k k
k k
 
(5.17) 
 
The closed loop transfer function gCL(s) conforms to the prototypical first order process. 
Stability considerations require that; 
 
 
CL > 0 
(5.18) 
 
 
kckp > -1 
(5.19) 
 
The time output response to a step change in input with magnitude Q can be shown to be; 
 
 
( )
1
CL
t
CL
y t
Qk
e
 
(5.20) 
 
At steady state or after infinite time, 
 
 
y(t) = QkCL 
(5.21) 
 
Only for values of kCL = 1 there is no offset. For other values of kCL 1, an off-set will be 
realized after enough time has elapsed since the step change was initiated. The process output 
will not be equal exactly to the set point. The final value theorem can be used to estimate 
the offset when P only control is used. 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
329 
 
Offset = 
0
0
0
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ) 1
( )
1
1
1
1
t
s
s
CL
CL
CL
s
CL
c
p
Lt e t
Lt se s
Lt s r s
y s
k
Q
Lt sr s
g
s
Q
Q
k
s
k k
 
(5.22) 
 
 
5.5. PROPORTIONAL-INTEGRAL, PI CONTROL 
 
It can be seen from the discussion in sections 5.3-5.5 the use of P only control can lead to 
an off-set between the desired set point and actual output. The control action can be modified 
by inclusion of a component that is proportional to the integral of the error. This can be in 
addition to the proportional to the error component used in P only control. This kind of 
control is called proportional-integral or PI control. The process history is taken into account. 
In this method the rectification takes place until the offset vanishes. Say there is an offset for 
a said period of time. The integral of the error would be finite. Control action is proportional 
to the integral of the error. This would reduce the error term. This progressively down can 
lead to zero error. The two tuning parameters are kc and kI. The PI control action law can be 
written as follows; 
 
 
0
( )
( )
t
c
I
u t
k e t
k
e
d
 
(5.23) 
 
 
Eq. (5.19) can also be written as; 
 
 
0
1
( )
{ ( )
}
t
c
I
u t
k e t
e
d
 
(5.24) 
 
 
I is the integral time and is given by kc/kI, the ratio of the tuning parameters. Obtaining 
the Laplace transform of Eq. (5.20); 
 
 
1
( )
( )
{ ( )
}
( )
I
c
c
I
I
s
e s
u s
k e s
k e s
s
s
 
(5.25) 
 
 
Figure 5.4. Simplified Control Block Diagram for PI Controller for Prototypical First Order Process. 
The control transfer function for PI control is thus given by gc(s) where u(s) = gc(s)e(s). 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
330 
 
 
1
( )
I
c
c
I
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.26) 
 
Example 5.1. PI Control Action for Prototypical First Order Process 
Consider any prototypical first order process. Consider a PI controller used to control this 
process. Let the process gains, kp = kc =1. What would be the time response of the process 
output variable y(t) to a step change in the set point, r(s) = 1/s. The time constant of the 
controller, I becomes 1% of the time constant of the process, p. The simplified control block 
diagram is given below. Disturbances are neglected and valve and measurement dynamics are 
lumped into the process transfer function. Develop the expression for the output variable y(s) 
in the Laplace domain and time domain y(t). Sketch the response y(t) as a function of time. 
The transfer functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) and that for PI control, gc(s) 
can be seen to be; 
 
 
( )
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.27) 
 
 
1
( )
1
1
1
( )
1
( )
p
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
r s
s
 
(5.28) 
 
 
y(s) = gp(s) u(s) = gp(s) gc (s) e(s) = gp(s) gc (s)(r(s) – y(s)) 
(5.29) 
 
 
1
1
( )
1
1 ( )
I
I
I
I
s
y s
s
s
s
s  
(5.30) 
 
 
2
1
1
( )
( )
2
1
I
p
I
I
s
y s
s
s
s
 
2
2
0.01
1
1
( )
( )
0.01
0.02
1
p
p
p
s
y s
s
s
s
 
(5.31) 
 
 
1
1
1
2 2
0.01
1
1
0.01
0.01
0.02
1
p
p
p
p
L
L
L
As
B
CS
D
s
s
 
(5.32) 
 
 
Where (As+B)(Cs+D) = 0.01p
2s2 + 0.02sp + 1 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
331 
Eq. (5.12) in the time domain can be seen to be; 
 
 
0.01
Bt
Dt
A
C
p
e
e
A
B
 
(5.33) 
 
 
2
1
2 2
2
2
2
1
1
1
sin
2
1
1
1
2
1
tan
t
e
L
t
s
s
s
 
(5.34) 
 
y(t) is the sum of Eq. (5.13) and Eq. (5.14). It can be seen from Figure 4.5 that y(t) can 
undergo a overshoot. This would happen when the damping factor,  < 1.0. The system 
described by Eq. (5.11) can be seen to be an underdamped system. The damping factor,  = 
0.1 which is less than 1.0. It is not clear as to what is causing the overshoot from the control 
action of the process. Mathematically the control transfer function and process combine in a 
form where an underdamped system can occur. Figure 5.4a is an example of a simplified 
closed loop of a controller and process. A closed-loop transfer function can be defined as 
follows; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
( ) ( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
CL
p
c
g
s g
s
y s
g
s r s
g
s g
s  
 
The denominator in Eq. (5.15) is called the characteristic equation. For stability, 
gp(s)gc(s) >>-1. The open loop configuration is shown in Figure 5.4. 
The denominator in Eq. (5.15) is called the characteristic equation. For stability, 
gp(s)gc(s) >> -1.  
The denominator in Eq. (5.15) is called as the characteristic equation. For stability, 
gp(s)gc(s) >>-1. The open loop configuration is shown in Figure 5.4a. 
 
 
Figure 5.5. Open Loop Configurations of Controller and Process. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
332 
Example 5.2. Closed Loop Transfer Function 
Derive the closed-loop transfer function between y(s) and l(s) and r(s)for the following 
control block diagram. This is for a feed forward/feedback controller. 
 
 
y(s) = X(s) + Z(s) 
(5.36) 
 
 
Z(s) = GL(s) L(s) 
(5.37) 
 
 
X(s) = Gp(s) u(s) 
(5.38) 
 
 
u(s) = v(s) + w(s) 
(5.39) 
 
 
V(s) = Gc(s) e(s) 
(5.40..).. 
 
 
w(s) = Gf(s) L(s) 
(5.41) 
 
 
r(s)- ym(s) = e(s) 
(5.42) 
 
 
y(s) = Gp(s) {Gc(s){r(s) – ym(s)}+ Gf(s) L(s)} +GL(s)L(s) 
(5.43) 
 
 
Now, ym(s) = Gm(s) y(s) 
(5.44) 
 
 
( )
( ) ( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
( )
p
c
f
p
L
p
c
m
G
s G s r s
L s G
s G
s
G
s
y s
G
s G s G
s
 
(5.45) 
 
Example 5.3. PI Control of Voltage Supplied to Automatic Washing Machine 
The operation of an automatic washing machine comprises of the following Steps; (i) 
wash step; (ii) rinse step and; (iii) dehydration step. A brushless DC motor drives an agitator 
and rotating tub during the wash step. During the rinse step only the rotating tub is used. 
Voltage is applied to the motor and controls the torque on the motor. The model equations 
that relate torque to agitator RPM are as follows; 
 
 
1
m
m
m
m
L
m
m
d
B
dt
J
J
 
(5.46) 
 
m is the rotor speed and m is the applied torque to the agitator. Both rotor speed and 
applied torque vary with time. Although the model equation predicts the relation between the 
rotor speeds with the applied torque, there is no model available for applied voltage on the 
motor and the applied torque. The controller will have to increase the voltage or decrease the 
voltage, check the angular speed against set point sp and adjust the voltage again till that set 
point angular speed is attained. Use a PI controller and develop a block diagram for the 
voltage control of the automatic washing machine. Noise and vibration need be minimized. 
Comment on the closed-loop stability transfer function, gCL(s). 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
333 
 
Figure 5.5a. Control Block Diagram of Feedback/Feed forward Control. 
 
 
Figure 5.6. Block Diagram for PI Control of Automatic Washing Machine. 
 
Toshiba washing machine [2] comprises of an electric motor where the torque needed for 
wash, rinse and dehydration steps are generated. It also contains a current detector that 
measures current flowing into the motor. A torque controller is used to optimize the torque 
developed for each of the wash, rinse and dehydration steps. The current measurement is used 
as feedback prior to control action being taken. 
Typical automatic washing machines comprise of a DC motor that is used to drive an 
agitator and a rotating tub in the wash step and only the rotating tub in the rinse step. A third 
dehydration step is also completed. According to the driving condition of the motor the 
voltage applied to the motor is increased or decreased thereby controlling the torque 
developed by the motor in order to drive the agitator and tub. PI control action is on the 
rotational speed of the motor. The basis or target speed is a ref, angular speed or RPM at the 
dehydrating step. A measured speed  can be acquired during the operation of the machine.  
One of the problems encountered during the operation of such washing machines is as 
follows. A rotational speed of the motor is proportional to the torque developed. The 
developed torque, on the other hand, is not proportional to the voltage supplied. The control 
action is by increasing or decreasing the applied voltage. An unstable operation condition 
may be encountered. This would happen when the operating speed  and target angular speed  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
334 
ref will diverge and not be equal to each other. Further, a motor speed variation is increased 
in the wash operation from 0. – 150 RPM in about 200 milliseconds the PI control 
action.cannot be applied to the wash step.  
Motor torque control that is more precise is the goal of the Toshiba technology. Electric 
current measurements are used as feedback in the torque control. 
 
 
m
L
m
m
m
m
m
d
B
dt
J
J
  
(5.47) 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transform of Eq. (5.25); 
 
 
( )
0
L
m
m
m
m
m
m
s
B
s
s
s
s
J
J
 
(5.48) 
 
Or, 
( )
( )
m
L
m
m
m
s
s
s
s J s
B
 
(5.49) 
 
In Figure 5.6,  
( )
( )
m
L
p
m
m
s
s
g
s
s J s
B
 
(5.50) 
 
The control transfer function for PI Controller can be written as; 
 
 
1
( )
I
c
c
I
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.51) 
 
 
y(s) = gp(s) u(s) 
(5.52) 
 
 
y(s) = gp(s) gc(s) {r(s) – y(s)} 
(5.53) 
 
 
( )
( ) ( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
p
c
g
s g
s r s
y s
g
s g
s
 
(5.54) 
 
For closed loop stability, gp(s) gc(s) >> -1. i.e., 
 
 
2
( )
1
1
1
m
L
c
I
m
m
I
s
s
k
s
s
sJ
B
 
(5.55) 
 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
335 
5.6. CONDITIONS FOR UNDERDAMPED RESPONSE OF PI CONTROL  
OF PROTOTYPICAL FIRST ORDER PROCESS 
 
Consider a prototypical first order process. Consider PI control of a prototypical first 
order process. The block diagram in shown in Figure 5.4. The control transfer functions for 
the process and controller are as follows; 
 
 
( )
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.56) 
 
The closed loop transfer function, gCL(s) can be written as; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
CL
p
c
g
s g
s
g
s
g
s g
s  
(5.57) 
 
Consider a step change in the input r(s) = 1/s. The following is the analysis of the output 
response to a step change in input. 
 
 
y(s) = r(s)gCL(s) = 
1
1
1
1
1
1
c
p
I
I
p
c
p
I
I
p
k k
s
s
s
s
k k
s
s
s
 
(5.58) 
 
or,  
2
2
1
( )
1
1
1
p c
I
I
p
I
c
p
c
p
I
p
c
p
I
c
p
c
p
k k
y s
s
s
k k
k k
k k
s
s
s
k k
k k
 
(5.59) 
 
Comparison of the first term of RHS of Eq. (5.37) and the Laplace transfer function of 
prototypical second order process system as given by Eq. (5.59) in chapter 3.0 reveal that for 
certain conditions the system can become underdamped. This would happen when the 
damping ratio,  < 1. Thus, 
 
 
2
1
2
I
p
c
p
I
c
p
c
p
k k
k k
k k
 
(5.60) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
336 
 
1
2
c
p
I
p c
p
k k
k k
 
 
For damping factor,  < 1, 
 
 
1
1
2
c
p
I
p c
p
k k
k k
 
(5.61) 
 
Or,  
2
4
1
p c
p
I
c
p
k k
k k
 
(5.62) 
 
Thus for small values of integral time, I, as given by Eq. (5.62) the closed loop system of 
PI control and prototypical first order process would become underdamped! 
 
 
5.7. PD, PROPORTIONAL DERIVATIVE CONTROL AND PID, 
PROPORTIONAL INTEGRAL DERIVATIVE CONTROL 
 
5.7.1. Development of Control Action Law 
 
The P, proportional only control action can be modified by added a component to the 
control action that is proportional to the derivative of the error; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
c
D
de t
u t
k e t
k
dt
 
(5.63) 
 
The control action law depicted in Eq. (5.41) is called as PD, proportional derivative 
control. It can be used in applications where it is important to preserve the curvature of the 
process variable with respect to time. For example a linear increasing function or constant 
function cannot have a steep curvature. Control action taken that is proportional to the 
derivative of the error can have a smoothing effect on the output response. The control 
transfer function for Eq. (5.41) can be written as; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
0
( )
( )
1
c
D
c
D
u s
k e s
sk e s
u s
e s k
s
 
(5.64) 
 
Where, D is the time constant of the derivative control.  
 
 
D
D
c
k
k
 
(5.65) 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
337 
The P, proportional only control can be modified by addition two components, one 
proportional to the derivative of the error and the other proportional to the integral of the 
error. 
 
 
0
( )
( )
( )
t
c
I
D
de t
u t
k e t
k
e
d
k
dt
 
(5.66) 
 
The control action law depicted in Eq. (5.44) is called PID control. Ideal PID control is 
not physically realizable. No instrument can take a perfect derivative. Real PID control can be 
affected after suitable modification of the control transfer function. The control transfer 
function for ideal PID control can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
1
( )
I
D
I
c
I
s
s
u s
k
s
 
(5.67) 
 
Example 5.4. PI Control during Desalination of Seawater using Nanoporous Carbon 
Consider sea water pumped across a packed bed of graphene nanoplatelets, GNP with 
molecular sieve diameter ~ 5A. Assume a voidage of 0.75 and material density of carbon of 
1.8 gm/cc. The interfacial area of ~ 5 million m2/gm. The inlet concentration of sea water can 
be taken as 3.6% by weight. Potable drinking water is filtered from the column at 1 m/s. The 
packed bed reached saturation after it has passed through 20 cm of the bed. The concentration 
of NaCl in potable water that is permitted is 30 ppm. For PI control of the packed bed 
operation develop the close loop transfer function. Under what conditions would there be 
instability; 
The mass balance of salt in the liquid phase pumped across the packed column at 
transient state can be written as; 
 
 
(Flow in) - (Flow out) - (Amount Filtered) = (Accumulation) 
 
Let L = length of the packed bed column (m),  
A – cross-sectional area of the packed bed (m2)  
a-Interfacial area for mass transfer between graphene nanoplatelets, NGP and water 
m – molar density (mol/m3)  
v – superficial velocity of the fluid (m/s)  
xA – weight fraction of salt in water 
 
 
mvA(xA/z) + kx(xA – 0)(a/A) = Am(xA/t) 
 
Let Z = z/L;  = vt/L; XA = xA/xA*; 
Dam = (kxLa)/(vAm), Damkohler number (mass transfer) 
xA* = saturation concentration of salt in the packed bed column 
The fluid can be assumed to be incompressible and constant density. 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
338 
The mass balance equation in transient state can be seen to become; 
 
 
(XA/Z) – DamXA = (XA/) 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transforms and for cases where (XA/Z = ) Eq. () can be seen to 
become; 
 
 
XA(s + Dam) = /s or  
 
XA = /s/(s+Dam) 
 
Above Eq. can be seen to be of the form 
 
 
XA(s) = u(s) gp(s) 
 
Thus, u(s) = /s and gp(s) = 1/(s+Dam) 
The closed loop transfer function for the PI control of a packed bed adsorption process 
for desalination of sea water using NGP can be found from the closed loop transfer relation; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
CL
p
c
g
s g
s
g
s
g
s g
s  
 
The weight fraction of salt in water can be measured and used for control purposes in the 
effluent water.  
 
Example 5.5. PI Control during Hydrolysis of Ethylene Glycol 
Consider PI control for hydrolysis of ethylene oxide in a CSTR as described in worked 
example 4-1. Develop the closed loop transfer function. Under what conditions would there 
be instability? Ethylene glycol is prepared in a CSTR by hydrolysis of ethylene oxide. The 
reaction can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
4
2
2
4
2
C H O
H O
C H
OH
 
(5.68) 
 
The CSTR is assumed to be operated at constant volume and constant temperature and 
with excess water. A model was developed to find the concentration of each species as a 
function of time in Example 4-1. 
From Eq. (4.6) 
 
 
(1
)
(1
)
A
A
A
A
A
dX
X
Da
X
d
dX
Da
X
Da
d
 
(5.69) 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
339 
 
Figure 5.7. PI Control during Hydrolysis of Ethylene Oxide in a CSTR. 
 
Obtaining Laplace transform of Eq. (5.47); 
 
 
1
( )
1
A
Da
X
s
Da s s  
(5.70.) 
 
Eq. (5.52) can be seen to be of the form; 
 
 
y(s) = u(s).gp(s) 
(5.71) 
 
where, u(s) = 1/s and gp(s) = (Da/(1+Da +s)). For PI conrol gc(s) is given by Eq. (5.26). The 
closed loop transfer function gCL(s) for PI control of hydrolysis of ethylene oxide to ethylene 
glycol can be written as follows; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
CL
p
c
g
s g
s
g
s
g
s g
s  
 
 
1
1
1
( )
( )
1
1
1
c
I
I
A
c
I
I
k Da
s
Da
s
s
y s
X
s
s
k Da
s
s
Da
s
 
(5.72) 
 
Eq. (5.50) can be seen to be; 
 
2
2
1
( )
1
1
1
(1
1
1
c
c
c
I
I
c
I
c
k
y s
s
Da
k
Da
k
s
s
k
s
s
k Da
k Da
k Da
k Da
 
(5.73) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
340 
The RHS, right hand side of Eq. (5.51) consists of two terms. The second term is the 
response to a step change of a prototypical second order system as given by Eq. () in chapter 
3.0. When the damping factor,  < 1 the system can become underdamped. This can be seen 
to happen when; 
 
 
2
2
4
1
1
c
I
c
k Da
k
Da
k
 
(5.74) 
 
The first term in RHS of Eq. (5.51) when inverted from the Laplace domain would 
contain two exponential in time terms; 
 
 
1
2
"
rt
r t
Ae
Be
  
(5.75) 
 
When the roots r1, r2 become complex the contribution to the output response can become 
sinuous! This happens when “b2 – 4ac” < 0 in the quadratic expression in the denominator of 
the first term in RHS of Eq. (5.51). This happens when; 
 
 
2
2
4
1
1
c
I
c
k Da
k
Da
k
 
(5.76) 
 
Eq. (5.76) is identical with Eq. (5.74)! 
 
Example 5.6. On the Use of PI Proportional Integral Control and Estimation of Static 
Formation Temperature in Oil Wells 
The importance of the use of initial condition was discussed in Chapter 4.0 (kindly see 
"sensitivity" of initial conditions to overshoot"). SFT, static formation temperature of oil 
wells is used during shut-in time process. Mathematical models can be developed in order to 
describe the processes involved during the well-bore formation system. The model equations 
are PDEs, partial differential equations that accounts for the heat transfer processes. Transient 
convective heat transfer due to circulation losses to the surrounding rocks of the well is an 
example of a process involved in well-bore formation system. A strategy of PI, proportional 
integral control can be applied in order to obtain the solution of an IHT, inverse heat transfer 
problem. This is used in the estimation of the SFT, static formation temperature of the oil 
well. The error between logged temperature and simulation temperature is the feed-back 
during shut-in time process. The SFT, static formation temperature, is unknown. This is the 
initial condition of the governing PDEs. Espinosa-Paredes et al. [2009] tested this method in 
two oil wells MB-3007 and MB-3009 in Gulf of Mexico. Only one temperature measurement 
for each fixed depth of estimate was needed. In the Fourier representation of transient 
temperature the initial accumulation in temperature condition is taken as zero. This can lead 
to overshoot that is more a mathematical artefact than a heat transfer event as discussed in 
Chapter 4.0. The damped wave heat conduction and relaxation equation can be used in the 
mathematical model. The IHT problem of using measured temperatures at a certain depth as a 
function of time in order to estimate the initial condition can be used with a non-zero 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
341 
accumulation of temperature initial condition. This may lead to more accurate estimates of the 
SFT, static formation temperatures. 
 
 
5.7.2. Time Response of PD Control of Prototypical First Order Process 
 
Consider a prototypical first order process. Consider PD control of a prototypical first 
order process. The block diagram in shown in Figure 5.4. The control transfer functions for 
the process and controller are as follows; 
 
 
( )
1
( )
1
p
p
p
c
c
D
k
g
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.77) 
 
The closed loop transfer function, gCL(s) can be written as; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
CL
p
c
g
s g
s
g
s
g
s g
s  
(5.78) 
 
Consider a step change in the input r(s) = 1/s. The following is the analysis of the output 
response to a step change in input. 
 
 
y(s) = r(s)gCL(s) = 
1
1
1
1
1
1
c
p
D
p
c
p
D
p
k k
s
s
s
k k
s
s
 
(5.79) 
 
or,  
1
( )
(
)
p c
D
p
c
p
D
c
p
k k
s
y s
s s
k k
k k
 
(5.80) 
 
The inverse Laplace transform in Eq. (5.58) can be found by the method of Heaviside 
expansion. 
 
Let, 
1
2
1
2
( )
( )
( )
A
A
p s
y s
q s
s
a
s
a
 
(5.81) 
 
The poles of Eq. (5.59), are 0, 
p c
p
D
p c
k k
k k
 respectively. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
342 
 
1
1
1
1
'
p c
p c
k k
p a
A
q a
k k
 
(5.82) 
 
 
2
1
D
p c
p
p c
D
k k
A
k k
  
(5.83)  
 
 
( )
1
(
)
p c
p
D
p c
k k
t
k k
D
p c
p
D
p c
k k
y t
e
k k
 
(5.84) 
 
Eq. (5.62) is stable decays monotonically. For positive values of kp, kc, p and D the 
system will not exhibit an overshoot. Thus switching from PI control to PD control the 
occurrence of “overshoot” or underdamped system has vanished. The conditions when an 
overshoot can be expected from mathematical analysis for PI control of a prototypical first 
order system have been derived in section 5.6. 
 
 
Example 5.7 PD Control during Hydrolysis of Ethylene Glycol 
Consider PD control for hydrolysis of ethylene oxide in a CSTR as described in worked 
example 4-1. Develop the closed loop transfer function. Under what conditions would there 
be underdamped response? Ethylene glycol is prepared in a CSTR by hydrolysis of ethylene 
oxide. The reaction can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
4
2
2
4
2
C H O
H O
C H
OH
 
(5.85) 
 
The CSTR is assumed to be operated at constant volume and constant temperature and 
with excess water. Aa model was developed to find the concentration of each species as a 
function of time in Example 4-1. 
From Eq. (4-14) 
 
 
(1
)
(1
)
A
A
A
A
A
dX
X
Da
X
d
dX
Da
X
Da
d
 
(5.86) 
 
 
Obtaining Laplace transform of Eq. (5.86); 
 
 
1
( )
1
A
Da
X
s
Da s s  
(5.87) 
 
Eq. (5.87) can be seen to be of the form; 
 
 
y(s) = u(s).gp(s) 
(5.88) 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
343 
where, u(s) = 1/s and gp(s) = (Da/(1+Da +s)). For PD control gc(s) is given by Eq. (5.77). The 
closed loop transfer function gCL(s) for PD control of hydrolysis of ethylene oxide to ethylene 
glycol can be written as follows; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
CL
p
c
g
s g
s
g
s
g
s g
s  
 
2
1
1
( )
( )
1
c
D
A
D c
c
Dak
s
y s
X
s
s s
s
Da
Da
k
Dak
 
(5.89) 
 
Eq. (5.89) can be seen to be; 
 
2
2
( )
1
1
c D
c
D c
c
D c
c
Dak
Dak
y s
s
s
Da
Da
k
Dak
s s
s
Da
Da
k
Dak
 
(5.90) 
 
There are two terms in the Laplace domain in Eq. (5.90). The first term can be inverted in 
the time domain to the following form; 
 
 
sin
at
c D
Dak
e
t   
(5.91) 
 
Where 
 
Where,  
2
2
2
2
1
(1
)
2
1
1
4
D c
D c
c
Da
k
a
Da
k
Da k
  
(5.92) 
 
The second term in Eq. (5.90) when inverted to the time domain can lead to an 
underdamped response under certain conditions. This happens when the “damping factor”,  
< 1. This is when; 
 
 
1
1
1
2
c
D c
Dak
Da
k
 
(5.93) 
 
Example 5.8 Control of Intermediate in Reactions in Series 
Consider the following scheme of reactions performed in a CSTR. 
 
1
2
k
k
A B
R
R
B
S
 
(5.94) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
344 
The scheme of reactions shown in Eq. (5.94) can be seen during the manufacture of 
chloroform by chlorination reactions as follows; 
 
 
4
2
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
2
4
CH
Cl
CH Cl
HCl
CH Cl
Cl
CH Cl
HCl
CH Cl
Cl
CHCl
HCl
CHCl
Cl
CCl
HCl
 
(5.95) 
 
Methane can be chlorinated to manufacture chloromethane, dimethylene dichloride, 
chloroform and carbon tetrachloride by successive chlorination reactions. The 2011 Spring 
prices for CHCl3, chloroform is 75 cents per pound and CCl4, carbon tetrachloride is 32.5 
cents per pound. Hence it is profitable to optimize the intermediate yield of CHCl3. 
Comparing the scheme of reactions shown in Eq. (5.94) and the chlorination reactions shown 
in Eq. (5.95) “A” can be CH4, “B” can be Cl2, “R” can be CHCl3 and S can be CCl4. 
Levenspiel (3) discusses the kinetics of the scheme of reactions given by Eq. (5.94) and gives 
an expression for CR,max, an optimal intermediate concentration. There is interest in designing 
a PI control for the intermediate product R as shown in Figure 5.8. Discuss the PI control for 
the concentration of R. What are the process and control transfer functions? What is the 
closed loop transfer function, gCL(s). Under what conditions would there be an underdamped 
response? 
 
 
Figure 5.8. Feedback Control by PI Controller of Intermediate Product R in a CSTR Component 
Material Balance. 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
345 
The material balance of components A, B, R and S can be written over the control 
volume as follows; 
 
 
(mass rate in) - (mass rate out) – (mass rate reacted) = (mass accumulated) 
(5.96) 
 
Species A (Methane) 
 
 
A
Ai
A
A
dC
v C
C
kC V
V dt  
(5.97) 
The rate of the reaction of chlorination of methane can be given by a pseudo-first order 
expression as; 
 
 
1
A
A
A
dC
r
k C
dt  
(5.98) 
 
Species R (Chloroform) 
 
 
1
2
(
)
R
Ri
R
A
R
dC
v C
C
k C
k C
V
V dt
 
(5.99) 
 
Species S (Carbon Tetrachloride) 
 
 
2
0
(
)
S
S
R
dC
v
C
k C
V
V dt  
(5.100) 
 
It can be noted that the residence time in the CSTR, 
V
v , and Eq. (3.8) and Eq. (3.10) 
would become; 
 
 
A
Ai
A
A
dC
C
C
k C
dt
 
(5.101) 
 
 
1
2
(
1
)
R
Ri
A
R
dC
C
k C
k
C
dt  
(5.102) 
 
 
2
S
S
R
dC
C
k
C
dt
 
(5.103) 
 
Let conversion, XA, Damkohler number Da1, Da2 and dimensionless time,  are as 
follows; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
346 
 
1
1
2
2
Ai
A
A
Ai
C
C
X
C
t
Da
k
Da
k
 
(5.104) 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transform of Eqs.(5.101-5.103); 
 
 
1
( )
1
Ai
A
C
C
s
s
Da
s
 
(5.105) 
 
 
1
2
1
2
( )
1
1
1
Ri
Ai
R
C
Da C
C
s
s
Da
s
s
Da
s
Da
s
 
(5.106) 
 
 
2
1
R
S
S
Da C
s
C
s
C
s
s
 
(5.107) 
 
Eq. (5.106) can be seen to be of the form; 
 
 
y(s) = u(s).gp(s) 
(5.108) 
where, 
1
( )
u s
s  
 
 
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
p
Ri
Ai
Ai
g
s
C
Da
C
C
Da
s
Da
s
Da
s
 
(5.109) 
 
Eq. (5.72) can be seen to comprise of two terms. The first term can be reduced to the 
general form of a prototypical first order process as given by Eq.() and reproduced below; 
 
 
( )
( )
1
p
p
k
y s
u s
s
 
(5.110) 
 
The process gain, kp and time constant, p for this term can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
1
1
Ri
p
Ai
p
C
k
C
Da
Da
 
(5.111) 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
347 
The second term in Eq.(5.109) can be reduced to the general form of a prototypical 
second order process as given by Eq.() and reproduced below as; 
 
 
2 2
( )
( )
2
1
p
p
p
k
y s
u s
s
s
 
(5.112) 
 
The second term in Eq. (5.109) can be rearranged as; 
 
 
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
Da
s
s
Da
Da
Da
Da
 
(5.113) 
 
By comparison of Eq. (5.112) with Eq. (5.113), the process gain kp, time constant, p and 
damping factor,  can be seen to be; 
 
 
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
p
p
Da
k
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
Da
 
(5.114) 
For PI control gc(s) is given by Eq. (5.26). The closed loop transfer function gCL(s) for 
PI control of chlorination of methane to chloroform or carbon tetrachloride can be written as 
follows; 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
CL
p
c
g
s g
s
g
s
g
s g
s  
(5.115) 
 
 
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
Ai c
I
Ri c
I
CL
Ai c
I
Ri c
I
Da C k
s
k
C k
s
k
s
Da
g
s
s s
Da
s
Da
C k Da s
k
C k
s
k
s
Da
 
(5.116) 
 
 
2
1
2
2
3 3
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
Ri c
Ai c
Ri c
Ri c I
Ri c I
CL
Ri c
Ai c
Ri c
Ri c
c I
Ai
Ri c I
C k
s
C k Da
C k
Da
C k k
C k k
Da
g
s
s
s
Da
Da
C k
s
Da
Da
Da C k
C k
Da
C k
Da k k C
C k k
Da
  (5.117) 
 
Where kI is the gain during PI control action. The stability of this system of PI control of 
intermediate product yield of chloroform, CHCl3 can be determined from the poles of Eq. 
(5.74). As the order of the polynomial in the denominator is increased beyond quadratic, 
cubic closed form analytical solutions are not possible. Numerical solutions are needed to 
obtain a solution of the polynomial of higher degrees. Routh (1905) stability criteria can be 
used to analyze the stability of systems such as the one encountered here. 
The Routh array of a general nth degree polynomial can be written as follows; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
348 
 
1
2
2
1
2
2
1
0
....
n
n
n
n
n
n
a s
a
s
a
s
a s
a s
a  
(5.118) 
 
For all the poles to be negative all the coefficients in the 3rd degree polynomial in the 
denominator of Eq. (5.75) need be positive. The sufficiency test establishes that the array; 
 
Row Coefficients 
 
2
4
1
3
5
1
2
1
2
n
n
n
n
n
n
I
a
a
a
II
a
a
a
III
IV
b
b
V
c
c
 
(5.119) 
 
Where, 
 
 
1
2
3
1
3
1 2
1
1
1
1
1
4
5
1
5
1 3
2
2
1
1
;
;
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
a
a
a a
b a
a
b
b
c
a
b
a
a
a a
b a
a
b
b
c
a
b
 
(5.120) 
 
The number of changes in sign as the first column is traversed down the number gives the 
number of unstable positive roots. Unstable roots would arise when sign of the coefficients 
are negative For the system of PI control of the intermediate product yield chloroform from 
chlorination of methane to chloroform and carbon tetrachloride the conditions for instability 
would arise when; 
 
 
2 1
3 0
a a
a a   
(5.121) 
 
This would happen when 
 
 
 
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
Ri c
c I
Ai
Ri c I
Da
Da
C k
Da
Da
Da k k C
C k k
Da
(5.122) 
 
Eq. (5.122) can be written in terms of the residence time in the CSTR  and the reaction 
rate constants k1 and k2 as follows; 
 
 
2
3
2
1 2
1
2
1 2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
3
1
2
0
Ri c
I
Ri
c I
k k
k
k
k k
C k k k
k
k
k
k
k
C
k k
k
 (5.123) 
 
For the special case when the further chlorination reaction rate constant k2 = kI the PI 
control gain Eq. (5.123) reduces to; 
 
 
2
3
2
1 2
1
2
1 2
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
3
1
2
0
Ri
c
k k
k
k
k k
k
k
k
k
C
k k
k
(5.124) 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
349 
5.8. TYREUS-LUYBEN OSCILLATION BASED TUNING 
 
Tyreus-Luyben oscillation based tuning was found to make the system less oscillatory for 
the parameters chosen. There are three tuning parameters in PID action. These are: (i) the 
control gain constant, kc; (ii) integral time constant, I; (iii) derivative time constant, D. An 
algorithmic or trial and error approach can be used for obtaining optimal results from tuning 
the controller. The tuning of PID control was developed by Ziegler and Nichols [1942]. This 
method is not widely used in the industry because the closed loop behavior tends to be 
oscillatory and sensitive to errors. The Tyreus-Luyben tuning parameters for PI and PID 
control are given below in Table 5.1. 
Where u is the ultimate time period and ku is the ultimate gain constant. For P only 
closed-loop control the magnitude of the proportional gain is increased until attainment of 
continuous oscillation. For larger values of the gain the closed-loop system becomes unstable. 
The value of the control gain constant where continuous oscillation is found is called the 
ultimate gain constant and notated by ku. The peak to peak time period that corresponds to this 
gain is called the ultimate time period, u. The tuning parameters are given in Table 5.1 and 
vary according to the control action taken. 
 
 
5.9. SUMMARY 
 
The control theory began with the investigations of J. C. Maxwell of the dynamics of the 
centrifugal governor in a Boulton and Watt engine of the 18th century. Self-oscillations and 
the lags in the system can draw overcompensation and lead to instability. Mathematical 
modeling of any process is an important task in the analysis and design of control systems. 
The model equations when converted into the Laplace domain can be represented using block 
diagram format. Control systems can be linear or non-linear. Non-linear systems may need 
numerical solutions for analysis. Closed form analytical solutions can be obtained for linear 
systems. Sometimes when multiplicity arises in the solutions other criteria is needed to select 
the feasible solution from amongst the solutions obtained.  
On-off controllers are used in centralized heating and air conditioning systems in modern 
homes, Christmas tree lighting, level in water and process tank. An on-off control strategy 
patented by Mackay (2003) for CHP, combined heat and power systems was discussed. 
During proportional control, the control action taken is proportional to the error detected 
between the measured value and set points of the process variables. Control actions taken can 
be represented using control block diagrams. Figure 5.3 is the control block diagram of the 
pressure, temperature control for a CHP system. Gains are defined as the ratio of steady state 
change in output in response to a steady state change in input variable. These are defined for 
valve, process, controller, etc. Proportional control is used for a prototypical first order 
process. The closed loop transfer function for the process and control action is derived and 
shown in Eq. (5.15). The gain and time lag of the closed loop transfer function can be seen in 
Eqs. (5-16, 5.17). The time output response to a step change in the input can be seen in Eq. 
(5.20). For values of kCL, closed loop gain other than 1 there is seen an offset at steady state.  
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
350 
Table 5.1. Tyreus-Luyben Tuning Parameters 
 
Control 
Action 
Integral Time 
Constant 
I 
Derivative Time 
Constant 
D 
Control 
Action Gain 
kc 
PI 
2.2 u 
NA 
0.3125ku 
PID 
2.2 u 
0.159 u 
0.4545ku 
 
In order to do better than an offset after implementation of offset PI, proportional integral 
control can be used. The control action is modified by addition of a component that is 
proportional to the integral of the error in addition to the action proportional to the error. This 
can lead to zero offset after rectification. kc and kI are the tuning parameters. The control 
transfer function for PI control is given in Eq. (5.26). In worked example 5.-1 is given an 
example of PI control action. The output response is seen to undergo an overshoot. The 
damping factor,  = 0.1, is less than 1.0. It is not clear as to what is causing the overshoot 
from the control action of the process. In example 5-2 is the analysis of closed-loop transfer 
function for feed forward/feedback controller. In example 5-3 is discussed the PI control of 
voltage supplied to an automatic washing machine patented by Toshiba. Model equations that 
relate torque to agitator RPM is given in Eq. (5.46). Electric motor is used in order to provide 
torque needed to perform the wash, rinse and dehydration steps. The control action may lead 
to instability because the error between target angular speed and operating angular speed in 
RPM can be rectified indirectly by changing the voltage supplied to the motor. The voltage 
will affect the torque in a manner that is not completely modeled or understood. The angular 
speed of the agitator and tub depends on the torque in a manner that is predicted by the 
mathematical model. Electric current measurements are used as feedback in the torque control 
of the Toshiba machine.  
The conditions when underdamped response of PI control of prototypical first order 
process is derived are section 5.6. Eq. 5.61 gives the criteria for underdamped response to be 
less than 1.0. This may be expected for small values of integral time. During PD control the 
control action taken is proportional to the derivative of the error. It may be used in processes 
where the curvature of the process variable with respect to time needs to be preserved. During 
PID control, components proportional to the error, proportional to the integral of the error, 
and proportional to the derivative of the error are introduced. Ideal PID control is not 
physically realizable! Real PID control can be affected after suitable modification of the 
control transfer function.  
In Example 5.4 the PI control during desalination of seawater using nanoporous carbon is 
discussed. PI Control action during hydrolysis of ethylene glycol is discussed in Example 5.5. 
For small values of integral gain the system can be expected to be underdamped as shown in 
Eq. (5.74). The PI control action can be used in the estimation of SFT, static formation 
temperature of oil wells as discussed in Example 5.6. Fourier parabolic and damped wave 
hyperbolic models can be used to describe the transient heat conduction processes. The 
problem is one in IHT, inverse heat transfer as the initial conditions are estimated from 
logged temperatures at specified locations.  
The time response to PD control of a prototypical first order process is given by Eq. 
(5.84). In Example 5.7 is discussed the PD control action during hydrolysis of ethylene 
glycol. The conditions for underdamped oscillations are given in Eq. (5.93). In Example 5.8 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
351 
the control action for intermediate in reactions in series is discussed. Industrial applications 
for these types of reactions are during the production of chloroform and carbon tetrachloride 
by chlorination of methane and biodiesel and glycerol production by consecutive-competitive 
reactions of methanolysis of vegetable oil. The stability of the system of PI control of 
chloroform production by chlorination of methane can be seen from the closed loop transfer 
function given in Eq., (5.117). The order of the polynomial in the denominator of Eq. (5.117) 
is cubic. Instability would arise when the criteria in Eq. (5.121) is met. The corresponding 
expression for PI control gain is given in Eqs. (5.123). 
Tyreus-Luyben oscillation based tuning was found to make the system less oscillatory for 
the parameters chosen. There are three tuning parameters in PID action. These are: (i) the 
control gain constant, kc; (ii) integral time constant, I; (iii) derivative time constant, D. An 
algorithmic or trial and error approach can be used for obtaining optimal results from tuning 
the controller.  
 
 
5.10. GLOSSARY 
 
Control Theory: Deals with dynamics of industrial processes. Behavior modification 
affected by feedback. Control objectives are met by using measurements and set points. 
Controllability, stability and observability are related issues. Closed form analytical and 
numerical solutions are obtained when needed. 
Error: Difference in value between the measurements and set points of the process 
variable.  
Feedback Control: Control action based on feedback from the process such as 
measurements and comparisons against the set points. 
Mathematical Model: A set of equations that can be used to describe a process or 
phenomena. Usually difficult to measure parameters can be predicted from readily 
measurable parameters.  
Laplace Domain: Often times differential equations become algebraic equations and 
integrals become algebraic expressions in this domain. The Bromwich integral and Fourier-
Mellin integral and Laplace transformation may be used to transform quantities from the 
Laplace domain and time domain and vice versa. 
Control Block Diagram: Flow diagram that can be used to show the control action and 
prototypical first and higher order processes using transfer functions. 
Valve Gain: Ratio of change in flow rate to the change in valve top pressure (Eq. (5.11) 
Process Gain: Change in volume of the reactor to the change in valve top pressure (Eq. 
5.12). 
Proportional Gain, kc: Ratio of the change in process variable to the error 
Proportional Integral Gain, kI: Tuning parameter. Pre „integral of the error‟ constant. 
Integral Time, I: Ratio of the proportional gain, kc and proportional integral gain, kI. 
On/Off Control: Shut-down and start-up is used at certain error levels. Used as 
safeguards. 
Proportional Control, P Control: Control action taken that is proportional to the error 
detected.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
352 
Proportional Integral Control, PI Control: The control action is modified by addition 
of a component that is proportional to the integral of the error in addition to the action 
proportional to the error. This can lead to near zero offset 
Proportional Derivative Control, PD Control: The control action is modified by 
addition of a component that is proportional to the derivative of the error in addition to the 
action proportional to the error. Used in cases where the curvature of the process output with 
time needs to be preserved. 
Proportional, Integral, Derivative, PID Control: During PID control, components 
proportional to the error, proportional to the integral of the error, and proportional to the 
derivative of the error are introduced.  
Ideal and Real PID Control: Ideal PID control is not physically realizable! Real PID 
control can be affected after suitable modification of the control transfer function. Methods to 
make PID control feasible are discussed in Chapter 7.0 Advanced Controls.  
Offset: It is the difference between the set point and process variable at steady state. 
 
 
5.11. REFERENCES 
 
Espinosa-Paredes, G., Maralan-Diaz, A., Olea-Gonzalez, U., & Ambiz-Garcia, J. J. (2009). 
"Application of a Proportional Integral (PI) Control for the Estimation of Static 
Formation Temperature in Oil Wells", Marine & Petroleum Geology, Vol. 26, 2, 259-
268. 
Fujui, A. “Chemical Concentration Control Device for Semiconductor Processing 
Apparatus”, US Patent 6,921,193 (2005), Kaijo Corp., Hamura, JP. 
Hosoito, T., Tanaka, T., Okazaki, Y., Kawabata, S., Nagai, K. & Isono, F. (2006). “Washing 
Machine with Vector Control for Drive Motor”, US Patent 7, 017, 377, Kabushiki Kaisha 
Toshiba, JP. 
Levenspiel, O. Chemical Reaction Engineering, (1999). Third Edition, John Wiley, New 
York, NY. 
Luyben, M. L. & Luyben, W. L. (1997). Essentials of Process Control, McGraw Hill 
Professional, New York. 
MacKay, R. (2007). “Combined Heat and Power System”, US Patent, 7,299,638  
Routh, E. J. (1905). Dynamics of a System of Rigid Bodies, Part II, MacMillan, London, 
United Kingdom (1905). 
Ziegler, J. G. & Nichols, N. B. (1942). “Optimum Settings for Automatic Controllers”, Trans. 
ASME, 64, 759-768. 
 
 
5.12. EXERCISES 
 
Review Questions 
 
1.0. What are the differences between “on-off” controller and “P” only control ? 
2.0. What are the differences between „PI‟ control and „PD‟ control ? 
3.0. How can ideal PID control be made realizable ? 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
353 
4.0. How is on-off‟ controller used in CHP, combined heat and power systems ? 
5.0. What is the significance of controller gain kc during „P‟ only control ? 
6.0. What is the significance of constant „b‟ in „P‟ only control action law ? 
7.0. What is the significance of valve gain constant kv ? 
8.0. What are the differences between process gain constant kp and controller gain 
constant kc ? 
9.0. What is meant by „offset‟ during „P‟ only control ? 
10.0. How does PI control action remove „offset‟ found during P only control ? 
11.0. What are the differences between control action law during; 
(i) PI Control 
(ii) PID Control (ideal) 
(iii) P only Control 
12.0. What are the differences between control action law during; 
(i) PD Control 
(ii) PI Control 
13.0. How is the final value theorem used to obtain „offset‟ found after control action is 
taken ? 
14.0. What are the transfer functions of control action law of; 
(i) P only Control 
(ii) PI only Control 
(iii) PD only Control 
(iv) PID Control (ideal) 
15.0. Can underdamped oscillatory conditions arise after P only control action of 
prototypical first order process is taken ? Why not ? 
16.0. Can underdamped oscillatory conditions arise after PI only control action of 
protypical first order process is taken ? Why ? 
17.0. What is the best control action for prototypical third order process from closed loop 
stability considerations ? 
18.0. Does the answer tp Q15, Q16 change on account of change in input to periodic 
signal ? 
19.0. Can underdamped oscillatory conditions develop after PD control of prototypical 
first order process ?Why not ? 
20.0. What is the physical significance of Bm in Eq. (5.47). 
21.0. Consider a PD control of the voltage in automatic washing machine in Example 5.3. 
What are the stability issues ? 
22.0. What is meant by „smoothing effect‟ on output response ? 
 
 
Problems 
 
23.0. PI Control of Prototypical First Order Process: Time Response to Periodic Input 
 
Consider any prototypical first order process. Consider a PI controller used to control 
this process. Let the process gains, kp = kc =1. What would be the time response of 
the process output variable y(t) to a periodic disturbance in the set point, 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
354 
2
1
( )
1
r s
s
The time constant of the controller, I is 1and the time constant of the 
process, p is 2.0. The simplified control block diagram is given below. Disturbances 
are neglected and valve and measurement dynamics are lumped into the process 
transfer function. Develop the expression for the output variable y(s) in the Laplace 
domain and time domain y(t). Sketch the response y(t) as a function of time. The 
transfer functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) and that for PI control, 
gc(s) can be seen to be; 
 
 
( )
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.125) 
 
24.0. PI Control of Prototypical First Order Process: Time Response to Input that 
undergoes Exponential Decay with Periodicity  
 
Consider any prototypical first order process. Consider a PI controller used to control 
this process. Let the process gains, kp = 3; kc =0.33. What would be the time response 
of the process output variable y(t) to a change in the set point,  
 
 
2
1
( )
1
1
r s
s
  
(5.126) 
 
 
 
The time constant of the controller, I becomes 10% of the time constant of the 
process, p. The simplified control block diagram is given below. Disturbances are 
neglected and valve and measurement dynamics are lumped into the process transfer 
function. Develop the expression for the output variable y(s) in the Laplace domain 
and time domain y(t). Sketch the response y(t) as a function of time. The transfer 
functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) and that for PI control, gc(s) can 
seen to be; 
 
 
( )
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.127) 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
355 
 
Figure 5.8a. Simplified Control Block Diagram for Q1.0. 
 
 
Figure 5.9. Control of CSTR Volume.  
 
25.0 On-off Control of Storage Tank 
 
A storage tank is used for the monomers prior to feeding them to the reactors during 
continuous polymerization of HIPS, high impact rubber modified polystyrene. The 
styrene monomer, solvent such as ethyl benzene and PBd, poly butadiene in solution 
form are brought from the suppliers as well as from recycle and stored in the storage 
tank. In order to keep the storage tank from overflowing and from being depleted and 
ruining the pumps that are starved a on-off controller is devised. The control action 
suggested is shown in Figure 5.9. Write the transfer function for the on-off control 
action. The residence time of the reactor depends on the volume of the reactants and 
products in the reactor. The volume of the reactor contents is measured by the 
volume transmitter, VT. This information is sent to the VC, volume controller. The 
set point volume and the measured volume are compared with each other. Desired 
action is then signaled to the control valve bu a pressure variable. The valves can be 
operated using pressure transducer values. The valve can be made to open upto a full 
open position. This action is called for when the tank is found to be depleted. The 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
356 
valve can be made to partially close or close completely until the input reactant 
streams are shut off. This action is called for when the reactor is found to be 
overflowing. 
26.0. PI Control Action for Prototypical Second Order Overdamped Process. 
 
Consider any prototypical second order process. Consider a PI controller used to 
control this process. Let the process gains, kp = kc =1. Let the damping factor  = 4.0. 
What would be the time response of the process output variable y(t) to a step change 
in the set point, r(s) = 1/s. The time constant of the controller, I becomes 5% of the 
time constant of the process, p. The simplified control block diagram given in Figure  
 
 
5.4 is applicable. Disturbances are neglected and valve and measurement dynamics 
are lumped into the process transfer function. Develop the expression for the output 
variable y(s) in the Laplace domain and time domain y(t). Sketch the response y(t) as 
a function of time. The transfer functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) 
and that for PI control, gc(s) can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
( )
2
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.128) 
 
27.0. PI Control Action for Prototypical Second Order Underdamped Process 
 
Consider any prototypical second order process. Consider a PI controller used to 
control this process. Let the process gains, kp = kc =1. Let the damping factor  = 0.4. 
What would be the time response of the process output variable y(t) to a step change 
in the set point, r(s) = 1/s. The time constant of the controller, I becomes 5% of the 
time constant of the process, p. The simplified control block diagram given in Figure 
5.4 is applicable. Disturbances are neglected and valve and measurement dynamics 
are lumped into the process transfer function. Develop the expression for the output 
variable y(s) in the Laplace domain and time domain y(t). Sketch the response y(t) as 
a function of time. The transfer functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) 
and that for PI control, gc(s) can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
( )
2
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.129) 
 
28.0. PI Control Action for Prototypical Second Order Undamped Process 
 
Consider any prototypical second order process. Consider a PI controller used to 
control this process. Let the process gains, kp = kc =1. Let the damping factor  = 0.0. 
What would be the time response of the process output variable y(t) to a step change 
in the set point, r(s) = 1/s. The time constant of the controller, I becomes 5% of the 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
357 
time constant of the process, p. The simplified control block diagram given in Figure 
5.4 is applicable. Disturbances are neglected and valve and measurement dynamics 
are lumped into the process transfer function. Develop the expression for the output 
variable y(s) in the Laplace domain and time domain y(t). Sketch the response y(t) as 
a function of time. The transfer functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) 
and that for PI control, gc(s) can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
( )
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
(5.130) 
 
29.0. Third Order Process with P only Control 
 
Consider a third order process whose process function is given by; 
 
 
2
1
( )
3
5
3
1
p
G
s
s
s
s
 
(5.131) 
 
 
 
What is the maximum proportional gain for P-only control in order for the control 
action to be closed loop stable. Use Routh stability criterion.  
30.0. PI Control of a Process that is Integrating Unstable 
 
Consider a process that is integrating unstable and has the following transfer 
function. 
 
 
0.5
2
p
G
s
s
 
(5.132) 
 
 
The output response in the time domain of this process is; 
 
 
2
( )
0.5
t
y t
e  
(5.133) 
 
 
Show that a PI controller can stabilize this integrating unstable process. Consider the 
control transfer function; 
 
 
1
I
c
c
I
s
G
s
k
s
 
(5.134) 
 
 
 
Show that the closed loop transfer function can be given by; 
 
 
2
0.5
1
0.5
2
0.5
c
I
CL
I
I
c
c
k
s
G
s
s
s
k
k
 
(5135) 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
358 
 
Further show that for stability 0 < kc < 4. Show that the system would be 
underdamped when; 
 
 
2
2
2
4
0.25
2
2
0.5
2
c
I
c
c
c
I
c
k
k
k
k
k
 
(5.136) 
 
 
Sketch the output variable as a function time before and after the control action 
considered. 
31.0. Best Control Strategy for Systems with Inverse Response 
 
Some systems exhibit a inverse response. The output response to a unit step response 
in such systems decreases initially and increases to a final steady state later. The 
transfer function of such a system has positive pole in the numerator; 
 
 
3
.
0.2
2
p
s
G
s
u s
s
s
 
(5.137) 
 
 
What is the best controller to use that would have a stabilizing effect on the process. 
Consider a PD controller for example with a transfer function given by; 
 
 
1
c
c
D
G
s
k
s
 
(5.138) 
 
 
Show that the closed-loop transfer function is given by; 
 
 
2
2
3
3
1
1
0.4
2.2
3
(1
3
)
D
D
CL
D
D
c
c
c
s
s
G
s
s
s
k
k
k
 
(5.139) 
 
 
Show that for small D the system can be stabilized. Show that, for stability, kc < 
0.133 and 
0.733
0.33
D
ck
. Is this both possible for positive values of gain 
constant of controller, kc. and controller time constant D. Under what conditions for 
the combined process and controller the system becomes underdamped oscillatory. 
32.0. Proportional Controller for Jacketed Exothermic CSTR 
 
The model equations for dimensionless concentration and dimensionless temperature 
for the jacketed CSTR described in Figure 4.19 are as follows; 
 
 
1
*
(
*)
*
*
dY
Y
U
X H
U
H
d
 
(5.140) 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
359 
 
(1
)
A
A
dX
Da
X
Da
d
 
(5.141) 
 
 
 
Obtaining Laplace transform of the two model equations the process transfer 
functions equations for dimensionless concentration and dimensionless temperature 
for the jacketed CSTR described in Figure 4.19 are as follows; 
 
 
( )
1
*
*
*
( )
1
1
*
1
*
1
*
Da
X s
s
s
Da
Da H
U
H
Y s
s
s
Da
s
U
s
s
U
s
s
U
 
(5.142) 
 
 
 
Consider a proportional controller with the control transfer function; 
 
 
c
c
G
s
k  
(5.143) 
 
 
Show that the closed loop transfer function for the dimensionless concentration and 
dimensionless concentration can be given by; 
 
 
2
3
2
*
1
*
*
*
* 1
( )
*
1
1
*
*
*
*
1
c
CL
c
c
CL
c
c
k Da
G
s
s
s
Da
k Da
k
s
H
U
H
U
Da
G
s
s
s
Da
U
s
Da
U
k
H
U
k
H
U
Da
 
(5.144) 
 
 
 
Derive the conditions for the system to develop underdamped oscillatory instability 
in dimensionless concentration and dimensionless temperature. 
 
33.0. PI Controller for Jacketed Exothermic CSTR 
 
 
Consider a PI controller for the jacketed exothermic CSTR in Example 3-3. The 
controller transfer function is given by; 
 
 
1
( )
I
c
c
I
s
G s
k
s
 
(5.145) 
 
 
Derive the closed loop transfer functions for the dimensionless concentration and 
dimensionless temperature. What are the conditions under which under damped 
oscillatory instability would develop ? 
34.0. Proportional Controller for Polymerization Kettle  
 
Consider a proportional controller for the dimensionless initiator concentration and 
dimensionless monomer concentration discussed in Example 3-4. The model 
equations for dimensionless initiator concentration is as follows; 
 
 
1
D
D
dY
Da
Y
Da
d
 
(5.146) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
360 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transform of the model equation the transfer function can be 
written as; 
 
 
( )
1
D
D
Da
Y s
s
Da
s  
(5.147) 
 
 
The model equations for dimensionless monomer concentration is as follows; 
 
 
1
1
1
M
M
dX
Da
Y
X
Da
Y
d
 
(5.148) 
 
 
Use a binomial approximation for (1-Y)1/2 and render the differential equation 
amenable for obtaining the Laplace transform; 
 
 
1
1
1
2
2
M
M
Y
Y
dX
Da
X
Da
d
 
(5.149) 
 
 
The equation can me linearized by double differentiation and combination of the 
other model equation. Obtain the process transfer function for dimensionless 
monomer concentration. Consider a Proportional controller for both the initiator and 
monomer concentrations. What are the conditions under which underdamped 
oscillatory instability may be expected in the dimensionless initiator and monomer 
concentrations. 
35.0. Proportional Integral, PI Controller for Polymerization in CSTR 
 
For the problem 13 consider a PI controller in place of the Proportional controller. 
What are the conditions under which underdamped oscillatory instability may be 
expected in the dimensionless initiator and monomer concentrations. 
36.0. PI Controller 
 
Consider a second-order process with the process transfer function with one pole at 
the origin; 
 
 
3
2
1
p
G
s
s
s
 
(5.150) 
 
 
Show that a PI controller with integral time constant of I = 2 can lead to a pole-zero 
cancellation. Show that the closed loop transfer function can be given by; 
 
 
2
3
3
c
CL
I
I
k
G
s
s
 
(5.151) 
 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
361 
 
Obtain the output response for a step change in input of magnitude R. Comment on 
the stability of the system given the order of the system and nature of control action 
taken. 
37.0. Proportional Controller of CSTR with Recycle 
 
Consider the process conducted in a CSTR with recycle as shown in Figure 4.26. The 
model equation for the dimensionless concentration in transient state is given by; 
 
 
1
1
1
A
A
dX
R
Da
X
Da
R
R
d
 
(5.152) 
 
 
where R is the recycle ratio. Obtaining the Laplace transform of the model equation 
the transfer function for the process can be seen to be; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
A
A
A
dX
R
Da
X
Da
R
R
d
Da
R
X
s
R
s s
Da
s s
Da
R
R
 
(5.153) 
 
 
Consider a P only controller for the dimensionless concentration. What is the closed 
loop transfer function for the system. Under what conditions will there be 
underdamped oscillations in the dimensionless concentration. 
38.0. Proportional Integral, PI Controller of CSTR with Recycle 
 
Consider a PI controller in place of P only controller in problem 16.0. Under what 
conditions will there be underdamped oscillations in the dimensionless concentration. 
39.0. Proportional Integral, PI Controller for a First Order Process with Dead Time 
 
Consider a PI, proportional integral control for a first order process with a lag time, 
. The process transfer function with dead time,  can be written as; 
 
 
( )
1
s
p
p
p
k e
G
s
s
 
(5.154) 
 
 
The controller transfer function is given by; 
 
 
1
( )
I
c
c
I
s
G s
k
s
 
(5.155) 
 
 
In order to evaluate the stability of closed loop transfer function Pade‟ approximation 
can be used to rationalize the process transfer function. The Pade‟ approximation is; 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
362 
 
2
2
s
s
e
s
 
(5.156) 
 
 
 
Show that the closed loop transfer function can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
3
2
2
2
2
c
p
I
I
CL
I
p
I
p
c
p
I
I
k k
s
s
G
s
s
s
k k
s
 
(5.157) 
 
 
Discuss the stability of the closed loop. Under what conditions can underdamped 
oscillatory conditions be expected ? Comment on the stabilizing effect of the PI 
controller. 
40.0. Proportional P Controller for a First Order Process with Dead Time 
 
Consider a P only, proportional control for a first order process with a lag time, . 
The process transfer function with dead time,  can be written as; 
 
 
( )
1
s
p
p
p
k e
G
s
s
 
(5.158) 
 
 
The controller transfer function is given by; 
 
 
( )
c
c
G s
k  
(5.159) 
 
 
 
In order to evaluate the stability of closed loop transfer function Pade‟ approximation 
can be used to rationalize the process transfer function. The Pade‟ approximation is; 
 
 
 
2
2
s
s
e
s
 
(5.160) 
 
 
Show that the closed loop transfer function can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
2
2 1
c
p
CL
p
p
p c
p c
k k
s
G
s
s
s
k k
k k
 
(5.161) 
 
 
Discuss the stability of the closed loop. Under what conditions can underdamped 
oscillatory conditions be expected ? Comment on the stabilizing effect of the P 
controller on the process with a lag time. 
41.0. Proportional Derivative, PD Controller for a First Order Process with Dead Time 
 
Consider a PD, proportional derivative controller for a first order process with a lag 
time, . The process transfer function with dead time,  can be written as; 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
363 
 
( )
1
s
p
p
p
k e
G
s
s
 
(5.162) 
 
 
 
The controller transfer function is given by; 
 
 
( )
1
c
c
D
G s
k
s
 
(5.163) 
 
 
In order to evaluate the stability of closed loop transfer function Pade‟ approximation 
can be used to rationalize the process transfer function. The Pade‟ approximation is; 
 
 
2
2
s
s
e
s
 
(5.164) 
 
 
Develop the expression for the closed loop transfer function. Show that the system is 
not physically realizable. 
42.0. Feedback Control of Semiconductor Processing 
 
Consider the following control instrumentation for a semiconductor wafer processing 
unit as shown in Figure 5.10. Three replenishing tanks A, B and C are used to refill 
the chemicals needed for wafer washing and processing. Concentration meter is used 
[2007] to monitor the concentration of the chemicals used in the wafer processing 
apparatus. Control action is taken using comparisons of the measured concentration 
against reference concentrations. Construct a block flow diagram labeling all signals 
and transfer functions. 
 
 
Figure 5.10. Feedback Control of Chemical Concentration during Semi-conductor Processing. 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
364 
43.0. Periodic Disturbance and System Stability 
 
Consider a process with the transfer function Gp(s) and a controller with a transfer 
function Gc(s) as shown in Figure 5.11. The feedback control is based on 
measurement of the output variable y(t). The load or disturbance transfer function is 
given by L(s). The set point transfer function is given by r(s). 
 
Show that the output transfer function y(s) can be written as follows; 
 
 
( )
( )
( ) ( )
( )
1
( )
( )
p
c
p
c
G
s
L s
G s r s
y s
G
s G s
 
(5.165) 
 
 
Consider a prototypical first order process with the transfer function; 
 
 
( )
1
p
p
p
k
G
s
s
 
(5.166) 
 
 
Consider PI controller with the transfer function given by; 
 
 
1
( )
c
I
c
I
k
s
G s
s
 
(5.167) 
 
 
Consider a disturbance that is periodic in nature with the transfer function; 
 
 
2
2
( )
L s
s
 
(5.168) 
 
 
Figure 5.11. Feedback Control of Chemical Concentration during Semi-conductor Processing. 
 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
365 
 
Consider a step change in the set point and the transfer function r(s) can be given by; 
 
 
( )
R
r s
s  
(5.169) 
 
 
Show that the closed loop transfer function can be written as; 
 
 
3
2
2
3
2
2
2
( )
1
c
p
I
c
p
c
p
I
c
I
CL
p
p
I
p c
p c
s
k k
s k k
s
k k
k
G
s
s
s
s
s
k k
k k
 
(5.170). 
 
 
Under what conditions can underdamped oscillations be expected ? What is the final 
steady state value of the output function y(t). Did the disturbance affect stability ? 
Why not ? 
44.0. PI Control of Intermediate Product in Series with First Order Followed by Zeroth 
Order Reaction 
 
Consider the following scheme of reactions performed in a CSTR given in 
Levenspiel [1999]. 
 
 
1
2
k
k
A
R
S  
(5.171) 
 
 
The kinetics of species A and R can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
1
2
A
A
R
A
dC
k C
dt
dC
k C
k
dt
 
(5.172) 
 
 
 
There is interest in designing a PI control for the intermediate product R as shown in 
Figure 5.8. Dicuss the PI control for the concentration of R. Show that the model 
equations for reacting species A and intermediate species R can be written as 
follows;  
 
 
 
1
A
Ai
A
A
dC
C
C
k C
dt  
(5.173) 
 
 
1
2
0
(
)
R
R
A
dC
C
Da C
Da
dt
 
(5.174) 
 
 
The process transfer functions can be written as follows; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
366 
 
1
( )
1
Ai
A
C
C
s
s
Da
s
 
(5.175) 
 
1
2
1
1
1
1
Ai
R
Da C
Da
C
s
s
s
s
Da
s s
 
(5.176) 
 
 
Where  is the residence time of the reacting species in the reactor and Da1 is the 
Damkohler number given by (k1) and Da2 is given by (k2). The control transfer 
function can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
( )
c
I
c
I
k
s
G s
s
 
(5.177) 
 
 
What is the closed loop transfer function, gCL(s). Under what conditions would there 
be a underdamped response ?  
45.0. PI Control of Intermediate Species in Denbigh Scheme of Reactions  
 
Denbigh [1999] presented a scheme of general scheme of reactions for series, 
parallel and series- parallel reactions. The kinetics of these reactions; 
 
 
12
1
34
3
2
4
A
A
R
A
R
S
R
T
A
U
R
dC
k C
dt
dC
k C
k C
dt
dC
k C
dt
dC
k C
dt
dC
k C
dt
 
(5.179) 
 
 
Where k12 = k1 + k2 and k34 = k3 + k4. Show that the process transfer functions for the 
reacting species in a CSTR during transient operation can be written as follows; 
 
 
  
(5.178) 
Figure 5.12. Denbigh Scheme of Reactions. 
 

Proportional, Proportional Integral, Proportional Derivative Feedback Control 
 
 
367 
 
12
12
12
34
3
12
34
2
12
4
12
12
34
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Ai
A
Ai
R
Ai
S
Ai
T
Ai
U
C
C
s
s
s
Da s
C Da
C
s
s
s
Da
s
Da
C Da
C
s
s
s
Da
s
Da
s
Da C
C
s
s
s
s
Da
Da Da C
C
s
s
s
s
Da
s
Da
 
(5.180) 
 
 
 
Consider a PI controller with the transfer function; 
 
 
1
( )
c
I
c
I
k
s
G s
s
 
(5.181) 
 
 
What is the closed loop transfer function for each of the processes of species A, R, S, 
T and U. Under what conditions would underdamped oscillatory concentrations 
develop ? 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
FREQUENCY RESPONSE ANALYSIS 
 
 
6.1. MOTIVATION 
 
The criterion for closed loop stability was discussed in Chapter 5.0. on Feedback control. 
The poles of the closed loop transfer function as given by Eq. (5.15) have to be stable, i.e., 
when zero it can become unstable and when negative the output response moves in the 
opposite direction compared with the set point change. Even when the process and control 
action devised appear stable according to the stability criterion developed there can be some 
stability problems. How? There can be uncertainties associated with the parameters that are 
used to describe the system and the gain constants and time constants for the control system. 
The uncertainties can become large enough for a reversal of stability criterion arrived at. This 
raises the question of how robust is the control action considered for a given process. If there 
are time delays in the process and control action taken the transfer function would contain an 
e-s. This renders the transform function irrational. The P(s)/Q(s) rational form is not 
preserved any more. 
The concern is the robustness of the control system for the considered process. Often 
times when what the problem is, is realized then dozen solutions can be offered to the 
problem. An old adage is even before dumping it all into the river, count it before dumping. 
Measure of robustness can be obtained from the method of frequency response analysis. 
Transfer functions that are irrational on account of time delays can be rationalized by use of 
what is called Pade approximation. [Bequette, 2003] 
 
 
6.2. OUTPUT RESPONSE OF A PROTOTYPICAL FIRST ORDER  
PROCESS TO A PERIODIC INPUT 
 
Consider a prototypical first order system that is linear. The differential equation that can 
be used to describe such a process is as follows; 
 
 
p
p
dy
y
k u
dt
 
(6.1) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
370 
Where p is the time constant, kp is the process gain, u is the input variable and y is the 
output variable. The Laplace transform of Eq. (6.1) given that the initial value of the output 
variable is 0 can be written as; 
 
 
( )
( )
1
p
p
k u s
y s
s
 
(6.2) 
 
Consider a sinuous input, u = Asin(t). The output would then be in the Laplace domain; 
 
 
2
2
( )
1
p
p
A k
y s
s
s
 
(6.3) 
 
The time domain y(t) can be obtained by using the convolution theorem [Mickley, 
Sherwood and Reed, 1957] on Eq. (6.3), and; 
 
 
0
( )
sin
p
t
p
t
p
p
k
y t
A
e
p dp  
(6.4) 
 
Integration by parts can be used in order to obtain the integral in Eq. (6.4). An I can be 
defined as; 
 
 
0
sin
p
p
t
I
e
t
p dp  
(6.5) 
 
Let; 
 
 
sin
p
p
u
t
p
dv
e
dp
 
(6.6) 
 
Realizing that;  
 
 
0
0
t
t
udv
uv
vdu  
(6.7) 
 
Another I emerges in RHS, right hand side of Eq. (6.7) and groups with the I on LHS, left 
hand side of Eq. (6.5) to give; 
 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
371 
 
2
2
( )
sin
1
p
t
p
p
p
Ak
y t
wt
e
 
(6.8) 
 
 was introduced to simplify the expression for y(t) such that cos() = 1 and sin() = p. 
or tan() = (p). The amplitude ratio is obtained as the ratio of the amplitude of the output 
sine wave and the amplitude of the input since wave. This can be obtained at long times after 
the exponential term in Eq. (6.8) has decayed to a large measure as; 
 
 
2
2
1
p
p
k
AR
  
(6.9) 
 
AR, amplitude ratio is found to be independent of the initial input amplitude A. The 
phase shift is another measure of this analysis. It is given by the relative shift in phase 
between the output and input sine waves. This can be seen to be  from Eq. (6.8). The input 
and output responses are plotted in Figure 6.1. 
 
 
Figure 6.1. Response y(t) to input u = sin(2t) to a First Order Process with Gain kp = 3 hr-1 and Process 
Time Constant p = 1.5 hr. 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
372 
It can be seen from Figure 6.1 that there is damping of the input function. AR, amplitude 
ratio of 0..3 is realized. There also can be seen a phase lag. The process acts like a low 
pass.filter. 
 
 
6.3. BODE AND NYQUIST DIAGRAMS 
 
In a Bode diagram, the AR amplitude ratio is plotted against the frequency in a log-log 
plot and the phase angle,  is plotted against the frequency in a semi-log plot [van 
Vackenberg, 1984]. A semi-log plot is chosen for the phase angle diagram in anticipation of 
negative values for phase shift. The Bode plot for the input function u = A sin(t) to a 
prototypical first order process as discussed in section 6.2 is shown in Figure 6.2 and Figure 
6.3. 
Aliter, another method of obtaining the Bode plot [Golnaraghi and Kuo, 20..09] is 
by..substitution of (i) for s in the Laplace domain of the transfer function. Then the 
expression is expressed as a complex number Z = a + ib. Further the steady state process gain 
can then be obtained from the absolute value of Z, i.e.  
 
 
2
2
Z
a
b
b
ATAN a
 
(6.10) 
 
For example for the prototypical first order process given by Eq. (6.1) the transfer 
function can be seen to be; 
 
 
( )
1
p
p
k
G s
s
 
(6.11) 
 
s is replaced with (i) in Eq. (6.11) and; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
(
)
1
1
1
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
k
k
k
G i
Z
i
i
 
(6.12) 
 
Applying Eq. (6.10) into Eq. (6.12) 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
(
)
p
p
p
k
Z
a
b
b
ATAN
ATAN
a
 
(6.13) 
 
 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
373 
 
Figure 6.2. Bode AR Plot of Response y(t) to input u = sin(2t) to a First Order Process with Gain kp = 3 
hr-1 and Process Time Constant p = 1.5 hr. 
 
 
Figure 6.3. Bode Phase Angle Plot of Response y(t) to input u = sin(2t) to a First Order Process with 
Gain kp = 3 hr-1 and Process Time Constant p = 1.5 hr. 
 
In a Nyquist diagram [1932] the imaginary part “b” can be plotted against the real part 
“a” in Eq. (61.2) for example. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
374 
Example 6.1 Construct the Bode plot and Nyquist diagram for a point in a semi-infinite 
medium subject to constant wall temperature boundary condition. Compare the results 
between damped wave conduction and relaxation and Fourier conduction. 
More detailed discussion on damped wave conduction and relaxation can be seen in 
chapter 4.0 of this book and also in Sharma [2005]. The governing equation for transient 
temperature for a semi-infinite medium heated by maintaining a constant wall temperature at 
the surface and assuming that the heat transmission is by damped wave conduction and 
relaxation mechanism can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
u
u
u
X
  
(6.14) 
 
Where, 
0
0
(
) ;
;
(
)
s
r
r
T
T
t
x
u
X
T
T
  
 
Ts is the surface temperature and T0 is the initial temperature of the semi-infinite medium. 
Obtaining the Laplace transform of Eq. (6.14) and applying the boundary conditions u = 0 at 
X = , u = 1 at X = 0; 
 
 
(
1)
( )
X
s s
e
u s
s
 
(6.15) 
 
Replacing s with (i) in Eq. (6.15) and obtaining the “a” and “b”; 
 
 
2
2
2
(
)
1
....
2!
i
X
u i
a
ib
X
i
i
 
(6.16) 
 
Let 
2
c
id
i
 
(6.17) 
 
Taylor series approximation was used to rationalize the Laplace domain expression with 
exponential term in Eq. (6.15). c and d in Eq. (6.17) can be solved for by squaring both sides 
of Eq. (6.17) and equating the real and imaginary parts on both sides, LHS and RHS of the 
resulting equation and; 
 
 
2
2
1
2
2
2
4
2
i
c
d
 
(6.18) 
 
a and b in Eq. (6.16) can then be seen to be; 
 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
375 
 
2
2
2
2!
1 1
2!
Xd
X
a
X
b
cX
 
(6.19) 
 
 
Figure 6.4. Bode Process Gain Plot for X = 0..5 in Semi-infinite Medium Subjected to Constant 
Wall.Temperature during Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
376 
The same analysis is repeated assuming Fourier conduction in the semi-infinite medium. 
The governing equation for transient temperature would then become; 
 
 
2
2
u
u
X
 
(6.20) 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transform of Eq. (6.20) and applying the boundary conditions u = 
0 at X =, u = 1 at X = 0; 
 
 
)
( )
X
s
e
u s
s
 
(6.21) 
 
Replacing s with (i) in Eq. (6.21) and obtaining the “a” and “b”; 
 
 
1
(
)
X
i
a
ib
u i
e
i
 
(6.22) 
 
Taylor series approximation is used to rationalize the exponential term in Eq. (6.22); 
 
 
2
2
1
2!
i
X
a
ib
X i
 
(6.23) 
 
Let
i
c
id . It can be seen by squaring both sides and by equating the real and 
imaginary parts of both sides of the resulting equation c and d can be obtained and is; 
 
 
1
2
c
d
 
(6.24) 
 
Combining Eq. (6.24) with Eq. (6.23) it can be seen that; 
 
 
2
X
a
 
(6.25) 
 
 
2
2
1
2!
2
X
X
b
 
(6.26) 
 
The Bode plot for X = 0.5 in the semi-infinite medium heated by Fourier conduction 
from a constant temperature surface is shown in Figure 6.5. The Bode plot for the same point 
in the medium heated by damped wave conduction and relaxation is also shown in Figure 6.5. 
A cross-over in the steady-state process gain can be seen at a frequency of approximately  = 
2. After the cross-over the process gain is higher for parabolic case compared with the 
hyperbolic case. Before the cross-over the process gain is lower for the parabolic case 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
377 
compared with the hyperbolic case. Before the cross-over the process gain is insensitive to the 
frequency for the parabolic case. After the cross-over the process gain is more sensitive to 
frequency for the parabolic case compared with the hyperbolic case. The process gain is 
equally sensitive to frequency for the hyperbolic case both before and after the cross-over 
frequency. The Bode phase angle plots for the parabolic and hyperbolic cases at X = 0.5 in 
the semi-infinite medium is shown in Figure 6.6. S shaped curvatures are found for both 
parabolic and hyperbolic cases. The Nyquist diagram for the hyperbolic cases at X = 0.5 in 
the semi-infinite medium is shown in Figure 6.7. 
 
 
Figure 6.5. Bode Process Gain Plot for X = 0..6 in Semi-infinite Medium Subjected to Constant 
Wall.Temperature during Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation and Fourier Conduction (Side by 
Side Comparison). 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
378 
 
Figure 6.6. Bode Phase Angle Plot for X = 0.5 in Semi-infinite Medium Subjected to Constant 
Wall.Temperature during Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation and Fourier Conduction (Side by 
Side Comparison). 
 
 
Figure 6.7. Nyquist Diagram for X = 0.5 in Semi-infinite Medium Subjected to Constant Temperature 
Surface during Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation. 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
379 
6.4. FREQUENCY ANALYSIS OF SECOND ORDER PROCESSES 
 
The discussions about prototypical second order systems and how over damped, critically 
damped and underdamped systems can arise for a step input was discussed in chapter 4.0. 
Here the frequency analysis as discussed in the above sections is applied to prototypical 
second order systems. The steady state process gain and phase characteristics that can be 
expected as a function of frequency, for prototypical second order systems are sketched in 
Figure 6.8. 
A resonant peak, Rpeak can be expected in the AR or steady process gain as shown in 
Figure 6.8 at a frequency of R for higher order systems such as prototypical second order 
systems. For systems with overshoot Rpeak would be very high. It is desirable to maintain Rpeak 
at values of about 1.1-1.5. R is called the resonant frequency corresponding to the 
occurrence of resonant peak Rpeak in the gain. A BW, bandwidth can be defined as the 
frequency corresponding to a value of 0.707 of the zero frequency ABS(Z) or the steady 
process gain. This is also shown in Figure 6.8. The BW frequency value can be used to better 
understand the transient properties of the time domain of the system under study. Quicker rise 
time manifests as larger bandwidth. Time response is slow for systems with lower bandwidth. 
BW can be used to study the filtering characteristics as well as the robustness of the system. 
The slope of the ABS(Z) vs.  curve can be representative of a „cut-off‟ rate. This can be 
used to gauge the signal to noise ratio of the system.  
 
 
6.5. CLOSED LOOP STABILITY – BODE AND NYQUIST CRITERION 
 
The closed loop shown in Figure 5.4 is applicable in general for any control action taken 
on any considered process. Consider the case when the loop in Figure 5-4 is opened as a 
hypothetical experiment in thought. A periodic wave such as a cosinuous function may be 
applied to the set point. The controller settings and tuning parameters are such that the output 
lags the input by PI radians. The amplitude of the output is the same as that of the input. 
Consider stoppage of the signal r(t) suddenly and closure of the loop subsequently. The error, 
e(t) = -y(t) the output variable. The output oscillates at the same frequency and magnitude as 
before the loop was closed. Such a control loop is said to be nominally stable. The control 
loop may be considered unstable when upon closure of the loop the output increases with 
time and the amplitude of the output is greater than the amplitude of the input. In the open 
loop the output is out of phase with input. The amplitude of the output signal is greater than 
the set point. Such a stability criterion is called as Bode Criterion. For a stable process, Gp(s) 
has no poles in the Right Half Plane and has the phase angle cross – PI radians only once in 
the Bode diagram. The system is considered closed loop stable if and only if; 
 
 
1
c
c
p
AR
G
G
 
(6.27) 
 
ARc is the amplitude ratio at the cross-over frequency, c. This is when the phase angle is 
–PI radians. The Nyquist stability criterion states that the process is said to be closed loop 
stable if the Nyquist diagram of Gp(s)Gc(s) does not engulf the critical identified point (-1,0.). 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
380 
The gain margin can be calculated as the reciprocal of the amplitude of the cross 
over.frequency. So the Bode stability criterion in terms of the gain margin can be written as; 
 
 
Mgain > 1 
(6.28) 
 
The phase margin m is the corresponding phase when the amplitude AR of Gc(s)Gp(s) = 
1. The corresponding frequency is m. The stability criterion can be written as; 
 
 
m > 0 
(6.29) 
 
It is up to what extent or degree of measure of phase angle that can decrease prior to 
onset of instability. 
 
Example 6.2. Construct the Bode diagram for the process in Example 6.1. 
The transfer function in worked Example 5.1 can be written as follows; 
 
 
2
2
0.01
1
1
( )
( )
0.01
0.02
1
p
p
p
s
y s
s
s
s
 
(6.30) 
 
Let s = i, Then, 
 
 
2
2
0.01
1
(1
0.01
)
0.02
p
p
p
i
Z
a
ib
i
 
(6.31) 
 
 
Figure 6.8. Typical Frequency Response Characteristics of Prototypical Second Order System. 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
381 
 
Figure 6.9. Bode AR Plot for Example 6.1 when p = 0..01. 
 
The “a” and “b” of the analytic function Z in Eq. (6.31) can be found by multiplying the 
numerator and denominator of Eq. (6.31) by (-0.022p -i(1-0.01(2p
2)). 
 
 
2
4
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
2
2
0.01 10
0.02
1
0.00981
1 10
0.0199
p
p
p
p
p
p
i
Z
a
ib  
(6.32) 
 
The AR is given by; 
 
 
2
2
AR
a
b
b
ATAN a
 
(6.33) 
 
The Bode AR plot when the process time constant, p = 0.01 is shown in Figure 6.9. The 
Bode phase angle  plot for the system in Example 5.1 for p = 0.01 is shown in Figure 6.10. 
 
 
6.6. SUMMARY 
 
For a given process of first order or second order suitable control action can be devised as 
shown in Chapter 5.0. The closed loop transfer function can be calculated and the system can 
be tuned to be stable. This is achieved by changing the control gain and lag parameters. There 
can be uncertainties associated with the parameters that are used to describe the system and 
the gain constants and time constants for the control system. This can cause a reversal in 
stability to instability. So the system has to be made robust. Robustness of system is 
measured using methods of frequency analysis described in this chapter. The output response 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
382 
to a sinuous input to a prototypical first order process was discussed. The amplitude reduction 
and phase angle development can be seen in Figure 6.1 as well as in the expression given by 
Eq. (6.8). Aliter is provided for calculation of AR, amplitude ratio and phase angle f. The 
Laplace transform variable „s‟ is replaced with „(iw)‟ in the transfer function. The real and 
imaginary part of the resulting complex number, Z = X +iY is calculated. The AR is given by. 
In a Bode diagram, the AR amplitude ratio is plotted against the frequency in a log-log 
plot and the phase angle, f is plotted against the frequency in a semi-log plot. A semi-log plot 
is chosen for the phase angle diagram in anticipation of negative values for phase shift. The 
AR and phase angle Bode plots for the sinuous input to a first order process was given in 
Figure 6.2 and Figure 6.3. In Example 6.1, the Bode plots and Nyquist diagram for a point in 
a semi-infinite medium subject to constant wall temperature boundary condition were 
constructed. The results between damped wave conduction and relaxation and Fourier 
conduction models were compared with each other. Taylor series approximation was used to 
rationalize the Laplace domain expression with exponential term in Eq. (6.15). The results 
were presented in Figures 6.4 -6.7. 
Typical frequency response characteristics of prototypical second order system were 
discussed. Resonant peak can be expected in the frequency domain where there was an 
„overshoot‟ in the time domain or where there was a damping coefficient of z < 1 in the 
Laplace domain. Bandwidth is defined as the frequency corresponding to a value of 0.707 of 
the zero frequency ABS(Z) or the steady process gain. Quicker rise time manifests as larger 
bandwidth. The closed loop stability considerations discussed in Chapter 5.0 takes shape in 
the frequency domain as Bode criterion and Nyquist criterion. Bode criterion states that; The 
system is considered closed loop stable if and only if; The Nyquist stability criterion states 
that the process is said to be closed loop stable if the Nyquist diagram of Gp(s)Gc(s) does not 
engulf the critical identified point (-1,0). Gain margin and phase margin are defined. AR and 
phase angle Bode plots were constructed for the transfer function obtained in Example 6.1.  
 
 
Figure 6.10. Bode Phase Angle Plot for Example 6.1 when p = 0.01. 
 
 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
383 
6.7. FURTHER READING 
 
E. van Valkenburg, M. (1984). University of Illinois at Urabana-Champaign, “In Memorian: 
Hendrik W. Bode, (1905-1982)”, IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, Vol. AC-29, 3, 193-
194. Quote: “Something should be said about his name. To his colleagues at Bell 
laboratories and the generations of engineers that have followed, the pronounciation is 
boh-dee. The Bode family preferred that the original Dutch be used as boh-dah”.  
Golnaraghi, F. & Kuo, B. C. (2009). Auntomatic Control Systems, John Wiley & Sons, 9th 
Edition, Hoboken, NJ. 
Levenspiel, O. (1999). Chemical Reaction Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ. 
Mickley, H. S., Sherwood, T. E. & Reed, C. E. (1957). Applied Mathematics in Chemical 
Engineering, McGraw Hill Professional, Second Edition, New York, NY. 
Nyquist, H. (1932). “Regeneration Theory” Bell System Technical Journal, Vol. 11, 126-147. 
Sharma, K. R. (2005). Damped Wave Transport and Relaxation, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands. 
W. Bequette, B. (2003). Process Control: Modeling, Design, and Simulation, Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
Yeung, K. S. (1985). “A Reformulation of Nyquist‟s Criterion”, IEEE Trans. Educ., Vol. E-
28, 59-60. 
 
 
6.8. EXERCISES 
 
Review Questions 
 
1.0. How do uncertainities in parameter values affect stability of output response ? 
2.0. What is meant by „robustness‟ of control ? 
3.0. What is meant by reversal of „stability criterion‟ ? 
4.0. What happens to the realizability of the system when a lag term such as e-s appear ? 
5.0. Illustrate a use of Pade approximation. 
6.0. What are the differences between AR amplitude ratio and phase angle  obtained 
during frequency analysis ? 
7.0. What in Figure 6.1 leads to the inference of a property such as „low pass filter‟ 
characteristic ? 
8.0. Why is a semi-log plot chosen in phase angle Bode plot ? 
9.0. Does process gain and time constant affect AR and phase angle ? Why ? 
10.0. Derive the amplitude ratio, AR, phase angle  for a given system output response 
for a given input to a prototypical second order process. 
11.0. What are the ordinates of Nyquist diagram ? 
12.0. What is meant by resonant peak ? 
13.0. What is the significance of bandwidth ? 
14.0. Can filtering characteristics be obtained from bandwidth analysis ? 
15.0. What is meant by „cut-off‟ rate ? 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
384 
16.0. When is a loop considered to be „nominally stable‟ ? 
17.0. What is meant by „Bode criterion’ ? 
18.0. What is meant by „Nyquist criterion’ ? 
19.0. What are the differences between „gain margin‟ and „phase margin‟ ? 
20.0. What is the significance of minima and maxima in Bode diagram of Example 4.1 as 
shown in Figure 6.9 ? 
21.0. Does the curve found in Figure 6.10 inflect ? 
22.0. What do you expect to see in AR Bode and phase angle Bode of a critically damped 
system ? 
23.0. How does the Nyquist diagram of a overdamped system differ from that of an 
underdamped system ? 
24.0. Can anything peculiar be noted in the Nyquist diagram of a critically damped 
system ? 
 
 
Problems 
 
25.0. Bode Diagram of Output Reponse of PI Control of Automatic Washing Machine 
Consider the output transfer function obtained in Example 4.3. The design is a PI 
control of voltage supplied to automatic washing machine. 
 
 
m
L
p
m
m
s
s
G
s
s sJ
B
 
 
 
1
I
c
c
I
s
G
s
k
s
 
 
1
p
c
p
c
G
s G
s
y s
G
s
G
s
 
 
 
 
Construct Bode plots for y(s). What can be inferred from AR plot and phase angle 
plot. 
26.0. Construct Nyquist diagram for output transfer function in Exercise 22.0.. 
27.0. Bode Diagram of Output Response of PI Control during Hydolysis of Ethylene 
Oxide  
 
The output transfer function of the system with PI control during hydrolysis of 
ethylene oxide is given by Eq. (4.73). Construct AR Bode and phase angle Bode 
plots for the system output response. How does the curve change when damping 
coefficient,  < 1. i.e., what are the differences seen in the AR Bode of underdamped 
systems and AR Bode of a overdamped system ? What are the differences between 
phase angle Bode of underdamped system and phase angle Bode of overdamped 
system? 
28.0. Bode Diagram of Output Response of System of PD Control of Prototypical First 
Order Process 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
385 
 
The closed loop transfer function of system with PD control of prototypical first 
order process is given by Eq. (4.80). Construct; 
(i) AR Bode Plot 
(ii) Phase Angle Bode Plot 
(iii) Nyquist Diagram 
29.0. Bode Diagram of Output Response of System of PD Control during Hydrolysis of 
Ethylene Oxide 
 
The closed loop transfer function response of system with PD control during 
hydrolysis of ethylene xide to form ethylene glycol is given by Eq. (4.90). Construct; 
(i) AR Bode Plot 
(ii) Phase Angle Plot 
(iii) Nyquist Diagram 
30.0. Frequency Analysis of Intermediate Formation in CSTR from Reactions ni Series 
 
Transient analysis of intermediate formation from reactions in series was discussed 
in Example 4.6. An example of such a reaction is chlorination of methane leading to 
formation of methyl chloride, dimethylene dichloride, choloform and carbon 
tetrachloride. The closed loop transfer function, GCL(s) of the system of PI control of 
such reactions to a step input is given in Eq. (4.117). Construct; 
(i) AR Bode Plot 
(ii) Phase Angle Bode Plot 
(iii) Nyquist Diagram 
(iv) What is the gain margin ? 
31.0. Bode Plot of System Response of PI Control of Prototypical First Order Process to 
Input that undergoes Exponential Decay with Periodicity  
 
Consider any prototypical first order process. Consider a PI controller used to control 
this process. Let the process gains, kp = 3; kc =0.33. The time response of the process 
output variable y(t) to a change in the set point,  
 
 
2
1
( )
((
1)
1)
r s
s



  
 
 
 
 
was discussed in exercise 2.0 at the end of chapter 4.0. The time constant of the 
controller, I becomes 10% of the time constant of the process, p. Disturbances are 
neglected and valve and measurement dynamics are lumped into the process transfer 
function. The transfer functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) and that for 
PI control, gc(s) can seen to be; 
 
 
( )
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
 
 
Construct the AR and phase angle Bode plots for the closed loop transfer function 
GCL(s). 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
386 
32.0. Bode Plot for System with PI Control Action for Prototypical Second Order 
Overdamped Process 
 
Consider any prototypical second order process. Consider a PI controller used to 
control this process. Let the process gains, kp = kc =1. Let the damping factor  = 4.0. 
A step change in the set point, r(s) = 1/s is given. The time constant of the controller, 
I becomes 5% of the time constant of the process, p. The simplified control block 
diagram given in Figure 4.4 is applicable. Disturbances are neglected and valve and 
measurement dynamics are lumped into the process transfer function The transfer 
functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) and that for PI control, gc(s) can 
be seen to be; 
 
 
2 2
( )
2
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
 
 
Construct the AR Bode and Phase angle Bode for the closed loop transfer function of 
the system. What happens to the characteristics of the Bode diagram when the 
process gain constant equals the controller gain constant. 
33.0. Bode Plot of System with PI Control for Prototypical Second Order Undamped 
Process 
 
Consider any prototypical second order process as in Exercise 7.0 at end of chapter 
4.0. Consider a PI controller used to control this process. Let the process gains, kp = 
kc =1. Let the damping factor  = 0.0. A step change in the set point, r(s) = 1/s is 
given. The time constant of the controller, I becomes 5% of the time constant of the 
process, p. The simplified control block diagram given in Figure 5.4 is applicable. 
Disturbances are neglected and valve and measurement dynamics are lumped into the 
process transfer function. Develop the expression for the output variable y(s) in the 
Laplace domain and time domain y(t). Sketch the response y(t) as a function of time. 
The transfer functions for prototypical first order process, gp(s) and that for PI 
control, gc(s) can be seen to be; 
 
 
2 2
( )
1
1
( )
p
p
p
I
c
c
I
k
g
s
s
s
g
s
k
s
 
 
 
 
Construct the AR Bode and Phase angle Bode for the closed loop transfer function of 
the system. What happens to the characteristics of the Bode diagram when the system 
becomes undamped from a system that is underdamped ? 
34.0. Bode Plot of System with PI Control of a Process that is Integrating Unstable 
 
Consider a process that is integrating unstable and has the following transfer 
function. 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
387 
 
0.5
( )
(
2)
p
G
s
s


 
 
 
 
Show that a PI controller can stabilize this integrating unstable process. Consider the 
control transfer function; 
 
 
(
1)
( )
I
c
c
I
s
G s
k
s




 
 
 
Show that the closed loop transfer function can be given by; 
 
 
2
0.5
(
1)
( )
(
(0.5
2)
0.5
)
c
I
CL
I
I
c
c
k s
G
s
s
s
k
k








 
 
 
 
As discussed in problem 9.0 at end of Chapter 4.0, r stability 0 < kc < 4. The system 
would be underdamped when; 
 
 
2
2
2
(4
0.25
2
)
2
(0.5
2)
c
I
c
c
c
I
c
k
k
k
k
k







 
 
 
 
Construct the AR and phase angle Bode plots for; 
(i) Process that is Integrating Stable 
(ii) Closed Loop Transfer Function that is Underdamped 
(iii) Closed Loop Transfer Function that is Overdamped 
 
How do the characteristics of the Bode diagram change with change in stability from 
integrating stable to overdamped stable and to underdamped unstable ? 
35.0. Bode Plot of Systems with Inverse Response 
 
Some systems exhibit a inverse response as discussed in Problem 10 at end of 
Chapter 4.0. The output response to a unit step response in such systems decreases 
initially and increases to a final steady state later. The transfer function of such a 
system has positive pole in the numerator; 
 
 
(
3)
( )
. ( )
(
0.2)(
2)
p
s
G
s
u s
s
s




 
 
 
 
 
Consider a PD controller for example with a transfer function given by; 
 
 
1
c
c
D
G
s
k
s
 
 
 
 
The closed-loop transfer function of the system is given by; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
388 
 
2
2
3
3
1
1
0.4
2.2
3
(1
3
)
D
D
CL
D
D
c
c
c
s
s
G
s
s
s
k
k
k
 
 
 
Show that for small D the system would be stable. For stability, kc < 0.133 and 
0.733
0.33
D
ck
. Is this both possible for positive values of gain constant of 
controller, kc. and controller time constant D. Construct the AR and phase angle 
Bode diagrams for the closed loop transfer function. What are the differences in 
characteristics found in the Bode diagram for; 
(i) Process with Inverse Response 
(ii) Closed Loop Transfer Function (stable regime) 
(iii) Closed Loop Transfer Function (underdamped oscillatory regime) 
36.0. Bode Plot of System with P only Control of Jacketed CSTR 
 
The Lapalce transfer functions of model equations for dimensionless concentration 
and dimensionless temperature for the jacketed CSTR described in Figure 4.19 are as 
follows; 
 
 
( )
1
*
*
*
( )
1
1
*
1
*
1
*
Da
X s
s
s
Da
Da H
U
H
Y s
s
s
Da
s
U
s
s
U
s
s
U
 
 
 
Consider a proportional controller with the control transfer function; 
 
 
c
c
G
s
k  
 
 
 
Show that the closed loop transfer function for the dimensionless concentration and 
dimensionless concentration can be given by; 
 
 
 
 
 
Construct the AR and phase angle Bode plots for; 
 
(i) Dimensionless Concentration, X(s) 
(ii) Dimensionless Temperature, Y(s) 
(iii) Closed Loop Transfer Function, GCL(s) for P only control of dimensionless 
concentration 
(iv) Closed Loop Transfer Function, GCL(s) for P only control of dimensionless 
temperature 
2
3
2
*
1
*
*
*
* 1
( )
*
1
1
*
*
*
*
1
c
CL
c
c
CL
c
c
k Da
G
s
s
s
Da
k Da
k
s
H
U
H
U
Da
G
s
s
s
Da
U
s
Da
U
k
H
U
k
H
U
Da

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
389 
37.0. Bode Plot of System with PI Controller with Process Transfer Function with One 
Pole at Origin 
 
Consider a second-order process with the process transfer function with one pole at 
the origin; 
 
 
3
2
1
p
G
s
s
s
 
 
 
 
A PI controller with integral time constant of I = 2 can lead to a pole-zero 
cancellation (see Exercise 15.0 at end of chapter 4.0). Show that the closed loop 
transfer function can be given by; 
 
 
 
2
3
3
c
CL
I
I
k
G
s
s
 
 
 
Construct the AR and Phase Angl Bode plots. Compare the characteristics of these 
plots with the AR and phase angle Bode plot of the process transfer function. 
38.0. Nyquist Diagarm of Proportional Controller of CSTR with Recycle 
 
Consider the process conducted in a CSTR with recycle as shown in Figure 4.26. The 
transfer function of model equation for the dimensionless concentration in transient 
state is given by; 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
A
A
A
dX
R
Da
X
Da
R
R
d
Da
R
X
s
R
s s
Da
s s
Da
R
R
 
 
 
 
where R is the recycle ratio. Consider a P only controller for the dimensionless 
concentration. What is the closed loop transfer function for the system. Construct a 
Nyquist diagram for the closed loop transfer function. What are the differences in 
characteristics between the Nyquist diagram of the process transfer function and the 
Nyquist diagram of the closed loop transfer function ? How does the charactertistics 
of the Nyquist diagram change when the combined system changes in regime from 
overdamped system to underdamped oscillatory systems ? 
39.0. Bode Diagram for a Prototypcial First Order Process with Dead Time 
 
Consider a first order process with a lag time, . The process transfer function with 
dead time,  can be written as; 
 
 
( )
1
s
p
p
p
k e
G
s
s
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
390 
 
Construct the AR and phase angle Bode plots for this process transfer function. Can 
you arrive at a suitable controller for this process from the Bode plots.  
40.0. Bode Plots of Systems with Proportional Derivative, PD Controller for a First 
Order Process with Dead Time 
 
Consider a PD, proportional derivative controller for a first order process with a lag 
time, . The process transfer function with dead time,  can be written as (see 
Exercise 20 at end of Chapter 5.0); 
 
 
( )
1
s
p
p
p
k e
G
s
s
 
 
The controller transfer function is given by; 
 
 
( )
1
c
c
D
G s
k
s
 
 
 
In order to evaluate the stability of closed loop transfer function Pade‟ approximation 
can be used to rationalize the process transfer function. The Pade‟ approximation is; 
 
 
2
2
s
s
e
s
 
 
 
 
Develop the expression for the closed loop transfer function. In order for the system 
to be realizable add a filter with order n whose transfer function can be written as; 
 
 
1
1
n
F s
s
 
 
 
Construct the AR and phase angle Bode plots for; 
(i) Process  
(ii) Nth order filter  
(iii) Closed loop transfer function 
 
Comment on the characteristics of Bode plots in each case. 
41.0. Bode Plots of System with PI Control of Intermediate Species in Denbigh Scheme of 
Reactions 
 
Denbigh [Levenspiel, 1999] presented a scheme of general scheme of reactions for 
series, parallel and series- parallel reactions. The scheme is given in Figure 5.12 (see 
Exercise 24.0 at end of Chapter 4.0). The kinetics of these reactions are 
 

Frequency Response Analysis 
 
 
391 
 
12
1
34
3
2
4
A
A
R
A
R
S
R
T
A
U
R
dC
k C
dt
dC
k C
k C
dt
dC
k C
dt
dC
k C
dt
dC
k C
dt
 
 
 
Where k12 = k1 + k2 and k34 = k3 + k4. Show that the process transfer functions for the 
reacting species in a CSTR during transient operation can be written as follows; 
 
 
12
12
12
34
3
12
34
2
12
4
12
12
34
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Ai
A
Ai
R
Ai
S
Ai
T
Ai
U
C
C
s
s
s
Da s
C Da
C
s
s
s
Da
s
Da
C Da
C
s
s
s
Da
s
Da
s
Da C
C
s
s
s
s
Da
Da Da C
C
s
s
s
s
Da
s
Da
 
 
 
Consider a PI controller with the transfer function; 
 
 
1
( )
c
I
c
I
k
s
G s
s
 
 
What is the closed loop transfer function for each of the processes of species A, R, S, 
T and U. Construct the AR And Phase angle Bode plots for; 
(i) Transfer Functions of species A, R, S, T and U 
(ii) Closed Loop Transfer Function of PI Control of Concentration of Species A, R, 
S, T and U 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
ADVANCED CONTROL METHODS  
 
 
7.1. ESTIMATION AND CONTROL OF POLYMERIZATION REACTORS 
 
The control of polymerization reactors is a non-trivial task due to the following reasons; 
 
(a) Specification of control objectives 
(b) High viscosities and exothermic nature of the reaction 
(c) Process dynamics is nonlinear 
(d) Measurement of polymer structure is difficult 
(e) Estimation techniques such as Kalman filter and Weiner filter are needed to estimate 
parameters that can be measured 
 
Elicabe and Meira [1988] presented a review of the estimation and control literature in 
polymerization reactors. Polymers can be prepared in different types of reactors such as; 
 
(a) Batch Reactor, BR 
(b) CPFR, Continuous Plug Flow Reactor 
(c) HCSTR, Homogeneous Continuous Stirred-Tank Reactor 
(d) SCSTR, Segregated Continuous Stirred-Tank Reactor 
 
Polymerization kinetics can be classified into monomer-monomer chain reactions with 
termination, polymer linkage without termination and polymer linkage by step reactions with 
monomer or graft chains. Nine different possibilities for the molecular weight distribution 
according to Elicabe and Meira [1988] from the different combinations of kinetics and 
reactors. The polymers prepared in BR or CPFR are found to have molecular weight 
distribution, MWD; (i) wider than Schulz-Flory distribution for monomer linkage with 
termination; (ii) Poisson or Gold distribution for monomer linkage without termination; (iii) 
Schulz-Flory distribution for polymer linkage with monomer or graft chains. 
The objective of the reactor control is to obtain superior product quality. Quality is 
characterized by parameters such as:  
 
(i) Chemical composition of repeat units;  
(ii) Chain sequence distribution of copolymers; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
394 
(iii) Alternating, block or random microstructure;  
(iv) MWD in linear homopolymers;  
(v) Multivariate distribution of molecular weight, composition; 
(vi) Degree of chain branching;  
(vii) Stereo-regularity;  
(viii) Particle size distribution in lattices obtained from emulsion polymerization; 
(ix) Partial porosity and surface area.  
 
End-use properties of polymers processed from molding, extrusion are governed by 
parameters such as;  
 
(a) Mechanical strength;  
(b) Elastomer relaxation;  
(c) Adhesive tack;  
(d) Melt viscosity;  
(e) Brittleness;  
(f) Impact strength;  
(g) Drawability;  
(h) Elastic modulus;  
(i) Hardness;  
(j) Softening temperature;  
(k) Tear strength;  
(i) Stress-crack resistance and;  
(j) Adhesive strength. 
 
Good structure-property relations are needed for devising control strategies based on 
measurement of end-use property values. Another difficulty in setting control objectives is 
that in polymerization reactors a desirable molecular weight distribution, MWD is the 
objective and a deterministic scalar quantity. The control objective is a mathematical function 
and not a vector of scalar parameters. Most propagation reactions are exothermic with an 
energy release of 20 cal/mole for vinyl monomers. The viscosity of the reaction mixture 
increases in an exponential manner with increases in conversion. Problems associated with 
heat removal, mixing and transporting the reactor syrups need be solved by control. 
Suspension and emulsion processes using water as suspending medium in part to avoid these 
problems. 
The polymerization process needs to be well understood before it can be controlled. 
Development of mathematical models for the processes is constrained by the following 
difficulties; 
 
(a) Kinetic equations for monomer are nonlinear. Control theory developed for linear 
systems is not applicable. 
(b) Parameters involved in dynamic models are not all known. This is more the case for 
reversible reactions and heterophase systems. 
(c) Highly sensitive to impurities at even low concentrations in the raw material streams. 
Disturbances are not measurable. 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
395 
Model equations are developed from mass and energy balances. These result in state 
space equation. The first moments of the MWD yields information about the molecular 
structure.  
Model calculations are performed in two phases. In the first phase, the monomer 
concentrations, temperature in the reactor are obtained from the input variables such as inlet 
flow rate, inlet reactor temperature. In the second phase, the molecular parameters are 
derived. The model equations written for BRs or HCSTRs are modeled by sets of non-linear, 
time-invariant, ordinary first order differential equations of a general form; 
 
 
*
, ,
( ,
)
x
x u d
y
f x u
 
(7.1) 
 
Where x  is a vector of n states, u  is a vector of m controls and d is a vector of k 
disturbances and y  is a vector of p measured outputs. Eq. (7.1) are the state and 
measurement equations. Eq. (7.1) when modeled in discrete form can be implemented in 
DDC, direct digital control. Controls are held piecewise constant over each sampling interval. 
Models of PFR, plug flow reactors result in partial differential equations. Some of this 
was discussed in Chapter 3.0. 
Feedback control of a variable is not possible if the parameter cannot be measured or 
estimated. On-line equipment for polymer characterization has limited availability. 
Independent variables such as inlet monomer, inlet initiator concentrations and inlet flow rate 
of the reactor are readily measurable, and intermediate variables such as reactor temperature, 
monomer concentration in the reactor are easier to measure compared with the structural 
properties. Indirect measurements such as level in the reactor are measured using nuclear 
probes. Vapor pressure transmitters are used for temperature detection. Melt index is 
correlated with viscosity. Viscometers are deployed. The electrical power consumed in the 
reactors can be used for estimation of viscosity. Structural parameters such as molecular 
weight, molecular weight distribution may be measured using SEC, size exclusion 
chromatography. Composition distribution can be obtained from elemental C, H and N 
analyzer. Sequence distribution can be measured using 13C NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy. Weight average molecular weight, Mw can be measured using light scattering 
photometers. Mn, the number average molecular weight can be measured using vapor pressure 
and membrane osmometers. Particle size distribution in lattices can be measured using 
hydrodynamic chromatography, SEC light scattering, field flow fractionation or electron 
microscopy. 
Implementation of on-line SEC requires; (a) a dead time in the reactor sample; (b) sample 
conditioning equipment for sample injection involving dilution and ultrafiltration; (c) 
fractionation time; (d) digital system for the acquisition and treatment of data. 
The nonlinear equations in the models need be linearized. Some control algorithms are 
designed from input-output measurements alone, without consideration of internal chemistry 
or local events within the reactor. This approach is also called „black-box‟ approach. The 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
396 
resulting models are empirical in nature. These are discrete linear transfer functions or 
difference equations. The output, yt may be found from r previous values of the same output, 
present value of input and s previous values of the input. A time delay b may also be included 
in the model structure. A parameter estimation algorithm can be used to estimate the 
coefficients 
t and t. Control strategies may be open-loop or closed-loop or self-regulating.  
An open-loop strategy may be derived from empirical or empirical and theoretical 
considerations. The control objectives would be met only if the model used is accurate and 
robust and no unmeasurable disturbances are present. Feedback of controlled variables are 
necessary. In Figure 7.1 is shown the scheme for possible feedback control configurations. 
The scheme comprises of state-model, subsystem 1, subsystem 2 and the measurement 
equations. It would be desirable to use the end use performance measurements for use in 
feedback control. This is not possible. Structure –property relations developed by in-house 
experts can be used to correlate the property measurements with the corresponding structure. 
Structural parameters can be measured directly or estimated from models that relate process 
variables with the structure. Different paths such as structural variables path, output to 
subsystem path, feedback the measured variables directly to obtain the state estimates 
^
( )
x t
from such measures. 
State estimation techniques have been developed to provide estimates of the state 
variables even in cases where they cannot be obtained by direct measurement. Sequential 
estimates can be updated using recursive algorithms. Filtered and predicted estimates are 
taken up. State estimation is a method of determination of values of the states from the 
knowledge of the output data and the input data. A unique estimate needs to be made from the 
input-output data set. The physical significance of these criteria is that the system is said to be 
observable and reachable. The architecture of the problem is shown in Figure 7.2. 
 
 
Figure 7.1. Possible Feedback Configurations. 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
397 
The process model is disturbed by the noise process (t) due to either unknown 
load/disturbance or model errors. The error in reading of output data is (t). The mean and 
covariance of the error and noise are known quantities. The symbol “^” is for estimated 
values in Figure 7.2. K is estimated by different methods. In non-linear estimation problems 
the objective may be to minimize the average squared errors in the initial estimate in the 
process model and in measurement device. This has been shown to lead to infinite set of 
coupled equations that are not tracfigure. Closed form analytical solutions are not possible. 
One way out is the approximation called extended Kalman filter for manufacturing units that 
can be modeled using linear equations. One of the benefits of this estimation approach is that 
when some of the model parameters are not known then under some conditions these 
unknown model parameters may also be estimated in addition to the states. 
Jo and Bankoff [1976] developed a Kalman filter in order to obtain estimates of 
conversion and Mw, weight averaged molecular weight. One of the parameters was 
augmented resulting in improvement of filter performance. Due to the long residence time in 
the study, the adaptive, exponential and/or iterative schemes did not improve the filter 
performance. Quasi-steady state assumption was used. Poor initial estimates of the state 
variables or of the state covariance matrix could readily be tolerated. Too small estimates of 
the process noise covariance matrix caused the filter to diverge. 
The Kalman filter is an on-line computer algorithm which is intended to provide better 
estimates of the state variables that be obtained by direct solution of measurement equations. 
If the system is observable, optimal estimates of variables that cannot be measured directly 
can be made. Consider a linear n-dimensional system in which the random-variable state 
vector xk, at time tk, evolves by means of a deterministic transition matrix, (k+1,k) to a new 
value, xk+1 at time tk+1 = tk+t, where t is a fixed sampling interval A zero-mean Gaussian 
disturbance k is imposed on the transition matrix. A m dimensional vector, yk is obtained, 
subject to a zero mean Gaussian measurement error, vk. The Kalman filter can be written by 
the following equations for predictions between observations; 
 
 
^
^
1
1,
k
k
k
k
x
k
k x  
(7.2) 
 
 
1
1,
1,
( )
1
k
k
T
T
k
k
P
k
k P
k
k
k Q k
k  
(7.3) 
 
 
1
^
^
^
1
1
1
1
(
1)
1
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
x
x
K k
y
M k
x
 
(7.4) 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
T
k
k
T
k
k
P
I
K k
M k
P
I
K k
M k
K k
R k
K
k
 (7.5) 
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
k
T
k
T
k
k
K k
P
M
k
M k
P
M
k
R k
 
(7.6) 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
398 
 
Figure 7.2. System with Corresponding Sequential Estimation. 
 
The algorithm for the filter can be processed as follows; 
 
(i) Obtain 
0
^
0
x  and 
0
0
0
P
P at time t0.. from..prior knowledge of the system or by guess. 
(ii) Set k = 0 
(iii) Calculate 
^
1
k
kx
 and 
1
k
kP
at tk from Eq. (7.2) and Eq. (7.3). These are a priori estimates 
of xk+1 and Pk+1 and tk. 
(iv) Calculate the Kalman gain matrix at tk+1, K(k+1) from Eq. (7.6) determining M and 
R from the measurement equations and properties of noise. 
(v) Once the measurement yk+1 is available at time t = tk+1 calculate the a posteriori 
estimates 
1
^
1
k
kx
 and 
1
1
k
kP
 from Eqs. (7.4), (7.5). 
(vi) Increment k by 1 and return to step 3 and repeat the loop. 
 
The linear filter may be applied to nonlinear systems after linearization of nonlinear 
equations. The nonlinear dynamic systems is described by the stochastic differential equation 
for a vector of size n; 
 
 
,
t
dx
f x t
G t
dt
 
(7.7) 
 
Measurements are given by; 
 
 
,
t
y
h x t
v  
(7.8) 
 
x, , v are the same as in the linear case and are random variable state vector, zero-mean 
Gaussian disturbance, and Gaussian measurement error respectively. A deterministic 
reference trajectory 
_
x t  is generated with a given; 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
399 
 
_
_
0
0
x
x t
 
(7.9) 
 
These equations are linearized and discretized as follows; 
 
 
1
1
1,
k
k
k
x
k
k
x
k
 
(7.10) 
 
Where, 
 
 
_
k
k
k
x
x t
x t
 
(7.11) 
 
 
_
,
k
k
k
k
k
k
y
y t
E y t
y t
h x t
t
 
(7.12) 
 
 
_
,
x
k
k
M k
h
x t
t
 
(7.13) 
 
and  is the transition matrix. This can be obtained from; 
 
 
_
*
,
,
,
x
t
f
x t
t
 
(7.14) 
 
With the initial condition; 
 
 
,
I  
(7.15) 
 
The linear filter is then directly applicable to the linearized system when the differences 
between reference and actual trajectories are small. In order to keep the differences small, the 
_
0x can be estimated when new observations are made available. This method is called the 
global iteration. This can be repeated till constant reference trajectories. An extended Kalman 
filter was developed; 
 
 
1
^
^
^
1
,
k
k
t
k
k
k
k
k
t
t
x
x
f
x
t dt  
(7.16) 
 
 
1
^
^
^
1
1
1
1
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
x
x
K k
y
h x
 
(7.17) 
 
An iterative Kalman filter can also be developed. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
400 
Congalidis, Richards and Ray [1989] discuss different approaches to the control of 
polymerization reactors. Homopolymers and copolymers can be made in CSTR by continuous 
mass polymerization. Increased competition and emphasis on product quality has rendered 
method of recipe control obsolete. During recipe control the operating conditions are updated 
infrequently based on results for testing of polymer samples. 
Control hardware equipment is available with improvements being made. Advances have 
been made on development of control theory. Control of polymerization reactors is a tough 
and complex problem. On-line sensors for product quality monitoring are needed. The steady 
state values are extremely sensitive to small changes in parameter values or operating 
conditions. Model equations written to describe reactor dynamics are nonlinear. There are 
three types of approaches to control of polymerization reactors; 
 
A. Development of optimal trajectories for the manipulated variables. The narrowing of 
the molecular weight distribution, or copolymer composition distribution can be 
achieved in batch and semi-batch reactions by manipulation of temperature, 
monomer and initiator during the batch. Manipulated variable trajectories were 
generated. The control problem becomes one of optimization problem. 
B. Use of nonlinear state estimation techniques to estimate infrequently measured 
control variables. Extended Kalman filter was used in order to obtain estimates of 
conversion and weight average molecular weight in an experimental continuous mass 
polymerization of vinyl acetate in a small glass CSTR. State estimation using both 
online and off-line delayed measurements was looked at in order to estimate the 
molecular weight distribution and branching distribution in a polymerization reactor. 
C. Evaluation of specific feedback controllers. Multivariable adaptive controller was 
used to control the reactor monomer concentration and temperature in the continuous 
mass polymerization of MMA, methyl methacrylate in a CSTR. Simulations were 
performed and acceptable performance was found in the presence of noise and load 
changes. Difficulties were encountered in the multiple steady state regions with 
strong interactions. 
 
Additional control problem is posed when there is need for recycle of monomer and 
solvent. 4 PI controllers were tuned to control the reactor outputs using the selected 
manipulated variables. The feedback strategy was implemented hierarchy above the feed 
forward level. A PI controller can be tuned to make it more proper and can be used to 
manipulate the coolant flow rate in order to control the jacket temperature. Jacket temperature 
is selected as manipulated variable and not the coolant temperature. The separator and hold 
tank are described as isothermal first-order lags with constant level and residence time equal 
to the reactor residence time. The need for level controllers is obviated.  
Congalidis, Richards and Ray [1989] considered copolymerization of MMA, methyl 
methacrylate and vinyl acetate in benzene solvent and AIBN, azo-bis-isobutyronitrile 
initiator. The reactivity ratios are r12 = 26 and r21 = 0.03. The steady state operating point was 
designed upon consideration of polymer production rate, composition of copolymer, weight 
average molecular weight and reactor temperature. The inputs are reactor flows of monomers, 
initiator, chain transfer agent, solvent, and inhibitor, the temperature of the reactor jacket and 
the temperature of the reactor feed. The reactor, separator and hold tank are preheated. The 
inputs to the nonlinear model were varied in order to obtain steady state values for output 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
401 
variables that are acceptable. Viscosity of the medium is held at moderate levels. The 
equations that govern the dynamics of the reactor assuming that the polymer chemistry is of 
the free radical type are as follows; 
Species mole balance can be written for monomer, initiator, solvent, CTA, chain transfer 
agent and the inhibitor; 
 
 
0
1
j
j
j
j
dC
C
C
Da
d
 
(7.18) 
 
Where, Daj = Damkohler number (kj) of species j,  = t.-1 and Cj0 is the concentration 
of the species j in the inlet of the reactor and Cj is the concentration of the species in the 
reactor and in the effluent. The energy balance of the reactor can be written as; 
 
 
2
2
1
1
0
r
r
j
r
rf
r
r
r
pjk
j
k
r
jk
r
j
i
p r
U A
T
T
T
T
dT
H
k
C C
T
dt
VC
 
(7.19) 
 
They used the long chain hypotheses for the polymer reaction rates. By quasi-steady state 
assumption they derived the expression for concentration of free radicals of all the different 
dyad types, AA, AB, BB, BA. The rate of change of concentration of radicals can be taken to 
be zero. The number and weight average molecular weight was calculated by equating the 
rate of initiation and termination rates. Dead polymer and live polymers are distinguished 
from each other. The moments of the dead polymer and live polymer were calculated. The 
separator and hold tanks were modeled as first-order lags on species concentration with 
constant volume reactor. It can be seen that the governing equations are nonlinear ordinary 
differential and algebraic equations. They were integrated using a 5th and 6th order Runge 
Kutta numerical method. The steady state and transient values of the polymerization rate, 
reactor temperature, copolymer composition and molecular weight. 
They suggest feed forward control strategy for their recycle streams. The polymer 
properties are affected by introduction of disturbances in the reactor monomer feed. The fresh 
feeds are manipulated and a constant feed composition is maintained and allowed to flow into 
the reactor. The recycle composition is measured by online gas chromatograph. This may 
introduce some time delays in the circuit. The open-loop output variable response to a purge 
disturbance was studied. The polymerization rate was found to have an inverse response with 
the molecular weight.  
The molecular weight was found to have an inverse response with the residence time in 
the reactor. The conversion was found to have a maxima as a function of time. It undergoes 
an integrating phase prior to undergoing a stable phase. The performance of the feed forward 
controllers was illustrated by examination of the response of the output and manipulated 
variables to a pulse disturbance of the purge ratio that occurs while the reactor operates at 
steady state.  
Feedback controllers were evaluated for polymer properties and production rate. The 
design procedure used in this study to select a control structure is based on ranking various 
candidate structures according to a condition number. They discuss use of CONSYD package 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
402 
of control system design programs in conjunction with the nonlinear model and how it cut the 
time needed for completion of the design.  
One of the issues in the control design is the specification of 4 manipulated variables to 
control previously specified output variables. The selected variables are monomer flow rates 
of monomers, initiator flow rate, chain transfer agent, reactor jacket temperature. Step tests 
were conducted using CONSYD package on the nonlinear reactor model. The transfer 
functions were fitted by least squares to the responses of the output variables for all choices of 
manipulated variables. The denominator polynomial of the transfer function was restricted to 
first or second order. The summary of transfer functions obtained from this method is 
summarized in for of Tables. There are 4! ways that the selected four manipulated variables 
can be paired with 4 output variables. All pairings have the same zero frequency condition 
number and minimum singular value.  
It is assumed that accurate measurements of output variables are available for feedback 
control. Reactor temperature is readily available. The remaining outputs are not available. 
Periodic laboratory analysis of monomer concentration, copolymer composition and 
molecular weight are available. Significant sampling dead time is introduced. The required 
variables can be obtained by improved online instrumentation such as viscometers, 
refractometers or by use of state estimator in order to infer polymer properties between the 
measurements. The estimator can be implemented in the form of an extended Kalman filter as 
discussed in [Jo and Bankoff, 1976]. Multiple steady states may cause problems during plant 
start-ups and plant shut-downs.  
The controllers will not operate efficiently when the assumptions in their derivations are 
not met. Feed forward control of the recycle stream eliminates recycle disturbances. The 
control of the reactor is separated from the rest of the process. Ratio controllers on the flows 
to the reactor partially decouple the multivariable nature of the reactor control problem. 
Feedback control of polymer rate, composition, molecular weight and reactor temperature is 
accomplished using PI controllers. The feedback PI and ratio controllers control the system 
on the arrival of disturbances and the nonlinear behavior of the reactor. These control 
schemes have been implemented successfully in several polymerization plants. 
 
 
7.2. IMC, INTERNAL MODEL CONTROL 
 
The methods of feedback control discussed in Chapter 5.0 such as P, PI control or 
Tuyreus-Luben oscillation based tuning does not require a model for the process a priori to 
control action. Closed loop response and stability considerations were paramount in devising 
of the control action. Control action law such as P control, PI control, PD control and PID 
control were obtained without any detailed knowledge of the process. A model based 
procedure can be developed with the culmination of embedment of the process in the 
controller. 
Consider the mixing tank (Figure 7.3) with a jacket provided for heating the tank.  
Model Equations: 
 
 
Reactor: 
i
j
p
dT
v
UA
T
T
T
T
dt
V
VC
 
(7.21) 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
403 
 
Jacket: 
j
j
jin
j
j
j
j
j
pj
dT
v
UA
T
T
T
T
dt
V
V C
 
 
Figure 7.3. Mixing Tank Heated by hot Fluid in Jacket. 
 
(a) At Steady State 
 
 
1
3
1
0
50
125
150
125
10
61.3(10)
(3)(61.3)
183.9
.
UA
UA
Btu F
ft
 
(7.22) 
 
 
3
1
183.9
0
200
150
150
125
2.5
61.3 2.5
75
1.5
.min
50
j
j
v
v
ft
 
(7.23) 
 
(b) Matrices in State Space Model 
 
 
0.4
0.3
5
1.2
1.8
120
j
j
dT
T
dt
T
dT
dt
 
(7.24) 
 
(c) Fourth Order Runge-Kutta Method for Integration of ODE in MS Excel Spreadsheet 
20.07 for Windows. 
Classical fourth-order RK method 
The recurrence formula is given from [Chapra and Canale, 2006]  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
404 
 
1
1
2
3
4
2
2
6
l
l
h
T
T
k
k
k
k
 
(7.25) 
 
 
 
'
'
'
'
1
1
2
3
4
2
2
6
jl
jl
h
T
T
k
k
k
k
 
(7.26) 
 
Where, 
 
 
k1 = f(ti,Ti) 
(7.27) 
 
 
k2 = f(ti+0.5h, yi+0.5k1h) 
(7.28) 
 
 
k3 = f(ti+0.5h,Ti+0.5k2h) 
(7.29) 
 
 
k4 = f(ti+h, Ti+k3h) 
(7.30) 
 
 
From Eq. (7.21), f(t,T) = 
i
i
v T
T
Q
V
 
Integration was performed using a MS Excel spreadsheet. The key results are shown in 
Table 7.3 and Table 7.1. The step size used was h = 0.01 min. Tj 
 
Table 7.1. Temperature in the Reactor, Jacket vs. Time 
 
T 
T 
Tj  
0 
50.000 
200 
0.1 
54.263 
189.145 
0.2 
58.066 
180.2475 
0.3 
58.066 
180.2475 
0.4 
64.567 
167.0994 
0.5 
67.374 
162.3572 
0.6 
69.946 
158.5734 
0.7 
72.316 
155.5905 
0.8 
74.514 
153.2766 
0.9 
76.566 
151.5209 
1 
78.492 
150.2307 
2 
93.615 
150.7255 
3 
105.150 
158.6955 
4 
114.938 
166.9491 
5 
123.438 
174.3797 
6 
130.854 
180.9078 
7 
137.329 
186.6161 
8 
142.985 
191.6031 
9 
147.925 
195.9591 
10 
152.240 
199.7639 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
405 
 
Figure 7.4. Transient Reactor Temperature and Jacket Temperature vs. Time.  
 
(d) From the last row of Table 7.1 it appears that the steady state temperature values, Tis 
= 152.2 and Tjs = 199.7 F. The values from solution in (a) are Tis = 150 F and Tjs = 
150 F. 
(e1) Large Step Change in Jacket Flow Rate: 10. times to 15 ft3.min-1. 
 
 
Figure 7.5. Transient Reactor Temperatures and Jacket Temperature vs. Time Response to a Big Step 
Change in Jacket Flow Rate by 10. Times. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
406 
(e2) Small Step Change in Jacket Flow Rate: 10% times to 1.65 ft3.min-1 
 
 
Figure 7.6. Transient Reactor Temperature and Jacket Temperature vs. Time Response to a Small Step 
Change in Jacket Flow Rate by 10.%. 
 
(f) Larger Vessel 
 
 
v = 10 ft3.min-1; V = 100 ft3 
 
1
3
10
0
50
125
150
125
100
61.3(100)
7.5 (4)(61.3)
73.56
.
25
UA
UA
Btu F
ft
 
(7.31) 
 
(g)
 
10
73.56
0
50
125
125
100
100(61.3)
7.5
1.5
750
0.012
js
js
T
T
F
 
(7.32) 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
407 
 
3
1
73.56
0
200
750
750
125
2.5
61.3 2.5
220
0.733
.min
300
j
j
v
v
ft
 
(7.33) 
(h) 
 
 
0.112
0.012
5
0.046
0.779
5.864
j
j
dT
T
dt
T
dT
dt
 
(7.34) 
 
 
Eigenvalues of the A matrix 
 
Characteristic second degree polynomial equation 
 
 
2
0.112
0.779
0.000552
0.891
0.0867
0  
(7.35) 
 
 
Eigenvalues are 1 = -0.78; 2 = -0.11 
 
Both eigenvalues are negative. Hence the system is stable. 
 
The model developed for the mixing tank heated by the hot fluid in the jacket can be used 
to design a controller. A good knowledge of then when the process is stable and when the 
process is underdamped oscillatory unstable can lead to better control action. Control action 
of unstable systems may result in unsatisfactory results. In general the model-based controller 
can be added as shown in Figure 7.7. 
The analysis of the block diagram in Figure 7.7 leads to; 
 
 
y(s) = Gp(s) M(s) r(s) 
(7.36) 
 
Consider a prototypical first order process such that; 
 
 
( )
1
p
p
p
k
G
s
s
 
(7.37) 
 
 
 
Figure 7.7. Model Based Control in Open Loop Configuration. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
408 
When M(s) is a constant, km. For a step change in the set point of magnitude R‟ the 
output function can be written as; 
 
 
'
( )
1
p m
p
k k
R
y s
s
s
 
(7.38) 
 
From the final value theorem it can be seen that after infinite time; 
 
 
0
( )
( )
'
s
t
p m
Lt
sy s
Lt
y t
k k R  
(7.39) 
 
In order for the output to be free of “offset”,  
 
 
1
m
p
k
k
 
(7.40). 
 
The output of the model based controller and process in the time domain can be seen  
to be; 
 
 
( )
' 1
p
t
m
p
y t
k k R
e
 
(7.41) 
 
In order to achieve perfect control; 
 
 
1
( )
( )
p
M s
G
s  
(7.42) 
 
If this perfect control, can be realized the output would track the input set point. Perfect 
control is easier written in Eq. (7.42) than can be implemented in practice. In order for a 
controller to be physically realizable the order of the polynomial equation that is used to 
determine the poles must be at least one order greater than the polynomial equation that is 
used to determine the zeros.  
A filter can be added in order to make the control action 
physically realizable. A first order filter has the following transfer function; 
 
 
1
( )
1
F s
s
 
(7.43) 
 
Where  is a filter tuning parameter with units of time? The model based control is made 
“more proper” so to speak. The transfer function is now; 
 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
409 
 
1
( )
( )
( ) ( )
( )
p
p
F s
M s
G
s F s
G
s
 
(7.44) 
For the first order transfer process whose transfer function is given by Eq. (7.37) the 
model based controller transfer function M(s) becomes; 
 
 
1
( )
1
p
p
s
M s
k
s
 
(7.45) 
 
By addition of a first-order filter the first order controller is made more physically 
realizable. The model based controller transfer function as given by Eq. (8.45) can be viewed 
as a lead/lag controller. This way the order of the polynomial equation that determines the 
poles is at least the same as the order of the polynomial equation that determines the zeros. 
The transfer function of the output variable y(s) is now; 
 
 
y(s) = Gp(s) M(s) r(s) 
 
 
( )
( )
1
r s
y s
s
 
(7.46) 
 
The output response is first-order with a time constant of. This controller is dynamic as 
compared with the static control in Eq. (7.40). The time response of the dynamic control 
action is faster than that compared with the static controller as long as; 
 
 
p  
(7.47) 
Inversion of a process model alone may not be sufficient for good control. In order for 
the controller to be stable and realizable the process transfer function must be factorized. For 
example, consider the following transfer function for the process; 
 
 
1
2
1
1
1
p
p
p
p
k
s
G
s
s
s
 
(7.48) 
 
When the parameter  is positive and real the zero is positive. This can lead to an inverse 
response of the process transfer function. A model based controller for this process is 
attempted as; 
 
 
1
2
1
1
( )
( )
1
p
p
p
s
s
M s
F s
k
s
 
(7.49) 
 
Consider a first order filter such that; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
410 
 
1
2
1
1
1
( )
1
1
p
p
p
s
s
M s
k
s
s
 
(7.50) 
 
The poles of the controller are 1  and 
1 . The system is unstable. The zero of the 
process has become the pole of the control transfer function that can lead to inverse response. 
The unstable pole in Eq. (8.50) can be removed. The model transfer function then becomes; 
 
 
1
2
1
1
1
( )
1
p
p
p
s
s
M s
k
s
 
(7.51) 
 
It can be seen from Eq. (7.51) that M(s) is not proper. In order to make M(s) proper the 
order of the filter can be increased. Thus when a second order filter is used instead of the first 
order filter; 
 
 
1
2
2
1
1
1
( )
1
p
p
p
s
s
M s
k
s
 
(7.52) 
 
For such control action the output response y(s) can be seen to be; 
 
 
y(s) = Gp(s) M(s) r(s) 
 
 
2
1
1
( )
1
s
y s
s s
 
(7.53) 
The output y(t) can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
( )
1
t
t
y t
e
te
 
(7.54) 
 
Eq. (7.54) is plotted in Figure 7.8. 
It can be seen from Figure 7.8 that there is an inverse response for values of  = 1.0 and  
= 0.1. Although Figure 7.8 is for the indicated values of  and  in general Eq. (7.54) results 
in an inverse response. For larger values of  there is a minima present prior to the inverse 
response. What can be inferred from this analysis is that the inverse response of the process 
cannot be removed by a stable filter or stable control system. 
The structure of IMC is shown as a block diagram in Figure 7.9. The components of.IMC 
structure are (i) load/disturbance GD(s); (ii) process, Gp(s); (iii) Model controller, M(s); (iv) 
Model, Gm(s); (v) set point, r(s); (vi) process output, y(s). Uncertainties in model can be 
designed for by improving the robustness of the control action. The ramifications of 
parameter uncertainties was discussed in Chapter 5.0. This can be achieved by adjustment of 
filter parameters. In some cases the model transfer function is not invertible readily. For 
example, in systems with time lag the transfer function of the process would be of the form; 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
411 
 
( )
1
s
p
p
p
k e
G
s
s
 
(7.55) 
 
 
Figure 7.8. Output Response to Model Transfer Function Given by Eq. (7.52) for  = 1.0. and  = 0.1. 
 
 
Figure 7.9. Block Diagram of IMC Internal Model Control. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
412 
A first-order Pade approximation can be used as follows; 
 
 
1
2
1
2
s
s
e
s
 
(7.56) 
 
Plugging Eq. (7.56) in Eq. (7.55); 
 
 
2
( )
1 2
p
p
p
k
s
G
s
s
s
 
(7.57) 
 
A model transfer function with an nth order filter can be developed as; 
 
 
1 2
( )
2
1
p
n
p
s
s
M s
k
s
s
 
(7.58) 
 
For a first order filter, n = 1, 
 
 
1 2
( )
2
1
p
p
s
s
M s
k
s
s
 
(7.59) 
 
The output transfer function for a step input is seen to be; 
 
 
 
1
( )
1
y s
s s
 
(7.60) 
 
The output transfer function can be written as; 
 
 
0
1
( )
1
p
t
t
y t
e
dp
e
 
(7.61) 
 
 
7.3. RATIO CONTROL 
 
In some applications, ratio control can be the method of choice. Consider the following 
example. Consider preparation of flue gas with CO, carbon monoxide in the mixture. A 
mixture of CO2, carbon dioxide and air is passed through a packed bed of pure carbon. The 
reactor is operated in an adiabatic manner. There are two reactions that are expected to take 
place to completion. These are as follows; 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
413 
Reaction A 
 
CO2(g) + C(s)  2CO(g) 
(7.62) 
 
Reaction B 
 
 
2C(s) + O2(g)  2CO(g) 
(7.63) 
 
The inlet mixture, CO2/air is at a certain ratio such that the heat of reactions from 
Reaction A and Reaction B cancel out each other. Reaction B is exothermic and Reaction A is 
endothermic. The feed is preheated to 600 0C and the bed is operated at 600 0C.  
The heat of formation at 298 K for CO from Smith, van Ness and Abbott [2005], can be 
seen to be; 
 
 
Hf
298 = -110.53 kJ/mole 
(7.64) 
 
The heat of reaction at 600 K can be calculated using the relation; 
 
 
H = <Cp>dT 
 
The temperature variation of heat capacity information can also be used in the analysis as 
follows; 
 
 
(600
)
(298)
2
2
ig
K
ig
p
p
C
C
D
A
BT
CT
R
R
T
 
(7.65) 
 
600
2
2
5
600
3
298
298
8.314
600
298
0.031*10
3.507
3.376 302
0.557*10
600
298
2
3
(8.314)(7.1163)
59.2
/
/
ig
p
C
T
J
mole K
 
 
 
600
0(600
)
0(298)
298
59.2(3.2)
110.5
128.4
/
1000
K
R
R
p
H
H
C
dT
kJ
mole  
(7.66) 
 
For Reaction A, 
 
600
0(600
)
0(298)
298
59.2*302
86.28*302
2
110.5
393.51
1000
1000
162.8
/
K
R
R
p
H
H
C
dT
kJ
mole
 (7.67) 
 
Let the outlet flue gas stream composition be as follows in mole fraction; 
 
 
yCO = 0.2; yCO2 = 0.01; yO2 = 0.005; yN2 = 0.781 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
414 
For a basis of 1 mole of CO formed x moles are formed by Reaction A from CO2 and (1-
x) moles are formed from Reaction B from carbon. The heat balance from the heat generated 
from Reaction B and heat absorbed by Reaction A can be written as follows; 
 
 
162.8x – (1-x) 128.4 = 0 
(7.68) 
 
 
128.4
0.44
162.8
128.4
x
 
(7.69) 
 
The corresponding inlet stream ratio between CO2 and air can be calculated as; 
 
 
0.44*0.2
0.088
1
0.56*0.2
0.005
0.557
6.33
0.21
Flue
Air
 
(7.70) 
 
The flue to air ratio of 1:6.33 can be seen to be an important process parameter to control 
in order to maintain the adiabatic reactor status. The ratio control block diagram is shown in 
Figure 7.10. The set point of 1:6.33 is input into the comparator. The measured flow 
velocities of CO2 stream and air streams are sent by flow transmitters to the comparator. The 
control action is taken proportional to the error between the set point and measured ratio. 
Ratio control can also be effected the flow stream velocity of CO2 can be maintained at a 
certain “ratio” of flow rate of air inlet stream. The flow rate ratio is calculated and this 
information is sent to the comparator. In another strategy the flow rate of CO2 inlet stream is 
measured and multiplied with a desired ratio in order to determine the set point for the air 
stream flow rate. This provides a linear input-output relation. The measured output is; 
 
 
Figure 7.10. Feedback Control of Ratio of CO2 to Air during Manufacture of Flue Gas. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
415 
 
2
2
1
air
air
CO
CO
v
Ratio
v
v
v
 
(7.71) 
 
The steady state process can be seen to be; 
 
 
2
(
)
1
p
CO
Ratio
k
u
v
 
(7.72) 
 
The process gain is a function of the flow rate of CO2 stream. For the air flow stream the 
process gain would be 1.  
 
 
7.4. NEURAL NETWORKS 
 
7.4.1. Overview of Neural Networks 
 
Neural networks can be used to approximate any reasonable function to any degree of 
required precision. ANN, artificial neural network is used in control and in pattern 
recognition and knowledge acquisition. The structure of an ANN consists of a number of 
computing elements which resemble neurons and synapses of a human brain organized in a 
network (McClelland, Rumelhart et al., [1986]. Presently most of the implementations of 
neural networks are software based. Interconnections higher than 2 units may lead to „higher-
order‟ or „Sigma-Pi‟ networks. A number of important architectures can be recognized.  
These are;  
 
i) 
Recurrent  
ii) Feed-Forward and  
iii) Layered. 
 
A recurrent architecture contains directed loops. An architecture without directed loops is 
said to be feed forward. Recurrent architectures are less simple. An architecture is layered if 
the units are partitioned into classes also called layers, and the connectivity patterns are 
defined between the classes. A feed forward architecture is not necessarily layered. The 
number of layers is referred to as the depth of the network. In the back-propagation model the 
network is processed in three distinct steps. The first step is the forward sweep. In the forward 
sweep the input is given to the input units. The output values of each unit is calculated and 
moved over the connections to the units in the next layer. 
The units in the next layer receive the input from units in the previous layer. The output 
values of the units are then calculated and passed to the units in the next layer and so on. The 
next step is the error calculation. In this step the values of the output units are compared to 
the desired output, teaching. If the difference between the actual output and the teaching is 
within the acceptable error range, then learning is successful. If the difference is not within an 
acceptable range then an error value is calculated and learning is unsuccessful. The third step 
is the back-propagation of the error value. In this step, should the learning be unsuccessful 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
416 
then the error value is propagated backward through the net. The weights of the connections 
between the units are adjusted to minimize the error value. The main objective of this step is 
to close the gap between the actual output and the desired output. The above three steps are 
repeated until learning is successful. The behavior of each unit in time can be described using 
either differential equations or discrete update equations. Typically a unit i receives a total 
input Xi from the units connected to it and then produces an output, Yi – f(xi) where f is the 
transfer function of the unit. In general, all the units in the same layer have the same transfer 
function, and the total input is a weighted sum of incoming outputs from the previous layer so 
that, 
 
 
 
( )
i
ij
j
i
j N i
X
W y
W  
(7.73) 
 
 
( )
( )
(
)
i
i
ij
j
i
j N i
Y
f x
f
W Y
W  
(7.74) 
 
Where Wi is called the bias or threshold of the unit. Wij and Wi are the parameters of the 
NNs. Other parameters such as time constants, gains and delays are possible. Usually, the 
total number of parameters is determined by the number of layers, the number of units per 
layer and the connectivity between layers. It is said to be „fully connected‟ when each unit in 
one layer is connected to every unit in the following layer.  
A normalized exponential unit is used to compute the probability of an event with n 
possible outcomes, such as classification into one of n possible classes. Let j run over a group 
of n output units, computing the n membership probabilities, and xj denote the total input 
provided by the rest of the NN into each output unit. Then the final activity yi of each output 
unit is given by; 
 
 
1
i
k
x
i
n
x
k
e
y
e
 
(7.75) 
 
 
1
1
n
i
i
y
 
(7.76) 
 
When n = 2, the normalized exponential is equivalent to a logistic function via a simple 
transformation.  
 
 
1
1
2
x
i
x
x
e
y
e
e
 
(7.77) 
 
Any probability distribution Pi (1  j  m) can be represented in normalized exponential 
from a set of variables xj (1  j  m): 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
417 
 
1
i
k
x
i
m
x
k
e
P
e
 
(7.78) 
 
As long as m  n. This can be done in infinitely many ways, by fixing a positive constant 
k and letting Xi = log(pi) + kj for i = 1, n. If m < n there is no exact solution, unless the pi 
assume only m distinct values at most. The radial basis functions, RBFs, is another type of 
widely used functions. Here f is a bell shaped function like Gaussian. Each RBF unit i has a 
reference input xi and f operates in the distance d(xi
, xi) measured with respect to some 
metric yi = f(d). In spatial problem, d is usually the Euclidean distance. Thus some of the 
important features of ANN model depend on the task at hand. The process of computing 
approximate weights is called „learning‟ or „training‟ in the ANN paradigm. There are many 
ANN learning algorithms that employ the principles described above. In general, ANN 
learning algorithms are classified are classified by either the tasks to be achieved or the 
methodologies to achieve a task: 
 
a) Auto association 
b) Classification 
c) Heteroassociation  
d) Regularity Detection. There are two classes of ANN learning algorithms; a) 
Supervised and b) Unsupervised. 
 
In supervised learning, a network is given an input along with its desired output. On the 
other hand, a network in unsupervised learning is given only an input. After each presentation 
of an input, the performance, is measured to tell how the network is doing. A network is 
expected to self-organize information by using the performance measure as guidance. 
Algorithms in these two categories are further divided into two groups on the basis of the 
input formats; binary or continuous valued input.  
 
 
7.4.2. Neural Modeling and Control of a Distillation Column 
 
Steck et al. [1991] considered control of a 9 stage, three component distillation column. 
The distillation column with control valves to the coolant to the condenser and steam flow to 
the jacket of the reboiler and the reflux to the top of the distillation column is shown in Figure 
7.11. Their control objectives were achieved using neural estimator and neural controller. The 
neural estimator was trained to represent the chemical process as precisely as possible. The 
neural controller was trained to provide input to the chemical process that will yield desired 
output. The training of the two neural networks was accomplished using a recursive least 
squares training algorithm implanted on an Intel iPSC/2 multicomputer (hypercube).  
ANNs can be used for control purposes. Control of any process system depends on the 
availability of suitable models that captures all the major phenomena of the system. 
Mathematical modeling of all the subsystems of a distillation column is an arduous task. 
Some of the theory such as the McCabe and Thiele method of design of distillation column is 
discussed in Sharma (2012). 20 different distillation problem types are discussed. Each of the 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
418 
distillation problem type offers a different problem in control. Mathematical model of a 
distillation column can contain hundreds of state variables. The model equations tend to be 
nonlinear. The range of operating conditions are wide. The dynamic response is slow. There 
are significant lag times or dead times. Distillation columns are widely used. A suitable 
control strategy is needed. 
ANNs can be trained offline in order to model the nonlinear inverse dynamics of the 
process with a pre determined level of accuracy. The input space can be large without a priori 
knowledge of the system equations. The ANNs are made to learn the nonlinear inverse 
dynamics during online applications. 
The feed input to the distillation column in Figure 7.11 is at the fourth stage. A side 
stream by-product is removed at the fifth stage. A heavy product is removed at the bottoms 
and a light product at the holdup tank at the top. A kettle type reboiler with steam jacket is 
used and a partial condenser is used. The control objective is to produce bottoms with a 
specified composition and the distillate with a pre-determined composition. The feed rate and 
feed composition gets disturbed a bit during the implantation of the process. The control 
objectives can be met by regulating the heat load on the reboiler and partial condenser. A 
mathematical model can be obtained by writing the mass and energy balance equations for 
each of the 9 stages of the column, the reboiler and condenser. The partial condenser can be 
treated as an extra stage. A computer program can be written that can be used to simulate the 
operations of the distillation column. The program can be used to simulate hundreds of state 
variables at discrete time intervals. Training pairs were generated from such simulation 
results in [Steck et al. 1991] for training the neural controller. 
A NN is trained as an estimator for the column. As part of the feed forward ANN 
controller, a neural network is trained as an estimator for the column. The state variables of 
the distillation column that were selected in the estimator are: flow rate; temperature and 
compositions of the three components for the bottom and overhead products; and temperature 
and three component compositions for the by-product as side stream. The data for the 
estimator comprises of discrete data sampled once per minute. The input to the estimator 
consists of the reboiler heat valve setting, condenser temperature, current feedrate, and the 
limited state vector at two previous sample times. The estimator is trained to provide as 
output a prediction of the limited state vector at the current time. The estimator is a fully 
connected feed forward network with 31 linear input neurons, 14 linear output neurons, and 
157 nonlinear sigmoid neurons distributed over two hidden layers.  
Training data is generated by simulating the column during startup, from an initial state 
to a steady operating state, and then varying the feed rate, reboiler heat value setting, and 
condenser temperature setting sinusoidal about their startup settings. The feedrate is varied at 
0.0125 cycle.min-1 with an amplitude of 2.0 moles/min about a mean of 25.0 moles/min. The 
reboiler valve is varied at 0.0375 cycle.min-1 with an amplitude of 0.05 about a mean of 0.308 
both as fractions of the full open position. The condenser temperature is varied at 0.025 
cycle.min-1 with an amplitude of 2.0" C about a mean of 75.0" C. These sinusoidal variations 
are continued for an additional 135 minutes after the 20 minute startup period giving a total of 
155 sampled data training pairs for the network. Training was accomplished using a recursive 
least squares (RLS) training algorithm implemented on an Intel iPSC/2 multicomputer 
(hypercube) [Steck et al. 1991]. The training with the RLS algorithm is much faster when 
compared to gradient descent. This is because of the parallel implementation and higher order 
nature of the RLS training algorithm.  

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
419 
 
Figure 7.11. Control of Reboiler Heat Load, Condenser Heat Load, Reflux during Binary Distillation. 
 
Another ANN was trained as a controller for the distillation column. The data for the 
controller consists of discrete data sampled once per minute, the same sampling rate as the 
estimator data. The input to the controller consists of the desired compositions of the light 
component of the bottoms and the heavy component at the overhead tank (the controller 
reference inputs), the feedrate, and the limited state vector at two previous sample times. The 
mass fractions of the two components used as reference inputs are generally desired to be 
small as the goal of the distillation process is to concentrate the heavy component at the 
bottom and the light component at the top. The controller output consists of a reboiler heat 
valve setting and condenser temperature at which the distillation column should give the 
specified reference input compositions. The controller is also a fully connected feed forward 
network having 31 linear input neurons, 2 linear output neurons, and 157 nonlinear sigmoid 
neurons distributed over two hidden layers. 
Training data for the controller is generated by rearranging the data used to train the 
estimator. The estimator inputs are the reboiler heat valve setting, condenser temperature, 
feedrate, and the state vector at the two previous sample times and that the training output 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
420 
data is the state vector at the current time. The controller is trained by taking as input the two 
desired composition values from the state vector at the current time, the current feedrate, and 
the two delayed samples of the state vector. The controller is trained to give as output the 
reboiler valve setting and condenser temperature which will produce the state vector at the 
current time. Training is again accomplished using the RLS training algorithm on the Intel 
iPSC/2 multicomputer. 
In order to investigate the capability of the trained controller to control the distillation 
column, the neural controller is connected to the neural estimator. The controller outputs, the 
reboiler valve setting and the condenser temperature, are connected to the inputs of the 
estimator by neural connections with unity weights. The state vector at two previous sample 
times are provided to the estimator and controller networks by feedback delay lines from the 
output of the estimator. The state vector for two sample periods prior to the beginning of the 
simulation is provided as known initial conditions. The current feedrate and the desired 
compositions at the bottom and top (the controller reference inputs) are known and specified 
at each simulation sample time. 
The heavy component (Xl) at the condenser can be manipulated by the controller and is 
moderately successful at controlling the light component at the bottom product. The moderate 
success is most likely due to the fact that the light component at the bottom is very small even 
without control and varies only by a small amount with the changes in reboiler heat used to 
train the estimator and controller. 
 
 
7.5. SPC, STATISTICAL PROCESS CONTROL 
 
7.5.1. Overview- Deming and 10. Step Process for Quality Improvement 
 
The emergence of Toyota motor corp. as the largest producer of automobiles by sales and 
by production surpassing the General Motors, corp., is seen as a vindication of the emphasis 
placed on product quality. One of the fruits of labor from Deming‟s principles [2000] is the 
SPC, statistical process control methods. Those who have worked with SPC have found the 
benefits from it as substantial and always in the positive quadrant. With more than 30 million 
cars sold the corolla brand is one of the more popular and bestselling unit. The reasons 
attributed to this success are fewer customer complaints, higher quality in terms of fuel 
efficiency, reliability, warranty etc. The 10 step process of Quality management include: (i) 
identify a broad area of improvement; (ii) survey the customers; (iii) form QIT, quality 
improvement team; (iv) Develop cause and effect relations from results of surveys (fish-bone 
diagrams); (v) develop action plan based on causes identified; (vi) settle for process measures 
and see whether SPC is applicable; (vii) Continue cycle of Plan-Do-Check; (viii) Continuous 
Improvement Strategy; (ix) Quality Audit and Documentation; (x) Certification and 
Management Review. 
Deming‟s 14 points for management include; 
 
Point 1: Create a constancy of purpose in order to improve quality and service, to become 
competitive and to stay in business. 
Point 2: Adopt the new philosophy. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
421 
Point 3: Create dependence on mass inspection. 
Point 4: End the practice of awarding business on the basis of price tag alone. 
Point 5: Constantly and forever improve the system of production and service. 
 
SPC, statistical process control refers to a set of methods and techniques of monitoring 
and control of a process so that the process is operated close to design premises. SPC is 
different from APC, automatic process control. The feedback and feed forward control 
methods discussed in earlier sections provide for correction of the deviation from set point on 
an as happened basis. No analysis goes into what caused the disturbance. So should there be a 
source for disturbances the deviation from set point and corrective control action would 
happen again and again. This would put a strain on the tuning controller elements due to 
hysteresis effects. In SPC control, the cause and effect analysis would lead to knowledge of 
source of disturbance among other things. Action on removal of the source of disturbance 
would result in decreased load on the control elements as compared with APC. Further in 
SPC, only statistically significant deviation are agreed upon as deviation. In APC what could 
be noise either random white or even biased ones can trigger corrective action. As with any 
device repeated use can lead to repair. The long term effect of SPC results in better product 
quality. The APC method suffers from the quality improvement by changes made upon 
infrequent and ad hoc inspection method. A more careful study is undertaken in the SPC 
method. 
 
 
7.5.2. Example of Application of SPC – Fluidization Quality Analyzer 
 
Here is an example of an application of SPC. 
 
Fluidization Quality Analyzer [Daw and Hawk, 1995]. The pressure drop in a gas-solid 
fluidized beds as a function of time is measured. From theory, the pressure drop during 
fluidization is expected to stay a constant. Experimental measurements indicate the pressure 
drop in a fluidized bed varies with time. Distinct patterns can be seen from the variation of 
pressure fluctuations with time [Sharma and Turton, 1998, Sharma, 1998, Renganathan 
1990]. 
The pressure signals can be converted to a frequency domain by use of a FFT, Fast 
Fourier Transform analysis (Sharma [1998]). Time series analysis such an ACF, 
autocorrelation function, CCF., cross-correlation function can be deployed to study the 
hydrodynamic regimes of fluidization. The dominant frequency of slugging beds were found 
to be lower and distinct such as 2 Hz for a 5 cm bed. For a bubbling bed the dominant 
frequency of FFT of P measurements were found to be significantly higher than that of 
that found for slugging beds. Those skilled in the art of fluidization generally agree with the 
following regimes during gas-solid fluidization:  
 
(i) Minimum fluidization regime 
(ii) Bubbling Bed 
(iii) Slugging Bed 
(iv) Turbulent Bed 
(v) Phase Inversion and Solid Packets at Dispersed Systems 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
422 
(vi) Elutriating Beds 
 
The hydrodynamics of fluidization depends on the particle size and particle size 
distribution and other characteristics of the powder fluidized. Geldart [1973] has classified the 
powders according to the quality of fluidization that can be realized. The characteristics of 
fluidization of Geldart A type powder include a maximum stable bubble size, distinct regimes 
of minimum fluidization with bed expansion and bubbling regime. The characteristics of 
Geldart D type powder is for coarse particle systems where onset of bubbling begins upon 
fluidization. The bubbles grow and coalesce into slugs. Geldart B type powder characteristics 
have been found to be between that of Geldart A and Geldart D type powders. Geldart C type 
powders do not fluidize well. The particles adhere to each other. Jetting or gas by-passing is 
found. 
At fluidization velocities near the minimum fluidization velocity, Umf the mixing of 
solids achieved is insufficient to prevent agglomeration. This limits the mass transfer rates. 
During the slugging regimes the gas by-passes contact with the solid particles resulting in 
decreased process efficiency. The most efficient contacting condition is that which produces 
significant agitation in order to prevent solids clumping while minimizing the degree of by-
passing. The fluidization quality can be related to the intensity of flow oscillations and degree 
of gas-solids mixing.  
A control loop based on P, fluctuations in pressure drop in fluidized beds, 
measurements with a control valve on the flow rate of the fluidizing gas is shown in Figure 
7.12. This was patented by Daw and Hawk [1995]. The P of the fluidized bed is measured 
using a PT, pressure transducer installed near the distributor plate of the fluidized bed. A 
signal conditioned circuit was introduced in order to obtain the derivative of signal. During 
severe slugging regime of fluidization (Bi and Grace [1995]) larger, faster pressure 
fluctuations compared with slightly slugging conditions can be found. The rate of pressure 
fluctuations was averaged in order to produce a fluidization intensity signal. Thus P 
measurements can be directly correlated with fluidization quality. The signal conditioning 
proposed in [Daw and Hawk, 1995] was based on chaotic time series analyses and in an 
advance over Fourier analysis methods. During some conditions of fluidization the P 
signals have been found to be non-periodic [Daw and Hawk, 1995]. Sharma [1998] by use of 
saddle point analysis in probability density functions of P, measurements for the 
experimental conditions used in the study found the P measurements in fluidized beds to 
be periodic.  
The control loop in Figure 7.12 can be used to control the degree of turbulence or 
fluidization quality in a fluidized bed. Daw and Hawk [1995] interpreted the P 
measurements as a function of time as comprising of turbulence induced time-varying 
component that can be associated with the bubble activity within the fluidized bed. Signal 
processing to separate the turbulence-induced time-varying component associated with 
bubble activity in the bed was introduced. The output signal display in the indicator of bubble 
activity within the fluidized bed. The signal processing circuitry includes obtaining the first 
derivative of pressure signal, operation amplifier, low pass filter and rectifier. The control 
action is effected by use of optimal flow rate of fluidizing gas.  

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
423 
 
Figure 7.12. Control Loop for Fluidization Quality Analyzer. 
 
One of the goals of SPC is to minimize production costs. This is accomplished with a 
“make it right the first time” program. Attainment of product consistency and compliance 
with product specifications and achievement of customer satisfaction are the goals of the 
SPC. They tend to create opportunities for all members of the organization to contribute 
towards quality improvement. They help both management and employees make 
economically sound decisions about actions affecting the process (Smith, [1998]). 
The basic tools for SPC include: (a) Flowchart; (b) Pareto Chart; (c) Check sheet; (d) 
Cause and Effect Diagram to identify the root cause of the problem; (e) Histogram; (f) 
Control Chart and; (g) Scatter Plot; (h) Factorial Design of Experiments. SPC is an important 
tool and leads to many process improvements and positive results such as; 
 
 
uniformity of output 
 
reduced rework 
 
fewer defective products 
 
increased output 
 
lower average cost 
 
fewer errors 
 
higher quality output 
 
less scrap 
 
less machine downtime 
 
less waste in production labor hours 
 
increased job satisfaction 
 
improved competitive position 
 
more jobs 
 
 
  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
424 
7.5.3. Control Charts 
 
Process control charts are used to achieve and maintain statistical control at each phase of 
the process. Process control charts are used in process capability studies to assess process 
capability in relation to product specifications and customer demands. Statistical sampling is 
part of a self-certification plan for vendors. The capability studies are gauged. 
Control charts are used in manufacturing units to delineate random noise and variability 
in process variables that can have Attributable causes. No control action is needed when the 
variation is due to random noise. Control action can be initiated when the Attributable cause 
is identified. When the variability is due to random noise it is also referred to as stable system 
of chance causes. Other kinds of variability can also be classified (Bi and Grace, [1995)] into 
four categories:  
 
(i) improper setting of machines;  
(ii) operator incompetence and errors;  
(iii) defects in raw materials, water supply and;  
(iv) utility malfunction.  
 
The variability is larger compared with random noise. These sources of variability are 
called as assignable causes.  
A process that is operating in the presence of assignable causes is said to be out of 
control. One of the goals of SPC is the elimination of batch to batch variability in product 
quality. A prototypical control chart is shown in Figure 7.13. The control chart can be treated 
as a graphical display of quality characteristics as a function of time. The samples are 
measured at a certain predetermined frequency, i.e., once every hour. The data points in 
Figure 7.13 corresponds to a process in control state. The UCL and LCL are upper control 
limit and lower control limit. These limits can be obtained given a certain set of objectives 
and characteristics of the statistical distribution that best corresponds with the raw data from 
the measurements. Sometimes even if the all the points lie within the UCL and LCL some 
biases can be detected. This is for example, when 15 out of 18 points measured lie above the 
center line. This would be indicative of a systematic error. Only random scatter can be 
concluded as in-control state. In Figure 7.13 is also shown a normal distribution. Often times, 
the LCL and UCL are calculated as shown in the Figure 7.13. 
Let the UCL and LCL be at a distance km from the mean value of the measurements, 
m. m is the square root of the variance of the statistical distribution the measurements 
conform to. It is also called the standard deviation. Sometimes Bessel’s correction can be 
used to calculate the sample standard deviation. Here (N-1) is used compared with N, where 
N is the number of data points in the sample. 
 
 
UCL = m + km 
(7.79) 
 
 
Center Line, CL = m 
(7.80) 
 
 
LCL = m – k m 
(7.81) 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
425 
 
Figure 7.13. Prototypical Control Chart. 
 
The units of “k” is in terms of standard deviation units. When k = 3, industrial practioners 
call it 3 sigma quality. When k = 6, industrial practioners call it 6 sigma quality. The inventor 
of control charts was Shewhart. These types of charts are also called as Shewhart control 
charts.  
The central limit theorem can be invoked for the sample means to conform to a normal 
distribution. Let the confidence level be given by 100(1-)%. Then, 100(1-)% of the sample 
means can be expected to fall in the interval of; 
 
 
_
/2
/2
m
m
LCL
Z
x
Z
UCL
n
n
  
(7.82) 
 
Where 
_
x  is the sample mean.  
Two of the parameters that determine the characteristics of the statistical distribution that 
the population of measurements the samples belong to are the sample mean and the sample 
standard deviation. The sample standard deviation can be used to estimate the degree of 
scatter in the information. Two charts may be generated an M, chart or chart that contains the 
sample means as a function of time. The second chart is an S chart that contains the sample 
standard deviations as a function of time. The UCL and LCL values as given by Eq. (8.13) 
can be calculated as long as the population variance,  and mean, m is known. When the 
parameters m and  are not known then they can be calculated using m preliminary samples. 
The population mean can be estimated by use of a grand mean; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
426 
 
_
^
1
1
m
m
i
i
x
x
m
 
(7.83) 
 
The UCL and LCL of the means of the samples lie in a range that can be expressed as; 
 
 
_
_
_
U
L
UCL
D q
CL
q
LCL
D q
 
(7.84) 
 
Where, 
_
q  is the range of sample means. The constants DU and DL varies with the sample 
size, n and is given below in Table 8.1. The range the sample means can fall under can be 
estimated as follows; 
 
 
_
;
R
m
R
q
 
(7.85) 
 
A random variable  is introduced. This is given by the ratio of the range of means with 
the standard deviation of the population. The statistical distribution that  conforms to for any 
sample size n has been determined. The mean of this distribution is say m and the standard 
deviation is say,. These values are given in Table 8.1. The UCL and LCL for the sample 
mean can be seen to be; 
 
 
3
3
m
m
UCL
x
q
n
LCL
x
q
n
 
(7.86) 
 
q  is the average range. A range can be attributed to each sample.  
On some occasions, the sample variances can be plotted in an S chart. The standard 
deviation of the population, , can be estimated from sample variance, s. The LCL and UCL 
for the S chart can be seen to be; 
 
 
'2
'2
'
3
1
'
'
3
1
LCL
c
c
CL
c
c
c
UCL  
(7.87) 
 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
427 
Table 7.2. Factors for Determining UCL and LCL of Sample Means and Sample 
Variance Charts 
 
N 
_
xchart  
3
m
n
 
_
xchart  
m 
R chart 
DL 
R Chart 
DU 
S Chart 
c’ 
2 
1.13 
1.13 
0 
3.27 
0.80 
4 
0.729 
2.06 
0 
2.28 
0.92 
6 
0.483 
2.53 
0 
2.0 
0.95 
8 
0.373 
2.85 
0.136 
1.86 
0.97 
10 
0.308 
3.08 
0.223 
1.78 
0.97 
12 
0.266 
3.26 
0.28 
1.72 
0.98 
14 
0.235 
3.41 
0.33 
1.67 
0.98 
16 
0.212 
3.53 
0.364 
1.64 
0.98 
18 
0.194 
3.64 
0.392 
1.61 
0.98 
20 
0.180 
3.74 
0.414 
1.59 
0.99 
22 
0.167 
3.82 
0.43 
1.57 
0.99 
24 
0.157 
3.90 
0.45 
1.55 
0.99 
 
 
The estimator of  from S chart can be given by; 
 
 
_
^
'
s
c  
(7.88) 
 
The control chart for sample variances can be whipped up as follows; 
 
 
_
_
_
_
_
'2
'2
'
3
1
3
1
'
s
s
UCL
s
c
CL
s
s
c
c
c
 
(7.89) 
 
c‟ values for difference sample sizes are given in Table 7.1. 
 
 
7.6. FEEDFORWARD CONTROL 
 
Feed forward control is different from feedback control. During feed forward control the 
load or disturbance is measured or gauged from other considerations and control action taken 
accordingly. This is different from feedback control when the process output is measured and 
the measurement is compared with the set point. The error generated is used in the control 
action taken. Feed forward control can be recognized in human physiological and anatomical 
systems. Feed forward control can be used in conjunction with feedback control. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
428 
Carrier Corporation has patented [Kolk et al., 2011] a feed forward control system for 
absorption chillers. Absorption chillers are different from mechanical vapor compression 
chillers. Thermochemical processes are used in order to produce refrigeration needed to 
generate chilled water. Lithium bromide and water are used as fluid pair. In order to generate, 
for example 44 F of chilled water the shell side of the machine has to be maintained in 
vacuum such that the water boils at 40 F. The vaporized refrigerant is absorbed by the 
Lithium bromide solution prior to being pumped into the generator section of the machine 
where heat is added to concentrate the solution. The boiled off water vapor is then condensed 
and returned to the evaporator as liquid. 
Disturbances to the chilled water temperature can arise from cooling water temperature 
and the entering chilled water temperature. The feed forward control method comprise of the 
following steps; (i) determine the disturbance transfer function; (ii) determine the capacity 
valve transfer function; (iii) measure the occurred disturbance; (iv) implement the feed 
forward control function.  
The control block diagram for feed forward control in combination with the control 
action such as PI control that was in place before for chilled absorber is shown in Figure 7.13. 
The feed forward control action law can be written as; 
 
 
( )
( )
D
D
u
U
G
s
D
G s  
(7.90.) 
 
Y is the exit chilled water temperature, U is the capacity valve position and D is the 
disturbance in wither the entering chilled water temperature or entering cooling water 
temperature. Change in chilled water temperature can be expressed as; 
 
 
( )
( )
u
D
Y
G s
G
s
D  
(7.91) 
 
 
 
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
u
D
D
D
u
D
U
u
D
D
u
Y
G
s
U
U
G
s
D
G
s
Y
G
s
U
D
G
s
D
G
s
Y
G
s
U
G
s
D
G
s
D
Y
G
s
U
 
(7.92) 
 
As shown in Figure 7.14, the feed forward control strategy in a nutshell comprises of: (i) 
computing the transfer functions GD(s) and Gu(s); (ii) measuring the disturbance signal D; 
(iii) implement the feed forward control as shown in Figure 7.13. GD(t) and Gu(t) are 
measured by application of a prescribed a known amplitude input perturbation and by 
recording the perturbation in the exit chilled water temperature. The ratio of the perturbation 
in exit chilled water temperature divided by perturbation of change in the disturbance is 
reflected in GD(t). The ratio of the perturbation of exit chilled water temperature divided by 
the perturbation in the capacity valve is captured in Gu(t). The entering cooling water 
temperature is around 70- 80 F. Fans in the cooling tower are used to maintain this 
temperature. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
429 
 
Figure 7.14. Block Diagram for Feed forward Control of Absorption Chillers. 
 
Another example of the use of the feed forward controller is in fuel supply control to a 
furnace as shown in Figure 7.14. The control strategy shown in Figure 7.14 is different from 
the feedback control strategy explained in Chapter 4.0. In the feedback control strategy the 
furnace temperature is measured. When found deviant from the set point temperature control 
action is taken such as P only control, PI only control, PD control etc. In feed forward control 
strategy the disturbance is attempted to be measured. One possible source for disturbance in 
the furnace example is the air flow rate to the furnace. The air gets heated and pumped to the 
room. Feed forward controller is used to regulate the supply of fuel to the furnace. 
 
 
Figure 7.15. Feed forward Control of Fuel Supply to Furnace. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
430 
One of the advantages of the feed forward control strategy is the control action is based 
on gauging the disturbance as it occurs. But one of the drawbacks is that the control action 
performance depends on the availability of reliable mathematical models. For example in the 
example, shown in Figure 7.14 a mathematical model that relates the temperature of the 
furnace, flow rate of air and fuel gas rate needed for achieving a given set point is needed. 
The less uncertain the model predictions are the better the performance of the control action 
taken is.  
Energy balance on the furnace at steady state can be written as follows; 
 
 
.
.
0
c
fg
p
i
f
H
vC
T
T
 
(7.93) 
 
Where 
.
fg is the fuel rate and Hc is the heat of combustion of the fuel gas,  is the fuel 
conversion efficiency from chemical energy to thermal energy. 
 
 
.
p
i
f
c
C
v
T
T
H
 
(7.94) 
 
It can be seen from Eq. (8.66) that a certain percentage change in temperature of the 
furnace will have to be compensated by the same percentage change in the fuel flow rate to 
the furnace.  
 
 
7.7. MEASUREMENT AND CONTROL OF BIOCHEMICAL REACTIONS 
 
The optimal operation of reactors in the biotechnology industry depends on the catalyst 
environment. The catalyst environment influences the useful lifetime of an enzyme catalyst of 
cell population. The state of the catalyst environment need be monitored and control schemes 
developed according to the observations against set points. There are three important steps 
towards achieving this goal; (i) Measurement; (ii) Analysis of Measurement Data and; (iii) 
Control. Advances have been made in the available reactor instrumentation, data acquisition 
and computer control areas. These methods can also be used on downstream processing 
operations and preparation of raw materials. Some of the quantities that can be measured and 
instruments available for biological systems are as follows [Stephanopoulos et al. 1985]; 
 
 
Torsional Dynamometer 
Shaft Power – from power supply 
 
Gene Expression Levels 
Biochips 
 
Piezoelectric Sensors 
Internal Force, Moment Realized 
 
Tachometer 
Tip Speed, Shear Rate, Agitator Speed in RPM 
 
Electromagnetic Flow Meter 
Liquid Flow Rate 
 
Additive Drop Count 
Flow Rate of Additive 
 
Diaphragm Pressure Gauge 
Pressure  
 
Glass Electrode 
pH 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
431 
 
Combined Platinum and  
Reference Electrode 
Redox 
 
Sterilized Electrode 
Dissolved Oxygen 
 
Thermometer, Thermistor,  
 
Thermocouple 
Temperature 
Load Cell for Level Control 
Product Removal 
 
Rota meter, Mass flowmeter 
Gas Flow rate 
 
Paramagnetic Electrochemical  
Cell 
Partial Pressure of Oxygen, pO2 
 
IR Analyzer 
Partial Pressure of Carbon Dioxide, pCO2 
 
Spectrophotometer 
Turbidity, Biomass Measurement 
 
Sensors 
for Glucose, Ethanol, DNA, RNA, NADH 
 
Ions of ammonium, magnesium, potassium,  
 
sodium, copper, phosphate 
 
Viscometer 
Viscosity 
 
Muscle strength can be measured using dynamometers. Handgrip strength is a measure of 
sarcopenia. Handgrip strength can be measured using dynamometers. The input shaft power 
that is used for agitating bioreactors can be measured using torsion dynamometer. 
Dynamometer is a device used to measure power. Power, torque and speed can be used to 
characterize the mechanical aspects of rotating machinery. These quantities needs to be 
measured in order to determine the efficiency of the agitator and identify operating regimes 
that are safe. 
 
 
7.8. DESIGN AND CONTROL OF BIOARTIFICIAL PANCREAS 
 
Nomura (5) used control theory to characterize the insulin release rate. He studies a step 
change in glucose concentration. The dynamics of glucose induced secretion of insulin can be 
expressed as the sum of the proportional response to the step change and a derivative 
response to the rate of change in the glucose concentration. Each of them have a first order 
lag time. The Laplace transform of the islet insulin release rate can be expressed as follows: 
 
 
_
cos
1
2
1
1
prop
der
glu
e
isl
K
T
r
C
s
s
 
(7.95) 
 
 
The lag times are 1 and 2 respectively. The Laplace domain expression in Eq. (8.1) can 
be inverted to give; 
 
 
1
2
cos
cos
2
1
1
t z
t z
t
t
prop
glu
e
glu
e
isl
K
C
dC
r
e
dz
e
dz
dz
 
(7.96) 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
432 
The lag times can be obtained by use of nonlinear regression of islet release-rate 
experimental data. The ramp function of glucose concentration is written as follows; 
 
 
0
cos
cos
glu
e
glu
e
C
C
 for t < 0. 
(7.97). 
 
 
 
0
cos
cos
glu
e
glu
e
C
C
mt  for 0  t  t0 
(7.98) 
 
Where 
0
cos
cos
0
ss
glu
e
glu
e
C
C
m
t
  
 
 
cos
cos
ss
glu
e
glu
e
C
C
 for t  t0 
(7.99) 
 
Eqs. (8.3-8.5) can be substituted into Eq. (8.2) and integrated to yield; 
 
 
1
1
1
2
0
0
cos
1
cos
1
1
1
(1
)
t
t
t
isl
prop
glu
e
prop
prop
glu
e
t
der
t
r
K
C
e
K
m
e
K
C
e
T
m
e
 
(7.100) 
 
 
for 0  t  t0 
(7.101) 
 
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
2
2
0
0
0
cos
1
cos
1
cos
(
1)
1
(
)
t t
t t
t
t
t
isl
prop
glu
e
prop
prop
glu
e
t t
t t
t
ss
prop
glu
e
der
t
r
K
C
e
K
m
e
e
K
C
e
e
K
C
e
T
m e
e
  
 
for t  t0 
(7.102) 
 
The insulin release rate from an islet and its dependence on plasma glucose levels needs 
to be better understood. This is needed for better design of bio artificial pancreas. A step 
change in glucose concentration is given to islets that have been isolated from a pancreas of 
mammals. The islet viability and glucose responsiveness are studied from the F curve. Insulin 
release have been found to be biphasic.  
Pharmacokinetic models have been developed to describe glucose and insulin 
metabolism. A model was proposed by Sturis et al. (6) to predict the oscillations of insulin 
and glucose concentrations with time observed experimentally. Insulin formed in human 
anatomy have been found to exhibit two kinds of oscillations: i) a rapid oscillation with a 
time period of 10-15 minutes and small amplitude; ii) longer or ultradian, damped oscillations 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
433 
with a period of 100-150 min and larger amplitude. Compartment model was proposed by 
Sturis et al. to describe glucose and insulin interactions Sturis et al. [1984]. 
4 negative feedback loops form their model involving glucose and insulin interactions: i) 
insulin formation is triggered when glucose levels become more than tolerable limit; ii) 
increase in insulin level increases the utilization of glucose and hence reduces the glucose 
levels; iii) rise in glucose level inhibits production of glucose; iv) increase in glucose levels 
stimulates its utilization. The glucose and insulin never reach stable equilibrium. The model 
includes two time delays that are critical in describing the observed oscillatory dynamics. The 
suppression of glucose levels by insulin production is captured by one time delay and the 
correlation of biological action of insulin with insulin concentration is captured by another 
time delay in interstitial compartment. Six differential equations describe the system. The 
variables are 
cos
plasma
glu
e
C
, concentration of glucose in plasma, 
plasma
insulin
C
, concentration of insulin 
in the plasma, 
int erstitial
insulin
C
, concentration of insulin in the interstitial fluid. Three additional 
variables used to describe the insulin and glucose system are the delay between the plasma 
insulin level and its effect on glucose production x1, x2, x3 and time lag, delay. The 6 
differential equations can be written as follows: 
 
 
int
cos
plasma
plasma
plasma
insulin
plasma
plasma
erstitial
insulin
plasma
isl
E
insulin
glu
e
insulin
plasma
C
V
dC
V
r C
k
C
C
dt
  (7.103) 
 
 
int
int
int
int
int
plasma
erstitial
erstitial
erstitial
insulin
insulin
insulin
insulin
E
erstitial
erstial
C
C
dC
C
k
dt
V
 
(7.104) 
 
 
cos
int
cos (
)
2
3 4
3 5
cos
cos
plasma
glu
e
plasma
plasma
erstitial
plasmaG
glu
e in
insulin
glu
e
glu
e
dC
V
r
f C
f f C
C
x f
dt
 
(7.105) 
 
 
int
1
1
3
plasma
erstitial
insulin
delay
C
V
x
dx
dt
 
(7.106) 
 
 
1
2
2
3
delay
x
x
dx
dt
 
(7.107) 
 
 
2
3
3
3
delay
x
x
dx
dt
 
(7.108) 
 
The volumes of the insulin plasma compartment, insulin interstitial fluid compartment 
and glucose plasma compartments are denoted by Vplasma, Vinterstitial and VplasmaG respectively. 
The kE is the rate constant that is used to describe the insulin transport rate into the interstitial 
fluid compartment. The first order degradation time constants for insulin in plasma 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
434 
compartment, insulin in interstitial fluid compartments are given by plasma,interstitial 
respectively. Utilization functions are given by f. The subscripts 2 and 3 are used to denote 
the glucose utilization function through the glucose plasma compartment. The 4 subscript is 
used for dependence on interstitial insulin concentration. The glucose inhibition on account of 
insulin formation is given by subscript 5.  
The above pharmacokinetic model developed by Sturis et al. (6), can be combined with 
an insulin-release model to monitor the glucose control that is achievable using bio artificial 
pancreas. There are two types of tests used: i) IVGTT, intravenous glucose tolerance test and; 
ii) OGTT, oral administration of glucose tolerance test. The initial conditions for IVGTT or 
OGTT can be selected based on the fasting levels of the patient.  
 
 
7.9. MODELING AND CONTROL OF APFR, ANNULAR PLUG FLOW 
REACTOR FOR PRODDUCTION OF SINGLE LAYER GRAPHENE 
 
Graphene can be made into thin films or thick films. Thin films of graphene can be made 
on flexible substrates. Other thin films such as Nickel needs rigid substrate. Graphene made 
by CVD, chemical vapor deposition methods can be rolled into thin films by a transfer 
process. The process [11] comprises of three steps: (i) Adhesion of polymer supports to the 
graphene on copper foil. Two rollers are used to get the graphene film grown on a copper foil 
to be attached to a polymer film coated with adhesive film as it passes through; b; (ii) Etching 
of copper layers. Electrochemical reaction with aqueous 0.1 M ammonium persulphate 
solution (NH4)2S2O8 enables the removal of copper layers and; (iii) Release of the graphene 
layer onto a target substrate. Thermal treatment is used to detach the graphene from the 
polymer support and reattach the film onto a target substrate. This target substrate could have 
been placed below the copper foil in order to obviate the third step. 
 
 
7.9.1. Adhesion, Etching and Transfer 
 
Graphene is synthesized in an annular plug flow reactor, APFR. The annular reactor 
space is generated by an 8 inch outer quartz tube and an inner 7.5 inch copper foil, wrapped 
quart tube. The use of annular reactor in place of the tubular reactor is to minimize radial 
temperature gradients. This was found to cause inhomogeneity in the film formation. The 
inner tube is heated to 1000 0 C. Hydrogen, H2 is allowed to flow at 8 s.c.c.m and 90 mtorr. 
Annealing process comes next. Annealment for 30 minutes allows for increase in grain sized 
in copper foil from a few micron to 100 microns. This has been found to increase the 
graphene growth. Methane, CH4 is allowed to mix with the flowing hydrogen at a flow rate of 
24 s.c.c.m at 460 m torr. The sample is rapidly cooled at about 10 0C.s-1. The graphene film 
grown on copper foil is attached to a thermal release tape by applying pressure on the rollers 
at 0.2 MPa. Copper foil is etched in a plastic bath filled with etchant. The etched film is 
washed with deionized water to remove and unused etchant. The graphene film is ready for 
transfer to a target substrate such as a curved surface. 150- 200 mm.min-1 transfer rates by 
thermal treatment can be achieved by letting the graphene film pass through the rollers at 
mild heat of 90-120 0C. Multilayered graphene can be made by repetition of this process. The 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
435 
product that comes as a result of this would be different from the bilayer or multilayer 
material formed during the reaction by other methods. This can be viewed as physical 
stacking of the formed graphene layers. Screen printing can be used to generate 4 wire touch 
panels.  
Continuous production of graphene on large scale is possible. Scalability of the process is 
high. Processability is good. Carbon has limited solubility in Copper even at 1000 0C. The 
copper may have a catalytic effect on the graphene formation reaction. Transparent electrodes 
can be made using graphene in large scale and replace the currently used indium tin oxide, 
ITO, electrodes. Monolayer graphene was confirmed using Raman spectra. Bilayer and 
multilayer islands were found from atomic force microscope, AFM and transmission electron 
microscope, TEM. Stacked layers reduces the optical transmittance by 2.2-2.3% a layer and 
the conductivity also decreases. Dopants can be added as desired. p junction formation by 
doping can be achieved by addition of nitric acid, HNO3. Sheet resistance can be increased by 
chemical doping. Poly methyl methacrylate, PMMA can be used as polymer supports. Some 
of the challenges in using this method is the formation of polycrystalline graphene due to 
occurrence of nucleation again to form a second layer. Oxidation of copper has to be avoided. 
High rates of evaporation of copper from the foil can hinder graphene growth. Copper is not 
as effective as Ni, nickel to lower the energy barrier to form graphene.  
Other carbon sources in addition to methane that can be used for the purpose of preparing 
graphene are carbon monoxide, CO, ethane, C2H6, ethylene, C2H4, ethanol, C6H5OH, 
acetylene, C2H2, propane, C3H8, butane, C4H10, butadiene, C4H6, pentane, C5H12, pentene, 
C5H10, cyclopentadiene, C5H6, hexane, C6H14, cyclohexane, C6H12, benzene, C6H6, toluene, 
C7H8, iso-butane, iso-pentane and hexene. Mixtures of these sources may also be used. 
Carbon formation from carbon sources are thermodynamically favored only at high 
temperatures. The temperature that can be used in the reactor is 300 – 2000 0C. The flow rate 
range can be 5 – 1000 s.c.c m (standard cubic centimeters per minute). Inert gases can prevent 
undesirable oxidation. Reynolds number in the reactor is in the regime where laminar flow 
can be assumed. The reactor is operated at low pressure. This would enable the entire vapor 
and solid system to fall near the sublimation curve of the P-T, pressure-temperature diagram 
of reactants and products. 
 
 
7.9.2. Reactor Performance 
 
Horizontal low pressure chemical vapor deposition reactor, LPCVD is discussed in 
Fogler [12]. The reactor is operated at 100 Pa. The APFR discussed in the above paragraph 
(Figure 7.16) is operated at about 60 Pa. One of the advantages of using LPCVD is the 
capability of large number of wafers without sacrifice to film uniformity. At low pressures, 
the diffusion coefficient is expected to increase. Sometimes Knudsen diffusion effects cannot 
be ignored. The surface reactions are expected to be rate limiting compared with other mass 
transfer effects. Assume the reaction mechanism for the formation of graphene on copper foil 
in the APFR above is as follows; 
 
Dissociation 
 
 
2CH4  C2H2 + 3H2 
(7.109) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
436 
 
1000 0 C 
Adsorption 
 
 
C2H2 + 2Cu  2Cu.C + H2 
(7.110) 
 
Surface Reaction 
 
 
Cu.C  Cu + C 
(7.111) 
 
Given the monolayer formation of graphene, the Langmuir-Hinshelwood kinetics may be 
a reasonable assumption for the adsorption kinetics. At high temperatures such as 1000 0 C 
the dissociation rate can be expected to be rapid. Adsorption is a surface phenomenon. 
Molecules adsorb on the surface. Other molecules in the interior of the solid substrate are 
attracted by other surrounding molecules in all directions. The molecules that reside in the 
surface are in a state of imbalance and are pulled inward. The dissociated products from 
methane will interact with the molecules in the surface. The amount adsorbed would be 
proportional to the surface area available for adsorption. The Langmuir isotherm can be 
derived as follows [13]; 
 
 
[filled sites] + [empty sites]  [filled sites] 
(7.112) 
 
Sites are subject to chemical equilibrium; 
 
 
[bulk solute] + [empty site]  [filled site] 
(7.113) 
 
 
K‟ = 
[
_
]
'
[
_
][
_
]
filled
sites
K
bul
solute empty
site  
(7.114) 
 
 
[
_
]
[
_
]
'[
_
]1
'[
_
]
total
sites
filled
sites
K bulk
solute
K bulk
solute  
(7.115) 
 
 
Figure 7.16. APFR, Annular Plug Flow Reactor for Dissociation of Methane and Formation of 
Graphene Deposition on Copper Foil. 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
437 
The rate of adsorption can be written as follows; 
 
 
Rate of adsorption r” = 
2
2
2
2
0
1
'
C H
C H
k p
K p
 
(7.116) 
 
k0 is a measure of total concentration of sites available. Eq. (8) is an alternate form of 
Langmuir isotherm. The reciprocal of the rate of adsorption varies in a linear manner with the 
reciprocal of the partial pressure of acetylene. The equilibrium rate constant and the total 
concentration of the sites can be obtained from the slope and intercept of the straight line.  
Acetylene decomposition can become autocatalytic [14]. It is a free radical process. Free 
radicals can combine with the copper metal and become inert. This may keep the reaction 
from becoming a thermal autocatalytic runaway. The axial flow in the annulus can be 
assumed to be in laminar flow. This is from the Reynolds‟ number estimated for APFR of less 
than 50. As the reactant gas flows through the annulus simultaneous reaction and diffusion 
can be expected. The dissociated products diffuse to the surface of the copper foil and get 
adsorbed. At high temperatures the surface reactions of carbide formation and graphene 
formation are found. Diffusion direction is radially inward. The cross-sectional area of the 
annulus is given by; 
 
 
 
Ac = 0.25π (Dt
2 – Dc
2) 
(7.117) 
 
Where Dt and Dc are the diameters of the outer tube made out of quartz and inner quartz 
tube wrapped with copper foil. With the progress of CVD the mole fraction of acetylene in 
the annulus decreases as the reactant flows down the length of the annulus. An effectiveness 
factor can be calculated to determine the overall rate of reaction per unit volume of the reactor 
space. The reactants diffuse radially inward toward the copper foil. Graphene deposits grow 
on the copper foil by the surface reaction given by Eq. (3). Concentration of the acetylene in 
the surface of the copper is less than the concentration of acetylene in the bulk. The 
effectiveness factor is defined as; 
 
 
_
_
(
)
_
_
(
_
_
_
_
_sup
_
)
rate of
reaction actual
rate of
reaction if
entire
foil
is
at
plied
concentration  (7.118) 
 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2
[
"]
"
"
c
C H
C H
c
D D
c
AA
c
AA
C
D
D
r
dD
r
D
r
D
r
 
(7.119) 
 
Consider a cylindrical shell of length L and thickness r from a distance r from the center 
of the APFR. The acetylene formed from dissociation of methane undergoes simultaneous 
diffusion and reaction at the copper surface of the inner tube. The copper carbide becomes 
graphene upon further reaction. A mass balance on a cylindrical shell of thickness on the  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
438 
dissociated acetylene that undergoes simultaneous diffusion and reaction to the surface of the 
quartz inner tube can be written as follows; 
 
 
 
 
(7.120) 
 
The boundary conditions used are as follows; 
At the center of the reactor the concentration profile has to be symmetric in the annular 
space. There is no reason for asymmetry. Hence at r = 0, 
 
 
 
 
(7.121) 
 
At the quartz wall of the outer cylinder, the wall is impervious 
r = R, 
 
 
 
(7.122) 
 
The governing equation for the concentration profile that varies with space and time can 
be obtained by combining Eq. (7.120) with the damped wave diffusion and relaxation 
equation given in Eq. (7.123); 
 
 
 
(7.123) 
 
The governing equation for concentration of acetylene species can be seen to be; 
 
 (7.124) 
 
The dimensionless form of Eq. (7.124) can be obtained by defining the following non-
dimensionalizing variables; 
 
 
 
(7.125) 
 
The dimensionless governing equation is as follows; 
 
 
 
(7.126) 


0
1
2
2
2
2
"'







H
C
H
C
r
C
k
t
C
r
rJ
r
0
2
2



r
C
H
C
0
2
2



r
C
H
C
t
J
r
C
D
J
r
r
H
C
H
C
r








2
2
2
2


C
k
r
C
r
D
r
C
D
t
C
k
t
C
H
C
H
C
H
C
H
C
H
C
r
H
C
r
'"
'"
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2















)
'"
(
*
;
;
;
2
2
2
r
r
H
C
r
s
s
H
C
k
k
D
r
X
t
C
C
C
u
r

















u
k
X
u
X
X
u
u
k
u
*
1
*
1
2
2
2
2
















Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
439 
The solution is obtained by the method of separation of variables. First the damping term 
is removed by multiplying the above equation by en. It can be seen that the terms group as W 
= uen and the governing equation becomes at n = (1-k*)/2; 
 
 
 
(7.127) 
 
The method of separation of variables can be used in order to obtain the analytical 
solution to Eq. (7.127). 
 
Let  
W = V()  (X) 
(7.128) 
 
 
 
 
 
(7.129) 
 
 
 = c1 J0 ( X) + c2 Y0 ( X) 
(7.130) 
 
It can be seen that c2 = 0 from the symmetry condition that the derivative of the 
concentration with respect to r = 0. Now from the BC at the surface, 
 
 
 
(7.131) 
 
The solution for time domain is the sum of two exponentials. The term containing the 
positive exponential power exponent will drop out as with increasing time the system may be 
assumed to reach steady state. At steady state or infinite time W = uexp(/2), becomes zero 
multiplied with infinity. This is an inderdeterminate form of the fourth kind (Piskunov). This 
can be shown to go to zero. Thus, 
 
 
 
(7.132) 
 
 
 
(7.133) 
 
Eq. (7.133) is an infinite series of Fourier Bessel that is modified for inclusion of damped 
wave diffusion and relaxation effects. The cn can be solved for from the initial condition by 


X
W
X
X
W
W
k
W










1
16
*
1
2
2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2
*
1
"
0
)
(
)
('
)
(
"
















k
V
V
X
X
X
X












r
H
C
n
r
H
C
D
R
J
D
c
X
u




2
2
2
2
1
1
0
2
2
2
*
1
4
n
k
e
c
V



























1
2
*
1
2
*
1
0
2
2
n
k
k
n
n
e
X
J
c
u





Kal Renganathan Sharma  
440 
using the principle of orthogonally for Bessel functions. At time is zero the LHS and RHS are 
multiplied by J0 (m X). Integration between the limits of 0 and R is performed. When n is not 
m the integral is zero from the principle of orthogonally. Thus when n = m,  
 
 
cn = - 0
R J0 (n X) / 0
R J0
2 (n X)  
(7.134) 
 
 
It can be noted from Eq.(7.133) that when  
 
 
( 1 + k*)2/4 < n
2  
(7.135) 
 
 
The solution will be periodic with respect to time domain. This can be obtained by using 
De Movries theorem and obtaining the real part to exp(-i  (n
2 - ( 1 + k*)2/4 ) ). For large 
relaxation times the concentration of graphene product will undergo oscillations. 
 
 
 
(7.136) 
 
Estimates of relaxation time from Stokes-Einstein formulation from chemical potential 
(Sharma, [13] ) for graphene at 5 torr this can be as high as 50 minutes. 
 
 
 
(7.137) 
 
The surface to volume ratio needs to be maintained high. It can be seen that there exist a 
critical value of R above which the rate at which the free radicals are produced in the reaction 
is larger than the rate at which it is removed by diffusion. This will lead to a runaway 
condition in autocatalytic reactions. At the critical value, 
 
 
(2R h ) u/ X Cs D/Dr = ( R2 h) (k”‟ C) 
(7.138) 
 
or  
Rcrit = 4 D/k”‟ J1 (R (k”‟/D) )/J0(R (k”‟/D)  
(7.139) 
 
Considering the average reaction rate instead,  
 
 
Rcrit = 2D/k”‟ J1 (R (k”‟/D) 
(7.140) 
 
 
Due to high temperature and low pressure the primary mode of heat transfer is expected 
to be due to radiation. Small temperature differences may exist between the copper foil and 
graphene sheet. There is no need to couple the energy and mass balances at these small 
temperature gradients.  
CVD, chemical vapor deposition methods can be used to prepare monolayer graphene 
sheet. Hydrocarbons are decomposed on transition metals such as Nickel, Ni, Cu, Copper, Co, 
Cobalt and Ruthenium, Ru. Hydrocarbons used are methane, ethylene, acetylene and benzene.  


2
2
7.
58
*
1
2
2
H
C
r
D
R
k



P
D
H
C
r
2
2



Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
441 
Foils made of Ni and Co with thickness of 0.5 mm x 2 mm were used as catalysts [15]. 
These foils were chopped into five, 5 mm2 pieces and polished mechanically. CVD process 
was carried out by effecting the decomposition of hydrocarbons around 800 – 1000 0C. 
Methane is passed at 60 – 70 sccm along with flow of hydrogen at 500 sccm at 1000 0C for 5- 
10 minutes over a Nickel foil. Ethylene at 4 – 8 sccm can be used in place of methane at 60-
70 sccm. Benzene can be used as the carbon source at 1000 0C for 5 minutes. Dilution of 
benzene is effected using argon and hydrogen. Acetylene at 4 sccm was decomposed on a Co 
foil at 800 0C. Methane was decomposed at 1000 0C over Co foil. Cooling step of the Metal 
foils after the decomposition step were performed in a gradual manner.  
 
 
7.10. COMBINED CYCLE POWER PLANT 
 
Integrated Solar Combined Cycle, ISCC, power plants can result in more efficient use of 
fossil fuels such as coal, natural gas and petroleum. The waste heat from the exhaust of the 
gas turbine can be used along with the solar energy to raise steam and drive a steam turbine. 
The world record for obtained power for less fuel was accomplished in April, 2011. Siemens 
set-up a 580 MW power station with combined cycle operations of steam and gas turbines. 
The gas turbine blades were made out of crystalline nickel. The inlet gas turbine temperature 
was 1400 0C – 1500 0C. The boiler weighs 7000 metric tons and the heat exchanger has an 
area of 510,000 m2. Combined cycle power plant in China operates at efficiencies of about 
59.7% recorded at a 430 MW power plant in operation. Thermo economic analysis and 4E 
analysis – Energy, Exergy, Environment and Economic Analysis, second law costing 
methods can be used to confirm the feasibility of increases in thermal efficiency from 30% to 
~ 60-75%. There is potential for power plant with higher combined cycle efficiencies in this 
country, United States from the current levels reported at ~ 40%.  
By use of both the steam and gas turbines the Carnot cycle efficiency has been increased 
from 30% to 50%. After nearly two centuries since the discovery of the steam engine by 
James Watt, from the point of view of thermodynamics that defines the limits of machines, 
what are the issues involved in solar power plant. The power plant size for combined cycle 
power plant can be high, as high as nuclear power plants. The 2 GW power plant that is being 
constructed at Pembroke, Wales will be the largest and most efficient combined cycle power 
plant in the United Kingdom. A 1642 MW combined cycle power plant is expected to be 
commissioned in Iraq in 2016. Alstom will supply four gas turbines, four HRSGs, heat 
recovery steam generators, two steam turbines and six air-cooled turbo generators. 2.6 GW is 
the plant capacity that is expected to come on stream in 2016 or 2017 in Taipei, Taiwan. 
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd and CTCI Corp. in Engineering and Procurement have 
jointly received the order. The gas turbine inlet temperature is slated at 1600 0 C. The largest 
power plant there is the hydroelectric power plant with 22.5 GW capacity at Three Gorges, 
China. The suspended nuclear power plant in Kashiwasaki Kariwa in Japan has a capacity of 
8.2 GW. 
The federal government by its Sun Shot Initiative expects to make the abundant solar 
energy resources in this country, United States more affordable and accessible. Within 10 
years the cost of photovoltaic, PV panels, is expected to be reduced by 75%. The solar PV 
panels can be used to raise saturated steam. Safety of birds and other living creatures near the 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
442 
concentrated regions of light is an important consideration during the design of the plant. 
Acreage use can come down from increases in light to electricity conversion.  
The mass of the sun can be calculated from the period of the earth which is 365.25 days. 
The mass of the sun is ~ 2 x 1033 gm. The surface temperature of the sun is 5500 0C. Using 
Boltzmann‟s law if hydrogen molecules were made to travel at the speed of light the micro 
scale temperature will be 7.22 x 1015 K. If that molecule was polyfullerene then the 
temperature will be ~ 2.6 x 1018 K. Sun is a hot reservoir from which more heat engines can 
be made to work from. With improvements in energy storage materials energy from lightning 
can someday be transformed into useful work in earth surface.  
The world‟s largest electric power generating system using CSP concentrated solar power 
technology has been commissioned by NRG solar along with Brightsource energy in 2013. 
The capacity is 392 MW. CSP used a field of mirrors to concentrate sunlight onto thermal 
receivers mounted on top of towers. Lower cost of production and zero emissions are 
expected from use of solar power plants. The technology is low risk. The efficiency of 
conversion of sunlight to useful energy using photovoltaic cell technology hovers around 
15%. Photovoltaic efficiency of PV cells is 8% for solar cells made from amorphous silicon. 
Their efficiency has increased now to 14%. This can be further increased to 20% by use of 
thin films that contain small amounts of crystals of silicon. Single crystal silicon can be used 
to make the “most efficient” solar cells with 30% efficiency. These PV cells are more 
expensive. 
By 2021, six Public sector undertakings: BHEL, Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., PGCIL, 
Power Grid Corp. of India Ltd., SECI, Solar Energy Corporation of India, SSL, Sambhar Salt 
Ltd., REIL, Rajasthan Electronics & Instruments Ltd., and SJVNL, Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam 
in India are planning to set-up solar power plant with 4 GW capacity in Rajasthan, India. The 
solar photo-voltaic power plant will use PV modules based on crystalline silicon technology. 
CO2, Carbon dioxide emissions can be reduced by 4 million tons per year. The land area 
proposed to be used is 19,000 acres at Sambhar, Rajasthan. It can be the largest power plant 
in the world in its kind. 
In 1955 Bell Labs, created a 6% PV cell for everyday use. Hoffman electronics increased 
the light to electricity conversion efficiency to 10% in 1959 in commercial applications. The 
first thin film cell to exceed 10% mark in conversion efficiency was made at University of 
Delaware, Institute of Energy Conversion in 1980. In 1985, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA created a solar cell that is 25% efficiency using 200 X concentration. The 30% mark was 
shown using Stirling cycle at NREL in 1994 using a gallium indium phosphide/gallium 
arsenide solar cell.  
A team of researchers from North Carolina State University has fabricated a “super 
absorbing” design that can be used in order to maximize the light absorption efficiency of the 
thin film solar cells while minimizing the manufacturing costs. According to EE times – Asia 
dated March 3rd 2014. Their design can decrease the thickness of the semiconductor materials 
in thin film solar cells by an order of magnitude without compromising the capability of solar 
light absorption. 100 nm amorphous silicon layer is a requirement in state-of-the art solar cell 
design. 90% of incident solar beam can be absorbed using 10 nm thick layer of amorphous 
silicon. 
The core of the super absorbing layer in solar cell comprises of a rectangular onion like 
configuration that is made up of a semiconductor layer. This layer is coated by 3 layers of 
AR, anti-reflection coating that transmits light at a greater efficiency. The researchers first 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
443 
estimated the intrinsic light trapping efficiency of the semiconductor material. Then they 
devised a structure where the light absorption efficiency is equal to that of the intrinsic 
efficiency of the semiconductor material. 
A team of scientists from CIT, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 
developed flexible solar cells that enhance the absorption of sunlight and hence the 
photovoltaic efficiency using fraction of expensive semi-conductor material. They built their 
solar cells using silicon wires embedded within a transparent, flexible polymer film. Black 
paint can absorb light well, but may not generate electricity. 
These solar cells convert most photons absorbed into electrical energy. These wires have 
what is called a near perfect internal quantum efficiency. A high-quality solar cell is built for 
high absorption of light and good conversion of photons to electric current. These wires are 
painted with anti-reflective coating prior to being embedded into the transparent polymer. 
Each wire is about 1 mm in diameter and 30-100 mm in length. 2% of the material is silicon 
and 98% polymer. This brings down the cost of the solar cell. These solar cells are also 
flexible. Photovoltaic cells respond only to a narrow part of the sun‟s spectrum. In order to 
circumvent the lower efficiency on account of absorption of narrow part of the spectrum some 
developers prepare layered materials. The efficiency goes up, but the material becomes 
expensive as well.  
Cloudy days may lower the efficiency. Ohio State University developed a doped 
polymer, oligothiopene. The resulting substance was responsive to wavelengths from 300 nm 
to 1000 nm. The spectrum of ultraviolet (UV) to near infra-red is spanned in this range. 
Traditional silicon cells, au contraire, function in the 600 nm to 900 nm range. This narrower 
range is between orange and red. The doped polymer both fluoresces and phosphoresces. 
Fluorescence emanates from electrons that get excited by incident rays of sunlight travel from 
a higher energy state and drop back to a lower energy state. Some light is emitted. The 
wavelength of the emitted light is in infrared range and not visible. This emitted light is 
seldom reused. Reuse of emitted light may improve the photovoltaic efficiency. These 
polymers are cheaper to produce compared with silicon. Hence they can be considered even if 
their photovoltaic efficiencies are lower. The relaxation time of these electrons during 
fluorescence of the doped polymer comes up from a few picoseconds in other solar materials 
to a few microseconds. 
A full spectrum solar cell that absorbs the full spectrum of sunlight from the near infrared 
and far ultraviolet to electric current can be prepared from an alloy of indium, gallium and 
nitrogen. This was made possible by a serendipitous observation by researchers at Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory interacting with the crystal-growing research team at Cornell 
University and Japan‟s Ritsumeikan University. This observation was that the band gap of the 
semiconductor indium nitride is not 2 eV as previously thought, but instead is a much lower 
0.7 eV. Solar cells made from this alloy would be the most efficient and can be lower in cost 
as well. 
The efficiency of photovoltaic cells is limited because of a number of factors. Some light 
energy that gets absorbed is rejected as waste heat. There exists a band gap in semi-conductor 
materials that the solar cells are made out of. Incoming photons of the right energy knock 
electrons loose and leave holes and migrate in the np junction to form an electric current. 
Photons with less energy than the band gap slip right through. Red light photons are not 
absorbed by high-band-gap semiconductors. Photons such as blue light photons that possess 
higher energy than the band gap are absorbed. Excess energy is dissipated as heat. There is a 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
444 
maximum efficiency limit for a solar cell made from a single material for converting light 
into electric power. This is about 30%. In practical applications it is about 25%. Stacks or 
layers of different materials are attempted in order to increase the efficiency. 
CIGS, CuInxGa1-xSe2 based photovoltaic thin films can deliver sunlight to electricity 
conversion performance greater than that of CdTe or silicon based thin films. Nanosolar) has 
developed a process with high-throughput, high-yield printing of nanoparticles onto low-cost 
substrates and formation of solar cells. CIGS based PV thin films can deliver sunlight to 
electricity conversion efficiencies of 19.5%. NREL has certified the solar cell efficiency of 
14% achieved by nanosolar with lower cost materials using nanotechnology. CIGS based thin 
films result in higher efficiencies. They are coated with a homogeneously mixed ink of 
nanoparticles using wet coating techniques. CIGS roll-printing technology developed by 
nanosolar uses a combination of high-speed, high-yield, no vacuum, wet coating of 
nanoparticles onto low cost per unit area of metal foil substrates with RTP (Rapid Thermal 
Processing) techniques. Nanosolar‟s rapid thermal processing of nanoparticle-based coatings 
resulted in solar-cell efficiencies confirmed by NREL (National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory) to be 14.5% which amounts to a world record for any printable solar cell. 
New discoveries such as the CNT (carbon nanotubes) are expected to increase the 
photovoltaic efficiency of solar cells to over 40%. For now, in areas, where the population 
density is sparse, and sunlight is abundantly available for most of the year the solar power 
plants may be profitable. This can be seen by a positive PW (present worth) value. They end 
up using large area. The solar panels are not protected from birds and other forms of dust that 
degrade their operations. Lenses and mirrors can be used to concentrate the sunlight and 
energy storage devices can store the energy in useful chemical forms such as batteries for use 
at night and during rainy days. Someday technology in solar energy generation will be as 
technically efficient as that of the combined steam and gas cycle power plant.  
Solar energy may be tapped in three different ways;  
 
(i) Solar thermal power,  
(ii) Photovoltaic Panels 
(iii) Solar Heaters.  
(iv) Concentrated Solar Power 
(v) Balance of Systems Costs 
(vi) Systems Integration 
 
In method (i) steam is generated in large boilers to turn turbines and generate electricity 
comparable in capacity to coal-fired boiler-based power plants. Photovoltaic panels can be 
used to convert directly the solar irradiance (w/m2) into electricity. This technology is used to 
meet peak load needs and distributed power needs. Small power plants of up to 50 MW can 
be built using panels. The capacity of the recently commissioned De Soto Solar Power 
Generation Center in Florida is 24 MW and is less than 50 MW. Solar irradiance (w/m2) is 
used to heat water or air and can be used for residential heating purposes. 
Solar power plant technology can be used to produce base-load, large-scale power at low 
technical risk. These can replace coal-fired boiler based power plants. Heat energy storage 
devices have been invented that can provide for uninterrupted services such as during the 
night hours, rainy days, etc. Lunar power can also be tapped into. Heat storage elements used  
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
445 
are concrete, molten salts and pressurized water. The capital solar plant costs and the plant 
utilization factor continue to affect the bottom line. Spain has five such plants under 
development and two that have been already commissioned. Investments have been made in 
several countries across the globe to advance the design of solar mirrors and lenses. These are 
used to gather the sunlight and focus on a fuel source to generate of electricity. Full scale 
commercial operations of such power plants with capacities in the range of 20-200 MW are 
expected by 2011. The cost per kWh is continuing to be the main concern. Optimization 
strategies are being developed. Cost effective storage devices are also expected. 
 
Present worth (pw) of solar power plants: A rapidly declining cost curve is seen in the 
photovoltaic cell technology. The price of solar modules is expected to fall from around $2/W 
today to $1 in the near future. The price per watt installed is likely to fall from $6.0-$8.0 to 
$3.0 per watt. Dominant in the costs are power electronics and installation. With current 
incentives in the United States and European Union the cost of electricity generation using 
solar technology is in the range of the IGCC (Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle) power 
generation plants. In the state of California the cost of electricity from solar power plants is 
about 14-15 cents per kWh. This is against the 8-10 cents per kWh cost of electricity from 
IGCC power plants. By 2013 with some incentives from the federal government the cost of 
electricity from solar power plant is expected to fall to 10-12 cents per kWh. The per kWh 
cost is sensitive to the capital cost and the cost of materials of construction of the plant. 
Sequestration related carbon credits at $30 t-1 of CO2 can affect a per kWh reduction of 3 
cents. Government carbon tax, cost of capital are sensitivity parameters on the bottom line of 
solar power plants. 
Worldwide, the solar thermal power capacity can grow at least 30% per year from 2010 
to 2020 or 2030. 200 GW of new power plant capacity can be added each year. About 1-2 
GW per year could be added in 2012. Solar technology is relatively simpler. The NREL, 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, has identified potential for 6 TW (terra watts) of 
solar thermal power in the Southwestern US. Few things are now known about the light to 
electricity conversion. The Carnot limit of efficiency of any man made machine is given by; 
 
 
1
C
carnot
H
T
T
 
 
By the Planck‟s theorem, 
 
 
hc
E
h
 
 
The IV, current-voltage characteristics of a photodiode cannot be described using the 
Ohm‟s law of electricity. GaAs multijunction devices are the most efficient solar cells 
reaching a record high of 40.7%. 20-30 different semi-conductors are layered in series. AR, 
antireflection coatings can be used to minimize reflection from the top surface. The IV 
characteristics can be given by; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
446 
 
0
0
(
1)
B
qV
k T
p
n
I
I
e
qAG
L
L
  
 
33% of solar insolation is lost as waste heat. The temperature of operation of the photovoltaic 
module can be determined from energy balance as follows; 
 
 
T
c T
L
c
a
I
I
U
T
T
  
 
The physical significance of each term above Eq is as follows;  
The fraction of radiation incident on surface of solar cells is given by (IT), where  is 
the transmittance of any cover;  
The efficiency of conversion of incident radiation into current is given by (cIT); 
Radiation and convection losses from top and bottom is given by (UL(TC – Ta).  
Ta is the ambient temperature.  
The temperature of the solar cell, Tc can be obtained by rearranging the terms and; 
 
 
1
c
T
c
a
L
I
T
T
U
 
 
 
It can be seen that as there exists an optimal working temperature of the solar cell. As the 
amount of concentrated solar flux is increased the absorption efficiency first increases and 
then decreases. As the working temperature increases the heat losses increase by radiation and 
convection. The optimal temperature of operation for maximum efficiency can be arrived at. 
The heat losses vary as T4 and the efficiency increases linearly with the working temperature. 
At /T = 0 the working temperature can be solved for. The UL the overall transfer 
coefficient will vary with temperature. 
Solar aided combined cycle power plant may first come about in large numbers before 
solar along power plants will become ubiquitous. Nuclear power plant can be aided by solar 
or other cycles starting from the exhaust of the steam turbine. Supercritical steam can be 
generated from nuclear boilers and from the steam recovered from the steam turbines can be 
used to drive a bottom second cycle. This second cycle can be aided by solar or coal. This 
way large power plant size, higher efficiency of energy transformation and lesser land acreage 
can be used. The solar module can be operated at the optimal temperature from the tradeoffs 
from radiation losses and temperature dependent heat absorption. 
A typical scheme for solar aided combined cycle power plant is shown in Figure 7.11. 
Similar design has been proposed by Kelly et al. (2001). The parabolic trough solar power 
plant is integrated into a modern combined cycle power plant with gas and steam turbines. A 
solar collector field can be seen in Figure 7.11. Kelly et al. (2001) found that the most 
efficient use of solar thermal energy was by the production of high pressure saturated steam 
for addition to the heat recovery steam generator. This way the solar energy and fuel energy 
in the inlet of the gas turbine is converted to electricity at higher conversion efficiency. Steam 
turbine alone power plant or gas turbine alone power plant operate at ~ 30% efficiency and 
the combined cycle efficiency is ~ 55-60%. The increase in combined cycle efficiency can be 
explained using the waste heat recovery from the exhaust of the gas turbine and use of solar 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
447 
insolation in the input. The parabolic trough collector can be used in order to heat mineral oil. 
This hot oil is used in a shell and tube heat exchanger in order to make steam. This steam is 
used to operate steam turbines with the generation of electricity. Optimization of layout and 
complete integration of solar technology is an ongoing saga. Natural gas may be used as the 
input fuel to the gas turbine. The combined cycle technology offers interesting technical 
problems to the control engineer. How much load the gas turbine ought to carry and how 
much load the steam turbine ought to carry can be provided by a feedforword scheme. 
Internal model control is another possibility. Feedback control using temperature, pressure 
measurements as discussed in Chapter 5.0 can be continued to be used. Performance models 
can be developed. The ambient temperature plays a more significant than expected role in 
determination of the overall thermal conversion efficiency. Plant designs can be conceived 
using software such as Gate Cycle from Enter Software. 
 
 
7.11. CONTINUOUS PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCTION 
 
Chemical engineering principles can be applied to scale-up formulations of drugs into 
large production in continuous manner. There are number of advantages for preferring 
continuous processes over batch modes. The quality will be higher, process cost will be 
lower. Capital investment and plant costs can be depreciated over reasonable periods of time. 
Centralized control is possible in continuous processes. The raw materials can be procured in 
whole sale prices. The finishing operations for the product such as formation of capsules, 
coating, coloring etc. can be sewn into the process flow with benefit. Productivity will be 
higher and product uniformity will be more. The residence time in the reactors can be lowered 
and the throughput can be increased. Less manual labor is required. Inventory costs will be on 
the lower side. Environmental impact is more benign in the case of continuous process 
compared with batch mode. Depending on the demand optimal strategies can be devised. 
Sometimes space can be minimized for the same throughput.  
Some of the hurdles that needs to be overcome in order to have widespread use of 
continuous processes for pharmaceutical production is the misperceptions of higher risk. A 
paradigm shift and outside the box thinking is needed for continuous production of drugs. 
Investors who are happy with current methods need be better informed. They may be used to 
the conventional pharma units with stepwise reactions, purifications and final product 
formulations were performed in the batch mode. Change to continuous does not mean that 
there is need for more engineering and operating skill. Chemical engineers are trained in 
order to accomplish some of the goals such as crystallization, purification, reaction, 
separation and heat transfer steps needed in pharmaceutical production. Handling solids need 
expertise in powder technology, continuous crystallization and particulate processing. Use of 
continuous crystallization can result in cost savings of about 50%. Start-up and shut down 
procedures in the continuous processes can be optimized using transient models tested on the 
computer. FDA approvals for the drug can be used effectively using quality inspections in 
process implementation. FDA encourage continuous production. Optimization of the total 
cost of operation with tradeoffs of operating costs and capital costs can result in arrival of 
certain number of stages for each unit operation used. Expertise in separation, purification 
and integration of biocatalysts are needed for continuous pharmaceutical production.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
448 
 
Figure 17. Integrated Solar Combined Cycle Power Plant. 
 
The industrial controls market size is expected to reach ~ 150 billion dollars worldwide. 
Process dynamics can be studied using desktop computers and proactive process solutions can 
be sought. Stability analysis using a pencil and paper can lead to a better perspective on the 
range of operation of the process variables. Control and automation have grown tremendously 
with the advent of computers and programmable logic controllers, PLCs. Plant start-up, Plant 
Shut-down operations gets more attention of the lead engineer compared with those during 
steady-state operation of the plant. Transient analysis is not well studied. Transient behavior 
of chemical reactors, distillation columns, absorption towers, adsorption beds, extraction units 
and other unit operations needs to be better studied. 
Collegiate education methods have to keep pace with the developments in the field of 
industrial controls. Moore‟s law states that computing speed of microprocessors double every 
18 months. Biological databanks double in size every 10 months. Mathematical methods for 
model development have been refined over centuries. The methods and means available to the 
engineer need be better utilized.  
Computer simulation and model development can be an integral part of an engineer‟s 
endeavors. The days when the effect of professionals who do mathematical modeling and 
computer simulation on the bottom line of the enterprise is only indirect are over. The coming 
era is when the PW, Present Worth of chemical plants are better for having an army of 
engineers and Ph.D. scholars who perform process dynamics studies, develop process control 
block diagrams, instrument the chemical plant with sensors hooked with data acquisition to 
the desktop computer. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
449 
GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, DSM, Lonza are developing continuous process 
technologies for pharmaceutical production. Over $ 1 billion has been invested in continuous 
process for pharmaceutical production. Glaxo is building a $ 50 million plant in Singapore in 
order to manufacture asthma and allergy drug fluticasone propionate. Contract manufacturing 
can be used in order to perform flow hydrogenations that are catalyzed in packed bed 
configuration, distillation, extraction, crystallization from the tube to manufacturing. SK Life 
Sciences sill run 60-70% of the chemistries in batch mode. The operators need to be trained in 
the PFD, process flow diagram. This can also be shown to the customers. Material and 
Energy balance can lead to cost savings for the enterprise. Spreadsheets can be used for this 
purpose. It does not come as a surprise that the high attrition rate in pharmaceutical industry 
can be decreased when continuous process is adopted. Several unit operations have to be 
made to work in consonance with each other. It is hard to miss the efficient conversion of raw 
materials to product using continuous process in large scale. Scale-up principles such as L/D, 
length over diameter ratio of the reactors, distillation columns, adsorption towers, agitator 
speed and power draw used, pre-treatment of raw materials can be augmented using reliable 
mathematical models for mixing, heat transfer, mass transfer for a given pharmaceutical 
chemistry. Waste heat recovery and energy audit can lead to a more optimal operation. For 
new products the continuous processes are readily adapted. The cost of over the counter drugs 
may decrease. Value addition during development of pharmaceutical products are high. It is 
not hard to break down the value addition along the sequence of unit operations used from 
raw material pre-treatment to post-treatment of the drug capsule steps. 
Industrial scale flow processes can be developed for a step identified in the bench scale. 
One example here is the nitration step developed by DSM. DSM manufactured API, active 
pharmaceutical ingredient at a capacity of few hundreds of tons per year. They ran hundreds 
of micro scale reactors in parallel. Usually PFR, plug flow reactor is more efficient. Utility 
costs will be high in the parallel configuration. The cost of recovery of the unreacted 
materials and recycling back to the reactors will consume the money budgeted. This is 
because of the low conversion in the micro reactors and high conversion in the case of the 
PFR. In cases where the yield of the reaction is low in the bench scale attempts have to made 
in order to improve the yield. Advances have been made in the downstream processing 
methods used in pharmaceutical industry. Implementation of these changes can result in 
higher overall yield of the product. Research in continuous manufacturing has led to the 
development of a pilot effort to make the API in Tekturna a cardiovascular drug, i.e., 
Aliskirne Hemifumarate. The number of operations in the batch mode was 21. The unit 
operations used in the continuous process is 14. Novartis is spending $ 65 million for more R 
& D over a 10 year period. Some steps used in continuous manufacturing of pharmaceuticals 
are reactions, separations, purification, crystallization, drying, formulation, tableting. 3 
million tablets a year can be made at a reactor output of 41 g/hr. Portable units are possible.  
Nutritional supplement, NBMI was developed by University of Kentucky in 6 years with 
the help of contract manufacturing. The drug is intended for use as antioxidant and can be 
used for reversing ageing. Clinical trials are being conducted. It works by mercury chelation. 
PCI the contract manufacturer eliminated chloroform used as solvent, increased the yield to 
98%, isolated the material in powder form and made into capsules.  
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
450 
7.12. SPECIFICATIONS LIMITATIONS IN BINARY DISTILLATION 
 
Distillation is the oldest and most common refinery process It is based on the principle 
that liquids with different boiling points can be separated by vaporization and condensation. 
Crude oil distillation involves feeding crude oil at its boiling point of 400 0C into a large 
fractionation column. The oil is split up into a series of product fractions depending on 
desired boiling point ranges. Vaporized oil on its way up through the column encounters 
condensed liquid on its way down. They are made to come in contact and exchange 
components at a number of sieve trays in the column. This contact caused light fluid 
molecules to vaporize and heavy gas molecules to condense. The further up the column, 
lighter the fluid found at the sieve tray it is. Part of the crude oil that cannot be vaporized is 
extracted as heavy oil at the bottom of the column. Exxon-Mobil is the world largest company 
that explores oil and in their refineries manufactures fuel. A schematic of the overall process 
used by Exxon-Mobil is shown below in Figure 7.12. 
In India the major oil companies are Indian Oil, Bharat Petroleum, Hindustan Petroleum, 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation, Chennai Petroleum, Kochi Refineries, Bangagoan Refinery, 
Mangalore Refinery and IBP. They are increasing their refinery capacity. The largest refinery 
in India is owned by Reliance under the management of Mr. Mukesh Ambani with a capacity 
of 31 million tons. For example, recently the 3 million ton refining capacity expansion and 
modernization project of Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd. CPCL, in Manali near Chennai, 
in order to improve the overhead distillates yield and produce cleaner fuel came on stream. It 
is a 9.5 million ton refinery. The expansion was on 120 acres at 2360 crore rupees. It is a first 
of its kind facility to process 100% hydrocracker bottom and as a result the liquefied 
petroleum gas production has increased from 1.8 lakh tons to about 4 lakh tons. The petrol 
production improved from 3.9 lakh tons to 7 lakh tons. The hydrocracker unit is a crucial 
component in the production of automobile fuels with low sulfur content.  
Industrial distillation is typically performed in large, vertical cylindrical columns known 
as "distillation towers" or "distillation columns" with diameters ranging from about 65 cm - 6 
m and heights ranging from about 6 m - 60 m. The distillation towers have liquid outlets at 
intervals up the column which allow for the withdrawal of different fractions or products 
having different boiling ranges. The "lightest" products (those with the lowest boiling point) 
exit from the top of the columns and the "heaviest" products (those with the highest boiling 
point) exit from the bottom of the column. Large-scale industrial towers also use reflux to 
achieve more complete separation of products. Fractional distillation is also used in air 
separation, producing liquid  oxygen, liquid nitrogen, and high purity argon.  
Distillation of cholorosilanes also enables the production of high-purity silicon for use as 
a semiconductor. In industrial uses, sometimes a packing material is used in the column 
instead of trays, especially when low pressure drops across the column are required, as when 
operating under vacuum. This packing material can either be random dumped packing (1-3" 
wide) or structured sheet metal. Typical manufacturers are Koch, Sulzer and other companies. 
Liquids tend to wet the surface of the packing and the vapors pass across this wetted surface, 
where mass transfer takes place. Unlike conventional tray distillation in which every tray 
represents a separate point of vapor liquid equilibrium, the vapor liquid equilibrium curve in a 
packed column is continuous. However, when modeling packed columns it is useful to 
compute a number of "theoretical stages" to denote the separation efficiency of the packed 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
451 
column with respect to more traditional trays. Differently shaped packing has different 
surface areas and void space between packing. Both of these factors affect packing 
performance. Typical number of plates required for a desired level of separation for different 
aromatic, organic and aqueous systems are given in Table 4.1. 
 
 
7.12.2. Method of McCabe and Thiele for Multistage Binary Distillation 
 
The widely accepted method popular with the practioniers in the chemical process 
industry is the method of McCabe and Thiele to calculate the number of theoretical stages 
needed to perform a desired level of separation of a binary system. A schematic of a 
multistage binary distillation column showing the key components is shown in Figure 7.13. 
The components are; 
 
1) Central Feed 
2) Vertical Cascade of Stages 
3) Enriching Section 
4) Overhead Condenser 
5) Reflux 
6) Distillate 
7) Stripping Section 
8) Reboiler 
 
In the enriching section the vapor rises above the feed and is washed with the liquid to 
strip the less volatile component. The washing liquid is prepared in the overhead condenser 
and part of the distillate is returned to the distillation column as reflux. A reflux ratio is 
calculated and comes in handy during further design estimates. The distillate is the product 
that is removed from the condenser and contains the more volatile component in high 
concentration. The stripping section is that section below the feed where the vapor that boils 
sweeps the more volatile component with it and moves upward through the column. The 
vapor is prepared in the reboiler by partial vaporization. The liquid that is removed from the 
reboiler is the residue and has predominantly the less volatile component. The reboiler can be 
viewed as an additional stage. The liquid and vapor at each of the n trays are at their dew 
point and bubble point. The highest temperature is at the bottom and the lowest temperature is 
at the top. The purity levels achieved for the distillate and residue depend on the liquid/gas 
ratios used and the number of theoretical stages provided in the two sections of the tower and 
the operating efficiency resulting from mass transfer diffusion resistances. The cross-sectional 
area of the distillation column varies with the quality and price of the material of interest. The 
interrelationship between the purity levels of the distillate, residue, feed and the number of 
stages required ideally, was outlined by McCabe and Thiele.  
The most common problem in distillation is designing a distillation column. Given the 
flow rate and concentration of entering stream, and the flow rate and concentration of the 
product stream, the size of column needs to be calculated. The industrial columns consist of a 
series of plates of the sieve tray or bubble cap variety and are used to separate the stages. The 
gas and liquid phases are made to come in contact with each other until it can reach 
equilibrium.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
452 
 
Figure7.12. Exxon Mobil Corporation‟s Refining of Crude Oil into Fractions. 
 
The main steps of the design involve; 
 
1. Mass Balance - Derive Operating Line 
2. Energy Balance - Obtain Equilibrium Curve 
3. Transient Mass Transfer Rate Equations - Derive Murphree Efficiency 
4. Step off the Ideal and Real Stages required (staircase graph) 
 
The method is less rigorous compared with some other methods such as the Ponchon 
Savarit method that used the enthalpy information as well. This method was found to give 
good results for concentrated feeds. The reflux ratio is given as an input parameter in the 
estimations. Equimolal overflow and vaporization is assumed. At each stage let Ln and xn 
represent the liquid phase flow rate and the mole fraction of the desired species and Gn and yn 
be the vapor phase flow rate and mole fraction of the desired species. At the 1st stage y1 is the 
vapor phase mole fraction and x0 is the liquid phase mole fraction. There is no y0 as the 
condenser returns will be all liquid. 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
453 
 
Figure 7.13. Schematic of Typical Multistage Distillation Column. 
 
 
7.12.3. The Mass Balances and Operating Lines  
 
From an overall mass balance on the feed, distillate and bottoms streams; 
 
 
F = Dis + W 
 
 
From a component mass balance on the feed, distillate and bottoms stream: 
 
 
xFF = xDDis + xwW 
 
 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
454 
When the column operates at steady state; 
 
 
Ln-1 + Gn+1 = Ln + Gn 
 
 
The component balance would then be; 
 
 
L x0 + Gyn+1 = Lxn + Gy1 
 
 
The vapor flux G and the liquid flux L are assumed constant between the top of the tower 
and the nth plate. Rewriting above Eq. 
 
 
yn+1 = (y1 – L/G x0) + (L/G)xn 
 
 
It can be seen that yn+1 varies linearly with xn. The slope can be seen to be (L/G) and the 
intercept (y1 – L/Gx0). In the special case of the total condenser, (Dis = G + L), 
 
 
xD = x0 = y1 
 
 
Noting that the vapor phase entering the nth plate is at the composition yn+1 and the liquid 
exiting the nth stage is at composition xn. From a mass balance on the nth plate and the 
condenser exit streams; 
 
 
xDDis = -xnL + yn+1G 
 
 
or yn+1 = xn(L/G) + xD(Dis/G) 
 
 
Defining a reflux ratio, R = L/Dis 
Then, 
 
 
Dis/G = Dis/(L + Dis) = 1/(R + 1) 
 
 
L/G = L/(L + Dis) = R/(R + 1) 
 
 
Combining Eqs. [4.9-4.10] into Eq. [4.4] the operating line of the rectifying section is 
then; 
 
 
yn+1 = xn(R/(R +1)) + xD(1/(R +1)) 
 
 
The operating line of the rectifying section is essentially a mass balance relationship 
between the components of the different inlet and outlet streams. The reflux ratio R can be 
used as a lever to achieve the desired objectives during the operation of the distillation 
column. In a similar fashion analysis of the reboiler section and a plate in the column leads to 
the derivation of the operating line of the stripping section: 
 
 
yn+1 = xn(W/G‟ -1) - xW(W/G‟) 
 
 
yn+1 = xn B/(B-1) - xW/(B-1) 
 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
455 
where B is the reboil ratio. The reboil ratio is that ratio of the vapor produced by the reboiler 
to the residue withdrawn (L‟/W). 
The nature of feed can be several kinds ranging from all vapors, all liquid or a partial 
mixture of both liquid and vapor. The feed can be found at the intersection of the two 
operating lines from the rectifying and stripping sections. For any feed, 
 
 
F + L + G‟ = G + L‟ 
 
 
Where G‟ and L‟ are the vapor phase and liquid phase flow rates in the stripping section. 
q can be defined as; 
 
 
q =(L‟ – L)/F = LF/F 
 
 
When the feed is all liquid below the bubble point the q value is > 1.0. For a saturated 
liquid feed q = 1, and for a mixture of liquid and vapor in the feed, the q value lies between 0 
and 1.0. For the saturated vapor q is 0 and for superheated vapor the q value is less than 0 and 
is negative. Later an expression for q in terms of the enthalpies will be shown. 
From the component mass balances; 
 
 
FzF = Dis xD + W xw 
 
 
The intersection of the two operating lines can be found as; 
 
 
yn+1 = xn(L/G) + xD(Dis/G) 
 
 
yn+1 = xn(L‟/G‟) - xW(W/G‟) 
 
 
Subtracting the equation for the rectifier from the equation for the stripper; 
 
 
yn+1 (G‟ – G) = xn(L‟ - L) - (xWW + Dis xD) 
 
 
Rewriting Eq. [4.17] by using Eq. [4.15), Eq. [4.13) 
 
 
yn+1 = qxn/ (q-1) - zD/(q - 1)  
 
 
Above equation is the feed line. The slope of the line gives the energy required to convert 
the feed to the vapor phase. The feed line for different feed conditions is shown in Figure 
7.14. 
 
 
7.12.4. Feed Location, Pinch Point, Minimum Reflux and Minimum Stages 
 
The information from the VLE, vapor-liquid equilibrium data and the operating lines 
derived from the mass balances as shown above are combined to calculate the number of 
theoretical stages needed to achieve a desired level of separation. A step by step illustration of 
this method is shown in worked example 4.1 in Sharma [2007]. The Pentium 4, 3 GHz PC 
was used. The graph of the VLE data called the equilibrium line relates the vapor composition 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
456 
on a particular stage to the liquid composition in the same stage. For a given reflux ratio, R, 
the two operating lines from the rectifying and stripping section can be shown to intersect 
with the feed line for any feed. Each stage can be seen as a staircase graph and stepped off 
from the graph. This is shown in the worked example 4.1. Thus by a combined graph of the 
equilibrium line and operating lines the number of stages can be stepped off with ease and is 
an important procedure. The feed can be located in a stage at the intersection of the operating 
lines. This is the optimal location of the feed. Other locations are suboptimal. 
The minimum number of stages required can be calculated when the reflux ratio becomes 
infinite. At infinite reflux ratio (R = ), the operating lines can be seen to revert to yn+1 = xn. 
Both the slopes of the rectifying and stripping sections become equal. At infinite reflux, zero 
distillate is produced. Thus for a lot of energy supplied, in a few stages, that can be stepped 
off from the graph, only a few drops of pure product is recovered. The minimum reflux ratio 
can be calculated by letting the operating line from the rectifying section to intersect with the 
equilibrium line and the q feed line and the number of stages stepped off from the graph. The 
reflux ratio that is used is often times 1.2 to 1.6 times the minimum reflux ratio needed. This 
ratio depends on the relative capital costs and operating costs of energy. If capital is cheap, a 
low reflux ratio with more number of stages can be used and where the energy is cheap a 
large reflux with fewer stages is preferred. The reboiler load will be low for the former and 
large for the latter. The condition of minimum reflux ratio also denotes the point of maximum 
ratio where infinite plates for the desired separation are needed. Above this ratio the desired 
separation can be effected. 
The intersection of the equilibrium line and operating line is called the pinch point. Two 
pinch points can be expected. One from the intersection of the rectifying operating line and 
the equilibrium curve and another from the stripping operating line and the equilibrium line. 
It can be seen that infinite stages are required to reach the pinch point from the point of the 
desired purity level. From this condition of infinite plates the minimum reflux ratio can be 
calculated by noting the y intercept of the graph. (xD/(Rm+1)). 
 
 
Figure 7.14. q Line for Different Feed Condition. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
457 
 
Figure 7.15. Minimum Reflux Ratio and Minimum Number of Stages. 
 
 
7.12.5. Reboilers 
 
The reboiler that is used to supply energy for the fractionation by vaporization of the 
residue and return to the fractionator may be of several kinds. The reboiler may be built either 
internal or external to the column. This depends on the heat load. For low capacity of 
separation, jacketed kettle may be used. Here the vapor capacity and heat transfer area are 
small. This can usually be found in pilot plants. Sometimes a tubular heat exchanger is built 
into the bottom of the tower. This is an internal reboiler and the heat transfer surface is larger. 
It provides a vapor in equilibrium with the residue product so that the last stage represents 
enrichment due to reboiler. The problem is when cleaning the heat exchanger requires the 
shutdown of the entire distillation operation. In order to avoid this maintenance routine, 
external reboilers can be used. They can be arranged with spares for cleaning. This can be 
used for large installations. The kettle reboiler has the heating medium inside the tubes. The 
vapor is in equilibrium with the residue product and behaves as an extra theoretical stage. The 
heating medium in a vertical thermo siphon reboiler is outside the tubes. All of the liquid 
entering the tubes are vaporized. Fouling is a problem. In horizontal reboilers steam is used 
for heating. In some vertical thermo siphon reboilers the liquid is received from the traps of 
the bottom tray. In order to reduce fouling sometimes the boiler is operated in the partially 
vaporized condition.  
 
 
7.12.6. Specifications Limitations 
 
The parameters of the design of a multistage binary distillation column at the beginning 
are usually available; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
458 
1. Temperature, Pressure, Composition and Flow rate of Feed 
2. Pressure of Distillation 
3. Optimal Feed Location 
4. Heat Losses 
 
It can be shown that only 3 more design specifications after the above is needed to 
completely specify the problem. (Treybal, 1980). The rest can be calculated from the other 
parameters. In the above sections it can be seen a lot of the parameters are related to each 
other by the mass balances and equilibrium line from VLE data. The 6 other parameters are; 
 
1. Total Number of Trays, N 
2. Reflux Ratio, R 
3. Reboil ratio, B 
4. Composition of product 
5. Product Split, Psplit (xDDis/xwW) 
6. Ratio of total distillate to total residue (Dis/W) 
 
There are some pitfalls in specifying the problem completely. Sometimes the problem 
may be over specified or underspecified. For example, it can be seen that say three parameters 
from the above six are given, i.e., the product split, Psplit, W/Dis and distillate composition are 
given. Then, from a component balance of the three main streams of feed, distillate and 
product. 
 
 
FzF = Dis xD + WxW 
 
 
Rewriting he above equation using F = Dis + W 
 
 
(Dis + W)zF = Dis xD + WxW 
(4.21) 
 
Dividing throughout by Dis 
 
 
(1 + W/Dis)zF = xD + W/Dis xW 
 
 
From the product split information and W/Dis and the distillate composition the residue 
composition can be calculated. Now that the residue and distillate compositions are known 
from the above equation the feed composition can be calculated. It cannot be made available. 
Otherwise the problem will be over specified. For problems that are underspecified 
insufficient information is available to complete the problem. There can be 6C3 = 20 problem 
types. With the advent of the PC it is easier to derive the necessary relationships and work 
with the information available to achieve the desired objectives. These problem types and the 
solution approach are as follows; 
 
I. 
Given Reflux Ratio R, Reboil Ratio B and Dis/W find the number of trays, Np, 
product split and the bottoms composition.  
The intersection point (xint, yint) can be seen to obey Eqs. [4.11, 4.12, 4.19] 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
459 
 
yint = xint(R/(R +1)) + xD(1/(R +1)) 
 
 
yint = xint B/(B-1) - xW/(B-1) 
 
 
yint = qxint/ (q-1) - 1/(q - 1) zF 
 
 
Further, 
 
 
(Dis/W + 1)zF = Dis/W xD + xw 
 
 
 
There are four equations and 4 unknowns, xw, xD, xint, yint which can be solved 
simultaneously. Once the intersection point is found the same procedure as shown in 
worked example 4.1 to step of the number of ideal stages required for a given desired 
level of separation can be stepped from the staircase graph. 
II. Given W/Dis, product split, R, calculate Np, xw, B 
 
Eq. [4.26] can be written in terms of xw only given the information in the product 
split and W/Dis. Once the xw, xD can be calculated from the product split 
information. Eqs. [4.25] and (4.23] can be solved simultaneously as they form a set 
of two equations and two unknowns. From this and Eq. [4.24] the reboil ratio, B can 
be calculated. 
III. Given Product Split, Psplit (xDDis/xwW), Reboil Ratio, B, Residue composition, xW, 
calculate Np, R, W/Dis. 
 
Straightforward solution. Given the residue composition and reboil ratio the 
operating line for the stripping section can be constructed in the graph. The 
intersection with the feed line can be identified. Rewriting Eq. [4.22],  
 
 
(Psplit xw/xD + 1)zF = Psplit xw + xw 
(4.27) 
 
Thus the distillate composition can be calculated given the product split and residue 
mole fraction. Now from Eq. [4.23] the reflux ratio can be calculated. This completes 
the specification of the problem.  
IV. Given Product Split, Psplit (xDDis/xwW), Reboil Ratio, B and Reflux Ratio R 
calculate Residue composition, xW, Np, W/Dis. 
 
The four equations can be solved for by simultaneous equations, simultaneous 
unknowns.  
V. Given Product Split, Psplit (xDDis/xwW), Reflux Ratio, R, Residue Composition, xW 
Calculate Np, W/Dis and Reboil Ratio 
 
Straightforward solution. Given product split and residue composition, the distillate 
composition can be calculated from Eq. [4.27]. Now the W/Dis can be calculated 
from the product split information. The intersection points of the two operating lines 
of rectification and stripping can be calculated by solving for Eqs. [4.23, 4.25]. The 
reboil ratio can then be calculated from Eq. [4.24]. This completes the description of 
the specifications. The slope of the rectifying line can be calculated and graphically it 
is straight forward to identify the intersection point. 
VI. Given Product Split, Residue Composition, and W/Dis calculate the Np, Reflux 
Ratio R, and Reboil Ratio, B 
 
Given the product split, residue composition and W/Dis the distillate composition 
can be calculated. The feed composition can be calculated and cannot be specified. If 
stated it would be a overspecification. Between the feed line, operating lines of 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
460 
rectification and stripping as given in Eqs. [4.23-4.25) and the feed line, the abscissa 
and ordinate of the intersection points and the R and B can be calculated by solving a 
system of 4 equations and 4 unknowns. 
VII. Given the Product Split, xDDis/xwW, W/Dis and Reboil Ratio, B, calculate Np, R, 
xW.  
 
Given the product split and W/Dis the distillate composition can be written in terms 
of the residue composition. Using this information in Eq. [4.20] there remains three 
simultaneous equations (Eqs. [4.23,4.24,4.25] and three unknowns to solve for the 
intersection point ordinates and the residue composition. This completes the 
description of the problem 
VIII. Given W/Dis, Residue composition, xW, Reflux ratio, R calculate Np, Reboil ratio, 
B and Product Split, xDDis/xwW 
 
The distillate composition can be calculated from Eq. [4.26] given the W/Dis and 
residue composition as the feed is completely specified. Now the product split can be 
calculated. Graphically the operating line for the rectifying section can be 
constructed. The intersection point with the feed line is identified in the graph. Given 
the residue composition the operating line of the stripping section is constructed. 
From the slope of the line the reboil ration can then be calculated. The number of 
ideal stages can be stepped off the staircase graph.  
IX. Given W/Dis., Reboil Ratio, B, Residue composition, xW, calculate Np, Reflux 
Ratio, R, Product Split, Psplit xDDis/xwW 
 
The distillate composition can be calculated from Eq. [4.26] given the W/Dis and 
residue composition as the feed is completely specified. Now the product split can be 
calculated. Graphically the operating line for the stripping section can be constructed. 
The intersection point with the feed line is identified in the graph. As the distillate 
composition is now available, the operating line of the rectifying section is 
constructed. From the slope of the line the reflux ratio can then be calculated. The 
number of ideal stages can be stepped off the staircase graph.  
X. Given the Reflux Ratio, R, Reboil Ratio, B and Residue Composition, xW, 
Calculate Np, Product Split, Psplit xDDis/xwW, W/Dis. 
 
Given the residue composition and reboil ration the operating line of the stripping 
section can be constructed. The intersection point with the feed line can be identified 
in the combination graph of both the equilibrium and operating lines. Given the 
reflux ratio the slope of the operating line of the rectifying section is calculated and 
constructed. The intersection of the operating line of the rectifying section gives the 
distillate composition. From the information gained the product split is now 
calculable. The Np the number of ideal stages needed for a desired level of separation 
can be stepped off from the staircase graph. 
XI. Given Np, Reboil Ratio, B, Reflux Ratio, R calculate W/Dis, Residue compositiobn, 
xW, Product Split, Psplit (xDDis/WxW) 
 
This problem requires a iterative solution. Here is a suggested procedure: 
 
Guess Distillate Composition, xD--------------- 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Calculate (xint, yint)  

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
461 
 
  
check 
 
  
 
 
Calculate xW  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Calculate Np --------------------------------------- 
 
XII. Given Np, Residue composition xW, Psplit (xDDis/WxW) calculate Reflux Ratio, R, 
W/Dis, Reboil Ratio, B 
 
Guess B, given residue composition the operating line of the stripping section can be 
constructed. The intersection point with the feed line can be identified in the graph. 
Given the product split and residue composition the distillate composition can be 
calculated from Eq. [4.27]. From the distillate composition and the intersection point 
the operating line of the rectifying section can be constructed. The Np can be stepped 
off from the graph. This is compared with the given Np. Then the reboil ratio is 
changed and the routine repeated until the calculated and given Np are identical 
within numerical error. 
XIII. Given Np, Reboil Ratio, B, Psplit (xDDis/WxW) calculate Reflux Ratio, R calculate 
W/Dis, Residue composition, xW 
 
Guess the residue composition, xW and given the reboil ratio the operating line of the 
stripping section can be constructed. The intersection point with the feed line can be 
identified in the graph. Given the product split and residue composition the distillate 
composition can be calculated from Eq. [4.27]. From the distillate composition and 
the intersection point the operating line of the rectifying section can be constructed. 
The Np can be stepped off from the graph. This is compared with the given Np. Then 
the residue composition is changed and the routine repeated until the calculated and 
given Np are identical within numerical error. 
XIV. Given Np, Reboil Ratio, B, W/Dis calculate Residue composition xW, calculate 
Reflux Ratio, R, Psplit (xDDis/WxW)  
 
Guess the residue composition, xW and given the reboil ratio the operating line of the 
stripping section can be constructed. The intersection point with the feed line can be 
identified in the graph. Given the W/Dis and residue composition the distillate 
composition can be calculated from Eq. [4.26]. From the distillate composition and 
the intersection point the operating line of the rectifying section can be constructed. 
The Np can be stepped off from the graph. This is compared with the given Np. Then 
the residue composition is changed and the routine repeated until the calculated and 
given Np are identical within numerical error. 
XV. Given Np, Residue composition xW, Reboil Ratio, B, calculate, Reflux Ratio, R, 
Psplit (xDDis/WxW), W/Dis 
 
Given the residue composition and reboil ratio the operating line of the strippping 
section can be constructed in the combination graph. The intersection point of the 
operating lines can be identified by letting the feed line intersect with the stripping 
line. The three remaining variables are W/Dis, distillate composition. By trial and 
error by a initial guess of reflux ratio, R, the other parameters are calculated. The Np 
calculated is compared with the given Np.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
462 
XVI. Given Np, Reflux Ratio, R, W/Dis calculate Reboil Ratio, B, Psplit (xDDis/WxW), 
Residue composition xW 
 
Guess the distillate composition. Given the reflux ratio the operating line of the 
rectifying section can be constructed in the graph. The intersection between this line 
and that of the feed line is identified. Given W/Dis and the distillate composition the 
residue composition can be calculated from Eq. [4.26]. The operating line for the 
stripping section is then obtained by connecting the residue point on the y = x line 
and the intersection operating point. The number of ideal stages can be stepped off 
and then compared with the given Np. The procedure is repeated till the two values 
come within numerical error of each other.  
XVII. Given Np, Residue composition xW, Reflux Ratio, R calculate Psplit (xDDis/WxW), 
Reboil Ratio, B, W/Dis  
 
Guess the reboil ratio. Given the residue composition and reboil ratio the operating 
line of the stripping section is constructed. From the feed line intersection with the 
stripping line the intersection point is obtained. From the intersection point and the 
reflux ratio the operating line of the rectifying section is constructed. The distillate 
composition is calculated from the distillate point on the y = x diagonal. The 
procedure is repeated until the calculated Np is within numerical error of the given 
Np. 
XVIII. Given Np, Reflux Ratio, R, Psplit (xDDis/WxW) calculate Reboil Ratio, B W/Dis, 
Residue composition xW  
 
Guess the distillate composition. Given the reflux ratio the operating line of the 
rectifying section can be constructed in the graph. The intersection between this line 
and that of the feed line is identified. Given product split and the distillate 
composition the residue composition can be calculated from Eq. [4.27]. The 
operating line for the stripping section is then obtained by connecting the residue 
point on the y = x line and the intersection operating point. The number of ideal 
stages can be stepped off and then compared with the given Np. The procedure is 
repeated till the two values come within numerical error of each other.  
XIX. Given Np, W/Dis, Psplit(xDDis/WxW) calculate Reflux Ratio, R calculate, Residue 
composition xW Reboil Ratio, B 
 
Given W/Dis and product split a relation between xD and xW can be established. This 
can be solved simultaneously for two unknowns with the Eq. [4.27]. Guess the reboil 
ratio. Construct the operating line of the stripping section. This intersects with the 
feed line. The line connecting the intersection point and the distillate point is the 
operating line of the rectifying section. The reflux ratio is calucalated. The Np 
stepped from the graph is compared with the given value and the guess of the reboil 
ratio changed until they match. 
XX. Given Np, W/Dis, Residue composition, xW calculate Reboil Ratio, B, Reflux Ratio, 
R, Product Split, Psplit (xDDis/xWW) 
 
Given the residue composition and W/Dis from Eq. [4.26] the distillate composition 
can be calculated. The product split is then calculated. Guess the reboil ratio. 
Construct the operating line of the stripping section. This intersects with the feed 
line. The line connecting the intersection point and the distillate point is the operating 
line of the rectifying section. The reflux ratio is calucalated. The Np stepped from the 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
463 
graph is compared with the given value and the guess of the reboil ratio changed 
until they match. 
 
 
7.12.7. Equilibrium Line 
 
As can be seen from the discussions above and the worked example 4.1, the construct of 
the equilibrium line is an important aspect to the design procedure due to McCabe and Thiele. 
Use of stages was made. Here a refresher is provided on the understanding of equilibrium 
between the vapor and liquid phases, VLE. This would provide the means to obtain the 
equilibrium line and later the real line limited by diffusion resistances.  
Every pure liquid exerts an equilibrium pressure, the vapor pressure in the gas phase. The 
extent of the vapor pressure depends on the temperature. A typical P-T diagram for a pure 
substance is shown in Figure 4.7. T is the tripe point of the substance where all the three 
phases co-exist at one temperature and one pressure. The phase rule gives the degrees of 
freedom in terms of the number of components and phases and is; 
 
 
Ff = Nc –  + 2 
 
 
The number of degrees of freedom, Ff is given by subtracting the number of phases from 
the number of chemical species or components present in the system and adding 2. Thus for a 
1 component system, the number of degrees of freedom for a two phase system can be seen 
from Eq. [4.28] to be, 1. Thus if the pressure is specified, the temperature can be calculated. 
When the number of phases is 3 the degrees of freedom become zero. This means that the 
temperature and pressure at which the three phases co-exist in equilibrium cannot be varied 
independently but are determinable values. This is also called the triple point of the pure 
substance and is shown as T in Figure 7.16. Equilibrium is the state of the system when after 
sufficient contact the compositions of the system and other parameters of the system such as 
temperature and pressure do not change with time. It is at steady state. The curve TB in 
Figure 4.7 can be seen to be the vapor pressure curve of the system. This gives the 
temperature and pressure relationship of the 1 component, two phase system in equilibrium. 
The points in the curve TB represent the saturated vapor and saturated liquid. The region 
sectored by CTB is pure liquid. The region sectored by CTA is solid. This is when the 
Pressure, P is high and temperature, T is low. The region bordered with ATB is pure vapor 
and the region beyond the point B is gas. These are regions of high temperature, T and low 
pressure, P. B is said to be the critical point and the corresponding temperature, Tc the critical 
temperature and pressure, Pc the critical pressure. Beyond point B the liquid and vapor phase 
are indistinguishable from each other. State of the system beyond this point is the gas. Gas 
cannot be liquefied by pressure increase beyond this critical point. The temperature 
corresponding to 1 atm pressure in the curve TB is called the normal boiling point of the 
system. The path EF in Figure 4.7 is an isobaric process where the phase changes from liquid 
to vapor upon supplying heat. The latent heat of vaporization at constant temperature is the 
amount of heat per mole supplied to effect the phase change.  
Vapor pressure data is scarce. The vapor pressure temperature curve TB can be 
established by interpolation or extrapolation of available data using the Clausius Clapeyron 
equation. The Clausius Clapeyron equation is; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
464 
 
dP/dT = vap/T(vv – vL) 
(4.29) 
 
where vap is the latent heat of vaporization. The liquid molar volume can be neglected and 
the vapor molar volume can be written assumingideal gas law as; 
 
 
dP/dT = Pvap/RT2 
(4.30) 
 
 
Integrating both sides of the equation, 
 
 
ln(P) = -vapR/T + c1 
(4.31) 
 
For a 2 component system with two phases the number of degrees of freedom can be 
found to be from Eq. (4.28) to be 2. Thus if both the temperature and pressure of the system is 
known then the compositions of the two phases are fixed and can be determined. This can be 
represented as a Txy phase diagram for a vapor-liquid mixture. This would be important in 
the equilibrium calculations during distillation as shown in the above sections. The VLE for a 
binary system of species A and B where B is the more volatile are shown in Figure 7.18. The 
Temperature vs y* is given by the DEW line and the temperature vs x is given by the bubble 
line. The horizontal tie lines shown join the equilibrium mixtures of liquid and vapor phases. 
tvu is a tie line. The compositions become fixed as the pressure and temperature are known. 
There can be infinite tie line. The relative amounts of the two phases, liquid and vapor in this 
example can be calculated as; 
 
 
Moles (Liquid)/Moles(Vapor) = vu/vt 
(4.32) 
 
 
Figure 7.16. Phase Diagram of a Pure Substance. 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
465 
The VLE data can be represented as a distribution diagram as shown in the lower part of 
Figure 7.17. The greater the distance between the equilibrium line and the y = x diagonal 
greater are the differences in composition between the vapor and liquid phases. A separation 
factor can be defined or a relative volatility can be defined as follows in order to 
quantitatively monitor the nature of the equilibrium line: 
 
 
 = (y*(1-x))/(x(1 – y*)) 
 
 
When  is 1 no separation is possible. Some examples of the distribution diagrams are 
given in Figures 7.17, 7.18. Some of the systems shown exhibit the condition of azeotropy 
where the two phases behaves like one phase and boils at a constant temperature. 
 
Ideal solutions are first considered as a model for the liquid phase in the distillation 
operations. It is good for several systems but may not be for all systems. Later special 
provisions can be made for dealing with liquid phase systems that deviates from the ideal 
solutions. For ideal solutions, the vapor phase partial pressure can be calculated from 
knowledge of the composition of the liquid phase alone apriori to any experimentation. This 
can be useful for systems where data is not readily available. Four characteristics that can be 
mentioned for ideal solutions are; 
 
1. The average intermolecular forces of attraction and repulsion in the solution are 
unchanged on mixing of the constituents.  
2. Volume of solution varies linearly with composition. 
3. The mixing is adiabatic. 
4. The total vapor pressure of the system varies linearly with the composition expressed 
as mole fraction. 
 
Real systems only approach the ideal solution in the limits. Search can be made from 
among isomers, or compounds from a series with similar structure differing only with a 
methyl group. The Raoult's law states that; 
 
 
pA = pA
* x 
 
 
The partial pressure of the vapor phase in equilibrium with the ideal solution is given by 
the product of the liquid phase composition and the pure component vapor pressure of the 
component at that temperature. For dilute non-ideal solutions, the Henry‟s law states that; 
 
 
y* = pA/P = mx 
 
 
Where m is the Henry‟s law constant. 
Other models for VLE in addition to the Raoult‟s law are available in the literature. These 
models are derived using the concept of fugacity and at equilibrium the fugacity of the 
component in different phases are equal when at equilibrium. Activity coefficients are defined 
for liquids. Van Laar, Margules, Wilson, NRTL and UNIFAC are some of the other models 
that can be used to interpolate and extrapolate VLE data. The resulting information will only 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
466 
be good for conditions where the data was measured and for those circumstances where the 
assumptions of the model are reasonably good. When the sum of the partial pressures of the 
components calculated exceeds the total system pressure deviations from ideality can be seen. 
Examples of maximum boiling azeotrope and minimum boiling azeotrope are shown in 
Figures 7.19 and7.29. Large positive or negative deviations from ideality can be seen for 
some systems. Some systems are partially miscible. An example of such a system is the 
isobutanol-water system as shown in Figure 7.18. When the sum of the component partial 
pressures are less than the total system pressure negative deviations from ideality can be seen. 
In a similar manner when the component pressures exceed the total system pressure positive 
deviations from ideality can be seen.  
 
 
Figure 7.17. VLE Phase Diagram of Two Component System. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
467 
Point k represents the tie line, tvu. B is the more volatile species. 
 
 
Figure 7.18. Maximum Boiling Azeotrope. 
 
 
Figure 7.19. Distribution Diagram of Isobutanol-Water Partially Miscible Systems. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
468 
 
Figure 7.20. Minimum Boiling Azeotrope in a Constant Pressure Txy Diagram & Distribution Diagram. 
 
 
7.13. AZEOTROPIC DISTILLATION AND EXTRACTIVE DISTILLATION 
 
Azeotropic systems are difficult to separate using binary fractionation methods. 
Azeotropes as indicated in the above section are constant boiling mixtures where a two 
component mixture behaves as a one component mixture. Some examples of binary 
azeotropes are; 
 
1) Tetrahydrofuran, THF/Carbon Tetrachloride 
2) THF/Chloroform 
3) Ethanol/Toluene 
4) CS2/acetone 
5) Acetone/Choloroform 
6) Acetic Acid/Water 
7) MMA/Methanol 
8) Ethanol/Water 
9) Acetone/Methanol 
10) Acrylic Acid/Water 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
469 
11) Ethyl Acetate/Ethanol 
12) Hydrazine/Water 
13) Methanol/Ethylacetate 
14) n-Heptane/Ethanol 
15) Methanol/Benzene 
16) Ethylene Glycol/Water 
17) Chloroform/Methanol 
18) Ethanol/Benzene 
 
In order to separate such systems a third component called the entrainer is added to the 
system. The entrainer is chosen such that the volatility is in a fashion that a new azeotrope is 
formed which is lower boiling and can be easily separated. For example, benzene is used as 
an entrainer in the ethanol/water azeotropic system. The normal boiling points of ethanol is 
78.3 0C, benzene 80.1 O C and that of water 100 0 C. Benzene is added as an entrainer to the 
ethanol/water azeotropic system. At the right pressure the lower boiling binary azeotrope of 
ethanol/benzene is formed and is boiled off. This system ethanol/water/benzene is reported to 
form a ternary azeotrope. One method of separating the mixture is shown in Figure 7.20. The 
water is collected as residue. The reboiler needs to be designed accordingly. The vapor from 
the first column is condensed and fed into a second column. In the second column the 
benzene is collected as a residue. The benzene/ethanol azeotrope is boiled off from the top of 
the column 2. Another method of separating the mixture is by tapping into the formation of 
ternary azeotrope. This boils at 64.9 0C. As this is lower than the normal boiling point of 
ethanol, ethanol can be collected as a residue. 
 
Table 7.3. Typical Number of Trays used in the Real World of Chemical Plants 
 
S.No 
System 
Typical Number  
of Trays 
1.0 
Ethylene/Ethane 
73 
2.0 
Propylene/Propane 
138 
3.0 
Propyne/1,3 – Butadiene 
40 
4.0 
1,3 Butadiene /Vinyl Acetylene 
130 
5.0 
Benzene/Toluene 
34,53 
6.0 
Benzene/Ethyl Benzene 
20 
7.0 
Toluene /Xylene 
45 
8.0 
Ethyl Benzene /Styrene 
34 
9.0 
o-Xylene/m-Xylene 
130 
10.0 
Methanol/Formaldehyde 
23 
11.0 
Dichloroethane/Trichlorethane 
30 
12.0 
Acetic Acid/Acetic Anhydride 
50 
13.0 
Vinyl Acetate/Ethyl Acetate 
90 
14.0 
Ethylene Glycol/Diethylene Glycol 
16 
15.0 
Acetic Anhydride/Ethylene Diacetate 
32 
16.0 
Cumene/Phenol 
38 
17.0 
Phenol/Acetophenone 
39,54 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
470 
Some other examples of entrainers that can be used are as follows; 
 
1. Butyl Acetate - Acetic Acid/Water  
2. Hexane - MMA/methanol 
3. Toluene - Hydrazine/water 
 
In addition to toluene, aniline, benzene, pyridine, xylene, propylalchohols, cresol, glycol, 
hexyl amine and glycol ethers can be used as entrainer to separate the hydrazine/water 
azeotropic system. The normal boiling point of the acetic acid is 118.1 0C and that of water is 
100 0C. In the first column glacial acetic acid is collected as the residue and the butlyl acetate 
and water heteroazeotrope is boiled off at 90.2 0C. In the second column water is collected as 
residue and the ester-water azeotrope is collected as an overhead product. A decanter can be 
used in between to let the ester rich and water rich layer separate.  
Some of the criteria for the choice of the selection of entrainer; 
 
1. Choice of entrainer is most important consideration 
2. Added compound should form a low boiling azeotrope with only one of the 
components of the binary mixture 
3. It has to have the lowest composition of the three to minimize energy Requirements 
4. New azeotrope should have sufficient volatility to make it readily Separable 
5. Residue should be lean in entrainer contents 
6. Must be inexpensive and readily available 
7. Chemical stability high and does not react with the component to be separated 
8. non-Corrosive toward common construction materials 
9. non-Toxic 
10. Low latent heat of vaporization 
11. Low freezing point and can be easily stored outside 
12. Low viscosity to produce high tray efficiencies 
 
 
Extractive distillation is a technique where the third component added to the system acts 
as a solvent for one of the components. The solution is removed as the residue as the other 
component will be the more volatile species and therefore removed as an overhead product 
from the top of the first distillation column. The solution is separated in a second distillation 
column with the solvent as the residue and the dissolved component as the overhead product. 
The solvent is recycled back to the top of the first distillation column. For example the 
acetone/methanol system forma binary azeotrope and is difficult to separate. A solvent such 
as butanol is used and the acetone dissolves in the butanol. The normal boiling point of 
acetone, methanol and butanol are 56.4 0C, 64.7 0C and 117.8 0C respectively. As shown in 
Figure 7.21, as the acetone dissolves in butanol the VLE changes such that the azeotrope is no 
longer present. Methanol although less volatile than acetone is removed as an overhead 
product from the column A and the butanol is collected as the residue from column B. The 
residue from column A, the solution of acetone in butanol is feed into column B and the 
acetone is collected as an overhead distillation product from column B. Thus butanol served 
as an extractive solvent. Another example of an extractive solvent is acetone or furfural to aid 
in the separation of buetten-2/n-butane mixture. Phenol is used as a solvent in the separation 
of toluene/isooctane mixture. The second column is an auxiliary column. The solvent changes 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
471 
the relative volatility of the binary system. The solvent itself, a low boiler does not enter into 
the rectifying section much.  
The requirements of an extractive distillation solvent are as follows; 
 
1. High Selectivity – ability to change VLE of original mixture in such a fashion that 
easy separation is permitted 
2. High Capacity to dissolve the components of the system 
3. Low Volatility – must not enter the overhead condensers 
4. Separability – Solvent must be readily separated from the mixture to which it is 
added 
5. Solvent must not form azeotrope 
6. Low cost 
7. Less Toxic 
8. non-Corrosive 
9. Good Chemical Stability 
10. Freezing Point suitable for storage 
11. Viscosity 
12. Optimal solvent circulation rate – low rate may indicate many stages and large rates 
require fewer trays but higher circulation costs 
 
 
Figure 7.21. Azeotropic Distillation of Ethanol/Water using Benzene as Entrainer. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
472 
In both azeotropic and extractive distillation an extraneous third component is added to 
the system. This is not desirable. It may surface as impurities in the product. Solvent losses to 
the tune of 1000 ppm can add to the cost of the process. The required solvent/feed ratios are 
often 3 or 4 for an effective separation. Materials of construction problems increase with the 
treatment of an additional chemical. Despite these problems it is the choice of separation in 
some cases. Generally speaking, extractive distillation is more desirable compared with 
azeotrpic distillation since; 
 
1. there is a greater choice of added component 
2. no need for another azeotrope to form 
3. smaller quantities of solvent must be volatilized 
 
As an exception is the ethanol/water system using n-pentane as entrainer. This is because 
n-pentane azeotropes with water. This is less expensive compared with extractive distillation 
with ethylene glycol. As the volatilized impurity is a minor constituent of feed and azeotrope 
composition is favorable the cost is less.  
 
 
Figure 7.22. Extractive Distillation of Acetone/Methanol with Butanol as Solvent. 
 
 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
473 
7.14. SUMMARY 
 
Ratio control is used in keeping the reactor adiabatic during the manufacture of flue gas. 
Heat of reactions from Boudard reaction and oxidation of carbon reactions are made to cancel 
out each other by control of the ratio of the CO2/air mixture. The control scheme is shown in 
Figure 8.1. The energy balance equations are derived in detail. 
SPC, statistical process control methods are discussed including Deming‟s quality 
principles, QIT, quality improvement teams. SPC, statistical process control refers to a set of 
methods and techniques of monitoring and control of a process so that the process is operated 
close to design premises. SPC is different from APC, automatic process control. In SPC 
control, the cause and effect analysis would lead to knowledge of source of disturbance 
among other things. Action on removal of the source of disturbance would result in decreased 
load on the control elements as compared with APC. The pressure fluctuations from a 
fluidized can be measured and used to control the expected quality of fluidization. Control 
charts are used in manufacturing units to delineate random noise and variability in process 
variables that can have Attributable causes. No control action is needed when the variation is 
due to random noise. Control action can be initiated when the Attributable cause is identified. 
Variability found can be classified into 4 different categories. A prototypical control chart 
with UCL and LCL control limits is displayed in Figure 7.3. Let the UCL and LCL be at a 
distance km from the mean value of the measurements, m. Calculation of control limits 
from use of statistical distributions such as normal distribution is given by Eq. (7.13). Sample 
variances can be plotted in an S chart. The control limits for an S chart is given in Table 8.1. 
IMC, internal model control uses the mathematical model developed for the process. 
Perfect control is achieved when model transfer function, M(s) is the reciprocal of process 
transfer function, Gp(s). A filter has to be added to make the system realizable. This keeps the 
numerator of the transfer function of the combined system at a lower degree of polynomial 
compared with the degree of the polynomial of the denominator of the transfer function of the 
system. Inversion of a process model alone may not be sufficient for good control. In order 
for the controller to be stable and realizable the process transfer function must be factorized. 
Examples are given. In order to make M(s) proper the order of the filter in some cases is 
increased.  
A lead/lag controller was considered by use of a model based transfer function as given 
by Eq. (8.45). Inverse response is expected for the process. A first order filter was added to 
make the system more „proper‟. The order of the filter was increased to two. The output 
function is given by Eq. (8.54) and plotted in Figure 8.9. It can be seen from Figure 8.9 that 
there is an inverse response for values of  = 1.0 and  = 0.1. Although Figure 8.9 is for the 
indicated values of  and  in general Eq. (8.54) results in an inverse response. For larger 
values of  there is a minima present prior to the inverse response. What can be inferred from 
this analysis is that the inverse response of the process cannot be removed by a stable filter or 
stable control system. 
Feed forward control is different from feedback control. During feed forward control the 
load or disturbance is measured or gauged from other considerations and control action taken 
accordingly. Carrier corporation has patented [11] a feed forward control system for  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
474 
absorption chillers. The feed forward control method comprise of the following steps; (i) 
determine the disturbance transfer function; (ii) determine the capacity valve transfer 
function; (iii) measure the occurred disturbance; (iv) implement the feed forward control 
function. The block diagram for feed forward control of absorption chillers is shown in Figure 
8.11. An example of feed forward controller for a regulation of fuel supply to a furnace was 
discussed. 
Estimation and control of polymerization reactors was discussed. Control of 
polymerization of reactors is a difficult task because of the exothermic nature of the 
polymerization reactions and higher viscosities of monomer/polymer syrups encountered in 
the reactor. The objective of the reactor control is to obtain superior product quality. Quality 
is characterized by different parameters. Good structure-property relations are needed for 
devising control strategies based on measurement of end-use property values. Technical 
hurdles during the development of mathematical models for polymerization reactors are the 
nonlinear equations encountered sensitivity to impurities etc. Feedback control of a variable is 
not possible if the parameter cannot be measured or estimated. In Figure 8.13 is shown the 
scheme for possible feedback control configurations. The scheme comprises of state-model, 
subsystem 1, subsystem 2 and the measurement equations. State estimation techniques have 
been developed to provide estimates of the state variables even in cases where they cannot be 
obtained by direct measurement. Estimation techniques such as Kalman filter, Weiner filter 
and extended Kalman filter may be used. In non-linear estimation problems the objective may 
be to minimize the average squared errors in the initial estimate in the process model and in 
measurement device. Jo and Bankoff [13] developed a Kalman filter in order to obtain 
estimates of conversion and Mw, weight averaged molecular weight. The Kalman filter is an 
on-line computer algorithm which is intended to provide better estimates of the state variables 
that be obtained by direction solution of measurement equations. If the system is 
observable, optimal estimates of variables that cannot be measured directly can be made. 
Congalidis, Richards and Ray [14] discuss different approaches to the control of 
polymerization reactors. They write species mole balance equations for initiator, monomer, 
CTA, etc. They suggest feed forward control strategy for their recycle streams polymer etc. 
Energy balance equation is also written for the temperature of the reactor. The molecular 
weight was found to have an inverse response with the residence time in the reactor. 
Feedback controllers were evaluated for polymer properties and production rate. They discuss 
use of CONSYD package of control system design programs. The controllers will not operate 
efficiently when the assumptions in their derivations are not met.  
Neural networks can be used to approximate any reasonable function to any degree of 
required precision. Three different architectures for ANNs, artificial neural networks are 
possible. The behavior of each unit in time can be described using either differential 
equations or discrete update equations. The use of ANNs to control a distillation column is 
discussed. A refresher was provided on methods and theory of distillation in Chapter 6.0. 
Control of any process system depends on the availability of suitable models that captures all 
the major phenomena of the system. Mathematical model of a distillation column can contain 
hundreds of state variables. The model equations tend to be nonlinear. The range of operating 
conditions is wide. ANNs can be trained offline in order to model the nonlinear inverse 
dynamics of the process with a pre determined level of accuracy. Training pairs were 
generated from such simulation results in [6] for training the neural controller.. The state 
variables of the distillation column that were selected in the estimator are: flow rate; 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
475 
temperature and compositions of the three components for the bottom and overhead products; 
and temperature and three component compositions for the by-product as side stream. The 
input to the estimator consists of the reboiler heat valve setting, condenser temperature, 
current feedrate, and the limited state vector at two previous sample times. The estimator is 
trained to provide as output a prediction of the limited state vector at the current time. The 
estimator is a fully connected feed forward network with 31 linear input neurons, 14 linear 
output neurons, and 157 nonlinear sigmoid neurons distributed over two hidden layers. In 
order to investigate the capability of the trained controller to control the distillation column, 
the neural controller is connected to the neural estimator. 
Typical solar aided combined cycle power plant is discussed. Continuous pharmaceutical 
operations are emerging. The azeotropic distillation and 20 different specification problem 
types distillation needs advanced control methods. Single layer grapheme sheets needs to be 
manufactured in large scale at lower costs. Some interesting control issues are associated with 
the roll to roll transfer process. Biochemical reactions and design of bio artificial pancreas 
needs separate control strategies.  
 
 
7.15. GLOSSARY 
 
Control Objective: The purpose for performing the control action. For example the 
objective of control of polymer reactor is superior product quality. There can be more than 
one control objective. 
Exothermic Reaction: Chemical reactions when there is a spontaneous liberation of of 
heat. Enthalpy change is negative.  
Nonlinear Process: The governing equation for the process output variable such as 
fractional conversion or temperature of the reactor is not a linear differential equation.  
Polymer Structure: Polymer can be characterized by its structure. Structures can be 
molecular chain structure, tautomeric structure, microscopic structure, behavior in solution, 
crystallographic structure, macrostructure etc. Molecular weight distribution is an example of 
structural parameter. 
Kalman Filter: linear Quadratic estimate of unknown variable from series of noisy data 
of measurable variable. The Apollo mission to the moon had four Kalman filters.  
Estimation Technique: The method used in order to obtain the information from the 
measured data. For example, Weiner filter or Kalman Filter or Low pass filter 
Weiner Filter: Linear filter. Estimates obtained by minimization of least square error 
found in the measured data from random process  
CPFR Continuous Plug Flow Reactor: Raw materials, catalyst and additives are input 
into a tubular reactor and the product and unreacted raw materials are collected from the 
effluent of the reactor in a continuous manner. The flow in the tube is plug flow, i.e. there is 
no mixing between the late elements and early elements of the fluid. The velocity of all the 
different layers of the fluid are constant. When the velocity profile is parabolic the reactors 
are called parabolic flow reactors. 
HCSTR, Homogeneous Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor: Raw materials, catalyst 
and additives are input into a tubular reactor and the product and unreacted raw materials are 
collected from the effluent of the reactor in a continuous manner. All the elements within the 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
476 
reactor are homogenized by use of an agitator. The effluent concentration of the important 
species and the reactor concentration of the same species are the same. 
SCSTR, Segregated Continuous Stirred-Tank Reactor: A set of batch reactors that 
operate in parallel with the same age distribution. For example suspension polymerization 
without coalescence is a said to be a SCSTR. 
Molecular Weight: The molar mass of a concatenated chain polymer with certain degree 
of polymerization. 
Molecular Weight Distribution: The statistical distribution of molar masses found in a 
given sample. The MWD may be characterized by moments of the distribution such as mean 
and variance. It can be fitted to the Gaussian normal distribution. 
Schulz-Flory Distribution: Statistical distribution named after P. Flory and G. V. Schulz 
used to describe the relative ratios of polymers of different length based on their relative 
probabilities of occurrence.  
Poisson distribution: Discrete distribution with the same mean and variance,. For 
example the number of typos made by a good typist can be described using Poisson 
distribution. Arrival of guests at a event can be described using Poisson distribution. 
Probability of the first couple of possibilities will be high and the rest will decrease in 
probability with increase in number of possibilities. The first error and second error of the 
typist will have higher probability and the probability of x errors will decrease with increase 
in x. 
Polymer Composition: The chemical elemental mix of the polymer. For example SAN 
copolymer contains 75 wt % styrene and 25 wt % of acrylonitrile. The chemical elements 
present in the copolymer are carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen. 
Chain Sequence Distribution: The probability of dyads, triads, tetrads, pentads, etc. of 
one repeat unit in a copolymer. More than 2 repeat units can be present in the copolymer. 
Block Microstructure: Copolymer made out of blocks of repeat unit is said to have 
block microstructure. When all the present members of two species are found next to each 
other concatenated the copolymer is said to have a diblock architecture. A triblock copolymer 
is when the species concatenate as three blocks. AAABBBBBBB is a 30/70 diblock 
copolymer of repeat units A and B. Triblock copopolymer for example would look like 
AAABBBBBBBBAAA.  
Alternating Microstructure: Pronounced in a copolymer with two monomers. 
Architecture is alternating, i.e., ABABABABABABA…. Multicomponent copolymer with 
more than 2 repeat units can alternate. For example ABCABCABC….is a lternating 
terpolymer with monomers A, B and C repeat every third unit from it. 
Multivariate Distribution: When there are more than independent random variable the 
distribution is said to be multivariate. 
Control Theory: Description of dynamical systems with inputs. Controllers are used to 
manipulate noisy inputs and provide a desired output. 
State Estimator: Variables introduced that can be estimates of real values underlying 
observed data 
Observable System: System that can be measured and estimation techniques can be 
meaningfully applied 
Corresponding Sequential Estimation: Sample size is not fixed a priori. As data arrives 
sampling is stopped according to stopping rules. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
477 
Nonlinear Estimation: A set of m values can be fit to n parameter non-linear model 
using least squares estimate. 
Feedback Controllers: Control action based upon the error between the measurements 
of the process variable and set point. 
Feedforward Control: Control action taken a priori to any feedback from the process 
variable. Disturbance measured or gauged and used in control action taken. 
Controller Tuning: Quantities such as controller gain kc, controller time constant, c and 
other parameters can be varied in order to achieve a desired output response. This process is 
called controller tuning. 
Jacket Temperature: The temperature of the steam in the jacket of the kettle is the 
jacket temperature 
Damkohler Number: The ratio of the reaction time to the mass transport time is called 
the Damkohler number. Different expressions can arise depending on the kinetics of the 
reactions such as its order, or mechanism such as free radical or autocatalytic, etc. 
5th Order Runge Kutta Method: The numerical solution method in order to solve ODE. 
The increment function has 7 weights. It represents a certain slope of the function. Error falls 
rapidly with effort to low levels. 
Inverse Response: The output function decreases with increase in input function. 
Online Gas Chromotograph: Sensor that is used during the performance of the process 
that can be used to obtain the composition of the species of interest. Sample is eluted in a 
column of adsorbent. The elution times are used to determine the species‟ type. 
Condition Number: Index used to evaluate and select controller schemes. 
CONSYD Package: Integrated Software for Compuater Aided Control System Design 
and Analysis 
IMC, Internal Model Control: Control action arrived at based on a mathematical model 
of the process 
Filter Tuning Parameter: Filters are added in order to make the system physically 
realizable. The parameters of the filter are the tuning parameters  
“more proper”: By adding a filter an otherwise physically unrealizable system can be 
made to be physically realizable. For instance, when the degree of the numerator of the 
system transfer function is greater than the degree of the system transfer function in the 
denominator the system is said to be physically unrealizable. When a filter is added with a 
transfer function that makes the degree of the denominator higher the system becomes 
physically realizable. This is said to make the system “more proper”. 
 
 
7.16. FUTHER READINGS 
 
Bi and Grace, J. R. (1995). “Flow Regime Diagrams for Gas- Solid Fluidization and Upward 
Transport”, International Journal of Multiphase Flow, Vol. 21, 6, 1229-1236. 
Chapra, S. C. & Canale, R. P. (2006). Numerical Methods for Engineers, 5th Edition, McGraw 
Hill Professional, New York, NY. 
Congalidis, J. P., Richards J. R. & Ray, W. H. (1989). Feedforward and Feedback Control of 
a Solution Copolymerization Reactor”, AIChE Journal, Vol. 35, 6, 891-907.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
478 
Deming, W. E. (2000). The New Economics for Industry Government and Education, MIT 
Press Boston, MA. 
Daw, C. S. & Hawk, J. A. (1995). “Fluidization Quality Analyzer for Fluidized Beds”, US 
Patent 5, 435, 972.  
Elicabe G. E. & Meira, G. R. (1988). “Estimation and Control in Polymerization Reactors. A 
Review”, Polymer Engineering and Sci., Vol. 28, 3, 121-135. 
Geldart, D. (1973). “Types of Fluidization”, Powder Technology, Vol. 7, 285-292. 
Jo, J. H. & Bankoff, S. G. (1976). “Digital Monitoring and Estimation of Polymerization 
Reactors”, AIChE Journal, Vol. 22, 361-369. 
Kelly, B., Herrmann, U. & Hale, M. J. “Optimization Studies for Integrated Solar Combined 
Cycle Systems”, Proc. of Solar Forum 2001 Solar Energy: The Power to Choose, April 
21st – 25th, Washington, DC. 
Kolk, R., Martini, D. M., Sheetan, D. & Jenkins, N. (2004). “Feedforward Control for 
Absorption Chiller”, US Patent 6,742,347, Carrier Corporation, Farmington, CT. 
Montgomery and Runger, G. C. (2007). Applied Statisticsand Probability for Engineers, 
Fourth Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboke, NJ. 
McClellland, J. L., Rumelhart D. E. & Hilton, G. E. (1986). The Appeal of Parallel 
Distributed Processing – in D. E. Rumelhart & J. C. McCelelland (Eds.) Parallel 
Distributed Processing Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA 
Renganathan, K. (1990). “Correlation of Heat Transfer Coefficients with Pressure 
Fluctuations in Gas-Solid Fluidized Beds”, Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV. 
Smith, G. M. (1998). Statistical Process Control and Quality Improvement, Prentice Hall, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
Steck, J., Krishnamurthy, K., Mcmillin, B. & Leininger, G, (1991). “Neural Modeling and 
Control of a Distillation Column”, Proceedings International Joint Conference on Neural 
Networks, Seattle, WA. 
Stephanopoulos, G. & Erickson, L. E. (1985). Biological Reactors. Chapter 13, in “Chemical 
Reaction and Reactor Engineering”, Carberry J. J. and Varma, A., Marcel Dekker, Inc., 
New York. 
Sharma, K. R. & Turton, R. (1998). “Mesoscopic Approach to Correlate Surface Heat 
Transfer Coefficients using Pressure Fluctuations in Dense Gas-Solid Fluidized Beds”, 
Powder Technology, 99, 2, 109-118. 
Sharma, K. R. (1998). Periodicity in Pressure Fluctuations in Gas-Solid Fluidized Beds, 
Fluidization IX, Durango, CO, USA. 
Sharma, K. R. (2007). Principles of Mass Transfer, Prentice Hall of India, N. Delhi, India. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). Nanostructuring Operations in Nanoscale Science and Engineering, 
McGraw Hill Professional, NY. 
Sharma, K. R. (2012). Polymer Themodynamics: Blends, Copolymers and Reversible 
Polymeization, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 
Smith, J. M., van Ness, H. C. & Abbott, M. M. (2005). Introduction to Chemical Engineering 
Thermodynamics, 7th Edition, McGraw Hill Professional, New York, NY. 
Sturis, J., C. Knudsen, N. M. O‟Meara, et al., “Phase-locking regions in a forced model of 
slow insulin and glucose oscillations,” in J. Belair, L. Glass, U. An der Heiden, and J. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
479 
Milton (eds.), Dynamical Disease: Mathematical Analysis of Human Illness, Woodbury, 
NY: AIP Press, 1995. 
 
 
EXERCISES 
 
1.0. Batelle/FERCO Low Pressure Process for Hydrogen 
Hydrogen is produced by a water-gas shift reaction of syngas. An alternative to fossil 
fuels is hydrogen. Hydrogen is manufactured from renewable resources such as 
sunlight, wind, and biomass and is more environmentally friendly. The 
Batelle/FERCO low-pressure process involves gasification of the biomass followed 
by steam reforming of the syngas produced. Pressure swing adsorption is used to 
separate the hydrogen from the unreacted raw materials and by-products. This 
process is used at the existing McNeil small power plant in Burlington, Vermont. 
The biomass feed rate for the inlet stream shown in Figure is 314 Mg/day. The 
effluent from the gasifier is separated and purified using cyclones. Steam reforming 
is followed by L.T. and H.T. steps. The calorific value of hydrogen is 141.8 MJ/kg. 
The gasifier is operated at low pressure and high temperature. The steam reformer is 
operated at high temperature and high pressure. The plant can be assumed to be 
operating at 80% capacity utilization during the year. What is a good control scheme 
for this process ? What advanced control concepts discussed in Chapter 7.0 are 
applicable for this process ? 
2.0. Bioethanol from Sugarcane Bagasse 
 
There are two processes to use sugarcane bagasse. In Process I as shown in Figure 
7.18 the sugarcane bagasse is used as fuel in steam boilers. The steam produced is 
allowed to operate a turbine and electricity is generated. In Process II the hemi-
cellulose in bagasse is treated with dilute sulfuric acid and steam in a high 
temperature, short residence time reactor. The cellulose and pentose are hydrolyzed 
in a second unit. The reactant and product mixture is separated using distillation in 
order to produce furfurol and ethanol. What are the differences in the control strategy 
that can be deployed for Process I and Process II ? What are the control variables ? 
What ought to the control objectives ? What advanced control methods discussed in 
Chapter 7.0 are applicable for Processes I and II ? 
 
3.0. 
Combustion Flame Synthesis Process for Production of Fullerene 
 
Fullerenes are a distinct allotrope of carbon. C60 is its structural formula. Hexagons 
and pentagons of carbon atoms for a cage-like structure that looks like a soccer ball. 
The nobel prize was given in 1996 to H. Kroto, R. Smalley and R. Curl for their 
discovery of fullerenes. Sharma (2010) discussed the reduction in process cost from 
$25,000 per kg in the Arizona process, $16,000 per kg in the first generation flame 
synthesis process down to $200 per kg in the second generation flame synthesis 
process. The second generation flame synthesis process comprises of two plug flow 
reactors in series. A oxy-benzene flame that is flat is generated. The feed flow rate 
determines the temperature in the first reactor. Vacuum conditions are maintained in 
the chamber. This has been found to be needed in order to generate the fullerenes. 
The O/C, oxygen/carbon ratio can be changed in order to increase the yield and 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
480 
purity of the fullerene production. Turbulence is found to enhance the micromixing 
and diffusion in the reactor. The flame can be considered as diffusion flame. The  
 
 
fullerene laden gas from the effluent of the reactor can be separated into fullerenes. 
The yield is sufficient for scale-up to commercial production quantities. Factories in 
Japan and USA produce fullerenes at a capacity of ~ 40 tons per year. Distance from 
the burner is variable of choice to look for fullerene production. The residence time 
in the two reactors are 5 ms and 15 ms respectively. The pressure in the first reactor 
is 10-400 torr and temperature is in the range of 1500 – 2500 K in both the reactors. 
What ought to the control strategy for this process ? Which of the advanced control 
methods discussed in Chapter 7.0 is applicable for this process ? Is feedback control 
discussed in Chapter 5.0 sufficient ? What ought to be the control variables ? 
 
 
Figure 7.17. Biomass to Hydrogen: Gasification, Separation, Steam Reforming and Separation by 
Preesure Swing Adsorption. 
 
Figure 7.18. Process I: Combustion of Sugarcane Bagasse to Generate Steam and then Electricity 
Process II: Sugarcane Bagasse to Ethanol and Furfural: Acid Hydrolysis and Separation. 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
481 
 
4.0. 
Hydrogen by Fast Pyrolysis and Steam Reforming 
Hydrogen can be manufactured by fast pyrolysis of biomass followed by steam 
reforming. Biomass is dried and then converted to oil by fast exposure to hot 
particles in a fluidized bed. The thermal energy needed for operation of the reactors 
may be obtained from combustion of chars and gases that were produced from the 
biomass. The oil products are condensed and cooled. Bio-oil is shipped in trucks to 
the hydrogen production unit. Shipment of bio-oil would be less expensive compared 
with the transport of biomass. This is because of the higher energy density of bio-oil 
compared with biomass. Bio-oil is fractionated into carbohydrate and lignin fractions 
using water extraction. Carbohydrate fraction is reformed. Hydrogen generated is 
separated from other products using PSA, Pressure Swing Adsorption. What ought to 
the control strategy for this process ? Which of the advanced control methods 
discussed in Chapter 7.0 is applicable for this process ? Is feedback control discussed 
in Chapter 5.0 sufficient ? What ought to be the control variables ? 
5.0. Rice Bran Oil as Feedstock for Hexane 
 
Rice-bran lipids can be extracted using hexane solvent from rice bran at a yield of 
26%. Rice is milled in order to produce the white ling-grain rice sold in 
supermarkets. The outer layers of the rice kernel are removed. These outer layers of 
the rice kernel are removed. These layers include the hull, the germ and the bran. The 
bran includes the testa, peripcarp, nucellus and aleurone layers. Rice bran becomes 
rancid and to be discarded in landfills. Parboiled rice bran has higher lipid levels 
compared with unstabilized rice bran. Rice-bran oil consists largely of saponifiable 
compounds. What ought to be the control strategy for the hexane extraction unit ? 
What are the control variables ? 
6.0. Ammoxidation of Glycerol to Acrylonitrile  
 
Acrylonitirle can be manufactured from glycerol in a catalytic fluidized bed reactor. 
Ammonia and Oxygen are added to glycerol to form acrylonitrile and water as 
products. The reaction is as follows; 
 
 
CH3OH- 
 
-CH3OH- + NH3 + 0.5 O2  CH3CN + H2O 
 
-CH3OH 
 
Triglycerol + Ammonia + Oxygen  Acrylonitrile + Water 
 
 
 
The glycerol is reacted in the vapor phase with ammonia and oxygen in the presence 
of an acid catalyst. The reaction temperature is about 400-500 0C and reaction 
pressure is ~ 1 – 5 atm. Pressure. The acid catalyst is an oxide of aluminum, nickel, 
etc. The ammonia/glycerol molar ratio is ~ 1 – 1.2 and oxygen/glycerol ratio is in the 
range of 0.5 – 10.0. Which is the best physic-chemical system that can be controlled 
in this process ? What ought to be the control objectives ? Which process variables 
needs to be measured using sensors and suitable instrumentation ? Which of the 
process variables are input variables and which are manipulatble ? What are suitable 
process constraints ? Which is the best control strategy from among feedback, 
feedforword and the number of control methods discussed in Chapter 7.0. 
7.0. Continous Mass Polymerization of Vinyledene Difluoride 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
482 
 
High melting temperatures of PVDF makes the separation process energy intensive. 
Centrifugation or atomization may result in less energy cost compared with 
extrusion. Continuous solution free radical processmay be used in order to make 
PVDF followed by fluidized bed devolatilizer for separation. The temperatures of the 
devolatilizer is ~ 120- 220 0C. The reactor temperature is about 110 0C and reactor 
pressure is about 200 atm. What ought to be the control objectives ? Which process 
variables needs to be measured using sensors and suitable instrumentation ? Which 
of the process variables are input variables and which are manipulatble ? What are 
suitable process constraints ? Which is the best control strategy from among 
feedback, feedforword and the number of control methods discussed in Chapter 7.0. 
8.0. Butadiene Monomer Reclaimation from Waste Tires  
 
Over 2 billion waste tires are estimated to be stockpiled in the landfills of this 
country, United States. The number of tires used in cars on the roads in the U.S. is 
more than one billion. China has 9.83 million passenger vehicles registered in the 
first eight months of 2011. 292 million automobile tires are discarded every year. In 
Texas state 32 million tires were thrown away this past year. 5 million tires form a 
mountain in Odessa and another 809,000 are piled on the side of Genoa Red Bluff 
Road in Southeast Houston, Texas. Tires thrown in landfills are against the law for 
the past two decades. Piled up tires collect water and leads to pandemic caused by 
spread of West Nile virus. A tire mountain in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, across the Rio 
Grande from El Paso, TX has gone down some from 7 million tires to 2.5 million 
tires. Several old tire fires have been reported in Canada and U.S.  
 
The energy needed to make 1,3 butadiene monomer is 60,000 BTU per pound. The 
fuel energy value of tire is ~ 15,000 BTU per pound. Monomer reclamation from 
waste tires may be more profitable compared to its use as fuel.. Given the cost of 
generation of butadiene monomer and polybutadiene and tire manufacture good uses 
for waste tires are needed. High performance rubber asphalt concrete based on stone 
mosaic asphalt, SMA can be used to resist differential frost along highways. Tire-
added latex concrete TALC was developed to include recycle tire rubber as part of 
concrete.  
 
The P-T diagrams for PBd can be constructed from the Tait equation of state.  
 
The ceiling temperature of PBd is 585 C at atmopsheric pressure. Butadiene 
monomer can be recovered by a two step process of swelling and de-vulcanization of 
cross-linked PBd rubber chains followed by unzipping of the linear PBd chains. The 
reactor temperature is about 635 0C and reactor pressure is 0.1 atm. NMP, N-methyl-
2-Pyrrolidone can be used to swell the rubber and acid may be used to unhook the 
sulfur used for cross-links amongst the PBd chains.  
 
What ought to be the control objectives ? Which process variables needs to be 
measured using sensors and suitable instrumentation ? Which of the process 
variables are input variables and which are manipulatble ? What are suitable process 
constraints ? Which is the best control strategy from among feedback, feedforword 
and the number of control methods discussed in Chapter 7.0. 
9.0. Enzymatic Process for Production of Acrylamide 
 
Acrylamide can be made by hydrolysis of acrylonitrile with the aid of the enzyme 
nitrile hydratase. Metabolic pathways of sequential metabolism of nitriles in bacteria 
are due to nitrole hydratase and amidase enzymes. The genome of M. Brevicollis has 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
483 
a sequence that has been found to encode for nitrile hydratase. The gene transcription 
and translation to rto protein and the signals to effect the enzymatic function is 
mapped. The process comprises of a reactor and a separator. Which is the best 
control strategy from among feedback, feedforword and the number of control 
methods discussed in Chapter 7.0.  
10.0. Hydrogen Production by Copper-Chlorine Thermochemical Cycle 
 
Thermal energy from nuclear or solar irradiance can be used for production of 
hydrogen. This is achieved using a hybrid copper-chlorine, CuCl cycle. 125 MT 
H2/day production rate requires 210 MW of thermal energy and 87.8 MW of 
electrical energy. There are three major reaction in the process; (i) Electrolysis 
Reaction; (ii) Hydrolysis of Cuproc Chloride leads to formation of Copper 
oxychloride and; (iii) Molten Cuprous Chloride is produced by decomposition. 
(i) 2CuCl + 2HCl + 4H2O  2CuCl2.2H2O (anode) + H2 (cathode) 
(ii)  2CuCl2 + H2O  CuOCl2 + 2HCl 
(iii)  CuOCl2  0.5O2 + 2CuCl 
 
What ought to be the control objectives ? Which process variables needs to be 
measured using sensors and suitable instrumentation ? Which of the process 
variables are input variables and which are manipulafigure ? What are suitable 
process constraints ? Which is the best control strategy from among feedback, 
feedforword and the number of control methods discussed in Chapter 7.0. 
11.0. Ethanol Production by Fermentation 
 
In order to deliver bioethanol to a newly proposed city distilleries were built. Starch 
is hydrolyzed and enzymatically saccharified in a series of agitated vessels. Glucose 
is sugar and Sacchromyces Cerevisiae is the yeast organism. pH of the vessel can be 
maintained in order to optimize the metabolism in the yeast organism. Oxygen is 
added to the vessel. The yeast cells are separated from the substrate and ethanol 
using a centrifuge. The ethanol is further refined using distillation. The reactor 
temperature is ~ 68 – 104 0F and pH range is ~ 2.5 – 5.5. Enzyme can catalyze the 
formation of ethanol.  
 
What ought to be the control objectives ? Which process variables needs to be 
measured using sensors and suitable instrumentation ? Which of the process 
variables are input variables and which are manipulatable ? What are suitable process 
constraints ? Which is the best control strategy from among feedback, feedforword 
and the number of control methods discussed in Chapter 7.0. 
12.0. Hydrogenation, Deodourization and Decoloration 
 
Vanaspati is a solid and is used in households in India as oil needed in vegetarian 
cooking. Other similar products are vegetable ghee, hardened industrial oils and 
partially hydrogenated liquid oil. Well stirred reactors are used for hydrogenation of 
oils in order to remove the unstaturation in oils and to raise the melting point of the 
fats and improve the resistance of oils to rancid oxidation. Vacuum tower is used to 
deodourized the hydrogenated oil. Fuller‟s earth is used as in adsorption towers in 
order to decolorize the hydrogenated oil. The adsorption isotherm obeyed by the 
adsorbent is Langmuir isotherm. The color concentration is reduced from 20 to 5 
color units in the adsorption tower.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
484 
 
What ought to be the control objectives ? Which process variables needs to be 
measured using sensors and suitable instrumentation ? Which of the process 
variables are input variables and which are manipulatable ? What are suitable process 
constraints ? Which is the best control strategy from among feedback, feedforword 
and the number of control methods discussed in Chapter 7.0. 
13.0. Adsorption Tower for Magnesium Chloride 
 
Sea water contains a number of salts. One example is Magnesium Chloride at 1.3 
gm/liter concentration. The NaCl, common salt concentration is 3.6 wt% in sea 
water. Montmorillonite clay can be used as adsorbent. Sea water feed solution can be 
made to come in contact in a counter-current manner with monotmorllinite clay. 
Crystalline Magnesium Chloride can be made from adsorption process. The 
Langmuir type adsorption has been found to take place for this system. Upon the 
adsorbent reaching a saturated state the adsorbed Magnesium salts can be desorbed 
using pure water. A supersaturated solution of Magnesium chloride can be pumped 
across a crystallizer and Magnesium chloride crystals formed. 
 
What ought to be the control objectives for the adsorption tower and crystallizer ? 
 
Which is the best control strategy for the adsorption and crystallization unit 
operations ? What are the control variables and input variables ? Enumerate the 
process contraints. 
14.0. Sugar Crystals 
 
Sugarcane from the farms are crushed using a jaw crusher and the sugar cane water is 
made. The bagasse is separated and sent to a facility as feedstock for enzymatic 
creation of bioethanol. The sugar water is pumped across a triple effect evaporator. 
The number of stages used in this step is optimized for minimal total cost. As the 
number of stages is increased the amount of steam used will increase running the 
utility bill up. Fewer stages would mean higher capital equipment cost and less utility 
cost. There exist an optimal number of stages for minimal total cost. The sugarcane 
water is decolorized in a adsorption tower. Linear isotherm is obeyed by the 
adsorbent. Upon evaporation sugar is harvested in crystalline form. 
 
What ought to be control objevtives for; (i) Crusher; (ii) Decolirizind Adorption 
tower; (iii) Triple Effect Evaporator and; (iv) Crystallizer. Which is the best control 
strategy that can be deployed for each of the unit operation. Discuss the process 
contraints for each unit operation.  
15.0. Separation of p-Xylene from its Isomers 
 
The method of choice for separation of isomers is adsorption. Zeolite can be used as 
adsorbent in counter-current adsorption continuous operations. A mixture of para 
xylene, ortho xylene and metal xylene can be brought in contact in a counter-current 
manner with zeolite adsorbent. On account of the differences in molecular sizes of 
the three isomers, the bigger molecule, para xylene is retained by the adsorbent and 
o-xylene and m-xylene elutes through the tower. The inlet feed solution to the 
adsorption tower is ~ 9% and the eluted stream has 2000 ppm of p-xylene. The spent 
adsorbent concentration can be 2.5 weight %. The Langmuir isotherm is applicable 
for this system. What ought to be the control objectives for this process ? Which of 
the methods discussed in this chapter and in earlier chapters are best suited for this 
process ? What are the process constraints ? Which are the input variables and which 
are the manipulatable variables ? 

Advanced Control Methods 
 
 
485 
16.0. Polymer Composition Replaces Sutures 
 
American dental association patented a process (US Patent # 5320886, 1994) to 
make a polymeric composition that can be used in order to replace sutures. 
Organofunctional monomers with dimethacrylates or diacrylates are used. Statistics 
and probability are used to optimize the polymer reaction products. Materials having 
similar physiochemical characteristics have higher affinity and adhesive bonding 
between them. A batch polymerization reactor can be used for this purpose. The 
unreacted monomers and polymer product are separated using a centrifuge. What are 
the control objectives ? Which is the best control strategy for the polymerization and 
separation steps ? 
 
List the input and manipulatable variables. 
17.0. SAN and PMMA Polymer Blend 
 
SAN, styrene and acrylonitrile copolymer with high molecular weight and PMMA, 
polymethacrylate are blended in a co-rotating, non-intermeshing twin screw extruder 
made by Berstoff, Germany. The system exhibits thermodynamic miscibility for 
certain compositions of SAN and temperature and pressure of the extruder. Design a 
feedforward control strategy in order to form a SAN/PMMA blend. How is this 
strategy different from a IMC, Internal model control strategy. The model for the 
SAN/PMMA blend can be found in Sharma [2012]. 
18.0. Feedback Control 
 
A ternary alloy made of silicone rubber, polycarbonate and polybutylene 
terephthalate is decomposed at high temperature and pressure. Simultaneous 
measurements using MS,mass spectrometry and FTIR, Fourier Transfrom Infra Red 
spectrpscopy are used in order to characterize the decomposition products. Develop a 
feedback control strategy for the decomposition of PC/PBT/silicone rubber ternary 
alloy. 
19.0. Durability of High Peformance Adhesive Joints 
 
The interface is an important consideration in adhesive systems. The Tg, glass 
transition temperature of polyamide used in adhesive systems is 260 0C. Notched 
coating adhesion tests can be used in order to study the debonding of the high 
performance adhesive joints. The strain at debonding can be indentied. X-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy can be used in order to measure the ageing time and 
bonding energy. Design a hybrid feedback/feedforward control strategy for the 
process of making the adhesive joints. 
20.0. IMC of High Temperature, Water-Gas Shift Inert Membrane Reactor 
 
An accurate model of a commercial scale membrane reactos is developed. A PFR, 
plug flow reactor with no back-mixing operated at constant temperature is used with 
no catalyst at high temperature. The feed mixture is pumped across a single tube 
membrane reactor. The permeate is hydrogen and the retentate is in the shell side of 
the tube. Ideal gas law is assumed to be applicable to the gas phase system. A first 
order kinetic model is applicable. The reaction rate constant varies with temperature 
and pressure and an expression is given to predict the reaction rate constant k as a 
function of T and P. When the temperature exceeds 600 0C unfavourable conditions 
can be expected for the formation of hydrogen. Ceramic-ion-transport membranes 
can be used in order to have hydrogen only as the permeate. An expression for the 
mass transfer rate can be written in terms of the concentration difference and area 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
486 
across which the mass transfer occurs. The equilibrium conversion is ~ 30-40%. The 
membrane can be characterized using porosity, pore size distribution etc. A bundle of 
7600 tubes can be used. Conversions greater than 90% can be attempted. Discuss the 
Internal Model Control strategy for this process ? Is a filter needed in order to make 
the control function “more proper” ? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
PHARMACOKINETIC ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
Single and Two Compartment Models 
 
Ethanol in Brain Tissue – Fourth Order Absorption 
 
First Order Absorption with Elimination  
 
Special Case when klumped = kinfusion 
 
Second Order Absorption with Elimination 
 
Michaelis and Menten Absorption with Elimination 
 
Krebs Cycle and Subcritical Damped Oscillations 
 
Periodic Absorption with Elimination 
 
 
8.1. OVERVIEW 
 
Pharmacokinetics comes from the Greek words, pharmacon that means drugs and 
kinetikos that means setting in motion. The mathematical models, experimental trials and 
computer simulations that are undertaken to study the change of concentration of drug or 
other compounds of interest with time in the human physiology is called Pharmacokinetics. 
Application of pharmacokinetics allows for the processes of liberation, absorption, 
distribution, metabolism and excretion to be characterized mathematically. The absorption of 
drug can be affected by 13 different methods. These methods include;  
 
(i) sublingual entry (beneath the tongue) 
(ii) buccal cavity (via the mouth) 
(iii) gastric entry (through stomach) 
(iv) IV therapy (through veins) 
(v) intramuscular therapy (within the muscles) 
(vi) subcutaneous therapy (beneath the skin) 
(vii)intradermal therapy (within the dermis) 
(viii)percutaneous therapy (topical treatment of skin) 
 
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
488 
(ix) inhalation through mouth, nose, pharynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, alveolar sacs, 
alveoli  
(x) intrarterial route (introduced to artery) 
(xi) intrathecal route (introduced to cerebrospinal fluid) 
(xii)vaginal route (through the vagina) 
(xiii)intraocular route (through eye) 
(xiv)splanchnic circulation (absorbed from stomach, intestines, colon and upper rectum) 
 
The change with time of the concentration of the drug can be by three different types i) 
Slow absorption Type A; ii) maxima and rapid bolus, Type B; iii) constant rate delivery, Type 
C. Pharmacokinetics studies can be performed by 5 different methods including compartment 
methods [Cooney, 1976 ] the five different methods are; 
 
(i) Non-compartment method 
(ii) Compartment method 
(iii) Bio analytical method 
(iv) Mass spectrometry and  
(v) Population pharmacokinetic methods. 
 
According to Notari [1987] the drug concentration can be denoted by a simple weighted 
summation of exponential decays. The factors that affect how a particular drug is distributed 
throughout the anatomy are: i) rate of blood perfusion; ii) permeability of capillary; iii) 
biological affinity of drug; iv) rate of metabolism of drug and; v) rate of renal extraction. 
Drugs may bind to proteins sometimes. The distribution volume is restricted. An apparent 
distribution volume of the drug is defined in such cases [Cooney, 1976]. The kinetics of 
enzymatic reactions that depleted the drug in the tissues can be expected to obey the 
Michaelis-Menten kinetics. The elimination of drug is affected by kidneys in a big manner by 
enzymatic degradation and formation of water soluble drug products. Blood urea nitrogen, 
BUN, a waste product produced in the liver as the end product of protein metabolism is 
removed from the blood by the kidneys in the Bowman‟s capsule. BUN is removed along 
with creatinine, a waste product of creatinine phosphate as energy storing molecule produced 
largely from muscular breakdown.  
The kidney comprises of more than a million nephrons. The nephron is composed of a 
glomerulus, entering and exiting arteriole and a renal tubule. The glomerulus consists of a tuft 
of 20-40 capillary loops protruding into Bowman’s capsule. Bowman‟s capsule [Cooney, 
1976] is a cup-like shaped extension of the renal tubule which is the beginning of the renal 
tubule. The epithelial layer of Bowman‟s capsule is about 40 nm in thickness and facilitates 
passage of water into inorganic and organic compounds. The renal tubule has several distinct 
regions which have different functions such as the proximal convoluted tubule, the loop of 
Henle, the distal convoluted tubule and the collecting duct that carries the final urine to the 
renal pelvis and the ureter. Glomerular filtration is the amount of fluid movement from the 
capillaries into the Bowman‟s capsule. Glomerular filtration rate, GFR, is about 125 ml/min 
or about 180 liters per day.  
 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
489 
8.2. RENAL CLEARENCE 
 
The concept of renal clearance is introduced by performing a mass balance on the drug in 
the human anatomy‟s apparent distribution volume at transient state. The elimination of drug 
in urine is seen to be a first-order process  
 
 
0
renal
a
F
t
V
plasma
plasma
drug
drug
C
C
e
 
(8.1a) 
 
The term plasma clearance represents all the drug elimination processes of the body. The 
primary elimination processes are from metabolism and GFR. The secondary processes can 
be from sweat, bile, respiration and feces. The rate constant for each secondary process is 
denoted by 
j
j
a
F
k
V  
A overall rate constant is defined that can be used to account for all the primary and 
secondary processes of elimination of drug in human anatomy; 
 
 
1
lumped
j
j
a
j
j
k
k
F
V
 
(8.1b) 
 
The change in concentration of drug with time can be written as; 
 
 
0
plasma
a
F
t
V
plasma
plasma
drug
drug
C
C
e
 
(8.1c) 
 
Where, 
plasma
j
j
F
F  
Eq. (8,1c) is an example of a pharmacokinetic model derived from first principles. The 
Type B response can be explained using the model. The area under the concentration of drug 
vs. time can be denoted by Area (Eq. (8.1d); 
 
 
0..
0
drug
Area
C
dt  
(8.1d) 
 
 
8.3. SINGLE COMPARTMENT MODELS 
 
The drug or metabolite that enters the human anatomy from external sources finds its way 
to the blood plasma by a process of diffusion from the tissue regions. The concentration of the 
drug in the plasma starts at zero, some times experiences a lag phase, and then undergoes a 
phase of increase in concentration of drug with time. A maximum is reached. Then the  
concentration of the drug begins to decrease with time. The decrease in concentration in the 
plasma can be attributed to the primary and secondary elimination reactions that are in place 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
490 
to deplete the drug concentration. Compartment models can be developed to describe the 
different phases of the dynamics of the concentration of the drug in the plasma. A schematic 
of a single compartment model with first order absorption with elimination is shown in Figure 
8.1. 
The dose infused in given by Dose, D. A factor,  is introduced. This represents the 
fraction of dose that is absorbable. The mass balance equation on the concentration of the 
drug within a volume VA of the human anatomy can be written for Figure 8.1 as follows; 
 
 
inf
plasma
drug
plasma
usion anatomy
renal
a
drug
dC
k
n
F
C
V
dt
 
(8.1) 
 
Where kinfusion is the first-order rate constant of the absorption process and anatomy is the 
amount of drug that is available for absorption.  
 
 
8.3.1. First Order Absorption with Elimination 
 
The first-order absorption of the drug process can be written as; 
 
 
inf
anatomy
usion anatomy
dn
k
n
dt
 
(8.2) 
 
Where kinfusion is the absorption rate constant. Eq. (8.2) can be integrated to obtain; 
 
 
inf usion
anatomy
k
t
n
e
D
 
(8.3) 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transforms of Eq. (8.1) and Eq. (8.2); 
 
 
Figure 8.1. Single Compartment Model with First Order Absorption with Elimination. 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
491 
 
inf
inf
( )
( )
0
( )
( )
plasma
plasma
usion anatomy
renal
a
drug
drug
anatomy
usion anatomy
k
n
s
F
C
s
sV C
n
s
D
k
n
s
 
(8.4) 
 
Eliminating nanatomy(s); 
 
 
inf
inf
inf
( )
( )
usion anatomy
plasma
usion
drug
a
renal
a
lumped
usion
k
n
s
k
D
C
s
sV
F
V
s
k
s
k
 
(8.5) 
 
 
Where, Frenal is given in terms of a klumped that serves as an overall rate constant that can 
be used to account for all of the primary and secondary processes of the elimination of the 
drug in the human anatomy. Thus Frenal = (klumpedVa). Eq. (8.5) may be inverted in the time 
domain [Sharma, 20.10] as follows;. 
 
 
inf
inf
inf
lumped
usion
k
t
plasma
k
t
usion
drug
a
usion
lumped
k
D
C
e
e
V
k
k
 
(8.6) 
 
Eq. (8.6) may be written in dimensionless form as follows; 
 
 
inf
1
1
lumped
usion
plasma
k
t
drug
k
t
a
C
u
e
e
D
V
 
(8.6a) 
Where, 
inf
lumped
usion
k
k
 
β can be seen to be the ratio of the overall elimination rate constant with the absorption 
rate constant. This is valid for,
inf usion
lumped
k
k
. From Eq. (8.6) it can be seen that the 
concentration drug as a function of time varies inversely with the apparent volume of 
distribution of the drug within the human anatomy and directly proportional to the amount of 
drug that is absorbable and depends on the first order rate constants of absorption and 
elimination. It can be seen that Eq. (8.6) exhibits a maxima. This occurs at; 
 
 
inf
inf
1
ln
usion
m
usion
lumped
lumped
k
k
k
k
 
(8.7) 
 
The corresponding maximum concentration can be given by; 
 
 
 
inf
(
)
inf
lumped
lumped
usion
k
k
k
plasma m
usion
drug
a
lumped
k
D
C
V
k
 
(8.8) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
492 
The maxima vanish for large values of rate constant, kinfusion. The concentration will reach 
the asymptotic maximum in these cases. Eqs. (8.7-8.8) are valid only when
inf
lumped
usion
k
k
. 
Eq. (8.6a) is plotted in Figure 8.2 for different ratios of the rate constants, . It can be seen 
from Figure 8.2 that for very small values of  the dimensionless concentration does not 
exhibit maxima. It reaches the asymptic maximum limit of 1 at large time. For small values of 
 the maxima is sharper. A right skew can be seen in these decay curves. For the special case 
when the overall rate constant of the primary and secondary elimination processes is equal to 
the rate constant of absorption the following analysis would be applicable. Eq. (8.1) can be 
written when 
inf usion
lumped
k
k
k
 as; 
 
 
(
)
(
)
plasma
drug
plasma
kt
a
a
drug
dC
k D e
V k C
V
dt
 
(8.9) 
 
Let,  
;
plasma
drug
a
C
kt u
D
V
 
(8.10) 
 
Eq. (8.9) becomes; 
 
 
du
e
u
d
 
(8.11) 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transforms of Eq. (8.11) recognizing the initial concentration is u0 
and the transformed variable can be solved for as; 
 
 
_
0
2
1
(
1)
(
1)
u
u
s
s
 
(8.12) 
 
Obtaining the inverse of the Laplace transformed dimensionless concentration; 
 
 
0
u
u e
e
 
(8.13) 
 
The solution for the dimensionless concentration given by Eq. (8.13) is shown in Figure 
8.2 for the case of 0. initial concentrations. A maxima can be seen in the concentration vs. 
time graphs.  
Eq. (8.13) in the dimensional form can be written as; 
 
 
plasma
kt
drug
a
D
C
kte
V
 
(8.14) 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
493 
 
Figure 8.2. Dimensionless Concentration u as a Function of Time for Systems that Obey first Order 
Kinetics with Elimination (kinfusion = 1 min-1; 
inf
lumped
usion
k
k
). 
 
Eq. (8.14) can be integrated and given in terms of area under the concentration of the 
drug vs. time graph as; 
 
 
0..
a lumped
plasma
D
D
Area
V k
F
 
(8.15) 
Example 8.1 Ethanol in Brain Tissue 
Pharmacokinetic modeling of ethanol plays a salient role on brain‟s response to ethanol. 
Ethanol is a naturally produced drug used by humans for thousands of years because of its 
psychoactive properties. It is beneficial when used in moderation. Excessive use of ethanol 
can be devastating. Brain is a high blood flow, small water volume organ and ethanol readily 
crosses the blood-brain barrier. The ethanol gets eliminated by an oxidation reaction as 
follows: 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
494 
 
 
Figure 8.3. Drug Concentration as a Function of Time for the Special Case when k = klumped = kinfusion. 
 
 
2
5
2
2
2
3
2
3
0
C H OH
O
CO
H
 
(8.16) 
 
The stoichiometry of the reaction suggests that the rates of reaction are related by; 
 
 
2
1
3
O
A
r
r
 
(8.17) 
 
The kinetics of the reaction can be expected to be of the form; 
 
 
2
3
inf
A
usion anatomy O
r
k
n
n
 
(8.18) 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
495 
Lumping all the rate effects into the alcohol concentration assume that the rate 
expression can be given by a 4th order rate expression such as; 
 
 
4
inf
anatomy
A
usion anatomy
dn
r
k
n
dt
 
(8.19) 
 
Let the amount of alchohol ingested by given by D moles. Develop a single-compartment 
pharmacokinetic model for this 4th order absorption with elimination of ethanol. Plot the 
alchohol concentration as a function of time. Does it undergo maxima? Calculate the amount 
of ethanol in the urine. It appears that ethanol infusion in the brain tissue is a fourth order 
process of absorption. Eq. (8.19) is applicable. The elimination steps are also included. 
Integration of Eq. (8.19) realizing the initial condition at t = 0, nanatomy = (D) would result in; 
 
 
inf
3
3
1
1
3
3
usion
anatomy
k
t
n
D
 
(8.20) 
 
Eq. (8.20) can also be written as; 
 
 
1
3
3
inf
1
3
anatomy
udion
n
D
D
k
t
 
(8.21) 
 
Eq. (8.21) can be expressed as a Newton‟s generalized binomial series as follows; 
 
 
1
2
6
3
3
inf
inf
1 4
1
.......
3 3
2!
usion
anatomy
udion
D
k
t
n
D
D
k
t
 
(8.22) 
 
Obtaning the Laplace transform of Eq. (8.22) 
 
 
3
6
2
inf
inf
2
3
2
1
( )
....
9
usion
usion
anatomy
D
k
D
k
n
s
D
s
s
s
 
(8.23) 
 
The mass balance of ethanol in the plasma distributed over a volume per the single 
compartment model shown in Figure 8.1 as given by Eq. (8.1) is applicable and can be 
written as in the Laplace domain as; 
 
 
inf
( )
( )
0
plasma
plasma
usion anatomy
renal
a
drug
drug
k
n
s
F
C
s
sV C
 
(8.24) 
The concentration of drug in plasma can be solved for in the Laplace domain by elimination 
of nanatomy(s) between Eq. (8.23) and Eq. (8.24) as; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
496 
3
6
2
inf
inf
inf
inf
2
3
( )
2
1
( )
9
usion anatomy
plasma
usion
usion
usion
drug
a
lumped
a
lumped
k
n
s
k
D
D
k
D
k
C
s
s
s
s
V
s
k
V
s
k
 
(8.25) 
 
Term by term in Eq. (8.25) can be inverted from the Laplace domain into the time 
domain as follows; 
 
3
inf
inf
( )
1
1
.......
lumped
lumped
k
t
k
t
plasma
usion
usion
drug
lumped
a
lumped
lumped
k
D
D
k
t
C
t
e
e
k
V
k
k
 
(8.26) 
 
Eq. (8.26) is plotted in Figure 8.3 for a certain set of rate constants and dosage and factor 
of absorption. The set of parameters used to generate the concentration of drug in the plasma 
is given below in Table 8.1. 
 
 
Figure 8.4. Concentration of Drug in Plasma with Fourth Order Absorption with Elimination. 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
497 
Table 8.1. Parameters used in Figure 8.3 
 
Ethanol in Brain 
 
kinfusion 
400 
hr-1 
klumped 
2 
hr-1 
Va 
260 
liter 
D 
0.2 
moles 

0.8 
 
 
 
8.3.2. Second-Order Absorption with Elimination 
 
A mass balance on the concentration of drug within the human anatomy for the case of 
second order absorption with elimination can be written for Figure 8.1; 
 
 
2
"
plasma
drug
plasma
anatomy
renal
a
drug
dC
k n
F
C
V
dt
 
(8.27) 
 
Where k” is the second order rate constant of the absorption process and nanatomy is the 
amount of drug that is available for absorption. The second order absorption of the drug 
process can be described by; 
 
 
2
"
anatomy
anatomy
dn
k n
dt
 
(8.28) 
 
The solution to Eq. (8.28) can be written as; 
 
 
1
1
"
anatomy
k t
fDose
n
 
(8.29) 
 
Eq. (8.29) and Eq. (8.27) can be combined and the concentration of drug as a function of 
time can be solved for from the first order ODE, ordinary differential equation and by use of 
particular integral as; 
 
 
2
1
"
1
lumped
k
t
plasma
drug
C
e
k t
fDose
 
(8.30) 
 
The initial condition is; 
 
 
0
0,
0
plasma
drug
C
t
 
(8.31) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
498 
 
Figure 8.5. Second Order Absorption and Elimination - 
"
0.33;
5
renal
a
F
k
V
fDose
.
 
 
Eq. (8.30.) can be seen to exhibit maxima. The solution for the maxima needs numerical 
methods as the resulting equation is transcendental. Eq. (8.30) can be seen to be interplay of 
the rate of absorption and rate of excretion. When the second order absorption processes are 
rapid and excretion is slow, the drug tends to accumulate in the blood plasma. When the rate 
of excretion is rapid the drug concentration tends to drop off rapidly. 
 
  
8.3.3. Michaelis-Menten Absorption with Elimination 
 
A mass balance on the concentration of drug within the human anatomy for the case 
where the kinetics of absorption is in obeyance of Michaelis-Menten Kinetics with 
elimination can be written for Figure 8.1 as; 
 
 
0
plasma
E
anatomy
drug
plasma
a lumped
a
drug
a
M
anatomy
dC
kC
n
V k
C
V
V C
n
dt
 
(8.32) 
 
Let nanatomy be the amount of drug that is available for absorption. The absorption of the 
drug process can be described by Michaelis-Menten kinetics; 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
499 
 
0
anatomy
a
E
anatomy
a
M
anatomy
dn
kV C
n
dt
V C
n
 
(8.33) 
 
Where k is the infusion Michaelis-Menten rate constant, CE0 is the total enzyme 
concentration and CM is the rate constant. It can be seen that (Levenspiel, [1999]) the 
Michaelis-Menten kinetics becomes independent of concentration at high drug concentration 
and becomes zeroth order and at the low concentration limit reverts to a simple first order rate 
expression. Integration of Eq. (6.54) can be seen to be [Michaelis and Menten 1913]; 
 
 
0
ln
anatomy
anatomy
M
E
a
a
n
n
fDose
C
kC
t
fDose
V
V
 
(8.34) 
 
It can be seen that Eq. (8.34) is in a form that is not readily usable in terms of a one-to-
one mapping between the independent variable t and dependent variable nanatomy. In order to 
combine Eq. (8.34) with Eq. (8.32) and then solved for, for the concentration of drug in the 
plasma, a more usable form of Eq. (8.34) is sought. This can be done by realizing that any 
arbitrary function can be represented using the Taylor series. Taylor series representation of 
any arbitrary function is an infinite series containing derivatives of the arbitrary function 
about a particular point. Prior to obtaining the Taylor series Eq. (8.33) is made dimensionless 
as follows [10-11]; 
 
 
0
3
0
0
;
;
;
anatomy
E
a
M
a
E
E
M
n
C V
C V
u
k u
t u
u
fDose
fDose
fDose  
(8.35) 
 
Eq. (8.33) becomes; 
 
 
M
du
u
d
u
u
 
(8.36) 
 
Taylor series in terms of derivatives of u evaluated at the point =0 can be written as 
follows; 
 
 
2
3
(0)
'(0)
"(0)
"'(0)
.........
2!
3!
u
u
u
u
u
 
(8.37) 
 
From the initial condition,  
u(0) = 1 
(8.38) 
 
From Eq. (8.36),  
1
'(0)
1
M
u
u
 
(8.39) 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
500 
The initial value of the second derivative of the dimensionless concentration, u” can be 
seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
2
3
0
'
'
1
M
M
M
M
u
u
u
uu
u
d u
d
u
u
u
 
(8.40) 
 
The initial value of the third derivative of the dimensionless concentration, u”‟ can be 
seen to be; 
 
 
2
2
3
3
4
5
0
" 2
'(
)
2
1
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
u
u
u u
u u u
u
u
u
d u
d
u
u
u
 
(8.41) 
 
Plugging Eqs. (8.39-8.41) in Eq. (8.37); 
 
 
 
3
2
2
3
5
2
1
......
1
2!
1
3!
1
M
M
M
M
M
M
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
 
(8.42) 
 
Eq. (8.42) and Eq. (8.34) are sketched for a particular value of uM =11, in Figure 8.6. It 
can be seen that for times t < 
0
25
E
a
fDose
kC V
, the Taylor series expression evaluated near the origin 
up to the third derivative is a reasonable representation of the integrated solution given in Eq. 
(8.34). More terms in the Taylor series expression can be added to suit the application and the 
apparent volume, dosage, enzyme concentration, Michaelis constant and the desired accuracy 
level needed as shown above. 
 
 
Figure 8.6. Michaelis-Menten Kinetics from the Integrated and Taylor Series Expressions.  

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
501 
Eq. (8.37) and Eq. (8.34) can be combined and the concentration of drug as a function of 
time can be solved for from the resulting equation by the method of Laplace transforms as 
follows. The combined equation is also made dimensionless; 
 
 
0
plasma
lumped
drug
plasma
drug
M
E
du
k
u
u
u
u
ku
d
 
(8.43) 
 
Combining Eq. (8.42) and Eq. (8.43); 
 
 
2
2
3
5
0
2
1
......
1
1
2
1
plasma
M
M
lumped
drug
plasma
M
drug
M
E
M
M
u
u
du
k
u
u
u
ku
d
u
u
 
(8.44) 
 
Obtaining the Laplace transform of the governing equation for dimensionless drug 
concentration in the compartment (plasma), Eq. (8.44); 
 
 
2
_
_
3
5
2
3
0
2
1
......
0
(
1)
1
2
1
M
M
lumped
M
M
E
M
M
u
u
k
u
u
su
s u
ku
s
u
s
u
 
(8.45) 
 
The transformed expression for dimensionless drug concentration in the compartment can 
be seen to be; 
 
 






2
_
3
5
2
3
0
0
0
2
1
......
(
1)
1
2
1
M
M
M
lumped
lumped
lumped
M
M
M
E
E
E
u
u
u
u
k
k
k
s u
s
s
u
s
s
u
s
ku
ku
ku





























 (8.46) 
 
It can be seen that the inversion for each term in the infinite series is readily available 
from the tables [Mickley, Sherwood and Reid, 1957]. Thus a non-linear differential equation 
was transformed using Taylor series and some manipulations into an equation with closed 
form analytical solution. The term by term inversion of Eq. (8.46) can be looked from the 
Tables as; 
 
0
2
3
0
1
1
......
(
1)
1
lumped
lumped
E
k
k
k
M
ku
lumped
lumped
lumped
E
M
M
k
k
u
e
k
k
k
e
u
ku
u
u
  
(8.47) 
 
The dimensionless drug concentration in the compartment or plasma is shown in  
Figure 8.7. 
It can be seen from Figure 8.7 that the dimensionless drug concentration in the 
compartment goes through a maxima. The curve is convex throughout the absorption and 
elimination processes. The drug gets completely depleted after a said time. The curve is 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
502 
asymmetrical with a right skew. The constants used to construct Figure 8.7 using Microsoft 
MS Excel Spreadsheet were; 
 
 
1
1
0
11;
2sec
1sec ;
4
M
lumped
E
u
k
k
u
 
 
 
 
8.4. ANALYSIS OF SIMPLE REACTIONS IN CIRCLE 
 
The mathematical model predictions for drug concentration as discussed above depend 
on the nature of kinetics of absorption. It can be simple zeroth order, first order, second order, 
fractional order any order n. It can also be reversible in nature. It can obey Michaelis-Menten 
kinetics. 
Sometimes in the absorption process the Krebs cycle [1953] may be encountered. 
Reactions such as these can be represented by a scheme of reactions in circle (Sharma, 
[20..10]). The essential steps in the Krebs cycle are formation of: i) A. Oxalic Acid; ii) B. 
Citric Acid; iii) C. Isocitric Acid; iv) D. -Ketoglutaric Acid; v) E. Succyl Coenzyme A; vi) 
F. Succinic Acid; vii) G. Fumaric Acid; viii) H. Maleic Acid. There are other sets of reactions 
in metabolic pathways that can be represented by a scheme of reactions in circle. Systems of 
reactions in series and reactions in parallel have been introduced [Levenspiel, 1999]. Consider 
a system of reactions in circle: i) System of 3 Reactants in Circle; ii) System of 4 Reactants in 
Circle; iii) System of 8 Reactants in Circle such as in Krebs Cycle and; iv) General Case. A 
scheme of reactants in circle is shown in Figure 8.8. 
 
 
Figure 8.7. Michaelis-Menten Absorption and Elimination. 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
503 
(i) 3 Reactions in Circle 
 
The simple first order irreversible rate expressions for (i) 3 Reactants in Circle can be 
written as; 
 
 
1
3
A
A
C
dC
k C
k C
dt
 
(8.48) 
 
 
2
1
B
B
A
dC
k C
k C
dt
 
(8.49) 
 
 
 
3
3
C
C
B
dC
k C
k C
dt
 
(8.50.) 
 
Where, CA, CB and CC are the concentrations of the reactants A, B and C at any instant in 
time, t. Let the initial concentrations of reactants A, B and C be given by 
CA0, CB0 =0 and CC0=0. The Laplace transforms of Eqs. (6.68-6.71) are obtained as; 
 
 
_
_
1
0
3
A
A
C
s
k C
C
k C  
(8.51) 
 
 
_
_
2
2
B
A
s
k
C
k C  
(8.52) 
 
 
_
_
3
2
C
B
s
k
C
k C  
(8.53) 
 
 
Figure 8.8. Simple Reactions in Circle Representation of Krebs Cycle. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
504 
Eliminating CB and CC between Eqs. (6.72-6.74) the transformed expression for the 
instantaneous concentration of reactant A can be written as; 
 
 
_
_
3 2 1
1
0
3
2
A
A
A
k k k C
s
k C
C
s
k
s
k
  
(8.54) 
 
Or,  
_
0
3
2
2
1
2
3
1 2
1 3
2 3
A
A
C
s
k
s
k
C
s s
s k
k
k
k k
k k
k k
 
(8.55) 
 
The inversion of Eq. (6.76) can be obtained by use of the residue theorem. The 3 simple 
poles can be recognized in Eq. (6.76). Further it can be realized that when the poles are 
complex, subcritical damped oscillations can be expected in the concentration of the reactant. 
This is when the quadratic, 
2
4
0
b
ac
. This can happen when; 
 
 
2
3
2
1
2 1
4
0
k
k
k
k k
 
(8.56) 
 
Or, 
3
2
1
1 2
2
k
k
k
k k  
(8.57) 
 
Or, 
2
3
2
1
k
k
k
 
(8.58) 
 
This expression is symmetrical with respect to reactants A, B and C. When the relation 
holds, i.e., when one reaction rate constant is less than the square of the sum of the square 
root of the rate constants of the other two reactions, the subcritical damped oscillations can be 
expected in the reactant concentration. 
 
 
(ii) 4 Reactions in Circle 
 
The equivalent Laplace transformed expression for concentration of reactant A for a 
system of 4 reactions in circle assuming that all the reactions in the cycle obey simple, first 
order kinetics can be derived as; 
 
 
_
0
3
2
1
3
2
1
2
3
4
1 2
1 3
2 3
1 4
2 4
3 4
1 2 3
1 2 4
1 3 4
2 3 4
(
)
A
A
C
s
k
s
k
s
k
C
s s
s
k
k
k
k
s k k
k k
k k
k k
k k
k k
k k k
k k k
k k k
k k k
 
(8.59) 
 
The conditions where the concentration can be expected to exhibit subcritical damped 
oscillations when the roots of the following equation becomes complex; 
 
3
2
0
s
s
s
 
(8.60) 
 
Where,  
1
2
3
4
k
k
k
k  
(8.61) 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
505 
 
2 3
1 3
1 2
1 4
4 3
1 4
k k
k k
k k
k k
k k
k k  
(8.62) 
 
 
1 2 3
1 2 4
1 3 4
2 3 4
k k k
k k k
k k k
k k k  
(8.63) 
 
It can be seen that  is the sum of all the 4 reaction rate constants,  is the sum of product 
of all possible pairs of the reaction rate constants and  is the sum of product of All possible 
triple products of rate constants in the system of reactions in circle. Eq. (8.60) can be 
converted to the depressed cubic equation by use of the substitution, 
 
 
3
x
s
 
(8.64) 
 
This method was developed in the Renaissance period (Ans Magna, [1501]). The 
depressed cubic without the quadratic term will then be; 
 
 
2
3
3
2
0
3
27
3
x
x
 
(8.65) 
 
Let,  
2
3
B ; 
3
2
27
3
C  
(8.66) 
 
Then, Eq. (6.86) becomes; 
 
 
3
0
x
Bx
C
 
(8.67) 
 
The complex roots to Eq. (6.88) shall occur when D > 0, where, 
 
 
3
2
27
4
B
C
D
 
(8.68) 
 
Thus the conditions when subcritical damped oscillations can be expected for a system of 
4 reactions in circle are derived.  
 
 
(iii) General Case of n Reactions in Circle 
 
For the general case, of which the Krebs cycle with 8 reactions in circle is a particular 
case can be obtained by extension of the expressions derived for 3 reactions in circle and 4 
reactions in circle. Aliter to this would be the method of Eigen values and Eigen vectors. The 
cases when  is imaginary is when the concentration of the species will exhibit subcritical 
damped oscillations are given by the characteristic equation [Varma and Morbidelli, 1997]; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
506 
 
K- I
0
Det
 
(8.69) 
 
The size of the K matrix depends on the number of reactions in circle. For n reactions in 
circle K would be a n x n matrix. For the case of Krebs cycle it would be a 8 x 8 matrix. 
Upon expansion an 8th order polynomial equation in  arises. Eight roots of the 
polynomial exist. Even if all the values in the characteristic matrix are real some roots may be 
complex. When complex roots occur they appear in pairs. The roots of the polynomial are 
called eigenvalues of the characteristic matrix. The polynomial equation is called the Eigen 
value equation.  
 
 
8.5. SUBCRITICAL DAMPED OSCILLATIONS   
 
As was discussed in the previous section, the concentration of the drug during absorption 
on account of kinetics such as the reactions in circle can undergo subcritical damped 
oscillations. In such cases, how can the absorption with elimination process be modeled? 
The solution for the dosage drug concentration upon absorption that obeys a certain type 
of kinetics that results in a subcritical damped oscillations can be given by; 
 
 
inf
(2
)
usion
k
t
anatomy
k
a
fDose
n
e
Cos
t
V
 
(8.70) 
 
A mass balance on the concentration of drug within the human anatomy for the case of 
kinetics of absorption resulting in subcritical damped oscillation can be written for Figure 6.4 
as; 
 
 
inf
inf
(
)
(2
(
))
usion
plasma
k
t
drug
plasma
usion
k
a lumped
a
drug
a
dC
k
fDose e
Cos
t
V k
C
V
V
dt
 
(8.71) 
 
Eq. (6.92) is the governing equation for concentration of drug in the single compartment. 
Eq. (6.92) is made dimensionless by the following substitutions; 
 
 
;
; *
plasma
drug
k
lumped
lumped
a
C
u
k
t
k
fDose
V
 
(8.72) 
 
Plugging Eq. (8.72) in Eq. (8.71), Eq. (8.71) becomes; 
 
 
inf
(2
(
* ))
usion
lumped
k
du
e
Cos
u
d
k
 
(8.73) 
 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
507 
 
Figure 8.9. Characteristic Matrix for System of 8 Reactions in Circle. 
 
The concentration of drug as a function of time can be solved for by the method of 
Laplace transforms as follows. Obtaining the Laplace transforms of Eq. (6.94); 
 
 
_
inf
2
2
*2
2
(
1)
1
1
usion
lumped
k
s
u
k
s
s
 
(8.74) 
 
Obtaining the inverse of the transformed expression by using the convolution property of 
Eq. (6.95); 
 
 
inf
(
* )
*
usion
lumped
k
Sin
u
e
k
 
(8.75) 
 
The solution for dimensionless concentration of the drug in the single compartment for 
different values of rate constants and dimensionless frequency are shown in Figure 8.10 – 
Figure 8.14. The drug profile reaches a maximum and drops to zero concentration after a said 
time. The fluctuations in concentration depend on the dimensionless frequency resulting from 
the subcritical damped oscillations during absorption. At low frequencies (* < 1.8) the 
fluctuations are absent. As the frequency is increased the fluctuations in concentration are 
pronounced. The frequency of fluctuations was found to increase with increase in frequency 
of oscillations during absorption. At high dimensionless frequencies a “saw-tooth” pattern 
could be seen in the dimensionless concentration. At even higher dimensionless frequencies 
the fluctuations in concentration again vanish. 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
508 
 
Figure 8.10. Dimensionless Concentration of Drug in Compartment *=/klumped = 6; 
inf
0.5
usion
lumped
k
k
. 
 
 
Figure 8.11. Dimensionless Concentration of Drug in Compartment *=/klumped=2; 
inf
0.5
usion
lumped
k
k
. 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
509 
 
Figure 8.12 Dimensionless Concentration of Drug in Compartment *=/klumped = 1.8; 
inf
0.5
usion
lumped
k
k
. 
 
 
Figure 8.13. Dimensionless Concentration of Drug in Compartment, *= 0.5, kinfusion/klumped =0.4. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
510 
 
Figure 8.14. Dimensionless Concentration of Drug in Compartment *=/klumped=25; 
inf
0.5
usion
lumped
k
k
.  
 
 
8.6. TWO COMPARTMENT MODELS 
 
Two and three compartment models are used when need to describe complex drug 
profiles. Such need arises especially when equilibrium between central compartment to 
describe the concentration of drug in blood and a peripheral tissue compartment is not rapid. 
A two-compartment model to model the absorption process with elimination is shown in 
Figure 8.15. 
The concentration that has diffused to the tissue region in the human anatomy is also 
accounted for in addition to the concentration of drug in the blood plasma. 
A bolus is administered intravenously. A mass balance on the concentration of drug 
within the human anatomy in the blood plasma and tissue compartments can be written for 
Figure 8.15 as follows; 
 
 
plasma
drug
plasma
tissue
p
pt
renal
tp
T
drug
p
drug
dC
V C
k
F
k V C
V
dt
 
(8.76) 
 
 
tissue
drug
plasma
tissue
p
pt
tp
T
drug
T
drug
dC
V C
k
k V C
V
dt
 
(8.77) 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
511 
 
Figure 8.15. Two Compartment Models. 
 
Where Vp and VT are the apparent distribution volumes of the blood plasma and tissue 
compartments. The initial concentrations of the drug in the compartments are; 
 
 
0
plasma
drug
P
tissue
drug
Dose
C
V
C
 
(8.78) 
 
Differentiating Eq. (6.98) with respect to time and eliminating the concentration of the 
drug in the tissue from Eq. (6.10..0) the governing equation for the concentration of drug in 
the blood plasma compartment can be written as; 
 
 




2
2
0
plasma
plasma
drug
drug
tp
plasma
pt
renal
tp
pt
drug
p
d C
dC
k Dose
k
F
k
k
C
dt
V
dt






 
(8.79) 
 
Eq. (6.10.1) is an ordinary differential equation of the second order with constant 
coefficients. This can be solved for by obtaining the roots of the complementary function and 
adding a particular solution. The solution to Eq. (6.10.1) can be written after use of the initial 
condition can be written as; 
 
 
2
plasma
t
t
t
drug
a
Dose
C
e
c
e
e
V
 
(8.80) 
 
The concentration of the drug in the tissue can be written as; 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
512 
 
2
(1
)
tissue
t
t
t
drug
a
Dose
C
e
c
e
e
V
 
(8.81) 
 
Where,  
2
4
2
pt
renal
pt
renal
pt
tp
k
F
k
F
k
k
 
(8.82) 
 
 
2
4
2
pt
renal
pt
renal
pt
tp
k
F
k
F
k
k
 
(8.83) 
 
The solution of the integration constant needs another time condition in addition to the 
initial conditions given by Eq. (6.10.0) and by mass balance at any given instant in time the 
initial concentration of the drug in the plasma is the total of the concentration of the drug in 
the blood compartment plus the concentration of the drug in the tissue compartment. The 4th 
constraint can be that the initial rate of reaction in the tissue compartment is zero. i.e.  
 
 
2
0
a
Dose
c
V
 
(8.84) 
 
Then,  
2
P
Dose
c
V
 
(8.85) 
 
Eq. (6.10.7) is valid only when, 
. 
 
 
8.7. COMPUTER SIMULATION 
 
With the advent of personal computers, the pharmacokinetic models are implemented on 
computers. Both linear and nonlinear pharmacokinetic models can be simulated in the 
computer. This is especially the case when drug concentration throughout the body or a 
particular location is high. The possible reason for this situation is the capacity of a 
biochemical process to reduce the concentration of the drug becomes saturated. Michaelis-
Menten kinetics is used to capture the non-linear nature of the system. This involves mixtures 
of zero-order and first order kinetics.  
Experimental methods are deployed to collect data on the change in the concentration of 
drug with time from a patient who has been injected a particular dose of a drug. This is 
followed by interpreting the data by analysis. Analysis of data involves plotting the points of 
concentration of drug in a logarithmic graph. The slope and intercept of the best-fit, linear, 
regression line to the data can be used to obtain the rate constant and the initial concentration 
of the drug. These constants are used in the compartment models to describe the drug‟s time 
course for additional patients and dosing regimes. 
Experimental methods to study drug profiles affected by Michaelis-Menten kinetics are 
similar to those used in standard compartment models. The drug profiles are usually non-

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
513 
linear. At high concentrations the drug concentration is linear. This is so, because the drug is 
eliminated at a maximal constant rate by a zero-order process. The data line then begins to 
curve in an asymptotic fashion with time until the drug concentration drops to a point where 
the rate process becomes proportional to the drug concentration via a first order process. 
Nonlinear pharmacokinetics can be used to describe solvation of the therapeutic ingredient 
from a drug formulation as well as metabolism and elimination processes. Toxicological 
events related to threshold dosing can be described using nonlinear pharmacokinetics. 
Single, two and three compartment pharmacokinetic models require in vivo blood data to 
obtain rate constants and other relevant parameters that are used to describe drug profiles. 
Further what may work for one drug may not be suitable for another drug. Blood profile data 
need be generated for each drug under scrutiny. In vivo state of a spectrum of drugs without 
experimental blood samples from animal testing cannot be predicted accurately using such 
models. Physiological pharmacokinetic models have been developed. These integrate the 
basic physiology and anatomy with drug distribution and disposition. The compartments used 
correspond to anatomic entities such as GI tract, liver, lungs, ocular, buttocks, etc, that are 
connected by passage of blood. However, a large body of physiological and physiochemical 
data is employed that is drug aspecific. The rate processes are lumped together in the 
physiological models.  
Computer systems have been used in pharmacokinetics to provide easy solutions to 
complex pharmacokinetic equations and modeling of pharmacokinetic processes. Other uses 
of computer in pharmacokinetics include: i) statistical design of experiments; ii) data 
manipulation; iii) graphical representation of data; iv) projection of drug action and; v) 
preparation of written reports or documents. 
Pharmacokinetic models are described by systems of differential equations. Computer 
systems and programming languages have been developed that are more amenable for the 
solution of differential equations. Graphics-oriented model development computer programs 
are designed for development of multi-compartment linear and nonlinear pharmacokinetic 
models. The user is allowed to interactively draw compartments and then link them with other 
iconic elements to develop integrated flow pathways using pre-defined symbols. The user 
assigns certain parameters and equations relating the parameters to the compartments and 
flow pathways and then the model development program generates the differential equations 
and interpretable code to reflect the integrated system in a computer-readable format. The 
resulting model can be used to simulate the system under scrutiny, when input values for 
parameters corresponding to the underlying equations of the model such as drug dose, etc are 
used. 
Tools are developed to implement pharmacokinetic models. However, the current state of 
the art does not permit predictability of the pharmacokinetic state of extravascularly 
administered drugs in a mammal from in vitro cell, tissue or compound structure-activity 
relationship SAR/QSAR data. The predictability is poor when attempting to predict 
absorption of drug in one mammal from data derived from a second mammal. Different 
approaches to predict oral administration and fraction dose absorbed are presented in the 
literature [Grass, 2003, Lvet-Trafit, 1996]. There are lacunae in these models as they make 
assumptions that limit the scope of prediction to a few specific compounds. These collection 
of compounds possess variable ranges of dosing requirements and of permeability, solubility, 
dissolution rates and transport mechanism properties. Other deficiencies include use of drug-
specific parameters and values in pharmacokinetic models that limit the predictive capability 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
514 
of the models. Generation of rules that may be universally applicable to drug disposition in a 
complex physiological system such as GI, gastrointestinal tract.  
Bioavailability of the drug includes the product price, patient compliance, ease of 
administration. Failure to identify promising, problematic drug candidates during the 
discovery and pre-clinical stages of drug development is a significant consequence of 
problems with drug bioavailability. There is a need to develop a comprehensive, 
physiologically-based pharmacokinetic model and computer system capable of predicting 
drug bioavailability and variability in humans that utilizes relatively straightforward input 
parameters. Computer based biopharmaceutical tools are needed for the medical community 
that encounters new therapeutic alternates and use of high throughput drug screening for 
selecting drug candidates. 
Lion Bioscience [Grass, 2003] has patented a pharmacokinetic-based design and 
selection PK tool. The tool can be used to predict absorption of a compound in a mammalian 
system of interest. The PK tool consists of: i) input/output system; ii) physiologic-based 
simulation model of one or more segments of a mammalian system of interest with 
physiological barriers to absorption based on route of administration; iii) simulation engine 
having a differential equation solver and a control statement module. The structure of the PK 
tool is shown in Figure 6.17. The PK tool is a multi-compartment mathematical model. 
Linked components include differential equations for one or more fluid transport, fluid 
absorption, mass transit, mass solvation, mass solubility and mass absorption for one or more 
segments of the human anatomy, input parameter values for the differential equations 
corresponding to physiological parameters and selectively optimized adjustable parameters 
for one or more segments of human anatomy and control statement rules for one or more 
transit, absorption, permeability, solubility, solvation, concentration and mathematical error 
correction for one or more segments of the human anatomy. 
The dose, permeability and solubility data of a drug or compound is received by the 
input/output system. Absorption profile for the compound is generated by application of 
physiological based simulation models. The PK tool also has a database that includes 
physiological based models, simulation model parameters, differential equations for one or 
more of fluid transport, fluid absorption, mass transport, mass solvation, mass absorption for 
different parts of the human anatomy, initial parameter values for the differential equations, 
optimized adjustable parameters, regional correlation parameters, control statement rules for 
transport, absorption, permeation, solvation, mathematical error corrections for different parts 
of human anatomy. The database also has a compartment-flow data structure that is portable 
into and readable by a simulation engine for calculation of rate of absorption, extent of 
absorption, concentration of a compound at a sampling site across physiological barriers in 
different parts of the human anatomy as a function of time. The PK tool can be used to predict 
accurately one or more in vivo pharmacokinetic parameters of a compound in human 
anatomy. The method uses a curve-fitting algorithm to obtain the fit of the model with one or 
more input variables. Then adjustable parameters are generated. These steps are repeated until 
the adjustable parameters are optimized.  
An example of simulation engine is STELLA® program from high performance systems 
Inc. It is an interpretive program that can use three different numerical schemes to evaluate 
differential equations: i) Euler‟s Method; ii) Runge-Kutta 2 or; iii) Runge-Kutta 4. The 
program KINETICATM is another differential equation solving program that can evaluate the 
equations of the model. By translation of the model from a STELLA® readable format to 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
515 
KINETICATM readable format, physiological simulations can be constructed using 
KINETICATM which has various fitting algorithms. The PK tools.  
 
 
8.8. SUMMARY 
 
The mathematical models, experimental trials and computer simulations that are 
undertaken to study the change of concentration of drug or other compounds of interest with 
time in the human physiology is called Pharmacokinetics. Application of pharmacokinetics 
allows for the processes of liberation, absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion to be 
characterized mathematically. The absorption of drug can be affected by 14 different 
methods. The change with time of the concentration of the drug can be by three different 
types as shown in Figure 6.1: i) Slow absorption (A); ii) maxima and rapid bolus (B); iii) 
constant rate delivery (C). Pharmacokinetics studies can be performed by 5 different methods 
including compartment methods. The five different methods are non-compartment method, 
compartment method, bio analytical method, and mass spectrometry and population 
pharmacokinetic methods. 
The factors that affect how a particular drug is distributed throughout the anatomy are: i) 
rate of blood perfusion; ii) permeability of capillary; iii) biological affinity of drug; iv) rate of 
metabolism of drug and; v) rate of renal extraction. Drugs may bind to proteins sometimes. 
The distribution volume is restricted. The kinetics of enzymatic reactions that depleted the 
drug in the tissues can be expected to obey the Michaelis-Menten kinetics. The elimination of 
drug is affected by kidneys in a big manner by enzymatic degradation and formation of water 
soluble drug products. Blood urea nitrogen, BUN, a waste product produced in the liver as the 
end product of protein metabolism is removed from the blood by the kidneys in the 
Bowman‟s capsule along with creatinine, a waste product of creatinine phosphate as energy 
storing molecule produced largely from muscle breakdown.  
The kidney comprises of more than a million nephrons. The nephron is composed of a 
glomerulus, entering and exiting arteriole and a renal tubule. The glomerulus consists of a tuft 
of 20-40 capillary loops protruding into Bowman‟s capsule. The renal tubule has several 
distinct regions which have different functions such as the proximal convoluted tubule, the 
loop of Henle, the distal convoluted tubule and the collecting duct that carries the final urine 
to the renal pelvis and the ureter. Glomerular filtration is the amount of fluid movement from 
the capillaries into the Bowman‟s capsule. Glomerular filtration rate, GFR, is about 125 
ml/min or about 180 liters per day.  
The concept of renal clearance is introduced by performing a mass balance on the drug in 
the human anatomy‟s apparent distribution volume at transient state. The elimination of drug 
in urine is seen to be a first-order process (Eq. 7.1a). The term plasma clearance represents all 
the drug elimination processes of the body. The primary elimination processes are from 
metabolism and GFR. The secondary processes can be from sweat, bile, respiration and feces. 
The rate constant for each secondary process is denoted by  
An overall rate constant is defined that can be used to account for all the primary and 
secondary processes of elimination of drug in human anatomy (Eq. 7.1b). Eq. (7.1) is an 
example of a pharmacokinetic model derived from first principles. Single compartment 
models were developed for:  

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
516 
i)  first-
represents the fraction of dose that is absorbable. The model equation is solved for by 
the method of Laplace transforms. (Eq. 7.5). The concentration of the drug as a 
function of time varies inversely proportional to the apparent distribution volume of 
the drug within the human anatomy and directly proportional to the amount of drug 
that is absorbable and depends on the first order rate constants of absorption and 
elimination. The time where the concentration reaches a maximum is identified (Eq. 
7.7) and the corresponding maximum concentration given by Eq. (7.6). The 
dimensionless concentration of the drug in the plasma as a function of time for 
various values of  is given in Figure 7.2. The maxima vanish at small values of . A 
right tail is seen in the curve.  is the ratio of the lumped rate constant of 
excretionary processes to the rate constant of absorption. A separate model solution 
for the special case when the overall rate constant of the primary and secondary 
elimination processes is equal to the rate constant of absorption (Eq. 7.13) was 
developed.  
ii)  fourth order absorption with elimination. The absorption of ethanol in brain tissue 
with elimination was discussed in Example 7.1. Newton‟s generalized binomial 
series expansion of the negative 0.33 power ponentiated term was used in order to 
obtain a closed form analytical solution. The model solution is given by Eq. (7.26). 
The concentration of ethanol in plasma was plotted in Figure 7.4 for a certain set of 
rate constants. 
(iii) second order absorption with elimination. The model solution was obtained by the 
method of particular integral for first order ODE and the model solution was given 
by Eq. (7.30). The concentration profile exhibited a maximum. The solution for the 
time at which maxima occurs needs numerical solution as the resulting equation in 
transcendental. Eq. (6.39) can be seen to be interplay of the rate of absorption and 
rate of excretion. When the second order absorption processes are rapid and 
excretion is slow, the drug tends to accumulate in the blood plasma. When the rate of 
excretion is rapid the drug concentration tends to drop off rapidly;  
iv)  Michaelis-Menten absorption with elimination. The MM kinetics when integrated 
(Eq. 7.33) results in a transcendental equation. It is not in a form that is readily 
usable. A more usable form of Eq. (7.33) is developed. This was accomplished by 
using Taylor series expansion of dimensionless concentration u in terms of its 
derivatives. The infinite series expression for dimensionless concentration is given 
by (Eq. 7.57). It can be seen that for times t <, the Taylor series expression evaluated 
near the origin up to the third derivative is a reasonable representation of the 
integrated solution. More terms in the Taylor series expression can be added to suit 
the application and the apparent volume, dosage, enzyme concentration, Michaelis 
constant and the desired accuracy level needed as shown above. The single 
compartment model solution was obtained by the method of Laplace transforms. It 
can be seen from Figure 7.7 that the dimensionless drug concentration in the 
compartment goes through a maxima. The curve is convex throughout the absorption 
and elimination processes. The drug gets completely depleted after a said time. The 
curve is asymmetrical with a right skew;  

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
517 
v)  Reactions in circle Absorption with elimination. A system of n simple reactions in 
circle was considered. The concentration profile of the reactants was obtained by the 
method of Laplace transforms. The conditions when subcritical damped oscillations 
can be expected are derived. A model was developed for cases when absorption 
kinetics exhibit subcritical damped oscillations can be expected. The solution was 
developed by the method of Laplace transforms (Eq. 7.75). The solution for 
dimensionless concentration of the drug in single compartment for different values of 
rate constants and dimensionless frequency are shown in Figures 7.10 – Figures 7.14. 
The drug profile reaches a maximum and drops to zero concentration after a said 
time. The fluctuations in concentration depend on the dimensionless frequency 
resulting from the subcritical damped oscillations during absorption. At low 
frequencies the fluctuations are absent. As the frequency is increased the fluctuations 
in concentration are pronounced. The frequency of fluctuations was found to increase 
with increase in frequency of oscillations during absorption.  
 
A two-compartment model for absorption with elimination is shown in Figure 7.15. The 
concentration that has diffused to the tissue region in the human anatomy is also accounted 
for in addition to the concentration of drug in the blood plasma. The model equation for 
concentration of drug in the tissue is found to be an ODE of the second order with constant 
coefficients (7.79). The model solution is given in Eq. (7.81) and obtained by the method of 
complementary function and particular integral. 
Software has been developed for the implementation of the pharmacokinetic models on 
the personal computer. There is a spectrum of capabilities of the software ranging from 
regression fit of experimental data to projection of drug action to preparation of written 
reports/documents. Computer systems and programming languages have been developed that 
are more amenable for the solution of differential equations. Tools are developed to 
implement pharmacokinetic models. However, the current state of the art does not permit 
predictability of the pharmacokinetic state of extravascular administered drugs in a mammal 
from in vitro cell, tissue or compound structure-activity relationship SAR/QSAR data. PK 
tools have been developed. The tool can be used to predict absorption of a compound in a 
mammalian system of interest. The PK tool consists of: i) input/output system; ii) 
physiologic-based simulation model of one or more segments of a mammalian system of 
interest with physiological barriers to absorption based on route of administration; iii) 
simulation engine having a differential equation solver and a control statement module.  
 
 
8.9. FURTHER READING 
 
Ans. Magna. (1501-1576). “Solution to the Cubic Equation”, Renaissance Mathematics, 
Internet Website. 
Cooney, D. O. (1976). Biomedical Engineering Principles, Marcel Dekker, New York, NY. 
Grass, G. M., Leesman, G. D., Norris, D. A., Sinko, P. J. & Wehrli, J. E. (2003). 
“Pharmacokinetic-Based Drug Design Tool and Method”, US Patent 6,542,858, Lion 
Bioscience AG, Heidelberg, DE. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
518 
Henningsson, A., Karlsson, M. O., Vigano, L., Gianni, L., Verweij, J. & Sparreboom, A.. 
(2001). “Mechanism-Based Pharmacokinetic Model for Paclitaxel”, Journal of Clinical 
Oncology, Vol. 19, 20, 4065-4073. 
 
Ikeguchi, E. F. (2002). “Method of Inducing Negative Pressure in the Urinary Collecting 
System and Apparatus Therefor”, US Patent 6,500,158, Columbia University, New York, 
New York. 
Levenspiel, O. (1999). Chemical Reaction Engineering, Third Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY. 
Levet-Trafit, B., Gruyer, M. S., Marjanovic, M. & Chou, R. C. (1996). “Estimation of Oral 
Drug Absorption in Man based on Intestine Permeability in Rats”, Life Sciences, Vol. 58, 
359-363. 
Mickley, H. S., Sherwood, T. K. & Reed, C. E. (1957). Applied Mathematics in Chemical 
Engineering, McGraw Hill Professional, New York, NY. 
Michaelis, L. & Menten, M. L. (1913). “Die Kinetik der Intertinwerkung”, Biochem. Z., Vol. 
49, 333-369. 
Notari, R. E. (1987). Biopharmaceutics and Clinical Pharmacokinetics, Marcel Dekker, 
Fourth Edition, New York, NY. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). Transport Phenomena in Biomedical Engineering: Aritifical Organ 
Design and Development and Tissue Design, McGraw Hill Professional, New York, NY. 
Sharma, K. R. (2003). “Subcritical Damped Oscillatory Kinetics of Simple Reactions in 
Circle”, CHEMCON 2003, Bubanewar, Orissa, India, December. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). On Michaelis Menten Kinetics in Single Compartment 
Pharmacokinetic Models, 102nd AIChE Annual Meeting, Salt Lake City, UT, November, 
7th – 12th. 
Sharma, K. R. (2009). On Michaelis-Menten Kinetics in Single and Multiple Compartment 
Pharmacokinetic Models, 65th SWRM, Southwest Regional Meeting of the American 
Chemical Society, El Paso, TX, November 4th – 7th. 
Sinko, P. J. & Amidon, G. L. (1988). “Characterization of the Oral Absorption of -Lactam 
Antibiotics. I. Cephalosporins: Determination of Intrinsic Membrane Absorption 
Parameters in the Rate Intestine in situ”, Pharmaceutical Res., Vol. 5, 10, 645-650. 
Sinko, P. J., Leesman, G. D. & Amidon, G. L. (1991). “Predicting Fraction Dose Absorbed in 
Humans Using a Macroscopic Mass Balance Approach”, Pharmaceutical Res., Vol. 8., 8, 
979-988. 
Sir Hans A. Krebs. (1953). “Citric Acid Cycle”, Nobel Prize Lecture, http://nobel.se 
Tang, S. & Xiao, Y. (2007). “One-Compartment Model with Michaelis-Menten Elimination 
Kinetics and Therapeutic Window: An Analytical Approach”, J. Pharmacokinet. 
Pharmacodyn., Vol. 34, 807-827. 
Varma, A. & Morbidelli, M. (1997). Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 
Young, J. D. Ramsey, J. C., Blau, G. E., Karbowski, G. E., Nitschke, R. J., Slauter, K. D. & 
Braun, W. H. “Pharmacokinetics of inhaled or Intraperitoneally Administered Styrene in 
Rats”, in Toxicology and Occupational Medicine. Proc. Of 10th Inter-America 
Conference on Toxicology and Occupational Medicine, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands. 
 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
519 
8.10. EXERCISES 
 
Review Questions 
 
1.0. Most of the transient decay curves of concentration of drug at asymptotically zero at 
infinite time. Suppose a patient takes a bolus of drug in summer 2001. Come summer 
2012 according to the model solution there is a finite concentration of drug left in the 
human stomach. Is this going to be the case in real practice ? What is the cause for 
this discrepancy ? 
2.0. What are the similarities between the loop of Henle and a U tube ? 
3.0. Name two elimination routes. 
4.0. The klumped in Eq. (8.1b) was arrived at by assuming that all the elimination routes act 
in series. What if some elimination routes act in series and some in parallel ? 
5.0. What are the differences between sublingual entry and buccal cavity during 
absorption? 
6.0. What are the differences between gastric entry and IV therapy during absorption ? 
7.0. What are the differences between intramuscular therapy and subcutaneous therapy ? 
8.0. What are the differences between Type C and Type A absorption ? 
9.0. How is Type B and Type C absorption different from each other ? 
10.0. Why does the (mass rate in) term in the mass balance equation n a single 
compartment model contain the (kinfusionnanatomy) and the (mass rate reacted) term set 
to zero ? 
11.0. What are the differences between the exit stream flow rate Frenal and the plasma 
flow rate Fplasma quantitatively in the single compartment model. 
 
 
Problems 
 
12.0. Pharmacokinetics of Styrene in Rats 
Styrene is a liquid at room temperature. It is widely used as a monomer in the 
production of polystyrene and HIPS and ABS engineering thermoplastic. Styrene is 
low in acute and chronic toxicity. It is metabolized in rats and humans by oxidation 
of the side chain to yield mandelic and phenylglyoxylic acids among other things that 
are rapidly excreted in the urine. Experimental data obtained from inhalation 
exposure of male Sprague-Dawley rats to different styrene concentrations by Young 
et al. [19] for upto 20 hrs. Rats were removed in groups of three from the exposure 
chambers at selected time intervals up to 20 hrs and immediately decapitated to 
obtain whole heparinized blood for styrene analysis. Samples of epididymal fat, liver, 
and kidney were also obtained from each rat. A group of over 25 rats was removed 
from exposure chamber after 6 hr of exposure. These rats were killed in groups of 3 
at selected time intervals up to 18 hour post exposure to examine the disappearance 
of styrene from blood and tissues. All samples were analyzed for styrene 
concentration by hexane extraction followed by GC/mass spectrometry with selected 
ion monitoring. At each exposure level the styrene concentration in blood increased  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
520 
rapidly and approached a near maximum value at 6 hr. The post exposure blood 
concentration curves revealed a biphasic log-linear shape at low concentrations. The 
data is given below for one styrene concentration. Determine the pharmacokinetic 
parameters that describe the absorption and elimination of styrene.  
13.0. Pharmacokinetic Model for Drug Infusion System that Obey the Special Case of 
Denbigh Scheme of Reactions  
The infusion rates of a certain drug system can be given by the special case of 
Denbigh scheme of reactions [Levenspiel, 1999] as shown in Figure 8.16. The 
absorption process kinetics can be represented as a simple set of reactions with a first 
order rate. These equations are given as follows; 
 
 
1
3
A
A
dn
k
k
n
dt
 
(8.86) 
 
Table 8.2. Styrene Concentration in Plasma 
 
time 
Styrene 
concentration 
(nano gm).lit-1 
0 
1,000 
2 
10,000 
4 
1,000 
6 
200 
8 
25 
12 
0.5 
16 
0.01 
20 
1.5 E-4 
 
 
Figure 8.16. Special Case of Denbigh Scheme of Reactions. 
 
 
 
4
B
B
dn
k n
dt
 
(8.87) 
 
 
 
4
3
5
S
B
A
S
dn
k n
k n
k n
dt
 
(8.88) 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
521 
 
 
 
1
2
R
A
R
dn
k n
k n
dt
 
(8.89) 
 
 
 
2
5
T
R
S
dn
k n
k n
dt
 
(8.90) 
. 
 
 
Show that a single compartment model with elimination for A can be written as.  
 
 
1
3
1
3
plasma
lumped
k
k t
plasma
A
A
A
a
k
dC
fDose
e
C
V
k
k
dt
 
(8.91) 
 
 
14.0. Show that a single compartment model with elimination for species B in Figure 
8.16 can be written as follows; 
 
 
4
4
plasma
lumped
k t
plasma
B
B
B
a
k
fDose
dC
e
C
V
k
dt
 
(8.92) 
 
15.0. Show that a space space model for the kinetics of the 5 species in Figure 8.16 can 
be written as follows; 
 
 
1
3
4
3
4
5
1
2
2
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
A
A
B
B
S
S
R
R
T
T
n
n
k
k
n
n
k
d
n
n
k
k
k
dt n
n
k
k
n
n
k
k
 
(8.93) 
 
 
Show that the characteristic equation can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
3
4
5
2
5
0
k
k
k
k
k
k
 
(8.94) 
 
Obtain the solution of the time decay of the 5 species concentrations. 
16.0. Obtain the eigenvalues of the rate matrix in Eq. (8.93) of Exercise 4.0.  
 (8.95) 
17.0. Show that a single compartment model with elimination for species R in Figure 
8.16 can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
2
R
A
R
dn
k n
k n
dt
 
(8.96) 
 
The intermediate species;  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
522 
 
1
2
1
2
1
(
)
k t
k t
R
k
n
fDose
e
e
k
k
 
(8.97) 
 
 
1
3
1
2
2
1
1
3
2
1
1
3
plasma
lumped
k
k t
plasma
k t
k t
A
A
R
R
a
a
k
fDose
k
fDose
k
dC
e
e
e
C
V
k
k
V
k
k
k
k
dt
 
(8.98) 
 
18.0. Develop a single compartment model for species T in Figure 8.16. 
19.0. Develop a single compartment model for species S in Figure 8.16. 
20.0. Obtain the transfer functions of the single compartment models for 5 different 
species in Figure 8.16. 
21.0. Construct the AR and Phase Angle Bode plots for transfer functions for 5 different 
species in Figure 8.16. 
22.0. Construct the Nyquist diagrams for transfer functions for 5 different species in 
Figure 8.16. 
23.0. What would happen to the concentration of species R in Eq. (7.98) when the rate 
constant k2 = k1.  
 
(Hint: Examine the kinetics again in Eq. (8.89) 
24.0. Area under the Pharmacokinetic Curve 
Some drug pass along with the urine. The rate at which drug accumulates in the urine 
at any given instant in time can be written as; 
 
 
plasma
urine
re a
drug
dm
k V C
dt
 
(8.99) 
 
 
Where murine is the mass of the drug collected in the urine at any given instant in 
time. Show that at infinite time,  
 
 
0..
re
urine
renal
lumped
k
m
Dose
Area
F
k
 
(8.100) 
 
Eq. (8.100) would be a relationship between the total amount of drug collected in the 
urine, the renal clearance and the area under the concentration of the drug vs. time 
curve.  
25.0. Calculate the total amount of species A and species B collected in the urine for the 
scheme of reactions shown in Figure 8.16 using area under the curve from the 
solutions of the single compartment pharmacokinetic model. 
26.0. Calculate the total amount of species R, S and T collected in the urine for the 
scheme of reactions shown in Figure 8.16 using area under the curve from the 
solutions of the single compartment pharmacokinetic model. 
27.0. In Example 8.1 a 4th order rate process was assumed for ethanol oxidation reaction. 
Develop a single compartment pharmacokinetic model assuming a third order rate 
process for ethanol oxidation reaction. 
 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
523 
 
3
inf
anatomy
A
usion anatomy
dn
r
k
n
dt
 
(8.101) 
 
Is the Taylor series expansion needed in order to obtain the closed form analytical 
solution ? 
28.0. Use Lambert function and show that the solution to the Michaelis and Menten 
kinetics in the dimensionless form can be written as follows; 
 
 
1
M
M
u
M
u
M
u
e
Lambert
u
u e
 
(8.102) 
 
29.0. Trambouze Reactions 
The infusion rates of a certain drug system can be given by the Trambouze scheme of 
reactions [[Levenspiel, 1999] as shown in Figure 8.17. The absorption process 
kinetics can be represented as a simple set of kinetic equations as follows; 
 
 
0
1
2
0
1
2
A
A
R
S
A
T
A
dn
k
k
k
n
dt
dn
k
dt
dn
k n
dt
dn
k n
dt
 
(8.103) 
 
Develop a first order pharmacokinetic model for species A in Figrue 8.17 with 
elimination. Obtain the transfer function for the model. 
 
 
Figure 8.17. Trambouze Reactions Scheme.  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
524 
30.0. Construct the AR and Phase angle Bode plots for the species A in the Trambouze 
scheme of reactions as discussed in Exercise 29.0. 
31.0. Develop a first order pharmacokinetic model for species S, R and T in Figure 8.17. 
Obtain the transfer function for the model. 
32.0. Construct the AR and Phase angle Bode plots for transfer functions for species S, R 
and T in the the Trambouze scheme of reactions as discussed in Exercise 29, 31.0. 
33.0. Construct the Nyquist diagrams for transfer functions of species A, S, R and T in 
the Trambouze scheme of reactions in Figure 8.17. 
34.0. 4 Reversible Reactions in Circle 
Consider the scheme of reactions in circle as shown in Figure 8.8. Consider 4 species 
and consider that each of the reaction steps are reversible in nature. Write the 
reaction rate equations for each step. Under what set of reaction rate constants would 
there be subcritical damped oscillatory conditions developed. 
35.0. Second Order Reversible Reaction 
Develop a single compartment pharmacokinetic model with absorption and 
elimination. Assume that the kinetics of absorption is second order and reversible. 
Obtain the output response as a function of time. Is a closed form analytical solution 
possible or a numerical solution needed to solve for the governing equation ? How 
sensitive are the model results to the absorption kinetics rate constant and the 
excretion rate constants ? 
36.0. Michaelis-Menten Kinetics 
Consider the single compartment pharmacokinetic model with absorption and 
elimination for the case when the absorption kinetics obey the Michaelis and Menten 
kinetics as discussed in section 8.3.3. Obtain the model solution at the asymptotic 
limits of high concentration when the reaction rate becomes zeroth order and at the 
asymptic limits of low concentration when the reaction rate becomes first order. How 
do the results from the asymptotic limits compare with the exact solution discussed 
in section 8.3.3. 
37.0. Two Compartment Model 
Develop a two compartment pharmacokinetic model with absorption and elimination 
for case when the absorption kinetics obey the Michaelis and Menten kinetics. Use 
the Taylor series expansions solution as discussed in section 7.3.3 and compare the 
model results with the exact solution for the kinetics. 
38.0. Two Compartment Model at the Asymptotic Limits of High and Low Concentration 
Consider the two compartment pharmacokinetic model with absorption and 
elimination for the case when the absorption kinetics obey the Michaelis and Menten 
kinetics as discussed in section 7.3.3. Obtain the model solution at the asymptotic 
limits of high concentration when the reaction rate becomes zeroth order and at the 
asymptic limits of low concentration when the reaction rate becomes first order. How 
do the results from the asymptotic limits compare with the exact solution discussed 
in section 7.3.3. 
39.0. 3 Reversible Reactions in Circle 
Consider the scheme of reactions in circle as shown in Figure 7.8. Consider 3 species 
and consider that each of the reaction steps are reversible in nature. Write the 
reaction rate equations for each step. Under what set of reaction rate constants would 
there be subcritical damped oscillatory conditions developed. 

Pharmacokinetic Analysis 
 
 
525 
40.0. Dosage Obeys Ramp Function 
The single compartment pharmacokinetic model with absorption and elimination 
discussed in section 7.3.1 was for the case when the dose decays in a monotonic 
exponential manner. Consider that the dosage decay obeys a ramp function such as; 
 
 
1
anatomy
n
fDose
kt  
 
Plot the output response for the Cdrug in the human anatomy as a function of time. 
What happens during the special case when the reate constant k = klumped. 
41.0. Dosage Obeys Impulse Function 
The single compartment pharmacokinetic model with absorption and elimination 
discussed in section 7.3.1 was for the case when the dose decays in a monotonic 
exponential manner. Consider that the dosage decay obeys a impulse function such 
as; 
 
 
0
anatomy
n
fDose
t
 
 
Plot the output response for the Cdrug in the human anatomy as a function of time. 
What is the transfer function of the model. 
42.0. Pharmacokinetic Model for Paclitaxel Distribution 
Anticancer drug paclitaxel in the plasma has been known to [Henningson, 2001] 
cause nonlinear behavior. 23 female and 3 male patients with different cancer types 
such as ovary, breast, bladder, lung and adenocarcinoma were included in the study. 
Patients received 3 hr intraveneous IV infusions of paclitaxel. Concentrations of 
paclitaxel were measured using an isocratic reversed-phase-high-performance liquid 
chromatographic method with UV detection at 230 nm. Develop a single 
compartment pharmacokinetic model that can best describe the concentration of 
paclitaxel in blood plasma as a function of time as given in Table 8.3. 
 
Table 8.3. Observed Concentrations of Paclitaxel 
 
# 
Time (hr) 
Cdrug (mol.lit-1) 
1.0 
0.5 
0.2 
2.0 
2 
0.5 
3.0 
5 
0.2 
4.0 
8 
0.03 
5.0 
10 
0.015 
6.0 
20 
0.003 
7.0 
25 
0.002 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
INSTRUMENTS 
 
 
9.1. PRECISION AND ACCURACY 
 
A modern chemical plant contains a number of sensors and probes that are used to 
measure the relevant process variables, 24 x 7 round the year. The entire process, starting 
with the raw material procurement and metering tanks, reactor vessels, distillation columns 
and other equipment used in different unit operations that are needed for the operation of the 
plant, are instrumented with appropriate sensors. These measurements are often recorded in a 
computer using data acquisition methods. These data are used to devise the control action. 
Several kinds of control action are discussed in earlier chapters.  
The accuracy of the device and precision of the device are two different things. A digital 
readout to the third decimal place may be precise but need not be accurate. Accuracy is the 
margin of error or error bar or confidence interval surrounding the measured value within 
which the true value may lie. The error bar denotes the experimental error associated with the 
instrument and with the personnel used to operate the equipment. For example, a temperature 
reading may be 91.423 0F. There are 5 significant figures used in representation of the 
temperature. The number is precise to 10-3 or 0.001 0F. The accuracy of the reading depends 
on the device used to measure the temperature. If the thermocouple used to measure the 
temperature is good to an accuracy of ± 0.1 0F, for example, then the temperature reading is 
as good as 91.4 ± 0.1 0F.  
 
 
9.2. SENSORS AND PROBES 
 
There can be different kinds of sensors such as magnetic sensors, infrared and visible 
light sensors, temperature and flow sensors, chemical sensors etc. Microprocessor 
technologies are used to make sensors that can be used to measure process variable with 
increased resolution such as less than micron size in space and less than a millisecond in time. 
Bulk machined sensors are obtained by accurate machining of a relatively thick substrate. 
Surface machined sensors are primarily made by accurate machining of a relatively thin 
substrate. Both these technologies use materials and processes borrowed from VLSI  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
528 
technology. The processes of etching, deposition and lithography are sufficient to construct a 
variety of mechanical structures required for specific sensors. A fundamental sensor 
fabrication problem is the development of a suitable fabrication process sequence of the 
above mentioned machining steps. 
 
 
9.3. TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS 
 
Temperature sensors are used to measure temperature at a specific location in the 
chemical reactor or distillation column or other unit operations of interest. There can be 
different types of temperature sensors; 
 
(i) Electronic Temperature Sensors 
(ii) Gas and Liquid Filled Thermometers 
(iii) Bimetallic Thermometer 
 
 
9.3.1. Thermocouples 
 
Thermocouples are built based on a principle called the Seebeck effect. In 1821 T. J. 
Seebeck discovered that when a thermal gradient is imposed on a conductor an electrical 
voltage would be generated. This phenomenon is also called the thermoelectric effect. 
Thermoelectric materials have gone through a renaissance with the emergence of 
nanotechnology. Bismuth Telluride, Bi2Te3 is a commonly used thermoelectric material. The 
Peltier effect is when an electric current is imposed on a conductor a temperature gradient is 
established. Thermocouples can be used to measure temperature. It is a thermoelectric device 
with two dissimilar metals joined so that a potential difference is generated between the 
contact points. This voltage is calibrated against the temperature and temperature backed out 
from the calibration. A leading manufacturer of thermocouples is Omega Inc., Stamford, CT 
makes a variety of thermocouples. They have 100,000 state of the art products for 
measurement and control of temperature, humidity, pressure, strain, force, flow, level, pH and 
conductivity. 
The customer can select the thermocouple based on their application and temperature 
range used and price that they are willing to pay. Chemical resistance of the thermocouple or 
sheath material, abrasion and vibration resistance and installation requirements are other 
factors used in selection of thermocouples. The common temperature-voltage calibrations are 
J, K, T and E. High temperature calibrations R, S, C and GB. The maximum temperature of 
use varies with the diameter of the wire used in the thermocouple. The range of temperatures 
different thermocouple types can be used are: (i) J type in the range of 315 – 760 0C; (ii) K 
type in the range of 590 -1260 0C; (iii) E type in the range of 320 – 870 0C; (iv) T type in the 
range of 150 – 370 0C; (v) N type in the range of 870 – 1260 0C; (vi) CX type in the range of 
400 – 472 0C. The thermocouples are usually sheathed and available in three different types: 
(i) grounded; (ii) ungrounded and; (iii) exposed. In the exposed variety the junction protrudes 
out of the tip of the sheath and is exposed to the surroundings. The time constant is defined as  
 

Instruments 
 
 
529 
the time required by a sensor to reach 63.2% of a step change in temperature under a specified 
set of conditions. About 5 time constants is recommended by Omega Inc., Stamford, CT after 
the set point change to reach 100% of the initial set point.  
Measurement of temperatures below -150 
0C is called cryogenic temperature 
measurement. Extreme temperature ranges of either too low or too high can cause damage to 
the sensors. Sensitivity of the temperature also depends on the temperature. Silicon diode 
chips are used in cryogenic temperature measurements. Infrared pyrometers can be used to 
measure temperature of objects in motion that are difficult to measure. IR rays are emitted 
from a source and focused using a lens onto a detector. The optical energy is converted to 
electrical signal that can be calibrated against the temperature of the object the IR was shined 
upon. This method offers a non-contact means of obtaining the temperature and can be used 
in places where thermocouples cannot be used for some reason. Thermistors can be used to 
measure temperature. It is made up of sintered semiconductor material that undergoes larger 
changes in electrical resistance in response to smaller changes in temperature. The coefficient 
of electrical resistance change with temperature is negative. Thermistors can be used to make 
accurate measurements. They have a limited range of applicability of 0 – 100 0C. 
 
 
9.3.2. Microwave Temperature Sensors 
 
Nuclear reactor in-core temperatures can be measured using: 
 
(a) Thermocouples 
(b) RTDs, resistance temperature detectors 
(c) Thermistors 
 
Some problems were encountered in obtaining the measurements in a radiation 
environment [1]. Errors in measurement can be caused by: 
 
(i) Radiation Heating 
(ii) Degradation of Insulation 
(iii) Transmutation of Constituent Materials 
(iv) Lattice Defects resulting from Elastic Neutron Collisions 
(v) Thermal Conduction in Connecting wires 
 
Absolute errors in temperatures as high as 815 0C at a true temperature of 2490 0C for 
thermocouples have been reported. RTDs, resistance temperature devices suffer moderate 
damage at fast neutron fluencies of 1017 n.cm-2 and gamma exposure of 1010 ergs.gm-1. The 
temperature sensors that are operated can result in errors less than 2 % of the indicated 
reading. Some of the issues in using this technique are: (a) adverse effects upon their life; (b) 
accuracy; (c) sensitivity; (d) precision; (e) time response. Microwave sensors being developed 
are made to respond to temperature variations with the periods of the order of 500 ms to 20 s. 
A Nickel-Chromium microwave temperature sensor is shown in Figure 9.1. 
. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
530 
 
Figure 9.1. Nickel-Chromium Microwave Temperature Sensor. 
 
An oscillator is used to excite a metal cavity at a resonant frequency determined by its 
physical size, geometry or distribution of electromagnetic fields within the cavity and value of 
the effective dielectric constant of the contained medium. Billister [Sharma, 20.10] assumed 
constant permittivity of the medium and for the chosen mode of excitation the resonant 
frequency f0 depends only on the cavity size as given below for a cylindrical cavity; 
 
 
0.5
2
2
,
0
2
nm
U
c
l
f
L
a
 
(9.1) 
 
Where l, m and n are resonant mode designators, L and a(m) the cavity length and radius 
respectively, c is the speed of light (m.s-1), U‟ argument for which the Bessel function 
derivative is zero. The expansion/contraction of the metal microwave cavity as shown in 
Figure 9.1 is used as the basis for the operation of the microwave sensor. The change in the 
resonant frequency is measured and the temperature obtained from the change. The change in 
dimension with temperature for any metal can be given by; 
 
 
2
3
0(1
......)
L
L
T
T
T








 
(9.2) 
 
Where the constants ,  and  can be determined experimentally. Nickel-Chromium 
steel is selected based on their high expansion characteristics. The rest of the waveguide is 
made of OFHC copper. The time constants for the sensor are 500 milliseconds when water is 
poured over the sensor and 30 seconds when immersed in Helium gas. 
Semi-conductor sensors can be used for obtaining force measurements. These are 
transducers that convert mechanical signals into electrical signals. Applications are in 
microphones, pressure sensors and accelerometers. The development of MEMS, 
microelectromechanical sensing system offered stimulus to research in semi-conductor 

Instruments 
 
 
531 
sensors. Micro fabricated devices are micro machined sensors. In micromachining 
technology, advantage is taken of the benefits of semiconductor technology. This addressed 
the manufacturing and performance requirements of the sensor industry. New sensors with 
better capabilities are expected on account of the versatility of semiconducting materials and 
miniaturization of VLSI patterning techniques. Bettered performance-to-cost ratio of the 
emerging devices over conventionally machined devices is expected. A micro machined 
accelerometer is shown in Figure 9.2. The micromechanical sensors with BICMOS 
technology were integrated into the sensor. 
Bulk micro machined sensors are primarily made by accurate machining of a relatively 
thick substrate. Surface micro machined sensors are primarily constructed from stacked thin 
films. Both technologies use materials and processes from VLSI technology. 
 
 
9.4. VISCOSITY MEASUREMENTS  
 
 
9.4.1. Efflux Viscometer 
 
The traditional methods of viscosity measurement of a liquid have changed over time. 
Viscosity used to be measured and reported in terms of seconds needed for the liquid to exit a 
tube. These viscometers are called efflux viscometers or short tube viscometers. The time 
needed for a given volume of fluid to discharge under the forces of gravity through a short 
tube orifice at the base of the instrument is measured. The viscometers are called Redwood in 
England and the Engler in Germany and Saybolt in this country, USA. Viscosity is quoted as 
Redwood or Saybolt seconds. Based on calibration the Saybolt universal for example gives 
the Stokes viscosity as 0..0226t – 1.95/t for fluids with efflux time between 32 and 100 
seconds. It can be seen that for higher viscosity fluids the relationship in the calibration are 
different. Further viscosity changes with temperature and pressure. The relationships of 
viscosity change with temperature and pressure have also been studied by some investigators. 
For reliable measurements during the test it is advisable to not let the conditions of pressure 
and temperature change appreciably. 
 
 
9.4.2. Falling Ball Viscometer (Bird et al., 2007) 
 
Falling ball viscometer is based on Stokes settling of falling spheres in a fluid attaining 
its terminal settling velocity. The terminal settling velocity of the falling sphere in a fluid is 
reached when the forces of gravity is balanced by the forces of buoyancy and drag. Once the 
terminal settling velocity of a sphere is measured using video photography, when the density 
of the solid and fluid, diameter of the solid are known, the Stokes‟ law can be used to 
calculate the viscosity of the fluid. For instance, steel ball bearings are dropped in glycerin to 
check the viscosity of industrial fluids. Nylon balls were allowed to fall through carbopol 
solution to measure the type of fluid, whether, Newtonian or otherwise. The glass container 
carrying the sphere must be wide enough so that the wall effects can be neglected. The 
expression used to calculate the viscosity is the terminal settling velocity of the sphere and 
can be written as: 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
532 
 
Figure 9.2. Micro machined Accelerometer. 
 
 
2
2
(
)
9
p
f
s
r g
V
 
(9.1) 
 
Aspherical particles can also be used to settle. The sphericity of the particle can be used 
in the calculations. Renganathan, Clark and Turton [1989] developed charts for distance 
traveled by accelerating spheres in a fluid prior to attaining terminal settling velocity. The 
change of drag coefficient with Reynolds number is also taken into account. Numerical 
solutions to the equation of motion were obtained and the results presented in easily usable 
charts.  These charts can be used in order to design better sedimentation tanks and design hot 
air balloons. Other moving body viscometers are the Hoeppler viscometer, Irvine-Park 
falling-needle viscometer used for transparent fluids, bubble rise velocity viscometer, falling 
rod viscometer, sliding-plate viscometer, etc.  
 
 
9.4.3. Cone and Plate Viscometer 
 
The liquid whose viscosity needs to be measured is placed between a stationary flat plate 
and an inverted cone whose apex just contact the plate (Figure 9.3). The cone is rotated at a 
known angular velocity,  in a cone and plate viscometer and the torque, Ty required to turn 
the cone is measured. An expression for viscosity of the liquid in terms of the angular 
velocity of rotation of the cone, torque needed and the made by the cone with the plate. This 
is usually about 10.. The expression for the torque required to turn the cone can be shown  
to be: 

Instruments 
 
 
533 
 
Figure 9.3. Side Views of Cone-and Plate Viscometer and Velocity Distribution in Control Volume. 
 
 
3
2
3
y
T
R  
(9.1) 
 
Where,  is the angle made by the cone with the flat plate, R is the radius of the cone,  is 
the viscosity of the liquid.  
 
 
9.4.4. Coutte Viscometer 
 
Coutte viscometer is a member of a class of rotational rheometers. The torque needed to 
rotate a solid object in contact with a fluid is measured and the viscosity deduced from 
derived expression. Modification of Coutte viscometer is the Stabiner viscometer. Here the 
inner cylinder is hollow and allowed to float avoiding bearing friction. Speed and torque 
measurements are made by remote techniques of rotating magnetic field. 
A schematic of a Coutte viscometer is shown in Figure 9.4. The cup holds the fluid 
whose viscosity needs to be measured. The cup is made to rotate with a constant angular 
velocity, o. The revolving viscous liquid caused the suspended bob to turn. A point is 
reached when the torque produced on account of momentum transfer in the liquid becomes 
equal to the product of the torsion constant, kt and the angular displacement of the bob. The 
angular displacement, o, is measured using a mirror mounted on the bob by noting the 
deflection of light beam. A steady tangential annular flow is maintained between two coaxial 
cylinders. The end effects due to the bob height H can be neglected. The equations of 
continuity and momentum for the liquid in tangential flow can be written as follows (Bird, 
Stewart and Lightfoot, 2007): The density and viscosity of the liquid are assumed to remain 
constant and unaffected by the flow. 
 
 
 
(9.2) 
 
 
(
)
1
0
d rv
d
dr
r
dr
 
(9.3) 
 
 
0
p
g
z
 
(9.4) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
534 
 
Figure 9.4. Coutte Viscometer. 
 
The boundary conditions are; 
 
r = R, v = 0. 
(9.5) 
 
 
r =R, v = o 
(9.6) 
 
Integrating Eq. (9.3) twice and solving for the boundary conditions it can be shown that 
the tangential velocity of the fluid can at steady state by; 
 
 
1
o
r
kR
kR
r
v
R
k
k
 
(9.7) 
 
Once the velocity distribution is available, the momentum flux can be estimated as; 
 
 
2
2
2
2
1
r
o
R
k
r
k
 
(9.8) 
 
The torque acting on the inner cylinder is then obtained as; 
 
 
2
2
2
4
1
z
o
t
o
k
T
R H
k
k
 
(9.9) 
 
Thus the measurements of angular velocity of the cup and the angular deflection of the 
bob enable the determination of the viscosity of the liquid. When a critical Reynolds number 

Instruments 
 
 
535 
is reached Taylor vortices form and turbulent flow ensues upon further increasing the 
velocity. 
 
 
9.4.5. Parallel Disk Viscometer 
 
In a parallel disk viscometer, a liquid whose viscosity needs to be measured is placed in 
the gap of thickness B between the two disks of radius R and held in place by surface tension. 
The torque needed to turn the upper disk at an angular velocity of  is measured and the 
lower disk is fixed. Assuming creeping flow, the working equation for obtaining viscosity of 
the liquid can be shown to be: 
 
 
4
2
z
BT
R
 
(9.10) 
 
In a parallel disk compression viscometer, a liquid is allowed to fill completely the region 
between two circular disks of radius R. The bottom disk is fixed. The upper disk is made to 
approach the lower one very slowly with a constant speed v0 starting from an initial height 
H0. The instantaneous height is given by H(t). It can be shown that the force needed to 
maintain the constant velocity is given by, where V is the volume of the liquid sample; 
 
 
2
0
5
3
( )
2
( )
v V
F t
H t
 
(9.11) 
 
The H(t) is measured as a function of time and then the viscosity is determined from: 
 
 
2
2
4
4
1
1
( )
3
o
o
F t
H t
H
R
 
(9.12) 
 
Where Fo is a constant applied force. 
 
 
9.4.6. Rolling Ball Viscometer 
 
Rolling ball viscometer is designed based upon the results from analysis of laminar flow 
in a narrow slit. A Newtonian fluid is in laminar flow in a narrow slit formed by two parallel 
walls a distance 2B apart. Edge effects can be omitted as B << W. Performing a differential 
momentum balance the following expressions for the momentum-flux and velocity 
distributions can be derived: 
 
 
0
L
xz
P
P
x
L
 
(9.13) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
536 
 


2
0
2
(1
( ) )
2
L
x
z
B
P
P
B
v
L




 
(9.14) 
 
Where P = p+gh. 
The rolling ball viscometer is shown in Figure 9.5. A ball is rolled down the walls of a 
cylinder held at an incline angle  with the horizontal. The sector formed between the cross-
sections of the rolling ball and cylinder at any given instant can be shown to be a function of 
the polar angle,  and z. 
 
 
2
2
2
2(
)
2
2(
)
R
R
z
s
R
r
Cos
R
r
 
(9.15) 
 
 
9.4.7. Torsional Oscillatory Viscometer 
 
In a torsional oscillatory viscometer, the fluid is sandwiched between a „cup‟ and „bob‟. 
Sinusoidal oscillations are imposed in the „cup‟ in the tangential direction. This causes the 
suspended bob to oscillate with the same frequency with a different amplitude and phase. The 
torsion wire used to suspend the bob also oscillates at the same frequency and amplitude as 
that of the bob. The ratio of amplitudes between the cup and bob and the phase lag are a 
function of the viscosity of the liquid. Small oscillations are considered. The problem remains 
linear for small oscillation. The solution to the governing equations can be obtained by the 
method of Laplace transforms.  
Newton‟s second law of motion can be applied to the cylindrical bob for the special case 
when the annular space between the cup and bob are evacuated. It can be shown that the 
natural frequency of the system is 
0
k
I  where, I is the moment of inertia of the bob, k is 
the spring constant for the torsion wire. Further, Newton‟s second law of motion can be 
applied to the bob and; 
 
 
2
2
(2
)( )
R
R
r R
v
d
I
k
RL R
r r
r
dt
 
(9.16) 
 
The initial conditions are; 
 
t=0., 
0
R
R  
(9.17). 
 
 
0
R
d
dt
 
(9.18) 
 
The governing equation of motion for fluid and the time and space conditions can be 
written as: 

Instruments 
 
 
537 
 
 
Figure 9.5. Rolling Ball Viscometer. 
 
 
1
(
)
v
rv
t
r r r

















 
(9.19) 
 
t=0, v = 0 
 
r=R, 
R
d
v
R dt  
(9.20) 
 
 
r = R, 
R
d
v
R
dt
 
(9.21) 
 
R(t) is a sinusoidal function of time that caused the forced oscillations of the cup and 
the induced oscillations of the bob. For close clearances between the cup and bob,  is close 
to 1. The variables are made dimensionless and the resulting governing equations solved for 
by the method of complex velocity. It can be shown that from results the amplitude ratio can 
be given by: 
 
 
_
0
0
_
_
2
_
_
_
sinh
(1
)
cosh
R
R
AMi
i
i
M
AMi
M
i
M
 
(9.21) 
 
Where,  
M = 
2
2
(
1)
I
k
R


; 
k
t
I ;
_
0
 
(9.22) 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
538 
 
A=
4
2
(
1)
R L
I
; 
3
2
(
1)
R L
v
kI
 
(9.23) 
 
 
9.4.8. Bubble Viscometer 
 
In bubble viscometers, the time required for air bubble to rise in the fluid is an inverse 
measure the viscosity of the fluid. Calibration is used to standardize the technique in the 
desired viscosity ranges. Viscometers for non-Newtonian fluids are also called rheometers or 
plastometers. Piston cylinder arrangement is used in Norcross viscometers. Material is drawn 
through the clearance between the piston and cylinder by raising the piston periodically.  
 
 
9.4.9. Helical Screw and Other Viscometers 
 
A screw device is used. The measure of the force is the pressure difference resulting from 
rotational motion. A bank of pressure transducers of different sensitivities are used to measure 
viscosity over a wide range. Viscometers that are commercially used are Bohlin rheometer 
system, Brabender Rheotron Coutte viscometer, Brookfield synchro-Lectric viscometer, 
Carri-Med CS rheometer, Centraves rheomat, Fann V-G, Chan 35 direct indicating 
viscometer, Ferranti-Shirley viscometer, Haake Buchler instruments rotovisco system, 
Hercules viscometer, ICI cone-plate device, Mac Michael viscometer, Mooney shearing disk 
viscometer, Nametre rotary B rotational viscometer, Physica rotational viscometer, 
Ravenfield model BS viscometer, Rheometrics family of complex dynamic viscometer, Rheo-
Tech 
International 
viscoelastic 
rheometer, 
Stormer 
viscometer, 
Weissenerberg 
rheogoniometer.  
Controlled stress rheometer can be used to measure the viscoelasticity. Examples are 
Bohlen VOR rheometer, Carri-Med cs Rheometer, Metrovib MVA Mach I, Rank pulse shear 
meter. Capillary viscometers include Ostwald viscometer, Cannon-Fenske viscometer and 
Ubbelohole viscometer. 
 
 
9.5. BIOCHIPS 
 
Gene expression studies can be carried out in biochips. Target biological materials are 
examined using fluorescent probes in glass slides packed with thousands of genes. Disease 
states can be better understood using biochips and cures from better drug design can be 
effected. Microarray industry is expected to grow in a similar fashion to the microprocessor 
revolution. A microarray is an ordered array of microscopic elements in a planar substrate 
that allows for specific binding of gene or gene products. In order to qualify as microarray, 
the analytical device must be ordered, microscopic, planar and specific. Microarrays are 
evolving into nan arrays with the dot size decreasing to the nanoscale. One goal of microarray 
analysis is to eradicate every human disease by the year 2050. Some of the interesting 
applications of biochips lie in the areas of gene expression, drug delivery, genetic screening 
and diagnostics, gene profiling, understanding mechanism of ageing, the study of cancer, etc.  

Instruments 
 
 
539 
The confocal scanning microscope can be used in microarray detection where 
fluorescence scanning is sued. The sample is excited by a laser beam, and fluorescence light 
is emitted from the probe in the sample and can be detected using the difference in 
wavelength of 24 nm between excitation and emitted light beams. Epi-illumination is used in 
the scanning process. The excitation and emitted beams pass through the objective lens to and 
from the sample but in opposite directions. PMT is sued as a detecting element. The 
instrument performance measures are number of lasers and fluorescence channels, detectivity, 
sensitivity, crosstalk, resolution, field size, uniformity, image geometry, throughput and 
superposition of signal sources. High quality surfaces are needed for the preparation of 
microarray samples. An ideal microarray surface has to be dimensional, flat, planar, uniform, 
inert, efficient and accessible. 
Optimal target concentration occurs at a spacing of 1 DNA target molecule per 20 A. The 
probe duplex is approximately 24 A. Optimal probe concentration is the number of probe 
molecules per unit volume of sample that provides the strongest signal in a microarray assay. 
Microarrays of oligonucleotides can be prepared by using delivery or synthesis methods. The 
four steps in process of oligonucleotide synthesis are deprotection, coupling, capping and 
oxidation. The three manufacturing methods used during microarray manufacture are ink jet 
printing, mechanical micro spotting and photolithography. Stepwise coupling efficiency can 
be defined to gauge the quality of microarray synthesis. Linker molecules can be used to 
increase the efficiency of hybridization and DNA attachment at the surface. The time taken 
for ink-jet printing when jets or pins or used are compared against each other. 
Statistical normalization procedures can be used to remove systematic variations in nano 
array experiments that affect the measured gene expression levels. Speed [Sharma, 2010] 
developed a normalization procedure using gene expression data from lipid metabolism in 
mice. He used housekeeping genes that have constant levels of expression across variety of 
conditions. Differentially expressed genes were identified by computing the t statistics. 
Global normalization methods, M vs A plot, paired-slide normalization, within slide 
normalization and multiple-slide normalization methods are discussed. 
 
 
9.6. PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS 
 
Pressure of a process vessel can be measured by different methods such as; 
 
(i) Manometer: Bourdon Tube, U tube, Inclined Tube, Dial Types 
(ii) Piezoelectric Transducers 
(iii) Non-contact Measurements 
 
 
9.6.1. Pressure Transducers 
 
Pressure transducers can be used to convert pressure signals into an analog or digital 
electrical signal. A carefully designed probe can be used to obtain pressure signals. These can 
be converted into analog signals which in turn can be converted into digital signals and stored 
on a desktop computer via analog to digital boards. This process is called data acquisition. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
540 
Strain gauges made of metal foil or semiconductor can be used for obtaining pressure 
measurements. The metal foils are made of copper-nickel alloys. The change in resistance 
with deformation is built on further and calibrated and the pressure measurement is obtained 
indirectly. Semiconductor devices are made of silicon or germanium. Their piezoresistive 
properties are used to obtain pressure from voltage measurements. Electrical resistance is 
measured using Wheatstone bridge circuits. Piezoresistive gauges are bonded to a pressure 
measuring diaphragm using high strength epoxies. The pressure measuring diaphragm is 
circular in shape often times and made of steel/ceramic. 
MEMS, Micro electro mechanical systems have been developed to improve on the 
previous generation of piezoresistive strain gauges. Silicon based MEMS are used in order to 
measure water levels. MEMS based devices have high sensitivity, small size, low signal to 
noise ration, good reproducibility, low hysteresis, etc. Miniaturization techniques have been 
tapped into development of MEMS devices. A small diaphragm can hold thousands of 
miniaturized pressure sensors. Ion implantation techniques are used to molecularly embed 
strain elements. This is used to measure the strain induced by pressure at a higher resolution. 
MEMS devices can be used to make single and differential pressure probes and can be used in 
medical and aerospace applications. Outputs of MEMS are 50 times more than from the metal 
foil based strain gauges. Lower hysteresis effects can be expected on account of the elasticity 
of the silicon strain gauge. 
 
 
9.6.2. Intra-Ocular Pressure Measurements  
 
Intra-ocular pressure, IOP measurements are needed during the diagnosis of Glaucoma. 
Glaucoma, is a disorder of the eye. It is a disease of elevated pressure of intra-ocular fluid. 
Should this condition prevail for sustained periods of time it may lead to the damage of the 
optic nerve. This may lead to blindness. A high rate of false positive and false negatives 
during the diagnosis of glaucoma was found. This is because of the trials and tribulations of 
obtaining a pressure measurement of the intra-ocular fluid in the eye. A number of errors 
creep into the measurement of IOP using a tonometer (K. Renganathan, 1988). He proposed 
that demographic studies of tomographs can be used and tables generated from conditional 
probability. These tabless can be used to interpret the error bars in a single IOP measurement. 
He pointed out that a static measurement of a dynamic quantity may not be sufficient. The 
resulting values would be a better indicator of the occurrence of glaucoma and lead to lower 
false positive and false negatives. 
Applanation tomometers are used to obtain the single IOP measurement after applanation 
of the cornea. Goldman presented the principles of applanation tonometry [Renganathan, 
1988]. Force is applied via a small tonometer tip to a surface of the cornea in order to create a 
flat corneal surface. The area of the tonometer tip is designed (about 3.06 mm2) such that the 
required force in dynes multiplied by 10 is equal to the IOP in mm of Hg. Goldman 
applanation tonometer can either be hand-held or fixed type. The applanation-type tonometer 
is used with the application of anesthesia.  
Another type of tonometer is the Schiotz/plunger type. The plunger type tonometer is 
placed before the eye along the optical axis. When the plunger is released the cornea gets 
flattened to the specified diameter. The force applied is measured and the pressure value is 
backed out. Non-contact methods include blowing an air puff on the eye. This causes the 

Instruments 
 
 
541 
flattening of the cornea. Subsequently the force needed is measured. A high frequency 
tonometer was patented [Hsu, 1990] that can be used to obtain the IOP measurement by non-
contact method without applanation of the eye and without any physical contact with the eye. 
This obviates the need for anesthetics. Neither light nor air need be surged on the eye. 
Continuous data similar to a tomographic record can be obtained using this instrument. A low 
frequency sound wave is emitted towards the eye. Vibrations of the surface of the eye are 
caused. The intensity of the vibration depends on the IOP, intra-ocular pressure. Upon proper 
calibration the IOP can be backed out from the vibration peak. 
 
 
9.7. SUMMARY 
 
Precision is the significant figures used in recording measurements. For example 91.123 
0F has 5 significant figures. The accuracy is the error bar over the reading. For example the 
accuracy of this reading is about ± 0.1 0F. Sensors and probes can be used to obtain 
measurements. The working principle varies from device to device. Thermocouples are built 
on a principle called Seebeck effect and are used to measure temperature. The common 
temperature-voltage calibrations for thermocouples are J, K, T and E each with a specified 
temperature range. Infrared pyrometers. Thermistors, RTDs. Resistance temperature detectors 
are used in temperature measurements. Absolute errors of 815 0C at a true temperature of 
2490 0C lead to the use of microwave temperature sensor as shown in Figure 9.1. 
Expansion/contraction of metal microwave cavity is used as basis for sensing temperature. 
The time constant for the sensor are 50o milliseconds and accuracy is 2%. A MEMS 
microelectromechanical accelerometer is shown in Figure 9.2. 
Different viscometers and their principle operated by are given as follows; 
 
Efflux viscometer 
time needed for a given volume of fluid to discharge 
 
through an orifice 
Falling Ball Viscometer 
Stokes law is used and viscosity calculated from video  
 
clips at terminal settling velocity of the particle 
 
 
Cone and Plate Viscometer  
Torque needed to rotate a cone in a fluid atop a plate 
Coutte Viscometer 
Torque needed to rotate an object in contact with the  
 
fluid 
Parallel Disk Viscometer 
Torque needed to turn the upper disk held in place by  
 
surface tension 
Rolling Ball Viscometer 
uses theory of laminar flow in a narrow slit  
Torsional Oscillatory  
Viscosity calculated from the ratios of amplitudes  
Viscometer 
between the cup and bob and phase lag 
Bubble Viscometer 
Time needed for bubble to rise in a fluid 
Helical Screw Viscometer 
Pressure difference resulting from rotational motion 
 
Gene transcription and translation can be studies using biochips. The glow from the 
microarray slide can be used to obtain accurate kinetic information. Pressure transducers are 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
542 
devices that output a voltage proportional to the applied pressure on the transducer. These can 
be hooked to a computer by data acquisition and analog to digital conversion. Intraocular 
pressure measurement practices have to be improved. This has significance in the diagnosis of 
glaucoma.  
 
 
 
9.8. FURTHER READING  
 
Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E. & Lightfoot, E. N. (2007). Transport Phenomena, Wiley, New 
Jersey. 
Hsu, H. (1990). “Non-Contact High Frequency Tonometer”, US Patent 4,928,697, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH. 
Renganathan, K. Turton, R. & Clark, N. N. (1989). “Accelerating Motion of Geometric and 
Spherical Particles in a Fluid”, Powder Technology, Vol. 58, 4, 279-284.  
Renganathan, K. (1988). “Estimation of Intra-Ocular Pressure using Tomographs”, Original 
Research Proposal, Department of Chemical Engineering, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, WV. 
Sharma, K. R. (2010). Transport Phenomena in Biomedical Engineering: Artificial Organ 
Design and Development and Tissue Engineering, McGraw Hill Professional, New York, 
NY. 
 
 
9.9. EXERCISES 
 
Review Questions 
 
1.0. What are the differences between precision and accuracy? 
2.0. What are the differences between sensor and probe? 
3.0. What are the differences between magnetic sensors and chemical sensors? 
4.0. What are the differences between infrared and visible light sensors? 
5.0. What are flow sensors? 
6.0. How is microprocessor technology a trend setter in increasing resolution in space and 
time? 
7.0. Where are etching and lithography used? 
8.0. What are the differences between electronic and gas and liquid filled thermometers? 
9.0. What is meant by Seebeck effect ? How is it difference from Peltier effect, Dufour 
effect and Sorret effect ? 
10.0. State True or False 
(i) Temperature can be used as a output variable  
(ii) Humidity can be used as a output variable  
(iv) Noise in the input can be used as output variable 
(iv) Disturbance in the input can be used as output variable 
(v) Level in tank can be used as a output variable 
(vi) Material of construction of a reactor can be used as a output variable  
(vii) Pressure can be used as a output variable 

Instruments 
 
 
543 
(viii)Strain can be used as a output variable 
(ix) Force can be used as a output variable 
(x) Flow rate can be used as output variable 
(xi) pH in the reaction medium can be used as output variable 
(xii)Conductivity can be used as output variable 
11.0. Is chemical resistance of sheath material and vibration resistance factors used in 
selection of thermocouples? 
12.0. What are the differences between calibrations of thermocouple types J and K ? 
13.0. What are the differences between calibrations of thermocouple types T and E? 
14.0. What is meant by thermal time constant of the temperature sensor? 
15.0. How can sensors with a response time with a thermal time constant of the order of 
magnitude of a few nanoseconds be prepared? 
16.0. What is the temperature cut-off for cryogenic temperature measurement? 
17.0. What material in construction of cryogenic temperature sensors? 
18.0. What is the advantage of using infrared pyrometers? 
19.0. What are the differences between photoelectric effect and thermoelectric effect? 
20.0. What property of thermistors is used in measurement of temperature? 
21.0. What is the significance of the negative coefficient of electrical resistance change 
with temperature? 
22.0. What are the sources for an absolute error of the magnitude of 8150 C in 
measurement of nuclear reactor in-core temperatures in the range of 24900 C. 
23.0. Name two issues in measurement technique used for obtaining nuclear reactor in-
core temperatures? 
24.0. What are the major components of the Nickel-Chromium microwave temperature 
sensor? 
25.0. What principle is used in design of microwave temperature sensor for obtaining in-
core temperatures in nuclear reactors? 
26.0. Why does the time constant for the microwave sensor increase from 0. 5 second 
when immersed in water to 30 seconds when immersed in Helium? 
27.0. What are the features of a micro machined accelerometer? 
28.0. What feature of the fluid is used to measure viscosity using efflux viscometers? 
29.0. How is Newton‟s law of motion used in design of falling ball viscometer? 
30.0. How is torque calculations used in operation of cone and plate viscometer? 
31.0. How are the equations of continuity and motion used in the operation of Coutte 
viscometer? 
32.0. How is surface tension a consideration in the viscosity calculations in the operation 
of parallel disk viscometer? 
33.0. How is momentum balance used in obtaining the viscosity of a fluid using a rolling 
ball viscometer? 
34.0. How is Newton‟s second law of motion used in design and operation of torsional 
oscillatory viscometer? 
35.0. What are the differences between bubble viscometer and helical screw viscometers? 
36.0. Discuss the main components of a confocal scanning microscope. 
37.0. How is there an optimal target concentration during operation of biochips? 
38.0. Name one non-contact method and one contact method of pressure measurement. 
39.0. What is the advantage of using MEMS device? 

Kal Renganathan Sharma  
544 
40.0. How does the error bar in the IOP, intraocular pressure measurements used in the 
diagnosis of glaucoma? 
41.0. What are the differences between tonometer and tomography? 
42.0. What is meant by applanation tonometry? 
43.0. How Schiotz type tonometry is differs in operation from applanation tonometers? 
44.0. How is air-puff used as a non-contact method of tonometry? 
45.0. How did Renganathan [1988] estimate the true IOP from single tonometry 
measurements? 
46.0. What role does demographics have in the proposal of Renganathan [1988] What is 
the effect of sitting, standing or lying position on the single IOP measurements used 
in the diagnosis of glaucoma? 
47.0. Does tomographic records from MIB, medical information bureau of glaucoma 
patients used in the proposal of Renganathan [1988]? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
 
 
 
NANOROBOTS IN NANOMEDICINE 
 
 
10.1. INTRODUCTION 
 
In the movie, fantastic voyage, that came out in 1966 a group of doctors, are shrunk to 
microscopic size and enter the body of a patient in a submarine like capsule to set him right 
from the inside. In fantastic voyage, a secret agent is recruited by a top-secret organization to 
join the crew of a submarine called Proteus. The crew and submarine are reduced to 
microscopic size and injected into the bloodstream of scientist Jan Benes, who defects to the 
West and goes into a coma after suffering a surgically inaccessible blood clot. They must 
reach the brain with a laser to melt the clot within an hour or the miniaturization effect will 
wear off. However, the voyage is undermined by one of the crew who is a saboteur and is 
prepared to risk everything to stop the mission. The vision of nanomedicine is along the lines 
of this example. Feynman in his after dinner talk [1] alluded to nanomedicines being effective 
solutions to cardiovascular disease. Nanoscopic devices can be swallowed by the patient. 
These devices can me made to act as “mechanical surgeons”. Through the blood vessels the 
device is allowed to travel to the heart and performs a “search” of faulty valves, or clogged 
artery etc. It can be programmed to slice out the faulty valve and repair it or clear up the 
clogged artery.  
Dr. N. Schwalb and O. Solomon [2] at the department of mechanical engineering at 
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology have designed such a tiny submarine robot. The 
device is made capable of crawling through tubes with the diameter of human veins and 
arteries. It is capable of moving with or against the blood stream as needed. It can be used in 
branchytherapy. Prostate and certain other cancers of head and neck can be treated by 
branchytherapy. The product is in the development stage. Tiny robots can be programmed for 
an unlimited amount of time using an external magnetic field. The device is about 1 mm in 
diameter. Another similar device of 1 cm device is developed at Kyoto university [2]. Shaham 
has develoepd a robot for the Mazor company that is used in many hospitals world over for 
performing spinal surgery. Haifa/Ariel robot has a centralized structure with tiny winy arms 
that are used to grab onto the inside of the tubes. Movement of the device results in its 
advancement. Hair like structure allows for travel through miniature sized tubes. 
Nanorobotics is an emerging area. The words nanobots, nanoids, nanomachines, nanites, 
nanomites etc are also used in place of nanorobots. Nanomachines are expected to be used in 
medical technology to destroy cancer cells.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
546 
 
Figure 1.0. „Nanocar‟ with Fullerenes as `wheels‟. 
In Figure 1.0 is shown a `nanocar‟ designed at Rice University [3]. The molecule consists 
of `H‟ shaped `chassis‟. Fullerenes are attached at the four corners and can be viewed as 
`wheels‟. These can be attached to a gold surface. Heating of the surface to 200 0 C leads to 
motion of the molecules back and forth. Fullerene molecules begin to roll. The `axle‟ is 
formed from an alkyne group through a carbon-carbon sigma bond. Rotation is unhindered. 
These were observed using a STM, scanning tunneling microscope. 
According to some experts [4] nanomedicine is a medical modality where nanoparticles 
are used for diagnosis of diseases and subsequent treatment. Nanoparticles can be used as 
therapeutic agents for treatment of eye disorders. One such eye disorder is age related 
macular degeneration. Nanoparticles offer a number of advantages when used as drug. 
Greater capacity to detect diseases and early diagnois can be achieved using nanoparticles. 
Breast tumors and prostate cancer can be cured should they be detected early. Bone cancer 
can be cured using nanotherapeutic products. NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance machines 
can be used to effect breakthroughs in pharmaceutical development. Techniques used in 
nanomedicine can be used for treatment of diseases in a manner with minimization of damage 
to the human anatomy. This is because the disease germs are isolated in the anatomy and 
treatment is effected in a specific manner. Other pharmaceuticals cause damage to other parts 
of the human anatomy. There are ethical issues in use of genetic modification in 
nanomedicine that needs to be addressed in a modern society. Implantable devices 100,000 
times smaller than the head of a pin can be used in disease diagnosis without surgical 
invasion. The diseased cells are eradicated by `pumping‟ medicine to the malignant site. 
Research in nanomedicine is under way in development of diagnostics for rapid monitoring, 
targeted cancer therapies, localized drug delivery, improved cell material interactions, 
scaffolds for tissue engineering and gene delivery systems. 
Experts in Canada have obtained approval of PLGA based nanoparticles for suitable 
therapeutic formulation for clinical use in human anatomy. Degradation products of 
nanoparticles were lactic acid and glycolic acid and are non-toxic. At UCSF, University of  
California, San Francisco a function relationship was developed between bone-tooth complex 
and nanotechnology use. Scientists at Rice University, Houston, TX have approached the 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
547 
FDA, Food and Drug Administration for clinical trials in humans of an interesting 
development in nanomedicine. Trials in mice have proved succesful. Nanoparticles were 
injected into malignant cancer cells. The cells were overheated with lasers. The nanoparticle 
exploded and the malignant cells were destroyed. The surrounding cells were left unharmed. 
These trials have lot of potential in cancer therapy. In tradiational chemotherapy both the 
malignant cells and normal cells get damaged. Nanobots can be used in drug delivery and for 
performing repair work of DNA molecule. Agriculture is expected to benefit from the 
advances made in nanomedicine. Nanoparticles can be used to enhance photosynthesis, 
improve seed germination, soil clean-up and nutrient supply, fertilizer production, food 
processing and fisheries. 
Nanoscale science and engineering pertains to the synthesis, characterization and 
applications of matter with at least one or more dimensions less than 100 nm. Prescott 
introduced by Intel in Pentium IV chip has the dimensions of about 90 nm. Per the Rayleigh 
criterion the minimum resolution size achievable is half the wavelength of light ~ 200 nm. 
Nanotechnology is derived from the Greek words nanos which means dwarf and technologia 
which means a systematic treatment of an art or craft. Nanotechnology is rapidly emerging as 
a distinct discipline in its own right. Vision precedes invention. The movie fantastic voyage 
provided a vision where doctors where shrunk to nanoscopic size and allowed to enter the 
patient‟s anatomy in order to affect the cure. Nanoporous catalysts have been used for years 
now in the chemical industry. Commercial products introduced into the marketplace such as 
clay filled nylon nanocomposite by Toyota corp., clay intercalated polyolefin nanocomposite 
by General Motors, nanocomposite nylon in biomedical applications, chemical resistant 
coating made of nanometer sized particles suspended in epoxy, CNTs, carbon nanotubes, Li-
ion battery electrode of Altair nanotechnologies offer the proof in the pudding about the 
concern of achieving targeted levels of miniaturization. 
Richard Feynman‟s after dinner talk [1] in 1959 provided the vision for storage of 
Encyclopedia within the size of a pin head, method of writing small using ions, focus of 
electrons on a small photoelectric screen, etc. He called for the design and development of 
better electron microscopes with capability to view atoms, better f value lenses, making 
computer that filled several rooms to made small, elements of computer to be made 
submicroscopic. He alluded to a process of evaporation and formation of layered materials 
much like ALD methods used currently. He called for drilling holes, cutting things, soldering 
things, stamping things out, molding different shapes at an infinitesimal level. A pantograph 
can make a smaller pantograph that can make a smaller pantograph and so on and so forth. He 
mused whether atoms can be re-arranged at will. He offered $1000 to the first guy who can 
take the information on the page of a book and put in on the area 1/25,000 smaller in linear 
scale in such a fashion that is can be read using an electron microscope. 
Drexler and Smalley debated whether „molecular assemblers‟ that are devices capable of 
positioning atoms and molecules for precisely defined reactions in any environment is 
possible or not. Smalley objected to the immortality implied by Drexler‟s vision of molecular 
assembler in the form of the „fat fingers problem‟. Chemical and Engineering News carried 
the post of Drexler to Smalley with response from Smalley by three letters with Drexler  
 
countering and Smalley concluding the exchange on „sticky fingers problem‟. Drexler alluded 
to the long term goal of molecular manufacturing. Smalley sought agreement that precision 
picking and placing of individual atoms through the use of „Smalley-fingers‟ is impossibility. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
548 
Computer controlled fingers will be too fat and too sticky for providing the control needed. 
Enzyme and ribosomes were necessary to complete the reactions. He quarreled with the 
vision of self-replicating nanobot. Water is needed to provide the nutrients. Drexler applauded 
Smalley‟s goal of debunking nonsense in nanotechnology. Direct positional control of 
reactants are revolutionary and achievable. 
The chronology of events that mark the rise of nanotechnology as a discipline is shown in 
Table 1.0 in [5] from Feynman‟s talk in 1959 to the nanoethics meeting in 2005. Wide range 
of applications are expected in nanotechnology ranging from solar cells with increased 
photovoltaic efficiency, to sunscreens to GMR, Giga magnetic hardrives. The challenges in 
nanotechnology that need to be overcome are fundamental physical limits to miniaturization, 
thermodynamic stability of nanostructures and existence of a minimum size below which 
spheres tend to agglomerate, layer arrangement and why tubular morphology is preferred to 
spherical morphology in the nanoscale range. Some characterization tools needed in 
nanotechnology are SEM, AFM, SAXS, WAXS, etc. 
 
Nanoparticles in the size range 10 nm – 1000 nm can be used to entrap or encapsulate 
drugs. Nanodrugs can be synthesized on nanodrugs. Nanocapsules contain drug in the cavity 
and is surrounded by polymer layer. Nanopores refer to the pore size in materials that are that 
small. Encapsulated systems can be used in constant rate drug delivery processes. 
Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles can be used in drug delivery applications. Drug 
attachment to nanosystems can be by electrostatic interactions or covalent bonds. The 
absorption of drug can be affected by different methods. Drugs administered through the 
gastrointestinal tract, GI is referred to as enteral route of entry. Parenteral routes refer to all 
other types of drug entry. Drug administration: [6] i) beneath the tongue is by sublingual 
entry; ii) via the mouth is by buccal cavity; iii) through stomach by gastric entry; iv) through 
veins by IV therapy; v) within the muscular by intramuscular therapy; vi) beneath the 
epidermal and dermal skin layers via subcutaneous therapy; vii) within the dermis by 
intradermal therapy; viii) by topical treatment applied to the skin by percutaneous therapy; ix) 
through mouth, nose, pharynz, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, alveolar sacs, alveoli by 
inhalation; x) is introduced into artery by intrarterial route; xi) to cerebrospinal fluid by 
intrathecal route; xii) within the vagina by vaginal route and; xiii) through eye, intraocular 
route. Systemic circulation is reached by the drugs absorbed from the buccal cavity and the 
lower rectum. The splanchnic circulation is arrived at by the drugs absorbed from the 
stomach, intestines, colon and upper rectum.  
Nanopeapods can be grown as shown in [7]. Nanoshells were made out of a coating of 
CoAl2O4 on nanoparticles made of platinum. Nanowires can be made by alternating layers of 
cobolt and platinum by electrodeposition. Nanoropes are affected by allowing strong van der 
Waals forces to take place in extended carbon structures. Nanoshells are made by coating 
drugs on metal nanoparticles. The therapeutic response of these drugs depends on the 
thickness of the coating and capping agent used. Laser irradiation of the nanoshells causes 
release of the drug coat. Magnetic field can also be used to release the drug. These methods 
can be used in cancer therapy. Larger amounts of drugs can be treated on account of the 
higher surface to volume ratios associated with nanoparticles.  
 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
549 
10.2. FULLERENES – DISCOVERY AND SYNTHESIS METHODS 
 
 
Fullerenes, C60, is the third allotropic form of carbon. The Nobel Prize for their discovery 
was awarded in 1996 to Curl, Smalley and Kroto. Soccer ball structured, C60, with a surface 
filled with hexagons and pentagons satisfy the Euler‟s law. Euler‟s law states that no sheet of 
hexagons will close. Pentagons have to be introduced for hexagon sheets to close [4]. 
Stability of C60 requires Euler‟s 12 pentagon closure principle and the chemical stability 
conferred by pentagon non-adjacency. C240, C540, C960 and C1500 can be built with icosahedra 
symmetry. Howard [8] patented the 1st generation combustion synthesis method for fullerene 
production, an advance over the carbon arc method. In the second generation combustion 
synthesis method optimizes the conditions for fullerene formation. A continuous high flow of 
hydrocarbon is burned at low pressure in a three dimensional chamber. Manufacturing plants 
have been constructed in Japan and USA with production capacity of fullerenes at 40 metric 
tons/year. Purity levels is greater than 98%. The reaction chamber consists of a primary zone 
where the initial phase of combustion synthesis is conducted and a secondary zone where 
combustion products with higher exit age distribution do not mix with those with lower exit 
age distribution. Flame control and flame stability is critical in achieving higher throughputs 
of fullerenes. Typical operating parameters include residence time in the primary zone of 2 – 
500 ms, residence time in the secondary zone from 5 ms – 10 s, total equivalence ratio in the 
range of 1.8-4.0, pressure in the range of 10-400 torr and temperature in the range of 1500-
2500 K. It can be seen that the residence time can be short. 
A chemical route has been developed by Scott [9] to synthesize C60. Corannulene is 
synthesized from naphthaleneError! Bookmark not defined. structure. As the rings fuse and 
the sheet forms then it is rolled into soccer ball structure. The challenge is how to stitch up the 
seams between the arms to make the ball. Oligoarenes are transformed into highly strained 
curved Pi surfaces. The molecule needs to bend to effect ring closure on a „soccer ball‟ 
structure at 1000 0 C. 60 carbon ring system can be built by acid catalyzed aldol trimerization 
of ketone. Oligoarene zips up to the soccer ball structure affected by cyclodehydrogenations. 
In order to generate higher yield, supercritical ethanol [10] was used to react with naphthalene 
with ferric chloride as catalyst for 6 hours. The reaction products were subjected to extraction 
with toluene. The reactor temperature range was 31 – 500 0 C, pressure range was 3.8 – 60 
MPa. Smalley patented a process to make fullerenes by tapping into the solar energy [11]. 
The carbon is vaporized by applying focus of solar arrays and conducting the carbon vapor to 
a dark zone for fullerene growth and annealing. Fullerene content of soot deposits collected 
on the inside of the Pyrex tube was analyzed by extraction with toluene. In the electric arc 
process [12] for fullerene production, carbon material is heated using an electric arc between 
two electrodes to form carbon vapor. Fullerene molecules are condensed later and collected as 
soot. Fullerenes are later purified by extraction of soot using a suitable solvent followed by 
evaporation of the solvent to yield the solid fullerene molecules. 
 
 
10.3. SUMMARY OF NANOSTRUCTURING METHODS 
 
Nanostructures can be several kinds: nanowires; nanorods; nanotetrapods; nanoscrystals; 
quantum 
dots; 
nanosheets; 
nanocylinders; 
nanocubes; 
nanograins; 
nanofilaments; 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
550 
nanolamella; 
nanopores; 
nanotrenches; 
nanotunnel; 
nanovoids; 
nanoparticles. 
Nanostructuring methods encompass a wide range of technologies. Nanostructures can either 
be generated by building up from atoms using methods classified as „bottom-up‟ strategy or 
by diminishing of size from nanoparticles using methods grouped under „top-down‟ strategy. 
Bottom-up strategies use self-assembly concepts, are cheap, more scalable, more flexible and 
leads to molecular level engineering. Top down strategy are expensive, less scalable and 
inflexible.  
Sputtering of molecular ions under ultrahigh vacuum is used in the vacuum synthesis 
method of nanostructuirng [13]. Sputtering process is followed by annealing process. 
Crystalline silicon is made to form into isolated quantum wires. Gas evaporation [14] 
technique is a dry process to make ultrafine metallic magnetic powders. Metal is evaporated 
onto a thin film under vacuum conditions. Metal atoms are allowed to impinge on the surface 
of the dispersing medium. Condensation of metal atoms can also be accomplished using 
cooling nozzle. Nanoparticles in the size range of 50 nm – 4 m can be prepared using this 
technique. 
Triangular nanoprisms can be generated by exposure to light [15] at different 
wavelengths between 400 nm – 700 nm. Ostwald ripening concepts are used. Edge lengths 
range from 31-134 nm can be prepared. Nanorods may be produced using condensed phase 
synthesis method [16]. The starting material is heated until the material vaporizes. Later the 
vapor is condensed. Aggregate of nanoparticles are formed. Particles are delivered by 
boundary layer delivery and thermophoresis assisted deposition to form the epitaxial deposit. 
CNTs, carbon nanotubes can also be made using this method. 
Subtractive and additive fabrication methods can be used for nanostructuring operations. 
Lithography, etching, galvanic fabrication processes are subtractive. A series of chemical 
reactions effects removal of the layer in the apertures of the mask and transfer of material into 
gas phase. Lift-off process is employed in the fabrication of IC circuit. Nanotips and nanorods 
can be efficiently formed using conventional CMOS processes. Patterning Iridium oxide 
nanostructures [17] consists of the steps of; i) forming a substrate with first and second 
regions adjacent to each other; ii) growing IrOx structures from a continuous oxide film 
overlying the first region; iii) simultaneously growing IrOx nanostructures from a con-
continuous oxide film overlying the second region; iv) selectively etching area of second 
region; v) lifting off overlying IrOx structures and vi) forming a substrate with nanostructures 
overlying the first region. The second material can be SiOx. 
Dip Pen lithography, SAM,. Self-Assembled Monolayers, hot embossing, nanoimprint 
lithography, electron beam lithography, dry etching, reactive ion etching are techniques that 
can be used to prepare nanostructures with 50 – 70 nm dimensions [18, 19]. Nanomechanical 
techniques include processes that include local transfer of material from a tool onto a 
substrate when either the tool or the substrate is pre-structured. Quantum dots [20] are 
structures where quantum confinement effects are significant. Reproducibility of organized 
arrays of quantum dots is an identified problem. Techniques such as sol gel, solid state 
precipitation, molecular beam epitaxy, chemical vapor deposition, CVD and lithography were 
developed to enhance uniformity, control morphology and determine spatial distribution of 
quantum dots in thick and thin films. QDs can be prepared at low temperatures by 
precipitation from solution by sol-gel methods. Uniformly sized QDs are affected by control 
of nucleation and growth of particles within a lithographically or electrochemically designed 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
551 
template. FCC packing of silica balls can be used as template for melt/infusion of the 
semiconductor InSb. 
Nanostructures of metal oxides can be prepared by sol-gel processing methods. Chemical 
reactions are conducted in solution to produce nanosized particles called „sols‟. The „sols‟ are 
connected into a 3-dimensional network called a gel. Controlled evaporation of liquid phase 
leads to dense porous solids called „xerogel‟ [21]. Surface instabilities and pattern formation 
in polymer thin films can lead to formation of nanostructures [22]. The control of morphology 
of phase separated polymer blends can be result in nanostructures. Kinetic and 
thermodynamic effects during phase separation can be used in preparation of nanostructures 
[23]. Nanostructure can be synthesized by quenching of a partially miscible polymer blend 
below the critical temperature of demixing. Spin coating can be used to prepare polymer film. 
Pattern formation from polymer solvent systems is stage wise. A stage of layered 
morphology, followed by destabilization of layers by capillary instability and surface 
instability leads to nanostructure formation. Cryogenic milling [24] is a top-down approach to 
prepare nanoscale titanium of 100-300 nm size. Several mechanical deformations of large 
grains into ultrafine powder degassing lead to nanopowder with improved characteristics. 
Atomic lithography is the method of choice to generate structures less than 50 nm 
dimensions. A laser beam forms a high intensity optical spot allowing formation of 2-
dimensionsl pattern of atoms on the surface of the substrate [25]. Nanostructured thin film 
nanocomposites can be manufactured using electrodeposition method [26]. Electrodeposition 
can be used to form nanostructured films within the pores of mesoporous silica. Silica is then 
removed from the nanocomposite by dissolution in a suitable etching solvent such as HF, 
hydrogen fluoride. Plasma compaction techniques [27] can be used to form nanoparticles of 
semiconductor compounds resulting in improvements in the figure of merit. Nanoparticles 
can be expected as reaction product after the reactant mixture is subject to sufficient time, 
under prescribed temperature and pressure. Plasma compaction apparatus may comprise of 
two high strength pistons capable of compressive pressure in the range of 100-1000 MPa to a 
sample of nanoparticles that is disposed within a high strength cylinder. The desired level of 
compaction is achieved by varying the applied pressure, applied current and time duration of 
the process.  
In direct write lithography, [28] a tip can be used to pattern a surface and prepare 
polymeric nanostructures. Polymerization is initiated by the tip and pattern is formed. 
Polymer brush nanostructures can be synthesized using ROMP, ring opening metathesis 
polymerization. Edge distances of less than 100 nm is possible and control over feature size, 
shape and inter-feature distance is achievable. Nanofluids [29] comprises of nanoparticles 
dispersed in a suitable solvent. The surface to volume ration is increased by 1000 times. 
Nanofluids are expected to have enhanced thermal conductivity comparable that of copper 
[30]. Materials with pre-defined morphology can be made using self-assembly of block 
copolymer principle [31]. Nanospheres, nanolamellae, nanopores both cylindrical and 
spherical are possible using this approach. Thickness of interfacial layer if 2-30 nm. Using 
PLD, pulse layered deposition, pulses of laser are used to evaporate the starting material [32] 
and then deposited into a substrate to produce thin films with profound nanotechnological 
significance. Typical temperature of evaporation surface is 5000 K, average velocity of atoms 
in vapor flow is 2000 m/s and the expansion front moves at 6000 m/s. Laser intensity is 
optimized for more efficient evaporation of target.  

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
552 
18 different nanostructuring methods were reviewed by Sharma [33]. Three different 
methods of synthesis of CNTs, carbon nanotubes were compared side-side by side [34]. Metal 
nanopowders can be isolated using gravity methods [35,-37]. Rapid quenching of 
nanopowders in a sub atmospheric fluidized bed was discussed [38]. Nanopore filters can be 
used in dialysis [39]. The solid colloid dynamics that can be expected in nanocomposites [40, 
41] was discussed. The modified laws of motion were used in the study. This included long 
range, short range, dissipative and random forces. Smaller the particle size is made the greater 
the tendency for it to agglomerate can be expected. An algorithm to determine the particle 
size distribution and particle shape distribution from data from SAXS [42], small angle x-ray 
scattering device was developed. The size of the nanoparticle is less than the wavelength of 
light that is 400 nm in the visible region. The higher the scattering intensity the better is the 
chances for the detection of the presence of nanoparticles and determination of particle size 
distribution. The quality of the nanoparticulatre morphology for the target topology is 
evaluated using the entropic difference model. Stochastic simulations [43,44] using the 
supercomputer were used to better understand the process of spinodal nucleation and in situ 
laser ablation. The Equation of State, EOS for nanocomposite may be derived. This can be 
used to derive the stability curves for exfoliation of elastomeric nanocomposites. These 
simulations can be used to predict performance properties such as ballistic impact resistance 
[45]. Nanocomposites can be structured to prepare materials with higher thermal conductivity 
compared with copper [46, 47] for use in laptop computer casings and reducing the weight of 
automobiles. Nanoprobes can be devices to measure: (i) cellular signal [48]; (ii) 
nanobolometer to measure chemical plumes [49]; (iii) fiber-optic nanobiosensor [50]; (iv) 
nanoscale temperature distribution [51]. Nanocomposites can be modeled and the glass 
transition temperature of polymer nanocomposites can be estimated [52, 53]. 
 
 
10.4. THERMODYNAMIC STABILITY OF NANOSTRUCTURES 
 
The solvation thermodynamics define the stability of a system. It can be stable, 
metastable or unstable. UCST and LCST define the critical consolute temperatures of two 
phase systems. When a supersaturated system is disturbed the particles begin to nucleate, 
grow and form into stable structures. The process can be arrested sufficiently early to form 
nanosphere. But the free energy of formation of the structure and the surface energy of the 
solid can be equated with each other at equilibrium. For stability the free energy has to be 
negative or equal to zero. From these criteria a minimum stable size of the solid particle 
formed can be calculated. This depends on the solid-liquid surface tension values and other 
parameters of the system. In one system for example, the engineering thermoplastic, ABS, 
Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene, the smallest stable butadiene particle size can be calculated 
as 200 nm from Gibbs free energy. When attempted to be made any smaller the rubber phase 
particles agglomerated with each other to a size larger than 200 nm. It was reported by a 
number of investigators that making the rubber particles smaller and smaller was difficult. 
Maybe if they were made into tubes, they can be made into nanotubes. The free energy and 
surface energy analysis will still hold good. The shape is different in the derivation. 
 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
553 
The four thermodynamically stable forms of Carbon are diamond, graphite, C60, 
Buckmininster Fullerene and Carbon Nanotube. It would be a challenge to extend the 
experience gained in CNT to nanotubes made of other material other than Carbon. It would 
also be interesting to form stable spherical structures in the nanoscale dimensions without 
agglomeration. At what scale would the quantum analysis for atoms be applicable when 
compared with the Newtonian mechanics used to describe macro systems. Nanostructures of 
all the different shapes and Bravais lattices in several materials need to be established. 
Nanostructures that are known today and successfully used in the industry are in the form of 
tubular morphology, gate patterns of oxidation and packing transistors that leave some 
features at the nanoscale dimensions. Why is tubular morphology favored over spherical 
morphology during the formation of carbon nanotubes [54-57]? The layered materials of the 
nanoscale dimension made using Atomic Layer Deposition techniques break no known laws 
of thermodynamics. But one issue is the layer re-arrangement due to Marangoni instability. 
Thermodynamic miscibility of nanocomposites can be calculated from the free energy of 
mixing. 
 
 
S
T
H
G





 
(1) 
 
Where G is the free energy change of mixing the dispersed and continuous systems, S 
is the entropic change of mixing and T is the temperature of the blend. The thermodynamic 
basis to explain miscibility in nanocomposites is similar to the one seems in polymer blends. 
In polymer blends, it is an exothermic heat of mixing as entropic contributions are small for 
such systems. Intramolecular repulsions may be an important factor in realizing exothermic 
heats of mixing. This approach was independently presented by Kambour, Bendler and Bopp 
[58], Brinke, Karasz and MacKnight [59] and Paul and Barlow [60]. An additional condition 
for stability for binary mixtures is given by; 
 
 
0
2
2




i
m
G

 
(2) 
 
Where i is the volume fraction of either component -any suitable measure of the 
concentration can be used. This model further assumes that the heat of mixing is described by 
a van Laar expression [60];  
 
 
Hm = (VA+VB)BAB 
(3) 
 
Where B is the binary interaction energy density. The B parameter is related to the Flory-
Huggins interaction parameter,  by; 
 
 
~
~
~
AB
B
B
A
A
V
V
RT
B






 
(4) 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
554 
B is preferred since its basis is always clearly a unit mixture of volume. The binary 
interaction model for the heat of mixing can be extended to multicomponent mixtures as 
follows: 
 
 




j
i
j
i
ij
m
B
V
H


 
(5) 
 
The sum in Eq. (5) excludes terms with i=j, and obviates double counting of terms with i 
 j. Further, Bij = Bji. The sign of combinatorial entropy, always favors mixing, its value is 
diminished for molecular weights of the order of those for most important polymers. Thus, in 
the limit of high molecular weights, the conditions of miscibility can only be satisfied by a 
negative interaction parameter leasing to the conclusion that exothermic mixing is a 
requirement for miscibility in high molecular weight polymer blends. This is a simple model 
and cannot account for all the issues of mixture thermodynamics. Interaction parameters 
deduced from various phase behavior information are often believed to include other effects 
other than purely enthalpic ones. This way, the LCST (lower critical solution temperature) 
behavior observed in polymer blends can be explained and accounted for quantitatively. 
These theories refine the binary interaction parameter by removing extraneous effects. EOS 
effects do not favor phase stability and the B parameter must be negative to have miscibility 
in high molecular weight blends. Interaction parameters used in the ensuing sections are not 
limited to the Flory-Huggins framework and can be viewed as ones free of equation of state 
effects. 
The role of intramolecular repulsions as a causative factor in driving blend miscibility 
can be seen readily by considering mixtures of copolymers with homopolymers. Reports in 
the literature indicate cases of miscibility involving copolymers when their corresponding 
homopolymers are not miscible. For instance pure Polystyrene and pure polyacrylonitrile are 
not miscible with poly methyl methacrylate. But the copolymer SAN is miscible with PMMA 
over a range of AN compositions. The same is the case with PEMA in place of PMMA. 
Ethylene vinyl acetate, EVA copolymers are miscible with polyvinyl chloride, PVC for a 
range of VA composition in the copolymer. Neither polyethylene nor polyvinyl acetate is 
miscible with PVC. In a similar fashion, Butadiene-Acrylonitrile copolymers are found to be 
miscible with PVC for a range of compositions. Similarly, poly-AMS, alpha methyl styrene, 
AN copolymers are miscible with PMMA and PEMA; poly o-chlorostryene-p-cholorostryene 
copolymers are miscible with PPO, poly pheylene oxide over a range of p-chlorostyrene 
composition. The higher the phase separation temperature, LCST, more negative is the binary 
interaction parameter.  
The dispersion of particles in polymeric materials has proven difficult and frequently 
results in phase segregation and agglomeration. Mackay et al. [61] showed that 
thermodynamically stable dispersion of nanoparticles into a polymeric liquid is enhanced for 
systems where the radius of gyration of the linear polymer is greater than the radius of the 
nanoparticle. Dispersed nanoparticles swell the linear polymer chains, resulting in a polymer 
radius of gyration that grows with the nanoparticle volume fraction. It was proposed that this 
entropically unfavorable process is offset by an enthalpy gain due to an increase in molecular 
contacts at dispersed nanoparticle surfaces as compared with the surfaces of phase-separated  
 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
555 
nanoparticles. Even when the dispersed state is thermodynamically stable, it may be 
inaccessible unless the correct processing strategy is adopted, which is particularly important 
for the case of fullerene dispersion into linear polymers. More on stability is given in Kumar 
and Krishnamoorti [62]. 
 
 
10.5. NANOROBOTS IN NANOMEDICINE 
 
According to Frietas [63] “Nanomedicine is the preservation and improvement of human 
health using molecular tools and molecular knowledge of the human body." Tiny 
magnetically-driven spinning screws were developed by Ishiyama et al. [63,64]. These 
devices were intended to swim along veins and carry drugs to infected tissues or even to 
burrow into tumors and kill them with supply of heat. Untethered microrobot containing 
ferromagnetic particles under forces generated by MRI magnetic fields were tested for travel 
through the human anatomy at the NanoRobotic laboratory at Montreal, Canada [65] in 2003. 
 
 
10.6. MOLECULAR COMPUTING 
 
When the limits of miniaturization of transistor packing and gate width in silicon chips 
are reached where will further increases in microprocessor speed come from? It can come 
from biochemical nanocomputers. The area of DNA computing was flagged off when a 
programmable molecule computing machine composed of enzymes and DNA molecules was 
unveiled in 2003 at Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel. The computer 
operations were at a rate of 330 teraflops. This was 100,000 times faster than the personal 
computer. It was entered into the Guinness Book of World records as the „smallest biological 
computing device‟ ever constructed. Molecular computing is expected to emerge when the 
limits of miniaturization is realized in the silicon chips as the key to further increases in 
computing speed. In 1994 the idea to use DNA, De-oxy-ribonucleic acid molecules to store 
and process information took shape when a scientist from California used DNA in a test tube 
to solve a simple mathematical problem. Designs of DNA computers were drawn up where 
ATP molecules where thrown in to provide a steady supply of energy and fuel. The enzymes 
served as the hardware and the DNA served as the software. The ways in which molecules 
undergo chemical reactions with each other allow simple computer operations to be 
performed as byproduct of the reactions. The devices are programmed by scientists by 
controlling the composition of DNA software. A trillion biomolecular devices can be fitted 
into a single drop of water. Results are analyzed by a method where the length of the DNA 
output molecule is seen, in place of computer monitor. Rudimentary operations are performed 
by this computer. Self-organization of molecules is used in the design of molecular 
computation. This give rise to the field of molecular electronics. Processing in biological 
systems is used to device nanomachines. The autonomous formation of complex 
nanostructures is considered as one type of computation. In a cellular computer, membrane 
proteins are expected as I/O, input/output devices. Living cells are tapped into and the signal 
transduction functions are used for computations.  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
556 
DNA computing was born when Aldeman [66] in 1994 proposed a molecular algorithm to 
solve the Hamiltonian path problem with DNA and solved an instance of a directed graph 
with 7 nodes. The parallelism of DNA molecules was exploited. This offered faster solution 
of NP complete problems. Reactions at the nanoscale are used to perform computations with 
less energy. Several nanofabrication techniques were developed in the area of DNA 
nanotechnology. Scientists are beginning to obtain a better handle on the electric charge 
distribution in DNA and the charge transfer observed in DNA is used in device of novel 
molecular electronic circuits. The automata and the computational model are implemented 
using hairpin formed DNA molecules. The PCR, polymerase chain reaction that is found 
during DNA transcription and translation is tapped into. Autonomous assembly of molecular 
structures is used in devising DNA computation in the solid phase. The number of DNA 
molecules needed for effecting automated molecular computation is calculated. Suyama and 
Yoshida [67] studied the application of DNA computer to biotechnology such as gene 
expression analysis and molecular memory. In aqueous computing, the write once memory is 
represented by double stranded circular DNA. Plasmid contains multiple regions whose 
terminals are flanked by restriction sites. The write operation is implemented by removing a 
particular region using specific restriction enzyme. Head and Yamamura [68] proposed the 
molecular solution with write once memory to obtain solutions of NP complete problems as 
Max-Clique. 
 
 
10.7. MOLECULAR MACHINES 
 
Molecular machines are molecules that can with an appropriate stimulus be temporarily 
lifted out of equilibrium and can return to equilibrium in the observable macroscopic 
properties of the system. There is considerable „debate‟ in the literature as the exact 
constitution and properties of molecular machines. The controlled motions of synthetic 
molecular systems have been harnessed to cause observable macroscopic changes in bulk 
systems as a result of stereo chemical rearrangement at the molecular level. The construction 
of molecular machines has been enabled by: 
 
(i) Progress in Organic Synthesis – Living Free Radical Polymerizations, Asymmetric 
Catalysis, Metal Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reactions, Metathesis 
(ii) Powerful Computational Techniques 
(iii) Advent of Collection of Powerful Single Molecule Analytical Tools 
 
The design of molecular components is constructed in such a fashion as to interact 
favorably with each other and that they can self-organize and self-assemble into larger well 
defined architectures. The advances in spectroscopic techniques are also tapped into. The 
Nobel Prize in 1998 for chemistry went to Pople and Kohn for computing accurately many 
physical and electronic properties that have particular relevance to molecular machines and 
electronics. Self-Assembled Monolayers, SAMs, Langmuir-Blodgett techniques for creation 
of monolayer, soft lithographic techniques, etching the surface, AFM, atomic force  
 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
557 
microscopy, STM, scanning tunneling microscopy, XPS, photoelectron spectroscopy, 
ellipsometry and x-ray reflectometry are used in the manufacture of molecular machines. 
It is difficult to create molecular actuators. The Feynman ratchet can be a violation of the 
second law of thermodynamics and may be a PMM1 or PMM2, perpetual motion machine 1 
or 2. Actuation can be achieved by a „walking mechanism‟ using a class of motor proteins 
called kinesins. The muscle contraction and expansion involves such chemical changes. ATP 
hydrolysis and whip like and sinusoidal movements of cilia and flagella enable them to 
transport cells throughput the body. Based on these observations, molecular machines, 
molecular shuttles, switches, muscles, nanovalves, rotors and surfaces with controlled 
wettability are being created. Example chemicals involved in such constructs are rotaxane 
molecules. Calixarenes in the cone formation has an interval cavity able to host guest 
molecules of complementary size. The inclusion of guests in solid state has been studies in 
apolar medium. The solvation phenomena are of interest. The host-guest association is 
governed by coulomb attractions such as: i) Steric; ii) Entropic; iii) Solvation. Rotaxane 
synthesis involves calixarene wheels. During the synthesis of pseudorotaxanes, calixarene 
derivatives as host for QUATS, triphenylureidocalixarene derivative. The structure of 
pseudorotaxene can be studied using X-ray techniques.  
 
Molecular shuttle consists of a ring component that is mechanically interlocked onto a 
dumbbell shaped component and is able to shuttle between two recognition sites as a result of 
thermal activation by non-covalent interactions. Molecular switches are compounds that can 
be externally stimulated to exist in either of two observably different states or conformers. 
Molecular muscle is able to expand and contract reversibly upon external stimulation. 
Molecular valves can be used to trap and release other molecules as a result of controlled 
molecular motions. Molecular rotors undergo controlled rotational motion of a rotor until 
relative to a stator which is controlled via an axle. The surfaces with controlled wettability 
can be stimulated to be hydrophobic or hydrophilic. Mechanical movements of tetracationic 
cyclophane CBPQT along a diaminobenzene containing thread that is tethered to a Gold 
surface can be observed. A two electron reduction of the CBPQT ring erases the favorable 
binding interactions that exist along the ring host and diaminobenzene guest with an electron 
transfer rate of 80 Hz. The oxidative electron transfer rate is 1100 Hz. Reversible redox-
controllable mechanical motions of the interlocked molecule on a gold surface can be 
detected. A contracted structure can be generated by contraction of bistable dimmer by 
quantitative demetalation of the cuprous ions using KCN followed by treatment with 
Zn(NO3)2.  
Technologists are developing molecular nanovalves, irreversible thin film regulators, 
light regulated azobenzene and coumarin valves, supramolecular gatekeepers, reversible 
nanovalves, polymeric valves, biological nanovalves, etc. Rotation is one of the three 
fundamental molecular motions: a) translation; b) rotation and; c) vibration. Scientists at 
UCLA, university of California at Los Angeles, have demonstrated controlled unidirectional 
rotation of a tryptycene rotor unit relative to a helacine stator that is connected by a carbon-
carbon single bond axle using phosgene as chemical fuel. The difluorophenylene rotor has 
been used as molecular compass and gyroscope.  
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
558 
10.8. SUPRAMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY 
 
These are highly complex chemical systems made form components interacting through 
non-covalent intermolecular forces. It occurs in the interface of biology and physics [69] 
Strands of nucleic acids allow for huge amounts of information to be stored, retrieved and 
processed via weak hydrogen bonds. The principles in molecular information in chemistry 
were developed from these observations. Interactional algorithms were developed through 
molecular recognition events based on well-defined interaction patterns such as hydrogen 
bonding arrays, sequences of donor and acceptor groups and ion coordination sites. The goal 
here is to gain progressive control over complex spatio structural and temporal dynamic 
features of matter through self-organization. The design and investigation of pre-organized 
molecular receptors that are capable of binding specific substrates with high efficiency and 
selectivity are undertaken. The three themes are: i) Molecular Recognition; ii) Self-
Organization and iii) Adaptation and Evolution. 
Supramolecular materials offers alternative to top-down miniaturization and bottom-up 
nanofabrication. Self-fabrication is effected by controlled assembly of ordered, fully 
integrated and connected operational systems by hierarchical growth. The field of 
adaptive/evolutive chemistry emerged. Adaptive chemistry implies a selection and growth 
under time reversibility. The era of Darwinistic chemistry has dawned. The goal here is to 
merge design and selection in self-organization to perform self-design in which function 
driven selection among suitably instructed dynamic species generates the optimal organized 
and functional entity in a post Darwinian process. Chemical „learning‟ systems cannot be 
instructed but can be trained. Time is irreversible. The passage is from closed systems to open 
and coupled systems that are connected spatially and temporally to their surroundings. 
Investigators are progressively unravelling the complexification of matter through self-
organization. 
Molecular computing is expected to emerge when the limits of miniaturization is realized 
in silicon chips as the key to further increases in computing speed. DNA molecules and 
enzymes and biochemical reactions can be used to realize faster operations compared even 
with a transistors packed silicon chip microprocessor. They can be used to strore and process 
information. DNA computing started with the molecular algorithm to solve the Hamiltonian 
path problem. NP complete problems can be treated. Molecular machines can be devised 
using the better understanding of stereochemistry. Construction of molecular machines is 
driven by: i) progress in organic synthesis; ii) powerful computation techniques; iii) advent of 
single molecule analytical tools. Well defined architectures can be obtained by self-assembly. 
SAMS, Langmuir-Blodgett films, soft lithography, AFM, STM, XPS etc. can be used to 
manufacture molecular machines. When designing molecular architectures the second law of 
thermodynamics should not be violated. Rotaxane molecules are used to create molecular 
shuttles, molecular switches, molecular nanovalves, molecular muscles, molecular rotors and 
surfaces with controlled wettability. Supramoelcular materials offers alternative to top-down 
miniaturization and bottom-up fabrication. Self-organization principles hold the key. 
Gene expression studies can be carried out in biochips. Target biological materials are 
examined using fluorescent probes in glass slides packed with thousands of genes. Disease 
states can be better understood using biochips and cures from better drug design can be 
effected. Microarray industry is expected to grow in a similar fashion to the microprocessor 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
559 
revolution. A microarray is an ordered array of microscopic elements in a planar substrate 
that allows for specific binding of gene or gene products. In order to qualify as microarray, 
the analytical device must be ordered, microscopic, planar and specific. Microarrays are 
evolving into nanoarrays with the dot size decreasing to the nanoscale. One goal of 
microarray analysis is to eradicate every human disease by the year 2050. Some of the 
interesting applications of biochips lie in the areas of gene expression, drug delivery, genetic 
screening and diagnostics, gene profiling, understanding mechanism of aging, the study of 
cancer, etc.  
The confocal scanning microscope can be used in microarray detection where 
fluorescence scanning is used. The sample is excited by a laser beam, and fluorescence light 
is emitted from the probe in the sample and can be detected using the difference in 
wavelength of 24 nm between excitation and emitted light beams. Epi-illumination is used in 
the scanning process. The excitation and emitted beams pass through the objective lens to and 
from the sample but in opposite directions. PMT is sued as a detecting element. The 
instrument performance measures are number of lasers and fluorescence channels, detectivity, 
sensitivity, crosstalk, resolution, field size, uniformity, image geometry, throughput and 
superposition of signal sources. High quality surfaces are needed for the preparation of 
microarray samples. An ideal microarray surface has to be dimensional, flat, planar, uniform, 
inert, efficient and accessible. 
Optimal target concentration occurs at a spacing of 1 DNA target molecule per 20 A. The 
probe duplex is approximately 24 A. Optimal probe concentration is the number of probe 
molecules per unit volume of sample that provides the strongest signal in a microarray assay. 
Microarrays of oligonucleotides can be prepared by using delivery or synthesis methods. The 
four steps in process of oligonucleotide synthesis are deprotection, coupling, capping and 
oxidation. The three manufacturing methods used during microarray manufacture are ink jet 
printing, mechanical micro spotting and photolithography. Stepwise coupling efficiency can 
be defined to gauge the quality of microarray synthesis. Linker molecules can be used to 
increase the efficiency of hybridization and DNA attachment at the surface. The time taken 
for ink-jet printing when jets or pins or used are compared against each other. 
Statistical normalization procedures can be used to remove systematic variations in 
nanoarray experiments that affect the measured gene expression levels. Speed developed a 
normalization procedure using gene expression data from lipid metabolism in mice. He used 
housekeeping genes that have constant levels of expression across variety of conditions. 
Differentially expressed genes were identified by computing the t statistics. Global 
normalization methods, M vs a plot, paired-slide normalization, within slide normalization 
and multiple-slide normalization methods are discussed. 
Sequence alignment [69] can be used to develop cures for autoimmune disorders, in 
phylogenetic tree construction, identify polypeptide microstructure, in shot gun sequencing, 
during drug design, in protein secondary structure determination, in protein folding, clone 
analysis, protein classification, etc. Optimal global alignment and local alignment can be 
obtained using dynamic programming. Speedups can be achieved using greedy algorithm for 
nearly aligned sequences. Dynamic array can be used to cut the space required form O(n2). 
PAM and Blossum matrices provide different penalty that are specific to the sequences 
aligned. Sharma discussed X-drop algorithm, banded diagonal methods, sparse tables, 
staircase tables, super sequence, inverse dynamic programming, stability of alignment, suffix 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
560 
tree construction, generalized suffix tree procedures, and the advantages of using them. String 
algorithms can be used find patterns P in a text T. 19 such algorithms were discussed.  
Markov models are discussed for varying orders. Three questions in HMM, i.e, the 
evaluation, the decoding and the learning were reviewed. The speed up obtained using the 
forward algorithm, backward algorithm and Viterbi algorithm were clarified. Gene finding 
algorithms were touched upon. Advances made in protein secondary structure prediction were 
traced from Chou and Fasman rules, to Qian and Sejnowski‟s neural networks, to the PHD 
server of Rost and Sander where evolutionary information was used to effect improvement in 
prediction accuracy. HMMs, DAG-RNNs. BRNN, can be used for protein secondary 
structure prediction.  
Role of polymer nanoparticle in drug delivery applications were discussed. Some of the 
challenges in drug delivery are continuous release of agents over extended periods of time, 
local delivery of agents at pre-determined rates to local sites such as tumors, improved ease of 
administration. Polymer drug delivery systems can be nanoscopic. Self-assembled liposomes 
and micelles can accomplish the task. Drugs can be encapsulated in the polymer particles. 
Nanostructuring operations need to be compatible with the drugs. Nanoencapsulation of 
living cells can be effects by polymer precipitation, gelling and complexing polymer. 
 
 
10.9. CNRS COLLECTIVES OF NANOROBOTS 
 
Medical applications of nanorobots include: (i) cardiovascular health; (ii) immune system 
function; (iii) cancer and diabetes; (iv) drug delivery mechanisms and diagnostics. CNRs are 
a new genertion of self-organizing collectives of intelligent nanorobots. This new technology 
includes procedures for interactions between obbjects with their environment resulting in 
solutions of critical problems at the nanoscopic level. Social intelligence and self-organization 
are used in the development of the technology. Self-organizing entities are constructed from 
analogies from living species. Models on social intelligence are developed from observations 
of behaviors of insects. Chemical markers such as pheromones are used by individual 
organism to communicate a social goal. Interoperation of microbes and pathogens with the 
immune system of the organism leads to life/death of host. Intracellular models have been 
developed that can be used to show how proteins interact and how the functions governed by 
protein signals come about.  
Biomimetic materials are designed to mimic a natural biological material. For example, 
the third mercaptus bone in horse‟s leg is used as target for design of aerospace materials. 
Worm micelles are prepared that resemble linear proteins found in cytoskeleton filament and 
collagen fibers. Copolymers with block microstructure have been found to self-assemble and 
organize into periodic nanophases. Molecular shape is found to be a function of fraction of 
hydrophilic fraction. Polymerosomes or vesicles can be formed by self-assembly of PEO-PBd 
in water. Lipid vesicles are formed into different morphologies such as starfish, tube, pear and 
string of pearl shapes. Worms with less than 10 nm diameters and membrane with 3 nm 
thicknesses have been observed. Stability of protein folding can be studied using self-
assembly. Many biological membrane processes can be mimicked by synthetic polymer 
vesicles. 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
561 
The equilibrium kinetics of self-assembly reactions was discussed. A cooperativity 
parameter is defined along with the equilibrium rate constant. Example system used to 
illustrate the mathematical treatment is tropomyosin. Aminoacids in position 1 and 4 are 
hydrophobic and in positions 2,3,5,6,7 are hydrophilic. Banding on helix structures comes 
about. 
One property if biomaterials worthy of mimicking is capable of self-repair. Biomimetic 
mechanisms are stored in databases. Hydroxyapetite and collagen were used to prepare bone 
like nanocomposite. Howship‟s lacunae are cavities created by osteoclastic bone resorption. 
Hydroxyapetite form on Langmuir Blodgett monolayers. There is interfacial interaction 
between hydroxyapetite and collagen. Substitution process of composites to new bone occurs 
in stages similar to autogeneous bone transplantation: a) erosion of body fluid and formation 
of composite debris; b) phagocytosis of debris; c) resorption of composite and d) induction of 
osteoblast to the resorption lacunae. Reconstruction of a critical bone defect in beagles‟ tibia 
was examined for possible clinical use. The iridescence of insects and structural colors of 
plants are not well understood. Optical thickness of a dielectric stack layer of alternating 
thickness and wave length of maximum constructive interference was quantitated. Two 
lycaenid butterflies were studied for development of iridescence. The mechanism of bio 
mineralization in mollusks has been studied by investigation of „flat pearls‟. Rhombohedral 
calcite morphology, spherulite calcite morphology and aragonite needles are formed under 
different conditions. Argonite tablet growth was studied using AFM. Crystal CdS with rock 
salt morphology was synthesized in films made up of PEO.  
Efficient film formation needs clean substrate. Polyion multilayer films are characterized 
by SAXR, small angle x-ray spectroscopy. Quartz crystal microbalance is used to measure 
mass charges in nanogram quantity materials. Mechanism of PMF film formation was studied 
by using AFM. Polysaccharide containing PMF biopolymers have been prepared. Adsorption 
kinetics depends on ionic strength. A polymer/biopolymer hybrid such as DNA and PAH 
were formed into a film containing alternating layers. Film containing streptavidin, glucose 
isomerase etc. were discussed. Assembly of thin films is by sequential adsorption. 3 
dimensional controls of film composition and properties are discussed.  
Protein scaffold/biomimetic membrane material was discussed. Membrane material is a 
complex fluid made up of a mixture of a lipid, polymer amphiphile, a co-surfactant. It 
undergoes thermreversible phase changes and exists as liquid below a certain threshold 
temperature and liquid crystalline gel above that temperature. Biomimetic nanostructures are 
used to examine soft tissue cellular wounds and dry sensing and development and nerve 
regeneration. Smart materials are developed that undergo a property change in response to 
environmental stimuli. These materials are used in drug delivery systems. Magnetic pigment 
used in magnetite memory storage devices with a maghemite phase of size ranging between 
300-350 nm using biomimetic method was patented by CSIR, India. Longitudinal recording 
requires acicular shape. Molecular identification can be prepared using biomimetic sensors. 
High specificity requirements lead to development of Raman spectroscope. The surface 
enhanced Raman scattering SERS nanostructure is shown in Figure 7.2. Nanoparticles can be 
photogenerated.  
Development of the new generation of technology of CNRs still have to cross a few 
technical hurdles. These hurdles include: (i) building these nanorobots; (ii) connect  
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
562 
nanodevices; (iii) develop power source; (iv) develop nanorobotic computation; (v) develop 
nanorobotic functionality; (vi) develop communication systems; (vii) develop multi-
functionality; (viii) develop systems in which nanorobots work together; (ix) identify distinct 
nanorobotic collective behaviors; (x) activate nanorobotic functionality; (xi) activate 
computer programming; (xii) develop external tracking; (xiii) develop external activation; 
(xiii) use artificial intelligence; (xiv) reorganize nanorobot aggregates; (xv) develop sensors; 
(xvi) organize competing, cooperating teams of nanorobots; (xvii) emulate biological 
processes. 
Recent developments in collective robotics have derived inspiration from complex real 
life phenomena. Examples of complex social behavior include flocking, herding and 
schooling. Ant algorithms is the state of the art in emulation of natural processes. Another 
system worthy of emulation is the immunological defense system of human anatomy. 
Evolutionary computing is a field that where emulation of biological processes of evolution is 
a high priority. Generic algorithms are developed from emulation of generational behavior of 
polpulations. Inspiration can be derived from the “bee-hive” operation. Specialist roles and 
coordination of tasks are examples of what came from emulation. Self-organizing models are 
used to aggregate, reaggregate collection of robots.  
Nanorobots have characteristics lengths of 100 nm – 1 m. A WBC, white blood cell 
with 100,000 molecules fits into this domain. At this size, the scrutiny is mesoscopic in nature 
and note molecular or macroscopic. Organic material have been combined in creative ways 
and novel bacterial and viral organisms have been created. This is sort of artificial Darwinian 
system. Toxicity of an virus can be toggled off by use of recombinant DNA technology. 
Synthetic biology techniques can be used to engineer a new species. Biomimetic chemisty is 
used to synthesize organic molecules that emulate biological behavior. DNA and RNA parts 
and raw aminoacids are combined and novel genetic structures are created. Reverse 
engineering can be used in observation of natural protein behaviors emanating from specific 
gene sequences. Gene targeting techniques may used for this purpose. Natural proteins can be 
engineered from customized specific gene sequences. Small molecule ligangs can be allowed 
to bind to proteins resulting in change of the protein function. Protein-protein interactions are 
disrupted. At Harvard university, an autonomous molecular computer is arranged that 
performs specific cellular functions. Biomolecular computer can be used in diagnosis of 
disease and administration of drug on demand. 
A CNR, collective nanorobots system was patented by Solomon Research [70] in 2008. 
Drugs are allowed to be delivered and regulated more effectively to precise targets. These 
methods are used in cardiovascular applications, diabetes treatment and intracellular cancer 
therapies. CNRs can be used to cauterize wounds in patients with emergency trauma. CNRs 
can be applied to nerve cells to block pain signals. CNRs configure into synthetic molecules 
and are activated and modulated to control pain from specific nerve fragments. Enamel repair 
and repair of nerve damage to stop bleeding in dental applications are also possible. CNRs are 
used in neurosurgery. They can be used to peform complex regulatory functions that involve 
feedback in dynamic neural processes. It can be used in dermatological applications as well. 
Appearance of ageing can be reversed by use of self-repairing property of cells. Cellular 
regeneration processes are accelerated to promote healing. In the patent [70] is described a 
method for mapping the human anatomy. Tracking the nanorobots are by tags. Mapping of 
the architecture of the organism is affected on the molecular level. Specific tissue and cell 
types can be explored. CNRs congregate at specific tissue sites and wait for information about 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
563 
mission parameters with new goals. CNR teams are made to cluster at specific location prior 
to allowing the performance of an organized function to solve a key problem and then return 
to the location when the mission is completed. Pathways of functional behaviors within 
intercellular mechanisms are traced. Cellular differentiation are mapped and compared with 
the results from a bioinformatic sequence with the general human anatomy. Variations can be 
noted. CNR team is places at a specific location. Then they are broken into clusters and 
allowed to migrate top specific locations by several mobility patterns. The mapping process is 
recorded. The study of ageing process for example results in differences in state of cells at 
various tissues from specific organs. CNR is integrated with the external computer analysis. 
NEHW, nano evolvable hardware mechanisms are used.  
CNRs are used in insulin regulation. The pancreas produces insulin for regulation of 
glucose in the blood flow. Islets of Langerhans are the insulin secreting part of pancreas. Each 
of the million islets contain about 1000 cells that are structured in clusters. Pancreatic islets 
operate under a mechanism of amyloidogenesis in order to create amyloid polypeptides. 4 
types of cells are created at the islets” (i) alpha cells were production and inhibition of 
glucagen takes place; (ii) Delta cells were somatostatin is produced; (iii) insulin and; (iv) 
glucagons. Polypeptides are secreted by pancreatic cells that ends up supressing the secretion 
and stimulating gastric secretion. Paracrine feedback system is created by activation of beta 
cells by insulin and inhibition of alpha cells, by activation of beta and delta cells by glucagon, 
inhibition of alpha and beta cells by somatostatin. Self-organizing system taps into paracrine 
and autocrine communication between the islets. The signals are affected by chemical 
messengers. Obesity and Type II diabetes can be found when too much fat and carbohydrate 
are taken in the diet. CNRs can be used to regulate insulin. CNRs go beyond the paracrine 
and autocrine mechanims of communication. CNRs can be used to emulate proper 
functioning of iselts of Langerhans. A glycation process is conducted by CNRs whereby the 
blood sugar is treated with insulin. CNRs can be organized into an artificial implantable 
device that can be used in emulation of workings of a pancreas. Self-regulating pump is 
constructed. The pancreas-like device is exteral and can be adorned. 
 
 
10.10. DEVELOPMENTS IN NANOBOT APPLICATIONS 
 
A nanobot to measure surface properties was patented [71]. The nanobot unit has a 
manipulation unit and an end effector. The end effector can be a sensor or made to move as 
close as possible to the surface of interest. The drive device has piezoelectric drives. The 
resolution of the measurement can be in the nanometer range and the actual measurement in 
the centimeter range. The nanobot is made sensitive in all directions, in multiple dimensions. 
It can operate under vacuum. Surface roughness can be measured using nanobots. 
Geophysical formation of hydrocarbons at deeper portions of the earth‟s mantle can be 
studied using nanobots [72]. Nanobots of the size of less than 500 nm are inserted into the 
formation region. The nanobots are allowed to propel through the formation. Fluids and 
conditions surrounding the nanobots are studied using a computer in the surface of the earth. 
Communication between the nanobots and the computer on the surface is via a sereis of radio 
frequency receivers and transmitters located at the wellbore. A 3 dimensional map of the 
formation is developed on the remote computer. Pockets of hydrocarbons and their territories 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
564 
are marked and shown clearly in the map. The untethered robots are positioned within the 
geophysical formation. The body of the nanobot is made of CNT, carbon nanotubes that are 
capable of operations at 300 F. Kalman filters can be used to filter out the random white noise 
from signals from seismic exploration. 
A patent was developed [73] for minimally invasive procedure by means of DPR, 
Dynamic Physical Rendering. Use of “intelligent”, “autonomous” particles were made. An 
interventional aid is formed with the aid of self-organizing nanorobots. These nanobots were 
made of c atoms. C-arm angiography are used to monitor DPR procedures. A 3 dimensional 
image data record on target region is obtained. The determined form was converted to a 
readable and executable program code for the catoms of the nanorobots. The determined form 
was transferred to a storage unit. The program code was executed in order to achieve self-
organization in the unstructured catoms that were introduced in the target region. The 
execution of the program was triggered by a timer or position sensor. The intervention aid is 
used as a endovascular target region. Nanocrystal with motor properties was patented [74]. 
Reciprocating motor is formed by a substrate, atom reservoir, nanoparticle ram and 
nanolever. The nanoparticle ram is contacted by the nanolever resulting in movement of 
atoms between the reservoir and the ram. Substrate and nanolever are made of MWNTs, 
multi-walled nanotubes made of Iridium. The substrate used was a silicon chip. 
Nanoscale oscillator [75] was patented by Sea Gate technology, Scots Valley, CA. A 
microwave output is generated by application of a DC current that is allowed to pass through 
layers of magnetic structure separated by nanometer dimensions. Spin Momentum Transfer, 
SMT is a phenomena realized to exist in 1989. It can be used in MRAM devices. Phase-
locked microwave spin transfer is the next advance of the technology. The electric current 
produced is in the GHz spectrum. The local magnetic field source is used in the application of 
a magnetic field to a free layer of spin momentum transfer stack. The magnetic source can be 
from a horseshoe magnet with poles stationed above and below the SMT stack. The magnetic 
source can take on other forms such as helical coil that surrounds the SMT or pancake type 
coils above and below the SMT stack or an annular pole and a coil that surround the stack. A 
permanent magnet may be planted above the stack. SMT stack consists of a top electrode, a 
free layer, a non-magnetic layer a pinned magnetic structure and a bottom electrode. 
Nanowhiskers can be grown by control of nucleation conditions [76]. Nanowhisker formation 
on substrates can be made using the VLS, vapor-liquid-solid mechanism. A particle of 
catalyst material is placed on a substrate is heated in the presence of gases until it melts. A 
pillar is allowed to form under the melt. As the melt rises up on top of the pillar and a 
nanowhisker is formed. Miller direction <111> may be a preferred growth direction of the 
whiskers. The catalytic property is present at the interface of whisker and air. InP 
nanowhiskers, for example, were grown using metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy. 
Characterization of nanowhiskers is by electron microscopy. MOVPF is low pressure metal-
orgaic vapor phase epitaxy process. 50 nm aerosol gold particles were deposited on InP 
substrate. This was placed on a horizontal reactor cell heated by radio frequency heated 
graphite suceptor. Hydrogen was used as carrier gas. Temperatuer was ramped tp 420 0 C for 
5 min. The molar fraction of flow rate in the cell was 0.015. Nanowhisker growth was found 
to commence upon addition of TMI, trimethylindium. The molar fraction of TMI was 3 
millionth. Typical growth time for production of nanowhiskers was found to be 8 minutes.  
 
 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
565 
10.10.1. Alzheimer‟s Disease and Drugs Used Today  
 
By the year 2050 the number of patients with Alzheimer‟s disease will be 16 million. The 
cost of memory loss is about $1.1 trillion. Currently 5 million patients suffer from 
Alzheimer‟s in this country, United States. The root curcuma longa, turmeric root has found 
to have a positive effect in experiments with rats [9]. The drugs used such as bapinezumab 
from Eli Lily and solanezumab from Johnson and Johnson used today are used to target the 
amyloid-β protein in the brain. This protein has been found to misfold and results in clump 
formation in patients‟ brains. Furthermore these drugs are expensive. Turmeric root is used in 
curries in India and is readily available from farms at a lower cost. It is yellow colored. This 
is recommended by Ayurveda and Siddha Medicine. It is known to possess anti-inflammatory 
and antioxidant properties. Curcumin has been found to decrease inflammation in the brain. It 
causes reduction in oxyradicals formed in patients‟ brain. 
 
 
10.10.2. Nanomedicine-Advantages of Nanorobot Drug Delivery System  
 
Nanorobots can offer a number of advantages over current methods such as: 1) use of 
nanorobot drug delivery systems with increased bioavailability; 2) targeted therapy such as 
only malignant cells treated; 3) fewer mistakes on account of computer control and 
automation; 4) reach remote areas in human anatomy not operatable at the surgeon‟s 
operating table; 5) as drug molecules are carried by nanorobots and released where needed the 
advantages of large interfacial area during mass transfer can be realized; 6) non-invasive 
technique; 7) computer controlled operation with nobs to fine tune the amount, frequency, 
time of release; 8) better accuracy; 9) drug inactive in areas where therapy not needed 
minimizing undesired side effects; 10) greater speed of drug action.  
A nanorobot to measure surface properties was patented [12]. This technology is 10 - 20 
years in the future. The nanorobot unit has a manipulation unit and an end effector. The end 
effector can be a sensor or made to move as close as possible to the surface of interest. The 
drive device has piezoelectric drives. The resolution of the measurement can be in the 
nanometer range and the actual measurement in the centimeter range. The nano-robot is made 
sensitive in all directions, in multiple dimensions. It can operate under vacuum. Surface 
roughness can be measured using nanorobots. A patent was developed [13] for minimally 
invasive procedure by means of DPR, Dynamic Physical Rendering. Use of “intelligent”, 
“autonomous” particles were made. An interventional aid is formed with the aid of self-
organizing nanorobots. These nanorobots were made of c atoms. C-arm angiography are used 
to monitor DPR procedures. A 3 dimensional image data record on target region is obtained. 
The determined form was converted to a readable and executable program code for the c 
atoms of the nanorobots. The determined form was transferred to a storage unit. The program 
code was executed in order to achieve self-organization in the unstructured c atoms that were 
introduced in the target region. The execution of the program was triggered by a timer or 
position sensor. The intervention aid is used as an endovascular target region.  
 
 
 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
566 
10.10.3. Design and Control Strategy  
 
The strategy for design of nanorobot drug delivery sys- tem among other things comprise 
of the following salient features:  
 
1. Use fullerenes as carriers of curcumin.  
2. Complex the fullerene with curcumin and deactivate the drug action as in other cases 
of photodynamic therapy.  
3. Computer controlled irradiation can activate the fullerene. Breakage of fullerene is 
expected and release of curcumin at constant rate [17, 18]. The intensity, wavelength 
and areas of brain where is irradiated is con- trolled using computer software.  
4. Curcumin acts on the diseased cells and cure is affected.  
5. Pharmacokinetic model with 4th order process for irradiation and competing parallel 
reactions for fullerene breakage, polymerization of fullerene and drug action is 
developed. 
6. Time for drug release can be computed from the drug delivery model. Drug delivery 
model for fullerene nanorobot curcumin delivery system can be developed including 
all the main features of the procedure.  
7. Chromophores in curcumin is used as a dye and picked up from imaging. 
Information from the sensor on drug action is compared against model and feedback 
control affected by changing the intensity and wave- length of irradiation. This is 
used to trigger feedback control or model based control of irradiation using 
computers. 
8. Itrathecal route of entry for nanorobot fullerene cur- cumin complex can be preferred 
to sublingual entry. The choice of cerebrospinal fluid system may obviate any 
digestive disorders from fullerene carbon.  
 
Conventional treatments lack in their selectivity. Drugs administered generally become 
active in areas where treatment is not needed. Sometimes negative side effects of the drugs 
can be prevalent in those areas. Suppression of side effects is emerging as a salient 
consideration in the development of new drugs and drug strategies. Nanorobot drug delivery 
systems that are act only in targeted areas can be more beneficial.  
Complexing curcumin with fullerene may be more desirable compared with binding with 
a polymer molecule as carrier. The dimensions of the macromolecule carrier are large. On 
account of its size it cannot migrate to any part of the human anatomy. In such cases the drug 
stays near the region it is administered during the duration of treatment. This may call for 
separate ad- ministration of complex to each area requiring treatment. This can consume lot 
more time and the procedure be- comes impractical given a great number of treatment sites. 
The fullerene molecules as carriers can migrate to any region of the human anatomy such as 
the hypo- thalamus in the brain and be a better choice for carrier. Attempts to design drug 
delivery system with liposome encapsulated drug involve the rupture of the membrane and 
drug release. This is triggered by irradiation and pH changes. The response was found to be 
inconsistent. The pathway to drug release is indirect. i.e., the irradiation and pH changes 
affect a photosensitizer. A compound in turn is generated that is capable of cleaving a specific 
entity in the liposome membrane. At temperatures below the body temperature of 37°C the 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
567 
drug release drops. Thus at 15°C the release rate was less than 15%. This limits the 
application of this design. 
 
 
10.11. CNTS, CARBON NANOTUBES 
 
CNTs are rolled graphene sheets of atoms about its needle axis. They are 0.7-100 nm 
diameter and a few microns in length. Carbon hexagons are arranged in a concentric manner 
with both ends of the tube capped by pentagon containing Buckminster fullerene type 
structure. They possess excellent electrical, thermal and toughness properties. Young‟s 
modulus of CNT has been estimated at 1 TPa and yield strength of 120 GPa. S. Ijima verified 
fullerene in 1991 and observed multi-walled CNT formed from carbon arc discharge. 
Five different methods of synthesis of CNTs are discussed. These are: a) Arc Discharge 
[77]; b) Laser Ablation [78]; c) CVD [79-80]; d) HIPCO Process [81] and e) Surface 
Mediated Growth of Vertically Aligned Tubes [82]. The arc discharge process was developed 
by NEC in 1992. Two graphite rods are connected to a power supply spaced a few mm apart. 
At 100 amps carbon vaporizes and forms hot plasma. Typical yields are 30 – 90%. The 
SWNT, MWNT are short tubes with diameters 0.6 – 1.4 nm in diameter. It can be synthesized 
in open air. Product needs purification. CVD process was invented by Nagano, Japan. The 
substrate is placed in oven, heated to 600 0 C and a carbon bearing gas such as methane is 
slowly added. As the gas decomposes it frees up the carbon atoms which recombine as a 
nanotube. Yield range is 20-100%. Long tubes with diameter ranging from 0.6 – 4 nm were 
formed. It can be easily scaled up to industrial production. The SWNT diameter is 
controllable. The tubes are usually multi-walled and riddled with defects. Laser vaporization 
process was developed by Smalley in 1996. The graphite is blasted with intense laser pulses 
to generate carbon gas. Prodigious amount of SWNTs are formed. Yield of up to 70% is 
found. Long bundles of tubes 5-20 m with diameters in the range of 1-2 nm are formed. The 
product formation is primarily SWNTs. Good diameter control is possible and few defects are 
found in the product. Reaction product is pure. The process is expensive.  
The HIPCO process was also developed by Smalley in 1998. A gaseous catalyst 
precursor is rapidly mixed with carbon monoxide, CO in a chamber at high pressure and 
temperature. Catalyst precursor decomposes and nanoscale metal particles form the 
decomposition product. CO reacts on the catalyst surface and form solid carbon and gaseous 
CO2, carbon dioxide. The carbon atoms roll up into CNTs. 100% of the product is SWNT and 
the process is highly selective. Samsung patented a method for vertically aligning CNTs on a 
substrate. A CNT support layer is stacked on the substrate filled with pores. SAM, self-
assembled monolayer is arranged on the surface of the substrate. On end of each of the CNTs 
are attached portions of the SAM exposed through the pores formed between the colloid 
particles present in the support layer. CNTS can be vertically aligned on the substrate having 
the SAM on it with the help of pores formed between the colloid particles. 
CNTs possess interesting physical properties [83]. Thermal conductivity of CNTs is in 
excess of 2000 w/m/K. They have unique electronic properties. Applications include 
electromagnetic shielding, electron field emission displays for computers and other high –tech 
devices, photovoltaics, super capacitors, batteries, fuel cells, computer memory, carbon 
electrodes, carbon foams, actuators, material for hydrogen storage and adsorbents. CNTs can 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
568 
be produced with different morphologies [84]. Examples of different morphologies include 
SWNT, DWNT, MWNT, nano-ribbon, nano-sheet, nano-peapod, linear and branched CNTs, 
conically overlapping bamboo-like tubule, branched Y shaped tubule, nano-rope, nanowires, 
nanofilm. Processes are developed to prepare CNTs with desired morphology. Phase 
separated copolymers/stabilized blends of polymers can be pyrolyzed along with sacrificial 
material to form the desired morphology. The sacrificial material is changed to control the 
morphology of the product. Self-assembly of block copolymers can lead to 20 different 
complex phase separated morphologies. Often times as is the precursor so is the product. 
Therefore even more variety of CNT morphologies can be synthesized. 
 
 
10.12. CHARACTERIZATION OF NANOSTRUCTURES 
 
Needs for characterization of nanostructures are on the rise. Resolution limits of optical 
microscopes are of the order of wavelength of light. Per the Raleigh criterion, the resolution 
limit of optical microscopes is of the order of 200 nm. In order to characterize nanoscale 
materials, x-ray and helium ion microscopes are needed. Optical microscopes, scanning 
electron microscope, transmission electron microscope, scanning probe microscope and 
helium ion microscope have increasing powers of resolution in the mentioned order. 
Structural information in the scale of 2-25 nm can be characterized using SAXS [85]. 
Monochromatic source of x-rays are used to excite the sample and scattered x-rays are 
detected by 2-dimensional flat x-ray detector. Structure is deduced from patterns in the 
scatter. Interpretation of scattered pattern can be accomplished using Porad‟s law and Guiner 
approximation, Fourier transformation, etc. Thin films, multi-layered systems, oriented 
nanoparticles 
with 
different 
chemical 
compositions, 
colloids, 
proteins 
solutions, 
nanocomposites, micelles, fiber structures, etc., can be studied using SAXS. WAXS, 
GISAXS, SWAXS are techniques that are variations of SAXS. 
TEM, transmission electron microscopes have higher resolution power. Sample 
preparation for TEM analysis [86] is complex and the thickness of the sample has to be down 
to a few hundred nanometers. An electron beam is produced from a tungsten filament 
subjected to a high voltage. Electrons are allowed to pass through the specimen. With 
HRTEM, high resolution transmission electron microscope, resolutions achievable are as 
small as 1 A. TEM is used in life sciences, biomedical investigations, diagnostic tool in 
pathology, imaging of atoms, oligopeptides, nanogold, self-assembled nanotubes. It can also 
be used as an elemental analysis tool in addition to EDXA, energy dispersive x-ray analysis 
and at low temperatures as cryo-TEM. Magnification in SEM, scanning electron microscope 
ranges from 25-250,000 and resolution size is down to 1 – 25 nm. Electron gun is used to 
generate electron beams. Spatial resolution of SEM depends on the wavelength of the electron 
and electro-optical system that produces the scanning beam. Resolution at an atomic scale is 
not possible as can be with the case of TEM and HeIM. The electrons generated are focused 
as a spot with nanoscale dimensions. Electrons upon impingement with the specimen undergo 
elastic scattering, inelastic scattering and back scattering. Raster scanning is used to image 
surfaces. Surface topography, composition and other properties can be obtained from raster 
scan. 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
569 
Topographical map on atomic scale can be generated using SPM, scanning probe 
microscope [87, 88]. Neither electrons nor light is used for formation of images. 
Magnification of higher than 1 billion is possible. A tiny probe with a sharp tip is brought in 
close proximity to within 1 nm of specimen surface and then raster scanned. Nanoscale 
defects, bio molecules and silicon microprocessors can be characterized using SPM. They can 
also be used to prepare nanostructures. Dip Pen lithography, DPN, is such a technique. Tiny 
probe tip is used as „pen‟ to write structures consisting of a few molecules. STMs can be used 
to obtain conductance and current/distance measurements, AFM can be used for lateral force 
and adhesion measurements, NFOM can be used for laser transmission at various wave 
lengths and MFM can be used for temperature and other parameters. Quantum dots contain 
10-100 electrons in devices of dimensions of (500 nm)2. Photocurrent induced in quantum 
dots can be measured. The influence of high frequency microwave radiation [89] on single 
electron tunneling through a single quantum dot was used in microwave spectroscopy. 
Elemental composition of test specimen can be obtained using Auger Electron Microscope. 
Detection limits are 0.1% of the atomic composition of the elements. Spatial resolution is 
about 300 nm. Depth resolution is about 10 nm and typical analysis is 30 minutes per sample.  
Raman microscope [90] is designed based on the Raman Effect. Molecular types can be 
obtained from the scattering information. Raman microscopes can be used to study gene 
expression and DNA sequence distribution. SERS, surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy can 
be used to detect single nucleotide molecules. SERS includes a laser light source that excites 
the molecule and a detection unit for capturing Raman emission emanating from the 
molecule. STM evolved into AFM, [91] atomic force microscope. Fraction of nanometer 
resolution can be achieved using AFM. Specimen surface is scanned using a micro scale 
cantilever with a probe at its end with a sharp tip with a radius of curvature of a few 
nanometers. Laser source excites the sample. The laser light is reflected by the deflected 
cantilever. The reflected light is captured by avalanche of photodiodes. Individual atoms can 
be imaged using AFM. HeIM, Helium ion microscope [92] was developed as an alternative to 
electron microscope. Helium ions possess shorter wavelengths compared with electrons. A 
space resolution of 0.24 nm was achieved by Orion HeIM. This is close to the diameter of a 
single atom and is three times better in resolution compared with the electron microscopes. 
Individual atoms can be looked at. HeIMs can be operated in RBI and secondary electron 
mode. 
 
 
10.13. SUMMARY 
 
Advances have been made in development of nanobots for medical applications. 
Submarine robots are used in brachytherapy, spinal surgery, cancer therapy etc. Nanocar has 
been designed with fullerenes as wheels, alkyne groups as axle and can be observed using a 
STM, scanning tunneling microscope. Nanoparticles have been developed for use in eye 
disorders and for early diagnosis. Research in nanomedicine is under way in development of 
diagnostics for rapid monitoring, targeted cancer therapies, localized drug delivery, improved 
cell material interactions, scaffolds for tissue engineering and gene delivery systems. Novel 
therapeutic formulations have been developed using PLGA based nanoparticles. Nanobots 
can be used in targeted therapy and in repair work of DNA. Drexler and Smalley debated 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
570 
whether „molecular assemblers‟ that are devices capable of positioning atoms and molecules 
for precisely defined reactions in any environment is possible or not. Feynman‟s vision of 
miniaturization is being realized. Smalley sought agreement that precision picking and 
placing of individual atoms through the use of „Smalley-fingers‟ is an impossibility. 
Nanostructures can be nanoparticles, nanotubes, soccer ball structures, nanopores, 
nanopeapods, nanowhiskers, nanocapsules, nanoshells, nanowires, nanoropes, nanolayered 
materials, nanocomposites, nanofilm, nanocoating, nanocrystal,nanorods, nanotetrapods, 
nanosheets, nanotrenches, nanotunnel, nanograins, nanocubes, nanovoids, nanolamella, 
nanofilament, quantum dots, etc. Fullerenes, C60, is the third allotropic form of carbon. Soccer 
ball structured, C60, with a surface filled with hexagons and pentagons satisfy the Euler‟s law. 
Howard [8] patented the 1st generation combustion synthesis method for fullerene production, 
an advance over the carbon arc method. In the second generation combustion synthesis 
method optimizes the conditions for fullerene formation. A chemical route has been 
developed by Scott [9] to synthesize C60. Corannulene is synthesized from naphthalene 
structure. As the rings fuse and the sheet forms then it is rolled into soccer ball structure. 
Electric arc method can be used to prepare fullerenes. Nanostructures can either be generated 
by building up from atoms using methods classified as „bottom-up‟ strategy or by diminishing 
of size from nanoparticles using methods grouped under „top-down‟ strategy. Bottom-up 
strategies use self-assembly concepts, are cheap, more scalable, more flexible and leads to 
molecular level engineering. Top down strategy are expensive, less scalable and inflexible. 
Different nanostructuring methods are discussed. These include: sputtering of molecular ions 
[13]; gas evaporation [14] process to make ultrafine magnetic magnetic powder; triangulation 
and formation of nanoprisms by light irradiation [15]; nanorod production using condensed 
phase synthesis method [16]; subtractive methods such as lithography, etching, galvanic 
fabrication; lift-off process for IC circuit fabrication; nanotips and nanorods formation by 
CMOS process; patterning Iridium Oxide nanostructures; dip pen lithography; SAM, self-
assembled monolayers; hot embossing; nanoimprint lithography; electron beam lithography; 
dry etching; reactive ion etching; quantum dots and thin films generation by sol gel, solid 
state precipitation, molecular beam epitaxy, chemical vapor deposition, CVD, lithography, 
nucleation and growth; sol-gel processing methods; thin film formation from surface 
instabilities; thin film formation by spin coating; cryogenic milling for preparation of 100-300 
nm sized titanium; atomic lithography methods to generated structures less than 50 nm; 
electrodeposition method to prepare nanocomposite; plasma compaction methods; direct 
write lithography; nanofluids by dispersion. 18 different nanostructuring methods were 
reviewed by Sharma [33]. Three different methods of synthesis of CNTs, carbon nanotubes 
were compared side-side by side [34]. The solid colloid dynamics that can be expected in 
nanocomposites [40,41] was discussed. Stochastic simulations [43,44] using the 
supercomputer were used to better understand the process of spinodal nucleation and in situ 
laser ablation. Nanocomposites can be structured to prepare materials with higher thermal 
conductivity compared with copper [46, 47] for use in laptop computer casings and reducing 
the weight of automobiles. Thermodynamic miscibility of nanocomposites can be calculated 
from the free energy of mixing. The four thermodynamically stable forms of Carbon are 
diamond, graphite, C60, Buckmininster Fullerene and Carbon Nanotube. Mackay et al. [61] 
showed that thermodynamically stable dispersion of nanoparticles into a polymeric liquid is 
enhanced for systems where the radius of gyration of the linear polymer is greater than the 
radius of the nanoparticle. Tiny magnetically-driven spinning screws were developed by 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
571 
Ishiyama et al. [63,64]. DNA computing was born when Aldeman [66] in 1994 proposed a 
molecular algorithm to solve the Hamiltonian path problem with DNA and solved an instance 
of a directed graph with 7 nodes. Molecular machines are molecules that can with an 
appropriate stimulus be temporarily lifted out of equilibrium and can return to equilibrium in 
the observable macroscopic properties of the system. Molecular shuttle, molecular switches, 
molecular muscle, molecular rotors, molecular nanovalves are discussed. Supramoelcular 
materials offers alternative to top-down miniaturization and bottom-up fabrication. Self-
organization principles holds the key. Gene expression studies can be carried out in biochips. 
Sequence alignment [69] can be used to develop cures for autoimmune disorders, in 
phylogenetic tree construction, identify polypeptide microstructure, in shot gun sequencing, 
during drug design, in protein secondary structure determination, in protein folding, clone 
analysis, protein classification, etc. CNRs are a new genertion of self-organizing collectives 
of intelligent nanorobots. This new technology includes procedures for interactions between 
objects with their environment resulting in solutions of critical problems at the nanoscopic 
level. Biomimetic materials are designed to mimic a natural biological material. Nanorobots 
have characteristics lengths of 100 nm – 1 m. Five different methods of synthesis of CNTs 
are discusses. These are: a) Arc Discharge [77]; b) Laser Ablation [78]; c) CVD [79-80]; d) 
HIPCO Process [81] and e) Surface Mediated Growth of Vertically Aligned Tubes [82]. 
Characterization methods of nanostructures include SAXS, small angle X-ray scattering, 
TEM, transmission electron microscopy, SEM, scanning electron microscopy, SPM, scanning 
probe microscope, Raman microscope, AFM atomic force microscopy, HeIM helium ion 
microscopy. 
 
 
10.14. REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Feynman, RP. “There‟s plenty of room at the bottom”, Caltech Engineering and 
Science, Volume 23, 5, February 1960, 22-36. 
[2] 
“Tiny Robots for Surgery”, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nanorobotics. 
[3] 
“Rice scientists build world‟s first single-molecule car”, Rice University Press Release, 
October 10th 2005, Houston, TX. http://www.media.rice.edu/media/NewsBot.asp? 
MODE=VIEW&ID=7850&SnID=971109686. 
[4] 
“U.S varsity team stresses potential of nanomedicine”, The Hindu, Wednesday, August 
6th 2008, Chennai, India. 
[5] 
Sharma, KR. Nanostructuring Operations in Nanoscale Science and Engineering, 
McGraw Hill Professional, (2010) New York, NY. 
[6] 
Sharma, KR. Transport Phenomena in Biomedical Engineering: Artificial Organ 
Design and Development and Tissue Design, McGraw Hill Professional, (2010) New 
York, NY, 
[7] 
Science and Technology Concentrates, Chemical and Engineering News, 86, 31, 
(2008), 37-37. 
[8] 
Howard, JB; McKinnon, JT; Makaraovsky, Y; Laffleur, AL; Johnson, ME. “Fullerenes 
C60 and C70 in Flames”, Letters to Nature, 352, (1991), 139-141. 
[9] 
Scott, LT. “Methods for the Chemical Synthesis for Fullerenes”, Angewandte Chemie, 
43, (2004), 4994-5007. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
572 
[10] Kawakami, S; Yamamoto T; Sano, H. “Method for Producing Fulelrenes”, US Patent 
6,953,564, (2005), Cannon Kabushiki Kaisha, Tokyo, Japan. 
[11] Smalley, RE. “Solar Process for Making Fullerenes”, US Patent 5,556,517, (1996), 
Rice University, Houston, TX. 
[12] Smalley, RE. “Electric Arc Process for Making Fullerenes”, US Patent 5,227,038, 
(1993), Rice University, Houston, TX. 
[13] Smirnov, VK; Kibalov, DS. Methods of Formation of a Silicon Nanostructure, a Silcon 
Quantum Wire Array and Devices Bases Thereon, US Patent 6,274,007, (2001), 
Sceptre Electronics Ltd., St. Helier, NJ. 
[14] Process for the Manufacture of Metal Nanoparticle, US Patent 6688494, (2004), Cima 
Nanotech, Woodbury, MN, USA. 
[15] Methods of controlling nanoparticle growth, US Patent 7033415, 2006, Northwestern 
University, IL, USA. 
[16] Geohegan, DB; Seals, RD; Puretzky, AA; Fan, X. Condensed Phase conversion and 
Growth of Nanorods instead of from Vapor, US Patent 6,923,946, (2005), UT-Battelle, 
Oak Ridge, TN. 
[17] Iridium Oxide Nanostructure, Zhang, F; Steeker, GM; Barrowclift, RA; Hsu, ST. US 
Patent 7,053,403, 2006, Sharp Laboratories of America, Inc., Camas, WA. 
[18] Hong, S; Zhu, J; Mirkin, CA. Multiple Ink Nanolithography Toward a Multiple-Pen 
Nano-Plotter, Science, 286, 1999, 523-525. 
[19] Chou, SY; Krauss, PR; Renstrom, PJ. Imprint of Sub-25 nm vias and Trenches in 
Polymers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 67, 1995, 3114. 
[20] Duval, DJ; Risbud, SH. Semi-Conductor Quantum Dots:Progress in Processing, 
Handbook of Nanostructured Materials and Nanotechnology – Vol I: Synthesis and 
Processing, Eds., H. S. Nalwa, Academic Press, (2000), New York, NY. 
[21] Tillotsun, TM; Simpson, RL; Hrubesh, LW; Gash, A. Method for Producing 
Nanostructured Metal-Oxides, US Patent 6,986,818, (2006), Reagents of the University 
of California, CA. 
[22] Steiner, U. Structure Formation in Polymer Films: From µm to sub 100 nm Length 
Scales, in Nanoscale Assembly – Chemical Techniques (Nanostructure Science and 
Technology Ed. W. T. S. Huck), Springer, 2005, New York, NY. 
[23] Sharma, KR. Change in Entropy of mixing and Two Glass Transitions for Partially 
Miscible Blends, 228th ACS National Meeting, Polymeric Materials: Science and 
Engineering, 91, August, 2004, 755, Philadelphia, PA. 
[24] Keener, SG. Method for Preparing Ultra-Fine Submicron Grain Titanium and Titanium-
Alloy Articles and Articles Prepared Thereby, US Patent 7,241,328, The Boeing 
Company, Chicago, IL. 
[25] Saffman, ME. Atomic Lithography of Two Dimensional Nanostructures, US Patent 
6,787,759, (2004), Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation, Madison, WI. 
[26] Lu, Y; Wang, D. Process for the Preparation of Metal-Containing Nanostructured 
Films, US Patent 7,001,669, (2006), Tulane Educational Fund, New Orleans, LA. 
[27] Ren, Z; Chen, G; Poudel, B; Kumar, S; Wang, W; Dresselhaus, M. Methods for 
Synthesis of Semiconductor Nanocrystals and Thermoelectric Compositions, US Patent 
7,255,846, (2007), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA & Boston 
College, Chestnut Hill, MA. 

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
573 
[28] Mirkin, CA; Liu, X; Guo, S. Surface and Site-Specific Polymerization by Direct-Write 
Lithography, US Patent 7,326,380, (2008), Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. 
[29] Choi, SUS; Eastman, JA. Enhanced Heat Transfer using Nanofluids, US Patent 
6,221,275, (2001), University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. 
[30] Sharma, KR. Heat Conduction Mechanism in Nanofluids, 237th ACS National Meeting, 
Salt Lake City, UT, March 22nd – 26th 2009. 
[31] Cha, JN; Hedrick, JL; Kim, HC; Miller, RD; Volksen, W. Materials having Predefined 
Morphologies and Methods of Formation Thereof, US Patent 7,341,788, (2008), 
International Business Machines, Armonk, NY. 
[32] Rode, A; Gamaly, E; Luther-Davies, B. Method of Deposition of Thin Films of 
Amorphous and Crystalline Microstructures Based on Ultra fast Pulsed Laser 
Deposition, US Patent 6,312,768, (2001), Australian National University, Acton, 
Australia. 
[33] Sharma, KR. Eighteen Different Methods for Nanostructuring, Nanotech Conference & 
Expo 2009, Houston, TX, May, 2009. 
[34] Sharma, KR. Comparison of Three Methods of Synthesis of Carbon Nanotubes, 
ANTEC 2008, Milwaukee, WI, May 4th – May 8th 2008. 
[35] Sharma, KR. Isolating Metal Nanopowders, 93rd AIChE Annual Meeting, Reno, NV, 
November, 2001. 
[36] Sharma, KR. Separation Method for Metal Nanopowders, 37th Western Regiona 
Meeting of ACS, WERM 01, Santa Barbara, CA, October, 2001. 
[37] Sharma, KR. Acceleration Motion of Nanoflocs, Great Lakes Regional Meeting of 
ACS, GLRM 02, Minneapolis, MN, June, 2002. 
[38] Sharma, KR. Rapid Thermal Quenching in a Subatmospheric Fluidized Bed Chamber 
to Prepare Nanoscale Powders, 221st ACS National Meeting, San Diego, CA, April, 
2001. 
[39] Sharma, KR. Nanopore Filters for Dialysis Machine for Treatment of End Stage Renal 
Disease, 239th ACS National Meeting, San Francisco, CA, March, 2010 
[40] Sharma, KR. Nanocomposites - Is it a Solid Colloid ?, 218th ACS National Meeting, 
New Orleans, LA, August, 1999. 
[41] Sharma, KR. Solid Colloid Dynamics in Polymer Nanocomposites, 38th Annual 
Convention of Chemists, Jodhpur, India, December, 2001. 
[42] Sharma, KR. Particle Size Distribution of Nanoparticulate Materials using SAXS, 
 
Interpack 99, Mauii, HI, July,1999. 
[43] Sharma, KR. DPD Simulations to Study the Nanoparticle Dispersion, 74thColloid and 
Surface Science Symposium, Colloid 2000, Bethlehem, PA, June, 2000. 
[44] Sharma, KR. Stochastic Computer Simulations of Exfoliated Nanocomposites, 51st 
Southeast Regional Meeting of the ACS, SERMACS, Knoxville, TN, October, 1999. 
[45] Sharma, KR. Mesoscopic Simulation of Ballistic Impact Resistance of Nanocomposites, 
Annual Technical Conference for Society of Plastics Engineers, ANTEC 2000, 
Orlando, FL, May, 2000. 
[46] Sharma, KR. Thermoplastic Nanocomposite with High Thermal Conductivity, Interpack 
99, Mauii, HI, July, 1999. 
[47] Sharma, KR. Effective Thermal Conductivity of Thermoplastic Nanocomposite used in 
a Laptop Computer Casing, 30th ACS Central Regional Meeting, Cleveland, OH, May, 
1998. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
574 
[48] Sharma, KR. Cellular Signal Processing and Nanoprobes, 227th ACS National 
Meeting, Anaheim, CA, March/April, 2004. 
[49] Sharma, KR. On Nanoscale Bolometer to Study Chemical Plumes, AIChE Spring 
National Meeting, Tampa, FL, April 2009. 
[50] Sharma, KR. Nanofiber Optic Biosensor Design, 223rd ACS National Meeting, 
Orlando, FL, April, 2002. 
[51] Sharma, KR. Discrete Cosine Transform and Nanoscale Temperature Distributions, 
223rd ACS National Meeting, Orlando, FL, April, 2002. 
[52] Sharma, KR. Excluded Volume Reduction in Elastomeric Nanocomposites, 51st 
Southeast Regional Meeting of the ACS, SERMACS, Knoxville, TN, October, 1999. 
[53] Sharma, KR. Glass Transition Temperature of Elastomeric Nanocomposites, 51st 
Southeast Regional Meeting of the ACS, SERMACS, Knoxville, TN, October, 1999. 
[54] Sharma, KR. Thermodynamic Stability of Nanocomposites, Interpack 99, Mauii, HI, 
July, 1999. 
[55] Sharma, KR. Transparent Nanocomposites - Some Pitfalls, AIChE Spring National 
Meeting, New Orleans, LA, March, 2002. 
[56] Sharma, KR. Design Considerations in Preparation of Elastomeric Exfoliated 
Nanocomposites, 74th Colloid and Surface Science Symposium, Colloid2000, 
Bethlehem, PA, June, 2000. 
[57] Sharma, KR. Processing Methodology for Transparent Armor Nanocomposites, Annual 
Technical Conference for Society of Plastics Engineers, ANTEC2000, Orlando, FL, 
May, 2000. 
[58] Kambour, RP; Bendler, JT; Bopp, RC. Macromolecules, 16,(1983), 753. 
[59] Ten Brinke, G; Karasz, FE; Macknight, WJ; Macromolecules, 16, (1983), 1824. 
[60] Paul, DR; Barlow, JW. Polymer, 25, (1984), 487. 
[61] Mackay, ME; Tuteja, A; Duxbury, PM; Hawker, CJ; van Horn, B; Guan, Z; Chen, G; 
Krishnan, RS. “General Strategies for Nanoparticle Dispersion”, Science, 311 (2006), 
1740-1743. 
[62] Kumar, SK; Krishnamoorti, R. Nanocomposites: Structure, Phase Behavior, and 
Properties”, Annual Review of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, 1, (2010), 37-
58. 
[63] Freitas, RA. Jr. Nanomedicine, Vol. I: Basic Capabilities. Georgetown (TX): Landes 
Bioscience; 1999. Also available at: http://www.nanomedicine.com/NMI.htm. 
[64] Ishiyama, K; M. Sendoh KI; Arai KI. Magnetic micromachines for medical 
applications. J Magnetism Magnetic Mater, 242-245 (2002), 1163-1165. 
[65] Mathieu, JB; Martel, S; Yahia, L; Soulez, G; Beaudoin, G. “MRI systems as a mean of 
propulsion for a microdevice in blood vessels”. Proc. 25th Ann. Intl. Conf., IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology; 2003 Sep 17-21; Cancun, Mexico; 2003.  
[66] Yoshida, H; Suyama, A. in DNA Based Computers 5, E. Winfree and D. K. Gifford, 
Eds. Vol. 54 of DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer 
Science (American Mathematical Society), Providence, RI, (1999), 9-20. 
[67] Head, T; Yamamura, M; Gal, G. Aqueous Computing: Writing on Molecules, 
Evolutionary Computation, 1999. CEC 99. Proc. Of the 1999 Congress on., 
Washington, DC, July 1999. 
[68] Lehn, JM. Toward Self-Organization and Complex Matter, Science, Vol. 295, 5564, 
(2002), 2400-2403.  

Nanorobots in Nanomedicine 
 
 
575 
[69] Sharma, KR. Bioinformatics: Sequence Alignment and Markov Models, McGraw Hill 
Professional, (2009), New York, NY. 
[70] Solomon, N. “System and Methods for Collective Nanorobotics for Medical 
Applications”, US Patent 20080241264A1, Solomon Research LLC, Oakland, CA. 
[71] Klocke, V. “Nanrobot Module, Automation and Exchange”, US Patent 2010/0140473 
A1, (2010), Ohlandt, Greeley, Ruggiero and Perle LLP, Stamford, CT. 
[72] Kamal, RA; Sanni, ML; Kanj, MY. “System, Method and Nanorobot to Explore 
Subterranean Geophysical Formations”, US Patent 2010/0268470 A1, (2010)Bracewell 
& Giuliani LLP, Houston, TX.  
[73] Pfister, M. “Method for Forming an Interventional Aid with the Aid of Self-Organizing 
Nanorobots Consisting of CATOMS and Associated System Unit”, US Patent 
2011/0048433 A1, Bubenreuth, DE. 
[74] Regan, BC; Zettl, AK; Aloni, S. “Nanocrystal Powered Nanomotor”, US Patent 7,863, 
798 B2, (2011), The Regents of the University of California, Oakland, CA. 
[75] Dimitrov, DV; Peng, X; Xue, SS; Wang, D. “Spin Oscillatory Device”, US Patent 
7,589, 600 B2, Seagate Technology, LLC, (2009) Scotts Valley, CA. 
[76] Seifert, W; Samuelson, LI; Ohlsson, BJ; Borgstrom, LM. “Directionally Controlled 
Growth of Nanowhiskers”, US Patent 7,911,035 B2 (2011), QuNano AB, (2011), 
Lund, Switzerland. 
[77] US Patent 6794598, H. Huang, H. Kajiura, M. Miyakoshi, A. Yamada, M. Shiraishi, 
Arc Electrodes for Synthesis of Carbon Nanostructures, Sony Corp., 2003. 
[78] US Patent 6331690, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima, Process for Producing Single Wall Carbon 
Nanotubes Uniform in Diameter and Laser Ablation Apparatus used Therein, 2001., 
NEC Corp. Tokyo, Japan. 
[79] Meyyappan, M. 2004, Carbon Nanotube Growth by Chemical Vapor Deposition, in 
Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Eds. H. S. Nalwa, 581-589. 
[80] US Patent 6689674, R. Y. Zhang, R. K. Tsui, J. Tresek, A. M., Rawlett, Method for 
Selective Chemical Vapor Deposition of Nanotubes, 2004, Motorola, IL. 
[81] Smalley, RE; Smith, KA; Colbert, DT; Nikolaev, P. Bronikowski, MJ. Bradley, RK; 
Rohmund, F. Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes from High Pressure CO, US Patent 
7,204,970, 2007, Rice University, Houston, TX. 
[82] Jin, YW; Kim, JM; Jung, HT; Jeong, TW; Ko, YK. Carbon Nanotube Structure and 
Method of Vertically Aligning Nanotubes, US Patent 7,371,696, 2008, Samsung SDI 
Co. Ltd., Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do, KR. 
[83] Beetz, T; Sfeir, T. Dual Properties of Carbon Nanotubes Revealed, Science, April 
2006. Collins et al., 1997, Science, 278, 100. 
[84] Matyjaszewski, K; Kowalewski, T; Lambeth, DN; Spanswick, JT; Tsarevsky, NV. 
Process for the Preparation of Nanostructured Materials, US Patent 7,056,455, 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. 
[85] Dubcek, P. Nanostructure as Seen by the SAXS, Vacuum, 80, (2005), 92-97. 
[86] Zhang, S; Vauthey, S. Surfactant Peptide Nanostructures and Uses Thereof, US Patent 
7,179,784, (2007), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. 
[87] Duan, X; Daniels, RH; Niu, C; Sahi, V; Hamilton, JM; Romano, LT. Methods of 
Positioning and/or Orienting Nanostructures, US Patent 7,422,980, (2008), Nanosys 
Inc., Palo Alto, CA. 

Kal Renganathan Sharma 
576 
[88] Mirkin, CA; Piner, R; Hong, S. Methods Utilizing Scanning Probe Microscope Tips 
and Products Therefore or Produced Thereby, US Patent 6,827, 979, (2004), 
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. 
[89] Blick, RH. Microwave Spectroscopy on Quantum Dots, Chapter 6.0, Handbook of 
Nanostructured Materials and Nanotechnology, Eds., H. S. Nalwa, Vol.2, Spectroscopy 
and Theory, Academic Press (2000), 309-343. 
[90] Sundarajan, N; Sun, L; Zhang, Y; Su, X; Selena Chan, S; Koo, TW; Berlin, AA. 
Microfluidic Apparatus, Raman Spectroscopy Systems, and Methods for Performing 
Molecular Reactions, US Patent 7,442, 339, (2008), Intel Corp., Santa Clara, CA. 
[91] Liebler, CM; Kim, Y. Machining Oxide Thin-Films with an Atomic Force Microscope: 
Pattern and Object Formation on the Nanometer Scale, US Patent 5,252, 835, Harvard 
College, Cambridge, MA 
[92] Petkewich, R. Say Hello to Helium Ion Microscopy, Chemical and Engineering News, 
Science and Technology, Vo. 86, 47, (2008), 38-39. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
A 
a hyperbolic PDE, 277 
a semi-infinite, 374 
ABS, 262, 552 
ABS, Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene, 56 
absorbtion efficiency, 193 
absorption, 487, 498 
absorption process, 490 
Absorption profile, 514 
absorption rate constant, 490 
accelerating phase, 89 
accelerating spheres, 532 
acceleration, 292 
acceleration motion, 85 
Acceleration zone, 93 
accessible, 539 
accumulation condition, 288 
accumulation of concentration, 171 
accumulation of heat, 161 
accumulation term, 98 
accuracy, 565 
accurate, 527 
ACF, 421 
acid rain formation, 61 
acquisition, 395 
acrylamide, 302 
acrylonitrile, 302, 307 
Acrylonitrile, 151 
Activated sludge, 303 
actuators, 323, 567 
ad infinitum, 208 
Adaptation, 558 
adaptive, 397 
Adaptive Control, 27 
Adhesive strength, 394 
Adhesive tack, 394 
Adipic Acid, 54 
Adsorption Bed, 56 
aerosol, 564 
AFM, 548, 556, 569 
ageing, 538, 562 
agglomeration, 422, 554 
agitator, 333 
agitator RPM, 261 
air conditioning, 323 
air flow, 415 
Air pollution, 60 
air puff, 540 
Air resistance, 75 
airfoil, 164 
ALD, 547 
aldol trimerization, 549 
algae, 302 
algae biodiesel, 63 
Aliter, 372 
Alkali catalysts, 61 
allotropic, 549 
Alphamethylstyrene, 151 
Alternating, 394 
Aluminum, 181 
Alzheimer‟s, 565 
Aminoacids, 561 
ampacity, 193 
amplitude ratio, 371, 537 
amyloidogenesis, 563 
amyloid-β protein, 565 
AN, 554 
analytic, 277 
analytic function, 184 
Anatomical Temperature, xx, 16, 19 
anchor helix reactors, 261 
anesthesia, 540 
angiography, 564, 565 
angular deflection, 534 
angular momentum, 177 
angular speed of rotor, 127 

Index 
578 
angular velocity, 532 
animal fats, 61 
animal testing, 513 
ANN, 415 
annular space, 536 
antioxidant, 174 
anti-reflection coating, 189 
APC, 421 
Apollo 15 Mission, 75 
apoptosis, 110 
apparent volume, 491 
Applanation tomometers, 540 
aqueous computing, 556 
aragonite, 561 
Arc Discharge, 567 
architecture, 415 
Artificial Intelligence, 4, 8, 28, 562 
ascend, 80 
aspartame, 302 
Aspherical, 532 
Asymmetric Catalysis, 556 
asymmetry, 76 
asymptotic limit, 302 
asymptotic maximum, 492 
Asymptotically Stable, 142 
Atomic lithography, 551 
atomistic scale, 176 
Auger Electron Microscope, 569 
Autoassociation, 417 
autoimmune disorders, 559 
automation, 1, iii, ix, xix, 2, 9, 27, 565, 575 
autonomous systems, 148 
average size of the particle, 96 
average temperature, 251, 284, 286 
AW of the biodiesel plant, 66 
Ayurveda, 565 
azimuthal, 111 
azimuthal velocity, 97 
azobenzene, 557 
azoisobutyrontirle, 307 
B 
Babcock & Wilcox, 99 
back-propagation, 415 
back-propagation model, 415 
backward algorithm, 560 
bacteria, 302 
balance of properties, 174 
ballistic impact resistance, 552 
ballistic part, 206 
ballistic term, 205 
Ballistic/Acceleration Model, 211 
banded diagonal, 559 
bandwidth, 379 
bapinezumab, 565 
Basell, 43, 45, 56 
BASF, 43, 50, 51, 57 
Basketball, 76 
Batch Process, 27, 67 
batch reactor, 261 
Batch Reactor, 393 
batteries, 567 
Baxter, 9 
Bayer, 34, 53, 56, 58 
bee-hive, 562 
bell mouth entrance, 159 
bell shaped, 417 
Bessel composite function, 120, 123, 194 
Bessel function, 530 
Bessel function of the second order, 197 
Beta methyl styrene, 307 
better grafting, 174 
Bholin VOR rheometer, 538 
BICMOS, 531 
bile, 489 
Bimetallic, 528 
bimodal distribution, 174 
binary, 417 
binary diffusivities, 162 
binary interaction, 554 
binary interaction model, 554 
binomial infinite series, 209, 250 
binomial theorem, 101 
bioanalytical method, 488 
bioavailability, 514, 565 
biochips, 430, 538, 558 
Biodegradable, 548 
Biodiesel, 61 
bioinformatic, 563 
biological affinity, 488 
Biomimetic, 560 
Bionics, 10 
Biot number, 115, 161 
bituminous coal, 61 
Black paint, 189 
blend-time mechanism, 174 
block, 394 
block diagram(s), 27, 325, 335, 414 
block flow diagrams, 254 
Blocks, 16 
Blood profile, 513 
Blood urea nitrogen, 488 
Blossum, 559 
blow-up, 282 
bob, 533 

Index 
 
 
579 
Bode AR plot, 381 
Bode Criterion, 379 
Bode diagram, 372 
Bode phase angle  plot, 381 
Boeing‟s X-51A, 163 
Bohlin rheometer, 538 
Boltzmann equipartition energy theorem, 204 
Boltzmann transformation, 94 
Bone, 17, 546 
bone-tooth complex, 547 
Borealis, 45 
bottom-up, 550 
boundary condition, 199, 286 
boundary layer, 160 
Bourdon Tube, 539 
bow shock, 166 
Bowman‟s capsule, 488 
Brain, 493 
branched, 568 
branched polymers, 176 
branching distribution, 400 
branchytherapy, 545 
Bravais lattices, 553 
Brayton cycle, 324 
Brittleness, 394 
BRNN, 560 
broader variance, 174 
Brookfield synchro-Lectric viscometer, 538 
BS viscometer, 538 
bubble(s), 78, 532 
bubble viscometers, 538 
bubbling, 421 
buccal, 487 
Buckmininster, 553 
building up, 550 
bulk mass transfer, 173 
Bunsen solubility coefficient, 111 
buoyancy, 88 
butano, 302 
Butcher‟s method, 78, 89, 90 
butterflies, 561 
C 
C1500, 549 
C240, 549 
C540, 549 
C60, 549 
C960, 549 
calcite, 561 
calixarene wheels, 557 
Calixarenes, 557 
Camera Drones, xx 
cancel, 413 
cancer(s), 538, 545 
Cannon-Fenske viscometer, 538 
cantilever, 569 
Capillary viscometers, 538 
capital cost(s), 66, 93 
capital recovery factor, 66 
capping, 539 
carbohydrate, 563 
carbon arc method, 549 
carbon electrodes, 567 
carbon foams, 567 
carbon monoxide, 412 
Carbon Nanotube, 553 
carbon tetrachloride, 344 
cardiovascular disease, 545 
Carri-Med CS rheometer, 538 
Cartesian Trajectory, 28 
cause and effect, 420 
Cause and Effect Diagram, 423 
CCF, 421 
CdTe, 190 
Centralized Heating and Cooling, 15, 17 
Centraves rheomat, 538 
centrifugal governor, 323 
centrifugal liquid-liquid separator, 126 
centrifugal separation, 61, 132 
centrifuge, 127 
CFB technology, 99 
chain branching, 394 
chain transfer agent, 174, 400 
Chan 35, 538 
Chandra, 180 
chaotic time series, 422 
characteristic length, 162, 167 
characteristic velocity, 159, 168 
Chebyshev polynomial, 119, 203 
Checksheet, 423 
cheese whey, 302 
chemical, 323 
chemical changes, 183 
chemical sensors, 527 
chemical vapour deposition, 550 
chemotherapy, 547 
Chernobyl, 21 
chlorination, 344 
chloroform, 344 
chloromethane, 344 
choked flow, 163 
Chromophores, 566 
Citric Acid, 502 
Clapeyron equation, 182 
Classification, 417 

Index 
580 
Clausius‟ inequality, 140, 258 
clone analysis, 559 
closed loop, 349 
closed loop stability, 369 
closed loop transfer, 341 
closed-loop transfer function, 332 
CMOS, 550 
CNRs, 560 
CNT(s), 191,  547 
CO2, 414 
CoAl2O4, 548 
coal-fired boiler, 191 
Coconut Oil, 62 
collagen, 561 
collision rules, 176 
combinatorial entropy, 554 
combined heat and power system, 323 
combined statement, 184 
Combustion Engineering, 99 
combustion synthesis, 549 
comparator, 414 
compartment method, 488 
complex roots, 505, 506 
complex velocity, 537 
Complexing curcumin, 566 
composite heat transfer, 208 
composition, 393 
composition distribution, 174, 395 
compositional heterogeneity, 174 
compressibility, 181 
compressible, 163 
computer, 323 
computer controlled, 565 
computer memory, 567 
computer science, 156, 574 
Computer Simulation, xix, xx, 512, 573 
computer solution, 132 
Computer Vision, 4 
computers, 323 
concave upward, 265 
concentric, 567 
concrete, 191 
Condensation Process, xx 
condensed phase synthesis, 550 
condenser, 418, 419, 451 
condenser temperature, 418 
condition number, 401 
conductive, 162 
conductive  contribution, 102 
conductive resistance, 162 
conductivity, 528 
cone and plate, 532 
confocal scanning microscope, 539 
consecutive-competitive, 64 
conservative force, 176 
constancy, 420 
constant drag coefficient, 82 
constant rate delivery, 488 
constant surface temperature, 202 
constant volume, 261, 262, 401 
constant wall temperature, 282, 374 
constitutive equations, 201 
Constraints, 23 
constructive interference, 561 
CONSYD, 401 
contact time(s), 94, 104 
Continuous Mass Polymerization, xx, 34, 49, 51, 53, 
58, 225, 400 
Continuous Process, 1, iii, 7, xix, 27, 54, 67, 249, 
281 
continuous valued, 417 
control, 394 
Control Chart, 423 
control gain, 349 
Control hardware, 400 
control law, 325 
control objective(s), 23, 393, 475 
control theory, 156, 323,  394 
control transfer functions, 341 
control valves, 417 
control volume, 273 
Controlled stress rheometer, 538 
Controller, 6, 16, 24, 27, 326, 329, 332, 334, 344, 
358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 389, 477 
controller transfer function, 325 
convection, 125, 283 
convective, 162 
convective boundary condition, 290 
convective contribution, 102 
convective resitance, 162 
convergent-divergent tube, 163 
conversion, 268, 394 
convex to concave, 70 
convex upward, 265 
convexo-concave curvature, 71 
convolution property, 210 
convolution theorem, 256, 257, 259, 301, 370 
cooperativity parameter, 561 
copolymer, xix, xx, 46, 51, 53, 56, 242, 476 
copolymer composition, 149, 401 
copolymer composition distribution, 174 
copolymerization rate equations, 148, 150 
copper, 181, 551 
copra oils, 62 
Corannulene, 549 
coumarin, 557 

Index 
 
 
581 
coupled equations, 397 
coupling, 539 
coupling efficiency, 539 
Coutte viscometer, 533, 538 
covariance, 397 
covariance matrix, 397 
CPFR, 393 
creatinine, 488 
creatinine phosphate, 488 
creeping flow, 535 
creeping heat  transfer, 199 
critical Reynolds number, 534 
critical value, 132 
critically damped, 255, 379 
cross-links, 176 
cross-over, 376 
cross-over frequency, 379 
cross-over point, 70 
crosstalk, 539, 559 
crude naptha, 307 
crude oil reserves, 60 
Crushing, 65 
Cryogenic milling, 551 
cryogenic temperature, 529 
cryo-TEM, 568 
CSP, 188 
CSTR(s), 144, 261, 338 
cubic curves, 76 
cubic Zirconium Tungstate, 180 
cuprous, 557 
curcuma longa, 565 
current-voltage characteristics, 192 
curvilinear, 79, 93 
curvilinear path, 75 
cut-off, 379 
cut-off radius, 177 
cutting, 547 
CVD, 567 
CX type, 528 
cyclodehydrogenations, 549 
D 
D‟Alambert‟s wave solution, 106 
DAG-RNNs, 560 
Damkholer number(s), 250, 252, 264, 265, 305, 337, 
401 
Damkohler number (dissociation), 269, 273 
Damkohler number (monomer), 269, 273 
Damkohler number (PFR), 277 
damped wave conduction, 167, 173, 193, 374 
Damped Wave Conduction and Relaxation Model, 
211 
damped wave conuction, 282 
damped wave diffusion, 110 
damped wave heat conduction, 340 
damping coefficient, 250, 254, 255, 256, 260 
damping component, 136 
damping factor, 258, 286 
damping ratio, 335 
damping term, 195 
Dankwert‟s boundary condition, 280 
Darwinian, 558, 562 
data acquisition, 27, 527, 539 
database, 514 
de Laval nozzles, 163 
De Soto Solar Power Generation, 191 
dead time, 395 
decoding, 560 
deep tanks, 86 
Deep Water Horizon, 59, 126 
defective, 423 
degree of mixedness, 174 
dehydration, 333 
dehydrogenation, 307 
delafossite structure, 187 
delays, 416 
Delta cells, 563 
Deming‟s principles, 420 
demixing, 551 
demographic, 540 
Denavit-Hartenberg, 157 
Denbigh scheme, 298 
density, 97, 285 
density functionality, 176 
deposition, 528 
depressed cubic, 505 
deprotection, 539 
dermatological, 562 
dertivative time constant, 349 
descend, 80 
detectivity, 539, 559 
devolatilizer, 31, 174 
diabetes, 562 
diagonal matrix, 150 
diaminobenzene, 557 
diamond, 553 
difference equations, 396 
differential equations, 416 
differential volume, 276 
diffusion limited, 110 
diffusional speed, 168 
difluorophenylene, 557 
digital system, 395 
diglycerides,, 68 
dimensional, 539 

Index 
582 
dimensionless frequency, 507 
dimensionless time, 252 
dimethylene dichloride, 344 
diode chips, 529 
Dip Pen lithography, 550 
direct digial control, 395 
direct write lithography, 551 
disappearance, 282 
discharge rate, 84 
discrete update equations, 416 
disks, 86 
dissipative force, 176 
dissolution rates, 513 
distillation column(s), 307, 417 
distribution, 487 
Distributor, 54 
distributor plate, 422 
Disturbance(s), 16, 23, 218, 364, 394, 395, 421, 477, 
542 
diverge, 397 
DNA computing, 555 
DNA software, 555 
dose, 490 
doubly periodic flow, 132 
downtime, 423 
DPD simulation, 176 
DPN, 569 
DPR, 564 
drag, 164 
drag coefficient, 76 
drag force, 177 
Drawability, 394 
drift velocity, 204 
drilling, 547 
Drones, 9, 10 
droplet formation, 127 
drops, 78 
drug delivery, 538, 546 
drug delivery systems, 282 
Drugs, xiii, 310, 488, 515, 548, 560, 562, 565, 566 
dry etching, 550 
dumbbell, 557 
DWNT, 568 
dyad, 401 
dye, 566 
dye stream, 159 
dynamic, 409 
dynamic models, 394 
Dynamic process models, 59 
dynamic programming, 559 
dynamic viscometer, 538 
Dynamics, 1, iii, 7, xix, xx, 5, 28, 175, 182, 219, 
220, 222, 223, 249, 253, 276, 312, 315, 323, 352, 
573 
E 
E type, 528 
Earth Quake, 31 
effective diffusion coefficient, 111 
effective film thickness, 169 
Effective Thermal Conductivity, 573 
effective thermal diffusivity, 104 
efficient, 539 
efflux time, 531 
efflux viscometers, 531 
Eigen values, 505 
eigenvalues, 115, 300, 407 
Eight roots, 506 
Elastic modulus, 394 
elastic scattering, 568 
elasticity, 181 
Elastomer, 394 
elbow-down, 157 
elbow-up, 157 
Electrical, 323 
electrical power, 395 
electrical resistivity, 203 
electrodeposition, 548, 551 
electromagnetic shielding, 567 
electron beam lithography, 550 
electron field emission, 567 
Electron gun, 568 
electron microscopes, 547 
electron microscopy, 395 
electronic properties, 567 
ellipsometry, 557 
emission profiles, 61 
emitted, 559 
empirical correlations, 86 
Empirical Models, 59 
emulsion, 394 
emulsion polymerization, 394 
Enamel, 562 
encapsulated, 548, 566 
end effector, 563 
end-effector, 157 
endovascular, 564, 565 
energy balance, 167, 249, 293, 401 
ensemble, 179 
enteral, 548 
enthalpy, 108 
entrance, 280 
entropic difference model, 552 

Index 
 
 
583 
entropy, 183 
enzymes, 302 
Epi-illumination, 539, 559 
Epoxy, 181 
equation of continuity, 128 
equation of state, 176, 552 
error, 324 
error calculation, 415 
error function solution, 98 
Esterification, 50, 55, 56 
estimation, 393 
Estimation and Control, xx, 26, 478 
estimator, 174, 418, 419 
etching, 528, 550 
ethanol, 493 
ethyl benzene, 307, 469 
ethylene glycol, 252 
ethylene oxide, 252, 338 
Euler‟s law, 549 
Euler‟s Method, 514 
EVA, 554 
evaluation, 560 
evaporative cooler, 106 
Evolution, 558 
excitation, 559 
excretion, 487 
exhaust flow, 163 
exhaustion of oil fields, 60 
exit age distribution, 549 
exothermic, 249, 394 
Experimental methods, 512 
exponential, 394, 397 
exponential distribution, 96 
extended Kalman filter, 397 
external tracking, 562 
extra stage, 418 
extraction of soot, 549 
Extruder, 37 
Exxon, 45, 50, 60, 126, 450, 452 
Exxon Valdez, 126 
F 
f value lenses, 547 
factor of absorption, 496 
Factorial Design of Experiments, 423 
Falling Regime, 125 
falling rod viscometer, 532 
falling spheres, 531 
falling-needle viscometer, 532 
FAME, fatty acid methyl esters, 61 
Fann V-G, 538 
fantastic voyage, 545 
Fast Fourier transform, 93, 421 
fast simulation, 179 
faujasite, 180, 181 
feasibility, 260 
feather, 75 
feces, 489 
feed location, 128 
feedback control, 7, 17, 19, 21, 24, 25, 31, 323, 327, 
344, 351, 363, 364, 395, 414, 477, 485 
feedforward, 401, 415 
feedforward ANN controller, 418 
feedrate, 418 
fermentations;, 302 
Ferranti-Shirley, 538 
ferric chloride, 549 
ferromagnetic, 555 
FFA, free fatty acid, 62 
Fick number, 122, 167 
Fick‟s law of mass diffusion, 202 
field flow fractionation, 395 
field size, 539, 559 
fifth stage, 418 
film theory, 162 
film thickness, 162 
filter parameters, 410 
Filtered, 396 
filtering, 174, 379 
final condition, 139 
final value theorem, 328 
finger pad, 133 
finger tip, 156 
finite length of packet, 97 
finite speed conduction, 97 
fire truck, 153 
fire-fighting, 153 
first order, 341 
first order filter, 408 
first zero, 122 
first-order lags, 401 
fish-bone diagrams, 420 
Flame control, 549 
flat, 539 
flocculate, 84 
flocking, 562 
flow sensors, 527 
flow toward, 100 
FlowAway, 99 
Flowchart, 423 
flue to air, 414 
fluid, 323 
fluid friction, 86 
Fluidized Bed, 54, 99, 219, 221, 222, 224, 225, 227, 
228, 229, 307, 478, 573 

Index 
584 
fluidized bed heat transfer, 282 
fluidized beds, 93 
fluorescent destran beads, 110 
fluorescent probes, 558 
Fokker-planck equation, 179 
Football, 76 
force, 528 
forecast, 63 
Form, 76 
forward algorithm, 560 
forward kinematics, 156 
Foster Wheeler, 99 
four simultaneous equations, 130 
Fourier Conduction, 97 
Fourier model, 211 
Fourier number, 167 
Fourier parabolic model, 284, 290 
Fourier part, 206 
Fourier representation, 340 
Fourier transformation, 568 
Fourier‟s law of heat conduction, 202 
fourth Order Runge-Kutta, 294, 403 
fourth regime, 120, 123 
fraction of dose, 490 
fractional conversion, 252, 253 
fractionation time, 395 
free electron cloud, 203 
free electrons, 202 
free energy, 183, 552 
free radical polymerization(s), 28, 144, 250, 556 
free radical species, 145 
frequency, 94, 291, 372 
frequency domain, 421 
frequency number, 93 
frictional force, 204 
fructose, 302 
fuel cells, 567 
fuel efficiency, 420 
full spectrum solar cell, 190 
fullerenes, 549, 566 
Fumaric Acid, 502 
G 
gain margin, 380 
gains, 416 
galvanic fabrication, 550 
gamma exposure, 529 
gas chromotograph, 401 
Gas Convection, 97 
gas gap, 97 
Gas Phase Polymerization Process, 43 
Gas turbine, 324 
gas-solid fluidized beds, 421 
gastric, 487 
gastric secretion, 563 
gastrointestinal tract, 514, 548 
Gaussian disturbance, 397 
gear box, 261 
gel effect, 307 
gel electrophoresis, 282 
Geldart A, 422 
Geldart B, 422 
Geldart C, 422 
Geldart D, 422 
Gene expression, 538 
gene profiling, 538 
generalized Bessel equation, 121, 198 
generalized Bessel function, 115 
generalized Fick‟s law, 171 
generalized Fick‟s law of diffusion, 84 
generalized suffix tree, 560 
Generic algorithms, 562 
geometric object, 77 
geometries, 282 
Geophysical formation, 563 
germination, 547 
germs, 546 
Gibbs-Boltzmann distribution, 179 
Giga magnetic hardrives, 548 
GISAXS, 568 
glass transition, 552 
Glaucoma, 540 
global alignment, 559 
Global warming, 60 
Glomerular filtration, 488 
glomerulus, 488 
glucagen, 563 
glucagons, 563 
glucose, 302 
Glycol Recovery, 56 
glycolic acid, 546 
Gold distribution, 393 
governing equation(s), 90, 253 
graft chains, 393 
graft copolymer, 174 
grafting, 261 
graphene, 567 
graphene nanoplatelets, 337 
Graphics, 513 
graphite, 553 
Graphite Fiber Composites, 187 
greater speed, 565 
growth time, 564 
guess, 398 
Guiner approximation, 568 

Index 
 
 
585 
Gulf War Oil Spill, 126 
Gusher, 126 
gyroscope, 557 
H 
Haake Buchler, 538 
half live, 261 
half-live(s), 261, 271 
Halfnium Tungstate, 187 
half-width, 162, 285 
Hamiltonian, 179 
Hamiltonian path, 556 
hammer, 75 
Hardness, 394 
harmonic wave, 280 
HCSTR, 393 
head, 545 
heat capacity, 97, 285, 413 
Heat capacity, 206 
Heat Exchanger, 66, 67 
heat flux, 98 
heat of reactions, 413 
heat removal, 394 
heat resistance, 174 
heat source, 141 
heat transfer coefficient(s), 93, 285 
Heaviside expansion, 101, 258, 341 
heavy component, 419 
HeIM, 569 
helacine stator, 557 
helical coil, 564 
helical ribbon agitator(s), 174, 225, 261 
helium ion microscope(s), 568 
hemoglobin molecule, 111 
Hercules viscometer, 538 
herding, 562 
hermoelectric, 528 
Heteroassociation, 417 
Hewlett Packard Compaq Elite 8300, 70 
hexagons, 549 
Hexamethylene Diamine, 54 
Hexane, 470, 481 
hidden layers, 419 
high concentration of oxygen, 113 
HIPCO, 567 
HIPS, 262 
Histogram, 423 
Hitachi, 41, 42, 57, 58 
HMMs, 560 
Hoeppler, 532 
homogeneous, 287 
homogeneous transform, 157 
Homopolymer, 46 
Honey, 181 
horizontal reactor, 564 
hot embossing, 550 
HRTEM, 568 
Hubble, 180 
human skin, 141 
humidification operations, 106 
humidity, 528 
HVAC, 14 
hydrodynamic chromatography, 395 
hydrodynamic regimes, 421 
hydrogen bonds, 558 
hydrolysis, 252, 338 
Hydroxyapetite, 561 
hyperbolic, 100, 119 
hyperbolic damped wave conduction, 290 
hyperbolic PDE, 202 
hypercube, 417 
hypersonic, 166 
hypersonic flow, 164 
hypoxia, 110, 126 
I 
icosahedra, 549 
ideal fluid, 160 
ideal gas, 79 
ignocellulosics, 302 
image geometry, 539, 559 
IMC, 410 
immersed surfaces, 93 
impact strength, 174, 394 
implantable, 563 
Implantable devices, 546 
implicit, 90 
improvement, 420 
in state space, 294 
in vivo, 513 
Inclined Tube, 539 
incompressible flow, 262 
induction period, 303 
Industrial Controls Market, 27 
inert, 539 
inertia forces, 159 
inertial lag time, 126, 203 
Inertial Regime, 123 
Infinite Series, 103 
infinite space, 95 
infinite speed of propagation, 202 
infinite storage number, 292 
Information handling systems, 193 
infrared, 527 

Index 
586 
infusion Michaelis-Menten, 499 
inhalation, 488 
inhibitor, 401 
initation, 262 
initial accumulation, 251 
initial condition(s), 275, 285, 420 
initiator, 174, 261 
initiator I2, 273 
ink jet printing, 539 
InP nanowhiskers, 564 
input neurons, 419 
input variable, 253, 370 
input/output system, 514 
instability, 348 
instantaneous, 96 
instrumented, 527 
insulin, 109, 563 
integral time, 336 
integral time constant, 349 
integrating system, 144 
integrating unstable,, 249 
Intel Core i7 processor, 70 
interacting particles, 178 
interaction parameter(s), 176, 553,  554 
Interconnections, 415 
interfacial area, 337, 565 
interfacial tension, 176 
interlayer thickness ratio,, 132 
intermediate product, 347 
Internal Model Control, 25, 29, 402, 411, 477, 486 
internal quantum efficiency, 189 
intracellular, 562 
intradermal, 487 
Intramolecular repulsions, 553 
intramuscular therapy, 487 
Intra-ocular pressure, 540 
intraocular route, 488 
intrarteria, 488 
intrathecal, 488 
inverse dynamic programming, 559 
inverse dynamics, 418 
inverse heat transfer, 340 
Inverse Kinematics, 28, 15, 157 
inverse response, 249, 401, 410 
Inversion, 409 
iridescence, 561 
Iridium oxide, 550 
Iron, 181 
iron age, 60 
Irvine-Park, 532 
isentropic, 163, 182 
isentropic compressibility, 180 
isentropic expansivity, 188 
isentropic volume expansivity, 186 
islets of Langerhans, 109, 563 
Isocitric Acid, 502 
isometric particles, 86 
iso-propylene, 307 
isothermal compressibility, 180 
iterative, 397 
Itrathecal route, 566 
IV therapy, 487 
Ixtoc I,, 126 
J 
J type, 528 
jacket, 293 
jacket temperature, 402 
jacketed, 249 
Jacobian, 4 
jatorpa crop, 62 
Javelin Throw, 76 
jets, 539 
job satisfaction, 423 
joint angles, 156, 157 
jump, 123 
junction, 528 
K 
K matrix, 506 
K type, 528 
Kalman filter(s), 393 564 
Kalman gain, 398 
KCN, 557 
Keeler Dorr-Oliver, 99 
kettle type reboiler, 418 
Kinematics, xv, 5, 28, 156 
kinesins, 557 
kinetic theory of gases, 202 
KINETICATM, 514 
Kinetics, xx, 113, 114, 143, 302, 304, 306, 493, 498, 
501, 518, 524 
Kirchoff‟s law, 323 
knowledge acquisition, 415 
Krause‟s end bulb, 133 
L 
lactic acid, 546 
lag phase, 489 
lag property, 209 
lag time, 197 
lags, 400 

Index 
 
 
587 
Lakeview Gusher, 126 
lamellar stretch model, 174 
laminar, 85 
laminar boundary layer, 160 
laminar flow, 159 
laminar regime, 132 
Langmuir-Blodgett, 556 
Laplace transforms, 70, 99, 209 
large relaxation time, 286 
Large Relaxation Time Values, 141 
laser ablation, 552, 567 
Laser vaporization, 567 
lasers, 547 
Lattice Defects, 529 
launch angle , 153 
launch angle of 380, 76 
launch angles, 155 
launch velocity, 79 
law of cosines, 158 
law of kinematics, 154 
layer thickness ratio, 130 
Layered, 415 
layered flow, 127 
LCST, 552 
Leaning tower of Pisa, 75 
Lear, 9 
learning, 417, 560 
least squares, 402 
left hand limit, 251 
less oscillatory, 349 
level, 528 
liberation, 487 
lift coefficient, 165 
lift force, 164 
light absorbtion, 189 
light component, 420 
light scattering, 395 
light trapping, 189 
lignite, 61 
Li-ion battery, 547 
linearization, 398 
Linker molecules, 539 
lithography, 528 
Lithography, 550 
local alignment, 559 
Locomotion, 4 
logistic function, 416 
log-log plot, 131 
Lorenz analogy, 204 
Louisville operator, 179 
low concentration of oxygen, 113 
lycaenid, 561 
M 
m controls, 395 
Mac Michael viscometer, 538 
Mach 5, 163 
Mach number, 163 
machined sensors, 527 
macroscopic, 176 
macular degeneration, 546 
Magnetic pigment, 561 
magnetic sensors, 527 
magnetite memory storage, 561 
Magnification, 569 
Magnum ABS, 37, 38 
Magnus effect, 83 
Maleic Acid, 502 
malignant, 547 
manganese, 84 
Manipulator, 4, 20, 28, 156, 157 
Manufacturing Cost, 67 
Marangoni instability, 132, 553 
Marginally, 142 
Mason-Weaver equation, 84 
mass balance, 167, 249, 498 
mass diffusion velocity, 168 
mass inertia, 122 
mass inspection, 421 
mass spectrometry, 488 
mass transfer coefficient, 170 
mathematical artifact, 258 
Mathematical models, 59 
matrix, 174 
matrix equation, 152 
matrix form, 148 
Max-Clique, 556 
maxima, 252, 292, 401 
maximum, 271 
maximum convective heat transfer, 99 
maximum height, 80, 154, 155 
Maxwell number, 122, 172 
Maxwell relation, 184 
Maxwellian distribution, 104 
McCabe and Thiele, 417 
mean, 397 
mechanical, 323 
mechanical expelling, 63 
Mechanical manipulation, 4, 156 
mechanical microspotting, 539 
Mechanical strength, 394 
mechanical surgeons, 545 
mechanics, 156 
Mechanistic Models, 59 
Melt index, 395 

Index 
588 
Melt viscosity, 394 
membrane, 561 
MEMS, 530, 540 
mercaptus bone, 560 
mesocopic simulation, 175 
mesophases, 176 
mesoporous, 551 
mesoscale conduction, 105 
mesoscopic, 60, 176 
metabolic process, 110 
metabolism, 487 
metabolism of drug, 488 
metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy, 564 
metastable, 552 
Metathesis, 556 
methacrylonitrile, 151, 307 
method of Eigenvectors, 149 
method of residues, 105 
method of superposition, 265 
methyl methacrylate, 271, 400 
Metrovib MVA Mach I, 538 
MFM, 569 
micelles, 176, 568 
Michaelis and Menten, 302 
Michaelis constant, 111, 302 
Michaelis-Menten, 488 
Michaelis-Menten kinetics, 111 
Microarray, 558 
microarray detection, 539 
microbes, 303 
microelectrode, 110 
Microemulsions, 63 
microgravity, 78 
microrobot, 555 
microscopic, 538 
microscopic reversibility, 282 
microscopic temperature, 204 
microscopic theory, 202 
Microsoft Excel 2010 for Windows, 70 
Microsoft Excel Spreadsheet, 141 
microturbines, 324 
microwave cavity, 530 
microwave output, 564 
Microwave sensors, 529 
microwave spin transfer, 564 
Miller direction, 564 
milliseconds, 334 
mineral oil, 174 
minima, 298 
MINVERSE, 130 
miscibility, 554 
Miscible Blends, 572 
Mitsubishi, 9, 49, 58, 441 
mixedness, 174 
mixing, 394 
mixing tank, 293, 402 
mixing times, 174, 261 
mixture thermodynamics, 554 
Mn, 395 
model based controller, 408 
Model controller, 410 
model equations, 268 
modified Bessel, 120 
modified Bessel function, 104 
modified rate matrix, 151 
molding, 547 
molecular actuators, 557 
molecular assemblers, 6, 28, 547 
molecular beam epitaxy, 550 
molecular compass, 557 
molecular electronics, 555 
Molecular muscle, 557 
molecular parameters, 395 
Molecular Recognition, 558 
Molecular rotors, 557 
molecular shuttles, 557 
molecular sieve, 337 
Molecular switches, 557 
Molecular valves, 557 
molecular weight distribution, 261, 393 
molecular weights, 554 
molten salts, 191 
moment of inertia, 536 
moments, 395 
momentum balance, 87, 167, 535 
momentum diffusion, 176 
momentum transfer, 87, 160 
Monod, 303 
Monod constant, 303 
monoglycerides, 68 
mononoclinic Sellenium, 180 
monosaccharides, 302 
Monsanto Plastics, xvii, 30, 34 
Monte Carlo, 60 
Mooney shearing disk viscometer, 538 
more proper, 408 
morphology, 551 
Motors, 13, 15, 420, 547 
MQ-9 Reaper, 10 
MRAM, 564 
MS Excel, 502 
MS Excel 2007, 86, 249, 265, 267, 271, 275 
MS Excel for Windows, 158 
MS Excel spreadsheet, 294 
MS Excel Spreadsheet 2007, 294, 403 
multi-compartment, 514 

Index 
 
 
589 
multi-component copolymer, 150 
multi-component copolymerization, 144 
multi-functionality, 562 
multiple steady state(s), 400, 402 
multiple-slide normalization, 539 
Multiplicites, 249 
multiplicitie, 270 
multiplicity, 158, 265, 275, 323 
Multiplicity, 153, 157, 304 
Multivariable Process Control, 26 
Multivariate, 394 
Multizone Process, 39 
Muscle, 17, 431 
Mw, 395 
MWD, 394 
MWNT, 567 
N 
n comonomers, 150 
n states, 395 
N type, 528 
Nametre rotary B rotational viscometer, 538 
nanites, 545 
nanoarrays, 538 
nanobiosensor, 552 
nanobolometer, 552 
nanobots, 545 
Nanocapsules, 548 
nanocomposite, 79, 547 
nanocomputers, 555 
Nanocrystal, 564 
nanocubes, 549 
nanocylinders, 549 
nanodevices, 562 
Nanodrugs, 548 
nanoethics, 548 
nanofabrication, 556 
nanofilaments, 549 
nanofilm, 568 
Nanofluids, 551 
nanograins, 549 
nanoids, 545 
nanoimprint lithography, 550 
nanolamella(e), 550, 551 
nanomachines, 545, 555 
nanomedicine, 545 
nanoparticles, 190, 546, 547, 550 
nano-peapod, 568 
Nanopeapods, 548 
nanopores, 548, 550, 551 
Nanoporous, 547 
nanopowders, 552 
nanoprisms, 550 
Nanoprobes, 552 
nano-ribbon, 568 
Nanorobot Drug Delivery, 30, 565 
nanorobots, 562 
nanorods, 549, 550 
nano-rope, 568 
Nanoscale effects, 203 
Nanoscale oscillator, 564 
nanoscale systems, 282 
nanoscopic, 560 
nanoscrystals, 549 
nano-sheet, 568 
nanosheets, 549 
Nanoshells, 548 
nanosphere(s), 551, 552 
nanostructures, 548 
nanotechnology, 528, 547 
nanotetrapods, 549 
Nanotips, 550 
nanotrenches, 550 
nanotubes, 552 
nanotunnel, 550 
nanovalves, 557 
nanovoids, 550 
Nanowhiskers, 564 
nanowires, 548, 549, 568 
naphthalene, 549 
narrow slit, 535 
natural frequency, 536 
neck, 545 
necrosis, 110 
Negative temperatures, 185 
negative thermal expansion, 187 
NEHW, 563 
nephron, 488 
nerve cells, 562 
Netwon‟s law of cooling, 202 
networks, 176 
neural controller, 417, 418 
neural estimator, 417, 420 
neural network(s), 26, 415, 478, 560 
neurons, 415 
neutron fluencies, 529 
Newton  number, 167 
Newton and Raphson, 158 
Newton Raphson, 265 
Newton‟s law of viscosity, 201, 202 
NFOM, 569 
Nickel-Chromium, 529, 530 
NMR, 395 
noise, 174, 179 
noise process, 397 

Index 
590 
nominally stable, 379 
non-compartment method, 488 
Non-contact, 539 
non-Fourier equation, 99 
non-invasive, 565 
nonlinear, 393, 395, 512 
non-linear, 270, 323, 395 
non-linear estimation, 397 
nonlinear state estimation, 400 
Norcross viscometers, 538 
normalization, 559 
NP complete, 556 
nuclear power plant, 21, 59, 153, 154 
Nuclear spin, 185 
nucleate, 552 
nucleic acids, 558 
number of units, 416 
numerical integration, 90 
Nusselt number, 162 
Nutrasweet, 302 
N-wave, 164 
Nylon 6,6, xx, 54, 181 
Nylon balls, 531 
Nyquist diagram, 373 
O 
Obesity, 563 
oblique shock, 166 
observable, 396 
o-chlorostryene-p-cholorostryene, 554 
ODE, 95, 139 
OECD, 63 
of n monomers, 150 
of second order absorption, 497 
offet, 329 
offset, 328 
Ohm‟s law of electricity, 202 
oil rich, 127 
Oil spills, 126 
oil wells, 340 
Oligoarenes, 549 
oligonucleotides, 539 
oligothiopene, 190 
on-line, 395, 397 
on-line SEC, 395 
On-off, 323 
Open Interval, 123 
Optical microscopes, 568 
optimal operation, 64 
Optimal target concentration, 539 
optimal trajectories, 400 
optimal working temperature, 193 
optimization, 400 
order reduction is, 93 
ordinary differential equations, 149 
Organic Synthesis, 556 
orthogonality, 118 
oscillations, 140 
oscillator, 530 
oscillatory, 153, 256 
oscillatory discharge, 282 
Osphronemus gorami, 110 
osteoblast, 561 
osteoclastic, 561 
Ostwald viscometer, 538 
Output, 16, 23, 25, 143, 256, 257, 260, 275, 281, 
369, 384, 385, 411 
output neurons, 419 
output response, 256, 258, 260, 281, 328, 335 
output variable, 253, 254, 370 
overall coefficient, 106 
overall elimination rate constant, 491 
overall rate constant, 489, 491 
overall transfer coefficient, 161 
overdamped, 254, 379 
overflow rate, 85 
overshoot, 126, 194, 250, 251, 282, 331, 379 
Oxalic Acid, 502 
oxidation, 539 
oxirane, 252 
oxygen permeability, 110 
P 
P control, 402 
P only Control, 353, 357, 388 
packed bed, 337, 412 
packed column, 337 
packet theory, 94 
Pade approximation, 369, 412 
PAH, 561 
PAM, 559 
pancreas, 109, 563 
pantograph, 547 
Paracrine, 563 
parallel channels, 159 
parallel disk compression viscometer, 535 
parameter estimation, 396 
parameters, 270, 369 
Parenteral, 548 
Pareto Chart, 423 
partial condenser, 418 
Partially Stabilized ZrO2, 181 
particle diffusion, 176 
patient compliance, 514 

Index 
 
 
591 
pattern formation, 551 
pattern recognition, 415 
PCR, 556 
PD Control, 341, 342, 352, 353, 362, 384, 385, 390, 
402 
PDE, 94 
peat, 61 
Peclet number, 100, 173 
Peclet, 104 
Peltier effect, 528 
PEMA, 554 
penalty, 559 
penetration distance, 167, 212 
penetration length, 203 
penicillin, 302 
pentagons, 549 
Pentium IV, 201, 547 
percutaneous, 487 
perfect control, 408 
perfectly mixed, 261 
perfusion, 488 
periodic, 422 
periodic solutions, 148 
periodic wave, 379 
peripheral layer, 127 
peripheral tissue, 510 
permanent magnet, 564 
permeability, 112, 513 
permeability of capillary, 488 
petroleum, 61 
PFR, 65, 395 
pH, 528 
phagocytosis, 561 
pharmacokinetic equations, 513 
Pharmacokinetic model, 566 
Pharmacokinetics, 487 
phase angle, 372 
phase characteristics, 379 
Phase Inversion, 421 
phase shift, 371 
phase-separated, 554 
PHD server, 560 
phenylamine, 302 
pheromones, 560 
philosophy, 420 
phosgene, 557 
photodiod(es), 192, 569 
photodynamic, 566 
photoelectric, 547 
photolithography, 539 
photometers, 395 
photovoltaic, 191 
photovoltaic efficiency, 189 
photovoltaics, 567 
phylogenetic tree, 559 
Physica rotational viscometer, 538 
physical changes, 183 
physically realizable, 282, 408 
physiological, 513 
Physiological pharmacokinetic, 513 
physiologic-based simulation, 514 
PI control, 338, 339, 402 
PID control, 402 
piezoelectric, 539, 565 
piezoresistive, 540 
pin, 546 
pinned magnetic structure, 564 
pins, 539 
pitching moment, 165 
PK tool, 514 
planar, 538, 539 
Planck‟s theorem, 192 
Plan-Do-Check, 420 
plant start-up, 249 
plasma, 501, 567 
Plasma compaction, 551 
Plastics, xvii, 39, 573, 574 
plastometers, 538 
plateau, 93 
PLC, 14, 27 
plug flow reactor, 260, 276 
PMF, 561 
PMMA, 554 
pneumatic, 323 
poisoning, 303 
Poisson, 393 
poles, 102 
Polyamide, xx, 53 
Polybutadiene, 36, 37, 42 
Polydiacetylene Crystal, 187 
Polyester, 57 
Polyethylene, 31, 181 
Polyglycolide, 52 
Polyion, 561 
polymer blends, 551 
Polymer brush, 551 
polymer/biopolymer, 561 
polymeric valves, 557 
polymerization of fullerene, 566 
Polymerization reactions, 261 
polynomial degree, 149 
polynomial equation, 298, 408, 506 
Polypropylene, 45, 46, 48, 50, 261 
polyrate, 267, 271 
Polystyrene, xx, 29, 33, 40, 56, 58, 181, 554 
population pharmacokinetic, 488 

Index 
592 
Porad‟s law, 568 
porosity, 394 
posotional control, 548 
potential flow, 160 
power draw, 127, 261 
PPO, 554 
practically realizable, 156 
Prandtl-Galuert singularity, 164 
precise, 527 
precursor, 568 
preformed rubber, 174 
Prepolymerization, 56 
Present worth, 191 
pressure, 528 
pressure controller, 324 
pressure drop, 87, 92 
pressure fluctuations, 96, 421 
pressure transmitter(s), 324, 395 
pressurized water, 191 
price tag, 421 
primary zone, 549 
printed circuit board, 193 
probability distribution, 416 
probe duplex, 539 
probes, 527 
Process Dynamics, ix, 27 
process gain, 253, 254, 327, 370, 376 
processability, 174 
Product Ditribution, 72 
product price, 514 
production capacity, 549 
production rate, 400 
Progressive Methanolysis, 71 
projected area, 76 
projectile motion, 75, 153 
propagating species, 261 
propagation, 262 
proper, 400 
proportional controller, 327 
proportional derivative, 336 
proportional integral, 329, 340 
Prostate, 545 
protein classification, 559 
protein folding, 559 
proteins, 568 
prototypical first order process, 253 
protozoa, 302 
pseudo-stationary, 86 
pseudo-steady state, 263 
pulse layered deposition, 551 
pumping costs, 93 
Purity levels, 549 
PW, Present Worth, 1, 28, 448 
pyrolysis, 62 
pyrolyzed, 568 
Pyropower, 99 
Q 
QIT, 420 
QSSA, 150 
quadratic, 254 
quadratic equation, 306 
quality, 400, 420, 423 
Quantum dots, 549, 550, 569 
quartz glass, 180 
quasi-steady state assumption, 145, 149, 397 
quenching, 552 
R 
R1, 273 
R2, 273 
radial basis functions, 417 
Radiation Heating, 529 
radio frequency, 563 
radius of gyration, 554 
Raleigh criterion, 568 
Raman microscopes, 569 
random, 394 
random force, 176, 177 
range, 80 
Rank pulse shearometer, 538 
RAPID, 4 
rapid bolus, 488 
Rapid Thermal Processing, 190 
Rapseed Oil;, 62 
raster scan, 568 
rate coefficient, 263 
rate matrix, 151, 300 
rate of polymerization, 264 
rate of reactions, 268 
ratio control, 25, 412 
ratio of relaxation times, 287 
raw materials, 65 
Ray Mabus, 61 
Rayleigh criterion, 547 
Rayleigh regime, 132 
RBI, 569 
reachable, 396 
reactangular, 85 
reaction engineering, 249 
reaction speed, 252, 277 
reactions in circle, 502 
reactions in series, 143 

Index 
 
 
593 
reactive ion etching, 550 
reactivity ratios, 149, 152, 400 
reactor syrups, 394 
reactor temperature, 549 
reading, 527 
reaggregate, 562 
realizable, 409 
reboiler, 418 
recipe, 400 
rectilinear, 79, 93 
recurrence relations, 78 
recurrent, 415 
recurrent architecture, 415 
recursive least squares, 418 
recycle, 400 
red light photons, 190 
redwood, 531 
reference, 16, 187, 431 
reflection, 157 
refractometers, 402 
regeneration, 561 
regularity detection, 417 
relative motion, 88 
relativistic coordinate transformation, 99 
relativistic transformation, 119, 203 
relaxation number, 105 
relaxation time, 168, 173, 190 
relaxational rate, 173 
relaxational speed, 208 
Relaxational Transfer, 125 
relaxational/ballistic, 168 
reliability, 420 
renal extraction, 488 
renewable energy, 61, 66 
repulsion parameters, 179 
research rocket, 163 
residence time, 84, 130, , 227, 252, 261, 269, 270, 
273, 276, 397, 549 
residue theorem, 101 
resitance temperature detectors, 529 
resolution, 527, 539, 559, 568 
resonant peak, 379 
respiration, 489 
retail price, xix 
retrofit, 65 
reversible nanovalves, 557 
reversible reactions, 394 
Reynolds number, 76, 159 
rheometers, 538 
Rhombohedral, 561 
ribosomes, 548 
right hand limit,, 251 
right skew, 502 
rise velocity, 532 
Rising Regime, 125 
RLS algorithm, 418 
Robo-roo, 9 
Robot, 6, 21, 27 
robot arm, 156 
Robotic Institute Association, 3 
robotic manipulators, 323 
robust, 369, 396 
rolling ball viscometer, 536 
roll-printing, 190 
ROMP, 551 
root mean square velocity, 104, 187 
rotating tub, 333 
rotational motion, 538 
rotaxane, 557 
rotor speed, 64, 131, 332 
rotor, 126 
rounded leading edge, 165 
Routh array, 347 
Ruffini‟s ending, 133 
Runaway Reaction, 11, 27 
Runge Kutta fourth order, 249, 275 
Runge-Kutta, 267 
Runge-Kutta 2, 514 
Runge-Kutta 4, 514 
Runge-Kutta method, 250 
S 
saddle point, 249 
SAN, Styrene Acrylonitrile Copolymer, xx, 262, 554 
Sandestin principle, 61 
Saponification, 62 
SAR/QSAR, 513 
saturation concentration, 337 
saw-tooth, 507 
SAXS, 548, 568 
Saybolt, 531 
scaffolds, 546 
scale-up, 59 
scanning electron microscope, 568 
scanning probe microscope, 568 
scanning tunnelling microscopy, 557 
Scatter Plot, 423 
Schiotz/plunger, 540 
Schmidt number, 161 
Schott Glass, 180 
Schulz-Flory, 393 
scrap, 423 
screw device, 538 
SCSTR, 393 
SEC, 395 

Index 
594 
SEC light scattering, 395 
Second Law, 126 
second law of thermodynamics, 180, 203, 251, 557 
second order, 250, 254, 260, 379 
second order differential equation, 287 
second order filter, 410 
secondary processes, 489 
secondary structure, 559 
Sedimentation, 84 
sedimenting, 86 
Seebeck effect, 528 
Segregated, 393 
selectivity, 566 
selectivity of the FAME, 70 
Self Assembled Monolayers, 550, 556 
self-assembly, 551, 561 
Self-fabrication, 558 
self-organize, 556 
Self-organizing, 563 
self-oscillations, 323 
self-replicating, 548 
SEM, 548 
semiconductor, 363, 540 
Semi-empirical models, 59, 93 
semi-infinite medium, 202, 207 
semi-log, 372 
sensitivity, 529, 539, 559 
sensors, 323, 527 
Sensors, xx, 9, 23, 27, 28, 430, 431, 527, 528, 529, 
541 
separation efficiency, 91, 127, 131 
separation of variables, 115, 139, 270 
Sequence alignment, 559 
sequence distribution, 393 
SERS, 569 
set point, 23, 324 
Set Point,  
Shaft Horizontal Reactor, 53 
Sharma number, 172, 173 
Sharma Number (Mass), 122 
sharper fall, 93 
shear rate, 128, 174 
shear stress, 88 
Shell, ix, xix, 43, 50, 57, 59, 60, 126 
Shell Balance, 59 
Sherwood number, 112, 122, 172 
short, 549 
short time limit, 102 
shot gun sequencing, 559 
Showa Denko, 45 
shut down, 249, 324, 402 
side effects, 565 
sidestream, 418 
Sigma-Pi, 415 
sigmoid, 419 
sigmoidal, 303 
sigmoidal growth, 63 
sigmoidal manner, 265 
Signal, 422, 574 
silica, 104 
silica/alumina, 62 
Silicalite-1, 187 
Silicon, 181 
silicon chips, 555, 558 
Simulation, 59, 131 
simulation engine, 514 
simultaneous reaction and diffusion, 110 
single compartment model, 490 
Single Molecule Analytical, 556 
Singularities, 4, 202 
Sinopec, 45 
sinuous, 159 
Sinusoidal oscillations, 536 
sinusoidally, 418 
Skin, 17, 134, 135, 140, 141 
sliding-plate viscometer, 532 
Slow absorption, 488 
sludge, 84 
sludge zone, 88 
slugging, 421 
Smalley-fingers, 548 
Smart materials, 561 
SMT, 564 
Soda-Lime Glass, 181 
sodium hydroxide, 66 
sodium methylate, 61 
sodium zirconium phosphate, 180 
soft condensed matter, 176 
Softening temperature, 394 
softlithographic, 556 
sol gel, 550 
solanezumab, 565 
solar cells, 548 
solar heaters, 191 
solar power plants, 192 
Solar Thermal Power, 191 
soldering, 547 
solid circulation flux, 104 
solid colloid, 552 
solid propellant, 282 
solubility, 513 
Solution Copolymerization, 55, 477 
Solvation, 557 
Solvent, 13, 67, 471, 472 
somatostatin, 563 
soot deposits, 549 

Index 
 
 
595 
Soybean oil, 62 
space conditions, 283, 536 
Space shuttle, 164 
sparse tables, 559 
spatio-temporal, 197 
SPC, 420 
SPC charts, 174 
SPC, Statistical Process Control, 420 
species A, 301 
species B, 301 
species R, 301 
species S, 301 
species T, 302 
specific, 538 
speed of light, 282 
speed of sound, 182 
speed of the fluid, 252 
spherical, 548 
spherical shell, 194 
Sphericities, 86 
sphericity, 532 
Spheripol Process, 46 
Spherizone Process, 50 
spherulite, 561 
spills, 60 
deepwater horizon oil spill, 60 
Exxon Valdez, 60 
pipeline in Russia, 60 
Spin coating, 551 
spinal surgery, 545 
spinless electron, 212, 217 
spinless golf ball, 77 
spinning screws, 555 
spinodal nucleation, 552 
spiral response, 249 
splanchnic circulation, 488, 548 
Spline, 28 
sprayed, 106 
spring constant, 536 
Sputtering, 550 
square matrix, 150 
stability, 143, 144, 153, 328, 347, 555 
stability analysis, 148 
stability criteria, 347 
stabilized, 568 
Stabiner viscometer, 533 
stable, 142, 249, 552 
stable dispersion, 554 
Stainless Steel, 181 
staircase tables, 559 
stamping, 547 
starch slurry, 302 
start-ups, 402 
state space, 395 
state space form, 64 
state space model, 143, 250 
State Space Representation, 144 
state-model, 396 
static controller, 409 
static formation temperature, 340 
Static Mixer, 51 
stationary period, 303 
Statistical normalization, 539 
steady state, 265, 274 
steam jacket, 418 
steel ball bearings, 531 
STELLA®, 514 
step change, 254 
stereochemical, 556 
stereochemistry, 558 
Stereo-regularity, 394 
Steric, 557 
sticky fingers, 548 
STM, 569 
stochastic, 178 
stochastic differential equation, 398 
Stochastic simulations, 552 
Stokes regime, 77 
Stokes settling, 127 
Stokes-Einstein, 194 
stone age, 60 
storage coeffient, 173 
storage number, 251, 284 
storage unit, 564 
Stormer viscometer, 538 
strain, 528 
strain gauges, 540 
Stress-crack resistance, 394 
String algorithms, 560 
structural properties, 395 
Structure –property, 396 
structure-activity, 513 
styrene, 267, 307 
Styrene, xx, 13, 30, 33, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 151, 224, 
246, 469, 518, 519, 520, 552 
styryl radical, 261 
subcritical damped, 506 
subcritical damped oscillations, 141, 142, 203, 504 
subcutaneous, 487 
sublingual, 487 
submarine, 545 
subsonic, 166 
substitution, V = u/X, 195 
substrate, 527 
subsystem 1, 396 
subsystem 2, 396 

Index 
596 
Succinic Acid, 502 
Succyl Coenzyme A, 502 
suffix tree, 560 
sugar cane, 63 
Sun flower oil, 62 
supeficial speed, 277 
super capacitors, 567 
superabsorbing, 189 
supercomputer, 552 
Supercomputer based models, 59 
supercritical ethanol, 549 
superposition, 125, 539 
supersequence, 559 
supersonic, 163 
supersonic aerodynamics, 163 
Supersonic fracture, 164 
Supervised, 417 
Supply Chain Robotics, xx, 28 
surface area, 394 
surface gloss, 174 
surface instability, 551 
Surface Mediated Growth, 567 
Surface roughness, 563 
surface tension, 132, 535, 552 
survey, 420 
Suspension, 394 
Sustainable Engineering, 60 
SWAXS, 568 
sweat, 489 
sweeteners, 302 
SWNT, 567 
symmetrical, 504 
synapses, 415 
synthesized, 549 
T 
t statistics, 539, 559 
T type, 528 
Taitel paradox, 250 
Taiwan, 66 
Tallow, 66 
tangential shear, 87 
target, 559 
targeted therapy, 565 
Taylor series, 374, 499 
Taylor vortices, 132, 535 
TBPO, 267, 271 
TBPOND, 271 
TBPP, 271 
Tear strength, 394 
Tellerium, 180 
Tellurium, 22 
temperature of the sun, 192 
temperature transmitter, 324 
Tennessee Valley Authority, 99 
tensile strength, 174 
terminal settling velocity, 77, 531 
termination, 262 
Terpolymer(s), 31, 46, 144, 246 
tetracationic cyclophane, 557 
tetrapolymer(s), 144, 151 
tetrapolymerization, 144 
the 5 constant correlation, 79 
the laws of resistance, 159 
the loop of Henle, 488 
the mass transfer coefficient, 112 
The multicomponent copolymerization rate 
constants, 148 
thermal, 323 
thermal conductivity, 97, 205 
thermal diffusion rate, 160 
thermal diffusivity, 94, 167 
thermal expansion coefficient, 180 
Thermal Initiation, 261, 262 
thermal mass, 97, 173 
thermal polymerization, xx, 30, 250 
thermal wear, 133 
Thermistors, 529 
Thermocouples, 528 
thermreversible, 561 
thiele modulus, 117 
thin film solar cells, 189 
thin films, 190, 531 
third derivative, 500 
third order, 201, 261 
third regime, 197 
three compartment models, 510 
three component, 417 
three letters, 547 
threshold, 416 
threshold dosing, 513 
throughput, 539, 559 
time condition, 512 
time constant(s), 253, 254, 370, 409, 416, 528 
time shift property, 301 
tip shear rate, 261 
tomographic record, 541 
tomographs, 540 
top pressure, 327 
top-down, 550 
torque, 15, 131, 132, 333, 532, 541 
torque controller, 333 
torsion, 536 
torsional oscillatory viscometer, 536 
Trace, 149 

Index 
 
 
597 
tractable, 397 
Trade-offs, 93 
trailing edge, 165 
Training pairs, 418 
Trajectory Generation, 28 
trancedental, 498 
trancedental equation, 118, 304 
Transesterification, 61 
transient conversion, 271, 280 
Transient Study, 27 
transition, 85 
transition matrix, 397 
transmission electron microscope, 568 
transmitters, 563 
Transmutation, 529 
transonic, 166 
transplanted, 109 
transport cells, 557 
transport mechanism, 513 
trauma, 562 
travelling waves, 132 
trial and error, 79 
Triglyceride, 61 
trimethylindium, 564 
triphenylureidocalixarene, 557 
triple products, 505 
tropomyosin, 561 
tryptycene, 557 
tube, 99 
tube banks, 106 
tubular, 548 
Tubular Reactor, 30, 52 
tung oil, 62 
tuning parameter(s), 329, 408 
Turbulent Bed, 421 
turbulent flow, 85, 159 
Tuyreus-Luben, 402 
two components, 154 
two dimensions, 85 
Two initiators, 271 
two regimes, 197 
two time, 283 
two-compartment model, 510 
Type A, 488 
Type B, 488, 489 
Type C, 488 
Type I diabetes, 125 
Type II diabetes, 563 
Tyreus-Luyben, 349 
U 
U tube, 539 
Ubbelohole viscometer, 538 
UCST, 552 
ultrafast laser heating, 282 
ultrafiltration, 395 
ultraviole, 190 
uncertainities, 369, 410 
undamped, 256 
underdamped, 258, 260, 323, 335, 336, 340, 342, 
344, 379 
underdamped oscillatory, 249 
uniform, 539 
uniform distribution, 104 
uniformity, 423, 539, 559 
Universal Robot, 9 
unstable, 142, 323, 407, 552 
unstable system, 153 
Unsupervised, 417 
untethered, 564 
upper critical, 159 
usable form, 499 
using nuclear probes, 395 
V 
vacuum distillation, 62 
vacuum synthesis, 550 
VAL, 4 
Valve gain, 327 
valve setting, 418 
Valves, 15 
van Laar, 553 
vapor-liquid-solid, 564 
variable trajectories, 400 
variance in SPC, 174 
vector, 395 
vector M, 147 
vegetable oil, 61 
velocity gradient, 88 
velocity of heat, 99, 168, 206 
velocity of mass, 168 
velocity of the electron, 206 
Vents, 43 
Verlet algorithm, 178 
Vernotte number, 167 
very large Peclet numbers, 102 
vesicles, 560 
vibration resistance, 528 
vibrations, 164 
viscoelastic, 176 
viscoelasticity, 538 
Viscometers, 395 
viscosity, 261 
viscous diffusion rate, 160 

Index 
598 
viscous effects, 85 
viscous forces, 159 
visible light, 527 
viterbi algorithm, 560 
VLSI, 531 
volume expansivity, 179 
volume fraction, 31, 553 
W 
wake region, 164 
Wake separation, 77 
wall effects, 531 
wall heat flux, 96 
warm/cool feeling, 133 
warranty, 420 
Wars, 60 
waste, 423 
waste cooking oil, 65 
waste heat, 190 
Waste Tires, 482 
waste water, 84 
Water, 181 
water rich, 127 
wave concentration, 120, 278 
wave equation, 279 
wave form, 249 
wave front, 120, 123, 125, 280 
wave regime, 119 
wave temperature, 136, 290 
wave term, 286, 292 
WAXS, 548, 568 
WBC, 562 
Weiner, 178 
Weiner filter, 393 
Weiner-Hopf integral equation, 174 
weir area, 91 
Weissenerberg rheogoniometer, 538 
Westinghouse, 99 
Wheatstone bridge, 540 
Wilson cloud, 164 
wounds, 561 
write once memory, 556 
X 
X-drop algorithm, 559 
xerogel, 551 
x-ray, 568 
Y 
Y shaped, 568 
yeast, 302 
Z 
zero relaxation time, 284 
Zero Transfer Inertial Regime, 125 
zero-order, 512 
zeroth order, 302 
Zirconium molybdate, 187 
Zirconium Silicalite-1, 187 
Zirconium Tungstate, 187 
Zirconium Tungstate ZrW2O8, 181 
 

