
 Controlling Cyberspace 

This page intentionally left blank

 Controlling Cyberspace 
 The Politics of Internet 
Governance and Regulation 
 Carol M. Glen 

 Copyright © 2018 by Carol M. Glen 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a 
review, without prior permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Glen, Carol M., author.
Title: Controlling cyberspace : the politics of Internet governance and 
regulation / Carol M. Glen.
Description: Santa Barbara, California : Praeger, an Imprint of ABC-CLIO, 
LLC, [2018] | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁ ers: LCCN 2017039626 (print) | LCCN 2017042411 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9781440842757 (ebook) | ISBN 9781440842740 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Internet governance. | Internet—Government policy.
Classiﬁ cation: LCC TK5105.8854 (ebook) | LCC TK5105.8854 .G545 2018 (print) | 
DDC 384.3/34—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017039626
 ISBN: 978-1-4408-4274-0  (print)
 978-1-4408-4275-7  (ebook)
 22 21 20 19 18  1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available as an eBook. 
 Praeger 
 An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 www.abc-clio.com 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper 
 
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

 For Rick 

This page intentionally left blank

 Contents 
 Chapter 1 
The Challenge of Internet Governance  
1
 Chapter 2 
The Evolution of Internet Governance  
15
 Chapter 3 
The Role of the United Nations  
35
 Chapter 4 
The Digital Divide  
55
 Chapter 5 
Human Rights  
77
 Chapter 6 
Securing Cyberspace 
99
 Chapter 7 
The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries  
121
 Chapter 8 
The Persistent Challenge of Internet Governance  
143
 Abbreviations  
157
 Notes 
161
 Index 
191

This page intentionally left blank

 CHAPTER ONE 
 The Challenge of Internet 
Governance 
 During January 2012, Wikipedia went dark and millions protested online 
against two proposed laws, the Stop Online Piracy Act and the PROTECT IP 
Act, which many believed threatened freedom of speech on the Internet. In 
December of the same year, Congress unanimously passed a resolution that 
opposed a takeover of the Internet by the United Nations (UN). In February 
2015, Congress designated an “Internet Governance Awareness Week.” A few 
weeks later, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) voted to adopt 
net neutrality rules that would allow the agency to regulate the Internet as a 
public utility, following an unprecedented deluge of public comments on the 
issue. These are just a few examples that point to the dawn of a new era of 
Internet politicization and control. Although the Internet has been governed 
since its inception, regulation and management were technical in nature, 
designed to create standards that would facilitate the efﬁ cient operation of a 
network of networks. Supervision was conducted by computer scientists, 
engineers, and other technical experts, largely beyond the public’s view. 
Internet governance, as a result, evolved in an ad hoc manner that produced 
a decentralized regulatory environment shaped by myriad public and private 
organizations, as well as individuals. This framework generated the telecom-
munications revolution that we know today, but it is now being contested. 
New security, privacy, and legal issues have raised political questions about 
whether such loose regulatory coordination can adapt quickly enough to 
21st-century challenges. Such doubts go well beyond the technical; they 
reﬂ ect profound questions about who should control the Internet. 
 In the early years, it was widely assumed that the Internet was ungovern-
able, a “benevolent anarchy.” 1 Those who endorsed this view held that 

2 
Controlling Cyberspace
cyberspace is a distinct sphere, separate from the “real” world, where “real” 
world jurisdictional controls do not apply. As Johnson and Post asserted in 
1996, “The rise of an electronic medium that disregards geographical bound-
aries also throws the law into disarray by creating entirely new phenomena . . . 
that cannot be governed, satisfactorily, by any current territorially-based sover-
eign.” 2 A common perception at the time was that the Internet was, and should 
be, self-regulating. This was an optimistic view of how the Internet would 
evolve. A free and open Internet would foster cross-cultural understanding, 
promote greater political transparency, and bolster human rights. This vision 
was epitomized by Vice President Al Gore’s assertion that the information 
superhighway would lead to a “new Athenian age of democracy.” 3 By lowering 
the transaction costs of communication, the Internet was expected to create an 
increasingly networked population and reshape the very nature of our interac-
tions. At the heart of these ideas is the proposition that the Internet has tilted 
the balance of political power toward individuals and non-state actors, at the 
expense of traditional governments, “By creating a seamless global economic 
zone, borderless and unregulatable, the Internet calls into question the very 
idea of the nation-state.”  4 At the same time, it was also claimed that ongoing 
processes of globalization were undermining the ability of governments to 
control events, even within their own borders. 
 From today’s vantage point, many of these assertions appear to be over-
stated and utopian. Nation-states are clearly still relevant, and governments 
have successfully imposed domestic Internet regulations, ﬁ lters, and censor-
ship of content. The role of nation-states in Internet governance is closely tied 
to the traditional principle of sovereignty. This principle, which can be traced 
back to the Treaty of Westphalia (1648), implies the right of states to have full 
and exclusive authority over their own territories. The traditional coercive 
powers of governments, manifested in sovereignty and laws, shape how physi-
cal networks, search engines, Internet service providers, and other parts of the 
system operate. It has been argued that states can effectively control the Inter-
net through the regulation of such intermediaries. 5 Government practice there-
fore demonstrates that components of cyberspace are not free from state 
jurisdiction, and “cannot be interpreted as a waiver of the exercise of territorial 
sovereignty.” 6 Having said that, even though states have always had a right to 
regulate the Internet, they have not always chosen to do so. In the early years, 
governments adopted a largely laissez-faire approach to regulation, leaving 
non-state actors and technical experts to develop the Internet’s infrastructure, 
rules, and protocols. As the Internet became central to our lives, to commerce, 
and national security, governments have increasingly sought to assert their 
inﬂ uence over this crucial resource. When this shift began to occur is debat-
able, but there is broad agreement that a transition has taken place. It is pre-
cisely the reassertion of sovereign authority, and the “death of the borderless 
Internet,” 7 which have increased international political tension in this area. 

The Challenge of Internet Governance 
3
 Despite widespread recognition that governments have become increas-
ingly engaged in the realm of Internet governance and regulation, there is 
still debate over the relative power of nation-states in relation to other actors. 
The Internet evolved in a nonhierarchical way, in multiple layers, without a 
centralized control point. So, it would be mistaken to assume that it can be 
easily, or effectively, controlled by one group of actors operating at one level 
in the system. The term ecosystem is a frequently used, and appropriate, 
metaphor to describe the numerous actors who shape the Internet and con-
tribute to its governance. It suggests a network of interconnecting and inter-
acting parts, which, in the realm of Internet governance, includes a mix of 
state and non-state actors. Within that ecosystem there are different norms, 
hierarches, and controls, depending on the issue area. For instance, we 
would expect that government interest and inﬂ uence would be greater in 
areas related to national security and weaker in areas related to technical 
standard setting. 8 Within this ecosystem, parties with competing goals vie 
for inﬂ uence, and though governments play a signiﬁ cant role they are far 
from hegemonic. The distinction between traditional notions of sovereign 
power, which governments exercise within a deﬁ ned territorial space, con-
trasts with their diminished inﬂ uence over global political events. 
 What Is Internet Governance? 
 The term governance has been used in international relations discourse 
for many years, but not always with clear and consistent meaning. Finkel-
stein describes governance as a fuzzy term that we use “when we don’t really 
know what to call what is going on,” 9 but many authors have delineated the 
term. Dingwerth, for instance, states that the “global governance thesis” can 
be disaggregated into four major claims: (1) the internationalization of policy 
making, (2) diffusion of authority beyond the state, (3) changing procedural 
norms beyond the state, and (4) the distribution of governing resources 
among an increasing range of actors. 10 From this perspective, the state-centric 
world, in which national actors dominate, coexists with a multicentric world 
that includes a diverse range of relatively equal actors. 11 The idea that gover-
nance is a process that is much broader than government is captured in 
regime theory. Regimes are said to be “sets of implicit or explicit principles, 
norms, rules and decision-making procedures” in a given issue area of inter-
national relations. 12 Regimes form in particular policy areas when there is a 
need to establish order in the absence of a coercive power that can impose 
that order. Regimes help state and other actors cooperate, and they exist in 
all domains of world politics; there are trade regimes, security regimes, envi-
ronmental regimes, and others. 13 Regimes are often structured around inter-
national organizations and agreements (although they don’t have to be), and 
they evolve over time. Although there is no deﬁ nitive regime for Internet 

4 
Controlling Cyberspace
governance as yet, this issue area is not completely fragmented either. 14 
Rather, the realm of Internet governance is characterized by a set of loosely 
connected norms and institutions that Nye describes as a regime complex. 15 
 The academic discourse on governance and regimes highlight the emer-
gence of non-state actors on the global political stage, so too does the litera-
ture on networks. Networks are particularly relevant to the present 
discussion, since the expansion of the Internet has coincided with the expan-
sion of a multitude of new networks. Like the concept of governance, net-
works can be deﬁ ned in a number of different ways. In their trans-governmental 
form, they take the form of peer-to-peer interactions between domestic ofﬁ -
cials and their foreign counterparts. 16 These transnational regulatory net-
works (TRNs) bring together representatives from national regulatory 
agencies to facilitate cooperation on issues of mutual interest. 17 Such arrange-
ments help to solve some of the collective problems caused by globalization, 
since they are able to address complex issues in a speedy and ﬂ exible man-
ner, unhindered by partisan politics. 18 Networks also take the form of epis-
temic communities, comprised of issue experts with shared normative beliefs 
who cooperate to pursue a common set of policy goals. When discussing 
networks in relation to Internet governance, Mueller warns that it is crucial 
to distinguish between two types: network organizations and associative 
clusters. The former are consciously created, bounded, and somewhat hierar-
chical. They are looser than traditional organizations, but they nevertheless 
have identiﬁ able structures and processes. By contrast, associative clusters 
are decentralized, unbounded, and have shifting memberships. It is the 
movement from partially structured associative clusters to more institution-
alized network organizations that is “the most critical and revealing part of 
the global politics of Internet governance.” 19 
 A further evolution in the practice of global governance that has relevance 
for Internet governance is the concept of multistakeholderism. A somewhat 
inelegant term, it refers to “processes which aim to bring together all major 
stakeholders in a new form of communication, decision-ﬁ nding (and possi-
bly decision making) on a particular issue.” 20 The multistakeholder concept 
has been championed by the UN as a way to democratize and legitimize 
decision making at the international level. Its purpose is to include “all con-
stituencies relevant to the issue, recognize that the key actors are different for 
different issues and . . . empower a range of global policy networks to inno-
vate and build momentum on policy options.” 21 Multistakeholderism has 
become increasingly visible across a broad range of issues, including global 
business regulation, diplomacy, and environmental policy. However, 
nowhere has multistakeholderism been more developed than in the area of 
Internet governance. 
 Global governance, regimes, networks, and multistakeholderism all point 
to a fundamental shift in the way that international relations function. 

The Challenge of Internet Governance 
5
Sovereign states have been joined by a host of other actors that have impor-
tant roles to play in shaping global policy agendas. The practice of Internet 
governance incorporates many facets proposed in the global governance dis-
course, including the internationalization of policy making, public–private 
partnerships, the growing importance of technical experts, peer-to-peer 
interactions, and diffused authority. Although the relative power of these 
new actors vis-à-vis the state can be debated (and it is certainly not equal), 
their presence illustrates that international relations is now about more than 
interstate relations. At their core, global governance models challenge tradi-
tional intergovernmental perspectives and highlight the complexities of 
today’s international interactions. They are consequently more relevant to 
discussions of Internet governance than those based on state-centric 
assumptions. 
 Governance and Control of What? 
 The Internet is not one thing; rather, it is a network of networks that has 
many layers and many points of control. 22 Internet governance therefore 
encompasses a wide range of technical, economic, political, legal, social, and 
cultural issues over which governments, international institutions, and non-
state actors compete for inﬂ uence. Moreover, unlike traditional governing, 
Internet governance is performed by both public and private entities. Private 
corporations, for the most part, control the means of access to the Internet, 
including its infrastructure and communications software. In order to under-
stand Internet governance, we therefore have to take account of this public–
private relationship. 
 When Internet governance is conceived of in broad terms, the range of 
issues that it incorporates is extensive, as illustrated in Table 1.1.   The ﬁ rst 
three categories address the traditional questions of Internet governance. 
Policies in these areas focus on practical problems of coordination, technical 
efﬁ ciency, and standardization, in other words, the rules, procedures, and 
activities that maintain the functionality of the system. They are relevant to 
the present discussion because physical infrastructure utilizes the standard-
ized protocols that make the Internet work, and it is therefore subject to the 
governance of that software. The remaining categories relate to human con-
duct in relation to the Internet. These are broad social and political issues 
that clearly existed long before the Internet was conceived, and continue to 
persist independently of the medium. However, as Internet usage expanded, 
social and political questions began to intersect with issues of governance. 
For instance, governance in the security category could clash with interests 
in the human rights category. Similarly, private property and resource alloca-
tion issues become incompatible when disputes arise over who has the right 
to a particular Internet domain name. 

6 
Controlling Cyberspace
 The scope of Internet governance is potentially vast; its boundaries are not 
easily deﬁ ned, and they are still evolving. Although there is no universally 
agreed-upon deﬁ nition of the concept, some common themes can be 
identiﬁ ed: 
 1. Internet governance directly relates to the coordination and administration 
of a set of technical rules that dictate how the Internet operates. 
 2. Internet governance indirectly relates to broader social, political, and eco-
nomic issues. The management and administration of the Internet has 
implications for a host of public policy issues. The technical can become 
political. 
 3. Internet governance, like governance generally, is concerned with who has 
the power to set the rules. 
 4. The practice of Internet governance is performed by a complex set of organi-
zations and institutions that include both public and private actors. Decision-
making authority is broadly distributed. 
 5. Internet governance is concerned with policy issues surrounding the 
administration of the Internet rather than with the experience of users. 
However, policies that relate to the rights of users to access content are 
relevant. 
Table 1.1 Internet Governance Issues
Internet Governance Category
Related Issue Area
Infrastructure
Physical networks, Internet service 
providers, and Internet exchange 
points 
Technical standards
Protocols, interoperability, and WWW 
standards
Resource allocation
Naming and numbering 
Security
Encryption, cyber warfare, and crime
Private property 
Copyright, trademarks, and 
e-commerce
Human rights 
Freedom of expression, privacy, 
competing cultural, political and 
economic values, censorship, and 
ﬁ ltering 
Economic development
Market forces, Internet access, and the 
digital divide 

The Challenge of Internet Governance 
7
 The size and complexity of the Internet has produced a variety of governance 
structures and processes. In some areas, formal global institutions take the 
lead, while in others informal heterogeneous organizational forms are more 
evident. What is clear is that despite contentions that the Internet is ungov-
ernable, it always has been governed. Even in the absence of formal institu-
tional structures, the code of the Internet functioned as de facto regulation 
from its earliest days. “This code or architecture . . . determines how easy it 
is to protect privacy, or how easy it is to censor speech. It determines whether 
access to information is general or whether information is zoned. It affects 
who sees what, or what is monitored.” 23 Such “regulation” may be indirect, 
and is often invisible, but it nevertheless impacts the degree to which the 
Internet can be controlled. Since Internet governance is shaped by the Inter-
net’s design, it is useful to have some knowledge of the Internet’s 
architecture. 
 How Does the Internet Work? 
 The growth of the Internet has been explosive, but its basic design has 
remained largely unchanged over several decades. Indeed, the stability of the 
design over time is in large part responsible for the Internet’s growth. The 
founders of the Internet deliberately created an open, decentralized system 
that allowed different applications to be supported, and different types of 
computers and networks to be connected. The stability and consistency of 
this original architecture allowed users to build applications that would work 
across these different connections, and open-source codes meant that appli-
cation developers could learn from each other. So, as the number of Internet 
applications grew exponentially, they were built on the original architecture. 
For instance, although there are numerous e-mail applications in existence 
today, the basic design structure of e-mail that includes the use of @ symbol 
has remained unchanged since its creation in the early 1970s. While a 
detailed account of Internet architecture and operation is well beyond the 
scope of this work, a brief overview of the Internet’s main elements is pre-
sented subsequently as a foundation for later discussions of governance and 
policy. 
 Internet Addresses 
 In order for computers to communicate on the Internet, each needs a 
unique address, known as the Internet protocol (IP) address. Since 1981, IP 
addresses have been comprised of 32 bits of data, represented by four num-
bers between 1 and 255 and separated by periods, for example, 
64.233.167.99. IP addresses for individual computers are typically assigned 

8 
Controlling Cyberspace
by Internet service providers (ISPs) and act like electronic return addresses. 
The disadvantage of IP address strings is that they are difﬁ cult to remem-
ber, so fortunately a new system for identifying Internet addresses was 
developed in 1984. The domain name system (DNS) is a collection of pro-
grams and databases that converts numerical IP addresses into more user-
friendly alphabetic equivalents. The DNS is a giant directory of all the 
devices connected to the Internet. When you make a request for a particu-
lar website, your computer automatically notiﬁ es your browser of the 
numerical IP address, if it is known, or contacts a recursive name server (or 
resolver) to ﬁ nd it. The recursive server is tasked with obtaining the IP 
address from authoritative servers further up the hierarchy. If the authori-
tative server is not known, a query will be made to the Root server to ﬁ nd 
out where the address can be located. The DNS is arranged like a tree 
where uppermost are the Root servers that know the IP addresses of the 
authoritative servers that hold the addresses for top-level domains such as 
.com and .gov (Figure 1.1). For example, to ﬁ nd the IP address for the 
United States Senate your browser would ask for the numerical equivalent 
of www.Senate.gov. If the recursive server could not ﬁ nd the information, 
it would ask the Root server for the authoritative server responsible for 
.gov, and it would then request the address from that server. Although this 
process involves multiple steps, it is usually completed in a fraction of a 
second. Once a name is resolved the information is cached so that a Web 
page can be easily found the next time it is queried. There is also consider-
able redundancy built into the system; IP addresses for each domain name 
are stored in several authoritative servers. This is a complex system that 
handles billions of requests per day, but it works so quickly and reliably 
that many are unaware that it is occurring. 
 The original DNS was created in the 1980s with seven generic top-level 
domain names (gTLDs): .com, .org, .net .edu, .gov, .mil, and .int. The ﬁ rst 
three were characterized by open registration, while the use of the latter 
four was restricted to particular organizations: higher education, govern-
ment, military, and international organizations. The most common gTLD 
is .com. Each gTLD contains many second-level domains and second-level 
domains can include third-level domains organized hierarchically. Third-
level domains are not required, but in large organizations they are often 
used to distinguish particular departments, since they are highly custom-
izable. For example, www.harvard.edu.faculty is a third-level domain 
name. In addition to generic top-level domains, there are also country-
code top-level domain names (ccTLDs). The ﬁ rst country code .us (United 
States) was designated in 1985, followed by .uk (United Kingdom) and .il 
(Israel) a few months later. Since then the use of two letter ccTLDs has 
expanded to almost every country, sovereign state, and autonomous 
territory. 

 Figure 1.1  Domain Name System Hierarchy 

10 
Controlling Cyberspace
 Internet Protocols and Packet Switching 
 In addition to IP addresses, computers need a standard set of instructions, 
or protocols, in order to process information and communicate. The Internet 
is built on the transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP) suite. 
The lower level, known as IP, is responsible for applying source and destina-
tion addresses. The upper level, TCP, creates the connection between the 
source and the destination and ensures that data arrive intact. TCP/IP divides 
information that is to be transmitted into manageable packets. Individual 
packets for a given ﬁ le usually travel by different routes over the Internet and 
are reassembled into their original format when they arrive. Each packet 
contains information that directs it to its ﬁ nal destination intact, including 
the sending and receiving IP addresses, the quantity of packets being sent, 
and their identifying numbers. TCP also checks for errors and submits 
requests for re-transmissions if they are found. The process of sending and 
receiving packets is known as packet switching, a process that makes the 
transmission of information more reliable and the network more efﬁ cient. 
 Routers are key to the success of packet switching. The router plays an 
essential role in moving information around the Internet. When a packet is 
transmitted over a network, routers examine the packet then make a decision 
about where it should be sent. To do so, routers must identify IP addresses 
and assess the network for the best possible path. Routers are programmed 
to recognize standard protocols, which can map their local networks and 
know how to connect with routers that cover other networks. If the network 
becomes congested, routers communicate with each other so that packets 
that are not destined for the congested area can be sent via less crowded 
paths. This also applies if part of the network goes ofﬂ ine. The distributed 
nature of the Internet means that information is sent through thousands of 
routers so a local failure will be inconsequential for the whole system. The 
Internet is dependent on routers and the volume of trafﬁ c is immense; large 
routers that form part of the Internet’s backbone can examine and transmit 
millions of packets per second. 
 Internet Exchange Points 
 An increasingly important role in Internet trafﬁ c management is played 
by Internet exchange points (IXPs). IXPs allow network operators to exchange 
trafﬁ c with other network operators in a process known as peering. Peering 
is distinct from the usual type of connection to the Internet, in which a lower 
level network operator (tier 2) pays another, usually larger, network operator 
(tier 1) to carry their trafﬁ c for them, known as upstream transit. Tier 1 net-
works have comprehensive interconnection and they can send and deliver 
Internet trafﬁ c anywhere. However, it is sometimes unnecessary to send 

The Challenge of Internet Governance 
11
packets to the international network if the communication occurs within a 
single country or geographic region. This is where IXPs are useful. IXPs 
allow Internet service providers to connect and use each other’s networks 
locally. To illustrate, consider customers of two ISPs in India who would like 
to communicate. If these service providers are not connected to each other, 
then even local domestic trafﬁ c must travel internationally. Chawla illus-
trated the problem by tracing the route of a message sent from one part of 
South Delhi to another. 24 The message travelled to Singapore, New York, 
Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and Mumbai, before ﬁ nally 
arriving again in South Delhi at a location only 5 kilometers away. This 
results in much slower and more expensive service. IXPs are especially 
important for those in the Global South. They make the Internet more afford-
able for a larger proportion of the population and encourage both technologi-
cal and economic development. 
 World Wide Web 
 Any discussion of the Internet would not be complete without highlight-
ing the revolutionary role played by the World Wide Web (WWW) in its 
evolution. Prior to the development of the WWW by Tim Berners-Lee and 
his colleagues at CERN (European Laboratory for Particle Physics) laborato-
ries in the early 1990s, the Internet was primarily textual and difﬁ cult for the 
uninitiated to use. The WWW is distinct from the Internet; it is an applica-
tion level protocol that sits on top of the TCP layer. This protocol is called 
hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), and it is the foundation of communica-
tion on the Web. In addition to HTTP, the WWW introduced two other key 
innovations: hypertext markup language (HTML), which is the Web’s for-
matting language and allows users to click on links to connect to additional 
web pages, and universal resource locators (URLs), which are unique 
addresses that identify each resource on the Web. Together these features 
allowed for the development of graphical user interfaces and point and click 
technology that made the Internet much more user friendly. In addition, 
CERN ensured that the WWW would be widely disseminated when it placed 
software, a basic browser, and a library of code in the public domain. As a 
result, the WWW has grown exponentially from one website in 1991 to over 
one billion sites today. 25 
 Overview of the Book 
 Controlling Cyberspace  assesses global political conﬂ icts over Internet con-
trol. It focuses on attempts to replace the existing decentralized, multistake-
holder Internet governance system with a more centralized, intergovernmental 
model. 26 The book identiﬁ es and analyzes the unique governance challenges 

12 
Controlling Cyberspace
that the Internet presents, both in terms of technical problems and control 
over content. Internet governance is a relatively new ﬁ eld of study. The inter-
disciplinary nature of the topic lends itself to many viewpoints, and there 
have been several excellent books written on the topic. 27 However, this book 
is primarily informed by concepts associated with the study of international 
relations, public policy, and political science. The issue of Internet gover-
nance provides a framework for understanding important competing policy 
positions and alternative perspectives, such as democracy versus authoritari-
anism, rich versus poor, and freedom versus security. It is not an esoteric 
topic of interest only to academics; Internet governance and regulation pro-
foundly effects how our personal information is collected, used, and con-
trolled. Although most of us use the Internet on a daily basis, it is still a 
poorly understood resource. My primary objective of writing this book is to 
introduce the subject of Internet governance and regulation to those who 
know little about the topic. It is not intended for experts in the ﬁ eld, and no 
prior knowledge of the subject matter is assumed. I therefore begin by 
addressing some basic questions in Chapter 1. From there, the focus of the 
book is deliberately broad, going beyond the principal institutions of Inter-
net governance to include public and private regulations, as well as user 
experiences. 
 Chapter 2 explores the evolution of Internet governance from its earliest 
days. It emphasizes the important contributions made by individual com-
puter scientists in developing Internet technology as well as the technical 
standards that govern that technology. Particular attention is paid to the 
unique bottom-up collective decision making and collaboration that is a fea-
ture of technical standard setting for the Internet. This chapter also high-
lights the challenges posed by the exponential growth of the Internet and the 
unending need to ﬁ nd technical solutions to address those challenges. The 
important role played by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers (ICANN) in Internet governance is also addressed, as well as the 
political controversies surrounding that role. 
 Chapter 3 examines the contributions made by the UN to Internet gover-
nance. Its specialized agency International Telecommunications Union (ITU) 
traditionally allocates the global radio spectrum and communication satellite 
orbits. However, the worldwide expansion of the Internet, as a communica-
tion technology, placed the agency at the center of the Internet governance 
debate. At the urging of the ITU, the UN Security General organized two 
world summits on Internet governance that laid the foundation for later pol-
icy debates in this area. This chapter, in particular, presents details of politi-
cal conﬂ icts that erupted at the 2012 World Summit on International 
Communications, hosted by the ITU. It was during this meeting that divi-
sions were starkly revealed among countries that support the current 

The Challenge of Internet Governance 
13
multistakeholder system of Internet governance and those that seek to 
replace that system with one that gives governments more power. 
 Chapter 4 is the ﬁ rst to delve into the interplay between Internet gover-
nance and a speciﬁ c issue area, in this case, the digital divide. The digital 
divide traditionally refers to the distinction between individuals who have 
access to information technology and those who do not. However, a digital 
divide also exits with regard to Internet governance. For many the current 
multistakeholder system of governance is viewed as exclusionary, con-
structed to favor those who already have power. From the perspective of the 
Global South, multistakeholderism perpetuates inequity because its institu-
tions are largely comprised of individuals from a few wealthy countries. 
Overcoming the digital divide therefore entails broadening representation in 
centers of multistakeholder decision making. This chapter outlines the eco-
nomic, technical, social, and cultural barriers that stand in the way of this 
being achieved. In addition, while this chapter discusses the digital divide 
principally in relation to Internet governance, it also recognizes the broader 
deﬁ nition of the term. 
 Chapter 5 addresses another weighty issue, human rights. Traditionally, 
human rights have not been central to discussions of Internet governance, 
but that has been changing. More than a decade ago, the UN-sponsored 
World Summit on the Information Society afﬁ rmed that communication is a 
basic human right, and the ﬁ nal outcome documents of these meetings made 
numerous references to the Internet and human rights. While there is still 
debate over whether or not access to the Internet should be considered an 
entitlement, there is no question that the Internet has profound implications 
for a range of human rights. This chapter reviews the numerous statutory 
and non-statutory instruments related to human rights and Internet gover-
nance. It also discusses in some detail the issue of online freedom of expres-
sion, hate speech, and harassment. 
 Chapter 6 focuses on the topical and controversial issue of cyber security. 
Given the importance and pervasiveness of the Internet in our daily lives, it 
is imperative that the medium is secured not only to protect individual pri-
vacy but also national security. When the Internet was conceived, its security 
was not regarded as a top priority, since it was designed as a small network 
for scientists and academics. However, as the user base expanded, and as 
hacking and malicious attacks increased, Internet security was propelled to 
the forefront of political agendas. As a result, the issue increasingly became 
the focus of international efforts to develop voluntary rules and legal frame-
works to govern cyber security. This chapter discusses the Internet’s inherent 
security vulnerabilities and how these are being addressed. It also examines 
cyber defense and the evolution of international cooperation and norm build-
ing in this area. 

14 
Controlling Cyberspace
 Chapter 7 examines the roles played by private intermediaries in Internet 
governance. The traditional multistakeholder model allows for signiﬁ cant 
input from private corporations, but corporate accountability remains vague. 
Internet companies hold vast amounts of information about users, and they 
have tremendous power to block or alter information ﬂ ows, yet there is no 
broad agreement on their ethical and legal responsibilities. This chapter 
examines the question of corporate accountability and Internet governance, 
and assesses the beneﬁ ts and risks associated with privatized digital rights. 
It also recognizes that corporate interests are not monolithic, highlighting 
the clash between private intermediaries over issues such as copyright 
infringement and net neutrality. 
 The ﬁ nal chapter revisits the main theme of the book, reiterating that the 
current decentralized regulatory environment of the Internet is being chal-
lenged by those who seek to shift authority from multistakeholders to inter-
national institutions controlled by governments. These political battles over 
Internet governance have far-reaching implications for the future interoper-
ability of the medium. As governments increasingly place domestic controls 
on the Internet and try to assert sovereign control over the technology, the 
likelihood of fragmentation increases. This chapter discusses persistent 
threats to the Internet, both from cyber nationalism and from emerging tech-
nologies that raise complex governing challenges. This is a crucial period for 
Internet governance; the decisions that are made today will have important 
consequences for how the Internet evolves in the future.  

 CHAPTER TWO 
 The Evolution of Internet 
Governance 
 The origins of the Internet can be traced to multiple players who separately, 
and together, designed and created the technological infrastructure on which 
the medium is built. The architecture of what would become the Internet 
evolved from two separate research threads in the late 1950s and early 1960s. 
The ﬁ rst thread was conducted by scientists in the United States and the 
United Kingdom and focused on the problem of resource sharing on net-
works. The goal was to ﬁ nd a way to build a computer network that could 
handle intermittent and unpredictable trafﬁ c, and that could make efﬁ cient 
use of expensive computing resources. The traditional method of transmit-
ting information from point A to point B was circuit switching. Circuit-
switched networks reserve a dedicated single channel between two nodes for 
the entire communication and are useful for communication that needs to 
happen in real time, for example, during a telephone conversation. A signiﬁ -
cant drawback of circuit switching is that when all circuits are in use, any 
new circuit request gets blocked until a circuit becomes free (telephone busy 
signal). In addition, bandwidth is wasted when trafﬁ c is intermittent, since 
this leads to idle connections during silent periods. The answer to these 
problems was packet switching, whereby information is divided into blocks 
or packets and transmitted by different routes and reassembled at their ﬁ nal 
destination. Packet switching networks ﬁ nd the most efﬁ cient paths for 
transmitting information and can route around problem areas. They mini-
mize transmission latency, and are more effective than circuit switched net-
works at sending large amounts of information. 
 The second important research thread came out of the Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (ARPA). In 1962, ARPA hired J.C.R. Licklider, professor at 

16 
Controlling Cyberspace
the Massachusetts Institute of technology (MIT), to head its Information Pro-
cessing Techniques Ofﬁ ce (IPTO). Licklider was not a network engineer, but 
he was a visionary. In his 1960 landmark article “Man-Computer Symbiosis,” 
he envisioned a network of computers “connected to one another by wide-
band communication lines and to individual users by leased-wire services.” 1 
Later, in a series of memos to his colleagues at ARPA, he described this con-
cept as an “Intergalactic Network.” 2 Although Licklider remained at ARPA for 
only two years, his vision endured and the Agency committed signiﬁ cant 
funding to making his dream a reality. The ﬁ rst step was taken with an ini-
tial host-to-host message sent on ARPANET at 10:30  A.M. on October 29, 
1969, between computers at University of California, Los Angeles, and the 
Stanford Research Institute. Although the connection crashed after sending 
only two letters “lo,” the ﬁ rst part of login, the predecessor of today’s Inter-
net, had been launched. However, there was still one more important prob-
lem to be resolved before a true network of networks could be created, and 
that step was also taken at ARPA. 
 After communication between two computers on ARPANET was success-
ful, additional nodes were quickly added, and other organizations began to 
set up their own networks. By the 1970s, networks controlled by government 
agencies, universities, and private companies had been developed. However, 
since many of these ran proprietary software they were unable to communi-
cate with one another. What was therefore required was a method to connect 
dissimilar independent networks. The idea of developing an open-architecture 
network was ﬁ rst suggested by Robert Kahn at ARPA in 1972. 3 In such a 
system, individual networks could be randomly designed provided there was 
a common set of protocols that would allow them to communicate with 
wider networks. Kahn and his colleague Vinton Cerf are credited with solv-
ing this problem with their development of transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol (TCP/IP), which they ﬁ rst described at a scientiﬁ c confer-
ence in 1973. Following the development of TCP/IP the next step was to 
ensure that these protocols were disseminated and adopted, and here the 
National Science Foundation (NSF) played a pivotal role. 4 In 1985, NSF made 
TCP/IP mandatory for its research and education networks, including several 
nationwide backbone networks. NSF also deliberately encouraged the par-
ticipation of commercial actors by encouraging academic users of its NSFNET 
to seek private investment. At the same time, NSF banned commercial trafﬁ c 
on its backbone; all trafﬁ c that was not in support of research and education 
was prohibited. This had the intended effect of encouraging private and com-
petitive long-haul networks. 5 
 In 1979, CompuServe became the ﬁ rst commercial service to offer online 
services to consumers via phone lines, and it was the ﬁ rst to offer real-time 
online chat a year later. By 1982, the company had formed its Network Ser-
vices Division to provide wide-area networking capabilities to corporate 

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
17
clients. CompuServe also pioneered the use of forums that allowed users to 
share information of common interest. These were used extensively by early 
adopters of computing technology, and provided a link between corporations 
and consumers. For instance, IBM offered forums devoted to new users, soft-
ware, hardware, and communications interfaces, as did other large technol-
ogy companies. Very quickly, discussion forums became popular beyond the 
technical community and offerings expanded to include every conceivable 
interest. As a result, CompuServe had 2.6 million subscribers by 1997. 6 NSF’s 
policy of encouraging the development of a commercially viable Internet 
proved successful, and privatization was completed in a few years. ARPANET 
was retired in 1990 and the NSF backbone was defunded in 1995. 
 Standards Setting as Governance 
 As the number and scope of networks grew, so too did the need for better 
coordination, standards setting, and governance. 7 The very earliest attempts 
at standardization came out of a series of memos known as Request for Com-
ments (RFC) that were initiated by S. Coker at UCLA as a way for researchers 
to share ideas. The ﬁ rst RFC, which was sent in 1969 approximately six months 
before the ﬁ rst network transmission, asked for comments regarding 
software requirements for host computers, including suggestions on how to 
handle errors. 8 Since that time thousands of RFCs have been issued; some 
are exploratory and informational, but many are standards setting. When an 
RFC falls into the latter category it is speciﬁ ed as such, “This is an Internet 
Standards Track document. This document is a product of the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force (IETF). It represents the consensus of the IETF commu-
nity.” The IETF was not the only task force created in the early 1980s, but it 
became one of the most important. The IETF’s stated mission is “to make the 
Internet work better by producing high quality, relevant technical docu-
ments that inﬂ uence the way people design, use, and manage the Internet.” 9 
The objectives and processes of the IETF were ﬁ rst laid out in RFC 2026 dur-
ing October 1996. The goals of the Internet standards process are listed as: 
(1) technical excellence; (2) prior implementation and testing; (2) clear, con-
cise, and easily understood documentation; (3) openness and fairness; and 
(4) timeliness. 10 
 The adoption of Internet standards is necessarily a time-consuming pro-
cess, made more difﬁ cult by the dramatic growth in the scale of IETF. When 
the ﬁ rst RFC was issued in 1969, it was sent to half a dozen people. When 
the ﬁ rst IETF meeting was held, it was attended by 21 people. By contrast, the 
98th IETF meeting held in Chicago, Illinois, in March 2016 attracted 1,127 
onsite participants and 315 remote attendees. 11 Potential problems associated 
with the rapid growth of IETF have long been recognized. As D. Crocker 
pointed out in 1993, growth means there is less familiarity on a personal and 

18 
Controlling Cyberspace
professional level among participants. 12 In addition, since IETF decisions 
have signiﬁ cant ﬁ nancial implications for multimillion-dollar businesses, the 
stakes are much higher, and the debates are often more contentious than they 
were in the early days of the Internet. Despite some negative implications of 
growth, however, it is unlikely that IETF will scale back its participation 
levels. One of the cardinal principles of the IETF is that it is “open process,” 
meaning it is open to anyone. There is no membership fee, and documenta-
tion is made publicly available. At the same time, another core principle, 
“technical competence” requires that output be based on sound network 
engineering principles, which means that most contributors are engineers 
and other specialists who have a thorough understanding of networking soft-
ware, hardware, and protocols. In addition, the primary mechanism for 
developing IETF standards is through Working Groups, whose members 
largely conduct their deliberations via e-mail. These groups typically 
begin life as “Birds of a Feather” (BOF) meetings, which are small clusters 
of individuals who get together privately to discusses problems they have 
identiﬁ ed. The BOF group acts as an informal design team to formulate a 
problem statement, ascertain interest, and establish goals for a possible 
Working Group. 
 From a governance point of view, the open process nature of IETF stan-
dards setting makes it different from many other international bodies. IETF 
makes it clear that its processes work best when focused around people 
rather than organizations, corporations, governments, or interest groups, so 
participants are viewed as individuals rather than representatives of their 
organization. IETF decision making has been described as “direct, populist 
democracy” 13 based on the “beliefs of its participants.” 14 Although the IETF 
Steering Group acts as a central coordinating body, it is not a board of direc-
tors that can impose its will. This organizational culture is summed up in 
David Clark’s celebrated statement “We reject kings, presidents and voting. 
We believe in rough consensus and running code.” 15 The meaning of rough 
consensus varies by Working Group, but it is generally taken to mean that 
strongly held objections must be debated until most people are satisﬁ ed that 
those objections have little merit. RC 1603 notes for instance that, “consen-
sus does not require that all participants agree although this is, of course, 
preferred. In general the dominant view of the working group shall pre-
vail. . . . Consensus can be determined by balloting, humming, or any other 
means” agreed upon by the group. 16 
 When a consensus has emerged, the new speciﬁ cation goes through a 
period of development and several iterations of revisions, based on feedback 
from the Internet community, before it receives ﬁ nal approval. Speciﬁ cations 
that are intended to become Internet Standards evolve through a set of three 
maturity levels called Proposed Standards, Draft Standards, and Internet 
Standards. Proposed Standards are immature speciﬁ cations that are 

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
19
implemented to validate and test the speciﬁ cation. The content of Proposed 
Standards may be changed if problems are found that require additional ﬁ eld 
testing to detect unforeseen behavior across different environments. Draft 
Standards are considered to be a ﬁ nal speciﬁ cation, and changes are likely to 
be made only to solve unexpected problems.   A speciﬁ cation must remain at 
the Proposed Standards level for at least six months and at the Draft Stan-
dards level for at least four months before moving to the ﬁ nal stage. A speci-
ﬁ cation that displays successful operation and has been widely utilized is 
elevated to an Internet Standard. An Internet Standard is characterized by a 
high degree of technical maturity and by a generally held belief that the spec-
iﬁ ed protocol or service provides signiﬁ cant beneﬁ t to the Internet commu-
nity. It is adopted only after it has been repeatedly discussed in open public 
meetings and global electronic mailing lists, and has been tested and retested. 
 The growth of the Internet and the changing nature of its user community 
spurred the IETF to make some modiﬁ cations to its standards setting pro-
cesses. A straw poll at the 1995 IEFT indicated that there was broad support 
for moving all nontechnical issues to another related organization. This was 
motivated by the desire to coordinate with a legal entity that could protect 
standards emanating from the IETF, and elsewhere. As discussed in RFC 
2031, the nontechnical organization would provide legal insurance for all 
IETF ofﬁ cers, legal protection for RFC documents, and legal safeguards in 
case of intellectual property rights disputes over Internet standards. The 
Internet Society (ISOC) was the obvious choice. Formed in 1992 as an inter-
national, nonproﬁ t, membership organization, its stated mission is “to pro-
mote the open development, evolution, and use of the Internet for the beneﬁ t 
of all people throughout the world.” 17 An important part of this mission is 
fulﬁ lling its role as a coordinating organization for groups responsible for 
Internet standards, including IETF and the Internet Architecture Board 
(IAB). The latter is chartered both as a committee of IETF and as an advisory 
body of the Internet Society. IAB is responsible for long-range planning and 
provides oversight of Internet architecture standards, as well as the process 
used to create those standards. 
 In addition to acting as an organizational conduit for IETF and IAB, the 
Internet Society works to promote a broad range of Internet-related policies. 
It is a global clearing house for sharing information among hundreds of orga-
nizations and groups, as well as thousands of individuals. Since ISOC pro-
motes dialogue on a range of Internet policy issues, it is an important channel 
for mobilizing global civil society. Like IETF, the Internet Society favors 
broad participation, and it is a strong proponent of the multistakeholder 
approach to Internet governance: “It is our deep belief that the Internet can-
not be regulated in a top-down manner, but its governance should be based 
on processes that are inclusive and driven by consensus.” 18 ISOC is at the 
forefront of protecting and promoting the Internet’s foundational values. 

20 
Controlling Cyberspace
 Although these are the primary organizations that set standards for the 
Internet, they are not the only ones. There is a broad range of international 
institutions that operate outside the ISOC umbrella that directly or indirectly 
impinge on Internet governance. For example, the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) is a nonproﬁ t, technical association with mem-
bership across 150 countries. IEEE sponsors consensus-based standard 
activities ranging from computer engineering, biomedical technology and 
telecommunications, to electric power, aerospace, and consumer electronics. 
IEEE Committee 802 has particular relevance for Internet governance as it is 
tasked with developing and maintaining networking standards for local, 
metropolitan, and wireless networks. Since there is considerable overlap 
with regards to IETF and IEEE 802 interests, the two bodies endeavor to 
cooperate and coordinate their activities to maximize the global interopera-
bility of networks. 
 Another prominent standards setting organization is the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C), founded by Tim Berners-Lee at the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology (MIT) in 1994. W3C’s mission is to develop “protocols and 
guidelines that ensure the long-term growth of the Web” based on two key 
principles, “Web for all” and “Web on everything.” 19 In practice, this involves 
developing recommendations for standardization across all Web technologies. 
Recommendations are made by consensus among Consortium members and 
denote that a particular speciﬁ cation is appropriate for widespread use. The 
process of developing Recommendations, like IETF Internet Standards, is mul-
tistage and often laborious. An important difference between these two bodies, 
however, is that in the W3C, members are organizations, not individuals, and 
a fee is required for membership. Fees are assigned on a sliding scale based on 
type and location of the headquarters of an organization as well as annual rev-
enues. For example, the annual fee assigned for organizations with revenue of 
over $1 billion is $77,000, whereas some nonproﬁ ts in developing countries 
pay less than $1,000. 20  
 W3C has established cooperative relationships with other standards set-
ting bodies, including IETF. The latter ceded control over designing standards 
for the Web to W3C as early as 1996. Strong support for W3C has also come 
from ISOC. In 2009, ISOC announced that it would donate $2.5 million to 
W3C over a three-year period “for the purpose of advancing the evolution of 
W3C as an organization that creates open Web standards.” 21 ISOC recognized 
the Web as one of the most important applications on the Internet and high-
lighted the commitment of both organizations to open standards. These 
shared values were more formally identiﬁ ed in a statement signed in August 
2012 by the leaders of ISOC, W3C, IAB, IETF, and IEEE. The announcement 
afﬁ rmed the importance of collaboration to jointly develop principles that 
would establish a “modern paradigm for global, open standards.” These 
became known as the ﬁ ve “Open-Stand” principles, summarized here: 22  

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
21
 1.  Cooperation: Respectful cooperation between standards organizations, 
whereby each respects the autonomy, integrity, processes, and intellectual 
property rules of the others. 
 2.  Adherence to Principles: 
 • 
Due process:  Decisions are made with equity and fairness among 
participants. 
 • 
Broad consensus: Processes allow for all views to be considered and 
addressed. 
 • 
Transparency: Standards organizations provide advance public notice 
of proposed standards and records are easily accessible. 
 • 
Balance: Standards activities are not exclusively dominated by any par-
ticular person, company, or interest group. 
 • 
Openness: Standards processes are open to all interested and informed 
parties. 
 3.  Collective Empowerment:  Standards are chosen based on technical merit; pro-
vide global interoperability, scalability, stability, and resiliency; enable 
global competition; serve as building blocks for further innovation; and 
contribute to the creation of global communities, beneﬁ ting humanity. 
 4.  Availability : Standards speciﬁ cations are made accessible to all for imple-
mentation and deployment. 
 5.  Voluntary Adoption : Standards are voluntarily adopted and success is deter-
mined by the market. 
 It is worth noting that both participation in standards setting and adoption 
of standards is entirely voluntary, as point 5 makes clear. There are practical 
reasons for this, not the least of which would be the difﬁ culty of enforcing a 
standard that is frozen in time in the fast-paced world of Internet innovation: 
“there are no permanent favorites.” 23 The idea that standards should be volun-
tary also reﬂ ects the long-standing cultural values that have shaped the evolu-
tion of the Internet. As Bernard Aboba, Chair of the IAB, described it, “The 
Internet has been built on speciﬁ cations adopted voluntarily across the globe. 
By valuing running code, interoperability and deployment above formal status, 
the Internet has democratized the development of standards.” 24 The dominant 
paradigm of Internet standards setting is therefore bottom-up collaboration 
aimed at harnessing global creativity. These principles are grounded in egalitar-
ian values, which contrasts with the top-down coercive governance practices 
that are typically exercised by national and international authorities. Another 
key characteristic of the Open-Stand paradigm is that it is market-driven, 
designed to promote universal standards so that industries do not have to nego-
tiate the complexities of standards setting country-by-country. However, while 
the Open-Stand principles aim to make standards setting less complex, they do 

22 
Controlling Cyberspace
not endorse a one-size-ﬁ ts-all model. Rather, the goal is to create minimum 
standards that will ensure interoperability. In other words, establish unity not 
uniformity. This approach therefore codiﬁ es and builds upon existing gover-
nance practices that have been central to the Internet’s success. 
 Domain Name Standards 
 Although Internet standards setting has been performed predominantly 
by nonstate actors and has been largely uncontroversial, there is one area 
that continues to be contentious, namely, the domain name system (DNS). As 
discussed in Chapter 1, DNS is a collection of programs and databases that 
converts numerical IP addresses into more user-friendly alphabetic equiva-
lents. DNS allocates top-level domains names (TLDs) (e.g., .com. and .org) 
and country codes (e.g., .uk and .fr). In doing so, DNS performs a critical 
resource management function that has both technical and policy implica-
tions. In order to work effectively and avoid name duplication, a high degree 
of coordination is required. DNS has therefore been one of the most central-
ized areas of Internet governance since its earliest days. 
 Domain name registration and standards setting began in the pre-Internet 
period of ARPANET. Since the network was small, this function was under-
taken by a single individual, Jon Postel, who worked at the Stanford Research 
Institute. The initial impetus for DNS was based on the need to establish a 
registry of port number assignments on the network, and Postel volunteered 
to undertake that task. “I propose that there be a czar (me?) who hands out 
ofﬁ cial socket numbers for use by standard protocols. This czar should also 
keep track of and publish a list of those socket numbers where host speciﬁ c 
services can be obtained.” 25 This original set of responsibilities evolved to 
become the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), the traditional 
name used to refer to the technical team that develops and publishes assign-
ments of Internet protocol technical parameters. IANA functions are typi-
cally divided into three elements: (1) management of protocol parameters, 
such as TCP, in coordination with IETF; (2) management of IP addresses, 
such as IPv4 and IPv 6; and (3) management of the root zone, which involves 
assigning top-level domains, such as .uk and .com. 26  IANA functions were 
initially performed on an ad hoc basis as required, but as the Internet 
expanded, more formalized arrangements developed. 
 In 1990, a private company Network Solutions, Inc., won a NSF contract 
to assume registration responsibility for all generic top-level nonmilitary 
domain names. This was a controversial move since it gave a for-proﬁ t com-
pany an effective monopoly over the allocation of most domain names. This 
arrangement became especially divisive when the company began charging a 
fee for registrations in 1995, which many believed undermined the founding 

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
23
ethos of an open and free Internet. The traditional approach had distributed 
domain name registrations without cost on a ﬁ rst-come, ﬁ rst-served basis. By 
charging for each registration and for renewals, Network Solutions, Inc., 
made substantial proﬁ ts, especially in relation to the .com domain. However, 
high demand for this domain created a shortage. At the same time, the com-
pany became embroiled in legal action associated with copyright and trade-
mark violations, as businesses zealously competed for registrations. As a 
result of these controversies, several groups sought to end the role played by 
Network Solutions, Inc., in DNS when its contract expired in 1998. 
 Primary among those challengers was a coalition spearheaded by the 
Internet Society called the International Ad-Hoc Committee (IAHC). This 
temporary alliance comprised a variety of stakeholders and organizations, 
but it was signiﬁ cant because it included two intergovernmental organiza-
tions, the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) and the World 
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). IAHC aimed to break the 
monopoly held by Network Solutions, Inc., resolve the domain name short-
age, and internationalize DNS processes. The coalition’s ﬁ nal report was 
issued at the ITU headquarters in February 1997, with the unwieldy title of 
 Memorandum of Understanding on the Generic Top Level Domain Name Space 
of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (MoU) . The report identiﬁ ed DNS 
as an essential component of the Internet’s operational infrastructure, and 
stipulated that DNS names need to be created and managed in a stable, 
systematic, and equitable way. The coalition proposed a self-regulatory, 
market-oriented, and global approach. The MoU also recommended 
expanding the number of domain names available by seven, to be created 
by a Policy Oversight Committee (POC), and managed by a Council of Reg-
istrars (CORE). In specifying that CORE would be located in Switzerland, 
incorporated under Swiss laws, and that there would be a global distribu-
tion of registrars, the coalition aimed to expand and internationalize the 
system. 
 Although the MoU was ultimately signed by more than 200 public and 
private entities, its proposals were seen by many as a radical departure from 
traditional Internet policy making and practices. Of particular note were the 
concerns expressed by governments, which had been excluded from IAHC 
discussions. As Mewes noted shortly after the MoU was published, “the fail-
ure to include national governments in the decision-making process, and the 
participation of United Nations specialized agencies seems rather to reinforce 
the concern that this is a self-appointed, unaccountable, and illegitimate 
decision making body.” 27 IAHC proposals, while apparently concerned with 
resolving the domain name problem, had generated a broader conﬂ ict over 
who should have legal authority over the Internet. This served to encourage 
others to devise alternative solutions. 

24 
Controlling Cyberspace
 In the United States, the federal government created an interagency group 
led by the National Telecommunications and Information Administra-
tion (NTIA), part of the Department of Commerce (DOC), to assess the issue. 
NTIA issued a discussion paper informally known as the Green Paper in 
January 1998. The Green Paper argued in favor of policies that would priva-
tize the management of Internet names and addresses, promote competition, 
and facilitate global participation in Internet management. It stated that 
while the Internet began as a U.S.-based research vehicle, its growth neces-
sitated new organizational structures. The Green Paper acknowledged that 
there was widespread dissatisfaction with DNS and recognized that legiti-
mate concerns were being expressed from a variety of different quarters, 
both nationally and internationally. After a period of consultation, NTIA out-
lined its proposals in a White Paper titled  Statement of Policy on the Manage-
ment of Internet Names and Addresses in June 1998. The most far-reaching of 
these was a proposal to create a new, not-for-proﬁ t private sector corporation 
of Internet stakeholders to administer policy for the Internet DNS. The U.S. 
government proposed to transfer its management of DNS to this new body, 
guided by four principles: 28 
 1.  Stability: The U.S. government should end its role in the Internet number 
and name address system in a manner that ensures the stability of the Inter-
net. The introduction of a new management system should not disrupt cur-
rent operations or create competing root systems. During the transition and 
thereafter, the stability of the Internet should be the ﬁ rst priority of any DNS 
management system. Security and reliability of DNS are important aspects 
of stability, and as a new DNS management system is introduced, a compre-
hensive security strategy should be developed. 
 2.  Competition: The Internet succeeds in great measure because it is a decen-
tralized system that encourages innovation and maximizes individual free-
dom. Where possible, market mechanisms that support competition and 
consumer choice should drive the management of the Internet because they 
will lower costs, promote innovation, encourage diversity, and enhance user 
choice and satisfaction. 
 3.  Private, Bottom-Up Coordination : Certain management functions require 
coordination. In these cases, responsible, private-sector action is preferable 
to government control. A private coordinating process is likely to be more 
ﬂ exible than government and to move rapidly enough to meet the changing 
needs of the Internet and of Internet users. The private process should, as 
far as possible, reﬂ ect the bottom-up governance that has characterized 
development of the Internet to date. 
 4.  Representation: The new corporation should operate as a private entity for 
the beneﬁ t of the Internet community as a whole. The development of 
sound, fair, and widely accepted policies for the management of DNS will 

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
25
depend on input from the broad and growing community of Internet users. 
Management structures should reﬂ ect the functional and geographic diver-
sity of the Internet and its users. Mechanisms should be established to 
ensure international participation in decision making. 
 The White Paper emphasized that these proposals did not endorse a 
monolithic structure for Internet governance. Rather, they were designed to 
address the narrow issues of management and administration of Internet 
names and numbers on an ongoing basis. However, the White Paper was 
quite speciﬁ c with regards to the structure of this new entity. It included the 
following requirements: (1) members of the body’s Board of Directors should 
come from around the world to ensure that it is representative of the global 
Internet community; (2) the new corporation’s processes should be fair, 
open, and pro-competitive; (3) decision-making processes should be trans-
parent; (4) super-majority or even consensus requirements should be consid-
ered to protect against capture by a narrow group of stakeholders; 
(5) trademark holders and domain name registrants should have access to 
searchable databases of registered domain names; and (6) ofﬁ cial representa-
tives of governments or international organizations should be restricted from 
becoming members of the Board of Directors, although they would be per-
mitted to participate in the organization in a nonvoting advisory capacity. In 
addition, the White Paper assigned a role to WIPO, based in Geneva, Swit-
zerland. WIPO was given responsibility for deﬁ ning new domain name 
trademark procedures. This was an acknowledgment of WIPO’s expertise in 
this area, but it also gave Europeans a formal role in the process. Many Euro-
peans feared that U.S. trademark law would be imposed on the world 
otherwise. 
 The publication of the White Paper prompted a variety of interests to com-
pete for the right to create the organization. Two of these were most promi-
nent, the International Forum on the White Paper (IFWP), and the IANA 
Transition Advisory Group, headed by Jon Postel. The former was in the 
form of a series of global workshops designed to develop a consensus around 
a set of common principles and structures, and to formulate a general charter 
for the new organization. Meetings were open process, held in Switzerland, 
Singapore, and Argentina, and attended by interested parties from a variety 
of backgrounds. In addition to these meetings, IFWP sponsored a series of 
e-mail discussions. As Mueller describes, IFWP’s approach would establish a 
nonproﬁ t organization controlled by an elected board that represented a 
diversity of professional interests, not unlike a business corporation board, 
whereas the IANA group envisaged a public beneﬁ t organization that con-
ferred considerably more power in the hands of the board and manage-
ment. 29 The latter was closest to the traditional approach to managing IANA 
functions, which had vested extensive centralized power in the hands of Jon 

26 
Controlling Cyberspace
Postel. As discussions unfolded, it became clear that these two visions were 
incompatible. Although Postel had the support of much of the academic and 
technical community, IFWP sent a letter to NTIA during September 1998 
asserting that its position represented the “real consensus of the Internet 
Community.” 30 The same letter criticized Postel’s proposal, arguing that it 
would create an organization with “vague lines of accountability, limited, if 
any, means as for individual participation, have a high degree of susceptibil-
ity to capture by companies and organizations, and ﬁ nally is not guaranteed 
to ever have a membership structure.” Despite these complaints, it was Pos-
tel’s IANA group proposal that was ultimately accepted by the U.S. 
government. 
 Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
 Born in controversy approximately ﬁ ve months after the publication of the 
White Paper, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
(ICANN) was ofﬁ cially recognized in a Memorandum of Understanding on 
November 25, 1998. The U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) agreed that 
the new body would be incorporated in California as a nonproﬁ t organization 
and it would assume primary responsibility for administrating DNS. For its 
part, ICANN agreed to collaborate on the development of procedures neces-
sary to transition management responsibility for DNS. It was envisaged that 
once testing had been completed, and a smooth transition was underway, 
DOC’s relationship with ICANN would be limited to ensuring that ICANN 
fulﬁ lled its contractual obligations. This laissez-faire approach was described 
at the time as one in which the government “adopted a clearly articulated pol-
icy of getting out of the way in the future and letting the consensus of the 
Internet community, as articulated through the new ICANN, govern this pow-
erful yet fragile technology.” 31 At the same time, the government did not fully 
relinquish its authority. In giving ICANN responsibility for managing DNS, 
DOC made it clear that while management of the authoritative root server 
“may be transferred to ICANN at some point in the future. . . . The Depart-
ment of Commerce has no plans to transfer to any entity its policy authority to 
direct the authoritative root server.” 32 This was signiﬁ cant since the root zone 
is the deﬁ nitive source of data for DNS, and it is where changes to the zone’s 
contents are made. Control of the root zone therefore confers substantial 
power. 33 For instance, the DOC could veto new top-level domain names, or 
theoretically remove a country’s Internet presence by erasing its ccTLD. 
 So, while it appeared that the government had privatized and decentral-
ized the system, the reality was that ICANN had operational authority, but 
it did not have ultimate control. Nevertheless, DOC adopted a largely 
hands-off presence in DNS, and ICANN became the face of Internet 
governance. 

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
27
 As the steward of the IANA functions, ICANN oversees the allocation of 
IP addresses, which is performed by ﬁ ve regional Internet registries (RIRs), 
some of which predate ICANN (See Table 2.1). All RIRs are private nonproﬁ t 
organizations with broad-based membership that typically include Internet 
service providers (ISPs), Web hosting organizations, and other stakeholders. 
To avoid fragmentation of address space, as well as coordination problems, 
only one RIR is established per region. Typically, policy making in RIRs 
evolves as a result of discussions conducted on public mailing lists and dur-
ing open RIR meetings, and policy changes are usually adopted by consen-
sus. RIRs therefore typify the type of organizational transparency and 
self-regulation that are found in other areas of Internet management. The 
allocation of addresses is generally accomplished on a hierarchical basis. 
When an RIR receives address space from ICANN, it allocates that space to 
local Internet registries (LIRs) or ISPs, which in turn, assign addresses to end 
users. Over the years, this system has evolved routine and stable practices 
that have been largely free from political power struggles. However, the 
explosive demand for IP addresses and their subsequent shortage have cre-
ated new challenges for RIRs. 
 The most common form of IP address, which was ﬁ rst deployed in 1983, 
is IP version 4 or IPv4. This provided for a 32-bit number ﬁ eld in four octets, 
such as 192.212.0.235. The number of possible IPv4 addresses that is math-
ematically possible is approximately 4.3 billion. When the Internet was cre-
ated, this number was more than adequate to service government and 
military agencies as well as research institutions that used the Internet. How-
ever, the popular expansion of the Internet along with the advent of mobile 
technology means that IPv4 addresses are becoming quickly depleted. To get 
around this problem, some short-term technical ﬁ xes have been employed. 
Table 2.1 Regional Internet Registries
Registry Name 
Founded 
Location
Coverage
RIPE NCC
1992
Netherlands
Europe, parts of Asia, 
and the Middle East
APNIC 
1993
Australia
Parts of Asia and the 
Paciﬁ c region
ARIN 
1997
United States
North America and parts 
of the Caribbean
LACNIC
2002
Uruguay
Latin American and 
parts of the Caribbean
AFRINIC
2005
Mauritius 
Africa

28 
Controlling Cyberspace
For example, network address translators (NATs) allow certain IPv4 addresses 
to be shared among several devices. Although these solve some of the imme-
diate difﬁ culties associated with the depletion of IPv4, the use of NATs create 
additional problems since they increase the complexity and costs of opera-
tion and present barriers to innovation. The only viable long-term solution to 
the IPv4 shortage is to upgrade to a new system. The urgency of this move 
was highlighted by ICANN in a press release on February 3, 2011: “A critical 
point in the history of the Internet was reached today with the allocation of 
the last remaining IPv4 (Internet Protocol version 4) Internet addresses from 
a central pool. It means the future expansion of the Internet is now depen-
dent on the successful global deployment of the next generation of Internet 
protocol.” 34 The last ﬁ ve blocks of IPv4 addresses were allocated to RIRs dur-
ing a ceremony in Miami in 2011. After that date, RIRs will continue to allo-
cate IPv4 addresses until they are completely expended, but for some this 
has already occurred. ARIN, depleted its IPv4 pool on September 24, 2015. It 
subsequently introduced a waiting list for unmet requests that will be ﬁ lled 
only as addresses are added back to its inventory, either as a result of being 
returned or revoked. 35 
 Fortunately, the problem of IPv4 depletion was anticipated, and the 
Internet technical community has been preparing for this eventually since 
the 1990s. The next generation of IP, known as IPv6 represents the most 
signiﬁ cant infrastructure modiﬁ cation to the Internet since it was founded. 
It is designed to accommodate the Internet’s dramatic growth, provide bet-
ter security, and improve trafﬁ c ﬂ ow. IPv6 addresses are 128 bits in length, 
as opposed to 32 bits for IPv4 addresses, which increases the number of 
possible addresses from 4.3 billion to an unfathomable 340 trillion trillion 
trillion. IPv6 addresses are conventionally expressed as hexadecimal 
strings (e.g.  2001:0db8:582:ae33::29 ). 36 The IPv6 address management func-
tion was formally delegated to IANA in December 1995, and ICANN’s 
stated goal is to “work with the Regional Internet Registries and other 
stakeholders to promote education and outreach, with the goal of support-
ing the future growth of the Internet by encouraging the timely deploy-
ment of IPv6.” 37 To this end, ICANN has held a series of open forums and 
discussions about IPv6 to spread understanding and facilitate cooperation 
among Internet organizations. Despite such efforts, IPv6 has been only 
slowly adopted and IPv4 remains dominant. There are several reasons for 
the slow uptake, but cost is a signiﬁ cant factor. IPv6 requires considerable 
capital investment, as much as $25 billion for U.S. ISPs alone, according to 
DOC. Part of the problem is that IPv6 is not backward compatible with 
IPv4, which makes incremental updating of systems difﬁ cult. This lack of 
compatibility means that operators will have to run IPv4 and IPv6 concur-
rently for the foreseeable future. As a result, early adopters face higher 
maintenance costs, without reaping immediate beneﬁ ts. With the added 

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
29
technical complexity of IPv6, labor costs, and the fact that IPv4 still works 
well on legacy systems, there is little immediate incentive to make the tran-
sition. However, as the demand to connect billions of additional devices to 
the Internet continues to grow, those without IPv4 addresses will ulti-
mately be forced to upgrade. Cisco predicts that there will be 50 billion 
devices connected to the Internet by 2020. 38 These devices can only do so 
if each has an IP address. 
 IPv4 depletion and the insipid response to IPv6 have social, economic, 
and political implications. Since upgrading is costly, it could potentially 
increase the global digital divide; those who cannot afford to switch will be 
left behind with IPv4 addresses, or worse, with no IP addresses at all. 
Moreover, since there is now a strong trading market for previously allo-
cated IP address blocks, competition for these scarce resources will likely 
inﬂ ate prices as organizations attempt to proﬁ t from the shortage. In addi-
tion, the IPv4 shortage and the slow uptake of IPv6 have led some to ques-
tion ICANN’s ability to manage DNS fairly. The former Director of ITU H. Zhao 
noted, “The early allocation of IPv4 addresses resulted in geographic 
imbalances and an excessive possession of the address space by early 
adopters. . . . It is important to ensure that similar concerns do not arise 
with respect to IPv6.” 39 He proposed that ITU take responsibility for allo-
cating some blocks of IPv6 addresses to give more equitable access to 
developing countries. In doing so, Zhao clearly linked the introduction of 
IPv6 to questions of Internet governance that extend beyond the purely 
technical. 
 ICANN in Dispute 
 ICANN was born in controversy and it has been involved in a number of 
policy-related governance disputes since that time. Almost immediately after 
ICANN was founded, it was challenged by some governments that sought to 
assert their purported sovereign rights over domain names. Much of this 
conﬂ ict emerged in the Government Advisory Committee (GAC), which is a 
permanent part of ICANN’s organizational structure. GAC was established 
in parallel with ICANN’s ﬁ rst meetings, and its membership is open to all 
national governments. While the White Paper that outlined ICANN’s frame-
work explicitly excluded government representatives from serving on its 
board, it did envisage that governments would play an advisory role. 
ICANN’s bylaws state, “advice of the Governmental Advisory Committee on 
public policy matters shall be duly taken into account.” 40 The formation of 
GAC was intended to placate governments who were concerned about the 
U.S.-centric nature of ICANN, and its purely advisory role is consistent with 
the principle that ICANN is a private-sector organization. Nevertheless, 
GAC’s inﬂ uence in ICANN has grown over time. 

30 
Controlling Cyberspace
 An early example of GAC’s assertion of authority was the publication of a 
document in 2000, titled  Principles for Delegation and Administration of ccTLDs . 
Among other points, GAC declared that “the relevant government or public 
authority ultimately represents the interests of the people of the country or 
territory for which the ccTLD has been delegated . . . governments or public 
authorities maintain ultimate policy authority over their respective ccTLDs.” 41 
The GAC principles not only asserted that governments have ultimate 
authority over Internet policy within their own territories, they also afﬁ rmed 
the view that DNS is a public resource that must be managed in the interests 
of the global Internet community. GAC’s broad assertion of authority was 
further underlined at its 2003 meeting in Rio de Janeiro when it established 
six working groups to address speciﬁ c program areas, including generic top-
level domains, international domain names, WHOIS (which is a system that 
allows anyone to look up registered domain name owners), country-code 
domains, DNS security, and IPv6. The loosely deﬁ ned role of GAC within 
ICANN has allowed it to expand its prerogatives over time. Mueller points 
out that since GAC has a special role in advising on policy matters, it “can 
address any issue before ICANN.” 42 As a result, GAC has increasingly become 
the primary advocate for sovereign government interests that are frequently 
at odds with the inclinations of the broader multistakeholder community. 
Despite efforts to improve cooperation and processes between GAC and 
ICANN, the relationship has been described as dysfunctional. 43 
 In addition to conﬂ icts over county-level codes, GAC and the ICANN 
Board publicly diverged on the issue of establishing an .xxx domain. In 
2000, ICANN received an application from ICM Registry to create an .xxx 
top-level designation for adult sites on the Internet. After a prolonged 
period of consultation with a variety of stakeholders, ICANN approved the 
application. This decision proved to be highly contentious, however, and 
many of those concerns were expressed through GAC. The Chairman of 
GAC Mohed Sharil Tarmizi wrote to the ICANN Board to express a “strong 
sense of discomfort” about the decision among some GAC members and he 
requested further debate. 44 GAC was wholeheartedly supported in this 
position by the Bush administration, which was being lobbied to oppose 
the decision by domestic interests, including the Family Research Council 
and Focus on the Family. In the face of such strong government pressure, 
ICANN agreed to withdraw its approval, but the case did not end there. 
Following an appeal by ICM Registry, upheld by an independent review 
panel authorized under ICANN bylaws, ICANN determined that the appli-
cation met all the necessary conditions and approved the submission in 
2011. In doing so, ICANN acknowledged but rejected the opposition of 
GAC, arguing that approval of top-level domain names does not require the 
“active support of GAC.” 45 These events had several important conse-
quences. Having ﬂ exed its muscles, GAC became more closely involved in 

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
31
ICANN policy discussions and demanded more inﬂ uence in the process. 46 
The controversy also placed a spotlight on U.S. government oversight of 
DNS, prompting further calls for the internationalization of the system. 
The Obama administration did not, however, challenge ICANN on this 
issue, stating that while it did not concur, “we respect the multi-stakeholder 
Internet governance process and do not think that it is in the long-term 
best interest of the United States or the global Internet community for us to 
unilaterally reverse the decision.” 47 So, after many years of wrangling, 
ICANN’s original decision was implemented. The organization had suc-
cessfully asserted its independence based on stipulations and processes 
outlined in its founding bylaws. Nevertheless, the statement from the 
Obama administration implied that it had the power to unilaterally reverse 
ICANN’s decision if it had chosen to do so. 
 Another controversy that placed ICANN in a policy-making role relates 
to domain names and intellectual property. These issues predate the found-
ing of ICANN, and indeed, the issue of intellectual property was one of the 
problems ICANN was initially formed to resolve. Disputes over trademarks 
and domain name ownership intensiﬁ ed as the volume of domain names 
grew over time and as their commercial value increased. While such intel-
lectual property disputes are traditionally handled by national courts, there 
were no legal standards for resolving domain name disputes internationally. 
Based on a proposal by the U.S. government, the task of devising such a 
system was given to WIPO, which published its recommendations on April 30, 
1999. In its report, WIPO advised ICANN to implement a Uniform 
Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP) to settle disputes. This 
would have the advantage of resolving challenges more quickly, and at less 
cost, than in national courts or in existing international institutions. ICANN 
subsequently adopted WIPO’s recommendations and UDRP went into effect 
on December 1, 1999. The policy applies to all generic top-level domains, 
and all registrars are required to submit to arbitration as a condition of their 
contracts with ICANN. This makes UDRP a powerful policy, since any reg-
istrar who refuses to agree in advance with these conditions would be 
excluded from DNS. 
 The main purpose of UDRP is to allow anyone to challenge domain 
name ownership if they believe that the name registration violates their 
trademark or other intellectual property rights. For a complaint to succeed, 
the complainant must establish that all of the following cumulative criteria 
are met: 48  
 1.  The domain name is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark or service 
mark in which the complainant has rights . This involves a comparison of the 
trademark and the domain name to assess the likelihood of user confusion. 
It typically applies to cases where the trademark is incorporated in the 

32 
Controlling Cyberspace
domain name. For instance, a wal-martsucks.com domain name was 
deemed to violate this ﬁ rst condition. 
 2.  The registrant of the domain name has no rights or legitimate interests in respect of 
the domain name . Generally, legitimate rights to a generic word or phrase rest 
on whether that name is genuinely used in connection with the relied-upon 
meaning. For instance, someone may have a legitimate right to include the 
word “apple” if the domain is used to sell apples but not computers. 
 3.  The domain name has been registered and is being used in bad faith . One of the 
main problems that UDRP was designed to address is the practice of cyber-
squatting. This occurs when individuals intentionally register similar 
domain names in bad faith for proﬁ t. For instance, Donald Trump success-
fully contested and acquired ownership of trumplasvegas.com and several 
other domains that contained his name. Many high-proﬁ le celebrities have 
done the same, including Madonna, Jennifer Lopez, Julia Roberts, and Tom 
Cruise. 
 ICANN does not arbitrate disputes directly, rather this is accomplished 
by dispute resolution service providers, including panels administered by 
WIPO. Nevertheless, ICANN’s inﬂ uence lies in the fact that it accredits all 
of these dispute resolution providers, and it governs the rules by which they 
operate. URDP therefore ultimately rests on top-down authority, and the 
system does not have signiﬁ cant mechanisms for checking that authority. 
Although theoretically UDRP can be bypassed, and it was intended to sup-
plement, not replace, national courts, the cost, complexity, and time 
involved in pursuing national litigation make this option less feasible. Hav-
ing said that, the operation of UDRP has been largely successful. The WIPO 
panels alone adjudicated over 35,000 cases in the ﬁ rst decade of UDRP’s 
existence. The speed of the process is also impressive. Most decisions are 
made within 45 days, and most favor the complainant, 49 indicating that the 
process is heavily tilted in favor of protecting established intellectual prop-
erty rights. 
 Opposition to ICANN’s authority and role in Internet governance none-
theless continues to emanate from governments that are suspicious of U.S. 
inﬂ uence over the organization as well as those who believe that they are 
underrepresented in the system. In this regard, denunciation of ICANN 
reﬂ ects broader critiques of the Internet governance framework. Much of this 
traditional criticism of ICANN stems from its perceived lack of accountabil-
ity and legitimacy. In managing the DNS and enforcing rights, some see 
ICANN encroaching on the time-honored prerogatives of governments. 
ICANN is clearly not a democratically elected institution, but at times it acts 
as a “ de facto  legislator.” 50  This perceived lack of representation and answer-
ability has led some governments to seek greater oversight authority over 

The Evolution of Internet Governance 
33
ICANN, based on the assertion that only governments can legitimately rep-
resent the preferences of their citizens. Many would speciﬁ cally like to see 
ICANN placed under the authority of a multilateral institution like the 
United Nations. This strand of governmental criticism, which also opposes 
ICANN’s reliance on the U.S. Department of Commerce for its legal exis-
tence, became particularly strident following the National Security Agency 
spying scandal and WikiLeaks revelations. All of which signiﬁ cantly 
increased pressure on the U.S. government to review its relationship with 
ICANN. 
 As a result of mounting international mistrust, and a desire to cement 
the legitimacy of ICANN, the Obama administration agreed during 2014 to 
end its legal and functional oversight of the organization. However, from 
the outset, the administration stipulated that a transition would only occur 
if it had broad support from the Internet community and adhered to the 
following principles: (1) support and enhance the multistakeholder model; 
(2) maintain the security, stability, and resiliency of DNS; (3) meet the 
needs and expectations of the global customers and partners of the IANA 
services; and (4) maintain the openness of the Internet. In addition, the 
administration conveyed that it would not accept a plan that replaced 
NTIA’s role with a government-led or intergovernmental organization solu-
tion. Following two years of extensive consultations, and with broad sup-
port from the multistakeholder community, ICANN’s Board of Directors 
submitted its transition proposals to NTIA on March 10, 2016, which were 
approved three month later. Despite last-ditch attempts to derail the transi-
tion by some members of Congress, who likened it to “giving away the 
Internet,” 51 The DOC contract with ICANN expired on October 1, 2016. 
This removed the authority of the U.S. government over ICANN, trans-
forming it into an independent institution accountable to the global multi-
stakeholder community. 
 The full transition of authority for the IANA functions to ICANN repre-
sents another notable step in the evolution of Internet governance. Contrary 
to some views, the transition did not give the Internet away. The Internet has 
no overarching centralized authority, rather the practice of Internet gover-
nance is performed by an assortment of institutions. No single body could 
effectively develop and implement all of the technical and policy require-
ments that are required to support the Internet’s critical functions. The suc-
cess of Internet governance consequently rests on its multilayered distributed 
qualities with each component in the system contributing different areas of 
expertise. 52 While this system is not perfect, it has for the most part success-
fully managed the explosive growth of the Internet. However, old and new 
challenges continue to put pressure on the exercise of Internet governance. 
On one hand, there are governments that seek to overhaul existing 

34 
Controlling Cyberspace
arrangements to acquire more authority in this area. On the other, there are 
persistent frictions and contradictions that exist within the prevailing multi-
stakeholder paradigm. Multistakeholderism in Internet governance suggests 
bottom-up collaboration, transparency, and egalitarianism, but in a world of 
unequal, technical, economic, and political resources, these ideals are not 
always accomplished in practice. How these fundamental tensions are 
resolved will shape the future evolution of Internet governance. 

 CHAPTER THREE 
 The Role of the United Nations 
 The active involvement of the United Nations (UN) in Internet governance 
can be traced back to the 1998 Plenipotentiary of the International Telecom-
munications Union (ITU), a specialized agency of the UN. In the context of a 
rapidly expanding Internet and concerns regarding U.S. inﬂ uence over its 
governance, ITU passed a resolution asserting that “ITU is the organization 
best able to seek appropriate ways to provide for development of the telecom-
munication sector geared to economic, social and cultural development,” and 
called upon the UN Secretary General to organize a world summit on the 
information society. 1 It was intended that the principal topic of the summit 
would be the global digital divide. This objective dovetailed with ITU’s 
responsibility for spreading the beneﬁ ts of information technology, as laid 
out in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). However, as the prepara-
tory process for the summit evolved, the issue of Internet governance 
emerged as an unexpected and controversial topic; one which would ulti-
mately reveal opposing visions of how the Internet should be governed. 
 Prior to the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), prepara-
tory meetings were held in order to deﬁ ne the agenda, establish the condi-
tions for participation of stakeholders, and ﬁ nalize draft principles and an 
action plan. The structure of these meetings was to be “open-ended intergov-
ernmental” led by ITU, but nongovernmental organizations, civil society, 
and the private sector were also invited to contribute to discussions. 2 The 
ﬁ rst meeting, PrepCom1 held in Geneva in 2002, was more administrative 
than political in character, and there was no mention of Internet governance. 
At PrepCom2 in February of the following year, however, Brazil was unam-
biguous about the importance that it placed on this issue: “Internet has 
evolved into a global public good and its governance should constitute a core 
issue of the Information Society agenda.” 3 This statement proved to be a pre-
cursor to contentious debates that would develop during the summit between 

36 
Controlling Cyberspace
those who sought to internationalize Internet governance, removing it from 
the purported jurisdiction of the United States, and those who wished to 
preserve the status quo. 
 WSIS was conducted in two phases: the ﬁ rst segment convened in Geneva 
in December 2003, and the second was held in Tunis during November 2005. 
The Declaration of Principles produced in Geneva asserted that “policy 
authority for Internet-related public policy issues is the sovereign right of 
States,” but acknowledged that the private sector, civil society, international, 
and intergovernmental institutions all have a role to play in Internet gover-
nance. There was little agreement, however, concerning the respective powers 
and responsibilities of each of these actors. As a result of this deadlock, the 
Principles document also included a request for the UN Secretary-General to 
establish a working group on Internet governance to lay the foundation for 
negotiations during the second phase of WSIS in 2005. The new body, known 
as the Working Group on Internet Governance (WGIG), was tasked with 
addressing three issues: (1) develop a working deﬁ nition of Internet gover-
nance; (2) identify the public policy issues that are relevant to Internet gover-
nance; and (3) develop a common understanding of the respective roles and 
responsibilities of governments, existing international organizations (IOs) 
and other forums as well as the private sector and civil society from both 
developing and developed countries. WGIG was comprised of 40 members 
from governments, the private sector, and civil society, and it solicited input 
from a broad variety of stakeholders around the world. 
 Following seven months of deliberation, the group partially fulﬁ lled its 
mandate by proposing a working deﬁ nition of Internet governance: 
 Internet governance is the development and application by Governments, 
the private sector and civil society of shared principles, norms, decision-
making procedures and programs that give form to the development and 
use of the internet. 4 
 While acknowledging that it is impossible to arrive at a single, universally 
accepted, and uncontestable deﬁ nition of Internet governance, WGIG 
described this as a working deﬁ nition, designed to serve as the basis for con-
tinued global dialogue. Despite reservations, the deﬁ nition was positively 
received at Tunis, and it was included in the meeting’s ﬁ nal document, titled 
the  Tunis Agenda for the Information Society. However, broad acceptance of the 
WGIG deﬁ nition was more a reﬂ ection of its nonspeciﬁ c character, than the 
emergence of a growing consensus around the issue of Internet governance. 
Since the deﬁ nition did not resolve the fundamental issue of where authority 
in Internet governance should reside, it did not threaten exiting prerogatives. 
 A more contentious proposal by WGIG was a recommendation to establish 
a Global Internet Policy Council (GIPC) as a multilateral body responsible for 

The Role of the United Nations 
37
Internet-related public policy. It was controversial since civil society and the 
private sector would be permitted to participate only as observers. A similarly 
provocative suggestion was the establishment of a World Internet Corporation 
for Assigned Names and Number (WICANN), envisaged as a private-sector-led 
body made up of a reformed internationalized ICANN linked to the UN. Gov-
ernments would play an advisory role similar to that performed by the Gov-
ernment Advisory Committee (GAC), currently in ICANN. This suggestion 
had little chance of success, however. A few months before the Tunis Summit, 
the U.S. government announced that it would maintain its historic oversight of 
ICANN and the authoritative root zone ﬁ le. The proposal to replace ICANN 
with a new international body was therefore wholeheartedly rejected by the 
Bush administration. WGIG had more success with its plan to establish an 
Internet Governance Forum (IGF), which would focus on discussing and 
developing Internet-related public policy. IGF was designed to place govern-
ments, the private sector, and civil society on an equal footing, and was 
described in the Tunis Agenda as “multilateral, multi-stakeholder, democratic 
and transparent.” 5  
 Although IGF emerged as a compromise solution when the United States 
stood ﬁ rm against proposals to internationalize ICANN, the United States’ 
role remained controversial. Opposition to continued U.S. oversight of 
ICANN was almost universal. Even the European Union unexpectedly stood 
with most of the rest of world in demanding the creation of a new interna-
tional body to govern the Internet. This broad-based discontent was eluci-
dated by a Brazilian delegate to WSIS: “On Internet governance, three words 
tend to come to mind: lack of legitimacy. In our digital world, only one nation 
decides for all of us.” 6 The creation of IGF therefore presented a way out of 
this impasse since it seemed to offer something for everyone. Those who 
sought greater international management of Internet governance could point 
to IGF as a triumph of multistakeholderism that broadened participation in 
the process. UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon hailed IGF as a new model 
of international cooperation. “Its purpose is to bring people together from all 
stakeholder groups. You meet here as equals, not to make decisions or nego-
tiate, but to discuss, exchange information and share good practices. . . . This 
Forum is modest in its means but not in its aspirations.” 7 At the same time, 
IGF was acceptable to the United States since it would not have formal over-
sight functions, and it would not replace any existing institutions. 
 Internet Governance Forum and Dynamic Coalitions 
 The ﬁ rst meeting of IGF was held in Athens in 2006, facilitated by the 
Multistakeholder Advisory Group (MAG), established a few months earlier 
by UN Secretary General Koﬁ  Annan. Its mandate included requirements to 

38 
Controlling Cyberspace
strengthen the engagement of stakeholders and make recommendations 
regarding emerging governance issues. The Athens meeting drew approxi-
mately 1,000 onsite participants from all the main stakeholder groups and 
from around the world (Table 3.1). 
   The breakdown of participants in Athens was fairly typical of subsequent 
meetings, wherein roughly one-third of attendees represent civil society and 
one-third governments. Geography plays a large part in determining who 
attends. Typically, the largest contingent comes from the host country: in 
Athens 22 percent of participants were from Greece, while at the 10th IGF 
held in Brazil 49 percent of participants were from that country. However, 
onsite attendance is not required to participate and the barriers to IGF par-
ticipation are low. At the 10th IGF, there were more than 2,000 active partici-
pants from 112 countries who participated via 50 remote hubs. 8 
 With such broad participation, IGF has clearly satisﬁ ed its mandate to 
strengthen the engagement of stakeholders; however, the value of its contri-
butions continues to be questioned. As IGF has no formal policy-making 
authority, it is frequently dismissed as a mere talking shop that produces few 
tangible results. In order to address such concerns, a working group was 
established by the UN’s Commission on Science and Technology for Devel-
opment (CSDT) in 2011 to examine ways to strengthen the impact of IGF on 
global Internet governance in line with the mandate set out in the Tunis 
Agenda. The ﬁ nal report, published a year later, highlighted four areas for 
improvement: increase funding, broaden participation, link IGF to other 
Internet governance entities, and develop more tangible outputs. To achieve 
Table 3.1 Onsite Participation at the First IGF Meeting: Stakeholder 
Groups and Geographic Regions
Stakeholder Group
Participants (%)
Region
Participants (%)
Government/
parliamentary
30
Europe
56
Civil society
29
North America
12
Private sector
13
Africa
11
Technical/academia
11
Asia 
11
Media
12
Latin America 
& Caribbean
5
Intergovernmental
5
Middle East 
3
Oceana
2
Source: Internet Governance Forum. “First IGF Meeting: Athens, Greece.” Accessed 
December 12, 2015. http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/athensmeeting.

The Role of the United Nations 
39
the latter, the report recommended that each IGF meeting focus on speciﬁ c 
policy questions and include a summary of converging and diverging views 
in a ﬁ nal outcome document. The Commission further advised that IGF doc-
uments be made available to all major stakeholders with a view to improving 
IGF’s interaction with those bodies. 
 The need to improve linkages between IGF and other governance institu-
tions goes to the heart of IGF’s main predicament. It is broadly mandated to 
foster the sustainability, security, stability, and development of the Internet, 
but it has no powers of execution. As a result, in order to effectively fulﬁ ll its 
objectives, IGF must inﬂ uence those institutions that do have that authority. 
The degree to which IGF is able to do so is difﬁ cult to measure precisely, and 
it remains the subject of debate, but the forum is undeniably a unique space 
with its own value. Since IGF does not make binding decisions, it is free from 
the constraints that are typically present in formal international negotiations, 
and therefore can more easily promote the free exchange of ideas and share 
best practices. This is achieved not only through annual international meet-
ings but also via more frequent regional IGFs. ICANN has supported IGF 
since its inception and recognizes the utility of the forum as an “effective 
vehicle for stimulating constructive debate around a broad range of Internet 
governance issues.” 9 While IGF lacks formal authority, its role might best be 
described as decision-shaping, which denotes preliminary inputs that help 
to frame emerging issues. In other words, as a multilayered and multifaceted 
network of discourse, IGF represents a preparatory phase in Internet gover-
nance policy development and agenda setting. 
 A tangible collaborative innovation designed to promote idea sharing 
emerged at the ﬁ rst IGF meeting in Athens 2006. Dynamic coalitions are 
informal issue-speciﬁ c groups comprised of individuals from a variety of 
stakeholder groups that are organized on a functional basis. They are quint-
essential epistemic communities, since they are comprised of experts who 
have competence in a particular domain, and who have shared normative 
beliefs. A review of their membership reveals that they include representa-
tives from academic institutions, government agencies, international organi-
zations, nongovernmental organizations, private telecommunications, and 
media companies. As of 2017, there were 16 active dynamic coalitions. 10 Sev-
eral of them address the issue of Internet governance speciﬁ cally, whereas 
others focus on narrower topics or broader principles: 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Accessibility and Disability 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Accountability 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Blockchain Technologies 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Child Online Safety 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Community Connectivity 

40 
Controlling Cyberspace
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Core Internet Values 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Freedom of Expression and Freedom of the Media on 
the Internet 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Gender and Internet Governance 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Innovative Approaches to Connecting the Unconnected 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Internet and Climate Change 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Internet Rights and Principles 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Network Neutrality 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Platform Responsibility 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on Public Access in Libraries 
 • 
Dynamic Coalition on the Internet of Things 
 • 
Youth Coalition on Internet Governance 
 A major stumbling block that has undermined the inﬂ uence of dynamic 
coalitions in the formation of Internet governance policy is the lack of insti-
tutionalization within the IGF framework. Since they are self-organized and 
unaccredited, some have questioned whether these groups are truly legiti-
mate: “there are no institutional checks and balances to ensure that the 
structure of a dynamic coalition is (and remains) multistakeholder and dem-
ocratic, nor that its procedures are accountable and transparent.” 11 There are 
also valid concerns that dynamic coalitions could become subject to capture 
by narrow interests. In their research, Levison and Marzuki note, for 
instance, that dynamic coalitions offer international organizations (IOs) an 
“opportunity space” in which to promote their policies and shape discourse. 12 
While this in itself is not a problem, IOs are after all part of the multistake-
holder ecosystem; it could become an issue if IOs, or any other powerful 
actor, use their considerable resources to dominate and dictate agendas. 
Another difﬁ culty is that since dynamic coalitions are informal working 
groups, they have traditionally lacked the necessary mechanisms to make 
ofﬁ cial recommendations to the IGF plenary. This problem was rectiﬁ ed to 
some extent in 2015, when, for the ﬁ rst time, dynamic coalitions were given 
a platform to present their work to the broader community. This develop-
ment was a direct result of recommendations made by the UN’s CSTD Work-
ing Group, which encouraged IGF to produce more tangible outputs. 
 The Dynamic Coalition on Core Internet Values is particularly relevant to 
Internet governance since it deﬁ nes and articulates fundamental tenets that 
inform policy making in this area. The coalition identiﬁ es four core Internet 
values: (1) the end-to-end principle, (2) open standards, (3) universal access, 
and (4) freedom of expression. The ﬁ rst meeting of the coalition, at the 2009 
IGF, recognized that the Internet is more than technology, and that the pres-
ervation of this revolutionary medium requires the protection of an essential 

The Role of the United Nations 
41
set of principles. Collectively these normative tenets were labeled as the 
Internet model: 
 The Internet model is open, transparent, and collaborative and relies on 
processes and products that are local, bottom-up, and accessible to users 
around the world. These principles and values are threatened when policy 
makers propose to regulate and control the Internet, with inadequate 
understanding of the core values. 13 
 The process of delineating fundamental principles is continuing, but the 
stated goal of the Dynamic Coalition for Core Internet Values is to embed 
core values in IGF documents, and induce governments to acknowledge 
them as crucial for maximizing the beneﬁ ts of the Internet. This latter point 
is particularly ambitious since disputes over the Internet’s core values lie at 
the heart of the Internet governance debate. While this clash between top-
down versus bottom-up ideals of Internet governance has existed for many 
years, it emerged most starkly at the 2012 World Conference on International 
Telecommunications (WCIT). This conference laid bare diverging policy 
positions of the governments who were present and it represents a watershed 
in the evolving Internet governance debate. The perceived attack on core 
Internet values that occurred during WCIT prompted fears that the UN was 
trying to takeover of the Internet. 14 
 World Conference on Internet Governance 
 The WCIT was convened by ITU, in December 2012. ITU was established 
in 1865 as the main standards setting organization for international telecom-
munications, which before the 2012 WCIT had been largely noncontrover-
sial. The organization is charged with such seemingly mundane, but 
important, tasks such as allocating the global radio spectrum and satellite 
orbits, developing technical standards that ensure networks connect, and 
improving global access to information and communication technology 
(ICT). Although ITU lists 700 private-sector entities among its membership, 
only its 193 member countries participate and vote in the Plenipotentiary 
Conference, the key event at which governments decide on the future poli-
cies of the organization. 15 ITU is, therefore, a typical multilateral organiza-
tion. Decision-making power is held by governments that cooperate to 
develop international communications and telecommunication policies. The 
last major treaty negotiated under the auspices of ITU created the Interna-
tional Telecommunications Regulations (ITRs) in 1988. Ratiﬁ ed by 190 
countries, these regulations outlined the principles underpinning interna-
tional voice, data, and video trafﬁ c, and were successful in bringing a level 
of standardization to ICT. In the years that followed, however, there was 

42 
Controlling Cyberspace
growing recognition that the 1988 regulations needed to be updated to take 
account of the dramatic changes that had occurred in international telecom-
munications. The growth of the Internet as a telecommunications medium, 
therefore, placed ITU at the center of the Internet governance debate, and 
also generated considerable controversy. The intergovernmental structure of 
ITU prompted fears that the traditional multistakeholder model of Internet 
governance was about to be replaced by a multilateral approach that would 
give ITU control over the Internet. 
 During the 12-day WCIT conference, 1,275 proposals were discussed by 
more than 1,600 delegates, but a unanimous agreement could not be 
reached. The main point of contention was Internet governance: speciﬁ -
cally, whether the existing multistakeholder model should be preserved or 
whether Internet governance should be transitioned to the ITU, a multilat-
eral body. Both during and after WCIT, it become common to depict these 
controversies as signaling a new Cold War over Internet governance, 16 fre-
quently portrayed as a split between governments that strive to protect and 
promote freedom of expression, and those that seek to use the Internet to 
censor and control their populations. While this narrative may be applica-
ble in some, or even many, cases, it does not tell the full story. Reviewing 
the statements of participants reveals that there were three, not two compet-
ing policy visions, which I delineate as the following archetypes: (1) the 
multistakeholder view; (2) the repressive multilateral view; and (3) the open 
multilateral view (see Table 3.2). 17  
 Table 3.2  Three Views of Internet Governance  
View
Actors
Institutions
Concerns/Objectives
Multistakeholder 
NGOs, civil 
society, business, 
and government 
agencies
ICANN, IGF
Open Internet, net 
neutrality, 
maintenance of 
exiting Internet 
governance 
arrangement
Repressive 
multilateral 
Governments
WCIT and ITU Multilateral Internet 
policy decision 
making, domestic 
control and security 
Open multilateral Governments 
WCIT and ITU
Multilateral Internet 
policy decision 
making, equal access 
and greater 
accountability

The Role of the United Nations 
43
 The ﬁ rst of these, the multistakeholder perspective in its purest form, 
favors openness in terms of limited regulation, freedom of expression, and 
free-market interests. This position is consistent with the historical develop-
ment of Internet norms. While the Internet grew out of research initially 
conducted by the U.S. Department of Defense, it was nevertheless promoted 
as an “open commons” from the beginning, and nonstate actors have played 
a prominent role in its evolution. The status quo multistakeholder view best 
describes the approach adopted by the United States, and many of its allies at 
WCIT. The ﬁ rst U.S. proposal, published in August 2012, called for only lim-
ited changes to international telecommunication rules, largely aimed at pro-
moting market-based solutions rather than global regulations. The plans 
noted that the telecommunications market had transformed signiﬁ cantly 
since 1988, when most trafﬁ c was exchanged between monopoly carriers in 
the form of ﬁ xed telephony, ﬁ xed data, and telegraph. Today, by contrast, 
most trafﬁ c is exchanged between commercial carriers operating in competi-
tive environments. The United States therefore proposed to include provi-
sions in the revised treaty that would promote further market liberalization 
and private-sector investment. With regard to Internet governance, the 
United States’ position was made clear: 
 The United States will not support proposals that would increase the exer-
cise of control over Internet governance or content. The United States will 
oppose efforts to broaden the scope of the ITRs to empower any censor-
ship of content or impede the free ﬂ ow of information and ideas. It believes 
that the existing multi-stakeholder institutions, incorporating industry 
and civil society, have functioned effectively. 18 
 The United States therefore sought to maintain the status quo with respect to 
Internet governance. It promoted a decentralized, free-market approach that 
would retain the public–private partnership of ICANN at its center. 
 By contrast, the repressive multilateral perspective describes governments 
that not only seek to strengthen their own security but also shift responsi-
bilities for Internet governance to a multilateral intergovernmental body, 
such as ITU. A proposal at WCIT, known as Contribution 27, submitted by 
Russia, China, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Sudan, and Egypt, ﬁ ts that classiﬁ ca-
tion. Explicit within the document were statements that directly challenged 
the existing Internet governance framework. It called for greater national 
controls over Internet routing and content. Article A.2 notes, “Member States 
shall have equal rights to manage the Internet.” Article 3A.3 asserts, “Mem-
ber states shall have the sovereign right to establish and implement public 
policy, including international policy, on matters of Internet governance.” 
The document also challenged ICANN’s monopoly control over domain 
names. Article 3B.1 declares, “Member states have the right to manage all 

44 
Controlling Cyberspace
naming, numbering, addressing and identiﬁ cation resources used for inter-
national telecommunications/ICT within their territories.” 19 Although Con-
tribution 27 failed to gain enough support for these statements to be included 
in the ﬁ nal treaty, its proponents succeeded in adding similar language to the 
nonbinding appendix: “the Internet is a central element of the information 
society . . . all governments should have an equal role and responsibility for 
international Internet governance.” 20 
 The third approach, the open multilateral viewpoint describes those gov-
ernments that seek to challenge the status quo by internationalizing Inter-
net governance, but who are not primarily motivated by issues of domestic 
control. From this perspective multilateralism is viewed as having value in 
its own right. The open multilateral label applies to countries that are lower 
on the global power hierarchy and view multilateralism as a way to increase 
their inﬂ uence. For powerful states, the downside of multilateralism is some 
loss of policy control, but for weaker countries participation in multilateral 
institutions can provide additional venues in which to exercise authority. 
Multilateralism is one of “the most egalitarian forms of cooperation and 
decision making,” 21  since it potentially gives developing countries an equal 
voice. Even if those countries are underrepresented in multilateral institu-
tions, this is preferable to the complete absence of representation that they 
might face in traditional bilateral state-centric arrangements. Multilateral 
institutions also have the potential to provide greater external accountabil-
ity than other forms of decision making. Consequently, the open multilat-
eral view was expressed by WCIT participants who were primarily 
concerned with accountability in Internet governance, as well as nondis-
criminatory access to Internet resources. The target of much of their con-
cerns was the perceived lack of accountability in ICANN. For instance, 
during the 2005 WSIS, India, Brazil, and South Africa (a group known as 
IBSA) challenged ICANN’s dominance directly when they identiﬁ ed an 
urgent need for the establishment of an Internet oversight entity that would 
be part of the UN system. Attempts were also made to link the issue of the 
global digital divide to Internet governance. One Brazilian delegate, for 
example, argued that the digital divide is not simply about ﬁ nancial inequal-
ities and access to computers, it is also concerned with “political inequali-
ties, arising from the inability of developing countries to inﬂ uence Internet 
decision-making.” 22  
 During the 2012 WCIT, proposals that emanated from developing coun-
try blocks ﬁ t most closely with the open multilateral perspective. These 
countries sought to internationalize Internet governance, and they chal-
lenged the dominant role of ICANN in a way that is similar to the repressive 
multilateral view. However, they also pressed for provisions to be included in 
the treaty that would guarantee nondiscriminatory access to information 

The Role of the United Nations 
45
technology. This proposal proved to be unexpectedly controversial and 
ultimately ended any possibility of consensus. The problem emerged during 
ﬁ nal discussions when the African block proposed adding text in the pre-
amble that raised the issue of human rights and recognized “the right of 
access of Member States to international telecommunications services.” 23 
Equal access to technology and centers of decision making are important 
issues for countries in the Global South. Many governments complain that 
the current multistakeholder model of Internet governance is neither as open 
nor inclusive as it is often portrayed. Under the existing framework, govern-
ing bodies such as ICANN are dominated by countries of the Global North, 
which means that often developing world perspectives are not fully repre-
sented. While the Internet is becoming more important in developing 
countries, non-Westerners are still not entering leadership positions in mul-
tistakeholder organizations in representative numbers. Stakeholders in the 
Global South are often disadvantaged in Internet governance participation as 
a result of a number of structural issues including language, funding, and 
cultural factors that hamper communication and understanding. 24 For these 
countries, ITU holds at least the promise of greater representation. As an 
intergovernmental organization, it is based on the principle of one country, 
one vote. 
 The proposal to include a reference to human rights in the treaty was imme-
diately rejected by the United States, Canada, and several European states, and 
they consequently refused to sign the revised treaty. 25 Nevertheless, the 
amendment passed with 77 votes in favor, 33 against, and 8 abstentions. The 
African block was joined by several Middle Eastern countries as well as China 
and Cuba. So, ironically, pro-Internet freedom democracies argued against 
declaring Internet access as a human right, while non-democracies argued in 
favor of that right. This incongruity can be explained by the type of human 
rights that was proposed. The amendment argued for the establishment of a 
right of Internet access for countries, not a right of access for people, so coun-
tries such as China and Cuba could support its inclusion. Ultimately, the dis-
pute over access proved to be the barrier that brought WCIT to a close without 
consensus. Of the 144 countries present, 89 signed the new treaty, while 55 
did not. 
Table 3.3  Signatories and Non-Signatories of the 2012 WCIT Final Acts
Signatories
Non-Signatories
Not Free
33
2
Partially free
33
8
Free
23
45

46 
Controlling Cyberspace
 While most of the countries that refused to sign the treaty are advanced 
democracies and most of the signatories are not, it would be simplistic and 
inaccurate to explain the outcome of the conference solely in these terms. 
With respect to Internet governance, three broad perspectives were evident 
before and during WCIT: (1) those who sought to protect the status quo, rep-
resented by the multistakeholder perspective; (2) those who sought to 
strengthen domestic Internet controls and internationalize Internet gover-
nance, represented by the repressive multilateral view; and (3) ﬁ nally, the 
open multilateral grouping who were primarily motivated by access and rep-
resentation issues. Table 3.3 conﬁ rms that signatory countries were a hetero-
geneous group in terms of their political makeup. Using Freedom House data 
from 2012, signatory countries are relatively evenly divided across “Free,” 
“Partially Free,” and “Not Free” classiﬁ cations. Since more than one quarter 
of signatory countries are designated as Free, it is difﬁ cult to assert that sup-
port for the WCIT treaty was predicated entirely upon a desire to adopt 
repressive Internet controls. Similarly, although a majority of non-signatory 
countries are “Free,” almost one-ﬁ fth are classiﬁ ed as “Partially Free” or “Not 
Free.” This contradicts a common perception that depicts disputes at WCIT 
as primarily disagreements between freedom-loving democracies and security-
obsessed dictatorships. 
 Although the dire predictions made prior to WCIT that the UN was about 
to take over the Internet were clearly over blown, the 2012 conference never-
theless represented a signiﬁ cant challenge to the current multistakeholder 
model of Internet governance as well as a deﬁ ning moment in the Internet 
governance debate. This is part of an ongoing trend in which some govern-
ments are endeavoring to territorialize cyberspace by demanding sovereign 
rights over the technology. Attempts to transfer responsibility for Internet 
governance from bodies such as ICANN to ITU epitomizes this develop-
ment, since the latter is an intergovernmental multilateral body in which 
only countries have the right to vote, to the exclusion of civil society. During 
WCIT it was clear that many governments prefer a multilateral state-centric 
form of Internet governance to a distributed multistakeholder one. While 
this idea was not universally accepted, references in the treaty to Internet 
governance reveal efforts to reassert national power over the global 
commons. 
 WCIT left fundamental questions concerning Internet governance unre-
solved, and the perceived legitimacy of the current system of Internet gover-
nance was further undermined less than a year later by Edward Snowden’s 
revelations about NSA spying. Overnight, the United States’ role as cham-
pion of the open multistakeholder system with ICANN at its center began to 
appear hypocritical and self-serving. At the 24th session of the Human 
Rights Council in September 2013, a representative from Pakistan, speaking 
on behalf of Ecuador, Venezuela, Cuba, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Russia, 

The Role of the United Nations 
47
Indonesia, Bolivia, Iran, and China, expressed concerns about the use of 
advanced surveillance technologies. The delegate asserted that the Internet 
should not be operated by “a few who have misused it without any interna-
tional legislation and monitoring of these abuses.” He went on to demand an 
“international intergovernmental mechanism of Internet governance.” 26 
One of the most vocal critics of the United States was Brazilian President 
Dilma Rousseff, who characterized NSA spying as “a grave violation of 
human rights and civil liberties . . . [and a] disrespect of national sover-
eignty.” Rousseff went on to declare that her government would present pro-
posals for a “multilateral framework for the governance and use of the 
Internet.” 27 Criticism was widespread even among major players in the 
Internet governance ecosystem. The directors of the so-called I* (read I star) 
organizations—ICANN, IETF, IAB, W3C, the Internet Society, and the ﬁ ve 
RIRs issued a statement that challenged U.S. oversight of the Internet. Their 
Montevideo Statement (October 2013) called for “accelerating the globaliza-
tion of ICANN and IANA functions, towards an environment in which all 
stakeholders, including all governments, participate on an equal footing.” 28 
 The statement stressed “concern over the undermining of the trust and con-
ﬁ dence of Internet users globally due to recent revelations of pervasive mon-
itoring and surveillance.” In addition, the president of ICANN, Fadi 
Chehadi, supported President Rousseff’s plans to host an international con-
ference to develop a new model of Internet governance. Under mounting 
international pressure the Obama administration unexpectedly announced 
in March 2014 that it would cede control over ICANN when the organiza-
tion’s current contract with the U.S. Department of Commerce expired. This 
move was criticized by many but it was clearly an attempt to forestall pres-
sures for even greater intergovernmental control in light of the NSA spying 
scandal. Later that month, Brazil hosted a global conference on Internet 
governance. 
 NETmundial and Beyond 
 The Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet Gover-
nance, also known as NETmundial, was convened in São Paulo, Brazil, in 
April 2014. It had two stated purposes: (1) to identify a set of universal Inter-
net governance principles and (2) to create a roadmap for the future of Inter-
net governance. This was to be a standalone conference, outside the existing 
Internet governance framework, which would take a fresh look at the issue in 
the aftermath of the NSA scandal. Unlike ITU, it would be open to a broad 
variety of interested parties including governments, academia, civil society, 
the technical community, and the private sector. In order to obtain a compre-
hensive spectrum of opinion, the organizers solicited online contributions in 
the months before the meeting. These contributions were then summarized 

48 
Controlling Cyberspace
and compiled by the newly formed Executive Multistakeholder Committee 
(EMC), comprised of representatives from the global multistakeholder com-
munity. Stringent efforts were made to make the process as open and inclu-
sive as possible. A total of 188 contributions were received from 46 countries 
and 158 institutions during the initial round, and the ﬁ rst published refer-
ence document received an additional 1,370 comments. The meeting was 
accessible to as many as the location could accommodate, which was 900, 
and there were dozens of hubs set up around the world to allow interested 
parties to interact remotely during the meeting in real time. 
 Given the original impetus for the NETmundial meeting, it is not surpris-
ing that privacy and information security issues were included in most initial 
submissions. There were also calls for greater inclusiveness and participation 
in Internet governance, but there was no consensus about what this would 
mean in practice. Consistent with positions adopted at the 2012 WCIT, clear 
divisions were evident among those who sought to strengthen the role of 
governments in Internet governance, and those who advocated in favor of 
the existing multistakeholder model. The strongest proponent of the existing 
system was the United States, which was consistent with its multistakeholder 
perspective as before, even though the complexion of the status quo had 
changed. The initial contribution of the United States to NETmundial also 
signaled that discussion of Internet governance would not be welcomed at 
the meeting: “We would discourage meeting participants from debating the 
reach or limitations of state sovereignty in Internet policy.” 29 The Russian and 
Chinese contributions also echoed many of the same themes that they pro-
moted at WCIT 2012, further reinforced by the NSA scandal. Russia noted, 
“The incident with Snowden has demonstrated a complete lack of security 
and control” and that control by one government of the root zone gover-
nance system “worries the intentional community.” 30 This was written before 
the surprise announcement by the Obama administration that it would 
relinquish legal control over ICANN, so the removal of this stumbling block 
had the potential to open a space for greater cooperation. That it did not is a 
clear reﬂ ection of the deep and persistent divide that exists in Internet gover-
nance. Countries such as Russia and China view Internet governance 
through a paradigmatic lens that is very different from that of the United 
States. For years, Russian governments have argued that there is an institu-
tional gap in the current Internet governance system that can be ﬁ lled only 
by governments. In Russia’s state-centric view, the U.S. version of multi-
stakeholderism is merely a cover used to subvert other states and push its 
own worldview and values. At NETmundial, the Chinese government’s con-
tribution was similarly state-centric. It began by reiterating a call for interna-
tional deliberations within the UN framework, and asserted that policy 
authority for Internet-related public issues is the sovereign right of nation-
states. As at WCIT, contributions from developing counties ﬁ t the open 

The Role of the United Nations 
49
multilateral perspective most closely, arguing that the structures that man-
age core Internet resources need to be internationalized and made represen-
tative and democratic. However, the lack of participation from the Global 
South was evident at NETmundial. Of the 188 contributions, only 19 were 
received from Africa and most of those were from civil society. Remarkably, 
only one African government, Tunisia, submitted a contribution to NET-
mundial. Despite efforts toward inclusivity, Africa and Asia were seriously 
underrepresented at the meeting. 
 While the policy positions of governments during NETmundial were 
largely predictable and afﬁ rmed prior stances on the issue of Internet gover-
nance, the approach adopted by Brazil is an interesting exception. During 
WCIT 2012, Brazil aligned with other BRIC countries to advocate multilat-
eral solutions for Internet governance, albeit for different reasons than those 
of Russia and China. However, at NETmundial, Brazil appeared to stake out 
a new middle ground between the poles of multilateralism and multistake-
holderism. For Brazil, Internet governance brings together three policy 
concerns: achieving technological development, pursuing a prominent inter-
national role, and checking U.S. dominance in the global order. 31 Tradition-
ally, the latter concern effectively placed Brazil in the multilateral camp. 
However, the nature of Brazil’s international Internet policy stance is becom-
ing increasingly out-of-step with its domestic Internet policy. The Brazilian 
Internet Steering Committee (CGI.br) is a multistakeholder organization that 
has had a long-standing and positive relationship with ICANN and with 
global civil society movements. So, while internationally Brazil’s diplomats 
were leading proponents of multilateralism, domestic actors were increas-
ingly championing multistakeholderism. 32 
 The outcome document of NETmundial was based on a rough consensus 
that achieved broad, but not universal, support. Russia complained about the 
lack of transparency in preparing the document and declared that it would 
not consider implementing Internet principles based on the document. The 
Indian government argued that the principles did not go far enough to chal-
lenge American hegemony and suggested that the Internet be further democ-
ratized and renamed as the Equinet. 33 Cuba asserted that the Internet 
governance debate should be held in the UN. To the extent that these were 
the only three governments that explicitly distanced themselves from the 
document, the outcome of NETmundial can be deemed a success. The rea-
sons for this lack of opposition are twofold. First, the NETmundial statement 
contains something for everyone since it incorporates both multilateral and 
multistakeholder elements. The document recognizes that “governments 
have primary, legal and political accountability for the protection of human 
rights,” 34 and that governments are important stakeholders in Internet gover-
nance. At the same time, the statement contains numerous references to mul-
tistakeholderism, including a recognition that decision making “should be 

50 
Controlling Cyberspace
bottom-up, enabling full involvement of all stakeholders” and, signiﬁ cantly, 
the word multilateral is absent. Second, the NETmundial statement is just 
that, a statement. Unlike a treaty, it does not carry the force or obligations of 
international law. As a result, the barriers to reaching an agreement were 
considerably lower than those that existed during the WCIT 2012. 
 To a signiﬁ cant extent the value of NETmundial is in the eye of the 
beholder. The United States viewed the meeting as a clear victory for multi-
stakeholderism over multilateralism, evidenced by a State Department blog 
that described the outcome of NETmudial as “substantive” and a “game 
changing achievement.” 35 Representatives from the United States were 
undoubtedly relieved that the meeting did not deteriorate into acrimony over 
NSA surveillance practices, and indeed the document makes only a passing 
reference to surveillance. However, that degree of optimism is somewhat pre-
mature. While the NETmundial statement appears to support multistake-
holderism, it is not clear that everyone agrees with how that is deﬁ ned. In her 
opening remarks, Brazil’s President Rousseff stated that Internet governance 
should be “multisectoral, multilateral, democratic and transparent” and that 
there is “no opposition” between the multisectoral and multilateral nature of 
the Internet.” 36 However, it is far from obvious how these competing and 
apparently contradictory perspectives can be combined. Multisectoralism 
implies that all stakeholders participate on a near equivalent footing. How-
ever, in traditional multilateralism, governments are preeminent. It is the 
balance of power between governments and others actors in the Internet gov-
ernance ecosystem that lies at the heart of this debate. 
 President Rousseff’s somewhat ambiguous statements concerning the 
desired nature of Internet governance might be explained by domestic ten-
sions in this area. When the Snowden revelations emerged, the reaction of 
the Brazilian government was to adopt a traditional state-centric approach by 
asserting sovereign authority. Brazil’s Army Science and Technology Depart-
ment immediately discussed routing Internet trafﬁ c around the United 
States, and Brazil’s parliament considered introducing provisions for data 
nationalization, meaning that data generated in Brazil would stay in Brazil. 37 
At the same time, Rousseff faced considerable pushback from Brazilian civil 
society that favored multistakeholderism. In the end, Rousseff ostensibly 
adopted an opaque middle position. She continued to assert the sovereign 
equality of all states in Internet governance and challenge U.S. dominance; 
however, she also accepted that domestic governance of the Internet should 
be conducted based on a multistakeholder approach. While Brazil has tradi-
tionally advocated multilateralism, along with countries such as China and 
Russia, the shift in language that occurred at NETmundial suggests that this 
may no longer be the case. This emerging rift between Brazil and its prior 
partners is signiﬁ cant since Brazil is often viewed as a swing state in interna-
tional Internet governance negotiations. 

The Role of the United Nations 
51
 Since the NETmundial conference was widely regarded as a success, there 
were strong incentives to try to build upon its achievements. One initiative was 
the creation of the NETmundial Initiative (NMI), which was ofﬁ cially launched 
on November 6, 2014, by ICANN and the World Economic Forum (WEF). The 
stated mission of NMI is to “address Internet issues and advance the imple-
mentation of the NETmundial Principles and Roadmap.” 38 However, the found-
ers of NMI made clear that the initiative would not be a policy-making body. 
Rather, it would act as a facilitator by highlighting important issues and bring-
ing together relevant stakeholders. As such, NMI was designed to complement 
existing Internet governance organizations. Despite best intentions, however, 
NMI faced almost immediate criticism based primarily on three arguments. 
First, the process by which NMI was created lacked transparency and it 
adopted a centralized top-down approach that was not inclusive. The NMI 
Coordinating Council with permanent members was compared to the power-
ful UN Security Council. Second, there were concerns over whether NMI 
would undermine the work of the IGF, and that it would not add additional 
value. Finally, the inclusion of WEF, whose membership is comprised of the 
world’s top corporations, raised suspicions that NMI was attempting to place 
business and economic elites at the center of Internet governance. 39 As a result, 
important stakeholders in the Internet governance community refused to 
endorse the initiative. The Internet Society reiterated its view that “there is no 
single, global platform that can serve to coordinate, organize or govern all the 
Internet issues that may arise.” 40 While IAB expressed its concern that “the 
creation of a highly structured coordination council for the Initiative may 
impede the development of broad participation.” 41 The success of the NETmun-
dial conference, followed by widespread dissatisfaction with the NMI, high-
lights the unpredictability of Internet governance processes. The nature of the 
Internet governance system is far from being settled, and even traditional allies 
sometimes ﬁ nd themselves in disagreement. 
 As multistakeholder processes were unfolding at NETmundial, so too were 
intergovernmental options being pursued under the auspices of the UN. The 
next major multilateral event that had the potential to shape Internet gover-
nance arrangements after NETmundial was the ITU Plenipotentiary held in 
Busan, South Korea, in December 2014 (PP14). The Plenipotentiary Confer-
ence   is the key event at which ITU member states decide on the future role of 
the organization; it is convened every four years and it is the top policy-making 
body of ITU. For PP14, ITU set a roadmap dubbed “Connect 2020” that laid 
out four broad themes for discussion of ICT, namely, promoting growth, inclu-
siveness, sustainability, and innovation of ICT. ITU member states were invited 
to focus their policy statements on how each country would contribute to the 
implementation of “Connect 2020” in each of these areas. There was no spe-
ciﬁ c mention of Internet governance, but the sustainability goal made refer-
ence to improving cybersecurity, which generated concern over whether some 

52 
Controlling Cyberspace
countries might use this to broaden the ITU mandate beyond technical mat-
ters. However, despite these trepidations, PP14 proved to be much less conten-
tious than WCIT 12, even though perspectives on Internet governance among 
the governments present remained largely unchanged. This was due in large 
part to conscious efforts, employed beforehand, to avoid another damaging 
diplomatic breakdown. The German government, for instance, implored 
members to avoid politicizing the conference, arguing that “governance of the 
Internet cannot be legitimately discussed in the restricted circles of govern-
ment representatives in a technical organization.” 42 The United States also 
played its part by laying the groundwork for cooperation almost two years 
before the Busan meeting. In doing so, it had two goals in mind: avoid another 
WCIT-type vote on Internet governance and block any piecemeal propositions 
that could shift responsibilities from the multistakeholder model to ITU. Such 
preparation evidently paid off, and U.S. representatives enthusiastically 
declared that a “Busan Consensus” had been reached. As Ambassador Daniel 
Sepulveda later effused, “we agreed to discuss matters in good faith and 
reached consensus-based decisions. Instead of votes, there was deliberation. 
Instead of acrimony, there was negotiation.” 43  
 The Chinese government also struck a more conciliatory tone. Although 
the Chinese proposal still advocated multilateral approaches to Internet gov-
ernance, the government modiﬁ ed its tactics with regard to how this could 
be achieved. Following the frustrations of WCIT 12, China adopted a new 
public relations campaign designed to gain broader acceptance of Internet 
sovereignty and multilateral Internet management concepts. An important 
component of this campaign was China’s decision to host the  First World 
Internet Conference in Wuzhen, a few days after PP14. The theme of the con-
ference was “An interconnected world shared and governed by all” and, in a 
public relations coup, it attracted top executives from Chinese and American 
tech ﬁ rms, including Baidu, Alibaba, Tencent, Apple, Amazon, Microsoft, 
and LinkedIn, as well as ICANN. Near the end of the conference, organizers 
made a bid to get attendees to adopt the Wuzhen Resolution, which acknowl-
edged that Internet governance should be grounded in multilateralism, and 
that national Internet sovereignty must be respected. This effort was ulti-
mately unsuccessful, but it was a clear indicator of China’s efforts to secure 
global buy-in for its vision of Internet governance based on multilateral con-
trol. This ﬁ rst conference as well as subsequent meetings signal that China 
has not abandoned its traditional positions, and that it is determined to play 
a more prominent role in the Internet governance debate. 
 The other major Internet governance event that followed NETmundial was 
the World Summit on Information Society Review, held in Paris during 2015. 
Known as WSIS+10, the meeting was a continuation of the process that began 
in Tunis in 2005. Pursuant to the Tunis Agenda, the UN General Assembly 
was tasked to “take stock of the progress made in the implementation of the 

The Role of the United Nations 
53
outcomes of the [WSIS] and address potential information and communica-
tions technology gaps and areas for continued focus, as well as addressing 
challenges, including bridging the digital divide, and harnessing information 
and communications technologies for development.” 44  An additional impor-
tant charge was to renew the mandate of IGF, which was set to expire in 2015. 
The WSIS review process was initiated in a series of conferences hosted by 
several UN bodies—ITU, UNESCO, UNCTAD, and UNDP in the two years 
prior. The involvement of these bodies clearly shaped the emphasis in the 
ﬁ nal outcome document since almost half of WSIS+10 resolutions focus 
on the digital divide and the link between ICT access and economic 
development. 
 With respect to Internet governance, WSIS+10 renewed the IGF mandate 
for another 10 years and conﬁ rmed the deﬁ nition of Internet governance 
contained in the Tunis Agenda. Beyond that, however, the signiﬁ cance of the 
document is less obvious. ICANN detected a general shift in positions, stat-
ing “We were pleased to see that the Outcome Document shows that the 
issue of Internet governance no longer evolves around the question of 
whether it should be  multilateral  or  multistakeholder. ” 45   However, this shift was 
very subtle. Article 29 of the original Tunis Agenda states, “The international 
management of the Internet should be multilateral, transparent and demo-
cratic, with the full involvement of governments, the private sector, civil 
society and international organizations.” While Article 57 of the WSIS+10 
document recognizes that “the management of the Internet as a global facil-
ity includes multilateral, transparent, democratic and multi-stakeholder pro-
cesses, with the full involvement of Governments, the private sector, civil 
society, international organizations, technical and academic communities.” 
The WSIS+10 outcome document also reafﬁ rms paragraph 35 of the Tunis 
Agenda, which declares that policy authority for Internet-related public pol-
icy issues is the sovereign right of States. The main difference between the 
Tunis Agenda and the WSIS+10 document is the numerous inclusions of the 
term multistakeholder in the latter. However, while this acknowledges a 
legitimate role for nongovernment stakeholders in Internet governance, it did 
not resolve the underlying tension between the multilateral and multistake-
holder approaches, evidenced by the fact that WSIS+10 produced a consen-
sus document that was supported by governments on both sides of the 
debate. Like many international agreements, the WSIS+10 outcome docu-
ment garnered broad support due to its creative ambiguity. 
 The Internet Governance Debate Continues 
 WCIT 12 represented a turning point in the debate over Internet gover-
nance, revealing deep political cleavages surrounding this issue. These divi-
sions persisted, albeit less dramatically, at NETmundial, Busan, and WSIS+10. 

54 
Controlling Cyberspace
In all of these fora efforts were made to introduce a new template for the 
future of Internet governance that, if successful, would signiﬁ cantly alter the 
dominant multistakeholder framework. These endeavors became more pro-
nounced as a result of the NSA spying scandal, which proved to be a highly 
disruptive event that intensiﬁ ed long-standing debates. Following the 
Snowden revelations, Russia’s President Vladimir Putin famously character-
ized the Internet as a “CIA project,” but intense criticism also came from U.S. 
allies. Signiﬁ cantly, objections to perceived U.S. hegemony in Internet gover-
nance go beyond the issue of surveillance to also address questions of legiti-
macy. As Germany’s contribution to NETmundial made clear, “democratically 
elected governments, as the representative of the people, possess public 
authority including internet-related public policy issues and are supposed to 
be the main source for legitimacy and democratic legitimation.” It is a com-
mon view in many countries that the existing multistakeholder system is 
characterized by a democratic deﬁ cit that can only be ﬁ lled by governments. 
This argument, that governments should play a greater role in Internet gov-
ernance, has intrinsic logic when viewed from public policy and public inter-
est perspectives. Governments, at least in democratic systems, theoretically 
embody the will of the people, and when they make international agree-
ments in the form of treaties, these are ratiﬁ ed by representatives of the peo-
ple. By contrast, the institutions of multistakeholderism, ICANN and the 
other I* organizations, lack democratic legitimacy and are largely unaccount-
able. In addition, the current system gives considerable weight to private cor-
porations that are primarily answerable to shareholders not citizens. It has 
not gone unnoticed that the largest and most economically powerful technol-
ogy corporations are incorporated in the United States, and they continue to 
assert their inﬂ uence in multistakeholder rule making. 
 Although the U.S. government’s support for multistakeholderism is con-
sistent with long-held political values concerning freedom of expression and 
a limited role of government in the economy, this approach is often conve-
niently self-serving. Traditional multistakeholderism reinforces existing 
power structures in Internet governance; it reﬂ ects dominant political and 
economic interests and obscures inherent advantages. In addition, the 
Snowden revelations revealed previously unknown levels of cooperation 
between American corporations on the one hand, and the American govern-
ment on the other. Although their interests do not always align, legal over-
sight of the dominant technology companies by the U.S. government gives 
the latter unique access and inﬂ uence. It is this perceived unequal distribu-
tion of power within the current system that explains why many govern-
ments, particularly in developing countries, prefer to anchor Internet 
governance in international institutions that operate on the principle of one 
country, one vote.  

 CHAPTER FOUR 
 The Digital Divide 
 The digital divide issue lies at the heart of the Internet governance debate. To 
many around the world, the existing Internet governance framework is per-
ceived as exclusionary, constructed to favor the already powerful. This view 
is particularly deep seated in countries of the Global South, which, as later 
adopters of the technology, have had less opportunity to inﬂ uence the evolu-
tion of Internet governance. Moreover, many governments in the Global 
South argue that the multistakeholder arrangements that have been the hall-
mark of Internet governance to date perpetuate inequity. They assert that 
membership in multistakeholder institutions is heavily tilted in favor of the 
Global North, and that access to the power structures of Internet governance 
is difﬁ cult. The solution to this perceived imbalance therefore lies in transfer-
ring decision-making authority in Internet governance to global institutions 
in which all countries’ votes are weighted equally. From this perspective, this 
remedy would not only lessen the perceived dominance of the United States 
in Internet governance, it would substantially increase the inﬂ uence of the 
Global South. In institutions where decisions are based on one country, one 
vote, the Global South beneﬁ ts from sheer numbers. Although the digital 
divide in Internet governance is fundamentally about gaining access to cen-
ters of decision making by governments that feel excluded, the term tradi-
tionally has had a broader meaning. The digital divide is typically articulated 
with reference to access to technology by individuals and groups, not access 
to decision making by governments. With its focus on individual users, this 
broader deﬁ nition normally falls outside scholarly analysis of Internet gover-
nance, but the two cannot be entirely disentwined. After all, access to Inter-
net governance presupposes access to technology. From a Global South 
perspective, contributing to Internet governance is not an end in itself. 
Rather, it is viewed as a means to spread access to technology worldwide. 

56 
Controlling Cyberspace
 What Is the Digital Divide? 
 The term digital divide was ﬁ rst used in the 1990s to depict the gap that 
existed between those who had access to information technologies, and those 
who did not. The phrase was originally applied to the uneven distribution of 
Internet resources in the United States. A landmark 1995 study titled  Falling 
Through the Net: A Survey of the “Have Nots” in Rural and Urban America found 
that inner cities and rural areas of the South had the least access to informa-
tion and communication technology (ICT), prompting federal and state gov-
ernments to increase funding for computers and Internet connectivity, 
especially in schools. 1 The digital divide was therefore viewed in dichoto-
mous terms, either people have access to technology or they do not. If it is 
the latter, then the solution is relatively straightforward; simply provide more 
ICT and the digital divide will be transformed into digital inclusion. 
 This technocratic optimism was also evident at the global level. The digital 
divide was seen as an inevitable phenomenon that, like previous technologies, 
gave early innovators advantages over late adopters. However, these advantages 
are not static. Laggards have opportunities to catch up as the technology 
spreads. Indeed, the Internet has the potential to shorten economic develop-
ment timelines for later adopters. For instance, instead of laying thousands of 
miles of telephone wires, technology laggards can skip that old technology and 
build cell phone towers instead. This has already occurred. Between 2011 and 
2013, the number of mobile broadband subscriptions in developing countries 
more than doubled, and they surpassed those in developed countries by 2013. 2 
These encouraging statistics seem to bolster the argument that the digital 
divide is a temporary phenomenon; it will eventually disappear due to the rap-
idly declining cost of technology and its consequent diffusion. However, avail-
ability of technology does not equate to adoption of that technology. In 2015, 
84 percent of the population in Sub-Saharan Africa had a mobile signal, but 
only 8 percent had adopted the technology. 3 So the view that technology diffu-
sion will automatically reduce the digital divide may be overly optimistic. 
 As early as 2000, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Devel-
opment (OECD) noted that “there is no single, clearly deﬁ ned divide, but 
rather a series of gaps, brought about by a variety of factors, which often come 
together, many of which do not have their roots in technology.” 4 In other 
words, socioeconomic factors play an important role in determining who uti-
lizes new technology. Factors such as education, gender, age, income, and 
technology skills all inﬂ uence how technology is used, and whether its access 
is equal. In categorizing determinants of the digital divide both at the interna-
tional and the national levels, Deichmann et al. 5 identiﬁ ed three dimensions: 
economic factors (equality of wealth and income), cultural factors (religion 
and language), and factors related to the telecommunications infrastructure 
(ownership, location of infrastructure, pricing). While Kenisten’s analysis of 

The Digital Divide 
57
information technology in India identiﬁ ed four digital divides: (1) the internal 
divide between those who are powerful, educated, and rich, and those who 
are not; (2) the linguistic–cultural gap between English and other languages 
and between “Anglo-Saxon culture” and other world cultures; (3) the digital 
gap between rich and poor countries; and (4) the emergence of a new elite 
group called the “digerati,” who possess the skills necessary to take advantage 
of dynamic knowledge-based sectors of the economy. 6 All of these categoriza-
tions highlight the limitations of viewing the digital divide in purely technical 
and dichotomous terms. 
 Discussions of the digital divide problem in Internet governance echo ear-
lier debates that focused attention on the imbalance of global communications 
and the dominance of the Global North in controlling information ﬂ ows. In 
1962, the UN General Assembly expressed its concern over the fact that “70 
percent of the population of the world lack adequate information facilities and 
are thus denied effective enjoyment of the right to information.” 7 The issue 
became highly politicized more than a decade later, when the Non-Aligned 
Movement called for the establishment of a New World Information and 
Communication Order (NWICO). Supported by the Soviet Union and its 
allies, NWICO expressed ambitious goals to democratize the international 
communication system and rebalance information ﬂ ows worldwide. UNESCO 
played a major role in fostering the debate at the time, especially with the 
publication of its report  Many Voices, One World . Commonly known as the 
MacBride Report, it called for “a new, more just and more efﬁ cient world infor-
mation and communication order.” 8 The report made 82 recommendations 
for action that were largely adopted as goals by UNESCO at its 21st conference 
in Belgrade in 1980. The recommendations emphasized the link between 
communication policies and economic, social, and cultural development, 
which foreshadowed current discussions about the digital divide. 
 Demands for NWICO arose in the context of a politically charged Cold 
War environment during a period of widespread decolonization in which the 
Global South challenged perceived imperialism in all its forms. They were 
closely tied to separate demands for the establishment of a New World Inter-
national Economic Order aimed at rebalancing global economic power. 
Although both of these initiatives failed to achieve their objectives, NWICO 
was an important landmark in global communications debates, and it pro-
vides some insights into such disputes today. Clearly, as now, global dis-
agreements over NWICO were as much about geopolitical and socioeconomic 
issues as they were about communications. NWICO demands remain rele-
vant to contemporary discussions of Internet governance since they grew out 
of discontent over existing power structures in global communications. The 
desire for greater democratization in global communications, which was at 
the heart of NWICO, echoes demands for greater egalitarianism in Internet 
governance today. 

58 
Controlling Cyberspace
 Ultimately, opposition from governments and media corporations in the 
Global North quashed NWICO objectives, but these ideas did not entirely 
disappear. As NWICO issues faded from intergovernmental forums, they 
were actively pursued by nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and civil 
society. 9 The McBride Round Table on Communication is just one example of 
an advocacy group that kept NWICO ideas alive during the 1990s. Interest-
ingly, the theme of its last meeting, held in Leipzig in 1999, was titled  How to 
Regulate the Internet? The Role of ICANN in a New World Communication Order 
(NWICO). Contributors discussed the status and mandate of the  Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), which had been 
established the previous year, and called upon the Clinton administration to 
transition oversight functions from the U.S. government to ICANN. Partici-
pants also contemplated how the new multistakeholder Internet governance 
model would address questions that had been discussed since the 1970s in 
the context of NWICO. In doing so, the group explicitly linked the digital 
divide issue to Internet governance. 
 The Digital Divide and Internet Governance 
 NWICO and the McBride Report have much in common with later 
debates emanating from the Global South concerning the digital divide and 
Internet governance. The Internet is considered to be a global public good—
an essential tool needed to spur economic growth, improve standards of liv-
ing, and reduce inequality. As a result of the close link between the digital 
divide and economic development, the concept became a rallying cry for a 
myriad of international agencies whose mission is to promote global welfare, 
most of which fall under the UN umbrella. As a 2000 UN report noted, “the 
international community, especially the United Nations, has a special obliga-
tion to assist countries in maximizing the beneﬁ ts they can secure from 
ICT.” 10 The report also raised concerns about the disadvantaged situation 
faced by developing countries in their representation in ICANN compared 
to that of wealthier nations, and recommended that the UN be given a formal 
participatory role in ICANN meetings. For the UN, resolving the digital 
divide problem was regarded as essential if broader development objectives 
were to be achieved, especially the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
Goal 8F referenced ICTs speciﬁ cally: “In cooperation with the private sector, 
make available the beneﬁ ts of new technologies, especially information 
and communications.” 11 Targets associated with this goal included increas-
ing access to ﬁ xed and mobile telephones, and to the Internet. ICT dissemi-
nation was not to be an end in itself; rather it would be a powerful enabler 
and accelerator of economic and social development: “Harnessing the 

The Digital Divide 
59
strategic and innovative use of ICT in development policies and programs 
may enable the world to meet the Goals. Without such technology, doing so 
by 2015 will be impossible.” 12 
 Recognition that the digital divide could seriously undermine economic 
development placed the issue at the heart of the World Summit on Informa-
tion Society (WSIS) meetings in 2003 and 2005. Indeed, the digital divide 
was the main reason for convening WSIS. In 2002, UN Secretary General Koﬁ  
Annan proclaimed: “This global gathering will be a unique opportunity for all 
key players to develop a shared vision of ways to bridge the digital divide and 
create a truly global information society.” 13 The goal of inclusiveness was also 
reﬂ ected in preparations for the second stage of WSIS. The Working Group on 
Internet Governance (WGIG), established in 2004 to make recommendations 
concerning Internet governance, was comprised of professionals from a broad 
range of geographic and cultural backgrounds. In their report, WGIG mem-
bers highlighted a number of aspects of Internet governance that relate to 
economic development in the Global South, 14 which include: 
 • 
Interconnection Costs:  Internet service providers (ISPs), based in the Global 
South, are often remote from Internet backbones and they must pay the full 
cost of international circuits. There is no effective global Internet gover-
nance mechanism to resolve this issue. 
 • 
Barriers to Participation in Internet Governance : Participation in international 
organizations is often expensive and limited; the frequency and location of 
venues for global policy meetings causes some stakeholders from more 
remote areas to limit their participation. Lack of transparency and openness 
in participatory processes is also a problem. 
 • 
Capacity Building : The Global South has not had adequate resources to build 
capacity in areas relevant to Internet management at the national level to 
ensure effective participation in global Internet governance. 
 • 
IP Addressing : There is an imbalance in the distribution of IP addresses. 
There should be balanced access to resources on a geographical basis. 
 • 
Multilingualism : Insufﬁ cient progress has been made toward multilingual-
ism. There is a lack of international coordination to create standards for 
multilingual top-level domain names, e-mail addresses, and keyword 
lookup, as well as insufﬁ cient multilingual local content. 
 The WGIG report identiﬁ ed two overarching prerequisites needed to 
enhance the legitimacy of Internet governance processes. First, build sufﬁ -
cient capacity in developing countries, in terms of knowledge, ﬁ nancial, and 
technical resources. Second, achieve meaningful participation by representa-
tives from the Global South in Internet governance. In doing so, WGIG 

60 
Controlling Cyberspace
characterized the digital divide as both the lack of access to ICT and the lack 
of access to Internet governance mechanisms. The report noted that the dis-
jointed nature of the Internet governance system made it difﬁ cult for all 
stakeholders to participate and recommended the creation of a new space for 
dialogue that would place stakeholders on an equal footing. This recommen-
dation culminated in the establishment of the Internet Governance Forum 
(IGF). Among other tasks, paragraph 72 of the Tunis Agenda, mandated that 
the IGF (1) advise all stakeholders in proposing ways and means to accelerate 
the availability and affordability of the Internet in the developing world; 
(2) strengthen and enhance the engagement of stakeholders in existing and/
or future Internet governance mechanisms, particularly those from develop-
ing countries, and (3) contribute to capacity building for Internet governance 
in developing countries, drawing fully on local sources of knowledge and 
expertise. 15 The ﬁ rst two IGF meetings adopted the theme  Internet Gover-
nance for Development , and later meetings explicitly incorporated develop-
ment themes in their main sessions. By integrating new voices from the 
Global South, it was hoped that IGF would help to refashion the alignment of 
power in Internet governance. 
 Another innovation that emerged from the WSIS meetings was the cre-
ation of the Digital Solidarity Fund (DSF). The idea for the fund was initiated 
by President Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal, who called for a transfer of 
resources from the Global North to promote ICT development in the Global 
South. Founding members of DSF (those who contributed €300,000 or 
more) included a variety of governmental authorities and institutions, 
including the Republic of Senegal, the Dominican Republic, the Republic of 
Equatorial Guinea, the Intergovernmental Agency of the Francophonie (AIF), 
the City of Dakar, the City of Geneva, the City of Delémont (Switzerland), the 
City of Lyon, the City of Paris, the City of Santo Domingo, the City of Curi-
tiba, the Province of Turin, the Province of Rome, the Region of Aquitaine 
(France), the Region of Rhône-Alpes (France), the Urban Community of Lille 
(France), and the Autonomous Community of Basque Land (Euskadi). 16 It 
was hoped that the involvement of local authorities would prove to be an 
innovative way to promote collaboration among cities and municipal govern-
ments in the Global South, and become a catalyst for other types of 
North–South and South–South cooperation. Another proposed ﬁ nancing 
mechanism was a 1 percent levy on ICT contracts. Such voluntary contribu-
tions would give private businesses the right to use a “Digital Solidarity 
Fund” label on their equipment and material. It was anticipated that DSF 
would allocate 60 percent of its funds to projects in the Global South, 30 
percent to projects in countries in transition, and the remainder to projects 
in Global North. 17 
 Although DSF received broad support from many countries, it became a 
controversial stumbling block at WSIS. The United States, EU, and Japan 

The Digital Divide 
61
opposed the measure, asserting that the global promotion of ICT would best 
be achieved within exiting governance mechanisms. However, when several 
delegates from the Global South threatened to walk out of the summit if DSF 
was not established, it was ultimately included in Article 28 of the Tunis 
Declaration of Principles (2005). “We welcome the Digital Solidarity Fund 
(DSF) established in Geneva as an innovative ﬁ nancial mechanism of a vol-
untary nature open to interested stakeholders with the objective of trans-
forming the digital divide into digital opportunities for the developing 
world.” 18 In the four years after its establishment, DSF supported a number of 
ICT education and infrastructure projects, mainly in Africa. However, lack of 
support from the United States and others, a shortage of funds due to the 
voluntary nature of its ﬁ nancing, and some degree of mismanagement ulti-
mately led to the demise of DSF. In 2009, the governing board of DSF agreed 
to dissolve the fund. 
 The U.S. position regarding DSF was consistent with its long-standing pref-
erences for private-sector initiatives, or at least public–private initiatives, to 
disseminate technology. In the months before the WSIS 2003 meeting, the 
Bush administration announced the establishment of a new program called 
the Digital Freedom Initiative, described by Secretary of Commerce Donald L. 
Evans as representing a “new model of how different parts of the federal gov-
ernment, the development community, the private sector and developing 
nations can join forces for progress.” 19 The proposed policy was unapologeti-
cally based on free-market principles: “Our solution is freedom and free enter-
prise. We know that the miracle of capitalism is that in an environment of free 
enterprise, a spirit of competition takes hold leading to more innovation, 
which leads to greater productivity .  .  . which leads to more economic 
growth.” 20 This approach is comparable to the Washington Consensus, a set of 
liberal economic policy prescriptions for troubled economies promoted by the 
United States, the World Bank, and IMF in the 1990s. 
 The Persistent Digital Divide 
 Despite some criticism of neoliberal approaches to ICT dispersion, 21  there 
has been a signiﬁ cant increase in Internet access in both the Global North 
and the Global South. Moreover, as Table 4.1 indicates, in recent years Inter-
net access has been growing at the fastest rates in developing countries. This 
would appear to bolster the traditional view that the digital divide problem is 
simply a function of time. As technology diffuses, so too will access, espe-
cially with the dramatic growth in mobile technology. However, while these 
developments are encouraging, it is worth noting that as of 2016, there were 
still approximately four billion people who were not connected to the Inter-
net. In addition, aggregate comparisons between developed and developing 
countries obscure signiﬁ cant differences within the latter. For instance, 

62 
Controlling Cyberspace
countries with very high Internet penetration rates, such as Bahrain and 
Qatar, where 91 percent of individuals have Internet access, are included in 
the data for developing countries. When Internet usage rates in the world’s 
48 least developed countries are disaggregated, a very different picture 
emerges. In 2014, only about ten percent of individuals in least developed 
countries used the Internet. Moreover, in ﬁ fteen of those countries, home to 
370 million people, the usage rates were below 5 percent. 22 So, although 
Internet penetration has increased substantially in the Global South, the very 
poorest are still being left behind. 
 That so many are still not connected to the Internet, despite improve-
ments, has signiﬁ cant implications for economic development. The digital 
revolution has tremendous potential for lifting millions more people out of 
poverty. By one estimate, the digitization of the economy could yield as much 
as $4.1 trillion in GDP for the world’s poorest people. 23 At the same time, 
there is a danger that rapidly advancing technology will reinforce existing 
patterns, widening the gap between technology leaders and later adopters. 
The urgent necessity to reduce the digital divide continues to be recognized 
at the international level. The 2015 World Summit on the Information Soci-
ety (WSIS+10) was tasked with “bridging the digital divide, and harnessing 
information and communications technologies for development.” 24 Almost 
all of the policy proposals submitted before the summit discussed the digital 
divide problem, and the ﬁ nal outcome document acknowledged the persis-
tence of several digital divides, both within and between countries. As before, 
 Table 4.1  Internet Access: Households and Individuals (per 100 Inhabitants)  
Households with Internet Access at Home 
2005
2010
2015
Percentage Change 
Developed
44.7
66.3
80.8
+81%
Developing
8.1
16.4
34.1
+321%
Individuals Using the Internet 
Developed
50.9
66.5
82.2
+61%
Developing
7.8
21.1
35.3
+353%
Active Mobile Broadband Subscriptions 
Developed
N/A
44.7
86.7
+94%
Developing
N/A 
4.5
39.1
+769%
 Source: ITU.  Facts and Figures.  Accessed April 12, 2016. http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/
Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx. 

The Digital Divide 
63
discussions at WSIS+10 directly linked the digital divide problem to the 
issue of development, noting that just as ICT played a critical role in enabling 
progress on MDGs, ICT would also be an essential tool for achieving the new 
Sustainable Development Goals. “We call for close alignment between the 
WSIS process and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, highlight-
ing the crosscutting contribution of information and communications tech-
nology to the Sustainable Development Goals and poverty eradication.” 25 The 
WSIS+10 document also highlighted the continuing digital divide in Internet 
governance and stressed the need for balanced representation from the 
Global South. The inclusion of this language was strongly promoted by the 
Group of 77 (G77), which emphasized the lack of participation from devel-
oping countries in policy development related to the Internet. “There is 
therefore a need to enable developing countries to have a say in policies 
which have a direct impact on their social and economic development. The 
role of developing countries cannot be limited to receiving support for devel-
opment. They should have an active role in Internet governance.” 26 
 Barriers to Connecting the Next Billion 27 
 The digital divide problem has now been the focus of three WSISs as well 
as countless efforts by governments, international organizations, and NGOs. 
That the problem remains, underlines the complexity of the challenge. The 
digital divide will not be resolved with a simple transfer of technology. The 
supply side of the equation is important and access to ICT is vital, but that is 
only part of the solution. At the very least, appropriate infrastructure must be 
in place, access must be affordable, users need to have suitable skills, and 
government policies should be designed to unleash the full potential of the 
technology. Resolving the digital divide will require multilayered, multi-
pronged solutions that focus on both the supply side and the demand side of 
the problem, undertaken by a variety of public- and private-sector 
stakeholders. 
 Infrastructure and Cost Barriers 
 Expanding global Internet connectivity means that more people need to 
gain access to physical telecommunications infrastructure. At the most fun-
damental level this means linking to the underwater cables and satellites that 
support international connectivity. Historically, the most abundant telecom-
munications connections linked the United States and Europe, and the ﬁ rst 
transatlantic ﬁ ber optic cable was laid between the two in 1988. It was not 
until 2002, however, that a similar cable was positioned to connect Europe 
with Africa and Asia. Known as the SAT-3 cable, it was created by a consor-
tium of 36 telecom companies, 10 of which were African, and the others 

64 
Controlling Cyberspace
being leading global telecommunications operators such as AT& T (USA), 
Deutsche Telekom (Germany), and Communications Global BT (UK). Since 
2002, SAT-3 has been joined by several additional underwater cables, so that 
the entire continent of Africa is now encircled; as a result, most coastal coun-
tries have direct access to the Internet via these cables. At the same time, 
landlocked African countries that are not members of the consortium have 
had to develop terrestrial ﬁ ber-optic infrastructure in order to connect. This 
situation is far from ideal as a 2013 report by the International Telecommu-
nication Union (ITU) makes clear, citing Niger as an example. 28 Niger is a 
landlocked country that borders seven countries, and among those seven 
countries, four (Algeria, Benin, Libya, and Nigeria) are coastal countries with 
submarine cable landing stations. However, the lack of infrastructure 
between Niger and most of its neighbors forces it to use the landing station in 
Benin. As a result, Niger is chronically dependent on the Benin landing sta-
tion and cannot take advantage of competition to negotiate a lower price. 
Niger could use Intelsat, the world’s largest commercial satellite service pro-
vider, which provides full coverage in Africa. However, this is often more 
expensive than ﬁ ber-optic cable linkages and connections are considerably 
slower. 
 Another problem faced by those connecting to the Internet in Africa is the 
lack of a signiﬁ cant regional backbone infrastructure, which means a large 
amount of data trafﬁ c, within countries and between countries, is sent via 
Europe or North America. For example, 67 percent of paths between routers 
and Google cache servers in Africa leave the continent. Similarly, an e-mail 
message sent from Kenya to South Africa will travel via the London Internet 
Exchange. 29  These circuitous paths create latency issues that result in slower 
and more expensive Internet connections. As a result, parts of Africa have 
the highest Internet prices in the world. The cost of wired Internet access 
ranges from $26.31 in South Africa to over $1,000 in Burkina Faso, well 
beyond the reach of most people, and expensive even for businesses. 30 In 
addition, ITU notes that the way the current international Internet connec-
tion model operates penalizes African operators. They must pay the full costs 
of international Internet interconnection, while users in developed countries 
do not pay equivalent compensation to operators in Africa. 31 The African 
Internet Service Providers’ Association offers the following example. When 
an end user in Kenya sends an e-mail to someone in the United States, it is 
the Kenyan ISP that bears the cost of the international connectivity from 
Kenya to the United States. However, when an American sends an e-mail to 
Kenya, it is still the Kenyan ISP who bears the cost of the international con-
nection, which in turn gets passed along to Kenyan subscribers in higher 
prices. 32 Typically, 90 percent of an African ISP’s upstream cost is purchasing 
bandwidth from international backbone providers. 33 Scarce bandwidth in 
the continent also keeps costs high. For instance, bandwidth costs for 

The Digital Divide 
65
broadband in Sub-Saharan Africa are 30–40 times higher than those in the 
United States, and availability tends to be concentrated in major metropoli-
tan areas. 34 It is also worth keeping in mind that although Africa is the fastest 
growing mobile market in the world, mobile broadband is still dependent on 
ﬁ xed backbone infrastructure. 
 One important way to reduce costs and keep local trafﬁ c in Africa is 
through the use of Internet exchange points (IXPs). IXPs are vital for the 
operation of the Internet since they connect this network-of-networks 
together. As of January 2016, there were 516 IXPs in 120 countries, of which 
214 were in Europe, 86 in North America, and 32 in Africa. 35 IXPs allow 
local ISPs to connect their networks and exchange trafﬁ c without cost, a 
practice known as “peering.” The major beneﬁ t of using IXPs is that provid-
ers do not have to use expensive international cables in order to exchange 
local trafﬁ c. This reduces costs, increases speed, and creates a more resilient 
system that is less affected by long-distance disruptions. One study on the 
impact of IXPs in Kenya and Nigeria concluded that they can create a virtu-
ous cycle. As IXPs draw more providers, they increase trafﬁ c and begin to 
“attract content providers, along with business, academic, and government 
users, and thereby become the center of a vibrant Internet ecosystem in the 
country.” 36 On the other hand, IXPs have also met with resistance in some 
parts of the world, often from former state monopolists in the countries 
where the IXPs are based. These actors normally have little interest in peer-
ing, preferring instead to protect some semblance of their communications 
monopoly. 37 In addition, since IXPs are generally more concerned with efﬁ -
ciency than inclusiveness, they have implications for the Internet governance 
debate. Although IXP governing arrangements vary, key stakeholder groups 
such as civil society, academia, and the technical community are often 
excluded from their decision-making processes. 
 Skills and Language Barriers 
 It has long been recognized that the digital divide problem will not be 
solved by simply expanding access to technology. Even when the Internet is 
available for use, disparities still remain with regard to who has the capabil-
ity to use the technology. Lack of necessary skills is referred to as the second-
level digital divide. The idea that knowledge is not equally distributed in 
society is an accepted concept in communications studies, where it is known 
as the knowledge gap hypothesis. Tichenor et al. ﬁ rst proposed this concept 
in 1970: “As the infusion of mass media information into a social system 
increases, segments of the population with higher socio-economic status 
tend to acquire this information at a faster rate than the lower status seg-
ments, so that the gap in knowledge between these two segments tend to 
increase rather than decrease.” 38 The authors presented ﬁ ve possible reasons 

66 
Controlling Cyberspace
for the knowledge gap: (1) people of higher socioeconomic status have better 
communication skills, education, reading, comprehending, and remember-
ing information; (2) people of higher socioeconomic status can store infor-
mation more easily or remember the topic from background knowledge; 
(3) people of higher socioeconomic status might have a more relevant social 
context; (4) people of higher socioeconomic status are better in selective 
exposure, acceptance, and retention; and (5) the nature of the mass media 
itself is that it is geared toward people of higher socioeconomic status. 
 The knowledge gap hypothesis rests on the assumption that socioeco-
nomic status and education are strongly correlated with a speciﬁ c pattern of 
media usage. Later, empirical analysis has conﬁ rmed this association. In a 
cross-national study of Internet usage in Europe, Guillén and Suárez con-
clude that “successful new technologies do not diffuse haphazardly but sys-
tematically into our society. The diffusion process appears as a vertical 
movement along the socio-economic strata, drifting from the highest to the 
lowest status position.” 39 The knowledge gap hypothesis underscores that 
there are fundamental demand-side obstacles to Internet usage in addition to 
ICT illiteracy. Research indicates that the main reason for not adopting the 
Internet when it is available is a perceived lack of need, followed by lack of 
skills and affordability. 40 Appreciating the value of information is a prerequi-
site for information literacy in both the digital and non-digital spheres. 
Becoming information literate involves a several-step linear process that 
begins with recognizing a need for information, then applying skills to iden-
tify, evaluate, organize, and use that information. Fundamentally, digital lit-
eracy requires not only functional literacy but also higher-order cognitive 
skills: “Digital literacy is about mastering ideas, not keystrokes.” 41 
 Language continues to be a serious obstacle to resolving the global digital 
divide problem. There are approximately 7,000 languages in the world, but 
only a fraction of them are present on the Internet. By one estimate, there are 
around 300 languages on the Internet, but their representation is far from 
equal. English is the predominant language with 26 percent of Internet users, 
followed by Mandarin Chinese with 21 percent. Other user languages fall 
much further behind, with Spanish at 7.6 percent and Arabic at 5 percent. 42 
These statistics represent the language of users, not the volume of websites in 
a particular language. When the language content of websites is analyzed, a 
different picture emerges. English still remains on top with more than 
51 percent of content, but it is followed by Russian (6.5%), Japanese (5.6%), 
German (5.6%), Spanish (5.1%), and French (4.2%). 43 Similarly, a study of 
languages available in Wikipedia, identiﬁ ed 288 different languages, how-
ever, only 52 of those displayed encyclopedia-length content, measured as 
100,000 articles. 44 Internet content is also heavily skewed toward the Global 
North. For instance, there are more articles about the Netherlands, Poland, 
and Ukraine than about the entire continent of Africa. 45 Another major issue 

The Digital Divide 
67
relates to domain names. These have historically been represented by Latin 
letters and numbers, which users in some parts of the world are unable to 
read. English speakers would face similar difﬁ culties if the Internet was cre-
ated and presented in Arabic or Cyrillic script. 
 English clearly remains the language of the Internet, however, some of 
these language-related challenges might be resolved with machine transla-
tion technology. Machine translation is the direct translation of text by com-
puters without human involvement, either in a rules-based system or a 
statistical system. Rules-based machine translation uses grammar rules as 
well as dictionaries to produce a translations. By contrast, statistical systems 
have no knowledge of language rules, instead they analyze vast amounts of 
text for each language pair and “learn” how to translate. Although machine 
translation has vastly improved over the years, it is still an imperfect tool 
since it often misses contextual and cultural elements in language. Moreover, 
while machine translation will likely increase the number of readable Web 
pages, it cannot address the more fundamental issues associated with lack of 
local content. The development of local content is essential if the digital 
divide is to be bridged; local content written in local languages will make the 
Internet more relevant and usable for millions of people. Importantly, local-
ization goes well beyond translation; it is concerned with the delivery of 
information that is tailored to indigenous cultures and interests. In the 
absence of content localization, there is a danger that existing cultural and 
economic disparities will be reinforced, as people in the Global South have 
little choice but to consume content produced elsewhere. Although the need 
for more local content is widely recognized, there are barriers that continue 
to hinder progress in this area. Not the least of which are outdated govern-
ment policies that block innovation. 
 Policy Barriers 
 Historically, telecommunication sectors in many developing countries were 
controlled by governments. These state-owned monopolies owned the ICT 
infrastructure, set the tariffs, and determined levels of investment. According 
to a 2005 report, only three historic operators were fully privatized in Africa, 
and 34 were partially privatized, or in the process of privatization, at that 
time. 46 Telecom systems were inefﬁ cient, with large-scale costly redundancies, 
and in some countries they provided signiﬁ cant opportunities for corruption 
and patronage. To illustrate, the Senegalese operator Sonatel, with roughly the 
same number of ﬁ xed-line customers as Telkom Kenya, had only 2,000 
employees compared to just over 17,000 in Kenya. 47 Despite commitments to 
introduce reforms, governments were reluctant to lose control over these 
important national assets, so when reforms were introduced they tended to be 
controlled and limited, essentially permitting de facto monopolies to remain 

68 
Controlling Cyberspace
in place. This lack of competition in developing countries was considered a 
major obstacle to economic development by leading global ﬁ nancial institu-
tions. As a result, the World Bank, the IMF, and the U.S. government pro-
moted policies that aimed to advance market liberalization, collectively 
known as the Washington Consensus. Reform proposals in telecommunica-
tions were part of this broader drive that sought to stimulate economic growth 
through foreign direct inward investment, the privatization of state-owned 
enterprises, and the abolition of regulation that restricts competition. 
 One such program was known as the Leland Initiative (LI). Created in 
1996 by United States Agency for International Development, this ﬁ ve-year 
program was designed to assist up to 20 African countries to connect to the 
Internet in order to promote sustainable economic development. The initia-
tive had three strategic objectives: (1) promote policy reforms that will 
encourage the development of ICT and reduce barriers to connectivity; 
(2) strengthen local telecommunications infrastructure to ensure the avail-
ability of reliable, accessible, and cost-effective services; and (3) achieve the 
broad-based use by both the public and private sectors of information tech-
nologies needed to meet the challenges of sustainable development. LI 
encouraged governments to view their telecommunications assets as more 
than public utilities, and instead see them as instruments crucial for social 
and economic improvement. The principal keys to unlock this potential were 
privatization of state-owned facilities and liberalization. African countries 
that applied to join the initiative were required to create business and mar-
keting plans, and commit to a timeline for licensing private-sector ISPs. 
Although the $15 million in funds made available for this program are very 
small by today’s standards, it nevertheless had some success. A 1999 study 
found that countries that participated in the initiative generally had more 
ISPs and more Internet accounts than countries that did not. 48 
 The liberalization of telecommunication markets that began in the mid-
1990s spread the beneﬁ ts of information technology more widely and 
restructured the role of governments from monopoly owners to regulators of 
services. However, the reform process is still incomplete in many places, and 
blockages to investment and competition still exist. According to ITU, more 
than 60 percent of African countries have restrictions on foreign ownership 
and foreign direct investment. 49 In addition, while more than 90 percent of 
countries in Africa have established a telecommunications regulatory author-
ity to oversee ICT markets and authorize competition, monopolies for local 
services still exist in almost half of the countries in the continent. A similar 
situation is evident with regard to international connections in Africa, where 
approximately one-ﬁ fth of international telecommunications gateways effec-
tively operate as monopolies. This allows the incumbent operator to main-
tain exclusive control over all incoming and outgoing international trafﬁ c, set 
monopoly prices, and collect all international trafﬁ c revenue. 

The Digital Divide 
69
 Government regulatory mandates differ, but most telecommunications 
authorities have responsibility for spectrum management and for issuing and 
overseeing licenses for network operators. Optimizing the mobile spectrum 
has tremendous potential for facilitating economic development, since allo-
cating more licensed spectrum for mobile use helps countries attract invest-
ment and makes mobile access more affordable. While the future of Internet 
access in the Global South will undoubtedly be mobile, spectrum manage-
ment remains a problem. The World Bank identiﬁ es the lack of spectrum for 
mobile as a regulatory failure that poses a major barrier to broadband devel-
opment and economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa. Essentially, spectrum 
allocation has not kept pace with the rapid growth in mobile use. In 2012, for 
instance, countries in Sub-Saharan Africa typically had only 80 MHz of 
mobile spectrum available for use, compared to almost 600 MHz available in 
the EU at that time. 50 
 Lack of spectrum availability brings signiﬁ cant negative consequences. It 
increases costs since operators have to build more towers to gain access to 
limited coverage, creates network congestion, and lowers the quality of ser-
vice. Several regulatory changes will therefore need to be adopted to address 
the problem of spectrum scarcity, especially as technology advances. One 
option for expanding spectrum access is through refarming second-generation 
bandwidth licenses. As the radio spectrum is ﬁ nite, it cannot be created; the 
only available options are to allocate and reallocate frequencies. Refarming is a 
process that liberalizes license allocations by allowing for the repurposing of 
existing 2G bandwidth to be used for newer generations of technology. This is 
not a new idea; it was ﬁ rst discussed internationally at ITU’s World Radio 
Communication Conference in 2000, and it has been frequently recom-
mended by ITU since. Another means to free some additional spectrum band-
width is through the digital dividend, which comes from the switchover from 
analogue to digital television. As a result of digital compression, several digital 
sub-channels can be transmitted in the same amount of spectrum previously 
used by just one analogue channel. 
 Managing scarce resources also remains a challenge with respect to infra-
structure, and governments are increasingly promoting asset sharing to 
address the problem. The World Bank identiﬁ es three different types of asset 
sharing strategies: infrastructure asset sharing, infrastructure mutualization, 
and infrastructure cooperation. 51  The ﬁ rst occurs when two or more compet-
ing operators that provide telecommunication services share network assets 
such as masts and transmitters. The second happens when a third party 
builds and operates network infrastructure, which it then leases to telecom-
munication service providers. The third type refers to sharing between util-
ity operators and broadband operators that share the same physical 
infrastructure, such as electricity distribution lines. Since these agents are 
not competing in the same market, they are more willing to share assets. 

70 
Controlling Cyberspace
Infrastructure sharing can also be delineated in terms of whether it is passive 
or active. Passive sharing includes sharing of assets such as, buildings, tow-
ers, power supplies, and licenses. While active infrastructure sharing 
includes the sharing of operating equipment such as frequency spectrum 
and transmission systems. There are signiﬁ cant gains to be accrued from 
asset sharing for both the operators, who seek to minimize costs, and regula-
tors who seek to expand coverage. Sharing provides economies of scale and 
the opportunity to divide high sunk costs, bringing signiﬁ cant savings to 
operators without adding substantially to the cost of operating that 
infrastructure. 
 Although infrastructure sharing is usually undertaken as voluntary com-
mercial agreements, governments can nevertheless play an important policy 
role in preventing collusion, which is especially crucial when the market is 
dominated by just a few large players. Government policy should also be 
designed to expedite the licensing of shared projects. In addition, since 
national operators cannot function regionally without a common regulatory 
and legal framework, policy makers have a vital role to play in promoting the 
harmonization of policies governing ICT. The Economic Community of West 
African States (ECOWAS) has been particularly active in this regard. At their 
2005 meeting, ECOWAS member states adopted guidelines designed to stan-
dardize ICT policies, which included an obligation to share infrastructure. 52 
Such cooperation objectives are frequently incorporated into national broad-
band plans, which have long been encouraged by the UN’s Broadband Com-
mission for Digital Development. The Commission found that having a plan 
is associated with a 2.5 percent higher ﬁ xed broadband penetration and 7.4 
percent higher mobile broadband penetration on average. 53 Analogous to 
MDGs and Sustainable Development Goals, it is recommended that broad-
band plans set speciﬁ c targets and deadlines, such as household Internet 
penetration rates, to be attained within a speciﬁ ed time period, usually 5–10 
years. 
 The Gender Digital Divide 
 The gender digital divide was evident from the earliest days of the Inter-
net. All of the principal founders of the Internet were men, and the earliest 
adopters of the technology were predominantly young, white, educated, and 
relatively afﬂ uent men. Moreover, this gender distinction began at an early 
age. Numerous studies conducted in the 1980s and 1990s found that boys 
were more enthusiastic about computers than girls, and they expressed 
greater conﬁ dence in their ability to use them. Gender differences were also 
found among college students. A 1997 study reported that male students 
were more interested than females in learning about computers, and more of 
them enjoyed working with the technology. 54  At the same time, female 

The Digital Divide 
71
students tended to be uncomfortable interacting with computers and were 
more anxious using them. These gender differences were attributed in part 
to parental attitudes toward computing. Students in the study reported that 
parents, especially fathers, believed that males know more about computers, 
have superior abilities to use them, and that computing is more appropriate 
for males. Female students who perceived that their parents held these views 
were less interested in the technology and less conﬁ dent in their ability to 
use it. 55 Although later research indicated that the digital gender gap in the 
United States had all but disappeared by the early 2000s, gender differences 
in Internet usage still remained. In 2005, the Pew Research Center con-
ﬁ rmed earlier analysis in ﬁ nding that men were more interested in the Inter-
net than women and more knowledgeable about the technology. While both 
men and women were concerned about potential risks associated with being 
online, women expressed more fears about the online environment in rela-
tion to general crimes, child pornography, organized terrorism, fraud, 
viruses, and privacy. 56  
 All of this is consistent with theoretical literature that challenges the view 
that technology is gender-neutral. The fact that technology has historically 
been a predominately male preserve means that women are underrepre-
sented in the power structures responsible for decision making in the ICT 
ﬁ eld. As far back as 2001, the ITU Task Force on Gender Issues noted: 57 
 So-called gender neutral policies or rules are not enough . . . men still 
hold most of the management and control positions in telecommunica-
tions companies and regulatory or policy making bodies; regulatory deci-
sions are made without any impact analysis; service licenses are attributed 
to companies without equal opportunity policies and controlled mostly 
by men. 
 The interaction of women, technology, and its governance can therefore only 
be understood if wider social and cultural contexts are taken into account. 
Both women and men occupy different identities, including gender, class, 
ethnicity, and race, all of which can impact how they access and use technol-
ogy. At the same time, women and men in the same social and cultural con-
text may not have equal access to technology. 58 In much of the world, 
women’s access to technology is limited by the gender division of labor and 
by institutional and family structures of patriarchal power. So, whereas a 
wealthy woman in the United States has greater opportunities to access 
information technology than a poor man in Africa, his wife’s access is even 
more limited. 
 Although gender parity with respect to Internet usage has largely been 
achieved in developed countries, a very different situation exists in the 
Global South. Nearly 25 percent fewer women than men have Internet 

72 
Controlling Cyberspace
connectivity in that part of the world, and this gap rises to nearly 50 percent 
in some parts of sub-Saharan Africa. 59 Gender issues fall generally into two 
categories: access and usage. Access refers to the location and availability of 
ICT infrastructure. In most parts of the Global South, Internet access is con-
centrated in urban areas leaving behind rural regions where millions of 
women live. Moreover, women’s traditional family responsibilities make it 
difﬁ cult for them to travel to cities for Internet connectivity, and they are also 
less likely to have access to the ﬁ nancial resources and independent means of 
transportation that would be required. Even when computers are available 
locally, access can be difﬁ cult. Socially and culturally constructed gender 
roles frequently limit the capacity of women to access ICT on the same basis 
as men. In some societies, legal and cultural restrictions prevent women and 
men from interacting outside of the family, so Internet locations such as 
cybercafes are highly gender segregated, and women are often not welcome. 
With respect to usage, most content on the Internet for women in the Global 
South is incomprehensible. Two-thirds of the world’s illiterate people are 
women, and women in developing countries are much less likely to know 
international languages than are men. Given their lower levels of education, 
women often do not have the skills that would allow them to take advantage 
of new technology. In some countries, traditional culture reinforces this dis-
parity. Parents still prefer to send boys to school rather than girls, and conse-
quently, women’s ability to explore opportunities in science and technology 
is constrained. These and other sociocultural problems tend to have a greater 
negative impact on women than on men. 
 One innovative program designed to address both the access and usage 
problems faced by people in the Global South are telecenters. These centers 
were ﬁ rst introduced in Sweden in the 1980s in order to expand ICTs to 
rural areas, then spread to developing countries in the 1990s. Telecenters are 
similar to cybercafes in that they offer Internet access, but they are usually 
subsidized by governments or NGOs, and offer additional communications 
tools. It was hoped that telecenters would help bridge the digital divide by 
allowing people to share resources at reduced cost. It was also envisaged that 
these centers would produce tangible economic results and magnify eco-
nomic development efforts. While there is evidence of some success, for 
instance, connecting farmers to wider markets, telecenters have also been 
criticized for paying too little attention to local needs and preferences. This is 
particularly true in relation to gender. Women make use of telecenters much 
less frequently than do men, because these centers have generally been set 
up to serve male interests and priorities. Rathgeber points to a number of 
faulty assumptions that underlie the telecenter concept. 60  It is assumed for 
instance that users have disposable income and that they can decide how it 
should be spent, that users are literate and able to communicate in a metro-
politan language, and that users feel comfortable with computers and 

The Digital Divide 
73
understand that information can be a valuable tool to help them solve their 
problems. None of these assumptions necessarily apply to women in much of 
the Global South. In addition, telecenters fail to address some of the practical 
concerns of women, such as child care and privacy. As a result, the typical 
telecenter users reﬂ ect common characteristics of Internet users in the 
Global South, most of them are under the age of 30 and male. 
 The ﬁ rst international policy document to discuss gender issues and ICT 
was drafted at the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in 1995. 
The Beijing platform recognized that new information technologies provide 
increased opportunities for women, but also warned that until women par-
ticipate equally in technical and decision-making areas of ICT their interests 
will not be represented. Advocates for greater gender equality in ICT hoped 
that WSISs in 2003 and 2005 would further advance the ideas presented in 
Beijing. In order to do so, the WSIS Gender Caucus was established, on the 
suggestion of UNIFEM, at the African Regional Preparatory Meeting in 2002. 
The purpose of the Gender Caucus is to ensure that gender dimensions are 
included in deﬁ ning and creating the global information society. As part of 
this initiative, the Caucus produced a 10-point plan that, among other things, 
urged all stakeholders at WSIS to incorporate a gender dimension into all 
capacity building programs, recognize women’s right to communicate, and 
commit to reducing the gender digital divide. Another initiative came from 
the Association for Progressive Communications Women’s Networking Sup-
port Programme, which submitted a list of priorities that they wanted to see 
included in the ﬁ nal WSIS outcome document. They called for gender equal-
ity to be speciﬁ cally identiﬁ ed as a Key Principle in the document, and a 
cross-cutting issue in relation to other principles and action plans. The group 
demanded that gender-related commitments that were made in Beijing be 
honored at WSIS. 
 WSIS negotiations and the ﬁ nal outcome document, however, did not live 
up to the expectations of gender advocates. The Gender Caucus, and others, 
pressed for speciﬁ c targeted interventions to promote ICT gender equality, as 
agreed in the Beijing platform, but these were not included in the ﬁ nal docu-
ment. Indeed, as Gurumurthy reports, at one point in the preparatory pro-
cess, all references to women were removed from the draft documents. 61 
Some of these were restored after vociferous protests, but the ﬁ nal declara-
tion made only one speciﬁ c reference to women. Principle 12, out of 67 prin-
ciples, notes that ICTs provide enormous opportunities for women and that 
women should be an integral part of the information society. It also states 
that the gender equality perspective should be mainstreamed in ICT policy. 
This, however, was a far weaker commitment than had been hoped earlier. 
So, while the WSIS principles committed participants to a bottom-up, multi-
stakeholder approach to ICT governance, women were all but absent in this 
framework. Women were also notably absent from the conference itself. Of 

74 
Controlling Cyberspace
the 193 ministerial-level speakers in the formal plenary, only 25 were 
women, and in three high-level round tables, 15 women were among 
96 speakers. One female participant at WSIS lamented that despite all the 
discussion of gender mainstreaming and gender equality, the comparative 
invisibility of women was profound. 62 Of course, the lack of women in prom-
inent roles at WSIS to a large extent reﬂ ected the role of women in many 
societies. Women have traditionally been underrepresented in leadership 
positions in government and business, and this is also true with respect to 
Internet governance. 
 Ten years later, the WSIS+10 outcome document demonstrated that little 
progress had been made on the issue of gender equality in ICT. Unable to 
point to speciﬁ c indicators of advancement, the document simply repeated the 
goals established at WSIS. The text reiterated support for WSIS Principle 12, 
noting that ICT provides opportunities for women and that gender issues 
should be mainstreamed, but it failed to acknowledge that these ambitions 
had already failed. There appears to be a disconnect between issues related to 
women and ICT on the one hand, and women and Internet governance on the 
other. Very little has been achieved with respect to gender equality in this area 
because the organizations that are responsible for Internet governance “never 
really delve into the issue of how Internet governance can foster the rights and 
well-being of women or their access to ICTs, and are content with symbolic 
acts such as resolutions to improve things in the future.” 63 Although the WSIS 
objectives were well intended, it is clear that they were overly broad to be eas-
ily translated into tangible positive outcomes. 
 Gender inequity has also been an ongoing feature of IGF as well as the 
I* organizations that are responsible for the technical governance of the 
Internet. At its inception in 2006, participants in IGF were overwhelming 
male. An analysis by the DiploFoundation reports that in 2006 the percent-
age of participants who verbally contributed to the meeting was 78 percent 
male and 22 percent female. By 2012, this ﬁ gure had improved only slightly, 
with verbal contributions of around 67 percent from men and 33 percent 
from women. 64 Similar data are evident with regard to who participates 
onsite at IGF meetings. At the 2015 IGF meeting in Brazil, 38 percent of 
onsite participants were female, and only 37 percent of panelists were 
women. Moreover, gender was mentioned in just 20 of the 107 workshops for 
which reports were submitted. 65 
 Women have also become slightly more visible in the Internet Engineer-
ing Task Force (IETF), but they have generally not broken through into lead-
ership positions. A 2015 report on diversity and conduct issues in IETF 
observed that participation in the organization was historically composed of 
a small group of white, American, male technicians who produced an in-
bred management style that signiﬁ cantly favors those who are already well 
known. 66  In an attempt to counter this structural bias, an informal IETF 

The Digital Divide 
75
women’s group submitted a large number of women candidates to be consid-
ered for management positions. However, despite recruiting a much higher 
proportion of female candidates than normal, the results were less than 
encouraging. Not a single woman was selected for a managerial role, an out-
come that generated signiﬁ cant IETF soul-searching at the plenary. 67 In 
2013, IETF further responded to gender diversity and conduct issues by 
establishing an anti-harassment policy. 68 The guidelines speciﬁ cally forbid 
offensive language or sexual imagery in public presentations, stalking, inap-
propriate physical contact, and unwelcome sexual attention. Such develop-
ments represent positive steps, but advocates for greater female participation 
and gender equity in Internet governance still have more work to do if their 
objectives are to be met. It is not enough to simply increase the frequency of 
the words women and gender into policy documents; practical steps must 
also be taken to increase female representation and decision making in the 
most important organizations of Internet governance. 
 It is clear that signiﬁ cant progress has been made in recent years in clos-
ing the digital divide. The spread of mobile broadband has helped to extend 
Internet availability to millions more people, and developing countries are 
catching up with regard to basic Internet access. However, meaningful gaps 
still exist. Simply increasing the availability of the Internet does not address 
the underlying and persistent social and cultural constraints that prevent 
equitable access. This is also true of representation in Internet governance. 
Organizations that are responsible for overseeing the Internet are still domi-
nated by the Global North, and women are signiﬁ cantly underrepresented. 
Moreover, new technological developments have the potential to widen the 
digital divide once again. The next phase of the Internet will increasingly 
involve machine-to-machine communications in the Internet of things (IoT), 
which refers to cloud-based networks of everyday physical objects that can 
send and receive data. While we are moving closer to the point where most 
people on the planet will be able to connect to the Internet, we are also wit-
nessing a growing divide with respect to the newest technologies that could 
once again leave millions behind. 
 

This page intentionally left blank

 CHAPTER FIVE 
 Human Rights 
 The association between human rights and the Internet was ﬁ rst visualized 
by writers in the 1990s who espoused a cyber-libertarian view of gover-
nance. Individuals such as John Perry Barlow conceived of the Internet as a 
new frontier, a separate space in which human freedoms would be more fully 
realized. His 1996  Declaration of Cyberspace, patterned after the American 
Declaration of Independence stated, “we will create a civilization for the 
Mind in Cyberspace,” 1 where governments have no moral right to rule, and 
where anyone may express opinions without fear of coercion. In a similar 
vein, Conners imagined that the freedom to connect to the Internet would 
one day be seen as a basic human right, in parallel with the right of free 
speech. 2 Though idealistic, these views were enormously inﬂ uential in estab-
lishing the foundational values of the Internet and would resurface in later 
discussions of Internet rights and freedoms. The World Summits on the 
Information Society (WSIS) in 2003 and 2005 explicitly recognized that 
Internet connectivity and freedom of expression were essential building 
blocks of the information society. They also afﬁ rmed that communication is 
a basic human right. As a result, the promotion of human rights also became 
increasingly recognized as an appropriate and legitimate objective to be 
undertaken by those in the Internet governance ecosystem. 
 Evolving Perspectives on Human Rights and the Internet 
 Ideas concerning the existence of human rights were the focus of philoso-
phers, religious leaders, and political actors long before the Internet was con-
ceived. Philosophers such as Cicero and St. Thomas Aquinas believed that 
the origins of rights predate human law, and this was echoed much later by 
social contract theorists such as John Locke. As the concept of innate human 
rights evolved in Western thought, it became universalized; all human beings 

78 
Controlling Cyberspace
have inalienable rights regardless of who they are or where they live. An idea 
enshrined at the Second World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna 
in 1993: “All human rights are universal, indivisible and interdependent and 
interrelated.” 3 Despite such proclamations, however, the idea that all human 
rights are universal has been challenged. Some contend that since human 
beings do not inhabit a universe of shared moral values they cannot all have 
the same rights. In particular, in some parts of the world, community or 
group rights take precedence over individual rights. As Pollis notes, “Notions 
such as the autonomous individual, individualism, freedom of choice, or 
legal equality are alien, often meaningless concepts. The person is subsumed 
within the communal group whose well-being and welfare has primacy.” 4 
 This tension between individual and group rights is also evident in relation 
to the Internet, where freedom of expression is curtailed by some govern-
ments on the grounds that they are protecting the interests of broader 
society. 
 Despite such divisions, there is a substantial body of international human 
rights law that has signiﬁ cance for the Internet, and that has been ratiﬁ ed by 
a majority of countries. Most of these laws and declarations emanate from 
the United Nations (UN) and their history reaches back to the pre-Internet 
era. At the very ﬁ rst meeting of the UN General Assembly in 1945, delegates 
adopted Resolution 59(I), recognizing that “freedom of information is a fun-
damental human right and is the touchstone of all the freedoms to which the 
United Nations is consecrated.” A few years later, the most commonly quoted 
legal statements in connection with human rights and the Internet were 
introduced in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Article 19(2) of 
the ICCPR states in part: “Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expres-
sion; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information 
and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in 
print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.” The refer-
ence to other media allowed for future technological developments to be 
accommodated, and it protects both expression and instruments of expres-
sion. The ICCPR entered into force in 1976 and by 2017 it had been ratiﬁ ed 
by 168 countries. Given the number of ratiﬁ cations, it would appear that this 
legally binding treaty provides signiﬁ cant human rights protections for most 
people in the world. However, Article 19(3) includes important disclaimers 
that allow for certain restrictions to be placed on freedom of expression. 
Those limitations include restrictions necessary to respect the rights or repu-
tations of others, and to protect national security, public order, or public 
health or morals. As a result, defamation, child pornography, and hate speech 
can be legally restricted in compliance with Article 19 if provided by law. 
 The connection between human rights and communication technology 
was made explicit at the 2003 WSIS in Geneva. The ﬁ nal outcome document 

Human Rights 
79
contains numerous references to human rights, most of which allude to prior 
UN documents. For instance, Article 3 echoes the Vienna Declaration in 
declaring the “universality, indivisibility, interdependence and interrelation 
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms,” 5 whereas Article 4 quotes 
directly from the UDHR “everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and 
expression.” 6 Despite inclusion of these important principles, the WSIS meet-
ings did not advance the issue of human rights beyond existing legal provi-
sions. At the time, the UN Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Information 
was highly critical of the outcome: “human rights issues, especially the right 
to freedom of opinion and expression, were largely neglected . . . the mere 
reiteration of a few well-established principles and commitments on human 
rights is not sufﬁ cient.” 7 He also pointed out that the WSIS Plan of Action 
lacked in-depth analysis of crucial human rights issues, the absence of which 
“may gravely hamper the good work done so far by international institutions 
and non-governmental organizations.” 8 So, despite grand rhetorical refer-
ences to human rights and the information society, the WSIS summits did 
not ultimately unify human rights principles and technology in any mean-
ingful way. There was no serious discussion of how technology could be 
used in a practical manner to promote human rights, no criticism of govern-
ment policies that undermine human rights, and no recognition of the ﬁ nan-
cial, social, and cultural barriers that stand in the way of advancing human 
rights through technology. 
 An important and controversial development concerning human rights 
and the Internet came in a 2011 report written for the UN Human Rights 
Council (HRC) by Frank La Rue, Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and 
Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression. When it was 
ﬁ rst published, it was widely reported that the UN had just declared Internet 
access to be a new human right; however, the document did not explicitly 
make that assertion. Rather, La Rue argued that since the Internet acts as a 
catalyst for freedom of expression, the Internet is a facilitator of a range of 
other rights. From this perspective, freedom of expression is considered to 
be both a fundamental right and an enabler of other rights. So, while the 
report did not explicitly proclaim that Internet access is a human right, it did 
label the Internet as an indispensable tool for the realization of human rights. 
The document’s detailed discussion of human rights and the Internet also 
serves to underscore the multidimensional nature of this issue. 
 Special Rapporteur La Rue identiﬁ ed the right to freedom of expression on 
the Internet as having two dimensions: access to content and access to its 
physical and technical infrastructure. With respect to the former, the report 
observed that blocking and ﬁ ltering of content was on the rise, and con-
demned the emerging trend of timed blocking, a practice that prevents users 
from accessing or disseminating information during key political moments, 
such as elections or times of social unrest. La Rue was particularly concerned 

80 
Controlling Cyberspace
about the criminalization of legitimate expression, whether through the 
application of existing criminal laws to online speech, or through the cre-
ation of new laws that speciﬁ cally target online expression. He asserts that 
the arbitrary use of criminal law to sanction legitimate expression constitutes 
one of the gravest forms of restriction to the right. It not only creates a chill-
ing effect, it also leads to other human rights violations, such as arbitrary 
detention and torture. 9 Though often justiﬁ ed on the grounds of national 
security and counter-terrorism, in practice such laws are frequently used to 
censor content with which governments do not agree. La Rue is unequivocal 
in stressing that such action contravenes state obligations under existing 
international human rights legislation. He also highlights the unprecedented 
role of private companies in Internet operations, which have gained an 
“unprecedented inﬂ uence over individuals’ right to freedom of expression,” 10 
and he reminds these entities of their corporate responsibility to respect 
human rights. 
 Regarding Internet infrastructure, the Special Rapporteur observed that 
the Internet is an important facilitator of economic development, without 
access to which developing countries and marginalized groups would remain 
disadvantaged. This is, ostensibly, the standard digital divide argument, but 
La Rue goes further in speciﬁ cally linking Internet access to human rights. 
The Special Rapporteur is not alone in this contention since there are numer-
ous examples of governments that have legislated Internet access as a right. 
As far back as 2000, Estonia passed legislation that gave every person the 
opportunity to have free access to public information through the Internet in 
public libraries. Similarly, in a 2008 revision of its constitution, Greece intro-
duced a right to information and a right to participate in the Information 
society (Article 5A). 11 A year later, French courts struck down a law that 
allowed a government agency to sever Internet access to people who repeat-
edly violated copyright law. In its ruling, France’s highest court stated that 
the law violated the 11th amendment of the 1789 French Constitution, which 
guarantees the freedom of communication and expression. A few months 
later, Finland became the ﬁ rst country to declare that basic broadband access 
was a universal right to be accorded by law. As a result, telecommunications 
companies were required to provide all citizens Internet access with connec-
tion speeds of at least 1 megabit per second by the end of 2010, moving to 
100 megabits per second by 2015. 12 
 The introduction of these laws and policies reﬂ ect a much older principle 
known as universal service obligation, which has been one of the key con-
cepts underlying the regulation of telecommunications utilities. The roots of 
the universal service principle can be traced to 20th-century telecommuni-
cations policy in the United States, and is summarized in the Communica-
tions Act of 1934. The Act’s stated purpose was to “to make available so far as 
possible, to all people in the United States, a rapid, efﬁ cient, nationwide, and 

Human Rights 
81
worldwide wire and radio communications service with adequate facilities at 
reasonable cost” (Section 1, Title 1). Although historically associated with the 
provision of telephone services, this idea is increasingly being applied to 
Internet access. Typically, supporters of universal service cite both its eco-
nomic and social beneﬁ ts. With greater connectivity comes higher economic 
growth, which increases a country’s global competitiveness and raises stan-
dards of living. Universal access is also necessary in order to prevent social 
exclusion and allow citizens to fully participate in society, which is becoming 
even more important as government services are increasingly being offered 
online. It is worth noting, however, that universal service does not imply free 
service, rather the goal is to provide service at a reasonable cost. The univer-
sal right to broadband access is therefore more accurately a right to purchase 
broadband service, rather than to have it provided as a public good like edu-
cation. There is also the issue of who determines what constitutes a reason-
able price. It has been reported, for instance, that the price set by the 
government of Finland for broadband access was higher than initially antici-
pated, and as a result consumer demand has been lower than expected. 13 
 The La Rue report recognized that most governments would not be able to 
provide free Internet access, and that universal access to the Internet for 
everyone would not be achieved instantly. However, governments were 
expected to adopt effective and concrete policies and strategies to make the 
Internet as widely available, accessible, and affordable as possible. These rec-
ommendations were inﬂ uential in shaping discussions and subsequent reso-
lutions adopted by HRC. Most signiﬁ cant, was the HRC’s 2012 resolution on 
the   promotion, protection, and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet. 
For the ﬁ rst time, the UN explicitly afﬁ rmed that “the same rights that peo-
ple have ofﬂ ine must also be protected online, in particular freedom of 
expression, which is applicable regardless of frontiers and through any media 
of one’s choice.” 14 This principle has been reafﬁ rmed in subsequent resolu-
tions. In line with La Rue’s report, the HRC observed that the right to free-
dom of expression on the Internet is an issue of increasing importance, and 
called upon all countries to promote and facilitate Internet access. 
 Is Internet Access a Human Right? 
 From the previous discussion, it is clear that momentum has been build-
ing around the idea that Internet access is a human right, and a number of 
events in recent years have helped propel the issue onto the world stage. The 
Arab Spring, which began around the time that Special Rapporteur La Rue 
was compiling his report, was widely viewed as being facilitated by social 
media. According to this view, Twitter and Facebook represent new forms of 
disruptive media that were effectively used to inform, politicize, and organize 
large segments of the population in opposition to their governments. Although 

82 
Controlling Cyberspace
the central enabling role of social media in the Arab Spring was later down-
played as a result of further research, 15 this did not change the perception 
that new media played a central role, evidenced by the efforts of some govern-
ments in the region to block access to social media, and to even disconnect 
from the Internet. During January 2011, for instance, the Egyptian govern-
ment ordered a complete Internet shut down that lasted for ﬁ ve days. This 
was following in February by an Internet curfew imposed by the Libyan gov-
ernment that lasted for four days. 16  These disruptions raised grave concerns 
about the dangers posed to Internet access by the use of a kill switch. Beyond 
the Middle East, legislation designed to protect intellectual property rights in 
the United States and elsewhere were also perceived as threats to freedom of 
expression. The proposed PROTECT Intellectual Property Act and the Stop 
Online Piracy Act (SOPA) in the United States, and the multilateral Anti-
Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) were widely criticized for placing 
corporate rights above individual freedom of expression. All of these events 
increased the visibly of the Internet access issue and the question of whether 
access should be a human right. Most Internet users around the world agree 
that this right ought to exist. A poll commissioned by the BBC of more than 
27,000 adults in 26 countries found that 87 percent of those who used the 
Internet felt that access should be “the fundamental right of all people.” For 
non-Internet users, the ﬁ gure was also high at 71 percent. 17  
 The idea that access to the Internet is, or should be, a human right is far 
from universally accepted, however. One of the most prominent critics of 
this notion is “father of the Internet” Vinton Cerf, who quickly responded to 
the La Rue report in a  New York Times editorial titled  Internet Access Is Not a 
Human Right . 18 Cerf argues that Internet access does not meet the criteria to 
be considered a human right, which he describes as “things we as humans 
need in order to lead healthy, meaningful lives.” Rather, “technology is an 
enabler of rights, not a right itself.” In this argument, Cerf distinguishes 
between means and ends. The Internet is a valuable tool to meet worthy out-
comes, such as freedom of expression, but it is not an end in itself. He warns 
that if we fail to make this distinction we will ultimately value the wrong 
things. If we do not have a right to a telephone, then by the same logic we do 
not have a right to the Internet. In making this point, Cerf concedes that the 
universal service principle could be applied to the Internet. However, he con-
ceives of this as a civil, not a human right. The distinction is important since 
human rights are thought to be innate, derived from nature, whereas civil 
rights are conferred by governments through law. 
 To further assess the question of whether Internet access is a human right 
it is useful to review the commonly accepted classiﬁ cations of human rights. 
As ﬁ rst proposed by Karel Vasak, director of UNESCO’s Division of Human 
Rights and Peace in 1979, there are three generations of human rights. First-
generation rights are those enshrined in the ICCPR, and include rights such 

Human Rights 
83
as freedom of expression, right to vote, and right to a fair trial. These are 
negative rights since they are “freedom from” rights that require others to 
abstain from harmful interference. By contrast, second-generation rights are 
enshrined in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights (ICESCR), and include the right to education, the right to health, and 
the right to social security. These are positive rights since they require action 
to provide them; they impose duties and obligations. The third-generation 
rights are also positive, but comprise group rather than individual rights. 
These are regularly called solidarity rights, and represent a complex mix of 
rights many of which are aspirational, such as the right to development, right 
to peace, and the right to a healthy environment. For purposes of the current 
discussion, the principles surrounding ﬁ rst- and second-generation rights 
are the most relevant. 
 There is broad agreement on the relevance of the ﬁ rst-generation right, 
freedom of expression, to the Internet. This right is long established in inter-
national law and it has been codiﬁ ed in numerous documents beyond the 
ICCPR. Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights, for 
instance, states: “Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right 
shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart informa-
tion and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of 
frontiers.” This and other such statements do not mention electronic com-
munications speciﬁ cally, but this is not required—the right applies to expres-
sion regardless of the medium. Importantly, this does not mean that the right 
to free expression is unlimited, as provided for in Article 19(3) of the ICCPR. 
Nor does it guarantee that all governments at all times will uphold this right. 
Just as lack of compliance with a criminal law does not negate the value of 
that law, the fact that some governments fail to observe the freedom of 
expression principle, does not make that principle meaningless. 
 A more intense debate centers on the interpretation of Internet access as a 
second-generation right. It is broadly agreed that a state meets its obligations 
in relation to a right if it acts to respect, protect, and fulﬁ ll that right. With 
regard to the right to Internet access, this entails an obligation to  respect the 
capacity of citizens to fully exercise access to content. It also obligates gov-
ernments to  protect citizens from the actions of others who interfere with 
their right of access. These ﬁ rst two conditions entail predominantly negative 
rights; however, the third obligation requires that governments  fulﬁ ll the 
right, which means ensuring that citizens have access to the technology 
needed to connect to the Internet. Unlike ﬁ rst-generation rights, which imply 
a largely passive role for government, second-generation rights often require 
concrete action be taken by government to ensure that right. It is worth not-
ing that negative and positive rights can both conﬂ ict and reinforce each 
other. For instance, it could be argued that the negative right of free expres-
sion on the Internet is meaningless without the positive right of access. 

84 
Controlling Cyberspace
 It is clear that the question of whether or not Internet access is a human 
right deﬁ es a simple explanation. To further clarify, another second-
generation right, the right to health, makes a useful comparison. UDHR 
includes a right to heath and health care, as does the ICESCR. The right to 
health principle is also enshrined in regional human rights treaties, includ-
ing the European Social Charter (1961) and the African Charter on Human 
and Peoples’ Rights (1981), as well as in the constitutions of dozens of coun-
tries. One study found that 109 countries have provisions in their constitu-
tions that address heath or health care. 19 It is important to recognize however 
that the right to health and health care is subject to gradual realization as 
well as available resources. Clearly, wealthier countries are better equipped 
than poorer ones to provide health care for their citizens, if they choose to do 
so. Nevertheless, poorer countries that have ratiﬁ ed international agreements 
containing human rights and health obligations must take steps to ensure 
the improving health of their populations. As Mary Robinson, former UN 
High Commissioner for Human Rights put it, the right to health does not 
mean “that poor governments must put in place expensive health services for 
which they have no resources. But it does require governments and public 
authorities to put in place policies and action plans which will lead to avail-
able and accessible health care for all in the shortest possible time.” 20 If we 
replace the term health care with the term Internet access, then it can be 
conceived as a second-generation right that could become attainable over 
time. The sentiments expressed in Robinson’s statement were echoed in La 
Rue’s report, “The Internet, as a medium by which the right to freedom of 
expression can be exercised, can only serve its purpose if States assume their 
commitment to develop effective policies to attain universal access to the 
Internet.” 21 The principle acknowledges resource limitations, but requires 
that progress be made over time. 
 Currently, there is no international treaty that recognizes and guaran-
tees a right to Internet access. Contrary to some reports, the Special Rap-
porteur to HRC did not assert that Internet access is a human right, rather 
La Rue viewed the Internet as an “indispensable tool for realizing a range of 
human rights” 22 —a point on which both Cerf and La Rue would likely 
agree. Regardless, it should be emphasized that declarations that emanate 
from HRC, and most other UN bodies, do not carry the force of interna-
tional law until they are ratiﬁ ed in the form of treaties. So, when viewed 
from an international legal perspective, Internet access is not a human 
right. At the same time, there is a plausible argument that presumes that 
human rights are not, in any case, determined by legal instruments. 
Instead, human rights are prior to and independent of international human 
rights law. From this perspective, human rights documents merely reﬂ ect 
our current moral understanding of what makes something a human 
right. 23 The global human rights canon is not static; it continues to evolve 

Human Rights 
85
as new circumstances arise. It is therefore conceivable that as national and 
regional authorities begin to recognize Internet access as both a moral and 
a legal right, this developing norm would be translated into international 
legal statutes. 
 IGF, ICANN, and Human Rights 
 Although WSIS in 2003 and 2005 were criticized for failing to advance 
the issue of human rights on the Internet, the establishment of the Internet 
Governance Forum (IGF) in 2006 provided a space for further discussion of 
this issue. Following WSIS, two groups were formed under the auspices of 
IGF in order to support and protect human rights online: the Internet Bill 
of Rights Dynamic Coalition and the Framework of Principles for the Inter-
net. At the 2008 Hyderabad IGF, these groups agreed to join forces to form 
the Internet Rights and Principles Dynamic Coalition (IRPC), as an “inter-
national, open network of individuals and organizations working to uphold 
human rights in the online environment and across the spectrum of internet 
policy-making domains.” 24   IRPC aimed to translate existing human rights to 
the online environment and establish human rights as the foundation of 
Internet governance. Like other dynamic coalitions, IRPC is a multistake-
holder forum that brings together representatives from government, busi-
ness, and civil society. 
 The coalition emphasizes that human rights apply online as they do 
ofﬂ ine, and underlined the link between the two in its landmark document, 
the  Charter of Human Rights and Principles  (2010). 25 The charter is designed to 
provide a reference point for dialogue and cooperation, as well as a frame-
work for the development of rights-based Internet policy. It was also hoped 
that the document would be used as an advocacy tool. IRPC’s charter con-
tains 20 articles, distilled to 10 broad principles (see Table 5.1). 
   Both the core principles and the more detailed charter clauses draw heav-
ily from the UDHR for inspiration and justiﬁ cation. Articles from the UDHR 
are cited in 15 of the charter’s 20 articles. In doing so, the document primar-
ily references soft law. There is no universally accepted deﬁ nition of soft law, 
but it is frequently contrasted to hard law in binary terms; hard law is legally 
binding while soft law is not. Abbot and Snidal deﬁ ne hard law as “legally 
binding obligations that are precise (or can be made precise through adjudi-
cation or detailed regulations) and that delegate authority for interpreting 
and implementing the law,” 26 whereas soft law begins “once legal arrange-
ments are weakened along one or more of the dimensions of obligation, pre-
cision, and delegation.” 27 Soft law therefore reﬂ ects normative and political 
commitments that generally do not impinge on state sovereignty, and do not 
involve compulsion. As a result, such agreements tend be aspirational. How-
ever, soft law can be a precursor for hard law, which was the case with UDHR. 

Table 5.1 Internet Rights and Principles Dynamic Coalition Charter of 
Human Rights and Principles
Core Principle
Description
 1.  Universality and 
Equality
All humans are born free and equal in dignity and 
rights, which must be respected, protected, and 
fulﬁ lled in the online environment.
 2.  Rights and 
Social Justice
The Internet is a space for the promotion, protection, 
and fulﬁ lment of human rights and the advancement 
of social justice. Everyone has the duty to respect the 
human rights of all others in the online environment.
 3.  Accessibility
Everyone has an equal right to access and use a secure 
and open Internet.
 4.  Expression and 
Association
Everyone has the right to seek, receive, and impart 
information freely on the Internet without censorship 
or other interference. Everyone also has the right to 
associate freely through and on the Internet, for social, 
political, cultural, or other purposes.
 5.  Privacy and Data 
Protection
Everyone has the right to privacy online. This includes 
freedom from surveillance, the right to use encryption, 
and the right to online anonymity. Everyone also has the 
right to data protection, including control over personal 
data collection, retention, processing, disposal, and 
disclosure.
 6.  Life, Liberty, and 
Security
The rights to life, liberty, and security must be 
respected, protected, and fulﬁ lled online. These rights 
must not be infringed upon, or used to infringe other 
rights, in the online environment.
 7.  Diversity
Cultural and linguistic diversity on the Internet must be 
promoted, and technical and policy innovation should 
be encouraged to facilitate plurality of expression.
 8.  Network Equality
Everyone shall have universal and open access to the 
Internet’s content, free from discriminatory 
prioritization, ﬁ ltering, or trafﬁ c control on 
commercial, political, or other grounds.
 9.  Standards and 
Regulation
The Internet’s architecture, communication systems, 
and document and data formats shall be based on 
open standards that ensure complete interoperability, 
inclusion, and equal opportunity for all.
10. Governance
Human rights and social justice must form the legal 
and normative foundations upon which the Internet 
operates and is governed. This shall happen in a 
transparent and multilateral manner, based on 
principles of openness, inclusive participation, and 
accountability.

Human Rights 
87
The UDHR was the forerunner of several legally binding international trea-
ties, the most signiﬁ cant of which are the ICCPR and the ICESCR. Given that 
there are numerous examples of hard law in the global human rights regime, 
it is somewhat puzzling that the IRPC’s charter primarily references the 
UDHR, a nonbinding instrument, rather than legally binding treaties. Never-
theless, the charter is a noteworthy and commendable effort to connect rec-
ognized human rights law to the Internet, and establish a practical framework 
for further discourse. During the WSIS+10 meeting in 2015, the IRPC 
launched a follow-up phase called “Charter 2.0” and invited further contri-
butions to this “living document.” 28  
 While IGF has long been interested in the issue of human rights and the 
Internet, the same cannot be said about ICANN. In reviewing ICANN’s mis-
sion one might assume that the question of human rights has little relevance 
for the organization. After all, its remit is predominantly technical, tasked 
with overseeing and coordinating the Internet’s domain name and address-
ing system. Moreover, the topic of human rights was not included in ICANN 
bylaws. In the last few years, however, ICANN has faced increased pressure 
to incorporate a human rights perspective into its policies and functions. 
Two events in particular catalyzed this change. The ﬁ rst was the IANA tran-
sition process, designed to shift IANA functions from the U.S. National Tele-
communications and Information Administration (NTIA) to the global 
Internet community. ICANN was charged with taking the lead in this pro-
cess, and as a result, was subjected to greater scrutiny with regard to its 
transparency, accountability, and social responsibility. The second event that 
raised the proﬁ le of human rights at ICANN was the adoption of the  Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights  by HRC in 2011. These principles 
require that all business enterprises respect human rights, regardless of their 
size, sector, operational context, ownership, and structure. Interestingly, this 
responsibility exists independently of states’ abilities or willingness to fulﬁ ll 
their own human rights obligations. Speciﬁ c provisions require that enter-
prises avoid causing or contributing to adverse human rights impacts, and 
that they mitigate any adverse human rights effects of their activities should 
they occur. The guidelines also recommend that businesses conduct impact 
assessments in order to gauge human rights risks. ICANN is a nonproﬁ t 
organization, so technically it is not a business enterprise, however, the 
guidelines also make reference to “other business enterprises” that includes 
any business entity, whether corporate, partnership, or other legal form. 29 
Moreover, even if the guidelines do not directly apply to ICANN, the non-
proﬁ t would still encounter legal obligations. Article 4 of ICANN’s Articles of 
Incorporation states, “The Corporation shall operate for the beneﬁ t of the 
Internet community as a whole, carrying out its activities in conformity with 
relevant principles of international law and applicable international conven-
tions and local law.” 30 

88 
Controlling Cyberspace
 Regardless of its legal status, ICANN activities clearly have human rights 
implications. The operation of the WHOIS protocol provides just one exam-
ple. The WHOIS protocol is used to query databases containing domain 
name information. Companies that want to sell domain names are required 
to sign a Registrar Accreditation Agreement (RAA) that governs their rela-
tionship with ICANN. During the term of the agreement, registrars are 
obliged to provide the public with a free interactive Web page that uses the 
WHOIS protocol to access up-to-date information about all active registered 
names. The Web page must also make available personal information, includ-
ing the name, postal address, e-mail address, voice, and fax number of the 
registered name holder. In addition, the registrar agrees to retain correspon-
dence and payment records of all registered name holders during the term of 
the contract and for a period of three years thereafter to allow for ICANN 
inspection. Both the easy availability of personal electronic data and its reten-
tion have raised concerns about individual privacy. The issue of digital pri-
vacy became particularly prominent following Edward Snowden’s revelations 
concerning National Security Agency spying. For instance, the disclosures 
prompted the UN General Assembly to adopt Resolution 68/167,  The Right to 
Privacy in the Digital Age  in 2013. The same year, HRC appointed the ﬁ rst 
Special Rapporteur on the Right to Privacy, with a remit to report on the 
right to privacy in connection with new technologies. All of these develop-
ments elevated the issue of digital privacy on the world stage and highlighted 
ICANN’s responsibilities in this area. 
 Another area that connects ICANN to human rights is in relation to 
generic top-level domain names (gTLDs). ICANN does not generally become 
involved with Internet content, but some domain names might constitute a 
form of expression that is protected under international human rights law. 
ICANN’s Applicant Guidebook for gTLDs states that the application may be 
denied if the applied-for name appears on its list of prohibited or ineligible 
words, or if it constitutes “sensitive expression.” The latter is deﬁ ned as a 
gTLD that would adversely affect the domain name system (DNS) by prompt-
ing the increased use of ﬁ ltering or blocking from those who object to the 
name. The controversy surrounding the .xxx domain name and potentially 
offensive terms such as .suck and .wtf illustrate this point. Although ICANN’s 
Board ultimately approved all of these domain names, it did so in the face of 
signiﬁ cant objections, even from its own Government Advisory Committee. 
These examples serve to illustrate that ICANN has to strike a balance 
between protecting freedom of expression and protecting the stability of 
DNS. They also underline the fact that human rights issues and ICANN are 
more intimately related than is often assumed. 
 In order to explore the responsibilities of ICANN in relation to human 
rights, a Cross Community Working Party on ICANN’s Corporate and Social 
Responsibility to Respect Human Rights was established at ICANN52 in 

Human Rights 
89
2015. One of its primary objectives was to formulate recommendations on 
how to harmonize ICANN’s policies and procedures with internationally 
recognized human rights and corporate social responsibility standards. The 
work of the group lead to a revision of ICANN’s Bylaws, which now make 
reference to human rights in Section 2.1. Speciﬁ cally, ICANN lists respecting 
internationally recognized human rights as a core value. However, the sig-
niﬁ cance of this statement is appreciably altered a few lines later, “This Core 
Value does not obligate ICANN to enforce its human rights obligations, or 
the human rights obligations of other parties, against other parties.” 31 Addi-
tional limitations are set forth in Section 27.2, which stipulates that the 
human rights core value will not take effect “unless and until” a framework 
of interpretation for human rights is approved by the ICANN Board. These 
caveats reﬂ ect a strong desire to ensure that the new human rights bylaw 
does not expand ICANN’s mission or scope. 
 Online Hate Speech and Harassment 
 The right to communicate entitles individuals to express their views free 
from government interference, and that right also applies online, but it is 
not absolute. Authorities have placed limits on speech to prevent libel, 
obscenity, and imminent violence, as well as to protect children and national 
security. However, since freedom of expression is crucial to the protection of 
a host of liberties, governments in democratic societies have generally been 
cautious in limiting this right. At the same time, it is also recognized that 
freedom of expression can threaten the realization of other rights, particu-
larly if that expression is designed to promote hatred based on race, gender, 
ethnicity, or other group characteristics. As a result, the right of freedom of 
expression has to be balanced against the rights of people to be free from 
hostility, intimidation, and harassment. Although hate speech existed long 
before the Internet was conceived, this form of expression has become well-
established and virulent on the Web. As a result of the mounting diffusion 
of hate speech online, and the perceived societal costs of this hostility, sev-
eral governments and international institutions have developed polices to 
address the problem. 
 The ﬁ rst hurdle in trying to limit hate speech is to deﬁ ne it. There is a gen-
eral consensus that hate speech goes beyond simply causing offense. As the 
Council of Europe notes, individuals have the right to “offend, shock or dis-
turb” others, 32 but there is no internationally agreed-upon deﬁ nition of what 
constitutes hate speech. The ICCPR establishes the foundational principle in 
Article 19 that individuals have a right to freedom of expression. It also estab-
lishes a right to be free from hostility in Article 20(2), which was drafted in 
response to fascist hate propaganda disseminated before and during World 
War II. It states, “Any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that 

90 
Controlling Cyberspace
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohib-
ited by law.” This obligates states to take concrete action, in the form of legisla-
tion and prosecution to protect this right, but the article provides little speciﬁ c 
guidance regarding how obligations should be interpreted. 
 Deﬁ ning hate speech is particularly difﬁ cult because it requires some 
notion of the perpetrators emotional state. Article 20(2), for instance, con-
tains the psychological elements hatred and hostility in its deﬁ nition of hate 
speech. It also prohibits the advocacy of hatred that constitutes incitement to 
discrimination, hostility, or violence, which suggests causation. Both of these 
conditions can be difﬁ cult to objectively assess, without also taking into 
account speciﬁ c contexts. For instance, writing a letter to the editor about 
the impact of immigration on jobs conveys a different message than if this 
sentiment is expressed in a protest outside an immigrant’s home. 33 The 
importance of intent and context has been recognized by the U.S. Supreme 
Court, which, in numerous rulings, has afﬁ rmed that the First Amendment 
right to freedom of expression and conduct are not absolute. When hate 
speech rises to the level of a true threat then it loses First Amendment pro-
tections. For instance, in  Virginia v. Black (2003) the act of cross burning was 
ruled as a “true threat” due to the historical associations surrounding this 
action. Interestingly, the Court ruled that the “speaker need not actually 
intend to carry out the threat. Rather, a prohibition on true threats protects 
individuals from the fear of violence.” 34 So, the measure of threat is the degree 
of fear that the message engenders in the recipient. 
 The imprecise nature of Article 20(2) of the ICCPR has made it difﬁ cult to 
build international norms to deﬁ ne and combat hate speech with any consis-
tency. As a result, regional and national variations in legal approaches to hate 
speech abound. Even countries that are geographically and culturally similar 
have adopted distinctive positions. Lessig and Resnik summed up the dis-
tinctions as follows, “What constitutes ‘political speech’ in the United States 
(Nazi speech) is banned in Germany; what constitutes ‘obscene’ speech in 
Tennessee is permitted in Holland; what constitutes porn in Japan is child 
porn in the United States; what is ‘harmful to minors’ in Bavaria is Disney in 
New York.” 35 Every jurisdiction controls speech, but what is controlled and 
the degree of that control differs from place to place. Having said that, the 
approach adopted in the United States is somewhat of an outlier. The United 
States emphasizes the protection of speech, and eschews limits on expres-
sion, to a far greater extent than is the case in other countries. 
 Reaching a universally agreed-upon deﬁ nition of hate speech is also com-
plicated by the fact that the International Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD) addresses the issue in a different 
way. The ICERD obligates states to condemn all propaganda based on ideas 
or theories of superiority of one race or group of persons of one color or eth-
nic origin. By simply prohibiting the dissemination of racist ideas, it avoids 

Human Rights 
91
some of the deﬁ nitional problems of the ICCPR since there is no requirement 
to demonstrate psychological intent. It also goes further than the ICCPR in 
proscribing action. Article 2 of the ICERD requires states to pursue a policy 
of eliminating racial discrimination in all its forms and promote understand-
ing among all races. Governments are speciﬁ cally required to ensure that 
public authorities and institutions do not discriminate, and that discrimina-
tory laws and regulations are nulliﬁ ed. They are also required to pledge that 
they will not sponsor, defend, or support racial discrimination by any per-
sons or organizations. 
 Concerns about hate speech are predicated on the view that such speech 
can result in violence. There are numerous historical and current examples 
of speech that incites violence. The most vivid example occurred in Rwanda 
in 1993, when national radio stations broadcast hate propaganda that incited 
genocide against the Tutsi population. Similarly, in 2011 the UN identiﬁ ed 
hate speech as a likely precursor to serious human rights violations in the 
Central African Republic. Though these are the most striking examples, hate 
speech and hate crimes occur in every country. For instance, the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) reported 5,818 single-bias incidents in 2015. Of 
these, 57 percent were racially motivated, while other motivators included 
religion, sexual orientation, gender, and disability. 36 In Europe, a survey of 
23,500 ethnic minorities found that more than one in four respondents had 
been a victim of “racially motivated” in-person crime during the year that 
preceded the survey. Roma minorities and those with African ethnic origins 
reported the highest levels of victimization. 37 
 Another challenging question revolves around whether or not religion 
should be protected from hate speech. This issue has been actively pursued by 
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) at the UN since the 1990s, and 
this activity became more urgent after September 11, 2001. OIC argues that 
Muslims are being targeted by a campaign of defamation, stereotyping, 
intolerance, and discrimination, and it identiﬁ es hate speech against Muslims 
as a major factor behind the rise of Islamophobia. “The most sacred symbols 
of Islam are being deﬁ led and denigrated in an insulting, offensive, and con-
temptuous manner to incite hatred.” 38 The OIC strongly condemns the publi-
cation of caricatures of Prophet Muhammad, and contends that Islamophobia 
is being spread under the guise of freedom of expression and the press. As a 
result of OIC’s organized campaign to raise this issue internationally, numer-
ous nonbinding defamation of religions resolutions have been passed in both 
HRC and the General Assembly of the UN. In addition, the use of blasphemy 
and apostasy laws at the national level is widespread. According to the Pew 
Research Center, in 2014, about a quarter of the world’s countries and territo-
ries had anti-blasphemy laws or policies, and more than one-in-ten nations 
had laws or policies penalizing apostasy. These were most commonly found 
in the Middle East and North Africa, where 18 of the region’s 20 countries 

92 
Controlling Cyberspace
criminalize blasphemy and 14 criminalize apostasy. The legal punishments 
for such transgressions vary from ﬁ nes to death. 39  
 In a 2008 declaration, representatives from several international organiza-
tions rejected attempts to label criticism of religion as hate speech. In doing 
so, they made the distinction between individual rights and institutional 
rights. “The concept of ‘defamation of religions’ does not accord with inter-
national standards regarding defamation, which refer to the protection of 
reputation of individuals, while religions, like all beliefs, cannot be said to 
have a reputation of their own.” 40 The declaration went on to say that restric-
tions on freedom of expression should never be used to protect particular 
institutions, abstract notions, or religious beliefs, and urged HRC and the 
General Assembly to desist from supporting such the ideas. According to this 
view, international law prohibits discrimination against individuals based on 
their religious beliefs, but religious beliefs per se are not protected from scru-
tiny, insults, or even mockery. 
 Following years of diplomatic stalemate on this issue, a compromise was 
ﬁ nally reached with Resolution 16/18  Combating intolerance, negative stereo-
typing and stigmatization of, and discrimination, incitement to violence, and vio-
lence against persons based on religion or belief , adopted by the HRC in March 
2011. The resolution dropped references to blasphemy and defamation of 
Islam, and it was written broadly enough to garner unanimous support in 
the Council. The resolution calls upon all UN member states to foster reli-
gious freedom, ensure religious minorities are properly represented, promote 
inter-religious tolerance and dialogue, and consider adopting measures to 
criminalize incitement to imminent violence based on religion or belief. The 
phrase “incitement to imminent violence” is similar to the “ﬁ ghting words” 
rule established by the U.S. Supreme Court in describing when the govern-
ment can and cannot punish speech. Fighting words refer to speech “directed 
to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or 
produce such action.” 41 However, the U.S. Supreme Court interprets “immi-
nent” in strict time-bound terms, and whether or not the threat is speciﬁ cally 
targeted. A report by the New York Bar Association points out that Internet 
communications generally reach too diffuse an audience to tie them directly 
to any speciﬁ c individuals whom the author of the communications intended 
to incite to commit immediate violence. By that standard, the 2012 anti-
Muslim video  Innocence of Muslims, that denigrated the Prophet Muhammad, 
would not meet the “likelihood of imminent violence” threshold. Though 
offensive, the video did not target Muslims for immediate attack nor did it 
call for any violence against Muslims. 42 
 Despite agreement on Resolution 16/18, it is clear that its meaning is subject 
to very different interpretations. Whereas limits on speech in the United States 
are very narrowly drawn, OIC maintains that speech that incites others to 
commit violence can be legitimately restricted. In this approach, OIC has 

Human Rights 
93
remained consistent throughout; it seeks to obtain a prohibition on speech that 
defames Islam. This position was underscored by the OIC Secretary General in 
a 2012 interview: “Freedom of expression, according to international law, does 
not entail freedom of insulting others, denigrating others, mocking others.” 43 
For OIC there is no conﬂ ict between Resolution 16/18 and the banning of 
offensive images of the Prophet Muhammad, and the organization frames the 
problem as primarily Islamophobia in the West, “the victim is Islam.” 44 This 
contrasts starkly with the position adopted by most Western governments; it is 
also viewed as being one-sided and hypocritical. As President Barack Obama 
stated in a speech at the UN, “the future must not belong to those who slander 
the prophet of Islam. But to be credible, those who condemn that slander must 
also condemn the hate we see in the images of Jesus Christ that are desecrated, 
or the churches that are destroyed, or the Holocaust that is denied.” 45  
 In an effort to clarify the substance of Resolution 16/18, the UN High 
Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, organized a series of expert 
workshops to provide a blueprint for the interpretation of the resolution. 
These culminated in the publication of the  Rabat Plan of Action on the Prohibi-
tion of Advocacy of National, Racial or Religious Hatred that Constitutes Incite-
ment to Discrimination, Hostility or Violence  in 2013. The plan afﬁ rms that 
speech can be legitimately restricted under the provisions laid out in the 
ICCPR, but that anti-blasphemy laws are generally incompatible with this 
convention. It stipulates that criminal sanctions should be applied to speech 
only as a last resort and only in strictly justiﬁ able situations. The Rabat Plan 
lays out six guidelines to judge whether speech should be prohibited: 
 • 
Context:  Place the speech within the social and political context prevalent at 
the time the speech was made and disseminated. 
 • 
Speaker:  Consider the individual’s or organization’s standing in the context 
of the audience to whom the speech is directed. 
 • 
Intent:  Article 20 of the ICCPR requires intent. Negligence and recklessness 
are not sufﬁ cient for an Article 20 situation which requires advocacy and 
incitement rather than mere distribution or circulation. 
 • 
Content:  The content of the speech is a critical element of incitement. Con-
tent analysis may include the degree to which the speech was provocative 
and direct, as well as a focus on the form, style, and nature of the arguments 
deployed. 
 • 
Extent of the speech: This includes elements such as the reach of the speech, 
its public nature, magnitude, the size of its audience, and means of 
dissemination. 
 • 
Likelihood: Some degree of risk of resulting harm must be identiﬁ ed. The 
courts will have to determine that there was a reasonable probability that 
the speech would succeed in directly inciting actual harm against the target 
group. 

94 
Controlling Cyberspace
 The Rabat Plan also recommends that robust deﬁ nitions of key terms such as 
hatred, discrimination, violence, and hostility be established and advises 
governments to draw from the Camden Principles in writing such legisla-
tion. The  Camden Principles on Freedom of Expression and Equality were pub-
lished in 2009 by the nongovernmental group known as ARTICLE 19 in 
consultation with high-level UN ofﬁ cials and other experts. The group 
emphasizes that freedom of expression and equality are mutually supporting 
and reinforcing foundational rights that play a vital role in safeguarding 
human dignity. Speciﬁ cally, the Camden Principles are comprised of 12 pre-
cepts that outline government and media responsibilities with regard to 
expression. For instance, Principle 11 discusses restrictions on expression, 
declaring that any limitations should be narrowly deﬁ ned and in accordance 
with the ICCPR. Principle 12 deﬁ nes key terms and afﬁ rms that govern-
ments should adopt legislation that prohibits national, racial, or religious 
hatred that constitutes incitement to violence, while Principle 9 highlights 
the moral and social responsibilities of all media in combating discrimina-
tion and promoting intercultural understanding. 
 Both the Rabat Plan and the Camden Principles allude to the fact that our 
increasingly interconnected world has brought new urgency to the issue of 
incitement to hate. Unquestionably, the growth of the Internet has been 
accompanied by the wider dissemination of hate speech. The ﬁ rst major hate 
site on the Intent was called Stormfront, which was created in 1995 by a 
leader of the Alabama Ku Klux Klan (KKK). With the motto “white pride 
worldwide,” the site had 300,000 registered members in 2015. Stormfront is 
also one of the best funded online hate groups, taking in more than $100,000 
per year. 46  The group is not only associated with hate speech but also with 
speciﬁ c acts of violence. In researching the group, the Southern Poverty Law 
Center (SPLC) found that almost 100 murders have been committed by 
registered members of Stormfront. Additional acts of violence have been 
associated with other hate groups and websites. The murder of British Mem-
ber of Parliament Jo Cox in 2016 was allegedly perpetrated by a British citi-
zen who was a member of an American hate group called National Alliance. 
The SPLC notes that this group was for decades the most dangerous and best 
organized neo-Nazi faction in the United States, and explicitly genocidal in 
its ideology. There can be little doubt that the Internet expanded the reach of 
this group’s message. It would have been considerably more difﬁ cult for the 
inﬂ uence of the National Alliance to extend across the Atlantic without that 
medium. 
 Globally, most online hate speech is written in English, and the majority 
of this expression is directed toward individuals based on their ethnicity. 47  A 
growing concern is that hate speech has entered the mainstream and become 
increasingly normalized. It has been pointed out that today some of the most 
virulent and violent hate speech is taking place on Reddit, a global online 

Human Rights 
95
discussion board owned by media giant Condé Nast. The proﬁ le of hate 
groups and hate speech was further heightened during the 2016 U.S. presi-
dential election when Hillary Clinton accused Donald Trump of having con-
nections with the Alt-Right and “taking hate groups mainstream.” 48 Members 
of the Alt-Right espouse far-right ideologies proclaiming that “white identity” 
is under attack by multicultural forces. These messages ﬁ nd fertile ground 
and spread rapidly on social media. While not all hateful messages result in 
hate crimes, such expression can create an environment in which violence 
becomes more likely. As the UN’s Special Rapporteur on minority issues 
points out “hate crimes rarely occur without prior stigmatization and dehu-
manization of targeted groups and incitement to hate incidents fueled by 
religious or racial bias.” 49 
 In addition to religion and race, there are also signiﬁ cant volumes of hate 
speech and online harassment associated with other characteristics, includ-
ing nationality, class, sexual orientation, and gender. According to a 2014 
Pew Research Center study, 40 percent of adult Internet users have experi-
enced some kind of online harassment, and 73 percent of users have wit-
nessed online harassment. 50 Such harassment generally falls into two distinct, 
but often overlapping, categories. The ﬁ rst is name-calling and embarrass-
ment, which occurs widely across a range of online platforms. The second 
category is less frequent but more intense and emotionally harmful; it 
includes sexual harassment, physical threats, sustained harassment, and 
stalking. The Pew Research Center discovered that women aged 18–24 are 
more likely than others to experience the most severe forms of harassment, 
across a variety of online environments. There are numerous examples of 
this type of online harassment, sexism, and misogyny, but one of the most 
publicized was an episode known as Gamergate. Beginning in 2014, several 
women in the video gaming industry were targeted for harassment over a 
period of several months. They were subjected to rape and death threats that 
were so severe that they were forced to leave their homes. As the  Washington 
Post pointed out at the time, Gamergate was not about video games, rather 
Gamergate is just a “proxy war for a greater cultural battle over space and 
visibility and inclusion.” 51 Speciﬁ cally, it was a reaction to the growing 
inﬂ uence of women in the industry. The Gamergate intimidation campaign 
prompted Congresswoman Katherine Clark to urge the Department of Jus-
tice to intensify their efforts to combat severe online stalking and harass-
ment. “While the women targeted by ‘Gamergate’ might be the most public 
examples of online intimidation, the sad reality is that millions of women are 
faced with online abuse.” 52 Representative Clark received support from the 
House of Representatives in calling for better enforcement of existing laws to 
combat online harassment. Research reveals that of the 2.5 million cases of 
cyber stalking in the United States between 2010 and 2013, federal prosecu-
tors pursued only 10 cases. 53 

96 
Controlling Cyberspace
 Along with the difﬁ culties associated with prosecuting hate speech gener-
ally, online hate speech presents a number of unique challenges that differen-
tiate it from hate speech in traditional media. Never before in human history 
have so many people been able to communicate so quickly over vast dis-
tances with such ease. The Internet provides opportunities to share ideas 
with an enormous global audience. However, the expansion of social media, 
with its low-cost high-volume transmissions, allows hate speech to ﬂ ourish, 
as millions can now be producers and not simply receivers of content. More-
over, those messages are far from ﬂ eeting, they remain online until they are 
deliberately removed, and they can be linked, distributed, and re-transmitted 
over and over. Even if an offending website is forcibly removed, it can reap-
pear under a different name or with a different Web hosting service. There is 
also the problem of identity. While some people who perpetrate hate speech 
use their own names, many, if not most, rely on pseudonymity, the use of a 
false name to hide identity. As a result of this perceived anonymity, few 
believe that they will face any signiﬁ cant consequences for exercising cyber 
hate, and evidence suggest that this is indeed the case. In addition, the Inter-
net’s global scope means that it covers a multitude of different legal jurisdic-
tions, complicating efforts by national governments to enforce national 
legislation in the cyber world. Finally, hate websites tend to gravitate to juris-
dictions that are more tolerant of hate speech. This is especially true with 
regard to the United States, which has become a refuge for extremist forms of 
online expression. 
 Traditionally, social media platforms have been self-regulating, relying on 
users to identify threatening content. Facebook, YouTube, and Microsoft all 
speciﬁ cally prohibit hate speech in their terms of service agreements. Twitter 
makes reference to hateful conduct rather than hate speech, but the meaning 
is essentially the same. “You may not promote violence against or directly 
attack or threaten other people on the basis of race, ethnicity, national origin, 
sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, religious afﬁ liation, age, disabil-
ity, or disease.” 54 At the same time, social media companies insist that they 
are also champions of free speech. Twitter sums it up this way, “We believe 
in freedom of expression and in speaking truth to power, but that means 
little as an underlying philosophy if voices are silenced because people are 
afraid to speak up.” 55  It should be remembered, however, that these are pri-
vate corporations, and as such, they have the right to restrict any speech that 
they choose. The First Amendment provides signiﬁ cant protection against 
government censorship, but it does not apply to private organizations. As a 
result, if a corporation decides to censor online speech there is ultimately 
little legal recourse for those who face that restriction; normal due process 
protections are absent. In the United States, terms of service agreements tend 
to provide for greater limits on speech than would be permitted under public 

Human Rights 
97
constitutional law. Of course, private censorship is not new, it has been evi-
dent in newspapers, magazines, and television; however, the scale and reach 
of the Internet has increased the signiﬁ cance of private censorship. By click-
ing “agree” when presented with a terms of service agreement, we consent to 
a whole range of responsibilities and conditions. We also give authority to 
the corporation to determine what is and what is not acceptable expression. 
 Internet companies do not have a completely free hand in establishing 
what is prohibited online, however, they are routinely required to impose 
restrictions in the interests of protecting children, intellectual property, and 
national security. In some countries, local laws also require restricting 
speech, which can result in a globally inconsistent pattern of controls. In 
2012, for instance, Twitter agreed to a German government request to block 
users from accessing a neo-Nazi account. The group’s message clearly vio-
lated German law, but this action was signiﬁ cant since it was the ﬁ rst time 
that Twitter employed its country-withheld content policy. In doing so, Twit-
ter permitted all users to access the offending account except people located 
in Germany. The same year, Google, which owns YouTube, blocked access to 
the defamatory video  Innocence of Muslims in India and Indonesia to comply 
with government requests since it violated local laws. Google also voluntarily 
blocked access to the video in Egypt and Libya on a temporary basis due to 
the sensitive nature of the subject matter and the ongoing political unrest in 
those countries. 56 Although the actions taken by Twitter and Google were 
transparent and legal, they raise concerns that authoritarian governments 
could use the justiﬁ cation of cultural sensitivities to demand suppression of 
legitimate online political dissent. 
 Political pressures have also been mounting on social media companies at 
the international level to encourage them to take a more active role in sup-
pressing hate speech. On May 31, 2016, the European Commission reached 
an agreement with Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, and Microsoft on a code of 
conduct for illegal online hate speech. Among a broad range of commitments, 
the media companies consented to take the lead in countering hate speech, 
and educate their users on the types of content that is not permitted. They 
also made a speciﬁ c commitment to review the majority of valid notiﬁ cations 
concerning illegal hate speech in less than 24 hours, and remove or disable 
access to such content if necessary. 57 It is not only the large social media 
companies that are facing demands to shoulder more responsibility in com-
bating hate speech, Internet service providers (ISPs) are also being encour-
aged to play a greater role in this regard. For example, in a January 2015 
report, the UN’s Special Rapporteur on minority issues recommended that 
ISPs establish detailed terms of service agreements, as well as notice-
and-takedown procedures, regarding hate speech and incitement in line 
with national legislation and international standards. 58 Much of this is a 

98 
Controlling Cyberspace
codiﬁ cation of existing practices, but it nevertheless raises concerns about 
increased private censorship. 
 Although human rights have not been central to traditional discussions of 
Internet governance, recent history suggests that this is now changing. Gov-
ernments, Internet governance institutions, international organizations, and 
civil society all recognize that the pervasiveness and importance of the Inter-
net demands that legal and moral questions surrounding the medium be 
addressed. The expansion of the Internet has generated new dilemmas with 
respect to human rights, whether related to access, freedom of expression, or 
the role of private corporations in mediating those rights. One of the biggest 
challenges facing governments will be to develop policy that fulﬁ ls both their 
negative and positive obligations regarding human rights and the Internet. 
This is made more difﬁ cult, however, by the privatization of rights enforce-
ment in a regulatory environment in which states are joined by corporations 
in shaping human rights policy. 

 CHAPTER SIX 
 Securing Cyberspace 
 It is stating the obvious that the Internet transports vast amounts of valu-
able information: international ﬁ nancial transactions that amount to tril-
lions of dollars per day, commercial trade secrets, personal banking and 
health information, and private conversations. The Internet permeates 
almost every aspect of modern society, and it has become an indispensable 
tool used by millions every day. The costs of failing to secure this valuable 
resource are staggering. Insurance company Lloyds estimates that cyber 
attacks cost businesses as much as $400 billion per year, and the insurance 
industry takes in billions of dollars in premiums on policies to protect com-
panies from losses resulting from cyber attacks. 1 As IBM’s CEO Ginni Romety 
put it, “Data is the phenomenon of our time. It is the world’s new natural 
resource. It is the new basis of competitive advantage, and it is transforming 
every profession and industry. If all of this is true—even inevitable—then 
cyber-crime, by deﬁ nition, is the greatest threat to every profession, every 
industry, every company in the world.” 2 It is not only the economic and pri-
vacy impacts of security breaches that are of concern, critical infrastruc-
tures and national security are also threatened. A large-scale cyber attack on 
energy, transportation, or water networks could have devastating conse-
quences for everyday societal functions, and the possibility of cyber warfare 
is no longer a theoretical threat. Countries around the world are currently 
gearing up for electronic warfare and, in this realm, the old rules of interna-
tional conﬂ ict do not apply. Given the centrality of the Internet for a multi-
tude of sectors, it is difﬁ cult to overstate the importance of securing that 
technology. 
 In the earliest days of the Internet, there was little concern about security 
issues. The network was small, and it was mostly used by scientists and aca-
demics. Those who wrote the code that created the Internet were more 
focused on the signiﬁ cant technical challenges that they faced rather than 

100 
Controlling Cyberspace
hypothetical security risks. As Vinton Cerf told the  Washington Post , “getting 
this thing to work at all was non-trivial.” 3  Neither could these founding 
fathers anticipate the degree to which users would use the technology 
destructively: “We didn’t focus on how you could wreck this system deliber-
ately.” 4 As a result, the original Internet architecture had few security protec-
tions. When security problems began to emerge as the Internet grew in the 
following years, short-term ﬁ xes rather than fundamental revamps became 
the typical response. Technology companies, even when they became aware 
of security problems, had little incentive to try to ﬁ x them. Remedies could 
prove costly and they feared the possibility that solutions would interfere 
with technical performance. After all, proﬁ ts depended on the development 
and sale of new products, not thwarting hackers. 5 As a result, users with 
some knowledge and malicious intent learned to exploit inherent technical 
vulnerabilities of the Internet. 
 Internet Architecture and Information Security 
 The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the 
National Research Council identiﬁ ed a discontinuity breakpoint between the 
time when computer systems could be trusted and when that trust was no 
longer justiﬁ ed. That dividing line was the point at which computers became 
widely connected. “The most damaging change in the operating assumptions 
underlying the PC was the advent of network attachment.” 6  The report 
warned that computer security could no longer rely on the absence of mali-
cious intent. “Although we trust them, they are vulnerable . . . to deliberate 
attack. The modern thief can steal more with a computer than with a gun. 
Tomorrow’s terrorist may be able to do more damage with a keyboard than 
with a bomb.” 7 Perceived cybersecurity threats increased signiﬁ cantly fol-
lowing the attacks on September 11, 2001, and the federal government 
reacted quickly. On October 16, 2001, President Bush issued Executive 
Order 13231,  Critical Infrastructure in the Information Age, which introduced a 
program to secure information systems and establish a framework for 
executive-branch cybersecurity policy. In 2003, the U.S. Computer Emer-
gency Readiness Team (US-CERT) became part of the Department of Home-
land Security, tasked with analyzing and reducing cyber threats and 
vulnerabilities, disseminating cyber threat warnings, and coordinating 
incident response activities. US-CERT collaborates with federal agencies, the 
private sector, the research community, state and local governments, and 
international entities to develop actionable information for broad distribu-
tion about current and emerging cyber threats. Also, in 2003, the  National 
Strategy to Secure Cyberspace  was published. The document recognized the 
country’s dependency on the Internet and established national priorities for 
preventing cyber attacks and minimizing the damage from attacks that do 

Securing Cyberspace 
101
occur. The 2003 strategy   also identiﬁ ed the three key protocols of Internet 
architecture that must be protected if cybersecurity is to be achieved: the 
transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP), the border gateway 
protocol (BGP), and the domain name system (DNS), all of which remain 
vulnerable today. 
 Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol 
 The TCP and IP protocols are the foundations of the Internet, yet, as origi-
nally designed, they lack basic security features. The main job of IP is to 
route packets around the network. This protocol contains unique addresses 
and destinations that identify the sender and the recipient of the informa-
tion. IP does not guarantee delivery of the packets that are being sent, how-
ever. It is an unreliable protocol, so the task of ensuring that packets are 
delivered accurately resides with higher layers including TCP. TCP uses vari-
ous mechanisms to ensure that packets are delivered in sequence to the cor-
rect destination. Every byte of data is given a sequence number so that the 
sender and receiver can verify whether it has been delivered correctly, or 
whether some parts have been lost in transit. 8 TCP is connection-oriented; it 
was speciﬁ cally designed to ensure reliable transmission of data over unreli-
able networks through the creation of dedicated communication channels. 
For a connection to take place, an initial bidirectional link is established 
known as the three-way handshake. When TCP wants to establish a connec-
tion between two hosts, host A sends a SYNchronize packet to host B, which 
returns a SYNchronize-ACKnowledgment back. Host A then completes the 
third part of the handshake by sending an ACKnowledgment to host B, and 
the connection is established. The three-way handshake is also known as the 
SYN, SYN-ACK, ACK method (see Figure 6.1). 
 TCP/IP was designed to send information reliably but not securely, and it 
has consequently become the target of a variety of attacks. One of the most 
 Figure 6.1   The Three-Way Handshake 

102 
Controlling Cyberspace
common forms of attack is known as spooﬁ ng. In IP address spooﬁ ng, the 
attacker alters packet headers to create a false address that makes it appear to 
be originating from a trusted source. This is often accompanied by a SYN 
ﬂ ood, which takes advantage of the three-way handshake. The attacking sys-
tem sends SYN messages to the victim server system, which appear to be 
legitimate but in fact reference a client system that is unable to respond to 
the SYN-ACK messages. 9 This means that the ﬁ nal ACK message will never be 
sent to the victim server system, creating a half-open connection that can be 
easily exploited. In order to address some of these weaknesses, the Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF) created a set of protocols called Internet Proto-
col Security (IPsec) to add encryption and authentication qualities to TCP/IP, 
as well as the means to create secure “tunnels” for data communications. 
These features are similar to the Secure Socket Layer (SSL) with which most 
of us are familiar, which creates secure channels between Web browsers and 
Web servers for exchanging private information, such as credit card numbers. 
Although IPsec is not perfect, it is considered a signiﬁ cant improvement over 
previously available security protocols. A particular advantage is that IPsec 
operates in Layer 3, the network layer, so it requires modiﬁ cation only to the 
operating system rather than to the applications that employ IPsec. 10 Despite 
improvements, as it exists today, TCP/IP still has security weaknesses. Migrat-
ing to a new protocol suite, such as IPv6, may be the only answer to ﬁ xing the 
ﬂ aws in TCP/IP. 11  
 Border Gateway Protocol 
 BGP is a routing protocol that is used to direct the ﬂ ow of trafﬁ c across the 
Internet. Speciﬁ cally, BGP uses algorithms to determine the best paths 
between autonomous systems, which are typically Internet service providers 
(ISPs). For instance, BGP is used by AT&T to connect to Comcast and other 
providers. BGP learns massive quantities of Internet routes, creates routing 
tables, and selects the best paths based on reachability, distance, and a num-
ber of other characteristics. It also has the capability of updating routes on a 
regular basis, a feature that is vital since network connections to the Internet 
change frequently. BGP evolved with the commercialization of the Internet 
to allow independently owned and operated networks to communicate, and 
it remains crucial to the smooth operation of the entire system. However, 
from a security perspective, abuse of routing mechanisms is one of the most 
straightforward protocol-based attacks. 12 An attacker can change routing 
information between two autonomous systems, or add misleading informa-
tion so that BGP selects a particular route. In the latter case, an attacker 
establishes a competing route that seems shorter than it actually is, making it 
appear to BGP that it is the most efﬁ cient route. 13 

Securing Cyberspace 
103
 There are numerous real-world examples of security issues surrounding 
BGP, some of which are due to operational errors. One of the best-known 
examples of unintended misdirection occurred in 2008 when the govern-
ment of Pakistan directed all of its ISPs to block access to YouTube. Pakistan 
Telecommunication Authority complied with the order by altering the BGP 
entry for YouTube so that users in Pakistan would be directed to a page that 
told them YouTube had been blocked. However, this information was also 
disseminated outside of Pakistan and propagated by other routers. As a 
result, all requests for YouTube videos were redirected through Pakistan, 
which crashed their servers and took YouTube off-line for several hours. 
A similar event occurred in Turkey in 2014, albeit with greater intention. In 
the run up to municipal elections, and in the midst of a corruption scandal, 
the Turkish government ordered access to Twitter and YouTube to be 
blocked. As part of that compliance, Turkish ISPs conﬁ gured servers to 
impersonate Google so that users were redirected to servers controlled by 
Turkish service providers. Turkish citizens thought they were connected to 
Google since their queries were answered, but they were receiving deceptive 
responses approved by the Turkish government. Moreover, the hijacking 
allowed Türk Telekom to log and record all queries without the user’s 
knowledge. 14 The security weaknesses of BGP have also been exploited for 
ﬁ nancial gain. In 2014, Dell SecureWorks Counter Threat Unit research 
team discovered a repeated BGP hijack that redirected Bitcoins to a hijacker 
server. It is estimated that the attacker proﬁ ted to the amount of $83,000 in 
slightly more than four months. 15  
 Of greater concern are the national security implications of BGP hijack-
ing. Jim Cowie, Chief Scientist at Dyn, an Internet performance manage-
ment company, observed that there has long been the “potential for someone 
to weaponize the classic Pakistan-and-YouTube style route hijack.” 16 These 
man-in-the-middle BGP hijacks are often difﬁ cult to trace, and it is even 
more difﬁ cult to ﬁ gure out to whom to attribute blame. To the victim every-
thing appears normal: “The attackers keep at least one outbound path clean. 
After they receive and inspect the victim’s trafﬁ c, they release it right back 
onto the Internet, and the clean path delivers it to its intended destina-
tion.” 17 A well-publicized trafﬁ c diversion, with national security implica-
tions, occurred over 18 minutes on April 8, 2010, when state-owned China 
Telecom advertised erroneous routing information that instructed Internet 
trafﬁ c to travel through Chinese servers. The incident affected around 
50,000 IP preﬁ xes including U.S. military (.mil) and other government 
(.gov) websites, as well as commercial sites, such as Microsoft and Dell. In a 
report to Congress later that year, the U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission acknowledged that it could not determine what hap-
pened to the hijacked data, but conﬁ rmed that diverted information could 
“conceivably be monitored, censored, or replaced with other data,” and that 

104 
Controlling Cyberspace
it is possible that the integrity of “supposedly secure encrypted sessions” 
could have been compromised. 18  
 These problems occur because BGP does not have built-in authentication 
mechanisms. Internet routing is based on trust. A number of solutions have 
been proposed to address BGP security concerns, including the use of 
Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI). The RPKI architecture allows IP 
address holders to authorize speciﬁ c routes in BGP so they can determine 
whether a particular route is authorized. According to a draft document pub-
lished by IETF, RPKI provides an initial step toward addressing the authenti-
cation routing problem but the “use of RPKI data alone provides little or no 
protection against a sophisticated attacker.” 19 To supplement RPKI, the task 
force is developing standards for BGPsec, which adds encrypted signatures 
to BGP messages. Each ISP would digitally sign its BGP messages in order to 
improve validation. Such potential solutions, however, have not yet been 
widely deployed, and BGP remains vulnerable. Part of the problem relates to 
economic considerations. Adding cryptography to routers will likely increase 
costs, thus reducing incentives for deployment. Ultimately, deployment of 
BGPsec rests on the economic choices of thousands of independently oper-
ated networks, some of which may prioritize commercial over security 
concerns. 20 
 Domain Name System 
 Like TCP/IP and BGP, DNS suffers from a number of security problems 
because it did not originate with built-in mechanisms to protect it from 
attack. As discussed in previous chapters, DNS is a distributed database that 
translates domain names into IP addresses. So, rather than having to remem-
ber a series of numbers, such as 192.168.124.1, we can simply remember 
Microsoft.com. DNS is organized in a hierarchical structure with the shape 
of an inverted tree. When we search for a website our browser ﬁ rst looks in 
our computer’s cache to see if it has a record of the IP address. If not, the 
query moves to the resolver, usually at the level of your ISP. If this informa-
tion is not already cached, then the query moves to the root name server, 
which will direct the enquiry to the authoritative servers where the informa-
tion is stored. The enquiry recursively traverses the DNS tree until it ﬁ nds 
the correct IP address. Throughout the process, information is cached for a 
speciﬁ ed period of time so that the same search does not have to be continu-
ously repeated. All of these steps take place in milliseconds and are abso-
lutely vital to the operation of the Internet. 
 A common attack that takes advantage of DNS caching is called cache 
poisoning. In this type of attack, the perpetrator inserts fake IP addresses 
into a cache. It is a form of spooﬁ ng that allows a hacker to direct users to 
sham websites that appear authentic. Once the attackers successfully inserts 

Securing Cyberspace 
105
the fake IP addresses, the real name servers will cache and disseminate that 
information, returning false addresses to enquiries. This is a particularly 
dangerous form of DNA attack, as Son and Shmatikov describe, “a hacker 
could redirect trafﬁ c intended for a bank’s web site to a web server with a 
replica of the site’s content, and steal account numbers and passwords; or 
siphon off trafﬁ c meant for a web-based merchant to an identical web site 
and capture credit card numbers.” 21 Cache poisoning is also frequently used 
to infect users’ computers with malware disseminated from fake websites. To 
deal with these security problems, IETF developed a set of speciﬁ cations 
known as DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC). Essentially, DNSSEC adds 
layers of authentication to IP address enquiries. By adding digital signatures, 
resolver servers using DNSSEC are able to determine if the answer they 
receive originates from the authentic DNS server. This is achieved by incor-
porating a chain of digital signatures into the DNS hierarchy with each level 
owning its own signature generating keys. 22 Although DNSSEC is an impor-
tant means to make DNS more secure, it has been only slowly adopted. Since 
it has to be deployed at each level, it can be time consuming and costly to 
implement. For some organizations, cache poisoning may not be viewed as a 
signiﬁ cant enough problem to justify such efforts. In addition, while DNS-
SEC addresses the problem of cache poisoning, it does not protect against a 
host of other network security threats. 
 Malware, Zombies, and Bots 
 There is no shortage of malware (malicious software) designed to exploit 
the security weaknesses of the Internet. Three of the most common are 
viruses, worms, and Trojan horses. Although the term virus is commonly 
used to describe any malicious code, there are differences in how malware 
programs operate. A virus operates by attaching itself to a legitimate pro-
gram, document, or ﬁ le, and remains dormant until it is executed. That is, 
users must run the infected program before the virus activates. Once acti-
vated the virus can replicate itself and infect other computers on the same 
network; it is most often spread through ﬁ le sharing and e-mail attachments. 
The ﬁ rst PC virus was released in 1986 by two Pakistani brothers, Amjad 
and Basit Farooq Alvi, who wanted to track piracy of their medical software. 
Known as Brain, it was a boot sector virus that was transported from com-
puter to computer via ﬂ oppy disks. The virus included the brothers’ address 
and telephone numbers as well as a message that told users that their com-
puters were infected and instructed them to call the brothers for inoculation 
instructions. In a 2011 interview, the brothers explained that they included 
their contact information because it was a “friendly virus” that was never 
intended to cause destruction. 23 They were surprised at how far the virus 
had spread when they received their ﬁ rst call from Miami, Florida. The 

106 
Controlling Cyberspace
brothers indicated that they never intended to cause harm, and that Brain 
was the ﬁ rst and last virus that they created. 
 Worms are a subset of viruses that also spread from computer to com-
puter, but they do not need to attach to a speciﬁ c program and they can 
travel without human action. A worm also has the ability to replicate and 
disseminate copies of itself. Most worms are designed to exploit software 
security weaknesses, but some spread by duping Internet users to click links 
inserted into bogus e-mail messages. Once a computer is infected, the worm 
can corrupt ﬁ les, steal sensitive information, and modify settings to further 
degrade security, such as installing a backdoor to give hackers easier access 
to your computer. The ﬁ rst worm was created by Robert Morris, a computer 
science graduate student at Cornell University, who wrote a self-replicating 
and self-propagating program and uploaded it to the Internet in 1988. 
Reports suggest that Morris was motivated more by intellectual curiosity 
than malice, and that the worm spread more quickly than he anticipated or 
intended. Nevertheless, the worm installed itself in an estimated 10 percent 
of the computers that were connected at that time in only a few days. Morris 
was subsequently charged and convicted of violating the Computer Fraud 
and Abuse Act in 1990. He was sentenced to three years of probation, 400 
hours of community service, and ﬁ ned $10,500. Although the Morris worm 
did not do any permanent damage to computers, it had broader repercus-
sions. The rapid dissemination of the worm shattered the complacency of 
many who did not appreciate the extent of potential network security threats. 
As the  Washington Post noted, “Before Morris unleashed his worm, the Inter-
net was like a small town where people thought little of leaving their doors 
unlocked.” 24 The Morris worm marked the point at which the Internet lost its 
innocence. 
 As with other types of malware, the Trojan Horse propagates when a user 
inadvertently clicks on a bogus e-mail link, or visits a counterfeit website. 
When cyber criminals send out thousands of e-mails randomly in the hope 
that they will catch some users to deceive, it is known as phishing. When 
criminals target a speciﬁ c group or organization, it is known as spear phish-
ing. In each case, e-mails appear to come from a legitimate source, making 
them more difﬁ cult to detect. Trojans differ from viruses and worms since 
they cannot reproduce and self-replicate, but they can nevertheless do sig-
niﬁ cant damage. The Trojan typically resides in the infected computer qui-
etly carrying out its intended functions, such as installing spyware to steal 
passwords, ﬁ nancial information, and other private data. More menacing is 
the role that Trojans play in installing sophisticated threats from malicious 
bots. Short for robot, a bot is a piece of malicious code that when installed on 
computers allows hackers to have full control over those computers, unbe-
knownst to users. These compromised machines are often referred to as 
zombies. When large numbers of zombie computers are connected, they 

Securing Cyberspace 
107
form powerful botnets, which can be used to disseminate spam and phish-
ing scams to millions of people. Since the source of this criminal activity 
emanates from zombie computers, it is difﬁ cult to trace the perpetrators. 
This is made more challenging by the fact that zombie machines are being 
constantly added or removed from botnets. Norton Symantec estimates that 
there are ﬁ ve million zombie computers operating at any given time, with 
one million of those being located in the United States. 25 
 Botnets are also the predominant means to execute distributed denial of 
service (DDoS) attacks on websites, which pose signiﬁ cant and costly secu-
rity threats. In DDoS attacks, hackers send instructions to zombie computers 
to trigger a ﬂ ood of data aimed at a targeted site. In doing so, the attack over-
whelms the system making it inoperable for legitimate users. These attacks 
are usually global in nature, making use of compromised computers in 
numerous countries. They are also perpetrated for a variety of reasons. DDoS 
perpetrators might be hacktivists promoting a social or political message. For 
instance, in 2008, the group that calls itself Anonymous attacked the Church 
of Scientology in a major DDoS as a protest against church policies and prac-
tices. They also launched a series of DDoS attacks on U.K., U.S., and Swedish 
government websites in 2012 to object to the treatment of WikiLeaks founder 
Julian Assange. A few months later, Anonymous ﬁ led a petition with the 
White House demanding that DDoS be recognized as a legitimate form of 
protest, which they likened to the “Occupy” movements. 26 DDoS attacks are 
also conducted for peer recognition and attention, often by teenagers. The 
term “Script Kiddies” is used as a derogatory description for such activity to 
denote their lack of knowledge, since they usually employ tools written by 
experienced hackers. The greatest motivation for DDoS attacks, however, is 
ﬁ nancial gain. This might be in the form of disrupting a competitor’s web-
site, or extortion. Today, there are a number of DDoS for-hire services that 
will take down websites for relatively little cost, but extortion is an increas-
ingly popular and lucrative means to ﬁ nancial gain. Since it usually costs 
businesses more to be off-line than the amount of money demanded, many 
will pay. Moreover, in order to successfully extort money, hackers do not 
employ a full-scale DDoS attack that takes down the system. Rather, they can 
engage in sub-saturating DDoS attacks, of typically less than ﬁ ve minutes in 
duration, to test for vulnerabilities within a network that can be exploited 
later. 27 Once those vulnerabilities have been found, hackers install ransom-
ware on network computers that lock screens and keyboards until the ran-
som has been paid. The massive “WannaCry” ransomware attack that 
occurred during May 2017 illustrates this tactic. It affected more than 
200,000 organizations in 150 countries, including Britain’s National Health 
Service, Spain’s’ Telefonica, Germany’s rail system, and many more. 
 Typically, DDoS attacks make use of zombie computers; however, a far-
reaching attack that occurred in 2016 highlighted inherent vulnerabilities in 

108 
Controlling Cyberspace
the Internet of things (IoT). This term describes the vast and growing num-
ber of physical devices that have discrete IP addresses and Internet connec-
tivity, other than computers. These include a host of household items, such 
as thermostats, appliances, baby monitors, and security cameras, as well as 
vehicles. On October 21, 2016, Dyn experienced a complex, two-phase, 
sophisticated DDoS attack that emanated from a botnet called Mirai. The 
malware scans the Internet for IoT devices that are unprotected and then 
hijacks those devices to conduct DDoS attacks. The attack affected several 
major websites including Twitter, Netﬂ ix, and Spotify. Although this was the 
ﬁ rst large-scale DDoS that connected millions of IoT devices, it was not a 
complete surprise. The Mirai malware had been released to an underground 
forum just three weeks earlier, prompting a senior director at Corero Net-
work Security, to predict that “Terabit-class attacks may be increasingly com-
mon and ‘breaking the internet’—or at least clogging it in certain 
regions—could soon become a reality.” 28 
 The security vulnerabilities that have plagued the Internet from the begin-
ning are therefore being seen with IoT today, largely for the same reason: the 
lack of security engineered into initial designs. These devices are particularly 
vulnerable because while most are always connected, they are subject to a 
one-time-only authentication process. After the initial set up, consumers 
typically are not asked to change passwords or update security. Of great con-
cern is that unlike the security problems we encounter with our computers, 
weak or nonexistent security in IoT can put lives at risk. Hackers have already 
demonstrated that they can control digital systems in vehicles remotely 
through the Internet, and there is considerable anxiety over potential secu-
rity vulnerabilities in hospitals. In 2014, the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion issued a security alert about computerized infusion pumps used in 
hospitals for delivering anesthetic or therapeutic drugs. These systems can 
be programmed remotely through a health-care facility’s Ethernet or wireless 
network. FDA warned: “An unauthorized user with malicious intent could 
access the pump remotely and modify the dosage it delivers, which could 
lead to over or under-infusion of critical therapies.” 29 In a statement to the 
U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee, Professor Kevin We of the 
University of Michigan warned that hospitals have been unaffected to date 
due to sheer luck; they have not yet been targeted. Other security profession-
als have raised similar concerns about hospital devices. A  Wired  magazine 
headline plainly described the problem, “It’s insanely easy to hack hospital 
equipment.” 30 
 In addition to the threats posed to human safety, the cost of cybercrime is 
immense, and it continues to increase. The Ponemon Institute reported an 
82 percent increase in the cost of cybercrime over a six-year period among 
the benchmark organizations it examined. By 2015, these organizations were 
each losing an average of $15 million per year. 31 The total global cost is 

Securing Cyberspace 
109
staggering, estimated at between $375 and $575 million per year. Estimates 
of cybercrime costs are unavoidably broad since a number of factors hinder 
the accurate collection of such data. Cybercrime is often not reported as com-
panies rarely want to advertise their vulnerabilities, and their legal obliga-
tions to do so vary. In the United States, 46 states have laws that specify 
when a hack must be made public, but all of those laws are different. There 
are also a number of deﬁ nitional questions that undermine attempts to pro-
duce accurate and consistent data on cybercrime: Which costs should be 
included? Only direct losses, or indirect losses such as the cost of securing 
the network after a breach? It is also difﬁ cult to place a dollar ﬁ gure on the 
damage to a company’s reputation following a large-scale attack. While we 
may not be able to accurately calculate the total costs of cybercrime, there is 
no doubt that cybercrime is a serious problem that impacts thousands of 
companies and millions of people every year, and it appears to be getting 
worse. 
 Although many crimes committed online are not new, cybercrime oper-
ates on a different scale than that of traditional crime. Cyber criminals have 
been adept at exploiting the speed, accessibility, convenience, and anonym-
ity of the Internet to enrich themselves and to cause disruption and harm. 
Today, complex and highly integrated global networks bring individuals 
together from around the world to commit crimes on an unparalleled scale. It 
is widely recognized that   Internet security should address at least three 
objectives: Conﬁ dentiality, integrity and availability (CIA), also known as the 
information security triad. However, the intrinsic security weaknesses in the 
Internet’s design and its patchwork evolution have made these goals more 
difﬁ cult to achieve. The conﬁ dentiality and integrity of information is fre-
quently undermined by hackers who acquire and reveal private information. 
The availability of information is compromised when DDoS attacks over-
whelm and shut down websites. As more people and devices connect to the 
Internet, opportunities for crime will also increase. A view pessimistically 
summed up in a report published by the National Academy of Sciences says: 
“Cybersecurity is a never-ending battle, and a permanently decisive solution 
to the problem will not be found in the foreseeable future.” 32 
 National Security and Cyber Defense 
 The openness of the Internet, and its innate vulnerabilities, leave individ-
uals and organizations exposed to malicious cyber attacks. However, it is 
threats posed to national security that are garnering the greatest concern. 
During May 2009, President Obama declared, “It’s now clear this cyber 
threat is one of the most serious economic and national security challenges 
we face as a nation. It’s also clear that we’re not as prepared as we should be, 
as a government or as a country.” 33 Former Defense Secretary Leon Panetta 

110 
Controlling Cyberspace
painted a similarly bleak picture during his Senate conﬁ rmation hearing in 
2011. He warned that the next Pearl Harbor could be a cyber attack that 
cripples power, security, ﬁ nancial sectors, and governmental systems. In 
2013, the Director of National Intelligence named cyber threats as the No. 1 
strategic danger to the United States, placing it ahead of terrorism for the ﬁ rst 
time since the attacks of September 11, 2001. These statements indicate that, 
due to the potentially devastating impact of cyber attacks on critical infra-
structure, information warfare is no longer regarded simply as a means to 
strengthen conventional warfare; in some instances, it is considered a viable 
replacement. 
 Cyber warfare is still in its infancy but there are numerous examples of 
cyber attacks that have been directed toward national governments by both 
state and non-state actors: 
 Estonia: One of the ﬁ rst full-scale cyber attacks on a nation-state was directed at 
Estonia in 2007. Over a three-week period major Estonian institutions were 
targeted in a series of DDoS attacks. The attacks occurred during a period 
when Estonia and Russia were embroiled in a dispute over the removal of a 
Soviet World War II memorial by Estonia. Multiple computer networks and 
websites were targeted, including the President’s Ofﬁ ce, almost all govern-
ment ministries, Parliament, political parties, newspapers, universities, and 
major banks. The cyber attacks intensiﬁ ed over time, with the heaviest traf-
ﬁ c occurring on May 9, averaging over 4 million incoming packets of infor-
mation per second to hundreds of targeted websites. 34 Faced with this 
onslaught, the Estonian government had little choice but to block all inter-
national trafﬁ c, severing the country’s Internet communications with the 
rest of the world. Although Estonia immediately accused Russia of orches-
trating the attack, the Russian government denied involvement, and there is 
no evidence of a direct connection. At the same time, there is little doubt 
that Russian nationalists were involved. While not part of the nation-state 
apparatus, it is likely that these “patriotic hackers” had the tacit consent of 
the Russian government. 
 Republic of Georgia: On August 7, 2008, the Republic of Georgia launched a sur-
prise attack against separatist groups in South Ossetia, an internationally 
recognized region of Georgia. Russia came to the assistance of South Osse-
tia by invading Georgian territory. Simultaneously, large-scale cyber attacks 
were launched against Georgian governmental websites. According to 
NATO, this was among the ﬁ rst cases in which an international political 
and military conﬂ ict was accompanied, or even preceded, by a coordinated 
cyber offensive. 35 A detailed study of hacker forums, conducted by Project 
Grey Goose, identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve phases of what they called a “cyber kill chain.” 
(1) Novice hackers were encouraged through patriotic imagery and rhetoric 
to get involved in a cyber war against Georgia. (2) Veriﬁ ed target lists of 

Securing Cyberspace 
111
Georgian government websites were published. (3) Types of malware were 
discussed and selected. (4) The attack was launched. (5) Results were dis-
cussed and evaluated. 36 Although the analysis could not pinpoint guidance 
from any state actors, there is circumstantial evidence that the Russian gov-
ernment might have been involved. Members of the Russian government 
had previously endorsed cyber attacks initiated by their country’s hacker 
population; coordination of the attack was conducted primarily in the Rus-
sian language; and, as was the case with Estonia, the attack occurred at a 
time of heightened tensions with Russia. Given the historical record, Project 
Grey Goose analysists concluded that even though evidence of direct Rus-
sian government was lacking, it does not mean that they are blameless. “We 
assess with high conﬁ dence that the Russian government will likely con-
tinue its practice of distancing itself from the Russian nationalistic hacker 
community thus gaining deniability while passively supporting and enjoy-
ing the strategic beneﬁ ts of their actions.” 37 
 Iran: In 2010, Iranian technicians at the Natanz nuclear facility observed that 
centrifuges used to enrich uranium were failing at an unprecedented rate. 
The culprit was later discovered to be Stuxnet, a 500-kilobyte computer 
worm that has been called the “world’s ﬁ rst digital weapon.” 38 The worm 
was likely introduced to the facility through an infected USB drive, and was 
designed, among other things, to cause centrifuges to spin out of control 
and destroy themselves. Reports suggest that Stuxnet was responsible for 
the destruction of almost 1,000 centrifuges. Although the creators of Stux-
net have not been ofﬁ cially identiﬁ ed, the sophistication of the worm led 
most experts to conclude that its authors must have been sponsored by one 
or more governments. Press leaks later identiﬁ ed the United States and 
Israel as the most likely candidates. Stuxnet was something new; it caused 
physical damage from cyberspace. Unlike most viruses, it was not designed 
for ﬁ nancial gain, or to steal secrets, rather it was produced with a very spe-
ciﬁ c security purpose in mind, namely, to disrupt Iran’s nuclear program. 
The Stuxnet worm remains signiﬁ cant because it is an example of a weap-
onized virus that undoubtedly will become the blueprint for many others. 
 United States: In 2012, the Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce (GAO) reported 
that the number of cyber-security incidents reported by federal agencies had 
increased by nearly 680 percent in the previous six years. 39 Many of these 
incidents were cyber attacks originating from foreign sources. For instance, 
on the July 4th weekend in 2009, cyber attacks targeted computers at the 
White House, the Pentagon, the State Department, the Treasury, and the 
Department of Homeland Security, as well as several private organizations 
including the New York Stock Exchange. While these were relatively unso-
phisticated attacks, they nevertheless suggest a high degree of coordination 
since they emanated from more than a dozen countries. During February 
2011, the U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense said that more than 100 foreign 
intelligence agencies had tried to breach U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) 

112 
Controlling Cyberspace
computer networks and that one was successful in breaching networks con-
taining classiﬁ ed information. Cyber attacks are clearly pervasive and origi-
nate from many sources; however, China and Russia are suspected of being 
responsible for a large number of these attempted and successful incursions. 
In its annual report to Congress in 2013, the Pentagon noted, “Computer 
systems around the world, including those owned by the U.S. government, 
continued to be targeted for intrusions, some of which appear to be attribut-
able directly to the Chinese government and military.” 40 One of the most 
controversial and consequential cyber intrusions occurred in the run up to 
the 2016 U.S. presidential election when e-mails from the Democratic 
National Committee and others were hacked and published. A joint state-
ment made by the Department of Homeland Security and the Ofﬁ ce of the 
Director of National Intelligence on October 7, 2016, asserted: “The U.S. 
Intelligence Community (USIC) is conﬁ dent that the Russian Government 
directed the recent compromises of e-mails from US persons and institu-
tions, including from US political organizations.” 41 As a result, President 
Obama ordered a more comprehensive report on the issue. A declassiﬁ ed 
summary of a subsequent report, published in January 2017, declared “with 
high conﬁ dence” that Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered an inﬂ u-
ence campaign in 2016 aimed at the U.S. presidential election. The goals of 
which were to “undermine public faith in the US democratic process, deni-
grate Secretary Clinton, and harm her electability and potential presi-
dency.” 42 The report recognized that while cyber attack attribution is 
difﬁ cult, it is not impossible since every cyber operation “leaves a trail.” The 
Pentagon warned that this attack signaled a new normal in Russian inﬂ u-
ence campaigns that would be replicated elsewhere. 
 These examples illustrate that cyber attacks are not only disruptive for the 
targets involved, they also raise international political tensions, but how 
should countries respond? Should cyber attacks be categorized at the same 
level as physical attacks? Do they constitute an act of war? There are no obvi-
ous answers to these questions; cyber-attacks come in a variety of forms and 
intensities. They also differ from traditional military attacks since they are 
often not immediately discernable and the perpetrators are rarely obvious. 
What is clear is that the rules of international relations are changing, and old 
norms are currently being dismantled and a more complex national security 
environment is emerging. The traditional organizing principles of interna-
tional relations are founded on state sovereignty, and the idea that nation-
states are overwhelmingly dominant in the system. Today, however, 
nation-states have been joined by countless non-state actors that are capable 
of challenging the national security of the state. Traditional deﬁ nitions of 
aggression did not anticipate cyber threats. To illustrate, the UN’s deﬁ nition 
of aggression, adopted in 1974, declares, “Aggression is the use of armed 
force by a State against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political 

Securing Cyberspace 
113
independence of another State.” 43 Since this deﬁ nition focuses on military 
attacks against territory, it is not directly applicable to cyberspace. At the 
same time, the term cyber attack is often used to describe a range of activities 
that clearly do not rise to the level of warfare. How countries respond to 
these challenges will depend on the nature of the threat, but analytical ambi-
guity still remains regarding what constitutes aggression. A 2001 Congres-
sional Research Service Report highlighted these problems: 44 
 Computer systems at the Pentagon and other military sites get “attacked” 
thousands of times each year. But is it war if many or most of those attacks 
come from teenagers here in the United States, or even abroad? Does the 
military even  know how many of those attacks it should genuinely be wor-
ried about? Is an attempt by a foreign nation to collect military secrets via 
the Internet or modem an act of war for which the United States is pre-
pared to respond coercively? Should, the United States respond in kind by 
waging war in cyber space? Or is spying traditionally considered some-
thing else, something less than war? What constitutes victory in cyber-
space? If another nation systematically attacks U.S. business networks to 
steal trade secrets in support of its own economic interests or to pass those 
secrets on to their own corporations for competitive advantage, is that 
warfare? Does the answer change if the attacking nation is a U.S. ally or 
friend? 
 Since this congressional report was published several years ago, many others 
have grappled with the deﬁ nitional problems surrounding cyber attacks and 
security. One of the most prominent contributions came from an interna-
tional group of experts who, at the invitation of North Atlantic Treaty Orga-
nization (NATO), developed the  Tallinn Manual on the International Law 
Applicable to Cyber Warfare , published in 2013 . 
 The  Tallinn Manual deﬁ nes a cyber attack as “a cyber operation, whether 
offensive or defensive, that is reasonably expected to cause injury or death to 
persons or damage or destruction to objects.” 45 Despite praise for the work, 
the manual’s deﬁ nition of a cyber attack has been criticized for leaving too 
many questions unresolved. The authors did not reach agreement concern-
ing how countries should respond to cyber attacks that do not cause physical 
harm—the so-called below threshold attacks. They examined this question 
with reference to state sovereignty, a long-established principle in interna-
tional law. The sovereignty norm stipulates that states have a right to control 
their own territory free from interference by others. This principle has two 
consequences for cyberspace; it gives countries the right to regulate cyber 
infrastructure, and it gives them the right to protect that infrastructure from 
intrusion. The general prohibition against intervention is established in a 
number of treaties and was upheld by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) 

114 
Controlling Cyberspace
in  Nicaragua v. United States : “The principle forbids all States or groups of 
States to intervene directly or indirectly in the internal or external affairs of 
other States.” 46 At the same time, not all interference amounts to interven-
tion. For instance, cyber-espionage that lacks a coercive element would not 
violate the nonintervention principle. The  Tallinn Manual authors were also 
unable to reach consensus on other issues, including whether the simple act 
of installing malware, that causes no physical damage, constitutes a violation 
of sovereignty. However, they did agree that coercive political interference 
does violate that principle. The examples they cited foreshadowed later 
events: “The manipulation by cyber means of elections or of public opinion 
on the eve of elections, as when online news services are altered in favour of 
a particular party, false news is spread, or the online services of one party are 
shut off. As always the decisive test remains coercion.” 47 
 Despite criticism, the  Tallinn Manual has become a cornerstone of NATO’s 
cyber defense strategy. At its Warsaw Summit in July 2016, NATO recog-
nized “cyberspace as a domain of operations in which NATO must defend 
itself as effectively as it does in the air, on land and at sea.” 48 This is notewor-
thy as it allows NATO to invoke Article 5 of its charter in response to a cyber 
attack. This means that an attack on one member country can be considered 
as an attack on all members, opening the way for a collective response. The 
Warsaw Summit also included references to cyber “deterrence,” which 
implies that NATO now accepts offensive cyber capabilities as part of cyber 
defense. Like the  Tallinn Manual, however, the Warsaw Summit did not 
clearly articulate a mechanism for assessing what constitutes a cyber attack 
worthy of a collective response. Neither did NATO’s Secretary General clarify 
the issue when he stated that while “a cyber-attack can trigger Article 5 . . . 
it’s also important to understand that cyber is not something that always trig-
gers Article 5.” 49  
 NATO’s decision to recognize cyberspace as an arena for potential conﬂ ict 
is consistent with U.S. military strategy that has formally identiﬁ ed cyber-
space as a warzone for some time. In 2010, the DoD established the United 
States Cyber Command to unify and oversee all aspects of cybersecurity. It 
created three types of cyber mission forces: (1) National Mission Forces to 
protect computer systems that undergird electrical grids, power plants, and 
other critical infrastructure; (2) Combat Mission Forces to help military 
commanders overseas plan and execute attacks; and (3) Cyber Protection 
Forces to reinforce DoD computer networks. Signiﬁ cantly, since 2011 the 
DoD has also instructed that attacks on computer networks that originate in 
other countries ofﬁ cially constitute an act of war that can be responded to 
with traditional military force. The  International Strategy for Cyber Space 
(2011) makes it clear that the United States “will respond to hostile acts in 
cyberspace as we would to any other threat to our country. We reserve the 
right to use all necessary means—diplomatic, informational, military, and 

Securing Cyberspace 
115
economic—as appropriate and consistent with applicable international law, 
in order to defend our Nation, our allies, our partners, and our interests.” 50 
However, the question of when a cyber attack “qualiﬁ es” as an act of war 
remains unclear. During 2016, Congress attempted to address this issue in 
two parallel bills introduced in the House and Senate titled the  Cyber Act of 
War Act  that direct the president to develop a policy on when an action in 
cyberspace constitutes a use of force against the United States. However, the 
legislation gives little guidance concerning appropriate criteria for assessing 
cyber attacks, and retaliation remains problematic without clear attribution 
of the source of the attack. 
 Cybersecurity is clearly a multilayered, multifaceted problem in interna-
tional relations for which governments have not yet found stable policy solu-
tions. The difﬁ culties they face in developing appropriate responses is made 
more intractable by the fact that the realm of cybersecurity involves a variety 
of subnational groups and individual actors, in addition to nation-states. 
Recent events suggest that the power and inﬂ uence of these non-state actors 
has strengthened in this area. The Internet empowers individuals to pursue 
both worthy and malevolent acts in cyberspace, and provides unparalleled 
channels for accessing and sharing information. Some of this information-
sharing has considerable national security implications, as illustrated by the 
WikiLeaks phenomenon, and the National Security Agency spying scandal. 
These incidents illustrate that the old rules of national security and foreign 
policy have been inextricably altered. Certainly, classiﬁ ed information has 
always been disclosed, but when that information was held in ﬁ le cabinets 
breaches were on a much smaller scale. The digitization of information has 
brought innumerable conveniences, but it has also brought increased vulner-
abilities. These revelations also raise perennial questions concerning the 
appropriate balance between privacy and security in democratic societies. 
For supporters, Assange and Snowden are heroes, defenders of democratic 
values ﬁ ghting for the greater good. For Assange, “The goal is justice, the 
method is transparency.” 51 While Snowden declares that, “privacy is the right 
of a free mind.” 52 By contrast, critics view these individuals as law breakers 
whose actions undermine national security and put the lives of others at risk. 
Regardless of one’s position, it is likely that the inﬂ uence of such non-state 
actors in the realm of cybersecurity will continue to strengthen, particularly 
if collaboration occurs between those non-state actors and governments, and 
whether that cooperation is explicit or tacit. 
 International Cooperation and Cybersecurity 
 In the non-virtual world, a myriad of treaties, regulations, and norms 
exist that aim to standardize when conﬂ ict is justiﬁ able and when weapons 
can be used. Although not always adhered to, a large corpus of international 

116 
Controlling Cyberspace
law has been built over many decades that expounds upon the principles of 
 jus ad bellum  (right to war) that sets out criteria for a just war, and  jus in bello 
(the law in waging war, also known as International Humanitarian Law) 
that establishes criteria for just actions in war. There is also a considerable 
body of laws and regulations that govern international cooperation with 
regard to transnational crime. Such principles and laws, however, cannot 
always be neatly applied to conﬂ icts and crimes in cyberspace, which pres-
ent unique challenges. Technology changes at lightning speed, but laws do 
not. As a result, regulatory frameworks in this area are frequently anti-
quated. Moreover, the challenge is not only to develop new legislation but 
also to establish new norms concerning acceptable behavior in cyberspace. 
International law and cooperation is built on more than treaties, it is also 
built on custom and practice and established modalities that in some cases 
have taken centuries to build. While some existing legal practices can be 
transferred to cyberspace, in many areas of cybersecurity we are in 
uncharted territory. 
 Most progress has been made with regard to transnational cybercrime. 
The ﬁ rst international treaty that addressed crimes conducted through the 
Internet is the Council of Europe’s  Convention on Cyber Crime , which opened 
for signatures in 2001 and entered into force in 2004. Its main objective is to 
pursue common policies that aim to protect society from cybercrime by 
adopting appropriate legislation and fostering international cooperation. The 
treaty, which is also known as the Budapest Convention, covers a broad 
range of cybersecurity topics, divided into four main areas: (1) conﬁ dential-
ity, integrity, and availability of computer data and systems; (2) computer-
related forgery and fraud; (3) child pornography; and (4) copyright 
infringement. 53 An additional optional protocol was added to the Convention 
in 2003 to cover offences related to racist or xenophobic propaganda. As of 
January 2017, 51 countries had ratiﬁ ed the Budapest Convention, with ﬁ ve 
more signing this treaty without ratiﬁ cation. The additional protocol has 
been ratiﬁ ed by 26 countries, with 14 additional signatures. In both cases, 
many of the countries that have signed and/or ratiﬁ ed these instruments are 
not members of the Council of Europe. 
 The Budapest Convention is important since it was not only the ﬁ rst mul-
tilateral treaty to address transnational cybercrime, it is also the only legally 
binding instrument that governs this issue. The treaty is not without ﬂ aws, 
however. It does not address important issues such as spam, identity theft, or 
criminal activity related to terrorism. Nor can it be said to have universal 
backing. While it is the most ratiﬁ ed cybercrime treaty in existence, a num-
ber of major countries have declined to give their support. Russia, for 
instance, although a member of the Council of Europe, asserts that the treaty 
is a threat to national sovereignty. Other countries, including India and Bra-
zil, have also rejected the treaty since they did not participate in its original 

Securing Cyberspace 
117
drafting, and they view it as Eurocentric. In addition, several governments 
have expressed the view that they would prefer to see the creation of a UN-
based treaty. Despite these failings, the Budapest Convention has served as 
the underpinning of a number of other legal instruments and standards 
related to cybercrime, including the 2005  Tunis Agenda for the Information 
Society . Article 40 of that agenda calls on governments to develop cybercrime 
legislation that takes into account existing regulatory frameworks, including 
the European Council’s  Convention on Cybercrime . The United Nations and 
Interpol have also encouraged governments to model national legislation on 
articles contained in the Budapest Convention. As a result, the treaty serves 
as a de facto reference for cybercrime legislation worldwide, even in coun-
tries that do not choose to become state parties. 54 
 The United Nations has been active in the area of cybercrime in additional 
ways. In 2010, the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Criminal Prevention 
and Criminal Justice agreed to convene an open-ended intergovernmental 
expert group to conduct a study of the problem of cybercrime and consider 
how governments and the private sector can best respond to the threat. The 
group identiﬁ ed six serious shortcomings in global attempts to combat 
cybercrime: 55 
 • 
There is signiﬁ cant fragmentation at the international level and diversity of 
national cybercrime laws. 
 • 
Reliance on traditional means of formal international cooperation cannot 
offer a timely response to cybercrime. 
 • 
The role of evidence “location” needs to be reconceptualized, especially 
with regard to accessing extraterritorial data. 
 • 
There is insufﬁ cient harmonization of “core” cybercrime offences, investiga-
tive powers, and admissibility of electronic evidence. 
 • 
Developing countries require long-term, sustainable, and comprehensive 
technical support and assistance for investigating and combating 
cybercrime. 
 • 
Cybercrime prevention activities need to be strengthened by raising aware-
ness, public–private partnerships, and by integrating cybercrime strategies 
into broader cybersecurity policies. 
 It was suggested that one of the key options for improving effectiveness in 
this area could be the creation of a binding multilateral instrument on cyber-
crime that would draw from existing international and regional agreements 
in order to set consistent standards. However, while most countries agree 
that a comprehensive cooperative approach at the global level is needed to 
ﬁ ght cybercrime, divisions have emerged over whether a new convention is 
required, or whether existing instruments will sufﬁ ce, if strengthened. 

118 
Controlling Cyberspace
 At the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and 
Criminal Justice in 2015, representatives from a number of countries includ-
ing Russia, India, Brazil, South Africa, and Arab states argued in favor of a 
new UN convention on cybercrime that would be “truly universal.” 56 Refer-
encing the Budapest Convention, a speaker from India asked, “Can we truly 
ﬁ ght against this crime with a decade-old instrument?” 57 By contrast, repre-
sentatives from the United States, the European Union, and the Council of 
Europe argued that time would be wasted drafting a new treaty, and that the 
Budapest Convention remains the most appropriate multilateral tool to ﬁ ght 
cybercrime. This dispute, as with many other areas of Internet regulation, 
highlights the existence of a clear division on the issue of cybercrime among 
those governments that support a greater Internet governance role for the 
UN, and those who do not. This divide is reminiscent of the contentious dis-
agreements that occurred at the 2012 World Conference on International 
Telecommunications. 
 Discussion of cybersecurity, beyond cybercrime, has also been the focus of 
the UN for some time. The issue was ﬁ rst placed on the agenda in a Russian 
Federation proposal during 1998 that resulted in Resolution 53/70  Develop-
ments in the ﬁ eld of information and telecommunications in the context of interna-
tional security.  This resolution, which was adopted without a vote, stated that 
“it is necessary to prevent the misuse or exploitation of information resources 
or technologies for criminal or terrorist purposes,” 58 and called for multilat-
eral cooperation to determine and address such threats. A few years later in 
2001, Russia proposed the establishment of a Group of Governmental Experts 
(GGE) to discuss cybersecurity and identify potential areas for international 
cooperation. The ﬁ rst 15-member GGE met in 2004, but disagreements 
emerged immediately, and it was unable to publish a substantive report. 
 Later GGE meetings were more successful. The 2013 meeting, which 
included experts from all permanent members of the UN Security Council, 
agreed that international law, in particular the UN Charter, is “applicable 
and is essential to . . . promoting an open, secure, peaceful and accessible 
ICT environment.” 59 Referencing the UN Charter in discussions of cyberse-
curity is signiﬁ cant since the charter is unambiguous concerning interna-
tional conﬂ ict. Article 2(4) prohibits the threat or use of force against the 
territorial integrity of any state, except for purposes of self-defense or when 
authorized by the Security Council. The critical question then is: Does a 
cyber attack constitute a use of force? While there is no consensus on the 
issue, former legal advisor to the U.S. State Department, Harold Koh, makes 
the case that Article 2(4) can be applied to cyber attacks under certain cir-
cumstances: “Cyber activities that proximately result in death, injury, or sig-
niﬁ cant destruction would likely be viewed as a use of force.” 60 Such instances 
might include attacks that trigger a meltdown in a nuclear facility, or 

Securing Cyberspace 
119
operations that interfere with air trafﬁ c controls resulting in airplane crashes. 
This perspective is consistent with the  Tallinn Manual in asserting that when 
a cyber attack causes physical harm, principles of international law unques-
tionably apply. Countries have a right to retaliate in response to a cyber 
attack, based on the standard of self-defense. Moreover, according to this 
view, there is no legal requirement that retaliation would have to be in cyber 
form provided that  jus in bello and  jus ad bellum  rules are employed. 
 There is still no authoritative agreement concerning many of the complex 
legal issues surrounding cyber attacks, but international law does provide for 
a response to nonviolent attacks through countermeasures. In international 
law, countermeasures refer to reprisals that do not involve the use of force, 
and are considered legal under certain circumstances. The ICJ gives four 
conditions under which countermeasures can be legally employed: (1) In 
response to an international wrongful act committed by another state and 
must be directed against that state. (2) The injured state must call upon the 
wrongdoing state to discontinue its wrongful conduct. (3) Countermeasures 
must be commensurate with the injury suffered. (4) Countermeasures must 
be designed to induce the wrongdoing state to comply with its obligations 
under international law, and the measures must be reversible. 61 While no 
panacea, the use of countermeasures could be an appropriate, legally per-
missible, response to low-intensity cyber attacks, assuming of course that the 
attribution problem has been resolved. 
 Legal frameworks concerning cyber attacks and cyber warfare are clearly 
still evolving, as are the new norms that are often necessary precursors to 
more substantive agreements. Established norms represent shared expecta-
tions among a group of actors concerning appropriate behavior that encour-
age them to do what is “right.” With regard to cybersecurity, the decentralized 
nature of Internet governance unavoidably slows this process, but norm-
building has become a more urgent focus of those in the multistakeholder 
ecosystem. Although we are still in the early stages of this process, some 
progress has been made, at least in terms of nonbinding agreements. For 
instance, the 2015 UN GGE consensus report included 11 recommendations 
on principles for the responsible behavior of nation-states. 62 These comprised 
several proposals aimed at improving cooperation as well as respecting 
human rights and privacy. The report also contained a number of important 
preventative and restrictive norms: 
 • 
States should not knowingly allow their territory to be used for internation-
ally wrongful acts using ICTs. 
 • 
A state should not conduct or knowingly support ICT activity that inten-
tionally damages critical infrastructure or otherwise impairs the use and 
operation of critical infrastructure to provide services to the public. 

120 
Controlling Cyberspace
 • 
States should seek to prevent the proliferation of malicious ICT tools and 
techniques and the use of harmful hidden functions. 
 • 
States should not conduct or knowingly support activity to harm the infor-
mation systems of the authorized emergency response teams of another 
state (i.e. CERTs), or use those response teams to engage in malicious inter-
national activity. 
 During the same year, the Group of 20 (G20) afﬁ rmed the applicability of 
international law to cyberspace, and endorsed the view that all states should 
abide by norms of responsible cyber behavior. There has also been an 
increase in the number of bilateral arrangements, including an agreement 
between the United States and China that committed both to promoting 
appropriate norms of state behavior in cyberspace and establishing mecha-
nisms to ﬁ ght cybercrime, including economic espionage. While such 
arrangements are nonbinding, and commitment and compliance challenges 
clearly remain, they nevertheless symbolize building blocks on which more 
tangible agreements could be erected. Intergovernmental norm-building is 
being further supplemented by private-sector initiatives. This is occurring 
even in the realm of security, which has traditionally been the preserve of 
nation-states. Microsoft’s publication of its white paper  Cybersecurity Norms: 
Reducing Conﬂ ict in an Internet-Dependent World  is representative of a deepen-
ing commitment by those in the broader multistakeholder community to 
play a greater role in this crucial policy arena. 
 Despite improvements, progress in cybersecurity cooperation is most 
probable among like-minded countries. Reaching a broader consensus will 
be difﬁ cult since disagreements still remain over even the most fundamental 
deﬁ nitions. Wolfers reminded us decades ago that national security is an 
ambiguous and contested value, primarily normative in character. He argued 
that terms such as national interest and national security “may not mean the 
same thing to different people. They may not have any precise meaning at 
all.” 63 This remains true today, evidenced by the contentious clashes over 
national security values that we see in the cybersecurity realm. For instance, 
one country’s restrictions on expression to protect its version of national 
security are another’s violation of human rights. These issues suggest that 
while voluntary measures in international cybersecurity are gaining traction, 
and some common interests are being identiﬁ ed, it is unlikely that a legally 
binding treaty on cybersecurity will emerge anytime soon. Moreover, gov-
ernments will only abide by voluntary agreements if they perceive them to be 
consistent with their national interests, and when international cooperation 
is deemed to serve those interests better than standing alone. 
 

 CHAPTER SEVEN 
 The Power of Private 
Internet Intermediaries 
 The traditional multistakeholder model of Internet governance allows for sig-
niﬁ cant input from private intermediaries. Internet intermediaries provide the 
infrastructure, web hosting, search engines, social media, ecommerce, and con-
tent delivery that deﬁ ne how the Internet operates. As one legal scholar put it, 
“Internet intermediaries govern online life.”  1  They are the entities responsible 
for providing unprecedented opportunities to communicate and conduct busi-
ness across multiple domains. However, the centrality of these actors for 
the operation of the Internet, and the fact that most reside in the private 
sector, raises important questions concerning accountability and legiti-
macy. Whose interests do Internet intermediaries serve? How compatible are 
those interests with democratic values? What legal and ethical responsibilities 
do they have? Responses to these questions are still evolving, but it is clear that 
answers must strike a balance between the free-market principles that have 
made the Internet so successful, and regulatory frameworks that protect the 
public interest. Those interests are not trivial; they include weighty concerns 
such as individual privacy rights, freedom of expression, and access to informa-
tion. Ultimately, the obligation to protect individual rights lies with states not 
corporations, but governments are increasingly recruiting private intermediar-
ies to address unlawful activity and act as gatekeepers to block certain content. 
 Corporate Responsibility and Accountability 
 The multi-jurisdictional nature of cyberspace makes enforcing corporate 
legal responsibility problematic. It is well established in national law that 
corporations can be subjected to ﬁ nes, and corporate leaders can be 

122 
Controlling Cyberspace
imprisoned if they violate laws. However, there is much less clarity on the 
question of corporate liability in international law, and even less agreement 
on the moral and ethical obligations of private companies. Traditionally, 
international law viewed nation-states as the only entities that bore legal 
rights and duties. Corporations were regulated indirectly through domestic 
legal systems. Similarly, international treaties primarily impose obligations 
on states, not corporations. However, there are indications that this tradi-
tional legal perspective is changing. While the issue is far from settled, a 
number of legal scholars argue, particularly in relation to human rights, that 
some international legal instruments impose direct duties on corporations 
and other private actors. They point out that since corporations have acquired 
the type of power that used to be the exclusive preserve of nation-states, 
“it is only appropriate that they should shoulder the caliber of responsibili-
ties that are imposed on states by international law.”  2  Others ask: “Why 
should individuals and armed opposition groups have fundamental interna-
tional legal obligations while companies that may be much more powerful 
have practically none?”  3  
 Discussions of corporate responsibilities go beyond the legal liabilities 
that might be imposed by international law to also include questions of cor-
porate social responsibility (CSR). A somewhat nebulous concept, CSR has 
been deﬁ ned as a commitment to “behave ethically and contribute to eco-
nomic development while improving the quality of life of the workforce and 
their families as well as of the local community and society at large.”  4  Several 
decades ago, economist Milton Friedman argued that the only social respon-
sibility that companies have is to generate proﬁ ts, and for the most part social 
obligations undertaken by businesses have been entirely voluntary. This was 
also the case at the global level, where there has long been a consensus 
among international organizations that supervisory activity should be of a 
“gentle, voluntary nature only.”  5  However, pressures have increased recently 
on corporations to agree to abide by new codes of conduct that would hold 
them accountable for their actions, especially with regard to human rights. 
Two documents in particular are prominent in this respect:  Norms on the 
Responsibilities of Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises with 
Regard to Human Rights (2003) and  Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights for implementing the UN “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework (2011). 
 The ﬁ rst document was issued by the Sub-Commission on the Promotion 
and Protection of Human Rights of the UN Human Rights Commission to 
deﬁ ne acceptable corporate behavior. It was an attempt to confront the 
increased power of transnational corporations and hold them accountable 
over a range of human rights. While the norms   document recognized that 
states have primary responsibility for protecting human rights, it also notes 
that businesses have an “obligation to promote, secure the fulﬁ lment of, 
respect, ensure respect of and protect human rights.”  6  Among other rights, 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
123
the norms provided for equality of opportunity, safe and healthy work envi-
ronments, social and cultural protections, and collective bargaining, as well 
as consumer and environmental safeguards. They are noteworthy, not only 
because they outline the speciﬁ c human rights obligations of transnational 
corporations, but also because they include monitoring and veriﬁ cation 
mechanisms. Corporations would be required to conduct periodic evalua-
tions concerning the impact of their activities on human rights, and would 
be subject to recurring supervision by the United Nations. The involuntary 
nature of these provisions, however, generated considerable opposition from 
some corporate leaders at the time of their publication. The International 
Organization of Employers, along with the International Chamber of Com-
merce, issued a joint statement accusing the Sub-Commission of misusing its 
authority and misrepresenting human rights law. They also declared that the 
“UN needs to do more to support business.”  7  The publication of the norms  
 clearly did not settle the question of corporate responsibility within the 
international legal order, and as a result of strong opposition from the busi-
ness community were not formally adopted. Instead, the Human Rights 
Commission requested the appointment of a Special Representative to inves-
tigate and further clarify the responsibilities of nonstate actors with respect 
to human rights. UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon appointed Harvard 
Professor John Ruggie to the post in 2005. Six years later, after a series of 
broad-based consultations and several drafts, the  Guiding Principles on Busi-
ness and Human Rights for implementing the UN “Protect, Respect and Remedy” 
Framework was endorsed by the Human Rights Council (previously the 
Human Rights Commission) in 2011. 
 The Ruggie report was issued in phases, beginning in 2008. The ﬁ rst part 
established a framework comprised of three pillars that would inform later 
investigations. Known as the “Protect, Respect, and Remedy” framework, it 
recognized: 
 1. State duty to protect against human rights abuses by third parties, including 
business enterprises, through appropriate policies, regulation, and 
adjudication. 
 2. Corporate responsibility to respect human rights, which means that busi-
ness enterprises should act with due diligence to avoid infringing on the 
rights of others and to address adverse impacts with which they are involved. 
 3. The need for greater access by victims to effective remedy, both judicial and 
nonjudicial, when rights and obligations have been breached. 
 Ruggie’s ﬁ nal report in 2011, expanded upon and operationalized the frame-
work pillars, by illustrating how states and corporations can ensure that they 
respect human rights. The guiding principles document contains 29 speciﬁ c 
recommendations accompanied by explanatory commentary. Like the earlier 

124 
Controlling Cyberspace
framework, Ruggie begins with state obligations to protect human rights, 
emphasizing their duty to require businesses within their jurisdiction to 
respect those rights. Although states are not directly responsible for human 
rights abuses perpetrated by private actors, governments would likely violate 
international human rights law if they fail to take action to prevent and pun-
ish such abuses. Ruggie therefore recommended that governments ensure 
that laws are aligned with their human rights obligations, and that they are 
effectively enforced. He also urged governments to provide guidance to cor-
porations across a range of human rights issues including recognizing the 
challenges that may be faced by women, children, indigenous peoples, eth-
nic, religious, and linguistic minorities, migrant workers, and the disabled. 
 The guiding principles elaborated upon the meaning of corporate due 
diligence in some detail. According to Ruggie, businesses perform due dili-
gence when they assess actual and potential adverse human rights impacts 
caused by their own activities, products, or services (Principle 17), consult 
with affected stakeholders (Principle 18), take appropriate action to prevent 
and mitigate adverse human rights impacts (Principle 19), track the effective-
ness of their response (Principle 20), and report externally how they have 
addressed adverse human rights impacts (Principle 21). Ruggie describes his 
approach as “principled pragmatism,” aimed at achieving the maximum 
reduction in corporate-related human rights harm in the shortest possible 
period of time. The guiding principles were unanimously approved by the 
UN Human Rights Council in 2011, signifying progress over the norms, 
which were essentially defeated by an unwillingness to commit to a compul-
sory legal instrument. While the voluntary nature of the principles meant 
that they garnered broader support, this aspect of Ruggie’s report also drew 
the greatest level of criticism from some segments of civil society. Human 
Rights Watch, for instance, accused the Human Rights Council of squander-
ing an opportunity to take meaningful action against business-related human 
rights abuses, stating “Guidance isn’t enough—we need a mechanism to 
scrutinize how companies and governments apply these principles.”  8  
 Much of this criticism is justiﬁ ed, since transparency and accountability 
gaps remain in relation to corporate human rights responsibilities. However, 
the voluntary nature of the guiding principles does not make them meaning-
less. As Ruggie put it, their “normative contribution lies not in the creation of 
new international law obligations, but in elaborating the implications of 
existing standards and practices for States and businesses.”  9  Rather than 
incorporating levels of obligation typically contained in treaties, the princi-
ples add to a body of soft law that is helping to mold standards, expectations, 
and norms regarding acceptable corporate behavior. The broad acceptance of 
the guiding principles illustrates the dramatic changes that have taken place 
with respect to perceived CSR. Surveys conducted during 2015, for instance, 
show that 83 percent of senior executives now agree that human rights are a 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
125
matter for business as well as governments.  10  This contrasts sharply with 
previous years when there was no widely accepted recognition that compa-
nies had human rights responsibilities. 
 The guiding principles may yet prove to be a stopgap on the way to a more 
robust legal instrument. For despite earlier failures, the Human Rights Coun-
cil established an open-ended intergovernmental working group in July 
2016, mandated to develop a legally binding instrument to regulate the activ-
ities of transnational corporations in international human rights law.  11  These 
attempts to regulate CSR at the international level have put increased pres-
sure on businesses to devise their own rules of behavior. As a result, partly in 
response to increased demands for accountability, some of the world’s largest 
ICT companies agreed to abide by certain human rights standards. For 
instance, the Global Network Initiative, a broad coalition of stakeholders rep-
resenting business, civil society, and academia, includes Facebook, Google, 
Yahoo!, Microsoft, and LinkedIn in its membership. Participants in the Ini-
tiative pledge to protect the freedom of expression and privacy of ICT users, 
and they commit to developing human rights impact assessments to identify 
potential human rights problems that might arise. 
 Beneﬁ ts and Risks of Privatized Digital Rights 
 Private corporations are responsible for the greatest expansion of access to 
information in human history. They build the infrastructure we use to com-
municate, they aggregate our global knowledge, and they design and employ 
the algorithms that shape what we see. As intermediaries of expression, pri-
vate businesses have tremendous power. On the positive side, social media 
applications, such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube, have given a global 
voice to those previously unheard. The so-called Twitter revolutions that 
began in the Middle East during spring 2011 illustrated how technology 
could be used to organize citizens to pursue political transformation. By giv-
ing people a voice that is independent of government, the Internet was 
viewed as a potential catalyst for democratization and the promotion of 
human rights. At the same time, it quickly became clear that the same tech-
nology that facilitates freedom of expression and global communication can 
also provide governments with an effective means to surveil, repress, and 
subjugate their peoples. This enduring struggle between human rights and 
government control creates a dilemma for private intermediaries. On the one 
hand, they are expected to fulﬁ ll their obligations with respect to global 
human rights standards. On the other, they frequently face governments 
who expect them to violate those standards. 
 Freedom of expression is one of the fundamental human rights that pri-
vate Internet intermediaries have the power to facilitate, which includes 
political expression. By reducing temporal and spatial barriers to 

126 
Controlling Cyberspace
mobilization, the Internet lowers the transaction costs of political participa-
tion, providing a space where small contributions by many people can be 
aggregated for greater political effect.  12  Social media tools also allow indi-
viduals to compile and share their own content, which can help shape politi-
cal discourse and amplify activism. The Internet has the potential to promote 
political change as a result of what has been called the “dictator’s dilemma.”  13  
A policy choice that autocrats are forced to make between lost economic 
opportunities related to restricting the Internet and the potential instability 
that could be caused by allowing it to continue to grow unfettered. As new 
media spreads, dictators ﬁ nd themselves increasingly scrutinized by their 
own populations, yet their traditional responses, censoring information and 
silencing their critics, are less effective than they once were. Social media can 
create an oppositional information cascade that spurs collective action. Pol-
lock offers an example of such a cascade from events in Tunisia.  14  For several 
months in 2008, intermittent demonstrations and labor strikes occurred 
near the city of Gafsa, which were met with a harsh government crackdown. 
Security forces opened ﬁ re on the demonstrators, killing 1 and injuring 26. 
Hundreds of arrests were made, and Internet ﬁ ltering and blocking was used 
extensively to control information. Under those circumstances only a few 
people learned about the incident; there were fewer than 28,000 Tunisians 
on Facebook at that time. Two years later, the Tunisian government attempted 
the same approach when the self-immolation of Mohammed Bouazizi trig-
gered the Arab Spring, but this time it could not control the ﬂ ow of informa-
tion. By then almost 2 million Tunisians were using Facebook. The spread of 
social media had not only informed but also politicized large segments of the 
population. 
 The spread of social media led some to predict that this technology would 
usher in a new era of liberation, where dictators would fall and human rights 
would be strengthened. However, it did not take long for this cyber-utopian 
view to be undermined by real-world examples of governments asserting 
their authority in cyberspace. China introduced one of the earliest and most 
extensive ﬁ ltering and censorship systems. Its “Great Firewall” has been 
blocking Internet content since the late 1990s, but China is not alone in this 
regard. Autocratic governments have become increasingly adept at using new 
media tools to prevent political change. Evengy Morozov, a leading critic of 
optimistic digital determinism, warns that we should not underestimate the 
power of dictators to adapt.  15  Such governments have shown themselves to 
be more than willing to use the Internet to reinforce their trilogy of 
authoritarianism—censorship, propaganda, and surveillance. Governments 
have also increasingly used private intermediaries to support this trilogy. 
One of the earliest and well-documented examples of this involved Yahoo!. 
In 2004, the company’s Hong Kong subsidiary received a request from the 
Chinese State Security Bureau for identifying information about journalist 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
127
Shi Tao. When Yahoo! complied, Shi Tao was arrested and imprisoned. 
Yahoo! defended its actions by arguing that it had to comply with local laws. 
However, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson rebuked 
the company for failing to assume their “responsibilities for the promotion 
and protection of international human rights standards wherever they oper-
ate.”  16  The Yahoo! case is more than a decade old, but it is far from the only 
example of technology companies raising human rights concerns. The non-
proﬁ t organization Business and Human Rights Resource Centre has received 
more than 200 complaints from civil society concerning ICT companies 
and human rights violations. These include accusations that corporations 
were providing surveillance technology to oppressive regimes and facilitat-
ing censorship.  17  Similarly, a 2016 UN Human Rights Council Report noted 
that “data transmitted or stored on private networks and platforms are 
increasingly subject to surveillance and other forms of interference, whether 
by the State or private actors.”  18  
 Increased surveillance is aided by new, more sophisticated ﬁ ltering tech-
niques that allow for third-party examination of information as it travels over 
networks. Deep-packet inspection (DPI) is a content review process that 
involves inserting software into the ﬂ ow of online data to examine the sub-
stance of data packets, not just packet headers. This is equivalent to looking 
inside a sealed envelope that has been mailed, not just at the address. ISPs 
use this technique for legitimate system management purposes, for instance, 
to identify viruses or illegal content, but it is also a powerful tool being uti-
lized by authoritarian regimes for purposes of surveillance. Iran employed 
this technique following the unrest surrounding the 2009 election, as did 
the Tunisian government at the start of the Arab Spring, and many others 
have followed their example. DPI technology is popular among such regimes 
because it can efﬁ ciently block, reroute, slow, prioritize, and modify content 
according to predetermined criteria. For instance, DPI can be used to iden-
tify people who are perceived to be a threat to the government, or modify 
information in a way that presents regime activities in a positive light. The 
fact that DPI technology is predominately produced by American and Euro-
pean companies raises questions concerning corporate moral and legal 
responsibilities in this area. As one member of the European Parliament said, 
“Western technology could immediately be traced back to individuals who 
had been dragged from their homes and put into prison.”  19  As a result, tech-
nology companies who produce DPI and other surveillance equipment face 
increased scrutiny, regulation, and legal challenges. In 2011, the European 
Parliament banned the selling of spyware to repressive regimes, and interna-
tional agreements such as the Wassenaar Arrangement limit the interna-
tional transfer of network communications surveillance systems and 
equipment.  20  However, the dual-use nature of the technology complicates the 
enforcement of such rules. 

128 
Controlling Cyberspace
 It is not only authoritarian regimes that make use of private intermediar-
ies to pursue their information control policies. The NSA spying scandal 
uncovered the extent to which governments, even in democracies, use Inter-
net companies such as Facebook and Google to obtain information about 
their users. Although the NSA Prism program was ultimately deemed illegal, 
the most prominent Internet companies continue to be ﬂ ooded with govern-
ment requests for information on a daily basis. Facebook reports, for instance, 
that between January and June 2016, it received almost 60,000 information 
requests worldwide from governments related to more than 86,000 user 
accounts. Similarly, during the second half of 2015, user data requests to 
Google reached more than 40,000 for the ﬁ rst time. The vast majority of 
these cases concerned criminal investigations, but both Facebook and Google 
also receive thousands of requests each year from governments to remove 
content. In 2015, Google received 8,399 such requests that targeted YouTube 
and blog content, as well as requests for URL delisting. However, it should be 
emphasized that Google frequently refuses to comply with such demands. In 
2015, the company fully complied with only 18 government content removal 
requests, although it partially complied with dozens of others.  21  Google 
reports that defamation is the most frequently cited reason given by govern-
ments for content removal in about one-third of the cases. The company 
states that it frequently rejects such requests since it is aware that some gov-
ernments attempt to use content removal requests to suppress political con-
tent and criticism. 
 The data from Google illustrate that Internet companies cannot be 
assumed to be pawns of government; in many instances, they exercise inde-
pendent control over information. The dispute between Apple and the Fed-
eral Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 2016 shows that government and private 
intermediaries can clash over values as well as objectives. Following the San 
Bernardino terrorist attack at the end of 2015, FBI sought the help of Apple 
engineers to access the iPhone of one of the perpetrators. Apple maintained 
that it was not technically possible to unlock passcodes or extract data with-
out writing new software that would bypass existing security features, and it 
refused to do so. In an open letter to its customers, Apple CEO Tim Cooke 
explained, “The government suggests this tool could only be used once, on 
one phone. But that’s simply not true. Once created, the technique could be 
used over and over again, on any number of devices. In the physical world, it 
would be the equivalent of a master key, capable of opening hundreds of mil-
lions of locks—from restaurants and banks to stores and homes. No reason-
able person would ﬁ nd that acceptable.”  22  He also maintained that if Apple 
complied with the order it would set a dangerous precedent that would ulti-
mately make its customers less safe. 
 The dispute was resolved only when FBI found an unnamed third party 
who could unlock the phone, and the government withdrew its court order. 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
129
However, it is unlikely that the resolution of the Apple–FBI dispute will 
become a model for future cases. Although FBI gave no details concerning 
the third party, it has been reported that the Bureau paid more than $1 mil-
lion to gain access to the phone, and that the hack would probably have been 
unsuccessful on a newer model iPhone.  23  So, while Apple prevailed in this 
one instance, further clashes between law enforcement and technology com-
panies are likely. In this struggle, local law enforcement ofﬁ cials are increas-
ingly turning to the federal government for assistance. A report published by 
the Manhattan District Attorney’s Ofﬁ ce in December 2016, titled  Smart Phone 
Encryption and Public Safety, described default devise encryption as a “severe 
threat to our safety” and called for “federal legislation that would compel soft-
ware and hardware companies that design or build mobile devices or operat-
ing systems to make such devices amenable to appropriate searches.”  24  The 
District Attorney’s Ofﬁ ce revealed that it had been “locked out” of approxi-
mately 34 percent of all Apple devices recovered since October 2014 when 
Apple changed operating systems, but that number jumped to 42 percent of 
those recovered in the previous three months. The report further warned that 
this problem will only worsen as older devices become obsolete and criminals 
switch to newer models with stronger levels of encryption. 
 Apple’s deﬁ ance of the FBI court order was widely applauded by other 
technology companies and privacy activists. However, privacy advocates in 
general have been uncomfortable with the power that Apple and other ICT 
companies wield. Cofounder of the nonproﬁ t organization Global Voices, 
Rebecca McKinnon, for instance, equates Apple with “Big Brother,” arguing 
that the company “shows troubling disregard for our political rights as citi-
zens.”  25  Clearly, Internet companies hold vast amounts of information on 
most of us, which has obvious and signiﬁ cant privacy implications. As we 
click around the Internet our choices are meticulously tracked, and detailed 
dossiers on our interests are compiled. Most are unaware that this is occur-
ring, and we typically have not given explicit consent. As Tim Wu wryly 
points out, by 2010, “tracking technologies evolved to a point that would 
have made a Soviet-era spy blush.” He went on to say that these practices are 
“a more thoroughly invasive effort than NSA data collection ever disclosed.”  26  
Our information is predominantly being tracked and traded for the purpose 
of customized advertising. Personalized marketing strategies offer some ben-
eﬁ ts to consumers. Such ads are designed to provide relevant product infor-
mation that better matches consumer interests, presumably reducing the 
time required to ﬁ nd the right product. However, taking advantage of this 
convenience requires signiﬁ cant privacy trade-offs. Our online searches and 
the data they generate represent the ultimate prize for advertisers.  27   We are 
no longer only consumers, we have become the product, as we willingly, or 
at least unwittingly, share reams of personal information online. As Google 
CEO disconcertingly described it in 2010, “With your permission, you give 

130 
Controlling Cyberspace
us more information about you, about your friends, and we can improve the 
quality of our searches. We don’t need you to type at all. We know where you 
are. We know where you’ve been. We can more or less know what you’re 
thinking about.”  28  Users elect to reveal even more personal information on 
Facebook. By creating a proﬁ le and liking posts and products, we construct a 
well-deﬁ ned representation of who we are. In return for free social media 
services, we have handed over “a treasure trove of detailed demographic 
data.”  29  This extraordinary level of privatized surveillance is accepted in part 
because it is viewed as less threatening to our civil liberties than government 
surveillance, but also because most are not fully aware that it is occurring. 
 With Internet companies holding so much information on users, and only 
indirect legal obligations to protect individual rights, they can set the rules 
for how data are used. Corporate Terms of Service (ToS) agreements speciﬁ -
cally outline the degree of control that social media companies have over 
user information, and research indicates that this is considerable. A 2016 
analysis of the ToS agreements of Google, Facebook, Yahoo, Twitter, Ama-
zon, and YouTube revealed the following: All gave themselves the right to 
access user data, including private chats and e-mails, modify user data with-
out notice, share information with law enforcement, unilaterally change the 
terms of the agreement, and delete legal material that violates their deﬁ nition 
of community standards. In addition, all but Amazon have the right to share 
user information with advertisers without giving users the ability to opt out. 
It is worth noting that these are legal agreements, which courts generally do 
not require users to actually read for them to be binding. Companies are 
obligated only to provide users with a reasonable opportunity to read the 
agreements. It is widely recognized, however, that the vast majority of people 
have no idea what they are approving when they “agree” to service terms. 
This point was empirically conﬁ rmed by another research analysis con-
ducted in 2016. In this study, researchers set up a fake social media site 
called NameDrop, presented as a competitor to LinkedIn. The privacy agree-
ment of NameDrop was deliberately set at the same length as LinkedIn’s pol-
icy. They discovered that 74 percent opted to skip reading the agreements 
altogether. Those who did read the privacy policies spent approximately one 
minute on each, even though at average reading speeds this should have 
taken around 45 minutes for both. The researchers also surreptitiously 
included a “gotcha” clause, which required users to agree to “immediately 
assign their ﬁ rst born child to NameDrop, Inc,”  30  which was missed by 
98 percent of participants. While amusing, the researchers were making a 
more serious point, namely, the current “notice and choice” privacy frame-
work is deeply ﬂ awed. It leaves “digital citizens with nothing more than an 
empty promise of protection”  31  and represents a ﬂ agrant regulatory failure. 
 The power of social media companies to control personal information has 
raised privacy concerns in many countries and has elicited a variety of 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
131
legislative responses around the world. While most people value online pri-
vacy, the nature of legislation to protect privacy reﬂ ects societal values and 
historical experiences. For instance, it has been argued that it is impossible 
to understand European privacy concerns without understanding how Nazis 
used centralized collections of personally identiﬁ able information to appre-
hend victims during the Holocaust.  32  Today, privacy rights in Europe are 
more stringently protected by statute than they are in the United States. The 
seminal document governing privacy of data in the EU is a 1995 European 
Parliament and Council Directive (95/46/EC), which stipulates unequivo-
cally that EU residents have a right to information privacy. Article 25 of the 
directive also requires that nonmember countries must “ensure an adequate 
level of protection” in order to receive data that originates in the EU.  33  By 
contrast, in the United States there is no single regulatory authority dedi-
cated to overseeing data protection, no general application of data privacy 
laws, and no restrictions on cross-border data transfers.  34  The few privacy 
laws that exist apply to speciﬁ c types of data, such as the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), which outlines allowable disclo-
sures of health information. Nevertheless, while social media companies face 
weak privacy regulations in the United States, they are subject to EU statutes 
if they operate in any member country, and European privacy laws have 
become increasingly rigorous. 
 In order to address dramatic increases in data collection, and to update pri-
vacy rights, the EU adopted sweeping new privacy legislation to take effect in 
2018. Four years in the making, and at over 200 pages, the General Data Pro-
tection Regulation (GDPR) replaces and strengthens user privacy provisions 
contained in the 1995 Directive. The legislation is intended to establish one set 
of well-deﬁ ned rules across all member countries in order to provide greater 
consistency and reduce business costs. The regulation goes signiﬁ cantly 
beyond prior rules in outlining both user privacy rights and corporate respon-
sibilities. It makes clear that personal data not only includes obvious identiﬁ ers 
such as names, addresses, and social security numbers, it also includes online 
and device identiﬁ ers such as IP addresses, cookie strings, and location data. In 
addition, GDPR introduces a new category of sensitive personal data covering 
biometric information, such as gene sequences, facial recognition, and retina 
scans, all of which are now protected. The user consent requirement has also 
been signiﬁ cantly strengthened. Consent must be freely given, informed, and 
unambiguous: “silence, pre-ticked boxes or inactivity should not therefore con-
stitute consent.”  35  Individuals also have the right to withdraw consent. More-
over, if a data breach occurs that is likely to pose a risk to individual rights or 
freedoms, it must be reported to the relevant authorities within 72 hours of 
discovery. Unlike the Directive, the GDPR includes substantial mandatory 
penalties for companies that violate its provisions. Corporations can be ﬁ ned 
up to 4 percent of their global turnover, or €20 million, whichever is greater. 

132 
Controlling Cyberspace
 One of the most signiﬁ cant departures from the 1995 Directive relates to 
the right to be forgotten, otherwise known as the right to erasure. Under 
Article 17 of the GDPR, search engines are obliged to erase personal data 
under certain speciﬁ c circumstances, such as when an individual withdraws 
consent and there are no legal grounds for processing the information. This 
provision is a codiﬁ cation of a right established by the judgment in  Google v. 
Spain (2014). The case was brought by Mario Costeja González, a Spanish 
citizen who sought to have information deleted about the repossession of his 
home, which occurred in 1998. The European Court of Justice ruled that 
González, and other EU citizens, have a right to request the removal of per-
sonal information from Google searches, and that the company has an obli-
gation to delete data that are “inadequate, irrelevant or no longer relevant.”  36  
This ruling remains controversial since the right to erasure conﬂ icts with 
other rights, such as the right to know and press freedom. It also alters the 
historical record. Although the GDPR attempts to limit the impact of the 
right to erasure with a couple of important caveats; it does not apply if 
the processing of the information is necessary for exercising the right of free-
dom of expression, or if it is counter to the public interest, these stipulations 
lack precision and are clearly open to interpretation. 
 In practice then, demands for the right to erasure are left to Google and 
other search engines to adjudicate. This is noteworthy since it means that 
Google, as a private for-proﬁ t corporation, is now “operating much like a 
government agency with numerous responsibilities, including quasi-
lawmaking, quasi-adjudicative, and quasi-enforcement powers.”  37  Search 
engines have acquired new legal responsibilities and can no longer claim to 
be neutral intermediary platforms. Moreover, the magnitude of right to era-
sure claims that are being decided is sizeable. During the ﬁ rst year following 
the European Court of Justice’s decision in the González case, Google 
received 253,617 requests to remove 920,258 links, and approved just over 
40 percent of those requests. By approving less than half of the requests, it 
appears that Google is taking a conservative approach, tilting in favor of free-
dom of information. However, there are valid concerns that once the GDPR is 
fully operational, incentives to approve right to erasure requests will increase. 
The law places the burden on search engines to remove irrelevant informa-
tion quickly or face the potential of substantial ﬁ nes. The GDPR could there-
fore result in more extensive private censorship. 
 Copyright: The Clash of Entertainment and Technology Giants 
 One of the most contentious and polarizing issues in Internet governance is 
intellectual property protection, especially copyright regulations. New tech-
nology makes it easy to duplicate and disseminate copyrighted material. Of 
course, this is not new, and complaints about copyright violations were made 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
133
in reference to photocopiers, audio and video cassettes, compact discs, and 
even player pianos. An invention that prompted John Philips Sousa to com-
plain that “Because of the laxity of your laws, and because of the perseverance 
of your music pirates, my royalties have gone a-glimmering.”  38  Copyright laws 
were traditionally applied to tangible, physical objects, and protection they 
offered covered a range of original literary, dramatic, artistic, musical, and 
architectural works. In the past it was relatively straightforward to determine 
which items deserved copyright protection, and whether or not an illegal copy 
had been made. The Internet, however, brought new challenges with respect to 
intellectual property protection. Although the same protections for creative 
authorship exist as in the past, both the scale of information dissemination on 
the Internet and its multijurisdictional spread complicates detection of copy-
right violations and enforcement of those laws. In addition, the question of 
what constitutes a copyright violation is not clearly understood. Some Internet 
users are unaware that in most cases creative works are not in the public 
domain unless the owner explicitly places them there, and the copying of pro-
tected materials continues to occur on a daily basis. Intellectual property issues 
also raise difﬁ cult questions concerning the balance of rights and responsibili-
ties among stakeholders. Understandably, copyright owners seek broad protec-
tions for their work, but how far should those extend, and who should be 
responsible for copyright enforcement? There are legitimate fears that overly 
enthusiastic Internet intermediaries might facilitate the suppression of pro-
tected speech. As Kreimer notes, “Putting the censorship decision in the hands 
of the intermediary allows commercially powerful blocs of customers a poten-
tial veto on the speech of others.”  39  This arrangement not only heightens due 
process concerns with respect to users, it also raises complex questions regard-
ing intermediary legal liabilities. 
 The Internet activity that most blatantly violates copyrights laws involves 
peer-to-peer (P2P) ﬁ le sharing of music, movies, and software, which has 
generated a signiﬁ cant number of high-proﬁ le law suits. One of the earliest 
cases involved Napster, an online P2P platform for sharing music ﬁ les cre-
ated by college student, Shawn Fanning. Launched in 1999, Napster allowed 
users to swap music ﬁ les without charge, and it became widely popular 
almost overnight. Within one year it had 20 million members, and millions 
more at its peak.  40  The popularity of Napster, and the fact that users were not 
paying royalties, brought it to the attention of the Recording Industry Asso-
ciation of American (RIAA) as well as some high-proﬁ le recording artists. In 
December 1999, RIAA began what would be a series of highly publicized 
battles between the recording industry and the purveyors of P2P technology 
when it sued Napster in federal court. During the trial, Napster lawyers 
claimed that the company could not be held liable for copyright infringe-
ment since it did not make or distribute copies, it simply facilitated ﬁ le shar-
ing among users. The court ultimately sided with the recording industry, 

134 
Controlling Cyberspace
however, ruling that Napster was legally liable since it “materially contrib-
uted” to wholesale copyright infringement. The problem for Napster was that 
it retained the right and ability to supervise the software, which made it 
responsible for the copyright violations of its users. Despite the loss, P2P ﬁ le 
sharing did not end. Napster simply paved the way for the development of 
new P2P software, which aimed to evade liability by removing centralized 
control. File sharing services, such as Kazaa, Grokster, and Limewire, quickly 
emerged to ﬁ ll the void left by Napster, but they too ultimately had the same 
ending at the hands of the movie and recording industries. After protracted 
legal battles over several years, the courts ruled that even though these ser-
vices did not have direct control over shared ﬁ les, they were nevertheless 
liable since they induced copyright violations and failed to install ﬁ lters that 
could reduce infringement. 
 While pursuing legal action against ﬁ le-sharing companies, RIAA also 
sought to sue individual users who violated copyright laws, but before it 
could do so it needed a way to locate alleged infringers from their IP 
addresses. Recording industry lawyers turned to a provision in the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) (1998) that allows copyright holders to 
subpoena ISPs to reveal user information. This involves a few administrative 
steps, and it does not require the approval of a judge. Once user details were 
obtained, the recording and movie industries brought lawsuits against 
alleged violators at unprecedented levels. Although most cases settled out of 
court, the few who challenged the suits generally did not fare well. Two cases 
were especially well publicized and served as a warning to others. The ﬁ rst 
involved a single mother of four, Jamie Thomas-Rassett from Minnesota, who 
was sued for sharing 24 songs via Kazaa. She was held legally liable for statu-
tory damages of $220,000. In the second case against college student Joel 
Tanenbaum, a jury found that he was liable for $675,000. In all, RIAA ﬁ led, 
settled, or threatened legal actions against more than 30,000 individuals over 
a ﬁ ve-year period.  41  
 Although the approach used by the recording and movie industries 
appeared successful in targeting copyright violators, there were downsides 
too. Litigation caused some reputational damage to these industries, and it 
was expensive. It has been reported that over a three-year period, RIAA spent 
over $64 million on its lawsuit campaign, but brought in only about $1.4 mil-
lion in settlement money.  42  Moreover, despite this effort, the problem of ille-
gal ﬁ le sharing did not disappear; the mass litigation strategy largely failed. 
As a result, in December 2008, RIAA announced that it would end its litiga-
tion campaign against individuals, and instead urge ISPs to take a more active 
role in mitigating copyright violations. Pressuring ISPs to police their users 
was again justiﬁ ed by the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Section 512 (c) 
permits copyright holders to issue takedown requests to ISPs to remove 
copyrighted content. Provided that the ISP notiﬁ es the violator and removes 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
135
the content expeditiously, the ISP will not be held liable for the infringement. 
Such notice-and-take-down procedures have been available for a number of 
years, but they were augmented in 2011 by a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) between major players in the entertainment industry and some of the 
world’s largest ISPs. The agreement, which included RIAA, the Motion Pic-
ture Association of America (MPAA), AT&T, Verizon, Comcast, and Time 
Warner Cable, established the Copyright Alert System (CAS). Also known as 
“six strikes,” CAS initiated a graduated response to copyright infringement. 
Under the terms of the program, ISPs agreed to send warnings to alleged 
copyright infringers. These would initially be educational in tenor, but if 
users failed to rectify the violation, more severe mitigation measures could be 
introduced, such as slowing transmission speeds, or redirecting the sub-
scriber to an information page until he or she contacted the ISP. The agree-
ment included wording that highlighted the legal obligations of ISPs under 
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, stating that ISPs must have a service 
termination policy in place, and presumably be prepared to use it, or they 
would risk losing their liability protections under the Act. 
 The entertainment industry also turned to Congress for stronger legal pro-
tections against intellectual property theft, especially targeting foreign web-
sites. Content providers made the argument that their industries were 
suffering huge economic losses as a result of copyright infringement by those 
who were beyond the jurisdiction of U.S. courts. Congress responded by 
introducing two bills: the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the PROTECT 
IP Act (PIPA). Both bills acknowledged that while U.S. law could not be 
directed against foreign websites, third-party services in the United States 
with connections to copyright infringing websites could be held liable. The 
objective was to isolate “rogue” websites from U.S.-based payment services, 
such as Visa and PayPal, and reduce their visibility by requiring search 
engines to delete links to those sites. Proponents of the legislation expected 
easy passage since it was supported by the largest companies in the enter-
tainment business, including Disney, ESPN, and all the major U.S. television 
networks. These companies spend substantial amounts of money lobbying 
Congress and contributing to political campaigns each year, and they antici-
pated a return on that investment. As former Senator and President of MPAA 
Chris Dodd, warned in a television interview “the industry is watching very 
carefully who’s going to stand up for them. . . . Don’t ask me to write a check 
for you when you think your job is at risk and then don’t pay any attention to 
me when my job is at stake.”  43  
 Opposition to the proposed legislation, however, was swift and signiﬁ -
cant. Internet companies immediately protested, claiming that provisions 
would allow for the removal of enormous amounts of non-infringing content 
from the Internet, since the bills targeted entire websites for removal not just 
speciﬁ c content. They were also worried about facing new legal liabilities. 

136 
Controlling Cyberspace
Others warned, somewhat dramatically, that the bills could “break the Inter-
net” by taking aim at its core technical infrastructure, threatening the very 
principle of interconnectivity.  44  Both bills also included provisions that 
would allow the removal or replacement of entries in the domain name sys-
tem (DNS), undermining the principle of DNS universality. Internet compa-
nies and rights activists quickly mobilized public opinion to block the 
legislation, culminating in an unprecedented level of online protests that 
proved pivotal. In addition to a Wikipedia blackout, Google recorded over 
4.5 million protest signatures, and the nonproﬁ t Electronic Frontier Founda-
tion (EFF) reported that more than one million e-mail messages were sent to 
Congress through its website. Within hours of the protests, dozens of legisla-
tors in Congress withdrew their support and the two bills were subsequently 
shelved. Ultimately, SOPA and PIPA pitted the entertainment industry 
against the technology industry, and the latter prevailed. The magnitude of 
the defeat spurred others to adopt similar tactics. Activists in Europe held 
widespread demonstrations against a multilateral treaty known as the Anti-
Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA), designed to address intellectual 
property enforcement. The protests put pressure on the European Parliament 
to reject the treaty, and ACTA was overwhelmingly defeated in a parliamen-
tary vote on July 4, 2012. 
 Despite some early successes, it is clear that content providers increas-
ingly face pushback from a technology sector that has become more politi-
cally active, and which has the support of a vocal public. As a result, legal 
strategies to address copyright infringement, whether directed against indi-
viduals, ISPs, or foreign websites have not produced the desired results, and 
in some cases have brought unintended negative consequences. Even the vol-
untary CAS ended abruptly in 2017, after only four years in existence. A 
statement issued by its members on January 27 asserted that the program 
had “succeeded in educating many people about the availability of legal con-
tent” and that despite its demise “the parties remain committed to voluntary 
and cooperative efforts to address these issues.”  45  However, from the perspec-
tive of the entertainment industry, it is obvious that CAS did not go far 
enough to curtail copyright violations. Steven Fabrizio, Global General 
Counsel at the MPAA, acknowledged the program’s high failure rate, noting 
that an estimated 981 million movies and TV shows were illegally down-
loaded using P2P in the United States in 2016 alone. He apparently placed 
much of the blame on service providers, stating that chronic offenders “must 
be addressed by ISPs under their ‘repeat infringer’ policies as provided in the 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act.”  46  
 The termination of CAS was welcomed by digital rights groups concerned 
about its lack of transparency and insufﬁ cient protections for subscribers. 
CAS raised serious due process concerns since mitigation measures designed 
to punish copyright violators could be imposed on the basis of the copyright 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
137
holder’s accusation alone, without judicial oversight. EFF describes such 
agreements among private companies as “Shadow Regulation,” arguing that 
while they are not inherently ﬂ awed, since they may be a substitute for more 
stringent laws, their implementation can be troublesome. “The crux of the 
problem is that they can quietly reshape our Internet without our knowledge 
or input. We weren’t consulted during their development, don’t know how 
they are being applied, and typically have little or no means of recourse when 
they are used to shut down our speech online.”  47  Nevertheless, the demise of 
CAS and the failure of SOPA, PIPA, and ACTA, means that the problem of 
copyright infringement remains unresolved. These cases illustrate that 
enforcement of intellectual property rights across the Internet is exceedingly 
difﬁ cult, made more challenging by the presence of competing interests 
among the major players. While the issue of copyright infringement is widely 
recognized as a signiﬁ cant problem, there is little agreement concerning its 
solution. Music and movie content providers seek stricter laws and punish-
ments to protect jobs and revenues, while Internet intermediaries maintain 
that overly punitive approaches to copyright enforcement threaten a free and 
open Internet as well as civil liberties. There appears to be little middle 
ground. 
 Net Neutrality: The Clash of Internet Intermediaries 
 Disputes over copyright pit the entertainment industry against Internet 
intermediaries, but a similarly divisive problem has triggered discord among 
the Internet intermediaries themselves. That issue is net neutrality. Although 
the concept lacks a precise deﬁ nition, net neutrality is essentially a nondis-
crimination principle, which afﬁ rms that all Internet content must be treated 
equally. The term was coined by Tim Wu in 2002, who deﬁ ned it as an Inter-
net that does not favor one application over others.  48  According to this prin-
ciple, there should be no separate fast lanes, no selective blocking of Internet 
access, and no prioritizing of content. On one side of the net neutrality debate 
are the Internet intermediaries that provide network infrastructure, such as 
cable and telephone companies, as well as ISPs. On the other are the search 
engines that index, organize, and distribute information, as well as social 
media platforms that facilitate group communication. While all of these enti-
ties are classiﬁ ed as Internet intermediaries, they often have conﬂ icting 
interests and pursue competing objectives. Similar to the disputes over copy-
right legislation, the clash between these technology giants is playing out in 
the political sphere as well as in the broader Internet governance ecosystem. 
 The net neutrality question is closely related to the end-to-end principle, a 
fundamental design feature of the Internet. This principle allows data pack-
ets to traverse the Internet without discrimination, following the best avail-
able path. A characteristic of the end-to-end principle is that terminals 

138 
Controlling Cyberspace
(end points) are “smart” while the network is “dumb.” That is, applications 
and devices are located at the edges of the network, and the network simply 
transports data in a functionally neutral manner. “All of the intelligence and 
control is held by producers and users, not the networks that connect them.”  49  
Proponents of net neutrality credit the end-to-end architectural design for 
the Internet’s growth and tremendous success. As inventor of the World 
Wide Web, Tim Berners Lee, declared, “It’s all predicated on a neutral net-
work.”  50  However, end-to-end architecture can create data management 
problems if the network becomes congested, which is increasingly the case. 
As the Internet has grown and the type of applications that it carries have 
become more bandwidth intensive, the likelihood of packet loss or delay 
increases. There are two possible solutions to this problem, invest in addi-
tional infrastructure to increase capacity, or “monetize the congestion by 
selling priority access.”  51  The dispute over these alternatives lies at the heart 
of the net neutrality debate. Network operators claim that prioritizing certain 
types of trafﬁ c is a necessary management practice to ensure the efﬁ cient 
operation of their networks, while advocates of net neutrality claim that reg-
ulation is needed to limit the ability of network operators to engage in con-
tent prioritization and discrimination. 
 Interest in protecting the neutrality of the Internet emerged during the 
late 1990s as a result of deregulation of the telecommunications industry and 
a series of subsequent mergers between telephone and cable companies. 
Some feared that these intermediaries would use their newly enhanced mar-
ket power to undermine established principles of equal Internet access, spe-
ciﬁ cally, that cable and telephone companies would have a ﬁ nancial incentive 
to favor their proprietary services and products over others, blocking com-
peting applications, and directing consumers to websites of their choice. For 
instance, cable companies that also produce content, such as Time Warner, 
could prioritize their movies and TV shows over others and steer consumers 
in that direction. Fearing that cable companies would assume the role of 
content gatekeepers, a collection of technology and media ﬁ rms, including 
Amazon, Yahoo!, Microsoft, Apple, and Disney, formed the Coalition for 
Broadband Users and Innovators (CBUI) in 2002 to lobby in favor of net neu-
trality. They argued that even before the Internet existed, policy makers rec-
ognized that “network operators cannot infringe or encumber the 
relationships among their customers or between their customers and desti-
nations on the network,” and they urged FCC to “bring this fundamental rule 
forward, into the broadband era.”  52  Faced with mounting political pressure, 
FCC issued a policy statement in 2005 outlining four principles that it 
believed would ensure open and affordable network access for users. FCC 
stated that consumers are entitled to (1) access the lawful Internet content of 
their choice; (2) run applications and use services of their choice; (3) connect 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
139
their choice of legal devices that do not harm the network; and (4) competi-
tion among network and content providers. 
 The ﬁ rst test of these principles came in 2008. After receiving complaints 
that cable company Comcast was slowing some users’ Internet access, FCC 
issued an order demanding that the practice be stopped since it violated fed-
eral policy. Comcast complied with the order and admitted that it did slow 
Internet access for peer-to-peer networking as a way to deal with bandwidth 
congestion, but appealed the decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 
District of Columbia. The court ruled in favor of Comcast ﬁ nding that FCC 
had no authority to regulate the management practices of ISPs. As a result of 
this decision, FCC issued a more speciﬁ c set of rules called the Open Inter-
net Order that banned the blocking and discrimination of Internet content. 
However, this order was challenged by Verizon and the District of Columbia 
Circuit Court struck down FCC’s net neutrality rules in 2014. Once again, 
the court cited FCC’s lack of authority for the ruling. “Given that the Com-
mission has chosen to classify broadband providers in a manner that exempts 
them from treatment as common carriers, the Communications Act expressly 
prohibits the Commission from nonetheless regulating them as such.”  53  
 Although the D.C. Circuit Court ruled against FCC, the judgment sug-
gested a new path for the Commission to pursue in order to ensure net neutral-
ity, namely reclassify Internet broadband as a public utility, an area over which 
FCC does have clear authority. After months of intense lobbying and conten-
tious political debate, during which time FCC received more than four million 
comments, the Commission voted 3–2 in favor of classifying Internet service 
as a public utility on February 26, 2015. In order to do so, FCC applied Title II 
of the 1934 Communications Act to broadband. The Commission followed up 
its landmark vote with the publication of a 400-page document justifying the 
reclassiﬁ cation and outlining speciﬁ c practices that would no longer be per-
mitted. FCC described its new rules as “Title II tailored for the 21st century, 
and consistent with the ‘light-touch’ regulatory framework that has facilitated 
the tremendous investment and innovation on the Internet.”  54  The Commis-
sion established three “bright line rules” to be applied to providers: 
 • 
No Blocking : Broadband providers may not block access to legal content, 
applications, services, or non-harmful devices. 
 • 
No Throttling : Broadband providers may not impair or degrade lawful Inter-
net trafﬁ c on the basis of content, applications, services, or non-harmful 
devices. 
 • 
No Paid Prioritization : Broadband providers may not favor some lawful Inter-
net trafﬁ c over other lawful trafﬁ c in exchange for consideration of any 
kind—in other words, no fast lanes. This rule also bans ISPs from prioritiz-
ing content and services of their afﬁ liates. 

140 
Controlling Cyberspace
 The 2015 FCC ruling was a clear victory for supporters of net neutrality. 
Moreover, FCC’s authority to reclassify and regulate Internet services was 
upheld by the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals the following year. Nevertheless, 
this issue remains politically contentious. FCC is comprised of ﬁ ve political 
appointees, of which no more than three can be of the same political party. 
Under President Obama, the majority were Democrats who were in favor of 
regulating net neutrality. Under President Trump the balance of power 
shifted to Republicans, who were considerably more skeptical concerning the 
principle of net neutrality and critical of FCC rulings in this area. Ajit Pai, 
appointed by President Trump as the FCC Chair in 2017, previously described 
net neutrality as a “solution in search of a problem,”  55  arguing that more com-
petition, not regulation, is the best way to ensure an open Internet in which 
user interests are protected. Others have countered that regulations are 
needed precisely because of a lack of competition in the provision of broad-
band services in most parts of the country. According to FCC, in 2015, at the 
25 Mbps download and 3 Mbps upload broadband standard, there were no 
ISPs in 30 percent of census blocks, and only one ISP offering service in 
48 percent of the blocks.  56  There is even less broadband availability and com-
petition at higher connection speeds. 
 The issue of net neutrality therefore remains controversial, with powerful 
economic interests on each side of the debate being reinforced by partisan 
politics. Changes in media consumption patterns also exacerbate the net 
neutrality versus data management problem. The growth of audio and video 
streaming in particular means that content providers need increasingly large 
amounts of bandwidth in order to provide their services. In 2016, this type 
of data delivery accounted for more than 70 percent of evening trafﬁ c in 
North America, and it is expected to reach 80 percent by 2020. Netﬂ ix alone 
represented 35 percent of trafﬁ c on North American ﬁ xed networks.  57  In 
response, large ISPs began demanding connection fees from media stream-
ing companies to pay for infrastructure upgrades. This dispute came to a 
head in 2014 when Netﬂ ix accused ISPs of creating bottlenecks that led to 
high buffering rates, long wait times, and poor video quality. However, ISPs 
stood ﬁ rm and countered that “there is no free lunch, and there’s also no 
cost-free delivery of streaming movies.”  58  Ultimately, as Netﬂ ix began to lose 
customers, it grudgingly agreed to pay Comcast and other ISPs to directly 
connect to their networks. Prior to that, Netﬂ ix had delivered its streaming 
videos to customers via third parties. 
 The Netﬂ ix–Comcast agreement raised concerns that ISPs would be 
emboldened to increase demands for payments for preferential access to their 
infrastructure, undermining the principle of net neutrality. However, inter-
connection fees and net neutrality are only indirectly related. As former FCC 
Chair Tom Wheeler noted, “it’s a cousin, maybe a sibling, but it is not the 
same issue.”  59  The principle of net neutrality applies only to the ﬁ nal stage in 

The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
141
the data transfer process, where users connect to their ISPs, not to how com-
panies who stream content connect to the network. Net neutrality rules are 
designed to ensure that the last mile remains free from content discrimina-
tion; it does not apply to interconnection agreements among private busi-
nesses. Neither does net neutrality preclude ISPs from charging different 
prices for users to access their network at different connection speeds. How-
ever, there is one price-related issue that does impinge more directly on the 
net neutrality principle—the practice of zero-rating. 
 When video or music services are zero-rated, broadband providers allow 
users to access content that does not count toward their plan’s monthly data 
allowance. For instance, AT&T introduced a program that allowed wireless 
customers to stream content from its DIRECTTV service for free, while Veri-
zon permitted edge providers to supply zero-rated content to its mobile 
broadband subscribers on a per-gigabyte-used basis. Although this may be 
appealing to consumers, zero-rating threatens the net neutrality principle 
because it allows ISPs to favor their own content or charge others who want 
to provide zero-rated content. As consumers are more likely to choose zero-
rated content over alternatives because it is free, the practice distorts compe-
tition and has the potential to harm innovation over the long term. Such 
pay-for-play agreements tend to favor large content providers who can afford 
the cost of access, and exclude new start-ups. Concerns about the effects of 
zero-rating on net neutrality have led some regulators to ban or limit the 
practice. For instance, India banned Facebook’s Free Basic Android applica-
tion in 2016. Regulators said that Facebook and India’s telecom companies 
unfairly excluded some services, while offering others for free, effectively 
fragmenting Internet availability. Similarly, a report by the Body of European 
Regulators of Electronic Communications (BEREC) the same year, noted that 
any zero-rating service that blocked or slowed all applications once the data 
cap is reached, except for zero-rated applications, would violate the EU’s net 
neutrality rules.  60  By contrast, in 2017, the Federal Communications Com-
mission, under its new chairman, indicated that it would end investigations 
into zero-pricing practices and would no longer “focus on denying Ameri-
cans free data.”  61  So, it appears that, on this issue, U.S. policy is diverging 
from that pursued in Europe and elsewhere. 
 Clashes over net neutrality and copyright regulations are unlikely to dis-
appear anytime soon because they are rooted in the political and economic 
interests of powerful private business enterprises. Although such corporate 
disputes are often resolved in the market place, the centrality of the Internet 
in our daily lives has increasingly made technology companies a target of 
government regulation, both at national and international levels. Regulators 
are concerned that private corporations have become the gatekeepers of our 
information. Their algorithms determine what we see, and their community 
standards and terms of service agreements dictate what we can and cannot 

142 
Controlling Cyberspace
do online. Yet, these vast global enterprises have not faced the same account-
ability, transparency, and legal obligations that we would normally expect 
with this level of authority. Indeed in recent years, privatized control of some 
basic human rights has only intensiﬁ ed. Private companies have also become 
important players in the surveillance society, as governments and law 
enforcement have demanded, and gained access to, portions of their vast 
databases. Nevertheless, it would be erroneous to assume that the activities 
of Internet intermediaries predominantly represent a threat to rights and 
freedoms, since they are also defenders of those rights. Apple’s clash with FBI 
over encryption and Google’s refusal to comply with government-initiated 
content removal requests illustrate this point. So, despite legitimate concerns 
regarding the private authority of Internet Intermediaries, these business 
enterprises can play a crucial role in protecting essential human rights if they 
are committed to doing so. 

 CHAPTER EIGHT 
 The Persistent Challenge of 
Internet Governance 
 From its earliest days, Internet governance was conducted by a loose collec-
tion of computer scientists, academics, and other professionals who forged 
common standards designed to achieve interconnectivity and interoperabil-
ity of the Internet’s component parts. Together they created a revolutionary 
medium that has had profound impacts on political, economic, social, and 
cultural interactions around the world. Over time, the growth and impor-
tance of the Internet dictated that greater levels of coordination were 
required, which brought additional stakeholders into the ecosystem, and 
precipitated the formation of more institutionalized Internet governance pol-
icy structures. While non-state actors continue to play a vital role in Internet 
governance, the biggest transformation in shaping how the Internet is gov-
erned is the expanded role played by governments and international institu-
tions in the process. The earlier laissez-faire approach of state actors in 
Internet governance has been supplanted by an unambiguous assertion of 
government authority. Debates during the World Summits on the Informa-
tion Society (WSIS), the World Conference on Information Technology 
(WCIT), NETmundial, and beyond, clearly highlight the collision between 
competing visions over how the Internet should be governed. On one side 
are governments that desire a multilateral state-centric form of Internet gov-
ernance, based in intergovernmental institutions where only member states 
have the right to vote. On the other are those who seek to maintain the mul-
tistakeholder governance model that incorporates a wide variety of actors 
and protects the role of civil society in shaping policy. Attempts by some 
governments to territorialize cyberspace suggest that the issue has entered 

144 
Controlling Cyberspace
the realm of high politics; disputes over Internet governance and assertions 
of state sovereignty are increasingly linked. 
 The multistakeholder versus multilateral dichotomy is a useful taxonomy 
to delineate the preferred policy positions of national governments in the 
debate over Internet governance. However, it should be stressed that these 
concepts are archetypes, and both models suffer from theoretical ambiguity. 
As noted in Chapter 3, governments that favor multilateral approaches may 
do so for very different reasons; some emphasize sovereignty and control, 
whereas others stress the need for greater access and equality in decision 
making. Similarly, the concept of multistakeholderism has been criticized for 
its lack of precision. DeNardis and Raymond argue, for instance, that it is 
inaccurate to refer to a single multistakeholder model since there are many 
different types. 1 While Hoffman maintains that the concept is “ﬁ ction,” char-
acterized by “interpretive ﬂ exibility” that is used to provide “meaning and 
regularity to a fragmented, disorderly world.” 2 The reality is that Internet 
governance incorporates numerous points of inﬂ uence in a multilayered sys-
tem that is characterized by both multilateralism and multistakeholderism. 
 The practice of Internet governance involves the complex and dynamic 
interplay of many competing interests, and the volume of Internet-related 
policy is vast and is still evolving. The UN Conference on Trade and Develop-
ment (UNCTAD) identiﬁ es no less than 41 international public policy areas 
pertaining to the Internet. 3 However, the central question of who should 
have the power to set the rules in Internet governance has not yet been set-
tled. While numerous technical issues have been agreed as a result of multi-
stakeholder consensus building, more politically sensitive issues that deal 
with fundamental rights and freedoms remain unresolved. That Internet 
governance is fragmented, and often conﬂ ictual, has signiﬁ cant implications 
for the future evolution of the medium. This is especially true as we see the 
emergence of new technologies that present additional governance and pol-
icy challenges. While it is not unusual for technology to outpace policy solu-
tions, the rapidity of the change, when existing governance problems still 
exist, will likely undermine attempts to forge effective agreements that 
endure. One example of a set of emerging technologies that will require new 
Internet governance policy innovations is the Internet of Things (IoT). 
 Governing the Internet of Things 
 There is no universally agreed upon deﬁ nition of IoT. Berman and Cerf 
describe it as “an increasingly interconnected cyber-physical-biological envi-
ronment that links devices, systems, data, and people.” 4 While others deﬁ ne 
the term as the connection of “physical objects connected to the Internet and 
to each other through small, embedded sensors and wired and wireless 

The Persistent Challenge of Internet Governance 
145
technologies, creating an ecosystem of ubiquitous computing.” 5 At its most 
basic, IoT refers to the millions of everyday devices that are connected to the 
Internet that send and receive data. This includes devices designed for busi-
nesses, such as radio frequency identiﬁ cation (RFID) tags that keep track of 
inventory, as well as a multitude of products designed for the consumer. IoT 
generally does not include computers, smartphones, or tablets, although 
these are used to control sensor-enabled objects. 6 IoT consumer devices 
include refrigerators that can tell us when it is time to buy more milk, smart 
thermostats that can be set from mobile phones, wearable devices that track 
our movements and our sleep patterns, and intelligent personal assistants 
such as Amazon’s Echo that respond to voice commands and offer hundreds 
of different functions. The number of sensor-enabled objects connected to 
the Internet is growing rapidly, surpassing the number of people connected 
to the Internet in 2010, and it is estimated that IoT will be comprised of 
50 billion devices by 2020. 7 
The  IoT is building an increasingly interconnected world that promises 
improved efﬁ ciencies and conveniences, but these developments are not 
without complications and risks. IoT will generate unimaginable amounts of 
data. According to Cisco, 600 zettabytes (ZB) will be generated by all people, 
machines, and things by 2020, up from 145 ZB generated in 2015. A ZB is 
equal to a trillion gigabytes. Much of this data will stem from machine-to-
machine connections and will not be saved, but the enormous scale of data 
production poses management challenges. Cisco reports that a city of one 
million people will generate 200 million gigabytes of data per day, from 
smart buildings, homes, vehicles, hospitals, businesses, and utilities. All of 
which will increase the need for “hyperscale” data centers and additional 
cloud resources. 8 As Joseph Salvo, manager of complex engineering at GE 
describes it, we are now in a transition from Big Data to “Inﬁ nite Data.” 9 
Another major technical challenge for IoT is the problem of interoperability. 
Since IoT is relatively new, universal open standards have not yet been devel-
oped that will allow seamless communication between devices regardless of 
make or manufacturer. Large companies, such as Apple, Microsoft, and 
Google, have a ﬁ nancial incentive to develop proprietary systems that give 
them a competitive advantage. This makes sense from a business perspec-
tive, but it perpetuates fragmentation and threatens to undermine the poten-
tial beneﬁ ts that IoT can offer. 
 Security, Safety, and Privacy 
 Technical questions surrounding IoT are challenging, but they pale when 
compared to the security, safety, and privacy issues raised by this new global 
network of devices. Information security has not been the primary objective 

146 
Controlling Cyberspace
in the development of sensor-enabled objects, which leaves IoT vulnerable to 
attack. The 2016 botnet attack on Dyn illustrated that it is relatively easy to 
access IoT devices since many of them are protected only by factory user-
names and passwords, which are readily available online. The problem is 
exacerbated when insecure defaults are hidden and manufactures do not run 
security updates. As one IT security manager described it, “almost no one 
has access to their thermostat at an [operating system] layer to notice that it 
has been compromised. No one wakes up and thinks, ‘Hey, it’s time to update 
my thermostats ﬁ rmware.’ ” 10 As a result, once a device has been compro-
mised, it is likely to remain that way. 
 Concerns about security vulnerabilities in IoT go beyond DDoS attacks to 
include legitimate fears about physical safety. IoT not only consists of home 
networked products, it also includes hospital and personal medical devices 
as well as vehicles. It has been estimated that U.S. hospitals currently average 
between 10 and 15 devices per bed that could be susceptible to attack. 11 In 
December 2016, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued rec-
ommendations to medical device manufacturers to encourage them to build 
security into their products and proactively pursue “good cyber hygiene” 
throughout the lifecycle of those products. 12 One month later, FDA con-
ﬁ rmed that some cardiac devices, such as pacemakers and deﬁ brillators, 
could be hacked. It warned that the programing commands of implanted 
devices could be altered, “which could result in rapid battery depletion and/
or administration of inappropriate pacing or shocks.” 13 Similar security con-
cerns revolve around connected cars. Researchers have shown that it is pos-
sible to gain control of a vehicle through wireless vulnerabilities, including 
shutting down the engine and manipulating the brakes and steering at slow 
speeds. Although to date there is no evidence of a malicious car hack, the FBI 
and the National Highway Trafﬁ c Safety Administration were concerned 
enough about the potential threat to issue a public service announcement in 
March 2016 to warn consumers. They made special note of “third party 
aftermarket devices with Internet or cellular access plugged into diagnostics 
ports” that could increase vulnerabilities. 14 This issue will become increas-
ingly pressing as more cars become “smart.” According to Gartner, by 2020 
there will be a quarter billion connected vehicles on the road, with more 
sophisticated infotainment systems and automated driving capabilities. 15 It is 
likely that these innovations will also increase opportunities for hackers. 
 As a complex, dynamic system of interdependent products and services, 
IoT also raises questions concerning legal liabilities, but assigning responsi-
bility in such an intricate system will not be easy. Existing statutes typically 
treat products and services differently. Providing data through IoT is consid-
ered a service, which usually falls outside product liability and safety stat-
utes. However, if harm is caused by false data, or by the failure to supply 
data, liability becomes more ambiguous. 16 Legal liability also needs to be 

The Persistent Challenge of Internet Governance 
147
addressed with regard to autonomous vehicles. Who should be held account-
able if an autonomous vehicle crashes? Is it a hardware, software, or human 
problem? Technical interdependencies in IoT could make it more difﬁ cult to 
identify the root causes of problems. Some ethicists also argue that overly 
stringent liability statutes might discourage innovations that save lives. Auto-
mated cars, for instance, are widely considered to be safer than human driv-
ers, so presumably more self-driving cars should mean fewer trafﬁ c fatalities. 
There are therefore powerful moral reasons to limit the legal liability of man-
ufacturers to ensure that the development of safer vehicles does not become 
too risky for the companies to undertake. 17 Further legal ambiguity may arise 
from machine-to-machine interactions especially “when smart objects enter 
into contracts with each other on the basis of autonomous decisions.” 18 
 The inherent security vulnerabilities of many of the devices that com-
prise IoT raise even greater concerns about individual privacy. The gather-
ing of vast amounts of personal data by a multitude of devices will make it 
more difﬁ cult, if not impossible, for individuals to track what is being 
amassed. It will also increase the chances that individual privacy will be 
compromised, either deliberately or unwittingly. When so much informa-
tion is being collected the borderline between IoT and surveillance will 
likely become less clear. Speciﬁ c privacy threats emanate from voice-activated 
consumer devices that are becoming increasingly popular. This issue made 
headlines in 2015 when Samsung’s privacy policies for its smart TVs were 
highlighted. The policies warned consumers that their conversations could 
be recorded, “Please be aware that if your spoken words include personal or 
other sensitive information, that information will be among the data cap-
tured and transmitted to a third party through your use of Voice Recogni-
tion.” 19 Samsung revealed that microphones are embedded both in the 
television and the remote control, but stressed that the voice recognition 
feature can be disabled. 
 Despite assurances, there are numerous examples of technology being 
used to reveal potentially incriminating evidence in court cases. In 2015, a 
woman who claimed that she had been raped by an intruder was charged 
with making a false police report when her Fitbit device contradicted her 
story. 20 In another case, an Ohio man was charged with arson and insurance 
fraud after data from his heart monitor was shown to be inconsistent with his 
alibi. He told police that he packed his suitcases and threw them out the win-
dow before escaping, but after reviewing his heart rate, pacer demand, and 
cardiac rhythms before, during, and after the ﬁ re, it was clear that the infor-
mation did not match his account of the event. 21 We are also seeing IoT data 
being requested in homicide investigations. In December 2016, police issued 
a warrant to Amazon to submit records from an Echo device that they believed 
may have recorded a murder taking place. The accused had several smart 
devices including Amazon’s Echo in his home on the night that his friend was 

148 
Controlling Cyberspace
killed, and police hoped that Echo microphones recorded some revealing 
audio. While Echo does not record conversations, police sought access to 
information stored on Amazon servers. In addition, the home’s smart water 
heater indicated that 140 gallons of water had been used between 1  A.M . and 
3  A.M ., which the prosecution claimed revealed that the accused was trying to 
clean the crime scene. Amazon contested the warrant for information, argu-
ing that compliance would set a dangerous precedent, citing the First Amend-
ment in its memorandum of law. “At the heart of that First Amendment 
protection is the right to browse and purchase expressive materials anony-
mously, without fear of government discovery.” 22 Given the privacy implica-
tions, Amazon requested that the warrant be quashed. The law in this area is 
still evolving, but it is clear that as devices become increasingly connected, 
allowing for more monitoring of our daily lives, such clashes between tech-
nology companies and law enforcement will become more frequent. 
 At another level, IoT has the potential to radically alter surveillance. Since 
cloud computing involves moving data from discrete devices to a centralized 
location, that information is no longer controlled by the user. This transfer-
ence therefore opens new opportunities for surveillance, including the pos-
sibility of circumventing encryption. Apparent conﬁ rmation of this point 
came from WikiLeaks in 2017, when it released documents that purported to 
reveal the existence of CIA and British intelligence plans to target IoT con-
nected devices. One program called “Weeping Angel” allegedly targeted 
Samsung smart TVs in particular, and allowed for the recording and trans-
ferring of audio. It was also reported that the hack could make it appear that 
both the set and the Wi-Fi were turned off when they were both still active. 
Other revelations included the claim that intelligence agencies have found 
ways to bypass encrypted applications on phones and other devices by col-
lecting audio and text trafﬁ c before encryption is applied. 23 
 All of this suggests that there is a glaring need for new public policy and 
legal standards to govern privacy related to IoT. The traditional approach to 
protecting data privacy was based on Fair Information Practices (FIPs), a set 
of internationally recognized principles that emerged during the 1970s, and 
which form the foundation of many national privacy laws. In the United 
States, this approach evolved as the Fair Information Practice Principles 
(FIPPs), which include the following tenets: notice, choice, access, accuracy, 
data minimization, security, and accountability. Of these, the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) identiﬁ ed three principles as being especially relevant to 
privacy and IoT, and made the following speciﬁ c recommendations: 
 • 
Security: Companies should build “security by design” by identifying signiﬁ -
cant privacy risks, test security before launching new products, and con-
tinue to monitor privacy throughout the lifecycle of the product. Consumers 
should be required to change default passwords. 

The Persistent Challenge of Internet Governance 
149
 • 
Data Minimization : Companies should limit the data they collect, and dis-
pose of it when it is no longer needed. Data collection and retention polices 
should be developed, including deﬁ ning the circumstances when it becomes 
necessary to obtain users’ permission to share their information. Compa-
nies should collect sensitive data only with consent. 
 • 
Notice and Choice:  For less sensitive data, the context is important. Providing 
consumers choice every time data are collected is not necessary, if the col-
lection is consistent with users’ expectations and their relationship with the 
company. For instance, collecting data about the operation of the device to 
improve the product would be acceptable, but selling that information to an 
ad network would not. The FTC acknowledges that IoT presents unique 
notice and choice challenges. Many IoT devices do not have a screen that 
would allow users to make a choice, so new innovative approaches that give 
consumers options will be needed. This may require a variety of approaches, 
such as opt-in choices at the point of sale or during device setup as well as 
tutorials and privacy dashboards that allow consumers to know what is 
being shared and conﬁ gure privacy setting at any time. 
 Giving consumers information about how their data will be shared, and 
providing op-out choices would certainly represent progress, but voluntary 
standards remain inferior to legislative protections. Nonbinding guidance on 
IoT privacy “essentially leaves it up to the industry to ‘do right’ by their cus-
tomers.” 24 In this regard, the EU has gone further than the United States in 
codifying privacy rights as they relate to IoT. The Article 29 Working Party 
composed of representatives from all EU Data Protection Authorities, the 
European Data Protection Supervisor, and the European Commission, issued 
an Opinion during October 2014 that presented a list of practical recommen-
dations for device manufacturers and application developers to help them 
implement privacy protections. Among other provisions, the Opinion 
asserted that “Data subjects and users must be able to exercise their rights 
and thus be ‘in control’ of the data at any time according to the principle of 
self-determination of data.” 25 While the Article 29 group is advisory, it did 
reﬂ ect provisions contained in the EU General Data Protection Regulations 
(GDPR). The GDPR, which is legally binding in 2018, stipulates that it should 
not be assumed that user consent has been given if the data subject is unable 
to refuse or withdraw permission. This principle of data self-determination 
was further reinforced in the Mauritius Declaration on the Internet of Things 
and the Resolution on Big Data, adopted at an international conference on data 
privacy in 2014. Although nonbinding, these declarations were approved by 
data privacy regulators from around the world. 
 There is broad agreement that IoT has the potential to bring tremendous 
societal beneﬁ ts, but it is clear that this new technology poses signiﬁ cant 
threats to security, safety, and privacy. To date, IoT has been only lightly 

150 
Controlling Cyberspace
regulated with most countries relying on industry self-regulation to protect 
consumer rights, but this is now changing. There is growing recognition that 
private self-governance is failing to protect individual rights, and that more 
stringent legislative controls are now necessary. The European Commission 
ominously warns that we could see “the emergence of a de-humanised world, 
where machines enforce rules,” and that we “risk becoming hostages to the 
technology,” 26 if we fail to adopt appropriate safeguards. Moreover, privacy 
and security are the essential pillars that support trust in IoT, and the Inter-
net generally. Trust is the lifeblood of the medium; without it the Internet 
would not have ﬂ ourished as it has. However, public opinion polls suggest 
that trust in the technology is now weakening. 
 To illustrate, Americans overwhelmingly say that privacy is important in 
their daily lives, but few feel that they have control over information that is 
collected about them and how it is used. In a 2015 report, the Pew Research 
Center revealed that 93 percent of adults say that being in control of who can 
get information about them is important, while 90 percent say that control-
ling what information is collected about them is important. 27 At the same 
time, a majority of Americans indicate that they would ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to 
locate tools to protect their privacy. Similarly, data collected by the National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) show that 
nearly 19 million households reported being affected by an online security 
breach, identity theft, or similar malicious activity during the 12 months 
prior to the survey. 28 Comparable results have also been uncovered by inter-
national surveys. A 2016–17 CGI-IPSO analysis of 24,225 Internet users in 
24 countries found that a majority of respondents trusted the Internet less 
than they did the year before, giving the main reason as “the Internet is not 
secure.” 29 One in ten also said that they are making fewer Internet purchases, 
so privacy and security concerns not only depress the free exchange of ideas 
online, they also undermine economic activity. 
 Internet Fragmentation 
 The observation that trust in the Internet has been diminishing is not 
new. In 2001, Blumenthal and Clark noted that “of all the changes that are 
transforming the Internet, the loss of trust may be the most fundamen-
tal.” 30 The authors were primarily concerned that lack of trust motivates 
self-protection measures and third-party controls that undermine the orig-
inal end-to-end principle on which the Internet is based. They were wor-
ried that the emergence of new cyber security threats would gradually 
undermine the open and transparent nature of the Internet, prompting the 
increased use of ﬁ rewalls “as crude means to limit the modes of communi-
cation with ‘outsiders.’ ” 31 The possibility that the Internet could fragment, 

The Persistent Challenge of Internet Governance 
151
or “balkanize,” is even more urgent today. Technical divisions might arise 
from the loss of net neutrality and the subsequent creation of fast and slow 
Internet trafﬁ c lanes. The uneven introduction of IPv6 could result in the 
creation of Internet islands, with some parts of the system running IPv4 
while others run IPv6. Since the latter is not backwards compatible, hosts 
and routers operating these two protocols cannot interact directly. In addi-
tion to such troubling technical challenges, there are a host of proprietary, 
social, and political risks that threaten the Internet’s traditional openness 
and interconnectivity. 
 Commercial Fragmentation 
 It should be remembered that the Internet evolved as an interoperable 
network of networks largely based on private business arrangements. Exam-
ples of commercial agreements that have contributed to the free ﬂ ow of 
information between independent networks are those among ISPs that own 
or control Internet backbones. Through peering agreements large ISPs carry 
each other’s trafﬁ c without charge, which results in more direct paths for 
Internet trafﬁ c and reduces both latency and costs. A 2013 OECD survey of 
4,300 networks, representing 140,000 direct interconnections found that 
99.5 percent of peering agreements were based on a handshake, without 
written contracts and with no money changing hands. 32 However, since 
peering is voluntary, agreements are vulnerable to commercial disputes that 
can result in de-peering and service degradation. Many of these peering dis-
putes are due to the dramatic increase in data ﬂ ows resulting from video 
streaming that have led to asymmetries in trafﬁ c. Although most peering 
disputes get resolved bilaterally, the traditional peering model that is based 
on trust appears to be breaking down as the largest ISPs are increasingly 
requiring written contracts and payments. Economic analyses also demon-
strate that under some circumstances a dominant ISP could pursue monop-
oly status by using its economic power to refuse to peer with a rival. Thus 
raising its rival’s costs and ultimately increasing prices to end users, encour-
aging customers to switch providers. 33 It therefore appears that the intensiﬁ -
cation of the commercialization of the Internet is creating new business 
models that are altering how the system operates. 
 Commercial fragmentation is also occurring in relation to proprietary ser-
vices or “walled gardens.” In walled gardens, users access the Internet 
through gatekeepers who offer closed information services, content, or media 
platforms. One of the earliest examples of a walled garden was America 
Online (AOL), whose subscribers were presented with preselected, user-
friendly Internet content. Ostensibly, the AOL service was designed to keep 
nonsubscribers out, but equally important was the objective of keeping users 

152 
Controlling Cyberspace
in the walled garden where they could be subjected to digital marketing and 
steered toward AOL proprietary services. Today, there are many more walled 
gardens, facilitated by mobile devices and proprietary apps and platforms. As 
a  Wired magazine article noted several years ago, the introduction of smart 
phones created a shift from the “wide-open Web to semi-closed platforms 
that use the Internet for transport but not the browser for display . . . it’s a 
world Google can’t crawl, one where HTML doesn’t rule. And it’s the world 
that consumers are increasingly choosing.” 34 Platforms such as Facebook cre-
ate a digital environment designed to lock-in users with a range of desirable 
and convenient services so that they ﬁ nd less need to explore the wider 
Internet. Facebook is not entirely closed however, since it allows connections 
to external e-mail accounts, gives users the option to login to other sites with 
their Facebook password, and it encourages users to “Like” products and 
services outside its environment. In doing so, the social media giant tracks 
users beyond its platform in order to micro target ads when they return. 
Social media platforms further undermine Internet openness when they 
build their services on proprietary rather than standard protocols that do not 
allow third parties to implement the product. “In a world of proprietary, non-
interoperable services, users are limited to choosing either Facebook (for 
example) or Google—they cannot choose among alternative providers of 
‘Facebook service’ or ‘Google service.’ ” 35 
 Sociopolitical Fragmentation 
 Of growing concern is the effect of Internet fragmentation on sociopoliti-
cal fragmentation. Over a decade ago, Tim Wu suspected that few of us visit 
websites based in other countries or read foreign language websites, which 
he described as a “small sign of the Balkanization of the Internet.” 36 Similarly, 
Tim Berners-Lee warned a few years later that social media companies were 
threatening open access to Web content that could break the Internet into 
fragmented islands. “The more you enter, the more you become locked in. 
Your social networking site becomes a central platform—a closed silo of con-
tent.” 37 These observations proved to be prophetic, even though they were 
made before the widespread use of geo-targeting of content, and before social 
media hyper-personalization. Similar themes were popularized by Eli Pariser 
in his 2011 book,  The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding from You. Pariser 
argued that ﬁ lter bubbles are created when social media algorithms divide us 
into groups of like-minded individuals based on our perceived interests, and 
also present us with personalized search results based on our location and 
search history. Although this may be convenient, ﬁ lters limit our exposure to 
alterative views and reinforce conﬁ rmation bias, so instead of being exposed 

The Persistent Challenge of Internet Governance 
153
to a broad range of opinions we become ﬁ rmly entrenched in echo chambers 
that support our existing beliefs. 
 Discussions of the role played by social media in shaping public opinion 
greatly intensiﬁ ed following the 2016 presidential election. In his 2017 book 
 #Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age of Social Media, Harvard University law 
professor Cass R. Sunstein warns that social media is driving political polar-
ization and extremism, and that it is posing a threat to democracy. Echo 
chambers can lead people to believe “fake news,” and group polarization 
tends to make opinions more extreme. People increasingly operate from “vir-
tual gated communities” and many have surrendered common points of ref-
erence, an essential component of representative democracy. During the 2016 
presidential election period, around 128 million people across the United 
States generated 8.8 billion likes, posts, comments, and shares related to the 
election on Facebook alone. 38 The importance of social media as a source of 
news and a conduit for political discourse is particularly pronounced among 
young adults. For a millennial, Facebook is the most common source for news 
about government and politics. A Pew study found that 61 percent of Internet-
using millennials reported getting their political news from Facebook out of 
42 different news sources that they were offered. 39 Obviously, if Facebook is 
awash with fake news and polarized opinions, it could have long-term nega-
tive consequences for the political system. Liberal democracy is, after all, 
founded on both competing opinions and shared values. 
 The conclusion that Americans have become more politically polarized 
online mirrors trends in the physical world. Research indicates that Americans 
have sorted themselves geographically, economically, and politically into like-
minded neighborhoods over recent decades and that they have become both 
more extreme and more certain in their beliefs. 40 We should therefore be care-
ful to avoid overestimating the impact of social media on political polarization. 
One study concluded, for instance, that the growth in polarization in recent 
years is largest for the demographic groups least likely to use the Internet and 
social media. 41 The impact of social media on politics is still therefore being 
debated, but social media companies are beginning to treat the problem of 
misrepresentation more seriously. While Mark Zuckerberg downplayed the 
inﬂ uence of Facebook in shaping the outcome of the 2016 presidential election, 
the company has nevertheless introduced new strategies to deal with misinfor-
mation that combine crowdsourcing to identify dubious news stories, greater 
reliance on third-party fact-checkers, and ﬁ nancial disincentives for purveyors 
of fake news. These are positive steps, but resolving the fake news problem 
may require more. Recent analysis indicates that repetition of fake news makes 
such information more believable over time. Interestingly, this effect held even 
in the presence of explicit warnings that fake news headlines had been dis-
puted by third-party fact-checkers. 42  

154 
Controlling Cyberspace
 Data Fragmentation 
 Data fragmentation occurs when government policies require that infor-
mation be stored nationally, or when they prevent data from being sent 
abroad. Data localization is motivated by a number of objectives, but the 
primary impetus for such a move is privacy protection and national security. 
Trends toward data localization intensiﬁ ed following the U.S. National Secu-
rity Agency (NSA) spying scandal, which revealed that American technology 
companies shared information from around the world with NSA. In an 
immediate backlash, the European Union and Brazil announced plans to lay 
a multimillion dollar undersea ﬁ ber-optic cable between them to avoid U.S. 
surveillance, while others implemented, or discussed implementing, data 
localization laws. Today, more than a dozen countries have implemented 
some form of data nationalism. For instance, Australia has placed restric-
tions on health data leaving the country. Brazil amended its Marco Civil law 
to give the executive branch the power to require information about its citi-
zens to be stored in Brazil. Two Canadian provinces, British Columbia and 
Nova Scotia, introduced legislation requiring that personal information held 
by public institutions be stored and accessed only in Canada, while the 
French government declared its goal to “build a France of digital sover-
eignty.” 43 Predictably, Russia and China have gone further. In September 
2015, the Russian government introduced Federal Law No. 242 that requires 
companies to store and process data collected on Russian citizens using serv-
ers physically located in Russia. Foreign companies that fail to comply with 
this new law are subject to ﬁ nes enforced by Russia’s communications 
authority, Roskomnadzor. In June 2017, China passed a new cybersecurity 
law requiring companies that operate “critical information infrastructure” to 
store personal information in China. 44 Data can be transferred out of the 
country only with express permission following a security assessment. The 
Chinese government also prohibits the transfer of all personal ﬁ nancial and 
health information. 
 Data localization laws are closely tied to the issue of sovereignty and the 
assertion of government control over the Internet. Countries that have intro-
duced the most stringent data localization laws are the same ones that seek 
to build a multilateral Internet governance framework. However, others see 
data localization in purely economic terms, as a means to challenge the dom-
inance of American technology ﬁ rms. For instance, Germany’s Deutsche 
Telekom has been spearheading data localization proposals, and promoting 
its “email made in Germany” system. 45 While data localization can boost the 
economic fortunes of some domestic enterprises, research suggest that it has 
a negative overall effect on the economy. One study discovered that data 
localization had a substantial negative impact on GDP in seven countries. 46 
Any gains stemming from data localization were found to be too small to 

The Persistent Challenge of Internet Governance 
155
outweigh losses in the general economy. Nevertheless, control over physical 
data may still bring some legal and political beneﬁ ts since location, to a large 
extent, determines jurisdiction. 
 Meeting the Challenges of Internet Governance and Regulation 
 Internet fragmentation comes in a variety of forms, but some types of frag-
mentation are potentially more destructive than others. The central argu-
ment of this book is that the traditional, decentralized nature of Internet 
governance is now being challenged by certain governments that seek to 
assert sovereign control over the technology. At its heart, the multistakehold-
erism versus multilateralism debate is about Internet fragmentation, between 
those who support an open, lightly regulated Internet and those who prefer 
more national control. Authoritarian governments have become adept at 
building virtual walls and blocking content, but governments of all types 
have increased Internet regulation, largely in response to perceived national 
security threats. Currently, forces of centralization are altering the traditional 
regulatory framework that has been at the heart of the Internet’s success. The 
future interoperability of the Internet will depend on resolving the growing 
tension between cyber nationalism that demands greater data sovereignty, 
and the transnational nature of a medium that traverses a multitude of legal 
and political jurisdictions. 
 Internet governance is essentially a complex coordination problem that 
encompasses a broad array of policy, and different forms of public–private 
regulation. Although it began as a largely anarchic system, the days of laissez-
faire governance are over. While the Internet has always been regulated, 
new challenges suggest that deeper levels of policy coordination and coop-
eration will be required if we are to avoid further balkanization. Even 
though governments are often viewed as inimical to multistakeholderism, 
they can play an essential and positive leadership role in determining 
how the Internet evolves; only governments can decide whether or not to 
align their Internet-related policies and laws. At the same time, the Internet 
will continue to be shaped by more than legislation. The process of norm 
building is an important precursor to constructing international agree-
ments, and that process involves the entire Internet governance ecosystem. 
While much has been written about Internet governance conﬂ icts, trends 
suggest a broad-based willingness to set some ground rules regarding 
acceptable and unacceptable state behavior in cyberspace, especially in 
relation to cybersecurity. Although trust remains limited, international and 
regional arrangements are increasingly utilizing conﬁ dence-building mea-
sures to improve communications, cooperation, and transparency in cyber-
space policy. 

156 
Controlling Cyberspace
 However, conﬂ icts related to Internet governance and regulation will only 
be resolved if legitimate concerns are recognized. Countries in the Global 
South have access concerns that relate to both Internet availability and Inter-
net governance. Many view the current Internet governance framework as 
imbalanced and exclusionary. Security is also a signiﬁ cant issue for many as 
cybercrime has become prevalent, and as the threat of cyber espionage and 
warfare has increased. Apprehension is further reinforced by the perceived 
threat posed by powerful private intermediaries that dominate Internet ser-
vices. They control vast amounts of private information, yet their legal and 
moral responsibilities remain unresolved. Basic human rights are potentially 
threatened by this unaccountable, privatized authority. Ultimately, anxieties 
over privacy, information protection, and security undermine trust in the 
Internet that could hasten further fragmentation. 
 It remains to be seen how the tension between multistakeholderism and 
multilateralism in Internet governance will be resolved, but space for agree-
ment might be found in the multilayered nature of the Internet. The Internet 
has many points of control, so Internet governance will continue to encom-
pass a wide range of cross-cutting technical, economic, political, legal, social, 
and cultural issues over which governments, international institutions, and 
nonstate actors all exert inﬂ uence. In addition, Internet governance is 
dynamic; it evolves as the technology does. New technology brings new 
opportunities to develop and implement innovative governance solutions. At 
the same time, it is to be expected that sovereign nation-states will strive to 
resolve these problems by whichever means they have available. They will 
continue to defend their authority in relation to Internet governance, since 
the Internet has become too important for them to do otherwise. If funda-
mental questions of legitimacy, accountability, and representation in the cur-
rent multistakeholder governance framework are not satisfactorily settled, 
then governments will have a greater incentive to search for unilateral solu-
tions that could have devastating effects on the Internet as we know it. 

 Abbreviations 
 ACTA 
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement 
 ARPA 
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
 BEREC 
Body of European Regulators of Electronic Communications 
 BGP 
border gateway protocol 
 CAS 
Copyright Alert System 
 CBUI 
Coalition for Broadband Users and Innovators 
 ccTLDs 
country code top-level domain names 
 CSR 
corporate social responsibility 
 CSTB 
 Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of the 
National Research Council 
 CSTD 
UN Commission on Science and Technology for Development 
 DDoS 
distributed denial of service 
 DMCA 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
 DNS 
domain name system 
 DOC 
Department of Commerce 
 DPI 
deep packet inspection 
 DSF 
Digital Solidarity Fund 
 ECOWAS 
Economic Community of West African States 
 FCC 
Federal Communications Commission 
 FIPs 
Fair Information Practices 
 FIPPs 
Fair Information Practice Principles 
 GAC 
Government Advisory Committee 
 GDPR 
General Data Protection Regulation 
 GGE 
Group of Governmental Experts 

158 
Abbreviations
 gTLDs 
generic top-level domain names 
 HRC 
UN Human Rights Council 
 IAB 
Internet Architecture Board 
 IANA 
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority 
 ICANN 
Internet Corporation of Assigned Names and Numbers 
 ICCPR 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 
 ICERD 
 International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Racial Discrimination 
 ICESCR 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights 
 ICT 
information and communication technology 
 IEEE 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
 IETF 
Internet Engineering Task Force 
 IFWP 
International Forum on the White Paper 
 IGF 
Internet Governance Forum 
 IoT 
Internet of things 
 IP 
Internet protocol 
 IRPC 
Internet Rights and Principles Dynamic Coalition 
 ISOC 
Internet Society 
 ISP 
Internet service provider 
 ITRs 
International Telecommunications Regulations 
 ITU 
International Telecommunications Union 
 IXP 
Internet exchange point 
 LIRs 
local Internet registries 
 MAG 
Multistakeholder Advisory Group 
 MDGs 
Millennium Development Goals 
 NATO 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
 NATs 
network address translators 
 NMI 
NETmundial Initiative 
 NSF 
National Science Foundation 
 NTIA 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration 
 NWICO 
New World Information and Communication Order 
 OIC 
Organization of Islamic Cooperation 
 PIPA 
PROTECT Intellectual Property Act 

Abbreviations 
159
 RAA 
Registrar Accreditation Agreement 
 RFC 
Request for Comments 
 RFID 
radio frequency identiﬁ cation 
 RIAA 
Recording Industry Association of America 
 RIRs 
regional Internet registries 
 RPKI 
Resource Public Key Infrastructure 
 SOPA 
Stop Online Piracy Act 
 SSL 
Secure Socket Layer 
 TCP 
transmission control protocol 
 UDHR 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
 UDRP 
Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy 
 UNCTAD 
UN Conference on Trade and Development 
 US-CERT 
U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team 
 W3C 
World Wide Web Consortium 
 WCIT 
World Conference on International Telecommunications 
 WEF 
World Economic Forum 
 WGIG 
Working Group on Internet Governance 
 WIPO 
World Intellectual Property Organization 
 WSIS 
World Summit on the Information Society 

This page intentionally left blank

 Notes 
 Chapter 1. The Challenge of Internet Governance 
 1 . Hans Klein, “ICANN and Internet Governance: Leveraging Technical 
Coordination to Realize Global Public Policy,”  The Information Society 18 (2002): 
193–207. 
 2.  David R. Johnson and David G. Post, “Law and Borders: The Rise of Law 
in Cyberspace,”  Stanford Law Review 1367 (1996). Accessed June 24, 2015. 
https://cyber.harvard.edu/is02/readings/johnson-post.html. 
 3.  Vice President Al Gore, “Information Superhighways Speech,” Interna-
tional Telecommunications Union, Monday, March 21, 1994. Accessed June 30, 
2016. http://vlib.iue.it/history/internet/algorespeech.html. 
 4.  John Perry Barlow, “Thinking Locally, Acting Globally,”  Time , January 15, 
1996, 76. Quoted in Daniel W. Drezner, “The Global Governance of the Internet: 
Bringing the State Back In,”  Political Science Quarterly 119(3): 2004. Accessed 
June 28, 2016. http://www.danieldrezner.com/research/egovernance.pdf. 
 5.  Jack Goldstein and Tim Wu,  Who Controls the Internet? Illusions of a Border-
less World  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006). 
 6.  Wolff Heintschel von Heinegg, “Territorial Sovereignty and Neutrality in 
Cyberspace,”  International Law Studies 89 (2013): 123, at 126. Accessed July 2, 
2015. http://stockton.usnwc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1027&context=ils. 
 7 . Goldstein and Wu,  Who Controls the Internet, xii. 
 8 . Joseph Nye Jr., “The Regime Complex for Managing Global Cyber Activi-
ties,”  Global Commission on Internet Governance . Paper Series: No. 1, May 2014. 
Accessed July 27, 2015. https://dash.harvard.edu/bitstream/handle/1/12308565/
NyeGlobalCommission.pdf?sequence=1. 
 9 . Lawrence S. Finkelstein, “What Is Global Governance?,”  Global Gover-
nance 1, no. 3 (1995): 368. 
 10 . Klause Dingwerth, “From International Politics to Global Governance? 
The Case of Nature Conservatism,”  Garnet Working Paper No. 46/08 . Institute for 
Intercultural and International Studies, June 2008. Accessed July 29, 2015. 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/c996/e18862a32e529056812542854317813a2cc8
.pdf. 

162 
Notes
 11 . James N. Rosenau, “Governance, Order, and Change in World Politics,” in 
 Governance without Government: Order and Change in World Politics , ed.   James N. 
Rosenau and Ernst-Otto Czempiel   (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1992), 1–29. 
 12 . Stephen Krasner,  International Regimes  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1983), 2. 
 13 . Andreas Hasenclever, Peter Mayer, and Volker Rittberger, “Integrating 
Theories of International Regimes,”  Review of International Studies 26, no. 1 (Jan-
uary, 2000). 
 14 . John Mathiasen,  Internet Governance: The New Frontier of Global Institutions 
(New York: Routledge, 2009). 
 15 . Joseph Nye Jr., “The Regime Complex . ” 
 16 . Anne-Marie Slaughter and David Zaring, “Networking Goes International: 
An Update,”  Annual Review of Law and Social Science 2 (2006): 211–29. 
 17 . Pierre-Hugues Verdier, “Transnational Regulatory Networks and Their 
Limits,”  The Yale Journal of International Law  34 (2009): 113. 
 18 . Anne-Marie Slaughter,  A New World Order  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2004). 
 19 . Peter M. Haas, “Introduction: Epistemic Communities and International 
Policy Coordination,”  International Organization 46, no. 1 (1992). 
 20 . Minu Hemmanti,  Multi-stakeholder Processes for Governance and Sustain-
ability (London: Earthscan Publishing, 2002), 2. 
 21 . United Nations,  We the Peoples: Civil Society, the United Nations and Global 
Governance. Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations Civil Society Relations , 
2004, 16. Accessed August 2, 2105. http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/pub
lic/documents/un-dpadm/unpan041831.pdf. 
 22 . Laura DeNardis,  The Global War for Internet Governance  (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 2014). 
 23 . Lawrence Lessig, “Code Is Law: On Liberty in Cyberspace,”  Harvard Mag-
azine (January 1, 2000). Accessed August 1, 2015. http://harvardmagazine.com/
2000/01/code-is-law-html. 
 24 . Rishi Chalwa, “Internet Exchange—a Solution Towards Cost Effective 
and Quality Internet Access,”  Semantic Scholar (2003). Accessed August 5, 2015. 
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Internet-Exchange-a-solution-towards-
cost-effectiv-Chawla/3d43665ffa7d05ef5f326d03e102ca961d9bd0fa. 
 25 . Internet Live Stats,  Total Number of Websites . Accessed May 5, 2017. http://
www.internetlivestats.com/total-number-of-websites. 
 26 . For a detailed discussion of government control of the Internet, see Jack 
Goldstein and Tim Wu,  Who Controls the Internet? Illusions of a Borderless World 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008). 
 27 . For example, Goldstein and Wu,  Who Controls the Internet; Milton L. 
Mueller,  Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Governance (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010); DeNardis,  The Global War for Internet Governance . 

Notes 
163
 Chapter 2. The Evolution of Internet Governance 
  1 . J. C. R. Licklider, “Man-Computer Symbiosis,”  IRE Transactions on Human 
Factors in Electronics  HFE-1 (March 1960): 4–11. Accessed September 5, 2015. 
https://groups.csail.mit.edu/medg/people/psz/Licklider.html. 
  2 . Internet Hall of Fame, “J.C.R. Licklider: Posthumous Recipient.” Accessed 
September 5, 2015. http://internethalloffame.org/inductees/jcr-licklider. 
  3 . Barry M. Leiner, Vinton G. Cerf, David D. Clark, Robert E. Kahn, Leonard 
Kleinrock, Daniel C. Lynch, Jon Postel, Dr. Lawrence G. Roberts, and Stephen 
Wolff,  Brief History of the Internet.  Accessed September 5, 2015. http://www.inter
netsociety.org/internet/what-internet/history-internet/brief-history-internet#
Leiner. 
  4 . Ibid. 
  5 . Ibid. 
  6 . Rajiv Chandrasekaran, “AOL Wins Compuserve Subscribers,”  Washington 
Post (September 8, 1997). Accessed September 21, 2015. http://www.washing
tonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2011/02/07/AR2011020702175.html. 
  7 . For further discussion of standards setting as public policy and gover-
nance, see Laura DeNardis,  The Global War for Internet Governance (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 2014), chapter 3. 
  8 . Internet Society, “Charter of the Internet Architecture Board,”  Network 
Working Group Internet Architecture Board Request for Comments: 2850.  Accessed 
September 18, 2017 .  http://www.rfc-editor.org/pdfrfc/rfc2850.txt.pdf. 
  9 . Internet Engineering Task Force,  Mission Statement . Accessed Septem-
ber 25, 2015. https://www.ietf.org/about/mission.html. 
 10 . Internet Engineering Task Force, “The Internet Standards Process—
Revision 3,”  Network Working Group Request for Comments: 2026 . Accessed Sep-
tember 25, 2105. https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2026.txt. 
 11 . Internet Engineering Task Force,  Past Meetings . Accessed September 27, 
2105. https://www.ietf.org/meeting/past.html. 
 12 . D. Crocker, “Making Standards the IETF Way,”  ACM Standard View  1, 
no. 1 (1993). 
 13 . Paulina Borsook, “How Anarchy Works,”  Wired (October 1, 1995). 
Accessed September 30, 2015. https://www.wired.com/1995/10/ietf. 
 14 . Paul Hoffman, ed.  The Tao of IETF: A Novice’s Guide to the Internet Engi-
neering Task Force.  Accessed September 30, 2015. https://www.ietf.org/tao
.html. 
 15 . Ibid. 
 16 . Internet Engineering Task Force, “IETF Working Group Guidelines and Pro-
cedures.”  Network Working Group Request for Comments: 1603 . Accessed October 3, 
2015. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1603. 
 17 . Internet Society,  Mission . Accessed October 2, 2015. http://www.inter
netsociety.org/who-we-are/mission. 

164 
Notes
 18 . Internet Society,  Internet Governance.  Accessed   October 2, 2015. http://
www.internetsociety.org/what-we-do/internet-issues/internet-governance. 
 19 . W3C,  Mission.  Accessed October 6, 2015.   http://www.w3.org/Consor
tium/mission#principles. 
 20 . W3C,  Membership Fees . Accessed October 6, 2015. http://www.w3.org/
Consortium/fees?countryCode=HT&quarter=07–01&year=2015#results?Gabon. 
 21 . W3C,  FAQ About ISOC and W3C . Accessed October 6, 2105. https://www
.w3.org/2009/11/isoc-w3c-faq. 
 22 . Open Stand,  Principles . Accessed October 9, 2015. https://open-stand
.org/openstandlaunch. 
 23 . Internet Society,  Internet Invariants: What Really Matters.  Accessed Octo-
ber 10, 2015. http://www.internetsociety.org/sites/default/ﬁ les/Internet%20Inva
riants-%20What%20Really%20Matters.pdf. 
 24 . Open Stand,  Principles . 
 25 . Jon Postel, “Proposed Standard Socket Numbers,”  Network Working Group 
Request for Comments: 349.  Accessed October 14, 2015. https://tools.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc349.txt. 
 26 . ICANN,  The IANA Functions . Accessed October 28, 2015. https://www
.iana.org/about/informational-booklet.pdf. 
 27 . Heather N. Mewes, “Memorandum of Understanding on the Generic 
Top-Level Domain Name Space of the Internet Domain Name System,”  Berkeley 
Technology Law Journal 13, no. 235 (1998). Accessed October 17, 2015. http://
scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1169&context=btlj. 
 28 . National Telecommunications and Information Administration,  State-
ment of Policy on the Management of Internet Names and Addresses . Accessed Novem-
ber 2, 2015. http://www.ntia.doc.gov/federal-register-notice/1998/statement-policy-
management-internet-names-and-addresses. 
 29 . Milton L. Mueller,  Ruling the Root (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 
177. 
 30 . Boston Working Group,  Management of Internet Names and Addresses . 
Accessed November 5, 2015. https://www.ntia.doc.gov/legacy/ntiahome/domain
name/proposals/bosgrp/submission-letter.html. 
 31 .  PGMedia, Inc. v. Network Solutions, Inc ., 51 F.Supp.2d 389, 405 (S.D.N.Y. 
1999). Accessed November 11, 2015. 
 32 . ICANN,  Fact Sheet on Tentative Agreements among ICANN, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce, and Network Solutions, Inc . Accessed November 10, 2015. 
https://archive.icann.org/en/nsi/factsheet.htm. 
 33 . For a detailed account of efforts to control the root zone, see Mueller,  
Ruling the Root . 
 34 . https://www.icann.org/en/system/ﬁ les/press-materials/release-03feb11-
en.pdf. 
 35 . ARIN,  Waiting List for Unmet Requests . Accessed November 14, 2015. 
https://www.arin.net/resources/request/waiting_list.html. 

Notes 
165
 36 . NRO Statistics,  IPv4 Depletion and IPv6 Deployment FAQs . Accessed Novem-
ber 2, 2015. https://www.nro.net/ipv6/nro_depletion_deployment_faq. 
 37 . ICANN,  Factsheet: IPv6 The Internet’s Vital Expansion. Accessed Decem-
ber 2, 2015. https://www.icann.org/en/system/ﬁ les/ﬁ les/factsheet-ipv6-26oct07-
en.pdf. 
 38 . Dave Evans, “The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the 
Internet Is Changing Everything,” Cisco White Paper (April 2011). Accessed 
December 5, 2015. https://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoT_
IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf. 
 39 . H. Zhao, “ITU and Internet Governance,”  Council Working Group on the 
World Summit on the Information Society  (December, 13–14, 2004) .  Accessed 
December 6, 2015 .  https://www.itu.int/council/wsis/Geneva3_04/Doc6_Zhao-
rev1.doc. 
 40 . ICANN-GAC,  ICANN By-Laws . Accessed December 14, 2015. https://gac
web.icann.org/display/gacweb/ICANN+Bylaws. 
 41 . GAC,  Principles for the Delegation and Administration of Country Code Top 
Level Domains . Accessed December 14, 2015. https://archive.icann.org/en/com
mittees/gac/gac-cctldprinciples-23feb00.htm. 
 42 . Milton L. Mueller,  Networks and States: The Global Politics of Internet Gover-
nance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010), 243. 
 43 . Quoted in Jonathan Weinberg, “Governments, Privatization, and Privati-
zation: ICANN and the GAC.”  Michigan Telecommunications & Technology Law 
Review 189 (2011): 207. 
 44 . Mohd Sharil Tarmizi,  Correspondence from GAC Chairman to ICANN Board 
regarding .XXX TLD (August 12, 2005). Accessed December 10, 2015. https://
www.icann.org/resources/pages/tarmizi-to-board-2005–08–12-en. 
 45 . ICANN,  Draft Rationale for Approving Registry Agreement with ICM’s for 
.XXX sTLD . Accessed December 17, 2015. https://www.icann.org/en/system/
ﬁ les/bm/draft-icm-rationale-18mar11-en.pdf. 
 46 . Jonathan Weinberg, “Governments, Privatization, and Privatization: ICANN 
and the GAC.”  Michigan Telecommunications & Technology Law Review 189 
(2011). 
 47 . Quoted in Lennard G. Kruger, “Internet Governance and the Domain 
Name System: Issues for Congress,”  Congressional Research Service Report  (Feb-
ruary 9, 2012). Accessed December 12, 2015. https://digital.library.unt.edu/
ark:/67531/metadc87212/m1/1/high_res_d/R42351_2012Feb09.pdf. 
 48 . WIPO,  Guide to the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy. 
 Accessed December 14, 2015. http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/domains/guide. 
 49 . Gerald M. Levine, Esq.,  Domain Name Arbitration: A Practical Guide to 
Asserting and Defending Claims of Cybersquatting Under the Uniform Domain Name 
Dispute Resolution Policy  (New York: Legal Corner Press, 2015). 
 50 . Milton Mueller, “ICANN and Internet Governance Sorting through the 
Debris of ‘Self-Regulation,’”  Info 1, no. 6 (December 1999): 519. 

166 
Notes
 51 . Senator Ted Cruz, “Cruz Senate Speech on Internet Giveaway,”  C-Span 
(September 8, 2106). Accessed January 22, 2017. https://www.c-span.org/video/?c4
619387/cruz-senate-speech-internet-giveaway. 
 52 . DeNardis,  The Global War for Internet Governance . 
 Chapter 3. The Role of the United Nations 
 1 . World Summit on the Information Society, “Resolution 73 of the ITU 
Plenipotentiary Conference, Minneapolis, 1998.” Accessed January 24 2016. 
http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs/background/resolutions/73.html. 
  2 . General Assembly Resolution 56/183, “World Summit on the Information 
Society.” Accessed January 24, 2016. http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs/back
ground/resolutions/56_183_unga_2002.pdf. 
  3 . World Summit on the Information Society, “Declaration of Principles and 
Plan of Action (Preliminary Inputs from Brazil) December 2002.” Accessed Janu-
ary 27, 2016. http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/md/03/wsispc2/c/S03-WSISPC2-
C-0057!!PDF-E.pdf. 
  4 . Report of the Working Group on Internet Governance, June 2005. 
Accessed December 15, 2016. http://www.wgig.org/docs/WGIGREPORT.pdf. 
  5 . World Summit on the Information Society, “Tunis Agenda for the Infor-
mation Society,” para 73. Accessed December 18, 2015. http://www.itu.int/net/
wsis/docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.html. 
  6 . Tom Wright, “EU Tries to Unblock Internet Impasse,”  New York Times 
(September 30, 2005). Accessed December 12, 2015. http://www.nytimes.com/
iht/2005/09/30/business/IHT-30net.html?pagewanted=print .
  7 . Secretary-General’s Message to the Internet Governance Forum, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil, 12 November 2007. Accessed January 23, 2016. http://www.un
.org/sg/statements/?nid=2859. 
  8 . Internet Governance Forum, “Tenth Annual Meeting of the Internet Gov-
ernance Forum, 2015.” Accessed December 12, 2015. http://www.intgovforum
.org/cms/2015-igf-joao-pessoa/igf-2015-attendance-statistics. 
  9 . ICANN, “ICANN at the Internet Governance Forum.” Accessed Janu-
ary 26, 2016. https://www.icann.org/news/blog/icann-at-the-internet-governance-
forum-igf-2015. 
 10 . Internet Governance Forum, “Dynamic Coalitions.” Accessed April 12, 
2017. http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/dynamiccoalitions. 
 11 . Jeremy Malcolm,  Multi-Stakeholder Governance and the Internet Governance 
Forum (Australia: Terminus Press, 2008), 459. 
 12 . Nanette Levinson and Meryem Marzouki, “Internet Governance Institution-
alization: Process and Trajectories,” in  Global Governance Facing Structural Changes, 
 ed.   Michèle Rioux, Kim Fontaine-Skronski (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2015), ch. 1. 
 13 . Internet Governance Forum, “Dynamic Coalition on Core Internet Val-
ues.” Accessed January 12, 2016. http://www.intgovforum.org/cmsold/dynamic
coalitions/481-dynamic-coalition-on-core-internet-values. 

Notes 
167
 14 . For example, on December 5, 2012, the U.S. House of Representatives 
unanimously passed a resolution urging the U.S. government not to give ITU 
control over the Internet. 
 15 . For more information about ITU responsibilities, visit http://www.itu
.int/en/Pages/default.aspx. 
 16 . The following article headline from the  Economist is one example, 
“A Digital Cold War.” December 14, 2012. http://www.economist.com/blogs/
babbage/2012/12/internet-regulation. 
 17 . These models were ﬁ rst introduced and discussed in, Carol M. Glen, “Inter-
net Governance: Territorializing Cyberspace?”  Politics and Policy  42, no. 5 (2014): 
635–657. 
 18 . World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT 12), 
“United States of America Proposals for the Work of the Conference Document #E.” 
Accessed November 3, 2015. http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/1962
44.pdf. 
 19 . World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT 12), 
“Russian Federation Proposals for the Work of the Conference.” Accessed Febru-
ary 2, 106. https://archive.org/details/Wcit12—RussianFederationProposalDocu
ment27-e. 
 20 . World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT 12), 
“Final Acts.” Accessed February 1, 2016. http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/documents/
ﬁ nal-acts-wcit-12.pdf. 
 21 . Lyndsay Powell, “In Defense of Multilateralism.” Paper prepared for 
Global Environmental Governance: the Post-Johannesburg Agenda, October 
23–25, 2003. Yale Center for Environmental Law and Policy (New Haven, CT, 
2003), 7. 
 22 . Gustavo Capdevila, “No Agreement on Internet Governance,”  Inter Press 
Service English News Wire , September 12, 2005. 
 23 . WCIT, “Final Acts.” 
 24 . Milton Mueller and Jisuk Woo, “Participation in International Governance 
Regime by the ‘Rest of the World’: An Analysis of ICANN.” Paper Presented at the 
Annual Meeting of the International Communication Association, New Orleans 
Sheraton, New Orleans, LA, May 27, 2004. Accessed January 28, 2016. http://
www.allacademic.com/meta/p112362_index.html. 
 25 . The U.S. government listed ﬁ ve reasons for rejecting the treaty: (1) Termi-
nology: Expanding the deﬁ nition with regard to which entities will be covered 
by the treaty. (2) Spam: Seen as a form of content, the regulation of spam opens 
the door to regulating other forms of content, including political and cultural 
speech. (3) Security: Granting that authority to deal with cybercrime could lead 
to an abuse of power if governments use this as a pretext to review and control 
content. (4) Internet governance: The United States will not support any 
UN sanctioned Internet control or mandates. (5) Internet resolution: WCIT is 
not the appropriate venue to discuss Internet issues, so Resolution 3 should be 
removed. 

168 
Notes
 26 . Pakistan, “On Behalf of Group of Countries Joint Statement on Right to 
Privacy,” 24th Session of HRC (2013). Accessed December 14, 2015. https://
www.apc.org/en/system/ﬁ les/HRC24_Pakistan_20130919.pdf. 
 27 . Dilma Rousseff, “Statement at the Opening of the General Debate off the 
68th Session of the United Nations General Assembly.” New York (September 24, 
2013). Accessed October 12, 2015. http://gadebate.un.org/sites/default/ﬁ les/ga
statements/68/BR_en.pdf. 
 28 . ICANN, “Montevideo Statement on the Future of Internet Cooperation” 
(October 7, 2013). Accessed October 12, 2015. https://www.icann.org/news/
announcement-2013-10-07-en. 
 29 . Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, “U.S. Government Submission 
to NETmundial on Internet Governance.” Washington, DC (February 24, 2014). 
Accessed November 11, 2015. 
 30 . State Duma of the Russian Federation, “Russian Parliament Submission 
to NETmundial.” April 23, 2014. Accessed November 11, 2015. http://content.net
mundial.br/contribution/themes/133. 
 31 . Harold Trinkunas and Ian Wallace,  Converging on the Future of Global 
Internet Governance: The United States and Brazil  (Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution, July 2015). 
 32 . Ibid. 
 33 . Sandeep Joshi, “India to Suggest Renaming of Internet as ‘Equinet,’”  The 
Hindu (April 16, 2014). Accessed November 20, 2015. http://www.thehindu.com/
sci-tech/technology/internet/india-to-suggest-renaming-of-internet-as-equinet/
article5916877.ece. 
 34 . NETmundial, “NETmundial Multistakeholder Statement”   (April, 24 2014). 
Accessed November 22, 2015. http://netmundial.br/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/
NETmundial-Multistakeholder-Document.pdf. 
 35 . DIPNOTE, U.S. State Department Ofﬁ cial Blog, “A Major Win for the 
Open Internet” (April 29, 2014). Accessed November 22, 2015. 
 36 . Dilma Rousseff, “NETmundial Opening Speech” (April 23, 2014). Accessed 
November 22, 2015. http://netmundial.br/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/NETMun
dial-23April2014-Dilma-Rousseff-Opening-Speech-en.pdf. 
 37 . Sarah Myers West, “Globalizing Internet Governance: Negotiating Cyber-
space Agreements in the Post-Snowden Era.” Paper Presented at the 42nd 
Research Conference on Communication, Information and Internet Policy, Uni-
versity of Southern California/Annenberg School for Communication (2014). 
 38 . NETmundial Initiative,  What Is the Mission of the NETmundial Initiative? 
Accessed April 24, 2015. http://www.netmundial.org/initiative-basics. 
 39 . Julia Pohle, “Multistakeholderism Unmasked: How the NetMundial Ini-
tiative Shifts Battlegrounds in Internet Governance,”  Global Policy (January 5, 
2015). Accessed April 24, 2015. http://www.globalpolicyjournal.com/blog/05/01/
2015/multistakeholderism-unmasked-how-netmundial-initiative-shifts-battle
grounds-internet. 
 40 . Internet Society, “Statement on the NETmundial Initiative.” November 16, 
2014. Accessed February 2, 2015. http://www.internetsociety.org/news/internet-
society-statement-netmundial-initiative. 

Notes 
169
 41 . Internet Architecture Board, “IAB Statement on the NETmundial Initia-
tive.” Accessed February 2, 2015. https://www.iab.org/documents/correspon
dence-reports-documents/2014–2/iab-statement-on-the-netmundial-initiative. 
 42 . Germany, “Statement to the ITU Plenipotentiary.” Busan (October 22 
2014). Accessed November 21, 2014. http://www.auswaertiges-amt.de/DE/Info
service/Presse/Reden/2014/141022_Cyber.html. 
 43 . Ambassador Daniel A. Sepulveda,  Remarks at the ITU Plenipotentiary 
and International Internet Governance (December 4, 2104). Accessed November 21, 
2015. https://2009-2017.state.gov/e/eb/rls/rm/2014/234684.htm. 
 44 . United Nations General Assembly, “Modalities for the Overall Review by the 
General Assembly of the Implementation of the Outcomes of the World Summit on 
the Information Society.”  A/RES/68/302 (August 13, 2104). Accessed January 16, 
2015. http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/68/302. 
 45 . ICANN, “Reﬂ ections on the WSIS+10 High-Level Meeting” (December 20, 
2015). Accessed January 22, 2016. https://www.icann.org/news/blog/wsis-10-hlm. 
 Chapter 4. The Digital Divide 
  1 . United States Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration, “Falling Through the Net: A Survey of the 
‘Have Nots’ in Rural and Urban America.” Accessed March 23, 2016. http://www
.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fallingthru.html. 
  2 . ITU, “The World in 2013: ICT Facts and Figures.” Accessed March 19, 
2016. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFig
ures2013-e.pdf. 
  3 . Michael Kende, “The Shrinking Digital Divide.” Accessed March 20, 
2016. http://techcrunch.com/2015/07/12/the-shrinking-digital-divide/. 
  4 . OECD Secretariat, “Emerging Trends and Issues: The Nature of the Digi-
tal Divide in Learning,” in  Learning to Bridge the Digital Divide  (Paris: OECD Pub-
lishing, 2000), 51. 
  5 . J. I. Deichmann, A. Eshghi, D. Haughton, M. Masnghetti, S. Sayek, and 
H. Topi, “Exploring Breakpoints and Interaction Effects among Predictors of the 
International Digital Divide,”  Journal of Global Information Technology Manage-
ment 9 no. 4 (2006): 47–71. 
  6 . Kenneth Kenisten, “The Four Digital Divides.” Accessed March, 26 2016. 
http://www.mit.edu/people/kken/PAPERS/Intro_Sage.html. 
  7 . United Nations, “Resolution 1778: International Cooperation to Assist in 
the Development of Information Media in Less Developed Countries.” Accessed 
April 3, 2016. https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/RESOLUTION/GEN/NR0/192/
86/IMG/NR019286.pdf?OpenElement .
  8 . International Commission for the Study of Communications Problems. 
Accessed April 2, 2016. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0004/000400/040066eb
.pdf. 
  9 . Kaarle Nordenstreng, “How the New World Order and Imperialism Chal-
lenge Media Studies.” Accessed April 4, 2016. http://triplec.at/index.php/tripleC/
article/viewFile/495/480. 

170 
Notes
 10 . UN Economic and Social Council, Report of the high-level panel of 
experts on information and Communication technology. Accessed March 30, 
2016. http://www.un.org/documents/ecosoc/docs/2000/e2000-55.pdf. 
 11 . United Nations, “MDG8—Access to New Technologies.” Accessed Febru-
ary 20, 2016. http://iif.un.org/content/mdg-8-access-new-technologies. 
 12 . United Nations Development Program, “Innovation: Applying Knowledge 
in Development.” Accessed April 12, 2016. http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/
documents/Science-part2.pdf. 
 13 . ITU Press Release, “United Nations adopts Resolution on the World Sum-
mit on the Information Society.” Accessed April 1, 2016. https://www.itu.int/
newsroom/press_releases/2002/01.html. 
 14 . United Nations, “Report of the Working Group on Internet Governance.” 
Accessed April 17, 2016. http://www.wgig.org/docs/WGIGREPORT.pdf. 
 15 . Internet Governance Forum, “About the IGF.” Accessed April 17, 2016. 
http://www.intgovforum.org/cms/aboutigf. 
 16 . International Telecommunications Union, “The Report of the Task Force 
on Financial Mechanisms for ICT for Development.” Accessed March 27 2016. 
http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/tffm/ﬁ nal-report.pdf. 
 17 . Ibid. 
 18 . World Summit on the Information Society, “Tunis Agenda for the Infor-
mation Society.” Accessed March 28. 2016. http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs2/
tunis/off/6rev1.html. 
 19 . U.S. Department of State, “Digital Freedom Initiative: A New Model for 
Development.” Accessed April 12, 2016. http://iipdigital.usembassy.gov/st/en
glish/texttrans/2003/03/20030305162229corey@pd.state.gov0.0325281.html#
ixzz4By8D98IV. 
 20 . Ibid. 
 21 . See, Abu Bhuiyan,  Internet Governance and the Global South  (London: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2014). 
 22 . International Telecommunications Union,  The State of Broadband . Acc-
essed April 11, 2015. http://www.broadbandcommission.org/Documents/reports/
bb-annualreport2015.pdf. 
 23 . Dr. Rajiv Shah and Priya Jaisinghani, “Toward a More Inclusive Digital 
Economy,”  Innovations Special Issue.  Accessed April 12, 2016.   http://www.mit
pressjournals.org/userimages/ContentEditor/1421439266694/INNOVATIONS-
DIGITAL-INCLUSION-FOREWORD.pdf. 
 24 . President of the UN General Assembly, “Concept Note: WSIS Stakeholder 
Consultation.” Accessed April 14, 2016. http://www.un.org/pga/wp-content/
uploads/sites/3/2015/07/300615_World-Summit-on-the-InfSociety-Stakehold-
ers-meeting-Concept-note-and-Programme.pdf. 
 25 . Ibid. 
 26 . Group of 77, “Statement on Behalf of the Group of 77 and China by a 
South African Representative to the United Nations During the Second Prepara-
tory Meeting for the UN General Assembly’s Review of Outcomes from the 
World Summit on the Information Society.” Accessed April 15, 2016. http://
www.g77.org/statement/getstatement.php?id=151020b. 

Notes 
171
 27 . “Connecting the Next Billion” was the theme of the 2015 Internet Gover-
nance Forum held in Brazil in 2015. 
 28 . International Telecommunications Union, “Study on International Internet 
Connectivity in sub-Saharan Africa.” Accessed April 15, 2016. https://www.itu.int/
en/ITU-D/Regulatory-Market/Documents/IIC_Africa_Final-en.pdf. 
 29 . Arpit Gupta, Matt Calder, Nick Feamster, Marshini Chetty, Enrico Calan-
dro, and Ethan Katz-Bassett, “Peering at the Internet’s Frontier: A First Look at 
ISP Interconnectivity in Africa.” Accessed April 12, 2016. https://www.cs
.princeton.edu/~arpitg/pdfs/pam14.pdf. 
 30 . International Telecommunications Union, “Study on International Inter-
net Connectivity.” 
 31 . Ibid. 
 32 . African Internet Service Providers Association, “The Halfway Proposi-
tion.” Accessed April 21, 2016. http://aﬁ x.afridns.org/technicaltraining/T1/AFRI
SPA_Halfway%20Proposition.pdf. 
 33 . Ibid. 
 34 . Towela Nyirenda Jere and Tesfaye Biru, “Internet Development and Inter-
net Governance in Africa.” Accessed April 21, 2016. http://www.internetsociety
.org/sites/default/ﬁ les/Internet%20development%20and%20Internet%20gover
nance%20in%20Africa.pdf. 
 35 . Africa IT, “List of Internet Exchange Points.” Accessed April 22, 2016. 
http://www.afrique-it.com/en/web-tech/list-of-internet-exchange-points-
in-africa-ixps/. 
 36 . Michael Kende and Charles Hurpy, “Assessment of the Impact of Inter-
net Exchange Points—Empirical Study of Kenya and Nigeria. Accessed April 22, 
2016. http://www.internetsociety.org/sites/default/ﬁ les/Assessment%20of%20
the%20impact%20of%20Internet%20Exchange%20Points%20%E2%
80%93%20empirical%20study%20of%20Kenya%20and%20Nigeria.pdf. 
 37 . Ben Wagner and Patricia Mindus, “NoC Internet Governance Case Stud-
ies Series: Multistakeholder Governance and Nodal Authority—Understanding 
Internet Exchange Point.” Accessed April 22, 2016. https://publixphere.net/i/
noc/page/IG_Case_Study_Multistakeholder_Governance_and_Nodal_Authority_
Understanding_Internet_Exchange_Points. 
 38 . P. J. Tichenor, G. A. Donohue, and C. N. Olien, “Mass Media Flow and 
Differential Growth in Knowledge,”  Public Opinion Quarterly  34, no. 2 (1970): 
159–170. doi: 10.1086/267786. 
 39 . Sylvia E. Korupp and Marc Szydlik, “Causes and Trends of the Digital 
Divide,”  European Sociological Review  21, no. 4 (2005): 417. 
 40 . World Economic Forum, “Expanding Participation and Boosting 
Growth: The Infrastructure Needs of the Digital Economy.” Accessed May 3, 
2016. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEFUSA_DigitalInfrastructure_Report2015
.pdf. 
 41 . Paul Gilster,  Digital Literacy (New York: Wiley, 1997), 15. 
 42 . Internet World Statistics,  Internet World Users by Language. Accessed 
May 5, 2015. http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats7.htm. 

172 
Notes
 43 . Web3 Techs, “Usage of Content Languages for Websites.” Accessed May 14, 
2016. http://w3techs.com/technologies/overview/content_language/all. 
 44 . Internet.org, “State of Connectivity 2014.” Accessed May 14, 2016. https://
fbnewsroomus.ﬁ les.wordpress.com/2015/02/state-of-connectivity1.pdf. 
 45 . Mark Graham, “Inequitable Distributions in Internet Geographies,”  Inno-
vations Digital Inclusion . Accessed May 3, 2016. http://www.mitpressjournals.org/
userimages/ContentEditor/1415302178306/INNOVATIONS_DIGITAL-INCLU
SION.pdf, p. 30. 
 46 . InfoDev, “Open Access Models Options for Improving Backbone Access 
in Developing Countries.” Accessed May 11, 2016. http://www-wds.worldbank
.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2005/11/15/000160016_20
051115175731/Rendered/PDF/343070OPEN1ACCESS.pdf. 
 47 . Ibid. 
 48 . Africa, “The Leland Initiative.” Accessed May 12, 2016. http://www
.oafrica.com/ict-policy/the-leland-initiative. 
 49 . International Telecommunications Union, “Connect Africa.” Accessed 
May 12, 2016. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Conferences/connect/Documents/
Post%20Connect%20Africa%20Summit%20Report%20%28English%29.pdf. 
 50 . Deloitte, “Sub-Saharan Africa Mobile Observatory 2012.” Accessed June 7, 
2016. http://www.gsma.com/publicpolicy/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/SSA_Full
Report_v6.1_clean.pdf. 
 51 . Jose Marino Garcia and Tim Kelly, “The Economics and Policy Implications of 
Infrastructure Sharing and Mutualisation in Africa.” Accessed June 7, 2016. http://pub
docs.worldbank.org/pubdocs/publicdoc/2016/1/533261452529900341/WDR16-BP-
Infrastructure-Mutualisation-Garcia.pdf. 
 52 . International Telecommunications Union, “Harmonization of Policies 
Governing the ICT Market in the UEMOA-ECOWAS Space.” Accessed June 5, 
2016. https://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/projects/itu-ec/Ghana/modules/Compil-
Guidelines_ﬁ nal.pdf. 
 53 . ITU and UNESCO, “The State of Broadband 2015.” Accessed March 21, 
2016. http://www.broadbandcommission.org/documents/reports/bb-annualreport
2015.pdf. 
 54 . Lily Shashaani, “Gender Differences in Computer Attitudes and Use 
Among College Students.” Accessed June 10, 2016. http://education.msu.edu/
cepse/mqm/documents/MQMPrelimArticleFS03.pdf. 
 55 . Ibid. 
 56 . Pew Research Center, “Issues about Computers and the Internet: Awareness, 
Interest, Attitudes, Aptitude, Self-conﬁ dence.” Accessed June 10 2016. http://www
.pewinternet.org/2005/12/28/part-6-issues-about-computers-and-the-internet-
awareness-interest-attitudes-aptitude-self-conﬁ dence. 
 57 . International Telecommunications Union, “Taskforce on Gender Issues” 
(29 January 2001). Accessed May 21, 2016. https://www.itu.int/ITU-D/tdag/
05thTDAG/5thMeeting/05-e.pdf. 
 58 . Anita Gurumurthy, “Gender and ICTs.” Accessed March 15, 2016. http://
www.bridge.ids.ac.uk/sites/bridge.ids.ac.uk/ﬁ les/reports/CEP-ICTs-OR.pdf. 

Notes 
173
 59 . International Telecommunications Union, “The World in 2013.” Accessed 
May 5, 2016. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFacts
Figures2013-e.pdf. 
 60 . Eva M. Rathgeber, “Gender and Telecentres: What Have We Learned?” 
Accessed June 15, 2016. slideplayer.com/slide/728339. 
 61 . Anita Gurumurthy, “Gender and ICTs.” 
 62 . Annabelle Sreberny, “WSIS: Articulating Information at the Summit,” 
 Gazette  66, no. 3–4 (2004): 193–201. 
 63 . Avri Doria, “Women’s Rights, Gender and Internet Governance.” Accessed 
June 16, 2016. http://gigx.events.apc.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2015/06/
women_IG_issue_gigx4.pdf. 
 64 . DiploFoundation, “Gender and the IGF: Participation and Language Used.” 
Accessed June 16, 2016. http://www.diplomacy.edu/IGFLanguage/gender. 
 65 . Internet Governance Forum 2015, “Evolution of Internet Governance: 
Empowering Sustainable Development.” Accessed June 15, 2016. http://www
.intgovforum.org/cms/documents/igf-meeting/igf-2016/takingstock/726-gender-
report-card/ﬁ le. 
 66 . D. Crocker and N. Clark, “An IETF with Much Diversity and Professional 
Conduct.” November 2015, section 2. Accessed June 16, 2016. https://tools.ietf
.org/html/rfc7704#section-2. 
 67 . Ibid. 
 68 . IETF, “IETF Anti-Harassment Policy.” Accessed June 16, 201. https://
www.ietf.org/iesg/statement/ietf-anti-harassment-policy.html. 
 Chapter 5. Human Rights 
  1 . John Perry Barlow, “A Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace.” 
Accessed June 3, 2016. https://www.eff.org/cyberspace-independence. 
  2 . Quoted in Jonathon W. Perry, “Internet Access Rights: A Brief History 
and Intellectual Origins,”  William Mitchell Law Review 38, no. 1: 18, Article 11. 
Accessed May 29, 2016. http://open.mitchellhamline.edu/wmlr/vol38/iss1/11. 
  3 . Vienna Declaration, part 1, paragraph 5. Accessed May 14, 2016. http://
www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/Vienna.aspx. 
  4 . Adamantia Pollis, “A New Universalism,” in  Human Rights: New Perspec-
tives, New Realities , ed. Adamantia Pollis and Peter Schwab (Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner Publishers, 2000), 12. 
  5 . World Summit on the Information Society, “Declaration of Principles.” 
Accessed June 4, 2016. http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs/geneva/ofﬁ cial/dop.html. 
  6 . Ibid. 
  7 . United Nations Press Release, 17, December 2003. Accessed June 11, 
2016. http://www.un.org/press/en/2003/hr4718.doc.htm. 
  8 . Ibid. 
  9 . Frank La Rue, “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion 
and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression.” Accessed 

174 
Notes
June 11, 2016. http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/17session/
A.HRC.17.27_en.pdf. 
 10 . Ibid. 
 11 . “The Constitution of Greece.” Accessed June 15, 2016. http://www.wipo
.int/edocs/lexdocs/laws/en/gr/gr220en.pdf .
 12 . BBC News, “Finland Makes Broadband a ‘Legal Right.’” Accessed June 12, 
2016. http://www.bbc.com/news/10461048. 
 13 . Stuart N. Brotman, “Life Liberty and the Pursuit of Broadband,”  Brookings , 
November 13, 2014. Accessed June 22, 2016. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/
techtank/2014/11/13/life-liberty-and-the-pursuit-of-broadband. 
 14 . Human Rights Council, “Resolution L13, the Promotion, Protection and 
Enjoyment of Human Rights on the Internet.” Accessed May 27, 2016. http://
www.loc.gov/law/foreign-news/article/u-n-human-rights-council-ﬁ rst-resolution-
on-internet-free-speech. 
 15 . Heather Brown, Emily Guskin, and Amy Mitchell, “The Role of Social Media 
in the Arab Uprisings.” Pew Research Center, November 28, 2012. Accessed May 15, 
2016. http://www.journalism.org/2012/11/28/role-social-media-arab-uprisings. 
 16 . Alberto Dainotti et al., “Analysis of Country-wide Internet Outages 
Caused by Censorship.” Accessed June 2, 2016. http://www.caida.org/publica
tions/papers/2011/outages_censorship/outages_censorship.pdf. 
 17 . BBC News, “Internet access Is ‘a Fundamental Right.’” Accessed June 17, 
2016. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/8548190.stm. 
 18 . Vinton G. Cerf, “Internet Access Is Not a Human Right,”  New York Times 
(January 5, 2012). Accessed June 11, 2016. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/05/
opinion/internet-access-is-not-a-human-right.html?_r=0. 
 19 . Eleanor D. Kinney and Brian Alexander Clark, “Provisions for Health and 
Health Care in the Constitutions of the Countries of the World,”  Cornell Interna-
tional Law Journal 37, no. 2 (2004). 
 20 . World Health Organization, “25 Questions and Answers on Health and 
Human Rights,”  Health & Human Rights Publication Series  no.   1 (July 2002): 9. 
Accessed June 2, 2016. http://www.who.int/hhr/NEW37871OMSOK.pdf. 
 21 . Frank La Rue, “Report of the Special Rapporteur to the Human Rights 
Council on Key Trends and Challenges to the Right of All Individuals to Seek, 
Receive and Impart Information and Ideas of All Kinds through the Internet.” 
UN Doc. A/HRC/17/27 (May 16, 2011), para. 60. 
 22 . Ibid., 22. 
 23 . Kay Mathiesen, “Human Rights for the Digital Age,”  Journal of Mass Media 
Ethics 29 (2014): 2–18. 
 24 . Internet Rights and Principles Coalition, “Charter of Human Rights & 
Principles for the Internet.” Accessed June 23, 2016. http://internetrightsand
principles.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/IRPC_english_4thedition.pdf. 
 25 . IRP Coalition, “10 Internet Rights & Principles.” Accessed June 23, 2016. 
http://internetrightsandprinciples.org/site/campaign. 

Notes 
175
 26 . Kenneth W. Abbott and Duncan Snidal, “Hard and Soft Law in Interna-
tional Governance,”  International Organization  54, no. 3 (Summer 2000): 421. 
 27 . Ibid., 422. 
 28 . Internet Rights and Principles Coalition, “Charter.” 
 29 . UN Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, 
“Responsibilities of Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises 
with Regard to Human Rights.” Resolution 2003/16, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/Sub.2/
2003/L.11 at 52 (2003). Accessed June 27, 2016. http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/links/
res2003-16.html .
 30 . ICANN, “Articles of Incorporation of Internet Corporation for Assigned 
Names and Numbers.” Accessed July 1, 2016. https://www.icann.org/resources/
pages/governance/articles-en. 
 31 . ICANN, “Bylaws for Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Num-
bers as Amended 2016.” Accessed July 1, 2016. https://www.icann.org/en/sys
tem/ﬁ les/ﬁ les/adopted-bylaws-27may16-en.pdf. 
 32 . Council of Europe, “Freedom of Expression and Information.” Accessed 
July 23, 2016. https://www.coe.int/en/web/internet-users-rights/freedom-of-expression-
and-information. 
 33 . Navi Pillay, “Freedom of Expression and Incitement to Hatred in the 
Context of International Human Rights Law,” Lecture at the London School of 
Economics, 15 February 2013. Accessed July 17, 2016. http://www.ohchr.org/
en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=13018&LangID=E. 
 34 . United States Supreme Court,  Virginia v. Black  538 U.S. 343 (2003). 
 35 . Lawrence Lessig and Paul Resnik, “Zoning Speech on the Internet: 
A Legal and Technical Model.”  Research Publication No. 1999–06 . Harvard Law 
School. Accessed July 23, 2016. http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/wg_home/uploads/
200/1999-06.pdf. 
 36 . Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Hate Crime Statistics” (2015). Accessed 
July 22, 2016. https://ucr.fbi.gov/hate-crime/2015/topic-pages/incidentsandoffen
ses_ﬁ nal. 
 37 . European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, “Hate Crime in the 
European Union.” Accessed July 22, 2016. https://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/
ﬁ les/fra-factsheet_hatecrime_en_ﬁ nal_0.pdf. 
 38 . Organization of Islamic Cooperation, “Observatory Report on Islamopho-
bia Annex.” A/HRC/9/G/2 (24 July 2008). Accessed August 2, 2016. http://hrli
brary.umn.edu/arabic/AR-HRC/AHRC9–61.pdf, p. 2. 
 39 . Angelina E. Theodorou, “Which Countries Still Outlaw Apostasy and Blas-
phemy?” Pew Research Center, July 29, 2016. http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2016/07/29/which-countries-still-outlaw-apostasy-and-blasphemy. 
 40 . “Joint Declaration on Defamation of Religions, and Anti-terrorism and 
Anti-extremism Legislation.” Accessed August 3, 2016. http://www.oas.org/en/
iachr/expression/showarticle.asp?artID=735&lID=1. 

176 
Notes
 41 . United States Supreme Court,  Brandenburg v. Ohio , 395 U.S. 444 (1969). 
 42 . New York City Bar Association, “United Nations Resolutions on Religious 
Hate Speech: The Impact on Freedom of Expression” (June 2014). Accessed 
August 5, 2016. http://www2.nycbar.org/pdf/report/uploads/20072724-UNRes
olutionsonReligiousHateSpeech—ImpactonFreedomofExpression.pdf. 
 43 . Ekmeleddin I˙hsanog˘lu, Interview with  France 24 (October 5, 2012). 
Accessed August 18, 2016. http://www.france24.com/en/20121004-ekmeleddin-
ihsanoglu-secretary-general-organisation-islamic-cooperation-ioc-protests-arab-
world-anti-islam-ﬁ lm-syria. 
 44 . Remarks by OIC Ambassador Slimane Chikh during the Opening Ses-
sion of the 3rd Istanbul Process Meeting, Geneva, June 19, 2013. 
 45 . Remarks by the President Barack Obama to the UN General Assembly, 
United Nations Headquarters, New York (September 25, 2012). 
 46 . Southern Poverty Law Center, “Stormfront.” Accessed August 12, 2016. 
https://www.splcenter.org/ﬁ ghting-hate/extremist-ﬁ les/group/stormfront. 
 47 . Hatebase, “Most Common Hate Speech.” Accessed August 12, 2016. 
https://www.hatebase.org/popular. 
 48 . Amita Kelly, “Clinton: Trump Is ‘Taking Hate Groups Mainstream.” 
National Public Radio. Accessed July 2, 2016. http://www.npr.org/2016/08/25/
491358661/clinton-trump-is-taking-hate-groups-mainstream .
 49 . Rita Izsák, “Report of the Special Rapporteur on Minority Issues.” A/
HRC/17/27 (May 16, 2011). Accessed July 29, 2016. http://www.ohchr.org, 6. 
 50 . Maeve Duggan, “Online Harassment.” Pew Research Center, October 22, 
2014. Accessed August 5, 2016. http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/10/22/online-
harassment. 
 51 . Caitlin Dewey, “The Only Guide to Gamergate You Will Ever Need to 
Read,”  Washington Post (October 14, 2014). 
 52 . Katherine Clark, Open Letter to the Appropriations Committee and 
Department of Justice (March 10, 2015). Accessed August 12, 2016. https://drive
.google.com/ﬁ le/d/0B-QkCUPMetwXdE5qNkVlb1U5REk/view. 
 53 . Danielle Keats Citron,  Hate Crimes in Cyberspace (Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 2014), 132. 
 54 . Twitter, “The Twitter Rules.” Accessed August 16, 2016. https://support
.twitter.com/articles/18311. 
 55 . Ibid. 
 56 . Claire Cain Miller, “Google Has No Plans to Rethink Video Status.”  New 
York Times (September 14, 2012). Accessed August 14, 2016. http://www.nytimes
.com/2012/09/15/world/middleeast/google-wont-rethink-anti-islam-videos-sta
tus.html?_r=2&. 
 57 . “Code of Conduct Countering Illegal Hate Speech Online.” Accessed 
August 4, 2016. http://ec.europa.eu/justice/fundamental-rights/ﬁ les/hate_speech_
code_of_conduct_en.pdf. 
 58 . Rita Izsák, “Report of the Special Rapporteur on Minority Issues,” 22. 

Notes 
177
 Chapter 6. Securing Cyberspace 
 1 . Stephen Gandel, “Lloyds CEO: Cyber-attacks Cost Companies $400 Bil-
lion Every Year,”  Fortune.  Accessed July 7, 2016. http://fortune.com/2015/01/23/
cyber-attack-insurance-lloyds. 
  2 . Ginni Rometty, “IBM Security Summit: Prepared Remarks.” Accessed 
July 7, 2016. https://www.ibm.com/ibm/ginni/05_14_2015.html. 
 3 . Quoted in “Net of Insecurity: A Flaw in the Design,”  Washington Post . 
Accessed July 9, 2016. 
  4 . Ibid. 
  5 . Ibid. 
  6 . Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, “Computers at Risk: 
Safe Computing in the Information Age.” National Research Council (1991). 
Accessed July 12, 2016. https://www.nap.edu/read/1581/chapter/3, p. 7. 
  7 . Ibid. 
  8 . Chris Chambers, Justin Dolske, and Jayaraman Iyer, “TCP/IP Security.” 
Accessed July 12, 2016. http://www.linuxsecurity.com/resource_ﬁ les/documen
tation/tcpip-security.html. 
  9 . Software Engineering Institute, CERT Division, “TCP SYN Flooding and 
IP Spooﬁ ng Attacks.” Accessed July 11, 2016. https://www.cert.org/historical/
advisories/CA-1996-21.cfm. 
 10 . John Thomas and Adam J. Elbirt, “IPsec: How It Works and Why We 
Need It,”  Computerworld. Accessed July 14, 2016. http://www.computerworld.com/
article/2561149/security0/ipsec—how-it-works-and-why-we-need-it.html. 
 11 . Chris Chambers et al., “TCP/IP Security.” 
 12 . S. M. Bellovin, “Security Problems in the TCP/IP Protocol Suite.” Accessed 
July 15, 2016. http://cecs.wright.edu/~pmateti/InternetSecurity/Lectures/Papers/
TCP-IP_Security_Problems.htm. 
 13 . Federal Communications Commission, “Final Report—BGP Security 
Best Practices.” Accessed July 21, 2016. https://transition.fcc.gov/bureaus/pshs/advi
sory/csric3/CSRIC_III_WG4_Report_March_%202013.pdf. 
 14 . Andree Toonk, “Turkey Hijacking IP Addresses for Popular Global DNS 
Providers.” Accessed August 2, 2016. http://bgpmon.net/turkey-hijacking-ip-
addresses-for-popular-global-dns-providers. 
 15 . Pat Litke and Joe Stewart, “BGP Hijacking for Cryptocurrency Proﬁ t.” 
 SecureWorks. Accessed August 2, 2016. https://www.secureworks.com/research/
bgp-hijacking-for-cryptocurrency-proﬁ t. 
 16 . Dyn Guest Blog, “The New Threat: Targeted Internet Trafﬁ c Misdirection.” 
Accessed August 6, 2016. http://research.dyn.com/2013/11/mitm-internet-hijacking. 
 17 . Ibid. 
 18 . U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2010 Report to 
Congress.” Accessed August 12, 2016. http://origin.www.uscc.gov/sites/default/
ﬁ les/annual_reports/2010-Report-to-Congress.pdf, 244. 

178 
Notes
 19 . Internet Engineering Task Force, “An Overview of BGPSEC.” Accessed 
August 23, 2016. https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-sidr-bgpsec-overview-02. 
 20 . Sharon Goldberg, “Why Is It Taking So Long to Secure Internet Routing?” 
 Web Security  12, no. 8 (September 11, 2004). Accessed August 22, 2016. http://
queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2668966. 
 21 . Sooel Son and Vitaly Shmatikov, “Hitchhiker’s Guide to DNS Cache Poi-
soning.” Accessed September 1, 2016. https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~shmat/
shmat_securecomm10.pdf. 
 22 . ICANN, “DNSSEC: What Is It and Why Is It Important?” Accessed 
August 29, 2016. https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/dnssec-qaa-2014-01-
29-en. 
 23 . Mikko Hypponen, “Brain: Searching for the ﬁ rst PC virus in Pakistan.” 
Accessed September 3, 2016. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lnedOWf
PKT0. 
 24 . Timothy B. Lee, “How a Grad Student Trying to Build the First Botnet 
Brought the Internet to its Knees,”  Washington Post  (November 1, 2013). Accessed 
September 8, 2016. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2013/
11/01/how-a-grad-student-trying-to-build-the-first-botnet-brought-the-
internet-to-its-knees/?utm_term=.25d90f476600. 
 25 . Norton Botnet Podcast, Accessed September 11, 2016. http://www
.symantec.com/content/en/us/about/mp3/hho/Botnet-Podcast-11-1-07-Final.mp3. 
 26 . Dan Kerr, “Anonymous Petitions US to See-DDoS Attacks as Legal Pro-
test,”  CNET. Accessed September 9, 2016. https://www.cnet.com/news/anonymous-
petitions-u-s-to-see-ddos-attacks-as-legal-protest. 
 27 . Corero, “DDoS Extortion Campaigns to Threaten 80% of European Busi-
nesses in the Next Year.” Accessed September 15 2016. https://www.corero.com/
company/newsroom/press-releases/ransom-driven-ddos-attacks-to-hit-three-
quarters-of-uk-businesses-in-the-next-year. 
 28 . Warwick Ashford, “Mirai IoT Botnet Code Release Raises Fears of Surge 
in DDoS Attacks,”  ComputerWeekly.com . Accessed September 20, 2016. http://
www.computerweekly.com/news/450400311/Mirai-IoT-botnet-code-release-
raises-fears-of-surge-in-DDoS-attacks. 
 29 . Food and Drug Administration, “Vulnerabilities of Hospira LifeCare 
PCA3 and PCA5 Infusion Pump Systems: FDA Safety Communication.” Accessed 
September 20, 2016. http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNo
tices/ucm446809.htm. 
 30 . Kim Zetter, “It’s Insanely Easy to Hack Hospital Equipment,”  Wired  
(April 24, 2014). Accessed September 26 2016. https://www.wired.com/
2014/04/hospital-equipment-vulnerable. 
 31 . Ponemon Institute, “2015 Cost of Cyber Crime Study: United States.” 
Accessed September 26, 2016. http://www.ponemon.org/blog/2015-cost-of-cyber-
crime-united-states. 
 32 . David Clark, Thomas Berson, and Herbert S. Lin, eds.  At the Nexus of 
Cybersecurity and Public Policy Some Basic Concepts and Issues (Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press, 2014), 116. 

Notes 
179
 33 . President Barack Obama, “Remarks by the President on Securing Our 
Nation’s Cyber Infrastructure.” Accessed September 30, 2016. https://www.white
house.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-securing-our-nations-cyber-
infrastructure. 
 34 . Jason Richards, “Denial-of-Service: The Estonian Cyberwar and Its Impli-
cations for U.S. National Security,”  International Affairs Review . Accessed Septem-
ber 30, 2016. http://www.iar-gwu.org/node/65. 
 35 . NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre for Excellence, “Cyber Attacks 
Against Georgia: Legal Lessons Identiﬁ ed.” Accessed November 1, 2016. 
http://www.ismlab.usf.edu/isec/files/Georgia-Cyber-Attack-NATO-Aug-
2008.pdf. 
 36 . Project Grey Goose Phase I Report, “Russia/Georgia Cyber War Findings 
and Analysis.” Accessed November 1, 2016. https://www.scribd.com/doc/696
7393/Project-Grey-Goose-Phase-I-Report. 
 37 . Ibid. 
 38 . Kim Zetter, “An Unprecedented Look at Stuxnet, the World’s First Digital 
Weapon,”  Wired  (November 3, 2014). https://www.wired.com/2014/11/count
down-to-zero-day-stuxnet. 
 39 . United States Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce, “Cybersecurity: Threats 
Impacting the Nation” (April 24, 2012). Accessed November 3, 2016. http://
www.gao.gov/assets/600/590367.pdf. 
 40 . David E. Sanger, “U.S. Blames China’s Military Directly for Cyberattacks,” 
 The New York Times , May 6, 2013. Accessed November 1, 2016. http://www
.nytimes.com/2013/05/07/world/asia/us-accuses-chinas-military-in-cyberat
tacks.html. 
 41 . Director of National Intelligence, “Joint Statement from the Department of 
Homeland Security and Ofﬁ ce of the Director of National Intelligence on Election 
Security” (October 7, 2016). Accessed November 3, 2016. https://www.dni.gov/
index.php/newsroom/press-releases/215-press-releases-2016/1423-joint-dhs-odni-
election-security-statement. 
 42 . “Background to ‘Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent US 
Elections’: The Analytic Process and Cyber Incident Attribution.” Accessed Janu-
ary 6, 2017. https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3254237/Russia-Hack-
Report.pdf. 
 43 . United Nations General Assembly Sixth Committee, “Deﬁ nition of Aggres-
sion, United Nations General Assembly Resolution 3314 (XXIX).” Accessed Novem-
ber 9, 2016. http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/instree/GAres3314.html. 
 44 . Steven A. Hildreth, “CRS Report to Congress: Cyberwarfare” (June 19, 
2001). Accessed November 12, 2016. http://nsarchive.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/
NSAEBB424/docs/Cyber-014.pdf. 
 45 . NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre for Excellence,  Tallinn Manual , 
106 . Accessed November 17, 2016. https://ccdcoe.org/tallinn-manual.html. 
 46 . International Court of Justice, Nicaragua v. United States (June 27, 1986). 
Accessed December 2, 2016. http://www.icj-cij.org/docket/?sum=367&p1=3&p2=
3&case=70&p3=5. 

180 
Notes
 47 . NATO,  Tallinn Manual , 45. Accessed November 17, 2016. 
 48 . NATO, “Cyber defence” (February 17, 2017. Accessed May 25, 2017. 
http://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/topics_78170.htm. 
 49 . Herb Lin, “NATO’s Designation of Cyber as an Operational Domain of 
Conﬂ ict.”  Lawfare  (June 15, 2016) .  Accessed December 7, 2016. https://www
.lawfareblog.com/natos-designation-cyber-operational-domain-conﬂ ict. 
 50 . Whitehouse.gov.  International Strategy for Cyberspace . Accessed Novem-
ber 1, 2016. https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/ﬁ les/rss_viewer/Interna
tional_Strategy_Cyberspace_Factsheet.pdf. 
 51 . Jason Pontin, “Secrets and Transparency: What Is Wikileaks, and What Is 
Its Future?”  MIT Technology Review (January 26, 2011). Accessed November 3, 
2016. https://www.technologyreview.com/s/422521/secrets-and-transparency. 
 52 . Vimeo, “Snowden, Chomsky, and Greenwald Discuss Privacy.” Accessed 
December 9, 2016. https://vimeo.com/160952562. 
 53 . Council of Europe,  Convention on Cyber Crime.  Accessed December 12, 
2016.   https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/rms/09000
01680081561. 
 54 . Alexander Seger, “The Budapest Convention on Cybercrime 10 Years On: 
Lessons Learnt or the Web is a Web” (February 16, 2012). Accessed December 
16, 2016. https://rm.coe.int/CoERMPublicCommonSearchServices/DisplayDCT
MContent?documentId=09000016802fa3e0. 
 55 . United Nations Ofﬁ ce on Drugs and Crime,  Comprehensive Study on Cyber-
crime (February 2013). Accessed December 16, 2016. https://www.unodc.org/
documents/organized-Crime/UNODC_CCPCJ_EG.4_2013/CYBERCRIME_
STUDY_210213.pdf. 
 56 . United Nations Press Release, “UN Congress Plenary Debate Focuses on 
Innovative Tools to Fight Cybercrime, Terrorism Recruitment, Wildlife Trafﬁ ck-
ing, among New, Emerging Threats” (April 17, 2015). Accessed January 5, 2016. 
https://www.un.org/press/en/2015/soccp365.doc.htm. 
 57 . Ibid. 
 58 . United Nations General Assembly, “Developments in the Field of Infor-
mation and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security,”  Reso-
lution 53/70 . Accessed December 14, 2016. https://ccdcoe.org/sites/default/ﬁ les/
documents/UN-981204-ITIS.pdf .
 59 . United Nations General Assembly, “Group of Governmental Experts on 
Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Con-
text of International Security.” Accessed January 6, 2016. http://www.un.org/ga/
search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/68/98, paragraph 9. 
 60 . Harold Hongju Koh, “Remarks: International Law in Cyberspace.” 
Accessed January 7, 2017. https://www.state.gov/s/l/releases/remarks/197924
.htm. 
 61 . Mary Ellen O’Connell and Louise Arimatsu, “Meeting Summary: Cyber 
Security and International Law,”  Chatham House  (May 29, 2012). Accessed Janu-
ary 4, 2016. https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/ﬁ les/chathamhouse/public/
Research/International%20Law/290512summary.pdf. 

Notes 
181
 62 . NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre for Excellence, “2015 UN GGE 
Report.” Accessed January 5, 2016. https://ccdcoe.org/2015-un-gge-report-
major-players-recommending-norms-behaviour-highlighting-aspects-interna
tional-l-0.html. 
 63 . Arnold Wolfers, “‘National Security’ as an Ambiguous Symbol.”  Political 
Science Quarterly , 67, 4 (Dec., 1952), 481. 
 Chapter 7. The Power of Private Internet Intermediaries 
  1 . Frank A. Pasquale, “Beyond Innovation and Competition: The Need for 
Qualiﬁ ed Transparency in Internet Intermediaries,” 105. Accessed January 9, 
2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1686043. 
  2 . Emeka Duruigbo, “Corporate Accountability and Liability for Interna-
tional Human Rights Abuses: Recent Changes and Recurring Challenges,”  
Northwestern Journal of International Human Rights 6, no. 2 (Spring 2008): 249, 
Article 2. Accessed January 9, 2017. http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern
.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1073&context=njihr .
  3 . Menno T. Kamminga, “Corporate Obligations under International Law,” 
Paper presented at the 71st Conference of the International Law Association, 
plenary session on Corporate Social Responsibility and International Law, Berlin 
(August 17, 2004), 5. 
  4 . Lord Holme and Richard Watts, “Corporate Social Responsibility: Mak-
ing Good Business Sense,”  The World Business Council for Sustainable Development 
(January 2010). Accessed January 18, 2017. http://www.ceads.org.ar/downloads/
Making%20good%20business%20sense.pdf. 
  5 . Kamminga, “Corporate Obligations,” 1. 
  6 . Norms on the Responsibilities of Transnational Corporations and Other 
Business Enterprises with Regard to Human Rights, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/Sub.2/
2003/12/Rev.2 (2003). Accessed January 15, 2017. http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/links/
norms-Aug2003.html. 
  7 . International Chamber of Commerce, “Joint Views of the IOE and ICC on 
the Draft ‘Norms on the Responsibilities of Transnational Corporations 
and Other Business Enterprises with Regard to Human Rights.’” Accessed Janu-
ary 18, 2017. https://business-humanrights.org/sites/.../IOE-ICC-views-UN-
norms-March-2004.doc. 
  8 . Human Rights Watch, “UN Human Rights Council: Weak Stance on Busi-
ness Standards” (June 16, 2011). Accessed January 22, 2017. https://www.hrw.org/
news/2011/06/16/un-human-rights-council-weak-stance-business-standards. 
  9 . John G. Ruggie, “Presentation of Report to United Nations Human Rights 
Council Professor Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Business 
and Human Rights Geneva” (May 30, 2011). Accessed January 19, 2017.http://
www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/TransCorporations/HRC%202011_Remarks_
Final_JR.pdf. 

182 
Notes
 10 . The Economist Intelligence Unit, “The Road from Principles to Practice: 
Today’s Challenges for Business in Respecting Human Rights.” Accessed Janu-
ary 24, 2017. https://www.eiuperspectives.economist.com/strategy-leadership/
road-principles-practice. 
 11 . Human Rights Council, “Report on the First Session of the Open-Ended 
Intergovernmental Working Group on Transnational Corporations and Other Busi-
ness Enterprises with Respect to Human Rights, with the Mandate of Elaborating 
an International Legally Binding Instrument” (February 5, 2016). Accessed Janu-
ary 23, 2017. https://business-humanrights.org/sites/default/ﬁ les/documents/
A.HRC.31.50_E.pdf. 
 12 . R. Kelley Garret, “Protest in an Information Society: A Review of Litera-
ture on Social Movements and New ICTs,”  Information, Communication, and Soci-
ety 9, no. 2 (2006). 
 13 . Jaclyn Kerr, “The Digital Dictator’s Dilemma: Internet Regulation and 
Political Control in Non-Democratic States,”  Social Science Seminar Series , Center 
for International Security and Cooperation, Stanford University (October 16, 
2014). 
 14 . John Pollok, “How Egyptian and Tunisian Youth Hacked the Arab Spring.” 
Accessed January 30, 2017. https://www.technologyreview.com/s/425137/
streetbook. 
 15 . Evengy Morozov,  The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom (New 
York: Public Affairs, 2011). 
 16 . Mary Robinson, “Remarks on Yahoo!’s Response Concerning Its Provision 
of Details to Chinese Government that Helped Lead to Journalist’s Imprisonment” 
(September 16, 2005). Accessed February 4, 2017. https://business-human
rights.org/en/doc-mary-robinson-remarks-on-yahoo%E2%80%99s-respo
nse-concerning-its-provision-of-details-to-chinese-government-that-helped-lead-
to-journalists-imprisonment. 
 17 . Business & Human Rights Resource Centre, “Information Technology: 
The Power and Responsibility of Business.” Accessed February 3, 2017. https://
business-humanrights.org/sites/default/files/media/documents/information-
technology-brieﬁ ng-feb-2014.pdf .
 18 . Human Rights Council, “Promotion and Protection of All Human Rights, 
Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Including the Right to 
Development” (February 20, 2009). Accessed February 3, 2017. http://www2
.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/10session/A.HRC.10.16.pdf, 15. 
 19 . Danielle Kehl and Robert Morgus, “The Dictator’s Little Helper,”  Slate. 
 Accessed February 8, 2017.   http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_
tense/2014/03/export_controls_how_to_stop_western_companies_from_send
ing_surveillance.html. 
 20 . The Wassenaar Arrangement. Accessed February 10, 2017. http://www
.wassenaar.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/WA-LIST-16-1-2016-List-of-DU-
Goods-and-Technologies-and-Munitions-List.pdf. 

Notes 
183
 21 . Google, “Transparency Report.” Accessed January 28, 2017. https://www
.google.com/transparencyreport/removals/government/?hl=en. 
 22 . Tim Cook, “A Message to our Customers” (February 16, 2016). Accessed 
February 4, 2017. http://www.apple.com/customer-letter. 
 23 . Devlin Barrett, “FBI Paid More Than $1 Million to Hack San Bernardino 
iPhone,”  Washington Post (April 21, 2016). Accessed February 4, 2016. https://www
.wsj.com/articles/comey-fbi-paid-more-than-1-million-to-hack-san-bernardino-
iphone-1461266641. 
 24 . Manhattan District Attorney’s Ofﬁ ce, “Smartphone Encryption and Pub-
lic Safety” (November, 2016). Accessed February 8, 2017. http://manhattanda.
org/sites/default/files/Report%20on%20Smartphone%20Encryption%20
and%20Public%20Safety:%20An%20Update.pdf. 
 25 . Rebecca McKinnon,  Consent of the Networked: The Worldwide Struggle for 
Internet Freedom (New York: Basic Books, 2012), 130. 
 26 . Tim Wu,  The Attention Merchants (New York: Knopf, 2016), 323. 
 27 . Ibid. 
 28 . Eric Schmidt, Quoted in  The Atlantic (October 1, 2010). Accessed Febru-
ary 9, 2017. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2010/10/googles-
ceo-the-laws-are-written-by-lobbyists/63908. 
 29 . Wu,  The Attention Merchants, 301. 
 30 . Jonathan A. Obar and Anne Oeldorf-Hirsch, “The Biggest Lie on the 
Internet: Ignoring the Privacy Policies and Terms of Service Policies of Social 
Networking Services” (August 24, 2016), 13. Accessed February 9, 2017. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2757465 .
 31 . Ibid., 25. 
 32 . Tracy B. Loring, “An Analysis of the Informational Privacy Protection 
Afforded by the European Union and the United States,”  Texas International Law 
Journal  37 (2002): 421. 
 33 . European Parliament and Council, “Directive 95/46/EC on the Protection 
of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free 
Movement of Such Data” (24 October 1995). Accessed February 11, 2017. http://
eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31995L0046:en:HTML. 
 34 . Lisa J. Sotto and Aaron P. Simpson, “United States” in  Data Protection and 
Privacy in 31 jurisdictions worldwide. Accessed February 2, 2017. https://www
.huntonprivacyblog.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/18/2011/04/DDP2015_
United_States.pdf. 
 35 . European Parliament and Council, “Regulation on the Protection of Natu-
ral Persons with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free 
Movement of Such Data, and Repealing Directive 95” (April 6, 2016)  Recital 32 . 
Accessed February 12, 2017. http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-
5419-2016-INIT/en/pdf. 
 36 .  Google Inc. v. Mario Costeja González (May 13, 2014). Accessed Febru-
ary 18, 2017. http://curia.europa.eu/juris/liste.jsf?num=C-131/12. 

184 
Notes
 37 . Edward Lee, “Recognizing Rights in Real Time: The Role of Google in the 
EU Right to Be Forgotten (July 28, 2015).  UC Davis Law Review . Accessed Febru-
ary 21, 2017. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2636856. 
 38 . John Philip Sousa,  Through the Year with Sousa; Excerpts from the Operas, 
Marches, Miscellaneous Compositions, Novels, Letters, Magazine Articles, Songs, Say-
ings and Rhymes of John Philip Sousa  (New York: T.Y. Crowell & Co., 1910). 
 39 . Seth F. Kreimer, “Censorship by Proxy: the First Amendment, Internet 
Intermediaries, and the Problem of the Weakest Link,”  Faculty Scholarship 
Paper 127 . Accessed February 21, 2017. http://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/fac
ulty_scholarship/127http://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
article=1256&context=penn_law_review. 
 40 . Tom Lamont, “Napster: The Day the Music Was Set Free,”  The Guardian 
(February 23, 2013). Accessed February 25, 2017. https://www.theguardian
.com/music/2013/feb/24/napster-music-free-ﬁ le-sharing. 
 41 . Electronic Frontier Foundation, “RIAA v. The People: Five Years Later” 
(September 30, 2008). Accessed February 25, 2017. https://www.eff.org/wp/
riaa-v-people-ﬁ ve-years-later#footnoteref2_5bh2g3j. 
 42 . Mike Masnick, “RIAA Spent $17.6 Million In Lawsuits .  .  . To Get 
$391,000 in Settlements?”  Techdirt (July 14, 2010. Accessed February 26, 2017. 
https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20100713/17400810200.shtml. 
 43 . Mike Masnick, “MPAA Directly & Publicly Threatens Politicians Who 
Aren’t Corrupt Enough To Stay Bought,”  Techdirt  (January 20, 2012). Accessed 
February 26, 2017. https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20120120/14472117492/
mpaa-directly-publicly-threatens-politicians-who-arent-corrupt-enough-to-stay-
bought.shtml. 
 44 . Mark Lemley, David S. Levine, and David G. Post, “Don’t Break the Inter-
net,”  Stanford Law Review (December, 2011). Accessed February 27, 2017. https://
www.stanfordlawreview.org/online/dont-break-the-internet. 
 45 . Center for Copyright Information, “Statement on the Copyright Alert 
System” (January 27, 2017). Accessed January 28, 2017. http://www.copyright
information.org/statement/statement-on-the-copyright-alert-system. 
 46 . Ted Johnson, “Internet Service Providers, Studios and Record Labels Call It 
Quits on Copyright Alert System,”  Variety  (January 27,   2017). Accessed January 29, 
2017. http://variety.com/2017/digital/news/copyright-alerts-piracy-mpaa-comcast-
att-1201971756. 
 47 . Electronic Frontier Foundation, “Shadow Regulation.” Accessed Febru-
ary 25, 2017. https://www.eff.org/issues/shadow-regulation. 
 48 . Tim Wu, “Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination,”  Journal on 
Telecommunications & High Technology La w. Vol 2 (2003). Accessed January 21, 
2017. http://www.jthtl.org/content/articles/V2I1/JTHTLv2i1_Wu.PDF. 
 49 . Lawrence Lessig and Robert W. McChesney, “No Tolls on the Internet,” 
 Washington Post (June 8, 2006). Accessed February 27, 2017. http://www
.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/06/07/AR2006060702108
.html. 

Notes 
185
 50 . Tim Berners Lee, Quoted in the  New York Times (October 8, 2014). 
Accessed March 1, 2017. https://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/10/08/tim-berners-
lee-web-creator-defends-net-neutrality. 
 51 . Ben Scott, Stefan Heumann and Jan-Peter Kleinhans, “Landmark EU and 
US Net Neutrality Decisions: How Might Pending Decisions Impact Internet 
Fragmentation?,”  Global Commission in Internet Governance, Paper series: no.18 
(July 2015). Accessed March 1, 2017. 
 52 . Members of the Coalition of Broadband Users and Innovators, “Letter to 
the Federal Communications Commission” (November 18, 2002). Accessed 
January 18, 2017. https://ecfsapi.fcc.gov/ﬁ le/6513396428.pdf. 
 53 . United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit  Veri-
zon v. Federal Communications Commission. Argued September 9, 2013. Decided 
January 14, 2014. 
 54 . Federal Communications Commission, “In the Matter of Protecting and 
Promoting the Open Internet.” No. 11-1355. GN Docket No. 14–28 (Released 
March 12, 2015). Accessed March 6, 2017. http://transition.fcc.gov/Daily_
Releases/Daily_Business/2015/db0312/FCC-15-24A1.pdf. 
 55 . Ajit Pai, “Remarks on Reforming Communications Policy in the Digital 
Age: A View from the FCC.” Accessed March 3, 2017. https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_
public/attachmatch/DOC-327841A1.pdf. 
 56 . Jon Brodkin, “US broadband: Still No ISP Choice for Many, Especially at 
Higher Speeds,”  Arstechnica (August 10, 2016). Accessed March 4, 2017. https://
arstechnica.com/information-technology/2016/08/us-broadband-still-no-
isp-choice-for-many-especially-at-higher-speeds. 
 57 . Sandvine, “What Are the Latest Internet Trends in North America and 
Latin America?”  Global Internet Phenomena (June 2016). Accessed February 
24, 2017. https://www.sandvine.com/trends/global-internet-phenomena. 
 58 . Jim Cicconi, Quoted by Brendan Sasso in “AT&T: ‘Arrogant’ Netﬂ ix 
Wants a Free Lunch,”  The Atlantic (March 21, 2014). Accessed March 2, 2017. 
https://www.theatlantic.com/amp/article/457137. 
 59 . Tom Wheeler, Quoted by Stacey Higginbotham in “The Netﬂ ix-Comcast 
agreement isn’t a network neutrality violation, but it is a problem,”  Gigaom (Feb-
ruary 23, 2014). Accessed March 2, 2017. https://gigaom.com/2014/02/23/
the-netﬂ ix-comcast-agreement-isnt-a-network-neutrality-violation-but-it-is-a-
problem. 
 60 . Pinsent Masons, “EU Takes Tough Stance on ‘Zero-Rating’ Practices in 
New Net Neutrality Guidelines” (August 31, 2016). Accessed March 1, 2017. 
https://www.out-law.com/en/articles/2016/august/eu-takes-tough-stance-on-
zero-rating-practices-in-new-net-neutrality-guidelines. 
 61 . Ajit Pai, Quoted by Karl Bode in “New FCC Boss Kills Zero Rating Inquiry, 
Signals Death Of Net Neutrality Enforcement” (February 6, 2017). Accessed 
March 3, 2017. https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20170206/06440236643/new-
fcc-boss-kills-zero-rating-inquiry-signals-death-net-neutrality-enforcement
.shtml. 

186 
Notes
 Chapter 8. The Persistent Challenge of Internet Governance 
  1 . Laura DeNardis and Mark Raymond, “Thinking Clearly about Multi-
stakeholder Internet Governance,” Paper Presented at the Eighth Annual GigaNet 
Symposium, Bali, Indonesia (October 21, 2013). Accessed February 26, 2017. 
http://www.phibetaiota.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/Multistakeholder-
Internet-Governance.pdf. 
  2 . Jeanette Hoffman, “Multi-stakeholderism in Internet Governance: Putting a 
Fiction into Practice,”  Journal of Cyber Policy  1, no. 1 (2016). Accessed January 29, 
2017. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/23738871.2016.1158303. 
  3 . Commission on Science and Technology for Development, “Mapping of 
International Internet Public Policy Issues.” Accessed February 3, 2017. http://
unctad.org/meetings/en/SessionalDocuments/ecn162015crp2_en.pdf. 
  4 . Francine Berman and Vinton G. Cerf, “Social and Ethical Behavior in 
the Internet of Things,”  Communications of the ACM  60, no. 2 (2017). Accessed 
March 1, 2017. https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2017/2/212443-social-and-ethi
cal-behavior-in-the-internet-of-things/fulltext. 
  5 . Gary Shapiro and Laura Knapp Chadwick, “Comments of the Consumer 
Electronics Association before the Federal Trade Commission” (June 10, 2013). 
Accessed February 19, 2017. htttps://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/ﬁ les/documents/
public_comments/2013/07/00027–86193.pdf. 
  6 . Federal Trade Commission Staff Report, “Internet of Things: Privacy and 
Security in a Connected World.” Accessed March 2, 2017. https://www
.ftc.gov/system/ﬁ les/documents/reports/federal-trade-commission-staff-report-
november-2013-workshop-entitled-internet-things-privacy/150127iotrpt.pdf. 
  7 . Ibid. 
  8 . Cisco, “Cisco Global Cloud Index: Forecast and Methodology, 2015–
2020.” Accessed March 5, 2017. https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en/us/solutions/
collateral/service-provider/global-cloud-index-gci/white-paper-c11-738085.pdf. 
  9 . Quoted in  The Economist  (October 24, 2014).   Accessed March 12, 2017. 
http://gelookahead.economist.com/future-scope/futurescope-joseph-salvo. 
 10 . Craig Williams, quoted in “IoT Reality: Smart Devices, Dumb Defaults,” 
 KrebsonSecurity . Accessed March 25, 2017. http://iotclassaction.com/iot-device-
thermostats. 
 11 . Lily Hay Newman, “Medical Devices Are the Next Security Nightmare,” 
 Wired  (March 2, 2017). Accessed March 27, 2017. https://www.wired.com/
2017/03/medical-devices-next-security-nightmare. 
 12 . U.S. Food and Drug Administration, “Post Market Management of Cyber-
security in Medical Devices.” Accessed April 2, 2017. https://www.fda.gov/down
loads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/
UCM482022.pdf. 
 13 . U.S. Food and Drug Administration, “Cybersecurity Vulnerabilities Iden-
tiﬁ ed in St. Jude Medical’s Implantable Cardiac Devices” (January 9, 2017). 
Accessed March 15, 2017. https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/Alertsand
Notices/ucm535843.htm. 

Notes 
187
 14 . Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Motor Vehicles Increasingly Vulnerable 
to Remote Exploits” (March 17, 2016),  Alert Number I-031716-PSA . Accessed 
March 25, 2017. https://www.ic3.gov/media/2016/160317.aspx#fn1 .
 15 . Gartner Newsroom, “Connected Cars Will Form a Major Element of the 
Internet of Things” (January 26, 2015). Accessed April 4, 2017. http://www.gart
ner.com/newsroom/id/2970017. 
 16 . European Commission Staff Working Document, “Advancing the Inter-
net of Things in Europe” (April 19, 2016). Accessed March 28, 2017. 
 17 . Hevelke Alexander and Julian Nida-Rümelin, “Responsibility for Crashes 
of Autonomous Vehicles: An Ethical Analysis,”  Science and Engineering Ethics  21, 
no. 3 (2015): 619–630. Accessed April 4, 2017. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC4430591. 
 18 . Ibid. 
 19 . Samsung Newsroom, “Samsung Smart TVs Do Not Monitor Living Room 
Conversations” (February 10, 2015). Accessed April 10, 2017. https://news.sam
sung.com/global/samsung-smart-tvs-do-not-monitor-living-room-conversations. 
 20 . Le Trinh, Esq., “Can Your Fitbit Data Be Used Against You in Court?” 
Accessed April 12, 2017. http://blogs.ﬁ ndlaw.com/blotter/2015/07/can-your-ﬁ t
bit-data-be-used-against-you-in-court.html. 
 21 . Christopher Coble, Esq., “Arsonist’s Heart Wasn’t in It; Pacemaker 
Data Leads to His Arrest.” Accessed April 12, 2017. http://blogs.ﬁ ndlaw.com/
blotter/2017/02/arsonists-heart-wasnt-in-it-pacemaker-data-leads-to-his-arrest
.html. 
 22 .  State of Arkansas v. James A. Bates , “Memorandum of Law in Support of 
Amazon’s Motion to Quash Search Warrant,” Case No. CR-2016-370-2. Accessed 
April 16, 2017. https://www.scribd.com/document/340118806/Amazon-Alexa-
Free-Speech. 
 23 . Scott Shane, Matthew Rosenburg, and Andrew W. Lehren, “WikiLeaks 
Releases Trove of Alleged C.I.A. Hacking Documents,”  New York Times (March 7, 
2017). Accessed April 18, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/07/world/
europe/wikileaks-cia-hacking.html?_r=0. 
 24 . Taylor Wessing, “The Internet of Things and Privacy in Europe and the 
USA” (March, 2015). Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.taylorwessing.com/
globaldatahub/article_wp29_iot.html. 
 25 . Article 29 Data Protection Working Party Opinion (August 2014). Accessed 
April 27, 2017. http://www.dataprotection.ro/servlet/ViewDocument?id=1088. 
 26 . EU Commission Staff Working Document, “Advancing the Internet of 
Things in Europe. Accessed April 29, 2017. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-con
tent/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52016SC0110. 
 27 . Mary Madden and Lee Rainie, “Americans’ Attitudes about Privacy, Secu-
rity and Surveillance,”  Pew Research Center  (May 20, 2015). Accessed April 28, 
2017. http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/05/20/americans-attitudes-about-privacy-
security-and-surveillance. 
 28 . Raﬁ  Goldberg, “Lack of Trust May Deter Economic and Other Online 
Activities.” Accessed April 29, 2017. https://perma.cc/GQY2-AV8A. 

188 
Notes
 29 . Centre for International Governance Innovation, “2017 CIGI-Ipsos Global 
Survey on Internet Security and Trust.” Accessed May 1, 2017. https://www
.cigionline.org/internet-survey. 
 30 . Marjorie S. Blumenthal and David D. Clark, “Rethinking the Design of 
the Internet: The End-to-End Arguments vs. the Brave New World,”  ACM Trans-
actions on Internet Technology 1, no. 1 (August 2001): 93. 
 31 . Marjorie S. Blumenthal and David D. Clark, “The Future of the Internet 
and Cyberpower” in  Cyberpower and National Security,  ed. Franklin D. Kramer, 
Stuart H. Starr, Larry K. Wentz (Dulles, VA: Potomac Books, Inc., 2009), 229. 
 32 . Dennis Weller and Bill Woodcock, “Internet Trafﬁ c Exchange Market 
Developments and Policy Challenges,”  OECD Digital Economy Papers (January 29, 
2013). Accessed April 30, 2017. DOI: 10.1787/5k918gpt130q-en. 
 33 . Paul Milgrom, Bridger Mitchell, and Padmanabhan Srinagesh, “Competi-
tive Effects of Internet Peering Policies.” Accessed April 29, 2017. http://web
.stanford.edu/~milgrom/publishedarticles/TPRC%201999.internet%20peering
.pdf. 
 34 . Chris Anderson and Michael Wolff, “The Web Is Dead. Long Live the 
Internet,”  Wired (August 17, 2010). Accessed April 28, 2017. https://www
.wired.com/2010/08/ff_webrip. 
 35 . Patrik Fältström, “Market-driven Challenges to Open Internet Standards,” 
 Global Commission for Internet Governance . Paper Series No. 33 (May, 2016). 
Accessed April 25, 2017. https://www.ourinternet.org/sites/default/ﬁ les/publica
tions/gcig_no33web.pdf. 
 36 . Tim Wu, “The Balkanization of the Internet” (August 17, 2004). Accessed 
April 26, 2017. http://www.lessig.org/2004/08/the-balkanization-of-the-inter. 
 37 . Tim Berners-Lee, “Long Live the Web: A Call for Continued Open Stan-
dards and Neutrality,”  Scientiﬁ c American (November 26, 2010). 
 38 . Dan Feldman, “Election Day Dominated Facebook with Over 716M 
Election-Related Interactions,”  Forbes  (November 9, 2016). Accessed Decem-
ber 12, 2016. https://www.forbes.com/sites/danafeldman/2016/11/09/election-day-
played-out-on-facebook-with-over-716m-election-related-likes-posts-comments-
shares/#53ad98d0241f. 
 39 . Amy Mitchell, Jeffrey Gottfried, and Katerina Eva Matsa, “Facebook Top 
Source for Political News among Millennials,”  Pew Research Center . Accessed Feb-
ruary 13, 2017. http://www.journalism.org/2015/06/01/facebook-top-source-for-
political-news-among-millennials. 
 40 . Bill Bishop,  The Big Sort: Why the Clustering of Like-Minded America Is Tear-
ing Us Apart  (New York: Houghton Mifﬂ in Harcourt Publishing Company, 2008). 
 41 . Levi Boxell, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Is the Internet 
Causing Political Polarization? Evidence from Demographics,”  NBER Working 
Paper No. 23258 (March 2017). Accessed April 3, 2017. http://www.nber.org/
papers/w23258. 
 42 . Gordon Pennycook, Tyrone D. Cannon, and David G. Rand, “Prior Expo-
sure Increases Perceived Accuracy of Fake News” (April 30, 2017). Accessed 
May 2, 2017. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2958246https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2958246. 

Notes 
189
 43 . Jonah Force Hill, “The Growth of Data Localization Post-Snowden: Anal-
ysis and Recommendations for U.S. Policymakers and Industry Leaders,”  Law-
fare Research Paper Series 2, no. 3 (July 21, 2014). Accessed April 24, 2017. https://
lawfare.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/staging/Lawfare-Research-Paper-Series-
Vol2No3.pdf. 
 44 . KPMG, “Overview of China’s Cybersecurity Law” (February 2017). Acc-
essed March 26, 2017. https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/cn/pdf/en/
2017/02/overview-of-cybersecurity-law.pdf. 
 45 . Jonah Force Hill, “The Growth of Data Localization.” 
 46 . Matthias Bauer, Hosuk Lee-Makiyama, Erik van der Marel, and Bert Ver-
schelde, “The Costs of Data Localisation: Friendly Fire on Economic Recovery,” 
 ECIPE Occasional Paper  No. March 2014. Accessed May 5, 2017. http://www
.ecipe.org/app/uploads/2014/12/OCC32014__1.pdf. 

This page intentionally left blank

 Abbot, Kenneth W., 85 
 Aboba, Bernard, 21 
 Acts of war, cyber attacks as, 114–15 
 Adherence to principles, 21 
 Adult sites designation (.xxx), 30 
 Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(ARPA), 15–16 
 Africa, infrastructure and connectivity 
in, 63–69 
 African Charter on Human and 
Peoples’ Rights (1981), 84 
 African Internet Service Providers’ 
Association, 64 
 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
63 
 Aggression, deﬁ ned, 112–13 
 Alt-Right hate groups, 95 
 Amazon Echo, 147–48 
 America Online (AOL), 151–52 
 Annan, Koﬁ , 37, 59 
 Anonymity, hate speech and, 96 
 Anonymous, 107 
 Anti-blasphemy laws or policies, 91 
 Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement 
(ACTA), 82, 136 
 Anti-harassment policy, 75 
 Apostasy laws, 91 
 Apple–FBI dispute, 128–29 
 Arab Spring, 81–82, 126 
 ARPANET, 17, 22 
 Article 19(2), 78 
 Article 19(3), 78 
 Article 28, 61 
 Article 29 Working Party advisory, 
149 
 Aspirational rights, 83 
 Assange, Julian, 107, 115 
 Asset sharing strategies, 69–70 
 Associative clusters, 4 
 Audio and video streaming, 140 
 Australia, 154 
 Authentication process, 104, 108 
 Automobile security concerns, 108, 
146 
 Autonomous vehicles, 147 
 Availability, Internet, 21 
 Balkanization of the Internet, 152 
 Bandwidth: congestion, 139–40; 
costs, 64–65; packet loss or delay 
and, 138; second-generation 
licenses, 69; wasted, 15 
 Ban Ki-moon, 37, 123 
 Barlow, John Perry, 77 
 Barriers to participation, 59 
 Beijing platform, 73 
Index
 Page numbers followed by  t  indicate tables and  f  indicate ﬁ gures. 

192 
Index
 Below threshold attacks, 113 
 Berners-Lee, Tim, 11, 20, 152 
 Big Data, 145 
 “Birds of a Feather” (BOF) meetings, 
18 
 Bitcoins, 103 
 Blasphemy and apostasy laws, 91 
 Blumenthal, Marjorie S., 150 
 Body of European Regulators of 
Electronic Communications 
(BEREC), 141 
 Boot sector virus, 105 
 Border gateway protocol (BGP), 101, 
102–4 
 Botnets, 107 
 Bots, zombies, and malware, 105–9 
 Bouazizi, Mohammed, 126 
 Brazil, 49–50, 154 
 Brazilian Internet Steering Committee 
(CGI.br), 49 
 “Bright line rules,” 139 
 Broadband: costs, 64–65; universal 
right to access, 80–82 
 Broadband Commission for Digital 
Development, 70 
 Budapest Convention, 116–17, 118 
 “Busan Consensus,” 51–52 
 Bush administration, 37, 61, 100 
 Business and Human Rights Resource 
Centre, 127 
 Cache poisoning, 104–5 
 Camden Principles on Freedom of 
Expression and Equality (2009), 94 
 Canada, 154 
 Capacity building, 59 
 Case law:  Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA)  (1998), 
134;  Google v. Spain (2014), 132; 
 Nicaragua v. United States (1986), 
114;  Virginia v. Black (2003), 90 
 Central African Republic, 91 
 Cerf, Vinton, 16, 82, 100 
 CERN (European Laboratory for 
Particle Physics), 11 
 “Charter 2.0,” 87 
 Charter of Human Rights and Principles 
(2010), 85 
 Chehadi, Fadi, 47 
 China, 52, 126, 154 
 China Telecom, 103 
 Circuit switching, 15 
 Cisco, 29 
 Civil rights–human rights distinction, 
82 
 Clark, David D., 18, 150 
 Clark, Katherine, 95 
 Classiﬁ ed information, 115 
 Clinton, Hillary, 95 
 Cloud computing, 148 
 Cloud resources, 145 
 Coalition for Broadband Users and 
Innovators (CBUI), 138 
 Code of conduct, 97 
 Coker, S., 17 
 Collective empowerment, 21 
 Combat Mission Forces, 114 
 Comcast, 139 
 Commercial fragmentation, 
151–52 
 Commission on Science and 
Technology for Development 
(CSDT), 38 
 Communications Act (1934), 80–81, 
139 
 Communication technology, human 
rights and, 78–79 
 Competition principle, 24 
 CompuServe, 16–17 
 Computer Emergency Readiness Team 
(US-CERT), 100 
 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, 
106 
 Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board (CSTB), 
100 
 Conﬁ dentiality, integrity and 
availability (CIA), 109 
 Conﬁ rmation bias, 152–53 
 “Connect 2020,” 51 

Index 
193
 Connectivity barriers: gender, 70–75; 
infrastructure and cost, 63–65; 
policy, 67–70; skills and language, 
65–67 
 Consensus, 18–19 
 Content gatekeepers, 138 
 Content review process, 127 
 Contribution 27, 43–44 
 Convention on Cyber Crime (treaty), 
116–17 
 Cooke, Tim, 128 
 Cooperation, 21 
 Coordination principle, 24 
 Copyright Alert System (CAS), 135 
 Copyright infringement, 132–37 
 Copyright law, 80 
 Corporate and Social Responsibility 
to Respect Human Rights, 
88–89 
 Corporate liability in international 
law, 121–22 
 Corporate responsibility and 
accountability, 121–25 
 Corporate rights, 82 
 Corporate social responsibility (CSR), 
122 
 Corporate Terms of Service (ToS) 
agreements, 130 
 Council of Registrars (CORE), 23 
 Country codes, 22 
 Countrycode top-level domain names 
(ccTLDs), 8 
 Cowie, Jim, 103 
 Cox, Jo, 94 
 Critical Infrastructure in the Information 
Age (Bush), 100 
 Crocker, D., 17–18 
 Crowdsourcing, 153 
 Cuba, 49 
 Cyber Act of War Act (2016), 115 
 Cyber attacks, 119 
 Cybercafes, 72 
 Cybercrime, 108–9, 117 
 Cyber “deterrence,” 114 
 Cyber hate, 96 
 Cyber mission forces, three types of, 
114–15 
 Cyber Protection Forces, 114 
 Cybersecurity: conﬁ dentiality, 
integrity and availability (CIA), 
109; international cooperation and, 
115–20; Internet architecture and, 
100–101; malware, zombies, and 
bots, 105–9; national security and 
cyber defense, 109–15; non-state 
actors and, 115; overview, 99–100; 
TCP and IP protocols, 101–5 
 Cybersecurity laws, 154 
 Cybersecurity Norms: Reducing Conﬂ ict 
in an Internet-Dependent World 
(Microsoft), 120 
 Cyberspace, multi-jurisdictional 
nature of, 121–22 
 Cybersquatting, 32 
 Cyber warfare attacks, 110–13 
 Data collection and retention polices, 
149 
 Data fragmentation, 154–55 
 Data localization, 154–55 
 Data nationalism, 154 
 Data production, scale of, 145 
 Declaration of Cyberspace (Barlow), 77 
 Declaration of Principles (2005), 36 
 Deep-packet inspection (DPI), 127 
 Defamation of religions, 92 
 Deichmann, J.I., 56 
 Dell SecureWorks Counter Threat 
Unit, 103 
 Deutsche Telekom, 154 
 “Dictator’s dilemma,” 126 
 Digital divide: barriers to 
connectivity, 63–70; deﬁ ning 
factors, 56–57; described, 56–58; a 
function of time, 61; gender 
differences, 70–75; Internet 
governance and, 58–61; North–
South inequality, 55; overview, 55; 
persistent nature of, 61–63; 
political inequalities and, 44; 

194 
Index
temporary phenomenon, 56; three 
dimensions of, 56–57 
 Digital Freedom Initiative, 61 
 Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
(DMCA) (1998), 134–35, 136 
 Digital privacy, 88 
 Digital rights, privatized, 125–32 
 Digital Solidarity Fund (DSF), 60–61 
 Digital sovereignty, 154–55 
 Dingwerth, Klause, 3 
 DiploFoundation reports, 74 
 Disruptive media, 81–82 
 Distributed denial of service (DDoS) 
attacks, 107 
 DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC), 
105 
 Dodd, Chris, 135 
 Domain names system (DNS): 
hierarchy, 8,  9f, 101; script 
representation, 66–67; security 
problems, 104–5; standards, 22–26 
 Draft Standards, 18–19 
 Dynamic Coalition on Core Internet 
Values, 40–41, 108 
 Dynamic coalitions, 39–40 
 Dyn botnet attack, 103, 108, 146 
 Economic Community of West 
African States (ECOWAS), 70 
 Economic development, Internet 
governance and, 5,  6t 
 Ecosystem metaphor, 3 
 Egypt, 82 
 Electronic communications, 83 
 Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), 
136 
 Encryption and authentication, 102, 
148 
 End-to-end principle, 137–38 
 Erasure, right to, 132 
 Estonia, 80, 110 
 European Convention on Human 
Rights, 83 
 European Parliament and Council 
Directive (95/46/EC), 131 
 European privacy concerns, 131 
 European Social Charter (1961), 84 
 Evans, Donald L., 61 
 Executive Multistakeholder 
Committee (EMC), 48 
 Extortion, 107 
 Fabrizio, Steven, 136 
 Facebook, 97, 141, 152, 153 
 Fair Information Practice Principles 
(FIPPs), 148 
 Fake news problem, 153 
 Falling Through the Net: A Survey of the 
“Have Nots” in Rural and Urban 
America (1995), 56 
 False addresses, 102 
 Family Research Council, 30 
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 
148 
 Fiber-optic infrastructure, 64 
 “Fighting words” rule, 92 
 The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is 
Hiding from You (Pariser), 152 
 Finkelstein, Lawrence S., 3 
 Finland, 80, 81 
 First Amendment protections, 148 
 First-generation rights, 83 
 First World Internet Conference  (China), 
52 
 Fitbit device, 147 
 Focus on the Family, 30 
 Fourth World Conference on Women 
(Beijing, 1995), 73 
 Framework of Principles for the 
Internet, 85 
 France, 80, 154 
 Free Basic Android application, 141 
 “Freedom from” rights, 82–83 
 Freedom of expression on the 
Internet, 79–80, 83, 89–98, 
125–26 
 Freedom of information, 78 
 Free speech prohibition guidelines, 
93 
 Friedman, Milton, 122 

Index 
195
 Gamergate intimidation campaign, 95 
 Gender Caucus, 73 
 Gender digital divide, 70–75 
 General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR), 131, 149 
 Generic top-level domain names 
(gTLDs), 8, 88 
 Geo-targeting of content, 152 
 Germany, 97 
 Global governance thesis, 3 
 Global Internet Policy Council (GIPC), 
36–37 
 Global South, 45, 49, 55–63, 69–73, 
156 
 González, Mario Costeja, 132 
 “Good cyber hygiene,” 146 
 Google, 97, 103, 128, 132 
 Google v. Spain (2014), 132 
 Gore, Al, 2 
 Governance, deﬁ ned, 3 
 Government Advisory Committee 
(GAC), 29 
 “Great Firewall” of China, 126 
 Greece, 80 
 Green Paper (NTIA), 24 
 Group of 20 (G20), 120 
 Group of 77 (G77), 63 
 Group of Governmental Experts 
(GGE), 118 
 Group rights, 83 
 Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights (HRC, 2011), 87, 122, 
123 
 Hackers.  See Cybersecurity 
 Harassment, sexism, and misogyny, 
95 
 Hate speech and harassment, 89–98 
 Health and health care rights, 84 
 Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 131 
 Hospital security concerns, 108, 146 
 How to Regulate the Internet? The Role of 
ICANN in a New World 
Communication Order (NWICO), 58 
 Human rights: civil rights distinction, 
82; evolving perspectives on, 
77–81; IFG, ICANN, and, 85–89; 
Internet access as, 81–85; Internet 
governance and, 5,  6t ; online hate 
speech and harassment, 89–98; 
overview, 77; three generations of, 
82–83; treaty controversy, 45 
 Human Rights Watch, 124 
 “Hyperscale” data centers, 145 
 Hypertext markup language (HTML), 
11 
 Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), 
11 
 IANA Transition Advisory Group, 25 
 IBM, 17 
 India: digital divide in, 56–57; 
Facebook app ban, 141; Internet 
governance policy concerns, 49 
 Individual privacy, 88, 147 
 Individual rights–group rights 
tension, 78, 82 
 “Inﬁ nite Data,” 145 
 Information literacy, 66 
 Information security, safety, and 
privacy, 145–50.  See also 
Cybersecurity 
 Information security triad, 109 
 Infrastructure: asset sharing 
strategies, 69–70; Internet 
governance and, 5,  6t 
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE), 20 
 Intellectual property disputes, 30 
 Intellectual property protection, 
132–34 
 Intellectual property rights, 82 
 Intelligent personal assistants, 145 
 Interconnection costs, 59 
 “Intergalactic Network,” 16 
 International Ad-Hoc Committee 
(IAHC), 23 
 International Chamber of Commerce, 
123 

196 
Index
 International connectivity, 63 
 International Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination (ICERD), 90–91 
 International cooperation, 
cybersecurity and, 115–20 
 International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights (ICCPR), 78 
 International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights 
(ICESCR), 83, 84 
 International Forum on the White 
Paper (IFWP), 25 
 International Humanitarian Law 
principles, 116 
 International law, Internet access and, 
84 
 International Organization of 
Employers, 123 
 International Strategy for Cyber Space 
(2011), 114–15 
 International Telecommunications 
Regulations (ITRs), 41–42 
 International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU), 23, 35, 41–42, 64 
 International treaties, 87, 122 
 Internet: as “benevolent anarchy,” 1–2; 
de facto regulation of, 7; deﬁ ned, 5; 
distributed nature of, 10; ecosystem 
metaphor, 3; international human 
rights law, 78; language-related 
challenges, 66–67; nonhierarchical 
evolution of, 3; origins of, 15–17; 
proposed legislation, 1; WWW 
distinct from, 11 
 Internet access: growth of, 61–63,  62t ; 
as a human right, 79–80; no 
international treaty guaranteeing, 
84; as a second-generation right, 83 
 Internet Access Is Not a Human Right 
(Cerf), 82 
 Internet Architecture Board (IAB), 19 
 Internet architecture security 
protections, 99–101 
 Internet Assigned Numbers Authority 
(IANA), 22 
 Internet Bill of Rights Dynamic 
Coalition, 85 
 Internet Corporation for Assigned 
Names and Numbers (ICANN), 
26–32, 44, 87–90 
 Internet Engineering Task Force 
(IETF) standards, 17–19, 74, 102 
 Internet exchange points (IXPs), 
10–11, 65 
 Internet fragmentation, 150–51 
 Internet governance: commercial 
fragmentation, 151–52; common 
themes, 6; data fragmentation, 
154–55; deﬁ ned, 3–5; disjointed 
nature of, 59–60; domain name 
standards, 22–26; economic 
development aspects of, 59–60; 
evolution of, 15–17; ICANN in 
dispute, 29–34; international public 
policy areas, 144; Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers (ICANN), 26–29; 
Internet design and, 7–11; the 
Internet of Things, 144–45; legal 
liabilities, 146–47; multistakeholder 
concept and, 4–5; 
multistakeholder–multilateral 
dichotomy, 144; overview, 1–3; 
persistent challenge of, 143–44; 
persistent divide, 48; public–
private relationship, 5; range of 
issues, 5–7,  6t ; regulation 
challenges and, 155–56; role of 
nation-states in, 2; security, safety, 
and privacy, 145–50; sociopolitical 
fragmentation, 152–53; standards 
setting as, 17–22; three views of, 
42–43; traditional multistakeholder 
model of, 121; WSIS+10 summit, 
52–53 
 Internet Governance Awareness Week 
(2015), 1 

Index 
197
 Internet Governance for Development 
(theme), 60 
 Internet Governance Forum (IGF), 
37–39, 60, 85 
 Internet infrastructure, 80 
 Internet intermediaries: copyright, 
132–37; corporate responsibility 
and accountability, 121–25; net 
neutrality, 137–41; overview, 121; 
privatized digital rights, 125–32 
 Internet of Things (IoT), 108, 144–45 
 Internet protocol (IP) addresses, 7–8 
 Internet Protocol Security (IPsec), 102 
 Internet registries (RIRs), 27 
 Internet Rights and Principles 
Dynamic Coalition (IRPC), 85,  86t 
 Internet security.  See Cybersecurity 
 Internet Society (ISOC), 19, 51 
 Internet Standards Track documents, 
17, 18–19 
 I* organizations, 47, 74 
 IP addressing, 59 
 IP address spooﬁ ng, 102 
 IPv4–IPv6 protocols, 27–28, 28–29, 
102, 151 
 Iran cyber attacks, 111 
 Islamophobia, 91, 92–93 
 ITU Plenipotentiary Conference 
(2014), 51 
 Johnson, David R., 2 
 Jus ad bellum (right to war) principles, 
116, 119 
 Jus in bello  (International 
Humanitarian Law) principles, 116, 
119 
 Just wars, criteria for, 116 
 Kahn, Robert, 16 
 Kazaa, 134 
 Kenisten, Kenneth, 56–57 
 Knowledge gap hypothesis, 65–66 
 Koh, Harold, 118 
 Ku Klux Klan (KKK), 94 
 Lack of legitimacy, 37 
 Language barriers, 66–67 
 La Rue report, 81, 84 
 Lee, Tim Berners, 138 
 Legal liabilities, 146 
 Legislation: Anti-Counterfeiting Trade 
Agreement (ACTA), 82; 
Communications Act (1934), 
80–81; Computer Fraud and Abuse 
Act, 106; Cyber Act of War Act 
(2016), 115; PROTECT Intellectual 
Property Act, 82; Stop Online 
Piracy Act (SOPA), 82 
 Legitimate expression, criminal law 
and, 80 
 Leland Initiative (LI), 68 
 Lessig, Lawrence, 90 
 Levison and Marzuki, 40 
 Licklider, J.C.R., 15–16 
 Local content/local languages, 67 
 Locke, John, 77 
 MacBride Report (UNESCO), 57 
 Machine-to-machine interactions, 
145, 147 
 Machine translation technology, 67 
 Malicious car hacks, 146 
 Malicious intent, 100.  See also 
Cybersecurity 
 Malware, zombies, and bots, 
105–9 
 “Man-Computer Symbiosis” 
(Licklider), 16 
 Many Voices, One World (UNESCO), 
57 
 Mauritius Declaration, 149 
 McBride Round Table on 
Communication, 58 
 McKinnon, Rebecca, 129 
 Media usage, knowledge barriers and, 
66 
 Medical device manufacturers, 146 
 Memorandum of Understanding on the 
Generic Top Level Domain Name 

198 
Index
Space of the Internet Assigned 
Numbers Authority (MoU), 23 
 Mewes, Heather N., 23 
 Microsoft, 97 
 Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs), 35, 58–59 
 Mirai malware, 108 
 Mobile broadband subscriptions, 56 
 Morozov, Evengy, 126 
 Morris, Robert, 106 
 Morris worm, 106 
 Mueller, Milton L., 4, 25 
 Multilingualism, 59 
 Multistakeholder Advisory Group 
(MAG), 37–38 
 Multistakeholder–multilateral 
dichotomy, 144 
 Multistakeholder perspective, 4–5, 
42–43, 46, 54 
 NameDrop, 130 
 Napster, 133–34 
 Natanz nuclear facility, 111 
 National Alliance hate group, 94 
 National Highway Trafﬁ c Safety 
Administration, 146 
 National Mission Forces, 114 
 National Science Foundation (NSF), 
16 
 National security, cyber defense and, 
109–15 
 National Security Agency (NSA) 
spying scandal, 88, 115, 154 
 National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace 
(2003), 100 
 National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration 
(NTIA), 24 
 Negative rights, 82–83 
 Netﬂ ix–Comcast agreement, 140 
 NETmundial conference, 47–50 
 NETmundial Initiative (NMI), 51 
 Net neutrality, 1, 137–41 
 Network address translators (NATs), 
28 
 Network attachment, cybersecurity 
and, 100 
 Network organizations, 4 
 Network Solutions, Inc., 22–23 
 New World Information and 
Communication Order (NWICO), 
57–58 
 Nicaragua v. United States, 114 
 Non-Aligned Movement, 57 
 Norms on the Responsibilities of 
Transnational Corporations and Other 
Business Enterprises with Regard to 
Human Rights (2003), 122 
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 113–14 
 Norton Symantec, 107 
 Notice and choice challenges, 149 
 NSA spying scandal, 47, 54, 128 
 Nye, Joseph, Jr., 4 
 Obama, Barack, 93, 109 
 Obama administration, 32, 48, 140 
 “Obscene” speech, 90 
 One-time-only authentication process, 
108 
 Online hate speech and harassment, 
89–98 
 Open-architecture networks, 16 
 Open multilateral perspective, 42, 
44–45, 46 
 “Open-Stand” principles, 20–22 
 Organization of Islamic Cooperation 
(OIC), 91 
 Pacemakers and deﬁ brillators, 146 
 Packet-switching, 10 
 Packet-switching networks, 15 
 Pai, Ajit, 140 
 Pakistan, 103 
 Panetta, Leon, 109–10 
 Pariser, Eli, 152 
 Peering, 10–11 
 Peering agreements, 151 
 Peer-to-peer (P2P) ﬁ le sharing, 
133–34 

Index 
199
 Personal electronic data, 88 
 Personalized search results, 152–53 
 Phishing, 106 
 Pillay, Navi, 93 
 Poland, 126 
 Policy barriers, Internet usage and, 
67–70 
 Political expression, 125–26 
 Political polarization and extremism, 
153 
 Political speech, 90 
 Pollis, Adamantia, 78 
 Pornography as free speech, 90 
 Positive rights, 83 
 Post, David G., 2 
 Postel, Jon, 22, 25–26 
 PrepCom1, PrepCom2, 35 
 Principle 12, 73, 74 
 Principles for Delegation and 
Administration of ccTLDs (GAC), 30 
 Privacy rights: in Europe, 131; IoT 
and, 148–49 
 Private censorship, 97 
 Private intermediaries.  See Internet 
intermediaries 
 Private property, 5,  6t 
 Privatized digital rights, 125–32 
 Project Grey Goose, 111 
 Proposed Standards, 18–19 
 Proprietary services, fragmentation of, 
151–52 
 “Protect, Respect, and Remedy” 
framework, 123 
 PROTECT Intellectual Property Act, 
1, 82, 135 
 Pseudonymity, hate speech and, 96 
 Public policy, 37 
 Putin, Vladimir, 54, 112 
 Rabat Plan, 93–94 
 Rabat Plan of Action on the Prohibition 
of Advocacy of National, Racial or 
Religious Hatred (Pillay), 93 
 Radio frequency identiﬁ cation (RFID) 
tags, 145 
 Ransomware, 107 
 Rathgeber, Eva M., 72 
 Recording Industry Association of 
American (RIAA), 133 
 Recursive name servers, 8 
 Reddit, 94–95 
 Refarming process, 69 
 Regime theory, governance and, 
3–4 
 Regional Internet registries (RIRs), 27 
 Registrar Accreditation Agreement 
(RAA), 88 
 Regulation challenges and, 155–56 
 Religion, hate speech and, 91, 92–93 
 Representation principle, 24–25 
 Repressive multilateral perspective, 
42–43, 46 
 Republic of Georgia cyber attacks, 
110–11 
 #Republic: Divided Democracy in the Age 
of Social Media  (Sunstein), 153 
 Request for Comments (RFC), 17 
 Resnik, Paul, 90 
 Resolution 16/18, 92, 93 
 Resolution 59(I), 78 
 Resolution 68/167, 88 
 Resolution on Big Data, 149 
 Resource allocation, Internet 
governance and, 5,  6t 
 Resource Public Key Infrastructure 
(RPKI), 104 
 Right to erasure, 132 
 Right to health, 84 
 The Right to Privacy in the Digital Age 
(UN, 2013), 88 
 Robinson, Mary, 84, 127 
 Romety, Ginni, 99 
 Root zone, 26 
 Rough consensus, 18 
 Rousseff, Dilma, 47, 50 
 Routers, 10 
 Rue, Frank La, 79 
 Ruggie, John, 123 
 Ruggie report, 123–24 
 Russia, 154 

200 
Index
 Russian Federation proposal (1998), 
118 
 Rwanda, 91 
 Salvo, Joseph, 145 
 Samsung, 147 
 San Bernardino terrorist attack, 128 
 SAT-3 cable, 63 
 Script Kiddies, 107 
 Second-generation bandwidth 
licenses, 69 
 Second-generation rights, 83–84 
 Second World Conference on Human 
Rights (1993), 78 
 Secure Socket Layer (SSL), 102 
 Security, Internet governance and, 5, 
 6t 
 Security, safety, and privacy, 145–50 
 “Security by design,” 148 
 Security vulnerabilities, 147 
 Self-driving cars, 147 
 “Sensitive expression,” 88 
 Sensor-enabled objects, 145 
 Sepulveda, Daniel, 52 
 Service agreement terms, 97 
 Sexual harassment, online, 95 
 Shi Tao, 127 
 Shmatikov, Vitaly, 105 
 “Six strikes,” 135 
 Smart cars, 146 
 Smart Phone Encryption and Public 
Safety (2016), 129 
 Smart phones, 152 
 Snidal, Duncan, 85 
 Snowden, Edward, 46, 48, 54, 115 
 Social media algorithms, 152–53 
 Social media platforms, hate speech 
and, 96–97, 126 
 Sociopolitical fragmentation, 152–53 
 Soft law–hard law distinction, 85–86, 
87 
 Solidarity rights, 83 
 Son, Sooel, 105 
 Sousa, John Philips, 133 
 Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), 
94 
 Sovereignty: digital, 154–55; 
traditional principle of, 2–3 
 Spear phishing, 106 
 Special Rapporteur: for Freedom of 
Information, 79–80; to HRC, 84; 
on minority issues, 95, 97; on the 
Right to Privacy, 88 
 Spectrum allocation, 69 
 Speech prohibition guidelines, 93 
 Stability principle, 24 
 Stalking and harassment, 95 
 Standards setting, Internet 
governance and, 17–22 
 Statement of Policy on the Management 
of Internet Names and Addresses 
(NTIA), 24–25 
 Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA), 1, 82, 
135 
 Stormfront (KKK hate site), 94 
 Stuxnet computer worm, 111 
 Sub-Commission on the Promotion 
and Protection of Human Rights, 
122 
 Sub-saturating DDoS attacks, 107 
 Sunstein, Cass R., 153 
 Surveillance, IoT borderline with, 147 
 Surveillance technologies, 46–47 
 Sustainable Development Goals, 63, 
70 
 SYN, SYN-ACK, ACK method, 101 
 SYN ﬂ ood, 102 
 System management, 127 
 Tallinn Manual on the International Law 
Applicable to Cyber Warfare (NATO), 
113, 114 
 Tanenbaum, Joel, 134 
 Tarmizi, Mohed Sharil, 30 
 Task Force on Gender Issues, 70 
 Technical standards, Internet 
governance and, 5,  6t 
 Technology diffusion, 56 

Index 
201
 Telecenter concept, 72–73 
 Telecommunication markets, 
liberalization of, 68–69 
 Telecommunications revolution, 1 
 Telecommunications utilities, 80–81 
 Telephone busy signal, 15 
 Terms of Service (ToS) agreements, 
130 
 Terrestrial ﬁ ber-optic infrastructure, 
64 
 Territorial sovereignty, 2, 3 
 Third-generation rights, 83 
 Thomas-Rassett, Jamie, 134 
 Three-way handshake, 101, 102 
 Tichenor, J., 65–66 
 Tier 1 networks, 10–11 
 Timed blocking trend, 79–80 
 Top-level domains names (TLDs), 22 
 Trafﬁ c diversion, 103 
 Transatlantic ﬁ ber optic cable, 63 
 Transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol (TCP/IP), 10, 16, 
101–5 
 Transnational cybercrime, 116 
 Transnational regulatory networks 
(TRNs), 4 
 Treaty of Westphalia (1648), 2 
 Trojan horses, 105–9 
 Trump, Donald, 95 
 Trump administration, 140 
 Tunis Agenda, 37, 52–53, 60, 126 
 Tunis Agenda for the Information Society, 
36, 117 
 Tunis Declaration of Principles 
(2005), 61 
 Turkey, 103 
 Twitter, 96 
 Twitter revolutions, 125 
 2G bandwidth, 69 
 2016 presidential election, 153 
 Undersea ﬁ ber-optic cable, 154 
 Uniform Domain Name Dispute 
Resolution Policy (UDRP), 31–32 
 United Nations (UN): 2012 World 
Conference on International 
Telecommunications (WCIT), 
41–47; Commission on Science and 
Technology for Development 
(CSDT), 38–39; Conference on 
Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD), 144; Congress on 
Crime Prevention and Criminal 
Justice, 117, 118; continuing debate, 
53–54; digital divide problem, 58; 
dynamic coalitions, 37–41; Human 
Rights Commission, 122; Human 
Rights Council, 124; international 
human rights law, 78; NETmundial, 
47–53; overview, 35–37; World 
Conference on International 
Telecommunications (WCIT), 
41–47 
 United States Agency for International 
Development, 68 
 United States cyber attacks, 111 
 United States Cyber Command, 114 
 Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights (UDHR), 78 
 Universal resource locators (URLs), 
11 
 Universal service obligation, 80–81 
 Universal service principle, 82 
 US-CERT (Computer Emergency 
Readiness Team), 100 
 US–China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, 103 
 User consent requirement, 131 
 Vasak, Karel, 82–83 
 Vehicle security concerns, 108, 146 
 Video streaming, 140 
 Vienna Declaration, 79 
 Violence, hate speech and, 94 
 Virginia v. Black (2003), 90 
 “Virtual gated communities,” 153 
 Viruses, worms, and Trojan horses, 
105–9 

202 
Index
 Voice Recognition, 147 
 Voluntary adoption, 21 
 Wade, Abdoulaye, 60 
 Walled gardens, 151–52 
 “WannaCry” ransomware attack, 
107 
 Warsaw Summit, 114 
 Washington Consensus, 61, 68 
 Wassenaar Arrangement, 127 
 WCIT Final Acts signatories, 45–46, 
 45t  
 We, Kevin, 108 
 “Weeping Angel” program, 148 
 Wheeler, Tom, 140 
 White Paper (NTIA), 24–25 
 WHOIS protocol, 88 
 Wide-area networking capabilities, 
16–17 
 WikiLeaks phenomenon, 115, 
148 
 Wikipedia blackout, 136 
 Working Group on Internet 
Governance (WGIG), 36, 59 
 World Conference on International 
Telecommunications (WCIT), 
41 
 World Economic Forum (WEF), 51 
 World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO), 23 
 World Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Number 
(WICANN), 37 
 World Radio Communication 
Conference, 69 
 World Summit on the Information 
Society (WSIS), 35, 59, 62, 77 
 World Summit on the Information 
Society Review (Paris, 2015), 52–53 
 World Wide Web (WWW), 11 
 World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 
20 
 Worms and Trojan horses, 105–9 
 WSIS+10, 52–53, 63, 74 , 87
 WSIS Gender Caucus, 73 
 WSIS Plan of Action, 79 
 Wu, Tim, 129, 137, 152 
 Wuzhen Resolution, 52 
 .xxx domain name controversy, 88 
 .xxx top-level designation, 30 
 YouTube, 97, 103 
 Zero-rating, net neutrality and, 141 
 Zombies, bots, and malware, 105–9 

 About the Author 
 Carol M. Glen, PhD, is professor of political science at Valdosta State Uni-
versity, Valdosta, Georgia. She received her degree from Florida State Uni-
versity. Her publications include  Global Issues and Controversies (coauthored 
with Markéta Žídková) as well as numerous refereed articles and book chap-
ters on a range of international political issues, including the United Nations 
and global governance, international security, human rights, nationalist 
movements, European integration, and technology and politics. 

