
Control Components Using Si, GaAs,  
and GaN Technologies

For a listing of recent titles in the 
Artech House Microwave Library,
turn to the back of this book.

Control Components Using Si, GaAs,  
and GaN Technologies
Inder J. Bahl
artechhouse.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library. 
ISBN-13: 978-1-60807-711-3 
Cover design by John Gomes
© 2014 Artech House
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of 
this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks 
have been appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this 
information. Use of a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity  
of any trademark or service mark.
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

v
Contents
Preface	
xi
Chapter 1
Introduction	
1
1.1	
History of Control Components	
1
1.2	
Types of Control Components	
2
1.3	
Solid-State Switching Devices	
3
1.4	
Design of Control Components	
5
1.5	
Fabrication of Control Components	
9
1.6	
Applications	
12
1.7	
Book Organization	
14
References	
15
Chapter 2
Control Devices	
19
2.1	
PIN Diodes	
19
2.1.1	 Operation of PIN Diodes	
19
2.1.2	 PIN Diode Models	
21
2.2	
GaAs MESFETs	
24
2.2.1	 Operation of MESFETs	
24
2.2.2	 Linear Switch FET Models	
26
2.2.3	 Nonlinear Switch FET Models	
33
2.3	
GaAs HEMTs	
36
2.4	
GaAs HBTs	
39
2.5	
GaN HEMTs	
39
2.6	
CMOS Transistors	
40
2.6.1	 Operation of CMOS Switch	
40
2.6.2	 Various Body Floating Techniques	
42
2.6.3	 CMOS Transistor Models	
44
2.7	
Other Devices	
45
2.7.1	 Schottky Diodes	
46
2.7.2	 Varactor Diodes	
49
2.8	
Transistor Model Scaling	
49
2.9	
Biasing of Switching Devices	
50
2.9.1	 Biasing of PIN Diodes	
50
2.9.2	 Biasing of Transistors	
58

vi
Contents
2.10	 Switching Speed	
59
2.10.1	 Switching Speed of PIN Diodes	
59
2.10.2	Switching Speed of Transistors	
61
2.11	 Comparison of Switching Devices	
62
References	
62
Chapter 3
Switches	
67
3.1	
Introduction	
67
3.1.1	 Switch Parameters	
67
3.1.2	 Devices for Switches	
69
3.1.3	 Basic Requirements of a Switch for Wireless Applications	
69
3.2	
Design of Switches	
70
3.2.1	 Types of Switches	
70
3.2.2	 Switch Configurations	
72
3.2.3	 Basic Theory of Switches	
75
3.3	
Multiport Switches	
78
3.3.1	 Multithrow Switches	
78
3.3.2	 Matrix Switches	
79
3.3.3	 Diversity Switch	
79
3.4	
High Isolation Switches	
81
3.5	
Broadband Switches	
84
3.6	
High-Power Switches	
86
3.6.1	 Impedance Transformation Technique	
88
3.6.2	 Stacked FETs Method	
90
3.6.3	 Resonant Circuit Technique	
91
3.6.4	 GaN HEMT Switches	
92
3.6.5	 Power Handling of PIN Diode Switches	
93
3.7	
Low Distortion Switches	
94
3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits	
96
3.8.1	 PIN Diode Switch Circuits	
96
3.8.2	 MESFET Switch Circuits	
99
3.8.3	 HEMT Switch Circuits	
101
3.8.4	 CMOS Switch Circuits	
107
3.8.5	 Comparison of Switch Technologies	
109
3.9	
Novel Switch Configurations	
110
3.9.1	 Filter-Integrated Switch	
110
3.9.2	 Redundant Switch	
111
3.9.3	 Switched Variable Power Amplifier	
111
3.9.4	 Switches with Integrated Control	
113
3.10	 Intermodulation Analysis of Switches	
113
3.10.1	 PIN Diode Switches	
114
3.10.2	MESFET Switches	
114
References	
115

Contents
vii
Chapter 4
Phase Shifters	
123
4.1	
Types of Phase Shifters	
123
4.1.1	 Digital Phase Shifters	
123
4.1.2	 Analog Phase Shifters	
126
4.1.3	 Active Phase Shifters	
127
4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters	
127
4.2.1	 Reflection-Type Phase Shifter	
127
4.2.2	 Switched-Line Phase Shifter	
133
4.2.3	 Loaded-Line Phase Shifters	
136
4.2.4	 Switched-Network Phase Shifters	
142
4.2.5	 Embedded-Device Phase Shifters	
152
4.3	
Multibit Phase Shifter Circuits	
155
4.3.1	 RMS Errors	
155
4.3.2	 PIN Diode Phase Shifters	
156
4.3.3	 MESFET/HEMT Phase Shifters	
157
4.3.4	 CMOS Phase Shifters	
163
4.4	
Analog Phase Shifters	
165
4.4.1	 Voltage-Controlled Reflection-Type Phase Shifters	
165
4.4.2	 Voltage-Controlled Transmission-Type Phase Shifters	
166
4.4.3	 Analog Varactor Diode Phase Shifters	
169
4.4.4	 Analog CMOS Phase Shifters	
170
4.5	
Broadband Phase Shifters	
171
4.5.1	 GaAs MESFET/HEMT Broadband Phase Shifters	
173
4.5.2	 Broadband CMOS Phase Shifters	
179
4.6	
Ultrawideband Phase Shifters	
180
4.7	
Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters	
185
4.7.1	
PIN/Schottky Diode Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters	
185
4.7.2	 MESFET/HEMT Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters	
185
4.7.3	 CMOS Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters	
189
4.8	
Active Phase Shifters	
190
4.8.1	 Dual-Gate FET Phase Shifters	
191
4.8.2	 Switchable-Amplifier Phase Shifters	
192
4.8.3	 Vector Modulator Phase Shifters	
192
References	
197
Chapter 5
Attenuators	
207
5.1	
Introduction	
207
5.1.1	 Types of Attenuators	
207
5.1.2	 Theory of Attenuators	
210
5.1.3	 Fabrication of Attenuators	
214
5.2	
Fixed Value Attenuators	
214
5.2.1	 Attenuator Pad	
214
5.2.2	 Temperature Variable Attenuator	
215

viii
Contents
5.3	
Multibit Attenuators	
216
5.3.1	 PIN Diode Step Attenuators	
217
5.3.2	 GaAs MMIC Step Attenuators	
218
5.3.3	 Si CMOS Step Attenuators	
220
5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators	
222
5.4.1	 PIN Diode Variable Attenuators	
223
5.4.2	 MESFET Variable Attenuators	
224
5.4.3	 CMOS Variable Attenuator	
227
5.4.4	 GaN HEMT Attenuator	
228
5.4.5	 Linear Voltage Variable Attenuators	
229
5.6	
Other Attenuator Circuits	
236
5.6.1	 Reflection-Type Attenuators	
236
5.6.2	 Balanced Attenuators	
240
5.6.3	 Frequency Dependent Attenuators	
242
5.6.4	 Phase Compensated Attenuators	
244
5.6.5	 CMOS Attenuator with Integrated Switch	
245
5.7	
Distortion in Attenuators	
245
5.7.1	
PIN Diode Attenuators	
246
5.7.2	 FET Attenuators	
247
References	
248
Chapter 6
Limiters	
253
6.1	
Introduction	
253
6.1.1	 Limiter Characterization	
254
6.1.2	 Limiter Types	
255
6.2	
PIN Diode Limiters	
259
6.2.1	 Analysis of PIN Diode Limiter	
259
6.2.2	 Si PIN Diode Limiters in Microstrip Configuration	
263
6.2.3	 GaAs PIN Diode Limiters	
265
6.2.4	 Matched Limiters	
267
6.3	
Schottky Diode Limiters	
269
6.3.1	 Analysis of Schottky Diode Limiter	
271
6.3.2	 Schottky Diode Design and Limiter Configuration	
273
6.3.3	 Broadband High Power Limiters	
274
6.4	
Monolithic GaAs Schottky Diode Limiter Circuits	
275
6.4.1	 Limiting Amplifiers	
276
6.4.2	 10-W Limiter with Embedded LNA	
278
6.5	
Other Diode Limiters	
282
6.5.1	 BiCMOS Diode Limiter	
282
6.5.2	 GaN Schottky Diode Limiters	
283
References	
283

Contents
ix
Appendix A
Physical Constants and Frequency Band Designations	
287
Appendix B
Thermal Design of Devices	
289
B.1	
Thermal Basics	
289
B.2	 Transistor Thermal Design	
291
B.2.1	 Cooke Model for Single-Gate Devices	
291
B.2.2	 Cook Model for Multiple-Gate Devices	
292
B.2.3	 Pulsed Operation	
294
B.2.4	 Component Assembly Thermal Design Considerations	
295
References	
296
About the Author	
297
Index	
299


xi
Preface
Control components are important parts of RF and microwave systems. Their com-
pact size, high performance, and low cost have played a vital role in the develop-
ment of high-performance, cost-effective solutions and new applications during the 
past quarter century. PIN diodes, GaAs MESFET, HBT, and HEMT, GaN HEMT, 
SiGe HBT and Si CMOS technologies have been used to develop a large variety of 
control components for commercial and military applications. Numerous articles 
scattered in a wide array of technical journals and conference proceedings, along 
with book chapters, have been published on control components. However, no com-
prehensive text dedicated to this topic covering both theory and practical aspects, 
and recent devices exists. This book not only provides a comprehensive treatment 
but also deals with HEMT- and CMOS-based control components to fill the void.
Control components constitute switches, phase shifters, attenuators, and limiters. 
Switches are used for changing the signal flow in different directions, phase shifters 
manipulates the phase of the transmitted signal, attenuators adjust the amplitude of 
the signal, while the limiters set the strength of the receive signal at the output of a 
circuit. A single active phased array radar system, for example, may use thousands 
of these circuits for precise control of the radiated beam. All these circuit functions 
are integrated parts of solid-state transmit-receive (T/R) modules.
Traditionally, two types of solid-state devices commonly used in control compo-
nents are: Si PIN diodes and GaAs MESFETs/HEMTs. Recently, MEMS, CMOS, 
and GaN HEMTs have been used for RF switches and offer challenges to PIN 
diodes and MESFETs/HEMTs. Si CMOS–based control components have signifi-
cantly small die size in comparison to PIN diode and MESFET/HEMT circuits. 
Applications of MEMS in RF circuits have been discussed in numerous references 
including some books. This book describes control circuits using solid-state devices. 
However, many of the circuit configurations and design approaches described in 
the book are applicable for MEMS technology also.
The GaN HEMT is an emerging solid-state device that exhibits great poten-
tial for high-power and high-voltage control components. The operation of GaN 
HEMTs at high voltages, high currents, and high temperatures offers a promise for 
a superior performance for RF functions including high-power control components 
and low-cost transceivers.
The unique characteristics of PIN diodes, MESFETs/HEMTs, CMOS, GaN 
HEMTs, and other devices are exploited in this book for the design of RF, micro-
wave, and millimeter-wave control components. Control components using GaN 
HEMT, SiGe HBT, and Si CMOS technologies have made tremendous progress in 
recent years. These technologies are treated for the first time in a book. Where ever 

xii
Preface
possible, the salient features of various technologies are compared qualitatively and 
quantitatively.
This book evolved basically with the author’s extensive control components 
design experience over the past 40 years. He has been actively involved with switch 
device development and numerous designs for switches, phase shifters, attenuators, 
and limiters from the concept level to the end products. The present book provides 
a comprehensive treatment of such circuits. The contents of the book are self-
contained and cover practical aspects in detail. Device operation and their models, 
basic circuit theory and designs, and applications are described. Design methods 
and circuit design examples using both hybrid and monolithic integrated circuits are 
presented. The topics discussed include modeling, analysis, design, and fabrication 
considerations. The book also includes extensive design information in the form of 
equations, tables, graphs, and examples. More than 20 practical examples are fully 
solved, make it simple to understand the concepts of circuit design. Simple design 
equations are also included to understand design concepts. The unique features of 
this book include in-depth study and broad view of solid-state control components. 
It has dedicated sections on broadband techniques. With its emphasis on theory, 
design, and practical aspects geared toward day-to-day applications, this book is 
intended for students, teachers, scientists, and practicing engineers. The students are 
required to have prior knowledge of topics such as solid-state device basics, theory 
of transmission lines, basic circuit theory, and electromagnetics taught at the under-
graduate level. It is hoped that the readers of this book will further understand RF 
and microwave control components design.
The book is divided into six chapters, with the material treated precisely and 
thoroughly covering various aspects of control components in each chapter. The 
text presents the operation of switching devices and their models, circuit analysis 
techniques and design, and circuit performance. These chapters provide the foun-
dation for analysis and design of RF, microwave, and millimeter wave control 
components. It is hoped that the selection of topics and their presentation will meet 
the expectations of the readers. Like any other comprehensive book, the work of 
other researchers is included or cited for further reading. This book also includes 
a comprehensive list of references.
The book contains enough material for a one-year course at the senior or gradu-
ate level. With judicious selection of specific topics, one can use the book for one-
semester, two-semester, or two-quarter courses.
This book is dedicated to all my colleagues who have done pioneer work in the 
advancement of microwave engineering. I gratefully acknowledge the association I 
had with Dr. Edward L. Griffin during my working at ITT and Tyco Electronics. 
I particularly want to thank George Studtmann for providing several control com-
ponent examples based on MSAG process. Professor Gabriel Rebeiz and his group 
on CMOS control components, Professor Robert Caverly on distortion analysis of 
control devices, and many other researchers who advanced the state of the art in 
control components are gratefully acknowledged. I would like to acknowledge and 
sincerely thank Drs. Gabriel Rebeiz, Prasad Shastry, Ernesto Limiti, Andrei Greben-
nikov, Reza Tayrani, J.-G. Kim, Koen Mouthaan, and Y. P. Zhang for providing and 
allowing me to use several photographs. This book became a reality only because 
of the great support I received from Mark Walsh and his staff at Artech House.

Preface
xiii
Finally and foremost, I want to express my deep appreciation to my wife, Sub-
hash Bahl, for her love, encouragement, enduring unselfishness, and support. Espe-
cially, I wish to thank my daughter Preeti, son-in-law Ashutosh, son Puneet, and 
grandsons Karan and Rohan for their love, support, and patience. They all truly 
deserve much of the credit.


1
C h a p t e r  1
Introduction
Control components constitute switches, phase shifters, attenuators, and limiters. 
They are employed for controlling the signal flow in transmitters and receivers. 
Switches are used for changing the signal flow in different directions, phase shifters 
manipulate the phase of the transmitted signal, attenuators adjust the amplitude of 
the signal, while the limiters set the strength of the receive signal at the output of a 
circuit. Control components have been used extensively in radars, communication 
systems, electronic warfare, wireless applications, cable television (CATV), test 
instruments, and other systems. All control components are integral parts of solid-
state transmit-receive (T/R) modules. A single active phased array radar system, for 
example, may use thousands of T/R modules for a precise control of the radiated 
beam. One of the highest volume applications of control components is for switches 
in mobile or cell and cordless phones, and tens of millions of switches have been 
used in wireless applications. In this chapter, an overview of control devices and 
components as well as their applications are provided [1–50].
1.1	
History of Control Components
The early history of control components is based on solid-state PIN diodes and 
ferrites. Using a germanium point contact mixer diode as a switch was reported 
in 1955. The use of Si-based PIN diodes in switches was proposed in 1958. The 
work on PIN (or p-i-n, or simply pin) diode limiters and phase shifters started in 
late 1950s and early 1960s. The ferrite-based control components were reported in 
1960s. Ferrite circuits can handle much higher power levels than solid-state devices; 
however, they are bulkier, are nonreciprocal, and have lower switching speed [1, 2].
Solid-state control components are well documented in early books written pri-
marily on silicon (Si) PIN diode control components [3–9]. Tremendous progress was 
made based on metal semiconductor field effect transistor (MESFET) or simply FET 
switching devices to develop low-cost gallium arsenide (GaAs) monolithic micro-
wave integrated circuit (MMIC) switches, phase shifters, and attenuators working 
up to 40 GHz during the 1980s [10–20]. Multipurpose switches using MESFETs 
and high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) led the MMIC technology in 1990s. 
Control components were also developed using GaAs heterojunction bipolar tran-
sistors (HBTs) [49] and silicon germanium (SiGe) HBT [50] –based PIN diodes for 
low-loss applications. Work on silicon complementary metal oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS) control components started only in late 1990s. Since then, amazing growth 
in CMOS radio frequency integrated circuit (RFIC) control components has been 

2
Introduction
recorded due to their vast potential in military and commercial applications. The 
development milestones in MMIC/RFIC control components [25–42] are illustrated 
in Figure 1.1. More extensive lists of references reporting the past and current prog-
ress on control components are included in the succeeding chapters.
During the past two decades, microelectromechanical system (MEMS) devices 
have been developed for RF switches and variable capacitors. MEMS devices have 
low loss and are challenging to PIN diodes and transistor control components if 
long-term reliability issues can be solved. However, MEMS are not as versatile as 
the solid-state devices when integration with other circuit functions is required. 
Because it is beyond the scope of this book to discuss MEMS-based control com-
ponents, readers are referred to numerous published papers/books on this subject 
[43, 44]. However, many of circuit configurations and design approaches described 
in this book are applicable for MEMS circuits also.
Since the focus of this book is limited to solid-state control components, no 
further discussions on ferrite, MEMS, ferroelectric [47, 48] or any other technology 
used for control components will be included in the book.
1.2	
Types of Control Components
Basic types of control components are shown in Figure 1.2. Figure 1.2(a) shows a 
typical configuration of a three-port switch also known as a single-pole double-
throw (SPDT) switch. In this configuration the switching devices are represented as 
short and open and biased so that they remain ON or OFF under the desired input 
signal power level. A switch may be a two-port, three-port, or four-port circuit. A 
popular topology for a phase shifter is shown in Figure 1.2(b). Here phase shifter is 
realized using two SPDT switches to switch one network to another network having 
the desired phase difference. Basic configuration of an attenuator is shown in Fig-
ure 1.2(c) and has the same concept as the phase shifter (i.e., switching a reference 
through line to the desired attenuation path). Figure 1.2(d) shows a limiter schematic. 
Here under ideal conditions, the limiting devices (unbiased or biased) remain open 
(minimum attenuation) at low signal power levels and are shorted (maximum reflec-
tion) at the desired threshold signal power level and beyond. Limiters are designed 
standalone or they are integrated with low noise amplifiers (LNAs).
Figure 1.1  Timeline developments of monolithic control components from 1980 to the present.

1.3	
Solid-State Switching Devices
3
1.3	
Solid-State Switching Devices
Solid-state switching devices are the backbone of control components. Switching 
devices are of two general classes: two-terminal diodes and three-terminal transis-
tors. Both are used in digital ON and OFF mode as well as in variable impedance 
mode. Early switching devices were dominated by two-terminal PIN diodes because 
they are typically less expensive to manufacture than transistors. Diodes can handle 
high power levels and have superior intermodulation characteristics. However, diodes 
need biasing networks and have low to medium DC power consumption. The asso-
ciated bias circuitry to achieve switching from a two-terminal device is much more 
expensive and makes the circuit bandwidth narrower in comparison to transistors.
Figure 1.3 shows two PIN diode configurations. The PIN diodes are available 
in pill, beam lead, and surface mounted packages as well as in chip form. The PIN 
diodes are fabricated using both Si and GaAs technologies. GaAs HBT [49] and 
SiGe HBT [50] based PIN diodes for MMIC applications are also available from 
Figure 1.2  Basic configurations of control components: (a) single-pole-double-throw switch, 
(b) phase shifter, (c) attenuator, and (d) limiter.
Figure 1.3  (a) Basic configuration of a Si PIN diode used as packaged device, (b) SiGe HBT 
process based vertical PIN diode for RFICs.

4
Introduction
some semiconductor foundries. The PIN diodes based on GaN technology have 
also been reported in the literature [51].
Today, three-terminal transistors are more popular than PIN diodes for use in 
switching and other control components. The transistors are operated in the passive 
mode (no voltage applied at drain or source), and the gates are isolated from the 
drain and source terminals. Using a control voltage applied at the gate of the transis-
tor, one can control the device’s low-high impedance states in a simple manner. The 
biasing network is a simple high value resistor and consumes negligible steady-state 
power (i.e., the DC power consumed during the transition as the device capacitor 
charges/discharges during the OFF and ON states). GaAs FET/HEMT switches have 
been used extensively in handheld and portable devices because of their low cost 
and negligible power consumption. Plastic packaged FET switch product, which 
includes switch die, package, and assembly, often costs less than $0.5 per unit.
Solid-state transistors may be grouped into two categories: bipolar and unipolar 
devices. The bipolar devices are comprised of SiGe and GaAs HBTs. The unipolar 
devices include Si metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFETs), 
GaAs MESFETs, GaAs pseudomorphic high electron mobility transistors (pHEMTs), 
and SiC/Si GaN high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs). The switchover from 
two-terminal to three-terminal devices was largely due to flexibility in integration 
and cost. Structures for transistor switching devices are basically the same as used 
for amplification and generation with minor adjustments in the channel. In com-
parison to amplifier devices, the gates in switching transistors do not have overlay 
and are placed symmetrically between the source and drain electrodes. Figure 1.4 
shows a cross section of a switching MESFET [20].
Both n-type MOSFET (nMOSFET) and p-type MOSFET (pMOSFET) are 
used. They are also referred to as NMOS and PMOS, respectively, and the process 
supporting these devices is popularly known as complementary MOS or CMOS. 
The CMOS technology has played a crucial role in the development of numerous 
wireless applications to manufacture low-cost solutions. Advantages of Si CMOS 
technology include on-chip integration with other front-end RF and intermediate 
frequency (IF) components, integration with digital signal processing circuits in 
baseband blocks, single polarity voltage control, and low-cost potential in large 
volume. CMOS control components such as switches, attenuators, and phase shift-
ers are evolving, and their success will be critical in the development of low-cost 
integrated T/R modules with higher Si-based functions. A special silicon process 
such as the silicon on sapphire (SOS) has performance comparable to GaAs and at 
Figure 1.4  Cross-section view of a MESFET.

1.4	
Design of Control Components
5
lower cost with negligible power consumption. Figure 1.5 shows a cross section of 
an NMOS transistor.
The GaN HEMT is an emerging solid-state device that exhibits great potential 
for high-power, high-voltage, and harsh-environment applications at radio, micro-
wave, and millimeter-wave frequencies. High electron mobility and high breakdown 
voltage HEMTs on high thermal conductivity semi-insulating SiC substrates are 
capable of controlling of significantly large amplitude power signals that cannot be 
delivered with conventional devices on GaAs or Si. The operation of GaN devices at 
high voltages, high currents, and high temperatures offers a superior performance 
for RF functions including high-power control components and high-performance 
transceivers. GaN-based highly integrated T/R modules can replace several ICs and 
a circulator. The distinct advantages are a smaller footprint and cost-effective solu-
tion. The smaller footprint will allow smaller spacing between the antenna elements, 
especially at higher microwave and millimeter-wave frequencies.
1.4	
Design of Control Components
The design of control components has several facets impacting their performance. 
The most important factors include the selection of semiconductor technology, 
device models, circuit architecture and design methodology, packaging, and thermal 
management. The design of control component for a particular application and fre-
quency range is quite complicated in the sense that it has to meet physical, electrical, 
thermal (especially high-power switches and limiters), and cost requirements. For 
example, typical performance requirements for a high-power switch are frequency 
band, insertion loss, isolation, power output, third order intercept, and input and 
output VSWR. The circuit performance is determined by the device sizes, the circuit 
topology, design methodology, fabrication technology, and packaging. More often it 
involves tradeoffs in terms of bandwidth, insertion loss, and isolation. At low micro-
wave frequencies (below C-band) monolithic phase shifters designed using lumped 
inductors and capacitors have an order of magnitude smaller size compared to phase 
shifters designed using the microstrip. Below 1 GHz, the size of monolithic phase 
shifters using lumped elements is relatively large, and MIC technology employing 
surface-mounted devices and discrete lumped elements becomes more attractive.
The initial cost of developing monolithic-based control components is far greater 
than in hybrid MIC-based technology. Also, the tuning of the fabricated ICs is 
Figure 1.5  Physical cross section of a NMOS transistor.

6
Introduction
difficult. Therefore, the design phase of RFIC and MMIC becomes very critical to 
achieve first-pass success to minimize expensive design iterations. The control com-
ponent design is normally performed using device S-parameters, linear and nonlinear 
models, and passive component models. An extensive accurate modeling library of 
active devices, passive circuit components, and other parasitic reactances including 
discontinuities, cross-coupling, bonding pads, connecting wires, and package lead 
frame becomes an integral part of a control component design.
The design of control components requires state-of-the-art computer-aided 
design (CAD) tools. The need for increased design sophistication arises from the fact 
that the post fabrication tuning flexibility available in conventional hybrid micro-
wave integrated circuits is no longer present in the monolithically fabricated control 
components. Consequently, an accurate and comprehensive design methodology is 
required. This includes development of accurately characterized standard library 
cells as well as sub circuits, accurate models for linear and nonlinear active devices, 
accurate passive component models, use of circuit topology and circuit elements that 
are more tolerant to process variations, tolerance centering of designs, proximity 
effect models, comprehensive simulation of complete circuits, and automatic RF 
testing of ICs on wafer. The latter is needed in order to obtain sufficient statistical 
characterization data without having to do expensive mounting or packaging. The 
development of integrated CAD tools and accurate and comprehensive models for 
solid-state devices and passive elements was a major activity during the 1980s and 
1990s. Both play a key role in the successful development of control components.
Figure 1.6 shows a comprehensive CAD tool that consists of device, circuit, system 
simulators, and their accurate models (including physics based and electromagnetic), 
Figure 1.6  Salient features of an IC design CAD tool.

1.4	
Design of Control Components
7
and statistical design feature. Several commercial microwave CAD tools are avail-
able to designers, including Agilent’s ADS, Ansoft’s Designer, and Applied Wave 
Research’s Microwave Office and Cadence. Commercially available CAD and high 
speed personal computers made it possible to develop an integrated computer-aided 
engineering, manufacturing and test workstation for friendly and comprehensive IC 
design. This modern interactive CAD system provides efficient coupling between 
the circuit simulation, the schematic captive/text editor, and the layout generator 
which greatly improves overall accuracy and reducing design cycle time. With such 
a system, first-pass design success for simple control components can be achieved.
Typically the design of an IC starts with the circuit specifications, which derive 
from the system requirements. System requirements also dictate the circuit topol-
ogy along with the types of passive elements and active devices to be used (e.g., 
distributed or lumped passive elements, diodes, or transistors). Comprehensive pas-
sive element and active device models developed by a foundry or by users are used 
to simulate circuit functions. The final design is completed by taking into account 
layout discontinuities, interaction between the components, and circuit yield analysis 
by considering process variations. In the case of nonlinear circuit design, an accu-
rate nonlinear model for each device used is essential in order to design the circuit 
accurately. Recent improvements in the IC technologies at captive and commercial 
foundries have made it possible to fulfill the need to design MMIC and RFIC con-
trol components up to 100 GHz and beyond.
An electrical model of a switching device is represented by an equivalent circuit 
and/or mathematical relations, used to calculate its behavior under a predetermined 
set of conditions. These models are used to improve the device performance and to 
design the control circuits. Basically there are three types of models: physics/electro-
magnetic theory-based models, analytical or hybrid models, and measurement-based 
models. Analytical and measurement-based models are described in Chapter 2.
In addition to diodes and transistors, the other important building blocks of a 
circuit design consist of passive elements and components, as shown in Figure 1.7. 
They are generally comprised of distributed elements or lumped elements or their 
combinations. Sections of microstrip line or coplanar waveguide (CPW) constitute 
the basic distributed circuit elements, and inductors capacitors and resistors belong to 
lumped elements. Couplers, used in balanced circuits, are usually based on microstrip 
lines. Microstrip line or coplanar waveguide, because of their superior performance, 
are exclusively used at millimeter-wave frequencies. Inductors are preferred to dis-
tributed circuit elements, because of their compact size and superior bandwidth 
performance at RF and low microwave frequencies. Resistors and capacitors are 
integral parts of most control circuits. Among all control circuits, phase shifters 
use the most passive elements. An overview of linear models (independent of bias 
conditions and input power) for passive circuit elements is given in Figure 1.8. The 
electromagnetic (EM) simulators for modeling of passive components have become 
the CAD tools of choice. Readers should consult [10, 20, 52, 53] for comprehensive 
design models for passive components.
For the design of MMICs and RFICs several foundry services are available to 
designers. Foundry design manuals include detailed process information including 
salient features of the process, active and passive components and their models, 

8
Introduction
Figure 1.8  Overview of passive component elements.
Figure 1.7  Passive component elements: (a) distributed, and (b) lumped elements.
device library, circuit layout rules, electrical design rules, process control monitor 
data reports and fail-pass criterion, CAD tools supported, and design examples. 
Most design manuals include extensive device models to help the designers to com-
plete their IC design.
First-pass success for IC designs depends on several critical factors, including 
stable and well-controlled IC process, extensive and accurate device models, design 
centering using device statistical data, and acceptable design margins between the 

1.5	
Fabrication of Control Components
9
final circuit simulations and target specifications. Typical solid-state device models 
are discussed in the next chapter, and more specific circuit designs are included in 
Chapters 3 through 6.
1.5	
Fabrication of Control Components
Semiconductor control components have been fabricated using MIC, MMIC, and 
RFIC technologies [10, 20, 52, 53]. The early development work on microwave 
control components started with pill packaged diodes in waveguides and coaxial 
lines. After the invention of planar transmission lines such as microstrip lines in 
the early 1960s, the work on microwave planar control components using hybrid 
microwave integrated circuits (MICs) kicked off. In MICs, discrete solid-state 
devices and lumped elements are attached to passives and interconnections printed 
on ceramic substrates. This brought about a revolution in the microwave industry 
because several microwave functions could be batch fabricated for large volume 
production. Since then several MIC manufacturing technologies are being used to 
reduce product size, components count, and cost. These include thin and thick film 
hybrid, and low and high temperature co-fired ceramic technologies.
Building upon the success of MIC technology, a new microwave GaAs semi-
conductor based technology known as monolithic microwave integrated circuit 
(MMIC) was introduced in the mid-1970s. Unlike MIC, in MMICs all active and 
passive circuit elements and interconnections are formed together on the surface of 
a semi-insulating substrate (usually gallium arsenide). MMICs provide low cost, 
improved reliability, reproducibility, small size, low weight, broadband perfor-
mance, circuit design flexibility, and multifunction performance on a single chip. 
Since in control components except phase shifters, a majority of circuit functions 
are realized by connecting solid-state devices, the monolithic approach became a 
technology of choice for fabrication of such components. However, a large variety 
of commercially available control components including switches, attenuators, and 
limiters are still manufactured using conventional coaxial lines and MICs for low-
volume applications.
Over the past 10 years, control component fabrication technologies have gone 
through a significant evolution to meet necessary requirements for lower cost solu-
tions, circuit miniaturization and higher levels of integration, improved reliability, 
lower power consumption, low-voltage operation, and high-volume applications. 
Component size and weight are prime factors in the design of electronic systems 
for satellite communications, phased-array radar (PAR), electronic warfare, and 
other airborne applications, while high volume and low cost drive the PAR and 
consumer electronics market. Among various IC technologies, Si RFIC technology 
is becoming popular by meeting these requirements.
The manufacturing of RFICs or MMICs is relatively complex and requires 
more processing steps than used for the fabrication of only diodes or transistors or 
both. Typically a monolithic IC manufacturing process includes fabrication of active 
devices, resistors, capacitors, inductors, distributed elements, air bridges/crossovers, 
and via holes for ground connections through the wafer. Basic process steps are 
similar for any monolithic IC technology. Fabrication of control components starts 

10
Introduction
with the selection of a wafer type or substrate. Various substrate materials used for 
solid-state devices are silicon, silicon carbide, sapphire, GaAs, InP, and GaN. Their 
electrical and physical properties are compared in Table 1.1. Except for Si and sap-
phire, all other substrate materials are called compound semiconductors. Silicon 
dominates the marketplace. GaAs is a distant second with less mature technolo-
gies such as InP, SiC, and GaN only now emerging. The semi-insulating property 
of the substrate material is crucial to providing higher device isolation and lower 
dielectric loss for monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMICs). For example, 
while silicon devices are capable of operating above 100 GHz, the relatively low 
resistivity of bulk silicon precludes the development of high-performance monolithic 
integration. In RFICs, passive components have high loss due to high dielectric loss 
in Si substrates. Various circuit fabrication techniques where the RF electromagnetic 
fields are confined more in the low loss dielectric layers have been employed to bring 
the Si passive circuit loss at par with GaAs MMICs. In RFICs, many available thin 
deposited metal and dielectric layers are used to reduce the circuit loss. However, the 
most popular method is based on silicon on sapphire technology. In silicon on sap-
phire or silicon on insulator (SOI) CMOS manufacturing technologies, a thin layer 
of silicon is grown on a sapphire (Al2O3) wafer or substrate for solid-state devices. 
In such circuits the passives are basically placed on insulating sapphire to realize 
low loss. GaAs semi-insulating substrates provide isolation up to about 100 GHz. 
InP has been used for millimeter-wave HEMTs up to 280 GHz. Pseudomorphic 
HEMTs fabricated on InP substrate exhibit much higher performance in terms of 
switch loss than a GaAs-based pHEMT of similar geometry. For high-power and 
high-temperature applications, wide band gap materials with relatively high thermal 
conductivity, such as SiC and GaN, play a significant role. Recent advancements in 
epitaxial techniques have made it possible to develop active devices on these sub-
strates. Basic steps of monolithic ICs fabrication are described next.
The IC process starts with the formation of an active layer or p-n junction 
on/into a qualified wafer. There are basically two methods of forming an active 
layer or p-n junction: ion implantation and epitaxial. Next in transistors, gates 
Table 1.1  Comparison of Transistor/Monolithic Integrated-Circuit Substrates*
Property
Silicon
SiC
GaAs
InP
GaN
Sapphire
Semi-insulating
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Resistivity (Ω-cm)
103–105
>1010
107–109
∼107
>1010
>1010
Dielectric constant
11.7
9.7
12.9
14
8.9
9.4/11.6
Electron mobility (cm2/V-s)
1450
500
8500
4000
800
—
Saturation electrical velocity (cm/s)
9 × 106
2 × 107
1.3 × 107
1.9 × 107
2.3 × 107
—
Density (g/cm3)
2.3
3.1
5.3
4.8
—
3.98
Thermal conductivity (W/cm-°C)
1.45
3.5
0.46
0.68
1.3
0.4
Operating temperature (°C)
250
>500
350
300
>500
>1800
Energy gap (eV)
1.12
2.86
1.42
1.34
3.39
—
Breakdown field (kV/cm)
≈300
≥2000
400
500
≥5000
4000
*Pure materials at room temperature.

1.5	
Fabrication of Control Components
11
are deposited followed by ohmic contacts. The purpose of an ohmic contact on 
a semiconductor material is to provide a good contact between the interconnect 
(electrode) metal and the active channel at the semiconductor surface. Next, a 
thick metal is overlaid on the gate by evaporation and liftoff. The metal reduces 
the gate resistance and also serves as a first-level metallization for IC fabrication 
(e.g., bottom plate for a capacitor or the interconnect metal under air bridges or 
crossovers). However, in switching transistors, gates are generally not overlaid 
with thick metal. Next, dielectric films are deposited for passivation of active 
areas of devices and resistors, for metal-insulator-metal (MIM) capacitors, and for 
crossover isolation. Silicon nitride (Si3N4) is commonly used as a dielectric mate-
rial that is easily deposited either by plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition or 
sputtering. The thickness of the dielectric film determines the capacitance per unit 
area of the MIM capacitor. Interconnection of components, air bridges, and the 
top plate of MIM capacitors are formed with the second-level layer metal system. 
Backside processing consisting of thinning by grinding or lapping, via hole etching 
and ground contact metallization and plating, is an important and cost-sensitive 
part of the processing. In a production environment, a significant investment has 
been made in the wafer by the time the frontside processing is completed and the 
backside processing is started. After the frontside process, the wafer is thinned by 
a lapping technique to the required thickness. Next, via holes are etched through 
the wafer under source connection, as well as under other pads where ground con-
nections are needed. Then the backside and the via-hole sidewalls are metallized. 
This provides a good connection from the frontside devices and components to the 
backside ground plane. This also eliminates the need for separate wire bonds to 
ground each device and other RF ground connections. The first check for a good 
circuit is automatic testing on wafer with microwave probes. After identifying RF 
good ICs, the wafer is diced into chips.
More specific details for the fabrication of control components are described 
in the succeeding chapters. An overview of monolithic fabrication technologies for 
control components is given in Figure 1.9.
Figure 1.9  Overview of monolithic fabrication technologies for control circuits.

12
Introduction
1.6	
Applications
Semiconductor control components are extensively used for controlling the signal 
flow at radio, microwave, and millimeter-wave frequencies. For control compo-
nents, many of the problems of bandwidth, switching speed, power handling, high 
dynamic range, low voltage operations, and high operating frequency have already 
been solved. They are integral part of transceivers fabricated using MIC, MMIC, 
and RFIC technologies. Applications of switches include GSM, CDMA, TDMA, 
EDGE, WCDMA, WLAN, GPRS, cable TV (CATV), LTE, and so on.1 They are 
also integral part of phased array modules and satellite switching networks. Other 
numerous applications include wideband transmitters and receivers, switched fil-
ter banks and attenuators, time delay phase shifters, and 77-GHz switched beam 
systems.
Applications of phase shifters include phases-arrays, phase discriminators, 
beam forming networks, linearization of amplifiers, power dividers, quadrature 
phase shift keying (QPSK) modulator, and modules requiring fixed phase. Digital 
phase shifters are integral parts of transmit/receive (T/R) modules used in active 
phased array antennas.
Attenuators are invariably used to control the gain of circuits and for tempera-
ture compensations. They are commonly used to precisely control the amplitude 
levels in RF, microwave, and millimeter wave systems. They are used in radars, 
electronic warfare (EW), mobile communication systems including TDMA and 
CDMA, measurement instruments such as spectrum analyzers, oscilloscopes, net-
work analyzers, and frequency synthesizers. The attenuators improve the dynamic 
range of instruments by adjusting the power levels at mixers and detectors. They are 
widely used in spectrum analyzers and signal analyzers to increase their dynamic 
range. Digital attenuators are also integral parts of T/R modules.
Limiters are used to control the strength of the incoming signals when placed in 
front of receivers. They allow low input power signals to pass through while attenu-
ating the high-power signals above its rated threshold power level. For example, in 
a T/R module, a limiter is placed in front of the LNA to protect it from the leaked/
coupled signal from the high-power amplifier (HPA) or any directly received high-
power signal. Other applications include RF and microwave receivers, integrated 
services digital network, broadband multichannel receivers, and instantaneous 
frequency measurement receivers.
The phase-array antenna, which employs a large number of elements, benefits 
significantly from low-cost T/R modules using several microwave functions includ-
ing control components. Figure 1.10(a) shows a simplified block diagram of a T/R 
1 GSM: global system for mobile communications
CDMA: code division multiple access
TDM: time division multiple access
EDGE: enhanced data rates for GSM evolution
WCDMA: wideband code division multiple access
WLAN: wireless local area network
GPRS: general pocket radio service
LTE: long-term evolution

1.6	
Applications
13
Figure 1.10  (a) A block diagram that illustrates the control components of a T/R module, 
(b) X-band radar GaAs MMIC chipset including three control components: limiter/LNA, SPDT 
switch, and integrated control chip.
module whose size and cost can be reduced drastically by monolithic integration 
of some or all microwave functions except the antenna. Figure 1.10(b) shows an 
X-band radar GaAs MMIC chipset employing several chips: limiter/LNA, phase 
shifter, attenuator, switches, driver, buffer amplifiers, and HPA. Figure 1.11 shows a 
four-channel fully integrated receive module chip developed using CMOS technology 
for low-cost applications. Figure 1.12 shows T/R module chip set using GaN and 
CMOS technologies, where power and low-noise functions were realized employing 
GaN technology and low-power chip was achieved in CMOS technology.

14
Introduction
Figure 1.11  X-band four-channel CMOS RFIC receiver chip. (Courtesy of Dr. Gabriel Rebeiz.)
Figure 1.12  C-band T/R chip set using GaN and CMOS technologies. (Courtesy of Dr. J.-G. 
Kim.)
1.7	
Book Organization
The book primarily deals with the operating principles and design of solid-state 
control components. It is organized into six chapters, with the material treated 
precisely and thoroughly covering various aspects of control components in each 

1.7	
Book Organization
15
chapter. The text presents the operation of switching devices and their models, 
circuit-analysis techniques and design, and circuit performance. These chapters pro-
vide the foundation for analysis and design of RF, microwave, and millimeter wave 
control components. Chapter 1 provided an introduction to the control components 
and their history. An overview of switching devices and control components, and 
their applications in both the commercial and military systems, have been included.
The second chapter deals with the operation of control devices and their models. 
Diodes and transistors, including PIN, Schottky, and varactor diodes, GaAs FETs, 
GaAs pHEMTs, GaN HEMTs, Si MOSFETs, and SiGe HBTs are described. Both 
linear and nonlinear transistor models are included. These models are the backbone 
of circuit designs and based on equivalent circuit formulation. Biasing circuits for 
diodes and transistors are also discussed.
In Chapter 3, the fundamentals of switch circuits are described, including 
switch types, switch parameters and their theory, and intermodulation analyses of 
switches. Various switch circuits including multiport, high isolation, broadband, 
high power, and low distortion are treated. Performance of switch circuits using 
PIN diodes, MSEFET, HEMT, and CMOS are described. It also provides a com-
parison of various switch technologies. Finally, several novel switch configurations 
are discussed at the end of the chapter.
Analyses of most commonly used phase shifter types are discussed in Chapter 
4. Both digital and analog phase shifters are described. Various phase shifter cir-
cuits including multibit, analog, broadband, ultrawideband, and millimeter wave 
are presented. Performance of phase shifters using PIN diodes, MSEFET, HEMT, 
and CMOS are included. Active phase shifters based on vector modulator concept 
are also discussed.
In Chapter 5, the fundamentals of attenuators are described. It includes theory, 
various types of attenuators, and intermodulation analysis. Various attenuator cir-
cuits including fixed value, multibit and analog are treated. Reflection-type, bal-
anced, frequency dependent, and phase compensated attenuators are also discussed. 
Performance of attenuators using PIN diodes, MSEFET, HEMT, HBT, and CMOS 
are presented.
The final chapter deals with limiters: standalone and integrated with LNA. 
Analysis and design of both PIN diode limiters and Schottky diode limiters are dis-
cussed. Examples of PIN diode limiters, Schottky diode limiters, broadband limiters, 
limiting amplifiers, and limiter/LNA are described. In addition, two appendixes are 
included at the end that will be useful for designers. The second appendix is on the 
thermal design of devices.
References
[1]	
Koul, S. K., and B. Bhat, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Phase Shifters, Part 1: Dielec-
tric and Ferrite Phase Shifters, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1991.
[2]	
Hord, W. E., “Ferrite Phase Shifters,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, 
K. Chang (ed.), Vol. 2, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 1497–1504.
[3]	
White, J. F., Semiconductor Control, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1977.
[4]	
Garver, R. V., Microwave Diode Control Devices, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1978.

16
Introduction
[5]	
White, J. F., Microwave Semiconductor Engineering, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1982.
[6]	
Davis, W. A., Microwave Semiconductor Circuit Design, New York: Van Nostrand Rein-
hold, 1984, Chap. 13.
[7]	
Bhartia, P., and I. J. Bahl, Millimeter-Wave Engineering and Applications, Chap. 8, 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 1984.
[8]	
Wolff, E. A., and R. Kaul, Microwave Engineering and Systems Applications, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 1988, Chap. 12.
[9]	
Koul, S. K., and B. Bhat, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Phase Shifters, Part 2: Semi-
conductor and Delay Phase Shifters, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1991.
[10]	 Robertson, I. D., and S. Lucyszyn, S., (eds.), RFIC and MMIC Design and Technology, 
London: IEE, 2001.
[11]	 Chang, K., I. Bahl, and V. Nair, RF and Microwave Circuit and Component Design for 
Wireless Systems, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2002, Chap. 7.
[12]	 Bahl, I., and P. Bhartia, Microwave Solid-state Circuit Design, Second Edition, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chap. 12.
[13]	 Chang, K. (ed.), Handbook of RF/Microwave Components and Engineering, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chaps. 16 and 17.
[14]	 Hilty, K., “Attenuation Measurements,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, 
Vol. 1, K. Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 434–452.
[15]	 Sundararajn, R., E. Peterson, and R. Nowlin, “Attenuators,” in Encyclopedia RF and 
Microwave Engineering, Vol.1, K. Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 
452–480.
[16]	 Kaul, R., “Microwave Limiters,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, Vol. 
3, K. Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2792–2801.
[17]	 White, J. F. “Microwave Phase Shifters,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineer-
ing, Vol. 3, K. Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2836–2849.
[18]	 Caverly, R. H., “Microwave Switches,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, 
Vol. 4, K. Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2991–2999.
[19]	 Fathy, A. E., “PIN Diodes,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, Vol. 4, K. 
Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 3858–3869.
[20]	 Bahl, I. J., Fundamental of RF and Microwave Transistor Amplifiers, Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2009.
[21]	 Grebennikov, A., RF and Microwave Transmitter Design, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 
2011, Chap. 13.
[22]	 Sharma, A. K., “Solid-State Control Devices: State of the Art,” Microwave Journal, State 
of the Art Reference, Sept. 1989, pp. 95–112.
[23]	 Li, X. J., and Y. P. Zhang, “Flipping the CMOS Switch,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 
Vol. 11, Feb. 2010, pp. 86–96.
[24]	 Li, X. J., and Y. P. Zhang, “Design of Transmit/Receive Switches in CMOS,” in Ency-
clopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, J. Webster (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2012.
[25]	 Ayasli, Y., et al., “ A Monolithic X-Band Single-pole, double-throw Bidirectional GaAs 
FET Switch,” IEEE GaAs Integrated Circuits Symp. Dig., 1980, pp. 4–6.
[26]	 Ayasli, Y., et al., “A Monolithic Single Chip X-Band Four-Bit Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, Dec. 1982, pp. 1201–1206.
[27]	 Ayasli, Y., et al., “An X-Band 10 W Monolithic Transmit-Receive GaAs FET Switch,” 
IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1982, pp. 42–46.
[28]	 Tajima, Y., et al., “GaAs Monolithic Wideband (2–18) GHz Variable Attenuators,” IEEE 
MTT-S Symposium Digest, 1982, pp. 479–481.

1.7	
Book Organization
17
[29]	 Schindler, M. J., and A. M. Morris, “DC-50 GHz and 20–40 GHz MMIC SPDT Switches,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-35, Dec. 1987, pp. 1486–1493.
[30]	 Pritchett, S. D., and D. Seymour, “A Monolithic 2–20 GHz GaAs PIN Diode SP16T 
Switch,” IEEE MTT-S Symposium Digest, 1989, pp. 1109–1111.
[31]	 Huang, F.-J., and K. O, “A 0.5-mm CMOS T/R Switch for 900-MHz Wireless Applica-
tions,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-36, March 2001, pp. 486–492.
[32]	 Teshiba, M., R.V. Leeuwn, G. Sakamoto, and T. Cisco, “A SiGe MMIC 6-Bit PIN Diode 
Phase Shifter,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 12, Dec. 2002, pp. 500–501.
[33]	 Bahl, I. J., “10W CW Broadband Balanced Limiter/LNA Fabricated Using MSAG MESFET 
Process,” Int. J. RF Microwave Comput.-Aided Eng., Vol. 13, March 2003, pp. 118–127.
[34]	 Kaper, V. et al., “Monolithic AlGaN/GaN HEMT SPDT Switch,” 12th GAAS Symp. Dig., 
Amsterdam, 2004, pp. 83–86.
[35]	 Lin, K.-Y. et al., “Millimeter-Wave MMIC Passive HEMT Switches Using Traveling-Wave 
Concept,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 52, Aug. 2004, pp. 1798–1808.
[36]	 Lee, H. D., D. W. Kang, C.-H. Kim, and S. Hong, “A Ku-Band MOSFET Phase Shifter 
MMIC,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2004, pp. 191–194.
[38]	 Yeh, M. C., Z. M. Tsai, and H. Wang, “A Miniature DC-50 GHz CMOS SPDT Distrib-
uted Switch,” Proc. Europ. Microwave Conf., 2005, pp. 193–196.
[39]	 Morton, M. A., et al., “A High Linearity 5-Bit X-Band SiGe HBT Phase Shifter,” IEEE 
MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2006, pp. 1668–1671.
[40]	 Cobham MMIC Products, Blacksburg, VA.
[41]	 Bettidi, A., et al, “High Power GaN-HEMT SPDT Switches for Microwave Applications,” 
Int. J. RF Microwave Comput.-Aided Eng., Vol.19, Sep. 2009, pp. 598–606.
[42]	 Li., W.-T., et al., “60-GHz 5-Bit Phase Shifter with Integrated VGA Phase-Error Compen-
sation,” IEEE Trans.Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, March 2013, pp. 1224–1235.
[43]	 Rebeiz, G. M., and J. B. Muldavin, “RF MEMS Switches and Switch Circuits,” IEEE 
Microwave Magazine, Vol. 2, Issue 4, December 2001, pp. 59–71.
[44]	 Rebeiz, G. M., RF MEMS Theory, Design, and Technology, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 
2003.
[45]	 Varadan, V. K., K. J. Vinoy, and K. A. Jose, RF MEMS and Their Applications, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003.
[46]	 Rebeiz, G. M., “The Search for a Reliable MEMS Switch,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 
Vol. 14, January/February 2013, pp. 57–67.
[47]	 Patel, D. P., J. M. Pond, and J. B. L. Rao, “Microwave Ferroelectric Devices,” in Wiley 
Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Vol. 13, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 
1999.
[48]	 Patel, D. P., J. M. Pond, and J. B. L. Rao, “Microwave Ferroelectric Devices,” in Encyclo-
pedia RF and Microwave Engineering, K. Chang (ed.), Vol. 3, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 
2005, pp. 2742–2751.
[49]	 Teeter, D., et al, “Ka-Band GaAs HBT PIN Diode Switches and Phase Shifters,” IEEE Int. 
Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1994, pp. 183–186. 
[50]	 Tayrani, R., et al., “Broad-Band SiGe MMICs for Phased-Array Radar Applications,” 
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-38, Sep. 2003, pp. 1462–1471.
[51]	 Yang, J. G., “GaN-Based PIN Diodes for Microwave Switching IC Applications,” Elec-
tronics Letts., Vol. 48, May 24 2012, pp. 650–652.
[52]	 Bahl, I., Lumped Elements for RF and Microwave Circuits, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 
2003.
[53]	 Garg, R., I. J. Bahl, and M. Bozzi, Microstrip Lines and Slotlines, Third Edition, Nor-
wood, MA: Artech House, 2013.


19
C h a p t e r  2
Control Devices
PIN diodes, MESFETs/HEMTs, and CMOS transistors are used extensively in MICs 
and MMICs, for RF, microwave, and millimeter wave control components, such 
as switches, phase shifters, attenuators, and limiters. PIN diode circuits have lower 
loss and handle higher power levels than do MESFET and CMOS components; 
conversely, the latter have great flexibility in the design of integrated subsystems, 
consume negligible power, and cost less. A MESFET or a CMOS transistor can 
provide possible power gain if the device is used in active mode, in which the drain 
is positively biased and the control voltage is applied to the gate. Before looking 
at circuit design approaches for control components, a brief description of device 
operation and device models are discussed in this chapter. A treatment of control 
devices and their modeling techniques can be found in [1–36].
2.1	
PIN Diodes
The PIN diodes are used extensively in microwave and millimeter wave circuits for 
amplitude modulation and leveling functions. They also make excellent switches, 
phase shifters, attenuators, and limiters. Basic physics and models of PIN diodes 
are described briefly next.
2.1.1	
Operation of PIN Diodes
A PIN diode structure got its name from the device construction that consists of a 
heavily doped p-region and a heavily doped n-region separated by a thin layer of 
high resistivity material that is nearly intrinsic. The nearly intrinsic layer is called 
π-type or ν-type depending on whether the conductivity is p-type or n-type, respec-
tively. The thickness of the high resistivity layer, usually of ν-type, is in the range 
of 10 to 300 μm for Si PIN diodes and 1 to 10 μm for GaAs PIN diodes. At zero 
bias, two separate space-charge regions are formed at the p-i and i-n junctions of 
a PIN diode just inside the highly doped p and n regions due to the diffusion of 
holes and electrons across the junction. This is shown in Figure 2.1. In the case of 
an ideal diode, the intrinsic layer has no impurities; that is, it is totally depleted of 
mobile charge carriers. When a reverse bias is applied, (n electrode positive and p 
electrode negative), the space-charge regions in the p and n layers become wider and 
the diode gives rise to very high impedance in this state. When a forward bias is 
applied to the diode (n electrode negative and p electrode positive), carrier injection 
takes place into the intrinsic layer. Electrons are injected into the intrinsic ν layer 

20
Control Devices
from the n-layer, and holes are injected from the p-layer. If the intrinsic thickness 
is less than the diffusion lengths or carrier life times of the injected mobile carri-
ers, the injected carries have uniform distribution, and both electrons and holes 
have equal concentrations. The i-layer flooded with mobile carriers behaves as a 
current-dependent resistor.
In this condition, the resistivity of the intrinsic layer drops as the forward bias is 
increased, as shown in Figure 2.2. The diffusion of carriers reduces the resistivity of 
the intrinsic layer and the resistance drops further with the increasing forward bias 
voltage, and the diode offers a very low impedance in this state. At high currents, 
the diode’s resistance reduces to ohmic contact resistance value. Thus, a PIN diode 
works as a switching device, open circuited (high-impedance) in the reverse biased 
state and short circuited (low-impedance) in the forward biased state. The voltage 
or bias dependence resistance of the i-layer is known as conductivity modulation, 
which makes PIN diodes useful devices in attenuators and amplitude modulators. 
A comprehensive treatment of PIN diodes can be found in [1–13].
Figure 2.1  PIN diode structure and conditions at zero bias.
Figure 2.2  PIN diode’s resistance as a function of forward bias current.

2.1	
PIN Diodes
21
In order to achieve low-impedance state of the PIN diodes, it is essential that 
the lifetime of mobile carriers in the intrinsic layer be greater than the time period 
of the operating frequency. At microwave frequencies, the time period is much 
shorter than the carrier lifetime, and there is not enough time to remove the large 
amount of charge from the i-layer. Because the amount of charge is so large, the 
device remains in the low-impedance state even under large negative half RF cycle. 
Therefore, under forward biased of the diode a large amount of charge stays in the 
i-layer during the full RF cycle. When the diode is reverse biased, the carriers are 
removed from the i-layer, and the diode acts like a high-value resistor and remains 
in the high-impedance state even under large positive half RF cycle.
The carrier lifetime τ and thickness W of the i-layer set the low-frequency 
limit of PIN diodes. The low-frequency limit is also known as the transit time fre-
quency—the frequency at which the time period of the RF cycle is longer than the 
mobile carrier’s lifetime. Below the transit time frequency, the PIN diode behaves 
like a rectifying p-n junction diode instead of a low/high impedance switch. This 
makes PIN diodes not very useful at lower radio frequencies.
The average of hole and electron diffusion length Lap, which is much longer 
than the i-layer thickness W, is given by [12, 13]
	
Lap =
Dapt =
0.026mapt 	
(2.1a)
where Dap and μap are the ambipolar diffusion constant and charge mobility, 
respectively. The temperature assumed is 300 K. For high-resistivity silicon i-layer 
(Dap = 15.6 cm2/s) the diffusion length Lap and the transit time frequency fT become
	
Lap = 39.5 t(ms)
mm 	
(2.1b)
	
fT =
Dap
W2 = 1560
W2
MHz 	
(2.1c)
where W is in μm. For a PIN diode having i-layer thickness of 50 μm, the low-
frequency cut-off is about 0.6 MHz.
There is a wide range of Si PIN diodes available for microwave control com-
ponents. The thickness of i-layer and its resistivity as well as the junction area are 
the basic device parameters varied to obtain a vast range of PIN diodes. Design 
considerations for such diodes include bias conditions, series resistance, junction 
capacitance, linearity, switching speed, carrier lifetime, and power handling. Table 
2.1 provides a sample of PIN diodes available from MACOM. The specifications 
listed are at the room temperature.
2.1.2	 PIN Diode Models
The PIN diodes are generally used in packaged form. Simplified lumped element 
equivalent circuit models of a packaged PIN diode in reverse and forward bias con-
ditions are shown in Figure 2.3. Ls and Cp represent the series inductance and shunt 

22
Control Devices
capacitance of the package, respectively; Rs is the total ohmic contact series resis-
tance and Cj is the junction capacitance of the diode. Under forward bias condition 
Rf is the total diode resistance consisting of intrinsic layer resistance Ri and ohmic 
contact resistances (Rf = Ri + Rs). Typical equivalent circuit model parameters of a 
package PIN diode are Ls ≅ 0.3 nH, Cp ≅ 0.3 pF, Rs ≅ 0.4 Ω, Cj = 0.02 pF, and Rf 
= 1 Ω. The forward bias current is about 10 mA, and reverse breakdown voltage 
at 10 μA current is about 50V.
The resistance of the intrinsic layer under forward bias is given by [12]
	
Ri ≅
W2
2maptI0 	
(2.2a)
where W is the width of the i-layer in cm, μap is the average of the electron and hole 
mobilities (610 cm2/V-s in silicon), τ is the i-region mobile carrier lifetime (average 
time a carrier exists in the i-region) in s, and I0 is the DC bias current in A. Typi-
cally, the value of τ varies from 1 ns in thin GaAs PIN diodes to 10 μs in thick Si 
PIN diodes. The derivation of (2.2a) is based on several simplifying assumptions. 
The main assumptions are that the i-layer is electrically neutral, the bias current 
injects holes and electrons that combine with each other in the i-layer, and the 
mobile carriers have sufficiently long lifetime so that both the holes and electrons 
Table 2.1  Typical Specifications of Si PIN Diodes 
PIN Diode
i-Layer  
Thickness  
(μm)
Max. Series 
Resistance  
(Ω) @ If (mA)
Max. Total  
Capacitance (pF) @ 
Reverse Bias (V)
Carrier  
Lifetime (μs)
Min.  
Breakdown  
Voltage (V)
MA47120
10
0.5 @ 10
1.00 @ 20
0.3
35
MA4PH401
10
1.5 @ 10
0.30 @ 20
0.2
50
1N5719
51
1.5 @ 50
0.25 @ 50
1.0
100
1N5767
102
2.5 @ 100
0.40 @ 50
1.0
200
MA4PH301
127
1.0 @ 50
1.1 @ 50
5.0
200
Figure 2.3  Equivalent circuit model of packaged PIN diode: (a) reverse bias state, and (b) 
forward bias state.

2.1	
PIN Diodes
23
have uniform distribution in the i-layer. In other words, the average of diffusion 
lengths of holes and electrons is longer than the i-layer thickness.
For a Si PIN diode with W = 100 μm, τ = 4 μs and I0 = 20 mA, the forward 
bias i-layer resistance is
	
Ri =
100 × 100 × 10−8
2 × 610 × 4 × 10−6 × 20 × 10−3 = 1.02Ω
	
For practical diodes [22] variation with I0 is more like I0
–0.87 instead of I0
–1.0. It is 
often advisable to make an experimental measurement of the variation of the Rf 
(which includes Ri and ohmic contact resistance Rs) with bias current.
The junction capacitance Cj is approximated as a parallel-plate capacitance 
and given by
	
Cj = ε0εrA/W = ε0εrπD2/4W	
(2.2b)
where A is the junction area, ε0 is the free space permittivity (8.854 × 10–14 F/cm) 
and εr is the dielectric constant of the intrinsic layer (εr = 11.7 for Si and 12.9 for 
GaAs). For pill type PIN diode structure A = πD2/4, where D is diameter.
For a Si PIN diode when W = 10 μm and D = 100 μm, junction capacitance Cj is
	
Cj = 8.854 × 10−14 × 11.7 × p × 100 × 100 × 10−8
4 × 10 × 10−4
F = 0.081 pF.
	
A simple PIN diode’s EC model may be represented by a resistor Ron ≅ Rf in the 
ON (low-impedance) state and a capacitor Coff ≅ Cj in the OFF (high-impedance) 
state. Table 2.2 lists model parameters for three GaAs PIN diodes for millimeter 
wave applications. The i-layer thickness was 2 μm and the ambipolar lifetime was 
3.8 ns [37]. The cut-off frequency fc is given by 1/2πRonCoff.
For different PIN diode geometries (i-layer thickness and diode area) and doping 
profile, it is possible to realize the device with similar Rf, Cj and small-signal charac-
teristics. However, a thinner i-layer diode has faster switching speed, and a thicker 
i-layer diode has higher breakdown voltage and better distortion characteristics. 
At operating frequencies, the carrier lifetime τ in the i-layer for the diodes is larger 
than the RF cycle time period. The i-layer thickness W is shorter than the average of 
carriers’ diffusion lengths. Thus, thin i-layer (≈1–2 μm) diodes are operated above 
1 GHz and have low power handling capability, and thick i-layer (≈50–100 μm) 
diodes can be operated as low as 1 MHz and have high power handling capability. 
Table 2.2  Simplified Model Parameters for Millimeter Wave GaAs PIN Diodes
Diameter (μm)
Ron (Ω)
Coff (pF)
fc (GHz)
Frequency of  
Operation (GHz)
56
0.5
0.14
2274
35
28
1.6
0.032
3108
77
20
2.2
0.02
3617
94

24
Control Devices
In both cases, the power handling capability increases with the increase of operat-
ing frequency.
Nonlinear PIN Diode Model
A time-domain model to predict the nonlinear behavior of PIN diodes has been 
reported by Caverly [36]. A SPICE implementation of the nonlinear model is fully 
described and validated with measurements on switches, attenuators, and limiters 
using discrete PIN diodes. There was good agreement between the simulated and 
measured IP2 and IP3 for switches and attenuators. More details can be found in 
[36].
2.2	
GaAs MESFETs
MESFETs are used in a switch as passive two-terminal devices, with the gate ter-
minal acting as a port for the control signal only. The RF connections are made to 
the drain and the source terminals, and the gate terminal looks into an open circuit 
for the RF signal. The RF impedance between the drain and the source terminals 
depends upon the DC control voltage at the gate terminal. For switching applica-
tions, low-impedance and high-impedance states are obtained by making the gate 
voltage equal to zero and by using a gate voltage greater (numerically) than the 
pinchoff voltage, respectively. In most applications, gate voltage is about 1.5 times 
the pinchoff voltage (however, for a high-power application or a GaN HEMT, the 
control voltage is much higher than the pinchoff voltage), and it is applied to gate 
through a high-value resistor that isolates the RF between the FET and the power 
supply. The resistor value depends upon the FET’s gate periphery and the frequency 
of operation. For C-band switches its value is about 3000 Ω-mm (i.e., if the gate 
periphery is 1 mm, the resistor is about 3 kΩ). A comprehensive treatment of FET 
as switching devices can be found in [8–10].
The state-of-the-art MESFET switches are bidirectional, and they offer wide 
bandwidth performance and great design flexibility. As they are compatible with 
MMIC technology, they have small size, low cost, and light weight. They offer the 
following:
• Negligible DC-control power dissipation;
• Nanosecond switching speed;
• No DC blocking capacitors;
• Multiwatt power handling capability.
2.2.1	 Operation of MESFETs
The basic operation of the MESFET as a switch can be explained as follows [14]: A 
FET consists of a highly conducting layer of high-quality semiconductor material 
known as an active layer on a semi-insulating (i.e., high-resistivity) GaAs substrate 
as shown in Figure 2.4. Rectifying Schottky gate and ohmic contact source and 
drain electrodes make it a three-terminal device.

2.2	
GaAs MESFETs
25
When no bias voltage is applied to the FET gate electrode, gate contact is iso-
lated from the n-type conducting channel between the drain and source due to the 
depleted electrons known as the depletion region. In this situation, the FET is con-
sidered in ON state (Figure 2.4(a)). The resistance between the drain and source 
is low, and its value depends upon the channel depth, mobile electron density, and 
FET’s gate periphery. When a negative bias is applied to the gate, the depletion 
region’s depth under the gate increases as more mobile electrons depletes from 
the conducting channel. When the absolute gate voltage is equal or greater than 
pinchoff voltage, the depletion region that acts like an insulator region extends up 
to the substrate and shuts off the conducting channel completely (Figure 2.4(b)). 
In this condition the FET is considered in OFF state and the impedance between 
the drain and source electrode is high. In a switching FET, the gate electrode is 
placed symmetrically between the source and drain electrode. Thus, a FET works 
as a switch whose impedance can be varied from very low value to high value by 
changing the gate voltage.
Figure 2.5 shows the layout of a FET having four fingers. In Figure 2.5(a) all 
fingers are connected in parallel, and in Figure 2.5(b) the gate line runs continuously 
in the meander geometry. Both geometries are used to compact the device structure. 
Figure 2.4  MESFET switch configurations: (a) low-impedance state, and (b) high-impedance 
state.
Figure 2.5  Physical layouts of a four-finger FET: (a) with via grounds for shunt configuration, 
and (b) series configuration using meander gate.

26
Control Devices
However, the meander and resistive (using thin gate metal) gate is preferred, espe-
cially in switch devices. A thinner gate metal provides higher gate resistance and 
lower fringing capacitance.
2.2.2	 Linear Switch FET Models
Switching FETs have been modeled using three methods: physics based [19], analyti-
cal [25], and measurement based [24, 29, 30, 32]. Physics-based models of switching 
devices derived in terms of doping profile and physical geometry are essential for 
establishing the link between the process and RF performance. Thus, the device 
model helps in device studies, process control, and circuit yield and optimization. 
Any adjustment in the device can be achieved using physics-based model without 
costly fabrication experiments. Due to lengthy execution times (also analysis time 
increases rapidly with model complexity), the application of the physics-based model 
is usually limited to device studies. Analytic models for active devices are based 
on simple equivalent circuit (EC) representation. The model parameters are formu-
lated based on simple equations whose values are obtained from the physics of the 
component or DC, S-parameters, or both measurements. The analytic models fall 
between physics- and measurement-based techniques.
The measurement-based model falls into two groups: linear (independent of 
bias conditions and input power) and nonlinear (bias and input power dependent, 
predicts P1dB, harmonics, and third order intercept (TOI)). Linear and nonlinear 
model parameters are derived using S-parameters. Analytical and measurement-
based models are briefly described next.
Analytical Model
In order to predict the switch performance, given the geometry and channel char-
acteristics, one must use a physics-based or analytical model. After establishing the 
accuracy of these models, the device and process may then be optimized for required 
switch application. Figure 2.6 shows physical cross section of a switch FET. Only 
one cell is shown. For a larger gate periphery device, multiple cells are connected in 
Figure 2.6  Physical cross section of a switch FET.

2.2	
GaAs MESFETs
27
parallel. The following equations are used to calculate the model parameter values. 
It has been assumed that the device is symmetrical with respect to the gate location.
Switching FETs are modeled by two lumped element equivalent circuit models: 
one when the device is ON (low-impedance state) and the second one when the device 
is OFF (high-impedance state). The FET’s OFF and ON state switch lumped element 
equivalent circuit (EC) models are shown in Figure 2.7. It may be pointed out that 
“L” has been used for both gate length and inductance, and they are appropriately 
defined. Next the calculation of model parameters is described in detail.
Expressions for the gate-source (Cgse) and gate-drain (Cgde) electrode capaci-
tances are given by [16]
	
Cgse = Cgde = e0
er + 1
(
)
2
2
K¢(k)
K(k) + t
S
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥F /length
	
(2.3)
where K(k) and its complement K′(k) are complete elliptic integrals of first kind, 
ε0 is the free space permittivity (8.85 × 10–18 F/μm), εr is the dielectric constant of 
the substrate, t is the thickness of electrodes being considered, and S is the spacing 
between electrode edges. The ratio of K(k) and its complement K′(k) is given by
	
K(k)
K¢(k) = 1
p n 21 +
k
1 −
k
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
for 0.707 ≤k ≤1
	
(2.4a)
	
=
p
n 21 +
k¢
1 −
k¢
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
for 0 ≤k ≤0.707 	
(2.4b)
Figure 2.7  OFF and ON state switch lumped element equivalent circuits: (a) OFF state, (b) 
simplified OFF state, and (c) ON state.

28
Control Devices
Here, S = S1 + S2 and k is given by
	
k =
(Le + W + S)S
(Le + S)(W + S) 	
(2.5)
where Le = L + 2 L′ and L is the gate length. These relations are valid under the 
following conditions: W >> Le and Le, W, S << h. Here, Le, W, and h represent the 
effective gate length, either source or drain electrode width, and substrate thick-
ness, respectively.
For drain-source capacitances Cdsn+ and Cdse, where electrode widths are equal, 
the following equations apply:
	
Cdsn+ ,Cdse = e0 (er + 1) K¢(k)
K(k) + t¢
S¢
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥F /length 	
(2.6)
where for n+ wells S′ = L + 2(L′ + S1), W is taken as the average width of the n+ 
wells for the drain and source, and t′ is the depth of the n+ wells. For electrodes 
ohmic-ohmic spacing S′ = L + 2(L′ + S1 + S2), W is the average of the source and 
drain ohmic metal widths, and t′ is chosen as the average of the ohmic metal and 
gold plating thicknesses. The aspect ratio k is given by
	
k =
(2W + S¢)S¢
(W + S¢)2
	
(2.7)
The channel capacitances Cgs and Cgd are determined when the channel is fully 
depleted (i.e., the control voltage ⎥Vc⎪ > ⎥Vp⎪). The following relation is used to 
compute Cgs and Cgd:
	
Cgs = Cgd = 0.5e0er
PLe
a
F
= 0.057PLe / a
fF
	
(2.8)
where P, Le, and a are the total gate periphery, effective gate length, and channel 
thickness, respectively, and all measured in μm. The gate periphery P is equal to 
the number of gate fingers multiplied by the unit gate width. The channel thick-
ness is determined from the doping profile. Typical physical dimensions values for 
low-power and high-performance MESFETs, in μm, for L, L′, S1, S2, S3, and S4 are 
0.4, 0.2, 0, 1.4, 1.0, and 1.0, respectively. For high-power devices, the values of S1, 
S2 are 1.1 and 0.8, respectively. The breakdown voltage for low- and high-power 
devices are 8 and 15 V, respectively. Typical thickness values of the ohmic metal, 
metal 1 and gold plating are 0.5, 0.5, and 4 μm. The minimum value of W is dic-
tated by the gold plating process.
These expressions do not take in to account the effect of ground plane on para-
sitic capacitances. However, for thinner substrates when the electrode dimensions 

2.2	
GaAs MESFETs
29
are comparable to the substrate thickness, the effect of ground plane should also 
be considered.
The resistances Rs and Rd are computed as follows:
	
Rs = Rd = Rc
P +
S1
1000P Rsc +
S2
1000P Rsn+ 	
(2.9)
where Rc is the ohmic contact resistance (0.15 Ω-mm), and Rsc and Rsn+ are the 
sheet resistances of the ungated channel and n+ well, respectively. P is the total gate 
periphery in mm. As shown in Figure 2.6, S1 and S2 are the spacing between the 
gate and n+ edge and the spacing between the n+ edge and ohmic, respectively. For 
Rsc = 1500 Ω/square, Rsn+ = 150 Ω/square, P = 1 mm, S1 = 0 and S2 = 1.4 μm, the 
calculated value of Rs or Rd is 0.36 Ω.
A simplified OFF state EC model is shown in Figure 2.7(b), where
	
Roff = Rs + Rd	
(2.10a)
	
C1 =
(Cgs + Cgse)(Cgd + Cgde)
Cgs + Cgse + Cgd + Cgde
	
(2.10b)
	
C2 = Cdsn+ + Cdse	
(2.10c)
The ON state model is shown in Figure 2.7(c). Here Con is effectively equal to 
the drain-source electrode capacitance Cdse as computed earlier. The ON resistance 
is calculated as follows:
	
Ron = Rs + Rch + Rd	
(2.11)
where Rs and Rd are calculated in the OFF state model, and Rch is the channel resis-
tance at Vc = 0 V. An approximate expression for Rch is given next:
	
Rch = Le
P
1
qmeNch a −d(V)
[
]
	
(2.12)
where q is the electron charge (1.6 × 10–19 C), μe is low field mobility (8500 cm2/V-s 
in GaAs), Nch is a channel doping density, a is the conducting channel thickness, and 
d(V) is the voltage-dependent depletion layer thickness. For an optimum device, a = 
L/3. For Le = 0.8μm, P = 1 mm, L = 0.4 μm, d(0) = a/2, and Nch = 1 × 1017 atoms/
cm3, the calculated value of Rch is 0.88 Ω and Ron is 1.6 Ω.
The calculation of inductance L depends on the unit gate width Wg, source and 
drain electrodes, number of fingers (n = P/Wg), and source and drain multifold pads. 
An approximate expression for L is given here:
	
L = Lslinesmp + Ldlinedmp + Lline
Wg
3
Nsp
Ns
+
Ndp
Nd
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥	
(2.13)

30
Control Devices
where Lsline and Ldline are the inductances per unit length of source and drain mul-
tifold pads of lengths lsmp and ldmp (Figure 2.5(b)), respectively, and Lline is the 
inductance per unit length of source and drain electrodes (assumed of equal width). 
Nsp, Ns, Ndp, and Nd represent numbers for source electrode pairs, source electrodes, 
drain electrode pairs, and drain electrodes, respectively. Using a transmission line 
theory, the microstrip inductance/mm on 100 μm thick GaAs substrate for 10, 20, 
30, 40, 50, 75, and 100 μm wide, conductors are 0.77, 0.67, 0.61, 0.56, 0.53, 0.46, 
0.41 nH/mm, respectively.
Consider a 300-μm gate periphery device with four fingers, W = 10 μm, and 
source-drain ohmic spacing of 3 μm. As shown in Figure 2.5(b), it has three source 
electrodes and two drain electrodes. The calculated source and drain multifold 
pad widths are Ws = 62 and Wd = 36 μm, and their line inductance/mm values are 
approximately 0.58 and 0.50 nH/mm, respectively. Assuming lsmp = ldmp and for 
their values of 15 μm, the inductance is computed as follows:
L = 0.58 × 15 × 10−3 + 0.50 × 15 × 10−3 + 0.77 75 × 10−3
3
2
3 + 1
2
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥nH = 0.041nH
A more accurate value of L can be obtained by S-parameter measurements or 
EM simulations. The procedure described earlier may also be used to calculate ON 
and OFF state models for pHEMTs, GaN HEMTs, and CMOS transistors.
Measurement-Based Model
The most commonly used method of developing models for switching transistors is 
by measuring their DC characteristics and S-parameters. This modeling approach 
gives quick and accurate results although they are limited to just the devices mea-
sured. The model parameters extraction is generally based on statistical data with 
average and standard deviation values, which will help in centering designs for high 
yield. The component is represented by an equivalent circuit model whose param-
eter values are extracted by computer optimization, which correlates the measured 
DC and S-parameter data up to 26 GHz, 40 GHz, or 100 GHz, depending upon 
the application. The accuracy of the model parameter values can be as good as the 
measurement accuracy by using on-wafer calibration standards and techniques. 
Many attempts have been made to develop scalable models for switchable devices.
Figure 2.8 shows simplified equivalent circuit models for a MESFET switch 
illustrating the origin of their source. In a low-impedance state, an equivalent cir-
cuit of a switching FET as shown in Figure 2.8(a) is simply represented by an ON 
resistance between the drain and source electrodes and is given by
	
Ron = 2Rc + Rch	
(2.14)
where Rc and Rch are the ohmic contact and channel resistances, respectively. The 
value of contact resistance is smaller than the channel resistance. Thus, for low-
impedance state, the channel presents a resistive path to the RF current between 
the drain and source. This resistance is also obtained by DC measurements. Typical 

2.2	
GaAs MESFETs
31
value of Ron for a 1 × 1000 μm2 gate GaAs FET suitable for X-band operation is 
about 2.5 Ω at around 10 GHz. Using self-aligned gate technology, this value is 
dropped to about 1.6 Ω.
For the high-impedance state of a FET operating in the passive mode, an equiv-
alent circuit may be derived by referring to Figure 2.8(b). As the channel is now 
pinched off, the capacitance of the depletion layer (represented by Cg) appears in 
series between the source and drain terminals. Also in this case, the capacitance 
Csd (and the leakage resistance rd) between the source and drain terminals needs to 
be incorporated in the equivalent circuit. These components are present in the low-
impedance state also, but need not be included in the equivalent circuit because of the 
small value of Ron appearing in parallel. A typical high-impedance-state equivalent 
circuit is shown in Figure 2.9(a). For a 1 × 1000 μm2 gate GaAs FET operating at 
10 GHz, typical values of the various elements in this equivalent circuit are Csd ≅ 
0.15 pF, rd ≅ 3kΩ, and Cg ≅ 0.4 pF. As Rg is much smaller than the reactance of Cg 
[Rg<< 1/(ωCg)], the equivalent circuit of Figure 2.9(a) can be replaced by a parallel 
combination of Roff and Coff [shown in Figure 2.9(b)], where
	
Coff = Csd +
Cg
2 	
(2.15)
Figure 2.8  MESFET equivalent circuit models: (a) low-impedance state, and (b) high-
impedance state.
Figure 2.9  (a) The MESFET high-impedance state equivalent circuit model, and (b) simplified 
circuit for the high-impedance state.

32
Control Devices
and
	
Roff =
2rd
2 + rdw2Cg
2Rg
	
(2.16)
where ω (= 2πf) is the operating frequency in radians/second. Typical values for Coff 
and Roff (for 1 × 1000 μm2 gate devices at 10 GHz) are about 0.35 pF and 2 kΩ, 
respectively. It may be noted that Roff, as indicated by (2.16), is now a function of 
the operating angular frequency ω.
A scalable EC model for a FET, which includes electrode inductance, is shown 
in Figure 2.10. The model element values, which are normalized to 1 mm, are given 
in Table 2.3. This model can be used for FET sizes from 75 μm to 800 μm, where 
the 300- and 600-μm FETs have 4 and 8 fingers, respectively. Each FET has a single 
meander gate of 0.5 μm gate length. The frequency range is 0.5 to 18 GHz. Another 
linear model of a switch FET is given by Pla and Struble [30].
The main disadvantages of the equivalent circuit model are nonscalability to 
different physical structures, frequency independence of circuit elements, lack of 
time dependence feature, and other inherent limitations of linear circuits.
Figure 2.10  ON and OFF state scalable equivalent circuits of an FET.
Table 2.3  Equivalent Circuit Model Parameter Values (Normalized to 1 mm) for a Switch FET (VP 
= −2.5 V) Having Gate Length of 0.5 μm (P Is the Gate Periphery in mm)
Parameter
Value
Units
Ron
1.55/P
Ω
Con
0.377 × P
pF
Lon
0.030 × P
nH
Roff
0.45/P
Ω
C1
0.130 × P
pF
C2
0.350 × P
pF
Loff
0.030 × P + 0.04
nH
Rshunt
1500/P
Ω

2.2	
GaAs MESFETs
33
2.2.3	 Nonlinear Switch FET Models
Several general-purpose nonlinear models for FETs are available [17, 19, 21, 26], and 
most of them cannot be used for switches because they are tuned for specific applica-
tions such as power amplifiers. Since switch FETs are passive devices, with proper 
modifications existing models can be applied to predict the nonlinear characteristics 
such as 1-dB compression, insertion loss, and intermodulation distortion of con-
trol circuits. Several nonlinear equivalent circuit models for switch FETs have been 
reported in the literature [24, 29, 30, 32]. These models are discussed briefly next.
The first nonlinear model reported by Kermarrec et al. [24] is a modified ver-
sion of the Curtice model [17]. Additional elements included in the modified model 
improve the accuracy of switch FET model and can easily be included in existing 
custom or commercially available CAD software. Switch FET is a passive device 
consisting of voltage-controlled resistors and capacitors. The operating condition of 
these devices is always resistive in nature; low impedance (Vgs = 0) in the ON state 
and high impedance (Vgs >⎥Vp⎢) in the OFF state. In the modified model as shown 
in Figure 2.11, the current equation is given by
	
Id = β(Vgs − Vp)2(1 − λVds)tanh(αVds)	
(2.17)
where α, β, and λ are model parameters. The voltage-dependent junction capaci-
tances of the intrinsic diodes, in the Curtice model, are given by
	
Cs = Cj0s(1 − Vgs/Vb)–1/2	
(2.18a)
	
Cd = Cj0d(1 − Vgd/Vb)–1/2	
(2.18b)
where
Vgd = gate-to-drain voltage
Cj0s and Cj0d = capacitances at zero junction voltage
Vb = built in Schottky voltage (positive constant)
Figure 2.11  Nonlinear FET model representation.

34
Control Devices
In the modified model, the varactor diodes D1 and D2 are added to replace 
intrinsic diodes given by Cs and Cd by setting Cj0s = Cj0d = 0 without eliminating 
them. The capacitance of varactors D1 and D2 is represented by
	
C = C0(1 − V/Vb)–M	
(2.19)
where
C = varactor capacitance
V = junction voltage
C0 = zero bias capacitance
M = positive constant depending on doping profile
Additional external diodes D3 and D4 are forward-biased when Vgs and Vgd 
are negative and account for the gradual reverse-bias breakdown characteristics of 
the switch FETs. The diodes have zero junction capacitance. The current voltage 
characteristics of intrinsic, varactor, and external diodes are given as
	
I = Is e(qVd / nkT) −1
⎢⎣
⎥⎦	
(2.20)
where:
I = diode current
Is = saturation current
Vd = junction voltage
q = electron charge
k = Boltzman’s constant
T = temperature (Kelvin)
n = ideality factor
Other parasitics such as Rs, Rd, and Cds represent source, drain resistances, 
and source-drain capacitance. Additional elements, shown in the modified Curtice 
model, are FETs’ OFF state resistance Roff, internal node capacitances Coff, and 
parasitic capacitances Cps and Cpd of the transistors source and drain terminals.
Equivalent circuit model parameter values are generally obtained by measuring 
transistors S-parameters and DC I-V data, at various bias voltages. The constants 
α, β, and λ are evaluated using measured I-V data, and Rg, Rs, Rd, Cds, Roff, Coff, 
Cps, and Cpd are determined from the measured S-parameters at the operating DC 
bias conditions. Coefficients of intrinsic and extrinsic diodes model are obtained 
from DC measurements, and varactor diodes coefficients are evaluated from DC 
measurements and S-parameters over a large range of DC bias conditions to cover 
the full range of device operation. Ideality factor values between 1 and 100 were 
used with external diodes to fix the FET’s reverse-bias breakdown characteristics 
[24]. Table 2.4 gives the model parameter values for two switch FETs: 1 × 500 μm 
FET A and 0.5 × 600 μm FET B, where several values are provided in units per mil-
limeter of gate periphery for scaling purpose. The agreement between the simulated 
(using model parameters) and measured S-parameters was excellent. Figure 2.12 

2.2	
GaAs MESFETs
35
Table 2.4  Nonlinear Model Parameter Values for Switch FETs
Parameter
Unit
Switch FET A
Switch FET B
Linear elements
α
1/V
2.0
1.8
β
A/V2/mm
0.03
0.07
λ
1/V
0.01
0.019
Vp
V
–3.2
–2.8
Rg
Ω⋅mm
2.0
1.0
Rs
Ω⋅mm
0.8
1.0
Rd
Ω⋅mm
0.8
1.0
Roff
Ω⋅mm
3000
5000
Cds
pF/mm
0.14
0.16
Cps
pF/mm
0.03
0.07
Cpd
pF/mm
0.03
0.07
Coff
pF/mm
0.1
0.07
Intrinsic diodes
n
1.15
1.0
Is
A/mm
10–5
10–14
Cj0
pF/mm
0
0
Varactor diodes D1 and D2
n
100
9.5
Is
A/mm
10–14
10–14
Cj0
pF/mm
0.8
0.1
M
3
0.2
Vbi
V
4
0.8
External diodes D3 and D4
n
75
1
Is
A/mm
10–14
10–14
Cj0
pF/mm
0
0
M
0.5
0.5
Figure 2.12  Measured and simulated output power versus input of a 600 μm FET.

36
Control Devices
shows a comparison between the measured and nonlinear model simulated power 
performance for 0.5 × 600 μm FET B. At the P1dB compression level the agreement 
is within 0.3 dB.
Accurate models for predicting intermodulation distortion have also been 
reported in the literature [27, 30, 32]. One of the necessary conditions to determine 
intermodulation distortion accurately is to evaluate precisely the second and third 
derivative of I-V characteristics to lead accurate distortion analysis.
Another nonlinear model based on Materka and Kacprzak nonlinear FET model 
to predict intermodulation distortion (IMD) has been reported by Pla and Struble 
[30]. The model was developed by using both DC I-V and pulsed I-V characteristics. 
The small signal ON and OFF state model parameters were obtained by measuring 
S-parameters at different control voltages. The model was validated to predict IMD 
in multibit wideband phase shifters.
The main advantage of the equivalent circuit models is the ease with which they 
can be integrated into RF circuit simulators. For linear operation (i.e., small signal), 
the interface is direct since the entire device and circuit model are simulated in the 
frequency domain. For nonlinear applications, the device models are formulated in 
the time domain and are interfaced with the frequency domain linear circuit simu-
lators by means of the Harmonic Balance Method. The RF performance obtained 
from these simulators can be satisfactory to good for circuits operated for mildly 
nonlinear applications. The large-signal equivalent circuit models generally do not 
scale well with varying operational conditions such as frequency or bias. As the 
circuit becomes increasingly nonlinear, simulator performance degrades.
2.3	
GaAs HEMTs
The heterojunction field effect transistor (HFET), also called a modulated doped FET 
(MODFET), can also be used as a control device in the same way as FET [38–41]. 
There are different variations of HFETs. One of the most commonly used versions 
is called high electron mobility transistor (HEMT). This device structure is shown 
in Figure 2.13(a). Another variation of the HFET is called pseudomorphic HEMT 
or pHEMT, and its cross-sectional representation is shown in Figure 2.13(b). Dis-
tinct advantages of a HEMT are low ON resistance and small OFF capacitance, 
Figure 2.13  Cross-sectional views of an HFET structure: (a) HEMT, and (b) pHEMT.

2.3	
GaAs HEMTs
37
which result in lower loss and good isolation characteristics at high frequency of 
operation. A pHEMT device has superior microwave properties compared to the 
HEMT. It has also been reported that pHEMT-based switches have higher linearity 
compared with FETs at low-voltage operation.
The performance improvement of a HEMT over the MESFET can be under-
stood by comparing the device material structures (see Figure 2.13). In HEMT 
devices, different materials are grown one on top of one another using epitaxial 
growth technology like molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) or molecular organic chemi-
cal vapor deposition (MOCVD). The structure has a layer of aluminum gallium 
arsenide (AlGaAs), which has a larger energy band gap than GaAs, grown on top 
of the GaAs layer. The difference in the Fermi energy band between two materi-
als causes band bending at the heterojunction interface (Figure 2.14). This band 
bending results in a quantum well where a large population of electrons forms a 
two-dimensional gas very close to the interface of the two materials. The AlGaAs 
layer is doped to provide electrons for the current conduction, and the GaAs layer 
is undoped. The electrons from the donor atoms in the AlGaAs move to the low-
energy level on the undoped GaAs. This effectively separates the donors residing 
in the AlGaAs from the electrons residing in the GaAs layer. Since donors and free 
electrons are in two different media, chances of collision between the donors and 
electrons are minimized, and the drift velocity of the electrons is increased. These 
electrons can be modulated very easily by the application of a voltage at the gate 
terminal. The HEMT devices exhibit higher transconductance, higher fc, and higher 
frequency operation compared to GaAs MESFETs.
In pHEMT structure a thin layer of indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) is intro-
duced between the undoped GaAs and the doped AlGaAs layers. The InGaAs mate-
rial has an energy band gap lower than the AlGaAs and GaAs material. When this 
layer is sandwiched between the two layers of higher band gap (InGaAs and GaAs) 
materials, the lowest energy quantum well states would reside in the InGaAs layer. 
Therefore, the free electrons provided by the donor atoms would move to the energy 
Figure 2.14  HEMT energy band diagram.

38
Control Devices
levels within the thin layer of InGaAs. These electrons are confined to this layer 
because of the presence of higher energy band gap materials on both sides. These 
electrons have much higher drift velocity and can be modulated by the application 
of a voltage at the gate terminal. The GaAs pHEMT device exhibits even higher 
transconductance and superior RF properties compared to the HEMT and MESFET. 
The pHEMT is preferred to HEMT and MESFET devices in many applications. 
Indium phosphide (InP) substrate-based pHEMT has superior performance than 
GaAs pHEMT at millimeter-wave frequencies. Metamorphic HEMT (or mHEMT) 
combines the affordability of the GaAs process and the superior performance of 
InP pHEMTs.
The small-signal equivalent circuits of the HEMT and pHEMT are very similar 
to the MESFET. The circuit designs quite often use the MESFET equivalent circuit 
configuration with proper values for the model parameters. Detailed discussions of 
these equivalent circuits have already been described in the previous section.
Small signal switch models for pHEMTs were developed by measuring S-param-
eters for different size devices. Figure 2.15 shows simplified single-port EC model 
for millimeter-wave pHEMTs. Table 2.5 summarizes the model parameter values 
for two gate-length pHEMT devices. The model also includes the inductance of via 
grounds having size of 80 μm. For 0.25-μm gate pHEMTs, the typical values for 
ON state resistance and OFF state capacitance values are 1.4 Ω⋅mm and 0.26 pF/
mm, respectively. The switch models parameters for 0.15-μm pHEMT and mHEMT 
(WIN foundry) are Ron = 1.1 Ω⋅mm, Coff = 0.31 pF/mm and Ron = 1.3 Ω⋅mm, Coff 
= 0.308 pF/mm, respectively.
Figure 2.15  ON and OFF state scalable equivalent circuit models of a pHEMT.
Table 2.5  Equivalent Circuit Model Parameter Values (Normalized to 1 mm) for pHEMTs Having 
Four Fingers (P Is the Gate Periphery in mm)
Parameter
Value
Unit
Gate length
0.10
0.15
μm
Ron
0.9/P
0.8/P
Ω
L
0.125 × P
0.115 × P
nH
Roff
0.12/P
0.33/P
Ω
Coff
0.423 × P
0.30 × P
pF
Control voltage
+0.3 to −2
+0.5 to −3
V

2.5	
GaN HEMTs
39
2.4	
GaAs HBTs
An HBT, an improved version of a bipolar junction transistor (BJT), is also used in 
control circuits, where BJT is seldom used. In this structure, the emitter has a wider 
energy band gap heterostucture and high base doping density resulting in reduced 
base resistance, lower base-emitter capacitance, and higher output resistance, as 
well as higher fT and fmax, lower 1/f noise, higher voltage handing capability, and 
higher current density. Thus, in general, the HBT’s performance is much higher 
than that of BJTs and FETs and at par with pHEMT. The HBT has also been used 
as a switching device.
A cross section of a HBT is shown in Figure 2.16. When the emitter-base 
junction is forward-biased, carriers are injected from the n-type emitter to the p+ 
base region. These injected electrons are swept across the base region by drift and 
diffusion processes, and ultimately collected by the reverse-biased collector-base 
junction. Electrons are the minority carries in the p+ base region. Due to the short 
lifetime of electrons, they recombine with the majority carrier holes in the base 
region, resulting in a current through the base terminal. The transport of electrons 
across the collector–base space charge region takes place due to the high-field elec-
tron saturation velocity.
In control components, the HBTs are mostly used in active mode. Extensive 
device models for HBTs are available by foundry services.
2.5	
GaN HEMTs
The fabrication of GaN HEMTs is similar to that for GaAs HEMTs. A major dif-
ference is in the AlGaN/GaN materials, which have high-field breakdown, giving 
rise to high-voltage operation of GaN HEMTs. GaN HEMT layers can be grown 
on sapphire, silicon, or SiC substrates. SiC substrates are generally preferred because 
of their very high thermal conductivity, which greatly helps these devices for high-
power density operation. Although 4-inch diameter SiC substrates are available, 
they are very expensive and have high defect densities. The high electron mobility 
Figure 2.16  Physical cross section of a GaAs npn HBT.

40
Control Devices
of GaN layers allows GaN HEMTs to be used at millimeter-wave frequencies. SiC-
based GaN HEMTs have the highest power density; the next closest are Si-based 
GaN HEMTs. Because SiC is a good electrical insulator, the SiC-based GaN HEMT 
process is very suitable for IC production due to the low-loss passive circuitry. The 
GaN transistors are very suitable for high-power switches, phase shifters, attenu-
ators, and limiters. Earlier, the control components were placed before drivers and 
HPAs in a transmit or receive module. With the high-power capability of GaN 
transistors, they can be inserted at a suitable place without worrying too much 
about the power handling.
Typical values of Imax, Idss, gm, fT, and fmax for a power GaN HEMT are 900 
mA/mm, 600 mA/mm, 290 mS/mm, 50 GHz, and 80 GHz, respectively. Mea-
sured breakdown voltage is 60–130 V for GaN HEMTs and 100–250 V for GaN 
field plate-HEMTs. The pinchoff voltage about −5 V, and control voltage used is 
around 20–30 V. The EC model for GaN HEMTs is the same as for FETs. Typical 
values of Ron and Coff for a 0.25-μm gate GaN HEMT are 2 Ω⋅mm and 0.3 pF/
mm, respectively.
2.6	
CMOS Transistors
The metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET) is widely used in RF 
and microwave ICs for commercial and military applications. Today RF integrated 
circuits (RFICs) are primary based on CMOS transistors. The n-type MOSFET, 
which is commonly referred to as NMOS, is primarily used for switching because of 
its high electron mobility. The recent development of submicron-CMOS technology 
has led to the development of RF, microwave, and millimeter-wave single-function 
and multifunction ICs. The typical values of fT for 0.25-, 0.18-, 0.13-, and 0.09-μm 
gate CMOS transistors are 30, 50, 75, and 110 GHz, respectively. Now 0.045-μm 
gate CMOS process is also available.
2.6.1	 Operation of CMOS Switch
A simplified cross-sectional view of a bulk NMOS transistor is shown in Figure 2.17. 
Assuming the source and drain terminals have no applied voltage, a positive gate 
voltage (VGS) repels the holes from the p-substrate surface and attracts the electrons 
from n+ regions. When the gate voltage is greater than the threshold voltage (Vth), 
the surface is filled with the electrons and results in a conductive path between the 
source and drain electrodes. The region between the source and drain electrodes is 
known as “channel” and has much lower resistance in comparison to when there 
is no gate voltage. Thus, the device behaves as a switch with two states: no gate 
voltage (VGS = 0) is high impedance state and gate voltage (VGS > Vth) is low imped-
ance state. For control components in addition to bulk NMOS, triple-well NMOS 
transistors are also used.
The switching operation of an NMOS device is similar to the FET/HEMT except 
that the control voltage requires a positive supply—a more desirable feature. The 
gate leakage current is negligible due to the insulator layer between the gate and 

2.6	
CMOS Transistors
41
channel, another desirable feature for a switching device. As they are compatible 
with RFIC technology they have small size, have low cost, and are lightweight. 
NMOS switching transistors offer
• Virtually no DC-control power dissipation;
• Nanosecond switching speed;
• No DC blocking capacitors;
• Single positive power supply.
As shown in Figure 2.17, there are two parasitic diodes between the source con-
tact and substrate and the drain contact and substrate. The substrate is normally 
biased at 0 V. The control voltage is applied at the gate. The device is in OFF state 
(high impedance) between source-drain contacts when gate is at 0 V. When the 
gate is positively biased at about 0.5 V, the device is in ON state (low impedance) 
between source-drain contacts.
To improve the switch performance, the coupling between the device and sub-
strate should be minimized. The coupling occurs due to finite conductivity of the 
Si substrate. In order to realize an isolated body for the NMOS transistor from the 
p-substrate, a triple-well CMOS structure shown in Figure 2.18 was proposed. It 
comprised of a p-well embedded within a deep n-well. Now in this case there are 
four parasitic diodes as compared to two for the bulk NMOS. These four diodes 
are known as p-well-source, p-well-drain, p-well-deep-n-well, and p-substrate-deep-
n-well. The triple-well CMOS structure as a switch has better performance than 
bulk NMOS transistor because of more flexibility in choosing body bias control, 
which is discussed next.
Figure 2.17  Simplified cross-section of a bulk NMOS transistor.
Figure 2.18  Simplified cross-section of a triple-well NMOS transistor.

42
Control Devices
2.6.2	 Various Body Floating Techniques
Since Si substrate is conducting, its body is considered as a fourth terminal and 
grounded. The substrate has finite parasitics and cannot be ignored. An expression 
is given [42] for the substrate resistance in the following for which the insertion loss 
contribution due to the substrate resistivity is maximum,
RB(max) = −w2CT
2(RonZ0 + Z0
2)
2w2CT
2(Ron + 2Z0) +
w4CT
4(RonZ0 + Z0
2)2 + 4w2CT
2(Ron + 2Z0)2
2w2CT
2(Ron + 2Z0)
 
(2.21)
where CT = Cdb + Csb + [(Cgd + Cgs)Cgb/(Cgd + Cgs + Cgb)], Z0 is the terminal imped-
ance, and ω is the angular operating frequency. The transistor’s various capaci-
tors are shown later in Figures 2.20 and 2.21. In order to minimize the additional 
loss due to RB in CMOS bulk switches, one must have either a much smaller or a 
much larger value of RB. The small value of RB is realized by fully surrounding the 
switching device with a large area of p+ substrate contacts. The large value of RB is 
obtained by blocking the p implants close to the switching device and moving the 
substrate connections far from it. Another method known as body-floating (high 
RB) has been used to improve the performance of CMOS switches. This method is 
based on adding additional circuit elements to the switching device.
The body-floating technique adds a high resistance at the body of the NMOS 
switch transistor and lowers the parasitic capacitance (substrate coupling), resulting 
in reduced insertion loss as well as increased isolation and bandwidth of the switch 
circuit. Several transistor body-floating techniques have been proposed for CMOS 
technology to improve the switch performance [42–53]. These are shown in Figure 
2.19 and are briefly discussed next.
LC-Tuned Body-Floating
In the LC-tuned circuit shown in Figure 2.19(a), the inductor and capacitor are 
realized on-chip and become an integral part of the device. At the parallel resonant 
frequency, the high impedance of the LC network makes the switching transistor 
floating. The technique has been proposed for bulk NMOS transistors. It works 
well at low frequencies and near parallel resonance. This method has disadvantages 
such as narrow band operation, increased design complexity, high insertion loss, 
and large silicon chip size.
Resistive Body-Floating
The resistive body-floating technique shown in Figure 2.19(b) is applied to triple-
well CMOS process and is not realizable with bulk CMOS process due to unknown 
substrate conditions. It is the simplest method and is wideband. It uses a large value 
of resistor to bias the transistor’s body. This technique is broadband; however, it 
has limited improvement in the switch’s P1dB performance. Linearity performance 
is inferior to the LC-tuned body-floating method.

2.6	
CMOS Transistors
43
Double-Well Body-Floating
Previously mentioned limitations have been addressed by using the double-well 
body-floating technique shown in Figure 2.19(c). In this method both p-well and 
deep n-well diodes are biased by using high value resistors, and the transistor’s body 
becomes RF floating.
Switched Body-Floating
In this technique the body floating is controlled by an additional switch. In the 
switched body-floating technique shown in Figure 2.19(d), the substrate resistance 
is regulated by using a switch across resistor R2. When the transistor M is in ON 
state, the switch S is in OFF state, the body of the transistor M becomes RF floating 
through R2. When the transistor M is in OFF state, the switch S is in ON state, the 
body of the transistor M is RF grounded through ON resistance of the transistor S. 
In this case, the drain-source coupling through the transistor body is significantly 
reduced. The disadvantage of this technique is that it has additional loss due to 
increased parasitic effect with the RF grounded body.
Figure 2.19  CMOS transistor body floating techniques: (a) LC-tuned, (b) resistive, (c) double-
well, and (d) switched.

44
Control Devices
The body-floating techniques described here improve the switch performance 
but add circuit complexity. The silicon-on-insulator (SOI) CMOS technology is 
also being pursued for low loss switches targeting comparable performance with 
other technologies. The main advantage of SOI CMOS vis-à-vis bulk CMOS is the 
reduction of parasitic capacitances because of the buried oxide layer, which leads 
to lower insertion loss and better isolation. Since the thermal conductivity of the 
oxide layer is approximately 100 times lower than Si, SOI CMOS switches are more 
suitable for low-power applications.
2.6.3	 CMOS Transistor Models
Small signal equivalent circuits for CMOS transistors are similar to FET/HEMT, 
and the EC parameter values are obtained from measured S-parameters. Small signal 
equivalent circuit models under ON and OFF state conditions are shown in Figures 
2.20 and 2.21 for bulk and tri-well CMOS transistors, respectively.
When a CMOS switch is used as a variable resistor, the drain-source resistance 
is given by [46]
	
Rds = Ron =
L
mnCoxP(VGS −Vth) 	
(2.22)
Figure 2.20  Bulk CMOS transistor equivalent circuits: (a) ON state, and (b) OFF state.
Figure 2.21  Triple-well NMOS transistor equivalent circuits: (a) ON state, and (b) OFF state.

2.7	
Other Devices
45
where μnCox = 3.95 × 10–4 A/V2, Vth = 0.475 V, and P and L are the device periphery 
and gate length. For devices to start conducting, the value of VGS > Vth. The nomi-
nal value for VGS is about 1.8 V. For P = 100 μm and L = 0.18 μm, Rds = 3.44 Ω.
Table 2.6 gives CMOS switch model parameters for three gate lengths. Table 2.7 
compares PIN diode, FET, pHEMT, GaN HEMT, and CMOS switching devices. 
Here, PIN diode is included for comparison purposes, as other devices in the table 
belong to the transistor family. PIN diode has the highest fc among all switch devices, 
and pHEMT has the highest performance among transistors. For PIN diodes, Ron 
and Coff are not normalized with regard to mm.
Data included in these two tables are typical and shown for comparison pur-
pose, and they do not represent a particular foundry. The process variations may 
change the parameter values at least by 15–20 percent.
The main disadvantage of the equivalent circuit models described earlier is the 
inherent inaccuracy resulting from simplifications in the model formulation. Work 
on nonlinear models for switch devices to design MMICs and RFICs is still evolv-
ing. These ICs require different types and sizes of switch devices and their models 
in order to meet demanding specifications such as high 1-dB compression and high 
third-order intercept point. Size scalability is another desirable feature in nonlinear 
models.
2.7	
Other Devices
Some derivatives of FETs have also been used to improve the switch performance, 
including control field effect transistor [54], recessed-back FET [55], and squeezed-
gate FET [56]. The control field effect transistor uses the gate behind the source-drain, 
Table 2.6  Switch Model Comparison of Various Gate Length CMOS Transistors Using Typical 
Parameters
Parameter
CMOS Transistors
Units
Gate length
180
130
90
nm
Ron
1.2
0.4
0.38
Ω⋅mm
Coff
0.56
0.58
0.47
pF/mm
fc
237
686
891
GHz
Table 2.7  Comparison of Various Switch Devices Using Typical Parameters
Parameter
PIN diode
MESFET
pHEMT
GaN HEMT
CMOS
Units
Diameter/gate length
56
0.5
0.25
0.25
0.18
μm
Ron
0.5
1.6
1.4
2.0
1.2
Ω⋅mm
Coff
0.14
0.25
0.26
0.3
0.56
pF/mm
fc
2274
398
437
265
237
GHz
Breakdown voltage
50
10
8
70
7
V
Low frequency limit
10
DC
DC
DC
DC
MHz
DC power consumption
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
—
Control voltage
2
5
2
40
2
V

46
Control Devices
which results in lower OFF capacitance. A recessed-back switch has also lower OFF 
capacitance. Both these FETs have lower insertion loss and higher isolation than 
a conventional FET. In order to improve the distortion of the variable attenuator 
using GaAs FETs, squeezed-gate FET structure, which consists of two different gate 
lengths in a unit gate width, have been used [56]. Using different gate lengths tech-
nique, the intermodulation distortion has been improved by about 10 dB. Multigate 
FETs such as dual-gate [57] and triple-gate FETs [58] have been used to improve 
switch intermodulation distortion and power handling characteristics. Figure 2.22 
shows a cross-sectional view of the triple-gate FET. One can also use enhanced-
mode devices in switching circuits; however, they do not handle as much power 
as depletion mode devices because of their limited current and voltage breakdown 
capability. The GaAs HBT PIN diode recently reported [59, 60] has excellent per-
formance in terms of insertion loss, isolation, and power handling capability at 35 
GHz. SiGe HBT PIN diodes for radar applications have also been reported [61].
In addition to various types of transistors, Schottky and varactor diodes are also 
used in the control components. Varactor diodes are primarily used in phase shifters, 
and Schottky diodes are used in limiters. These devices are briefly discussed next.
2.7.1	
Schottky Diodes
Figure 2.23 shows the top and cross-sectional views of the Schottky diode. A 
Schottky barrier or simply Schottky junctions are formed when a metal is placed 
on a semiconductor surface. The operation of the device is similar to the operation 
of the MESFET when source and drain electrodes are connected together. When 
the gate or anode is at 0 V with respect to source or cathode, the diode is in OFF 
state; when the gate is biased with a voltage greater than the built-in voltage (about 
1 V), the device is ON state.
The diode equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2.24(a). It consists of series 
resistance Rs, junction or depletion layer capacitance Cj and nonlinear junction 
resistance Rj. The value of Rj and Cj depends on the DC voltage and/or RF voltage 
across the diode. Series resistance of a Schottky diode is given by
	
Rs = Rc + Rch + Rg	
(2.23)
where Rc, Rch, and Rg are the contact, channel, and Schottky gate metal resistances, 
respectively.
Figure 2.22  Cross-section of triple-gate FET.

2.7	
Other Devices
47
When the diode is working as a switch or a limiter, it has two states: OFF, in 
which the value of Rj is very large, and ON, in which the value of Rj is very small 
compared to Rs. Therefore, as a first-order approximation, Rj may be neglected.
The depletion layer capacitance can be calculated in a manner analogous to 
that used for pn-juntion diodes. The device can be considered to be a parallel plate 
capacitor with a voltage-dependent space charge thickness given by
	
d =
2e0er
qNd
Vb −V −kT
q
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1/2
	
(2.24)
Figure 2.23  Schottky diode’s top and cross-sectional views.
Figure 2.24  Equivalent circuits of Schottky diodes: (a) chip or MMIC, and (b) packaged.

48
Control Devices
The junction capacitance is calculated by using the following expression [9]:
	
Cj = e0er
d
A =
qe0erNd
2 Vb −V −kT /q
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
1/2
A 	
(2.25)
where Nd, Vb, V and A are the donor density, built-in voltage, applied DC voltage 
and junction area, and ε0 = 8.854 × 10–14 F/cm, q = 1.6 × 10–19 C, k = 1.38 × 10–23 
J/K, and T = 300 K. For GaAs, εr = 12.9, Nd = 2 × 1017 cm–3, Vb = 0.75 V, and V = 
0 V, the junction capacitance Cj = 1.578A pF.
The figure of merit for Schottky diodes is defined in terms of its zero bias cut-
off frequency fc given by
	
fc =
1
2pRsCj0
	
(2.26)
where Cj0 is the junction capacitance at 0 V. For a Schottky diode having Rs = 10 
Ω and Cj0 = 0.02 pF, fc = 796 GHz. More accurate EC model parameters of a diode 
are obtained using a measurement-based modeling technique. Table 2.8 gives EC 
model parameters at three different anode voltages. Nonlinear model parameters 
for a 0.5 × 80 μm2 Schottky diode are listed in Table 2.9.
A more accurate EC model for a chip diode or a packaged diode is shown in 
Figure 2.24(b). Here, Cp and Lp represent pad/package capacitance and inductance, 
respectively.
Table 2.9  Typical Parameters of a 0.5 × 80 μm2 Schottky Diode
Parameter
Symbol
Unit
Value
Saturation current density
Is
A/μm2
10–13
Ideality factor
n
—
1.2
Transient time
τ
ps
3
Energy gap
Eg
V
1.43
Reverse breakdown voltage
VB
V
9
Schottky barrier height
ϕ
V
0.75
Series resistance
Rs
Ω
10
Junction capacitance
Cj0
pF
0.062
Table 2.8  Lumped Element Model Values for Schottky Diodes
Gate Dimensions (μm2)
Rs (Ω)
Rj (Ω)
Cj (pF)
−1 V
0 V
+1 V
−1 V
0 V
+1 V
0.5 × 32
25
> 5 k
>5 k
<1
0.016
0.025
—
0.5 × 80
10
> 5 k
>5 k
<1
0.041
0.062
—

2.8	
Transistor Model Scaling
49
2.7.2	 Varactor Diodes
A varactor diode is a p-n junction diode that is used as a variable-reactance circuit 
element. The variable capacitance is obtained from the variation of the diode deple-
tion layer capacitance with applied voltage (either DC or RF). In this case, the diode 
is reverse biased. Varactors are fabricated using Si bipolar junction transistor, SiGe 
HBT, NMOS, and GaAs Schottky diode technologies.
A simplified equivalent circuit model of a packaged varactor is the same as shown 
in Figure 2.24(b). The series resistance Rs represents the resistance of the bulk semi-
conductor regions extrinsic to the junction region and also the resistance due to the 
metal contacts. Both junction capacitance Cj and resistance Rj are functions of bias. 
Since in most applications the varactors are reverse biased, the junction resistance Rj 
is generally high and can be ignored. The depletion layer capacitance is given by [9]
	
Cj =
Cj0
1 −V /Vb
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
g 	
(2.27)
where γ is a constant and depends on the doping profile. For devices with abrupt 
doping profile γ = 0.5, for those with linearly graded profile γ = 0.33, and for hypera-
brupt profiles γ range is 1 to 5. Typical junction capacitance variation of the MA-
COM’s hyperabrupt GaAs MA46H120 varactor diode is shown in Figure 2.25 The 
capacitance varies by a factor of 3 when DC voltage changed from zero to −4 V.
The bipolar junction transistor as a control device is not a popular choice. 
However, varactors based on the Si BiCMOS technology, comprised of the bipolar 
junction transistor and the CMOS transistor in a single integrated circuit device, 
have been used in control components.
2.8	
Transistor Model Scaling
The device model scaling concept has been used frequently for switch transistors to 
obtain optimized performance for control components. The device gate periphery 
Figure 2.25  Typical C-V characteristic of a varactor diode.

50
Control Devices
can be increased or decreased by adding or subtracting unit cells or by increasing or 
decreasing unit gate width. This can be done safely up and down by a scale factor of 
2. Adding and subtracting unit cells approach with proper input and output feeds is 
relatively more accurate. For example, the EC model parameters for an FET/HEMT 
can be normalized to 1 mm and scaled to other gate peripheries. If a scale factor is 
greater than 2, special attention is required to scale the inductances Lon and Loff. 
These parameters depend on the unit gate width and the number of fingers. When 
parameters are normalized to 1 mm and the number of fingers remains same, the 
scaled parameters for other device sizes become capacitors and inductors ∝ periph-
ery and resistors ∝1/periphery. When the number of fingers is also scaled, the scaled 
parameters for capacitors ∝ periphery, and inductors and resistors ∝1/periphery.
Consider an example of scaling a 300-μm gate periphery FET, whose EC model 
is shown in Figure 2.14, to a 600-μm gate periphery FET. The number of fingers 
= 4, and only the unit gate width is increased. The scaled EC model parameter 
values for the 600-μm gate periphery FET are given in Table 2.10. The numbers 
before the multiplying factor are for the 300-μm gate periphery FET. If the model 
parameters are normalized with respect to millimeter unit, as shown in Table 2.3, 
one can obtain the model parameters for other sizes using the scale factor. In this 
example, the scale factor P = 0.6.
2.9	
Biasing of Switching Devices
The switching devices require DC bias voltage to change its state from ON to 
OFF and vice versa. The biasing scheme must be separated from the RF circuitry; 
otherwise, degradation of RF performance takes place. In other words, when bias 
voltage is applied to the device, the RF energy should not leak out through the bias 
port, and as well it must isolate the bias voltage applied to various devices. Biasing 
schemes for PIN diodes and transistors are described briefly in this section.
2.9.1	
Biasing of PIN Diodes
There are many PIN diode biasing schemes used in practice. Most of them are 
similar to biasing transistors used in the design of amplifiers [14]. Basically, a bias-
ing network consists of a DC block and an RF choke as shown in Figure 2.26. The 
Table 2.10  Scaling of EC Model Parameter Values from 300-μm to 600-μm Gate FET Periphery
Ron = 5.17 × 300
600 = 2.58Ω
Con = 0.113 × 600
300 = 0.226 pF
Lon = 0.009 × 600
300 = 0.018 nH
Roff = 1.5 × 300
600 = 0.75Ω
C1 = 0.039 × 600
300 = 0.078 pF
C2 = 0.105 × 600
300 = 0.21 pF
Loff = Lon + 0.04
Rshunt = 5000 × 300
600 = 2500Ω

2.9	
Biasing of Switching Devices
51
purpose of the RF choke is to have very high impedance at the operating frequen-
cies to block the RF from leaking through the biasing network. The grounded RF 
choke is used for DC return path. A DC block can be either a capacitor or a 3-dB 
backward-wave coupler described in [62]. The chip capacitors generally are used as 
DC bias blocks. Ideally, the capacitor should present a short circuit at the operating 
frequencies. The capacitance value should be selected such that 2 πfC is very large. 
Therefore, Zc = −j(1/ωC) is very small and the signal will pass through the capacitor 
with little loss or reflection. For example, at 1 GHz, a 100-pF capacitor will give 
Zc = −j1.6, which is almost a short circuit in a 50-Ω environment. The capacitor 
value or type is also selected so that there is no parallel resonance in the operating 
frequency range. The RF choke blocks the RF signal while acting as a DC short. 
At low frequencies, generally lumped inductors are used. The inductance value is 
selected so that its impedance at the operating frequencies is very high. In a 50-Ω 
environment, the choke impedance in the 500–1000-Ω range is acceptable in most 
applications. The choke in the right-hand side of Figure 2.26(a) provides a return 
path for the diode’s DC current.
PIN diode biasing circuit design considerations consist of a proper biasing topol-
ogy suitable for the application. Both microstrip lines and lumped elements are used 
in the design of biasing circuits. These are discussed next.
Microstrip Biasing Circuit
The RF choke at microwave frequencies is generally realized by using a high-imped-
ance λ/4 line, also known as a shunt stub terminated by an RF bypass capacitor 
CB, as shown in Figure 2.27(a). A DC block is a 3-dB backward-wave coupler. For 
low RF leakage through the biasing network, the impedance ratio of the shunt stub 
and the through line impedance Z0, Zs/Z0, must be much greater than unity. The 
low-high impedance lines serve as a low-pass filter, which prevents the microwave 
signal leaking into the bias port. In this case the bandwidth increases when the 
impedance of the stub increases. For VSWR ≤ 1.05 the bandwidth for Zs = 100 Ω 
is about 12 percent. In order to further increase the bandwidth, two sections of 
quarter-wave-long transmission lines are used. If an open circuit is required across 
the main line for RF signals, a quarter-wave high impedance line followed by another 
open circuited quarter-wave low impedance line are connected. The configuration 
is shown in Figure 2.27(b) [62]. Assuming that the characteristic impedance Z0 of 
Figure 2.26  Generic PIN diode biasing schemes: (a) series configuration and (b) shunt 
configuration.

52
Control Devices
the through line is the same as the system impedance, the normalized admittance 
with the load (Y0 = 1/Z0) is
	
y = Y
Y0
= 1 + Z0
Zin
	
(2.28a)
where
	
Zin = jZ1
Z1 tanq1 tanq2 −Z2
Z1 tanq2 + Z2 tanq1
	
(2.28b)
Here θ1, Z1 and θ2, Z2 are the electrical line length, characteristic impedance 
of the first and second line sections, respectively. Under matched conditions, Zin = 
∝ and y = 1. Maximum bandwidth is obtained when Z1/Z2 is large. For example, 
with Z1 = 100 Ω, Z2 = 10 Ω, Z0 = 50 Ω, and a VSWR = 1.2, the maximum band-
width is about 40 percent. Commonly, the low impedance line section is replaced 
with a radial line section, as shown in Figure 2.27(c). This arrangement using a 
radial stub provides better bandwidth than a λ/4 open circuited line section and 
smaller in size. In this biasing scheme, the biasing circuitry becomes an integral 
part of the circuit design.
Example 2.1
Compare the response of a lumped element biasing network, Figure 2.26(b), with a 
two-section distributed element biasing network, Figure 2.27(b). The design values 
are L = 8 nH, CB = C = 10 pF, Z1 = 120 Ω, and Z2 = 20 Ω. The center frequency, 
frequency range, and frequency step are 6 GHz, 4–8 GHz, and 0.5 GHz, respectively. 
The system impedance is 50 Ω, and the biasing networks are assumed to be ideal.
Solution
Using a commercial CAD, the calculated S11(dB) and S21(dB) for these two networks 
are given in Table 2.11. Figure 2.28 shows the frequency response for the lumped 
and distributed biasing networks.
Figure 2.27  PIN diode biasing circuits: (a) coupled-line DC block and λ/4 transformer, (b) 
chip capacitor DC block and two λ/4 transformers, and (c) chip capacitor DC block and a λ/4 
transformer in series with a radial line stub.

2.9	
Biasing of Switching Devices
53
The simulated S11 over the 4–8 GHz frequency range is less than −21.2 dB and 
−15.6 dB for the lumped element and distributed element biasing network, respec-
tively. The higher insertion loss at the frequency ends in the distributed biasing 
network is due to the reflection loss. This demonstrates that the lumped element 
technique has a larger bandwidth.
Example 2.2
Compare the response of two biasing networks shown in Figures 2.27(b) and (c) 
designed on an alumina substrate, h = 15 mil (381μm) and εr = 9.9. The transmis-
sion medium is microstrip. The design values for Figure 2.27(b) are W1 = 25 μm 
and W2 = 1500 μm, and the line lengths are λ/4 at 6 GHz. In Figure 2.27(c), for 
the microstrip section W1 = 25 μm and length is λ/4 and for the radial line section 
WI = 25 μm, length is λ/8 and angle ϕ = 90°. The frequency range is 4–8 GHz 
with 0.5-GHz step. The system impedance is 50 Ω, and the discontinuity effects 
may be ignored.
Table 2.11  Calculated Frequency Response of the Lumped Element and Distributed Element 
Biasing Networks
Frequency
Lumped Element
Distributed Element
(GHz)
S11 (dB)
S21 (dB)
S11 (dB)
S21 (dB)
4.0
–21.2
–0.033
–19.3
–0.052
4.5
–22.3
–0.026
–23.3
–0.020
5.0
–23.2
–0.021
–29.3
–0.005
5.5
–24.1
–0.017
–48.7
–0.000
6.0
–24.9
–0.014
–31.5
–0.003
6.5
–25.6
–0.012
–25.0
–0.014
7.0
–26.2
–0.010
–21.1
–0.034
7.5
–26.8
–0.009
–18.1
–0.067
8.0
–27.4
–0.008
–15.6
–0.122
Figure 2.28  Simulated frequency response of biasing networks in Example 2.1.

54
Control Devices
Solution
Refering to microstrip equations [62–64], the characteristic impedances for the line 
widths W1 = 25 μm and W2 = 1500 μm are Z1 = 115.3 Ω and Z2 = 21.7 Ω, respec-
tively. The effective dielectric constant values for these two lines are εre1 = 5.73 and 
εre2 = 8.03, respectively. The free space wavelength at 6 GHz is 5 cm. The quarter 
wavelengths for microstrip sections are:
	
1 =
5
4 5.73 cm = 5.22mm
2 =
5
4 8.03 cm = 4.41mm
	
For the radial microstrip section, the effective dielectric constant εre2 = 8.03 is 
assumed and the calculated λ/8 line length is 2.205 mm. Using a CAD, the calcu-
lated S11 (dB) and S21 (dB) for these two networks are given in Table 2.12. The data 
in Table 2.12 show that both biasing networks have similar performance response; 
however, the radial line approach is approximately half in size.
Lumped Element Biasing Circuit
Lumped element biasing circuits are commonly used at low frequencies and in 
monolithic circuits. The desirable features of these biasing circuits are compact in 
size, small RF leakage, and ultrawideband characteristics. A shunt coil inductor, L, 
also known as an RF choke, is used as a biasing element, while a series capacitor 
C is used to isolate the bias voltage applied to various stages/circuits. Shunt induc-
tor and series capacitor circuits are shown in Figure 2.29 (inset). The normalized 
admittance of the coil and normalized impedance of the capacitor backed by a 50-Ω 
matched element are given by
	
y = Y
Y0
= 1 −j Z0
wL 	
(2.29a)
Table 2.12  Calculated Frequency Response of the Distributed Biasing Networks
Frequency
Two λ/4 Sections
λ/4 and Radial Sections
(GHz)
S11 (dB)
S21 (dB)
S11 (dB)
S21 (dB)
4.0
–18.4
–0.114
–16.4 
–0.162
4.5
–22.3
–0.066
–20.1 
–0.089
5.0
–28.0
–0.040
–24.8 
–0.052
5.5
–44.0
–0.029
–33.3 
–0.034
6.0
–31.7
–0.029
–38.5 
–0.029
6.5
–24.6
–0.040
–27.1 
–0.035
7.0
–20.6
–0.064
–22.3 
–0.052
7.5
–17.6
–0.106
–19.0 
–0.083
8.0
–14.9
–0.177
–15.4 
–0.134

2.9	
Biasing of Switching Devices
55
	
z = Z
Z0
= 1 −j
1
wCZ0
	
(2.29b)
If y = z (i.e., Z0
2 = L/C), both the elements will have an equal VSWR at all fre-
quencies. The VSWR in each case may be written as
	
VSWR = (1 + ⎪ρ⎪)/(1 − ⎪ρ⎪)	
(2.30)
where
	
r = 1 −y
1 + y =
Z0 / wL
4 + Z0 / wL
(
)
2
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1/2
(for a shunt coil) 	
(2.31a)
	
= z −1
z + 1 =
1/ wCZ0
4 + 1/ wCZ0
(
)
2
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1/2
(for a series capacitor) 	
(2.31b)
The insertion loss (IL) in dB of a reactive discontinuity having a VSWR, S, is 
given by
	
IL = 20log S + 1
2 S
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
	
(2.32)
Variation of VSWR corresponding shunt coil and series capacitor elements is 
shown in Figure 2.29. Higher values of L or C have a lower VSWR.
Figure 2.29  Lumped L and C biasing networks and their frequency responses.

56
Control Devices
When both these elements are used simultaneously, the elements should be 
connected at the same plane. The normalized admittance of the capacitor, which 
is backed by a 50-Ω matched line, becomes
	
yC =
1 + j
1
wCZ0
1 + 1/ wCZ0
(
)
2 	
(2.33a)
This admittance will add to the admittance of the inductor (yL = −jZ0/ωL). The 
total admittance yt is given by
	
yt = yC + yL	
(2.33b)
When ωCZ0 >>1
	
yt = 1 + j
1
wCZ0
−Z0
wL
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
	
(2.34)
If Z0
2 = L/C
yt = 1
Thus, the VSWR will be unity and independent of frequency as long as L and 
C are independent of frequency. This network results in ultrawideband bias circuit 
performance. The high-frequency operation of this network is limited by the para-
sitic reactance associated with lumped inductor and capacitor. The low-frequency 
operation is limited by the L and C values. With suitably selected biasing network 
elements, one can design the circuit working over 30 MHz to 20 GHz.
Example 2.3
Determine a relation for the minimum frequency, fmin, of operation for the biasing 
network in terms of ideal shunt L and series C elements and system impedance Z0, 
shown in Figure 2.30. When the return loss is 20 dB and the system impedance is 
50 Ω, calculate the value of shunt indictor L and fmin for the capacitor C values of 
2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 50, 100, and 250 pF.
Figure 2.30  An ultrawideband L-C biasing network.

2.9	
Biasing of Switching Devices
57
Solution
Substituting yC and yL in (2.33b),
	
yt =
1
1 + 1/(wCZ0)2 + j
1
wCZ0
1
1 + 1/(wCZ0)2 −j Z0
wL 	
(2.35a)
When 
j
1
wCZ0
1
1 + 1/(wCZ0)2 −j Z0
wL = 0
	
L = Z0
2C 1 +
1
wCZ0
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	
(2.35b)
and
	
yt =
1
1 + 1/(wCZ0)2 	
(2.35c)
The magnitude of reflection coefficient ρ is given by
	
r = 1 −yt
1 + yt
Or
yt = 1 −r
1 + r
1/ yt = 1 + 1/(wCZ0)2 = 1 + r
1 −r
	
(2.35d)
After simplifying,
	
w =
1
CZ0
1 −r
2r
	
(2.35e)
When the maximum allowed value of ρ is ρmax, the minimum frequency, fmin, is 
given by
	
fmin =
1
2pCZ0
1 −rmax
2rmax
	
(2.35f)
For Z0 = 50 Ω and return loss = 20 dB or ρmax = 0.1, (2.35b) and (2.35f) are 
reduced to
L = 3.056 C
fmin = 6.748/C
where the units of L, C and fmin are nH, pF and GHz, respectively. The calculated 
L and fmin values for various C values are given in Table 2.13.

58
Control Devices
Thus, an LC biasing network operating from 30 MHz to 20 GHz requires an induc-
tor of about 765 nH and a capacitor of 250 pF.
2.9.2	 Biasing of Transistors
Unlike the PIN diode, the transistors (FET, HEMT, and CMOS) are three-terminal 
devices, and the control voltage is applied to gate terminal, which is isolated from 
the RF portion of the circuit. Therefore, in most applications, bias filter network 
is not essential for biasing switching transistors. In most cases, the gate is biased 
through a 2–5 kΩ-mm resistor (resistance value per mm gate periphery of a switch-
ing device), which provides sufficient isolation between the gate terminal and the 
bias supply. However, the selection of the right resistance value is important, as 
it affects switching characteristics such as the frequency of operation, switching 
speed, circuit loss, transient response, and power handling capability. Figure 2.31 
shows commonly used bias configurations for a shunt FET, a series FET, and a 
shunt CMOS transistor, whereas in Figure 2.31(b) the resistor R provides a return 
path for the FET’s DC current. The value of resistance selected is normally 5–10 
kΩ. The RF circuitry does not carry any DC voltage, and therefore biasing schemes 
shown in Figure 2.31 do not require DC blocking capacitors, which simplifies the 
biasing circuitry. Figure 2.31(c) shows bias configuration for a shunt CMOS, where 
the control voltage is of positive polarity.
Single Positive Power Supply Operation of MESFET/HEMT
Normally one needs a negative power supply to control switching action of GaAs 
FET and HEMT switches. It is also possible to operate these switches with a single 
positive power supply using standard TTL voltage inputs, by keeping source pads 
Table 2.13  Calculated L and fmin Values for Various C Values
C (pF)
L (nH)
fmin (GHz)
2
6.11
3.374
5
15.28
1.350
10
30.56
0.675
15
45.84
0.450
20
61.12
0.337
50
152.80
0.135
100
305.60
0.068
250
764.00
0.027
Figure 2.31  Biasing schemes for transistors: (a) negative control voltage for shunt FET, (b) 
negative control voltage for series FET, and (c) positive control voltage for CMOS.

2.10	
Switching Speed
59
“floating.” In this case, a positive voltage (normally +5 V) is applied at the source 
pad of the switching device through a resistor (5–10 kΩ, in order to keep the DC 
power dissipation low) and a control voltage of 0 V or +5 V applied at the gate pad. 
In this case, when gate voltage is 0 V and source voltage is +5 V, the gate is negatively 
biased below pinchoff (e.g., Vc = −5 V) with respect to source pad and the switch-
ing device is in the OFF or high impedance state. When gate voltage is +5 V, gate 
and source pads are at same voltage of +5 V (e.g., Vc = 0 V), the switching FET is in 
the ON or low impedance state. Thus, the switching FETs now can be controlled 
using TTL voltage (0, +5 V) and no negative voltage is required. Figure 2.32 shows 
biasing schemes for the shunt and series FET configurations.
In order to use source floating technique, RF and grounding ports have to be 
isolated, which is generally accomplished by using DC blocking capacitors (C) and 
grounding bypass capacitors (Cb). Their values depend upon the lowest frequency of 
operation, as described in Section 2.9.1. The selection of capacitor type is based on 
the intended use and the frequency of operation. Capacitors with high Q and the self-
resonance frequency greater than the maximum frequency of operation are selected.
2.10	 Switching Speed
The time required to change the state of a switch from OFF to ON (or vice versa) 
becomes an important consideration in several switching circuits, such as those used 
in transmit/receive modules, for modulation, or for ultra-high-speed digital circuits. 
The switching speed considerations for PIN diodes and FETs have been treated in 
[3, 9, 10]. Some of the switching speed considerations for PIN diodes and transis-
tors are discussed briefly in this section.
2.10.1	 Switching Speed of PIN Diodes
In PIN diodes the switching time depends on diode characteristics as well as on DC 
bias circuitry. When the diode is reverse biased, there are no carriers in the i-layer, 
and if a forward bias is abruptly applied, the i-layer is suddenly flooded with charge 
carriers. The time interval over which the i-layer is uniformly populated with charges 
is called the turn-on time of the diode. Again, if a reverse bias is abruptly applied, 
Figure 2.32  Positive biasing schemes for MESFET/HEMT switches: (a) shunt configuration, and 
(b) series configuration.

60
Control Devices
current flowing through the diode ceases immediately, and the time interval over 
which the i-layer is fully becomes neutral is known as the turn-off time. Since the 
charging and discharging of i-layer are different, the turn-on and turn-off times for 
the PIN diodes are not the same.
When PIN diodes are used for microwave switching, the main factor limiting 
the switching speed is the time required to remove the charge from the i-layer when 
the diode bias is switched from forward to reverse state. The charge removal time 
depends on the width W of the i-layer, and the switching time is proportional to W. 
A decrease in W makes the charge removal faster but at the same time reduces the 
reverse breakdown voltage and hence the peak power handling capability.
Enhancement in switching speed of PIN diodes can be obtained by using GaAs 
PIN diodes in place of the Si PIN diodes commonly used. Electron mobility in GaAs 
is about four times that in Si. This leads to faster switching times as well as lower 
drive current requirements for GaAs PIN diodes in comparison to Si PIN diodes.
Different terms, like turn-on delay, turn-on switching speed, turn-off delay, and 
turn-off switching speed, are used for microwave switches. These may be explained 
with the help of Figure 2.33. Figure 2.33(a) shows a test setup for observing switch-
ing speed on an oscilloscope.
Figure 2.33  (a) Experimental setup for measuring speed of switching circuits, and (b) 
definitions of various delay terms used for microwave switches.

2.10	
Switching Speed
61
The crystal detector and the dual-trace oscilloscope may also be replaced by 
a sampling oscilloscope. Two waveforms, one from the pulse generator and the 
second corresponding to the detected RF envelope, are compared on the calibrated 
time axis as shown in Figure 2.33(b). Turn-on delay is the time interval between 
the instants when the input signal reaches 90 percent of its peak value and when 
the detected RF envelope reaches 10 percent of its peak value. Turn-on switching 
speed is defined as the time interval between the instants when the envelope of the 
RF output rises from 10 percent of its peak value to 90 percent of its peak value. 
Turn-off delay and turn-off switching speed are defined in a similar manner and 
are shown in Figure 2.33(b).
In addition to the switching speed limitations imposed by the semiconductor 
devices used in the switching circuits, switching speed may also be affected by the 
bias circuit topology used. For example, a single pole single-throw switch may be 
treated as a three-port network where DC biasing terminal is the third port. In 
PIN diodes, the DC bias is applied through a RF choke whereas in transistors the 
DC bias is applied through a high-value resistor. Most switch circuits also have 
DC blocking capacitors at the RF input and output ports. The DC bias circuits and 
blocking capacitors increase the rise time of the switching pulse and thereby reduce 
the switching speed.
2.10.2	 Switching Speed of Transistors
The switching speeds of various transistors are similar because they are unipolar 
devices and have similar dimensions. The switching speed GaAs FETs is much higher 
than the PIN diodes because of very high carrier mobility in such devices. In FETs, 
the switching speed when they are driven from ON state to OFF state is of the order 
of 2 to 5 ps depending upon the device’s channel dimensions and carrier doping. 
The biasing resistor (Rb) introduced between the power supply and the gate of the 
device limits the switching speed of a FET. The switching speed can be estimated 
from the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 2.34. The switching time is given by
	
τ = RbCge	
(2.36)
where Cge is the effective gate capacitance of the switching FET. As an approxi-
mation, the value of Cge ≅ 2 Coff. The value of Rb depends upon the frequency of 
operation. As a rule of thumb, ωCoff Rb ≥ 20.
Figure 2.34  (a, b) Shunt FET and CMOS configurations, and (c) equivalent circuit for switching 
speed calculation.

62
Control Devices
For half-micron gate length switching FETs, Coff is approximately 0.25 pF/
mm. For switching circuits working at about 1 GHz, the value of Rb should be at 
or greater than about 13 kΩ - mm. In this case the switching time τ ≥ 3 ns. This 
shows that the switching speed of FETs, operating at L-band and C-band on the 
order of 3ns and 1ns, respectively, are possible. Measured data for FETs operating 
at C-band also suggest that the switching speed of the order of 1 ns are attainable 
without playing any tricks with the gate bias circuitry. However, for applications 
that require fast switching speeds, gate bias circuitry described for PIN diodes in 
the previous section can be used with FETs.
2.11	 Comparison of Switching Devices
Several commercial foundries provide GaAs and InP-based FET, pHEMT and HBT 
SiC-based GaN HEMT, and Si CMOS processes for custom designs. Extensive device 
models for transistors are also available in foundry portfolios [65–73]. Table 2.14 
provides a qualitative comparison of various switch technologies.
In this chapter, the operation of switching devices and their models including 
ECs have been described. Scaling of model parameters from one size to another size 
has also been discussed. The data presented in this chapter will be used in design 
examples throughout the book. The thermal design of control devices is included 
in Appendix B.
References
[1]	
White, J. F., Semiconductor Control, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1977.
[2]	
Garver, R. V., Microwave Diode Control Devices, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1978.
[3]	
White, J. F., Microwave Semiconductor Engineering, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1982.
[4]	
Davis, W. A., Microwave Semiconductor Circuit Design, New York: Van Nostrand Rein-
hold, 1984, Chap. 13.
[5]	
Bhartia, P., and I. J. Bahl, Millimeter-Wave Engineering and Applications, Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley, 1984, Chap. 8.
Table 2.14  Qualitative Comparison of Various Switch Technologies
Device
PIN Diode
MESFET/HEMT HEMT
CMOS
Technology
Si 
GaAs
GaAs
GaN/SiC
Si
Insertion loss
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
High
Isolation
Good
Good
Excellent
Good
Good
Bandwidth
Narrow
Narrow
Ultrabroad
Broadband
Broadband
Power handling
Very high
Moderate
Moderate
High
Low
Switching speed
Low
High
Very high
High
High
Power consumption
High
High
Low
Moderate (high power);  
low (low power)
Low
Integration capability
Limited
Good
Good 
Good
Excellent
Size
Large
Small
Small
Very small 
Very small

2.11	
Comparison of Switching Devices
63
[6]	
Wolff, E. A., and R. Kaul, Microwave Engineering and Systems Applications, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 1988, Chap. 12.
[8]	
Chang, K., I. Bahl, and V. Nair, RF and Microwave Circuit and Component Design for 
Wireless Systems, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2002, Chap. 7.
[9]	
Bahl, I., and P. Bhartia, Microwave Solid-state Circuit Design, Second Edition, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chap. 12.
[10]	 Chang, K. (ed.), Handbook of RF/Microwave Components and Engineering, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chapters 16 and 17.
[11]	 Lee, T. H., The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits, Second Edition, 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[12]	 White, J. F., “Semiconductor Control Devices: PIN Diodes,” in Handbook of RF/Micro-
wave Components and Engineering, K. Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2003, 
pp.1059–1097.
[13]	 Fathy, A. E., “PIN Diodes,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, K. Chang 
(ed.), Vol. 4, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 3858–3869.
[14]	 Bahl, I. J., Fundamental of RF and Microwave Transistor Amplifiers, Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2009.
[15]	 Hines, M. E., “Fundamental Limitations in RF Switching and Phase Shifting Using Semi-
conductor Diodes,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 52, June 1964, pp. 697–708.
[16]	 Ayasli, Y., “Microwave Switching with GaAs FETs,” Microwave J., Vol. 25, Nov. 1982, 
pp. 61–74.
[17]	 Curtice, W. R., “A MESFET Model for Use in the Design of GaAs Integrated Circuits,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 28, May 1980, pp. 448–456.
[18]	 Gopinath, A., and J. B. Rankin, “GaAs FET RF Switches,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 
Vol. ED-32, Jul. 1985, pp. 1272–1278.
[19]	 Snowden, C., “Computer-Aided Design of MMICs Based On Physical Device Models,” 
Proc. Inst. Elec. Eng., Vol. 133, Pt. H, Oct. 1986, pp. 419–427.
[20]	 Caverly, R. H., and G. Hiller, “Distortion in p-i-n Diode Control Circuits,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-35, May 1987, pp. 492–501.
[21]	 Gutmann, R. J., and D. J. Fryklund, “Characterization of Linear and Nonlinear Proper-
ties of GaAs MESFETs for Broadband Control Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory and Tech., Vol. MTT-35, May 1987, pp. 516–521.
[22]	 Gopinath, A., and H. Atwater, “Simulation of GaAs PIN Diodes,” IEEE Trans. Electron 
Devices, Vol. ED-35, Apr. 1988, pp. 414–417.
[23]	 Slobodnik, A.J., et al., “Millimeter Wave GaAs Switch FET Modeling,” Microwave Jour-
nal, Vol. 32, Aug. 1989, pp. 93–104.
[24]	 Kermarrec, C., B. Moaz, and J. Odell, “Accurately Model Unbiased FETs for Monolithic 
Switches,” Microwaves and RF, Vol. 29, Jun. 1989, pp. 91–98.
[25]	 Jain, N., and R. Gutmann, “Modeling and Design of GaAs MESFET Control Devices for 
Broadband Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 38, Feb. 1990, pp. 
109–117.
[26]	 Trew, R. J., “MESFET Models for Microwave CAD Applications,” Int. J. Microwave and 
Millimeter-Wave Computer-Aided Engineering, Vol. 1, Apr. 1991, pp. 143–158.
[27]	 Caverly, R. H., “Distortion in Broadband Gallium Arsenide MESFET Control and Switch 
Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 39, Apr. 1991, pp. 713–717.
[28]	 Sahjani, P., and J. F. White, “PIN Diodes Operation and Design Trade-Offs,” Applied 
Microwave, Spring 1991, Vol. 3, pp. 68–78.
[29]	 Eron, M., “Small and Large Signal Analysis of MESFETs as Switches,” Microwave J., Vol. 
35, Jan. 1992, pp. 128–140.
[30]	 Pla, J. A., and W. Struble, “Nonlinear Model for Predicting Intermodulation Distortion in 
GaAs FET RF Switch Devices,” IEEE Int., Microwave Symp. Dig., 1993, pp. 641–644.

64
Control Devices
 [31]	 Caverly, R. H., “Distortion in GaAs MESFET Switch Circuits,” Microwave Journal, Vol. 
37, Sep. 1994, pp. 106–114.
[32]	 Virk, R. S., and S. A. Maas, “Modeling of MESFETs for Intermodulation Analysis in RF 
Switches,” IEEE Microwave Guided Wave Letter, Vol. 4, Nov. 1994, pp. 376–378.
[33]	 Ehoud, A. et al., “Extraction Based Model for GaAs MESFET Switches,” IEEE MTT-S 
Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1994, pp. 861–865.
[34]	 Caverly, R. H., “Distortion in RF and Microwave Control Devices,” Microwave Journal, 
Vol. 40, Dec. 1997, pp. 74–82.
[35]	 Chung, Y., et al., “Characterization of Source-to-Drain Capacitance Effect of GaAs 
pHEMT for Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Switch,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave 
Symp. Dig., 2000, pp. 173–176.
[36]	 Caverly, R. H., “Microwave and RF p-i-n Diode Model for Time Domain Simulations,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, July 2012, pp. 2158–2164.
[37]	 Putnam, J., et al., “A 94 GHz Monolithic Switch with a Vertical PIN Diode Structure,” 
IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1994, pp. 333–336.
[38]	 Tutt, M. et al., “Monolithic Integrated Circuit Applications of InGaAs/InAlAs HEMTs,” 
IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1988, pp. 293–296.
[39]	 Lin, K.-Y. et al., “Millimeter-Wave MMIC Single-Pole-Double-Throw Passive HEMT 
Switches Using Impedance-Transformation Networks,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 51, April 2003, pp. 1076–1085.
[40]	 Kim, J. et al., “A High-Performance 40–85 GHz MMIC SPDT Switch Using FET-Integrated 
Transmission Line Structure,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Components Letts., Vol. 13, 
Dec. 2003, pp. 505–507.
[41]	 Lin, K.-Y. et al., “Millimeter-Wave MMIC Passive HEMT Switches Using Traveling-Wave 
Concept,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 52, Aug. 2004, pp. 1798–1808.
[42]	 Li, X. J., and Y. P. Zhang “Flipping the CMOS Switch,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, Vol. 
11, Feb. 2010, pp. 86–96.
[43]	 Chang, H.-Y., and C.-Y. Chan, “A Low Loss High Isolation DC-60 GHz SPDT Traveling-
Wave Switch with a Body Bias Technique in 90 nm CMOS Process,” IEEE Microwave 
Wireless Components Letts., Vol. 20, Feb. 2010, pp. 82–84.
[44]	 Lai, R.-B., J.-J. Kuo, and H. Wang, “A 60–100 GHz Transmission-Line Integrated SPDT 
Switch in 90 nm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Components Letts., 
Vol. 20, Feb. 2010, pp. 85–87.
[45]	 Thian, M., and V. F. Fusco, “Ultrafast Low 42–70 GHz Differential SPDT Switch in 0.35 
μm SiGe Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, March 2012, pp. 
655–659.
[46]	 Kuo, C.-S., et al., “V-Band High Isolation CMOS T/R Switch Fabricated Using 90-nm 
CMOS Technology,” Microwave Opt. Tech. Letts., Vol. 54, May 2012, pp. 1118–1123.
[47]	 He, J., et al., “Analysis and Design of 60-GHz SPDT Switch in 130-nm CMOS,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, October 2012, pp. 3113–3119.
[48]	 Li, X. J., and Y. P. Zhang “Design of Transmit/Receive Switches in CMOS,” in Ency-
clopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, J. Webster (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2012.
[49]	 Parlak, M., and J. F. Buckwalter, “A Passive I/Q Millimeter-Wave Mixer and Switch in 
45-nm CMOS SOI,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 61, March 2013, pp. 
1131–1139.
[50]	 Huynh, C., and C. Nguyen, “New Ultra-High-Isolation RF Switch Architecture and its 
Use for a 10–38-GHz 0.18-mm BiCMOS Ultra-Wideband Switch,” IEEE Trans. Micro-
wave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, Feb. 2011, pp. 345–353.
[51]	 Shin, D., D.-W. Kang, and G. M. Rebeiz, “A 0.01–8-GHz (12.5 Gb/s) 4 x 4 CMOS Switch 
Matrix,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, Feb. 2012, pp. 381–386.

2.11	
Comparison of Switching Devices
65
[52]	 Jeong, J., and Y. Kwon, “Design of High-Isolation Ka-Band Switch using Coupled Lines,” 
MOTL, Vol. 54, Nov. 2012, pp. 2528–2530.
[53]	 He, J., Y. P. Zhang, and Y.-Z. Xiong, “A 60-GHz Single-Pole-Single-Throw Switch in 
65-nm Bulk CMOS,” Int. J. RF Microwave Comput.-Aided Eng., Vol. 21, March 2011, 
pp. 190–198.
[54]	 Seymour, D. J., et al., “CFET—A New High Quality MMIC Control Device,” IEEE 
Microwave and Millimeter Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1995, pp. 95–96.
[55]	 Blackwell, D. A., D. E. Dawson, and D. C. Buck, “X-Band MMIC Switch with 70 dB 
Isolation and 0.5 dB Insertion Loss,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter Wave Monolithic 
Circuits Symp. Dig., 1995, pp. 97–98.
[56]	 Miyatsuji, K., et al., “A Technique for Improving the Distortion of GaAs Variable Attenu-
ator IC,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1996, 
pp. 43–46.
[57]	 Schindler, M. J., and T. E. Kazior, “A High Power 2–18 GHz T/R Switch,” IEEE Micro-
wave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1990, pp. 119–122.
[58]	 McGrath, F. et al., “Novel High Performance SPDT Power Switches Using Multi-Gate 
FET’s,” IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1991, pp. 839–842.
[59]	 Teeter, D., et al, “Ka-Band GaAs HBT PIN Diode Switches and Phase Shifters,” IEEE Int. 
Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1994, pp. 183–186.
[60]	 Kobayashi, K. W., et al., “Monolithic GaAs HBT p-i-n Diode Variable Gain Amplifiers, 
Attenuators, and Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. MTT-41, 
Dec. 1993, pp. 2295–2302.
[61]	 Tayrani, R., et al., “Broad-Band SiGe MMICs for Phased-Array Radar Applications,” 
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-38, Sep. 2003, pp. 1462–1471.
[62]	 Mongia, R.K., I. J. Bahl, P. Bhartia and J. Hong, RF and Microwave Coupled-Line Cir-
cuits, Second Edition, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2007.
[63]	 Bahl, I., Lumped Elements for RF and Microwave Circuits, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 
2003.
[64]	 Garg, R., I. J. Bahl, and M. Bozzi, Microstrip Lines and Slotlines, Third Edition, Nor-
wood, MA: Artech House, 2013.
[65]	 Cobham MMIC Products, Blacksburg, VA.
[66]	 http://www.macomtech.com
[67]	 http://www.velocium.com 
[68]	 http://www.triquint.com 
[69]	 http://www.tsmc.com 
[70]	 http://www.ibm.com 
[71]	 http://www.cree.com
[72]	 http:// www.psemi.com
[73]	 http://www.winfoundry.com


67
C h a p t e r  3
Switches
3.1	
Introduction
One of the most suitable MMIC/RFIC control components is the switch circuit. 
Prior to the introduction of GaAs MMIC switch technology, switches were based 
on Si PIN diodes and MIC fabrication method. In the beginning of GaAs MES-
FET MMIC technology acceptance, switch products play a key role. In the 1980s 
early survival of MMIC technology was based on low-cost GaAs switches. GaAs 
switches are produced in large volume. In the 1990s, the performance of MMIC 
switches was improved further and extended to millimeter-wave frequencies by 
employing GaAs HEMT devices. The Si CMOS and GaN technologies emerged in 
the 2000s because of their low cost and higher level of integration, and high power 
applications, respectively. Many design principles and methodologies described in 
this chapter are applicable to all transistor types. For example, broadband switch 
techniques using the distributed/traveling wave approach are common among Si, 
SiGe, GaAs, and GaN transistors and can also be used for diodes.
Semiconductor switch circuits have been used extensively in radars, com-
munication systems, electronic warfare, wireless applications, instruments, and 
other systems for controlling signal flow. Switches are also basic constituents of 
most phase shifters, attenuators, and thus need to be thoroughly described. At RF, 
microwave, and millimeter wave frequencies, many of the problems of bandwidth, 
switching speed, power handling, high dynamic range, low voltage operations, 
and high operating frequency have already been solved. In microwave systems, 
transmitter and receiver portion are called transceivers, and they require several 
switches (low and high power). Low-power switches are usually used in phase 
shifters and attenuators. This chapter deals exclusively with switches, and various 
aspects of these components are described. An excellent overview of these circuits 
can be found in [1–89].
3.1.1	
Switch Parameters
Because of finite impedance of the switching devices and finite losses of the con-
necting circuitry, the fabricated switch circuits do not have an ideal performance. 
The performance of a practical switch can be expressed by specifying its insertion 
loss and isolation as basic design parameters.

68
Switches
Insertion Loss
It is defined as the ratio of the power delivered to the load in the ON state of the 
ideal switch to the actual power delivered by the practical switch in the ON state. It 
is usually expressed in decibels and is a positive quantity. State-of-the-art MESFET 
and HEMT switches have about 1.5 dB insertion loss over DC-20 GHz, whereas 
narrowband have about 1 dB insertion loss at 10 GHz. The corresponding values 
for PIN diode switches are 1.2 dB (over 1–20 GHz) and 0.7 dB, respectively.
Isolation
Isolation is defined as the ratio of the power delivered to the load for an ideal switch 
in the ON state to the actual power delivered to the load when the switch is in the 
OFF state. It is also expressed in decibels and is a positive quantity. State-of-the-
art MESFET and HEMT switches have about 40-dB isolation over DC-20 GHz, 
whereas narrowband have about 60-dB isolation at 10 GHz. PIN diode switches 
have similar isolation performance. Figure 3.1(a) shows variations of insertion loss 
and isolation with frequency.
P1dB
Power delivered to the load is known as the output power, Pout, which is a strong 
function of the input power. When the insertion loss is increased at higher input 
power levels (as the device goes in saturation; also known as compressed) by 1 dB, 
the output power is defined as P1dB, which is normally used to characterize nonlin-
earity in the circuit. To monitor a weak nonlinearity 0.1 dB power compression of 
the output power is also used. Figure 3.1(b) shows a typical variation of insertion 
loss with input power of a switch. Output power points at 0.1 dB-and 1dB inser-
tion loss increase are also shown.
Intermodulation Distortion
A control circuit behaves in a linear mode when the output power increases lin-
early with the input power or the insertion loss is constant with input power. As 
Figure 3.1  Switch characteristics: (a) Transmission coefficient versus frequency, and (b) 
insertion loss versus input power.

3.1	
Introduction
69
input power increases, the device starts clipping asymmetrically, and the output 
power starts decreasing with the input power. One of the measures of nonlinear-
ity of a control circuit is intermodulation distortion. When more than one carrier 
frequency is present in a nonlinear device due to mixing multiple sidebands, inter-
modulation products will be generated. Intermodulation distortion can also arise 
from the combined effects of amplitude modulation (AM), AM-AM conversion, 
and AM to PM (phase modulation) conversion. Intermodulation distortion can 
be introduced by any nonlinear devices or amplifier stage. Since the intermodu-
lation distortion is an important switch performance parameter, it is described 
later in the chapter.
There are a number of different ways to measure the nonlinearity or distor-
tion behavior of a switch. The simplest method is the measurement of the 1-dB 
power compression level, P1dB. This provides a crude estimation of distortion 
but is not adequate. For a single carrier system, third-order intermodulation 
distortion measurement known as third-order intercept point (IP3) or third-
order intercept (TOI) is performed using two closely spaced carrier frequencies, 
whereas for multicarrier systems adjacent channel power ration (ACPR) mea-
surement is commonly used.
3.1.2	
Devices for Switches
Primary devices used for switches are Si PIN diodes, GaAs PIN diodes, GaAs MES-
FETs and pHEMTs, Si MOSFETs, SiGe HBTs, and GaN HEMTs. The operation and 
circuit design models for these devices have been discussed in the previous chapter. 
Among these devices, PIN diodes have the highest frequency of operation, and PIN 
diodes and GaN HEMTs have high-power handling capability. Transistors can be 
operated as low frequency as DC and have negligible DC power consumption. PIN 
diodes have low-frequency cutoff and moderate DC power consumption. Both diode- 
and transistor-based switches have been developed up to 100 GHz and beyond.
3.1.3	
Basic Requirements of a Switch for Wireless Applications
RF switches are becoming increasingly important for wireless applications as the 
complexity of the transceiver increases, including multiport, multiband, and broad-
band systems. Some of the systems include automotive radars, Gbps communication, 
narrowband ISM, worldwide interoperability for microwave access (WiMAX), long-
term evolution (LTE), wireless local area network (WLAN), wireless personal area 
network (WPAN), and ultrawideband (UWB). Switches are also used for antenna 
switching such as Tx/Rx and diversity. For a multi-input /multi-output (MIMO) a 
switch matrix is needed.
For wireless applications, basic requirements for switches are simple con-
figuration, low loss, low cost, and low DC power consumption. For a MIMO 
system, a high-power RF switch is required. A broadband switch with high isola-
tion is needed for high-speed data communications. This chapter treats various 
aspects of semiconductor switch circuit design, including several different circuit 
configurations.

70
Switches
3.2	
Design of Switches
The design of switches is as diversified as any other RF/microwave circuit design. 
Their design features include different circuit configurations, narrow and broad-
band, high isolation, high third-order interception (TOI), high-power capabilities, 
and lower cost. Even though switch circuits can be designed using device-equivalent 
circuit models described in the previous chapter, many designs with demanding 
performance require accurate nonlinear models for the switching devices.
3.2.1	 Types of Switches
There are several types of switches required for microwave systems. Figure 3.2 
shows three basic types of switches. These are the single-pole single-throw (SPST) 
switch, single-pole double-throw (SPDT) switch, and single-pole four-throw (SP4T) 
switch. For example, in Figure 3.2(b), the signal can be switched between in-out 
1 or in-out 2. When RF signals flow between in and out 1 ports, ports in and out 
2 are isolated from each other (i.e., these two ports are not connected together). 
These switches further classified into two categories: reflective and nonreflective.
Reflective
Switch types shown in Figure 3.2 are known as reflective type. This means when 
the switch in Figure 3.2(b) is closed between ports in and out 1, port out 2 is not 
Figure 3.2  Switch configurations for (a) single-pole single-throw, (b) single-pole double-throw, 
and (c) single-pole four-throw.

3.2	
Design of Switches
71
connected or it is open and any signal appearing at this port will be reflected. The 
reflective switch configurations provide lower insertion loss (0.2–0.5 dB, depend-
ing on the bandwidth and frequency range) than the nonreflective switch topolo-
gies. However, they have low output impedances for a shunt device or high output 
impedance for a series device (with respect to 50 Ω) when the switch is in the OFF 
state. Here device is referred to a PIN diode or a transistor.
Nonreflective
In many applications, reflective switches are not suitable as they introduce signifi-
cant standing waves between the components. In switches when the unused port 
is terminated in 50 Ω, the switches are called nonreflective, or absorptive, or ter-
minated/resistive. These switches are realized by adding a single series device and 
50-Ω resistor combination shunted to ground at each output port. This is shown in 
Figure 3.3 by switch representation and its schematic diagram for a SPDT.
Figures 3.4 and 3.5 show SPST and SPDT switch realization examples using 
FETs, respectively. Both reflective and nonreflective are shown. The circuits using 
more number of devices result in improved bandwidth and isolation performance 
but higher insertion loss. As shown in Figure 3.4 for SPST switch configuration, 
the gate control voltage to series FETs is Vc and to shunt FETs is —
Vc, where Vc and —
Vc 
are complimentary to each other. For example, for a series FET when Vc = 0V, the 
FET is in the ON state and for —
Vc = −4, the FET is in the OFF state, and vice versa 
for the FETs in the shunt configuration. Each FET’s gate is biased through an isola-
tion resistor, and control voltages are applied simultaneously to series FETs as well 
as to shunt FETs. Whereas, in a SPDT switch as shown in Figure 3.5, the control 
voltage —
Vc is applied simultaneously to the series FETs in the in-out1 arm and to 
the shunt FETs in the in-out2 arm, and the control voltage Vc is applied simultane-
ously to the shunt FETs in the in-out1 arm and to the series FETs in the in-out2 
arm. In Figure 3.5(b), when the in-out1 arm is ON, the in-out2 arm is OFF and the 
resistance between the output FET’s source and ground is about 50 Ω, and the out 
2 port is considered matched. The circuits using more devices result in improved 
bandwidth and isolation performance.
Figure 3.3  A nonreflective SPDT switch representation.

72
Switches
Figure 3.4  Various realizations of SPST switch: (a) and (b) are of reflective type, and (c) is 
nonreflective.
3.2.2	 Switch Configurations
There are three basic configurations that may be used for a simple switch designed 
to control the flow of microwave signals between various ports. These are shown 
in Figure 3.6 for a SPDT switch, which consists of series, shunt, and series-shunt 
configurations. The shunt configuration requires a λ/4 line in each arm. In a shunt 
configuration, when a device is in high-impedance state in one arm, the device in 
the second arm is in low-impedance state. With a 50-Ω λ/4 line, the low impedance 
is transformed to high impedance at the input, while the parallel combination of 
device’s high impedance and 50-Ω terminal impedance does not affect the input 
impedance. Thus, a λ/4 line reduces the effect of device’s low impedance on the 
input impedance of the switch and keeps the switch circuit matched to 50 Ω at the 
input under both the ON and OFF states.

3.2	
Design of Switches
73
Figure 3.5  (a) Reflective and (b) nonreflective realizations of SPDT switches.
The bandwidth of the SPDT switch in shunt configuration is limited because 
of λ/4 line lengths required between the input port and the locations of the two 
switching devices. Figure 3.7 shows the performance of two SPDT configurations 
when the switching devices are MACOM’s 47800 PIN diode chips. The design is 
centered around 3 GHz. In general, series SPDT switch configuration has better 
performance than a shunt SPDT switch. For a shunt-mounted switch, the variation 
of insertion loss with frequency limits the operating bandwidth. At lower frequen-
cies, the circuit size becomes larger due to λ/4 lines.
The series-shunt configuration is the most popular. The switch is ON when the 
series device is in the low-impedance state and the shunt device is in the high-imped-
ance state. In the OFF state of the switch, the series device is in the high-impedance 
state and the shunt device is in the low-impedance state. Isolation obtained with a 
series-shunt configuration is much better (more than twice in decibels) than that 
for either series or shunt switch. The insertion loss for the series-shunt configura-
tion is worse than that for a shunt switch but better than that for a series switch. It 
looks surprising that a switch using two (lossy) devices can have a smaller insertion 
loss than that with a single device. However, a detailed analysis shows [4] that use 
of a series-shunt switch reduces the reflection loss (compared to that for a series 
switch) and thereby improves the insertion loss. Using a combination of series-shunt 
devices eliminates the λ/4 lines and thus improves the bandwidth characteristic of 
the switch circuit.

74
Switches
Figure 3.6  Three basic configurations of a SPDT switch: (a) series, (b) shunt, and (c) 
series-shunt.
Figure 3.7  Typical simulated insertion loss and isolation of SPDT switches (series and shunt) 
using two PIN diodes.

3.2	
Design of Switches
75
3.2.3	 Basic Theory of Switches
The basic theory of a switch can be described briefly by considering a switch of 
SPST type. Figure 3.8 shows schematics for the series, shunt, and series-shunt SPST 
configurations. Figure 3.8(a) and (b) are complimentary to each other in the sense 
that for the series configuration, the low-impedance state of the device allows the 
signal to propagate, whereas in the shunt-mounted configuration, the signal is deliv-
ered to the load when the device is in the high-impedance state. In the OFF states 
of both of these types of switches, the microwave power incident on the switch is 
mostly reflected back. However, small fractions of power (1) get dissipated in device 
resistances or circuit losses, and (2) get transmitted to the load (accounting for a 
finite isolation) because of device/circuit imperfections.
If VL and VLD denote the actual voltages across the load in the ideal and lossy 
switch, respectively, the insertion loss IL may be written as
	
IL =
VL
VLD
2
	
(3.1)
For the series configuration (Figure 3.8(a)), we have
	
VLD =
2VL
2 + Z / Z0
	
(3.2)
Figure 3.8  Schematics of SPST switch configurations for insertion loss analysis: (a) series, (b) 
shunt, and (c) series-shunt.

76
Switches
where Z(= R + jX) is the impedance of the switching device. The insertion loss is 
given by
	
IL = 2 + Z / Z0
2
2
= 1 + R
Z0
+ 1
4
R
Z0
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
+ 1
4
X
Z0
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2 	
(3.3)
where R and X are the resistance and the reactance of the switching device in the 
low-impedance state.
For the shunt configuration (Figure 3.8(b)), the voltage across the load may be 
written by
	
VLD =
2VLY0
2Y0 + Y 	
(3.4)
and the insertion loss becomes
	
IL = 2Y0 + Y
2Y0
2
= 1 + G + jB
2Y0
2
= 1 + G
Y0
+ 1
4
G
Y0
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
+ 1
4
B
Y0
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2 	
(3.5)
where Y0 = 1/Z0, and G and B are the real and imaginary parts of the admittance Y of 
the switching device in the high-impedance state. It may be noted that the similarity 
of (3.3) and (3.5) originates from the dual nature of series and shunt configurations.
Isolation is a measure of the performance of the switch when it is in the OFF 
state. For the series configuration, the OFF state exists when the device is in the 
high-impedance state. The isolation in this case is also given by (3.3), with R and 
X replaced by the corresponding values in the high-impedance state. Accordingly, 
the isolation for the shunt configuration is given by (3.5) when we use the low-
impedance-state values for G and B.
Similarly by analyzing series-shunt configuration in Figure 3.8(c), the insertion 
loss and isolation may be written as
	
IL = 1
2 + Z0 + Zh
(
) Z0 + Z1
(
)
2Z0Zh
2
	
(3.6)
	
Isolation = 1
2 + Z0 + Z1
(
) Z0 + Zh
(
)
2Z0Z1
2
	
(3.7)

3.2	
Design of Switches
77
where Zl and Zh are the device impedance in the low-impedance and high-impedance 
states, respectively.
Expressions (3.3) and (3.5) for series and shunt switches may be obtained as 
limiting cases of (3.6) for Zsh (= Zh) → ∞ and for Zse(= Z1) → 0, respectively. It may 
be noted that if nonidentical devices are used in the series and the shunt locations, 
values of Zh and Z1 in (3.6) could be different from those in (3.7).
Example 3.1
An SPDT switch employs two Si PIN diodes in chip form in the series-shunt con-
figuration. The PIN diode EC model (Figure 2.3) parameter values are Rf = 1 Ω, Ls 
= 0.003 nH, Cj = 0.1 pF, and Cp = Rs = 0. Calculate the insertion loss and isolation 
at 6 GHz when Z0 = 50 Ω.
Solution
ω = 2πf = 2 × 3.1416 × 6 × 109 = 37.7 × 109 rad/s
Zh = (jωCj)–1 + jωLs = (j37.7 × 109 × 0.1 × 10–12)–1 + j37.7 × 109 × 0.003 × 
10–9 = –j265.25 + j0.113 Ω = −j265.14 Ω
Zl = Rf + jωLs = 1 + j37.7 × 109 × 0.003 × 10–9 = 1 + j0.113 Ω ≅ 1 Ω
Using (3.6) and (3.7)
IL = |0.5 + (50 − j265.14)(51)/[100(−j265.14)]|2 = 1.03 = 0.13 dB
Isolation = |0.5 + (51)(50 − j265.14)/[100(1)]|2 = 18,961 = 42.8 dB
The single-pole two-throw (SP2T) switch, also known as single-pole double-
throw (SPDT) switch, is probably the most widely used MMIC or RFIC chip in 
microwave systems. For example, an SPDT switch’s schematic and simplified equiva-
lent circuits are shown in Figure 3.9, where Roni (i = 1 or 2) is the impedance of the 
FET in the ON state and Coffi and Roffi represent impedance of the FET in the OFF 
state. This topology is now more involved and solved using numerical methods or 
CAD tools.
Figure 3.9  (a) Schematic of an SPDT switch using series-shunt FET configuration and (b) its 
simplified equivalent circuit representation.

78
Switches
3.3	
Multiport Switches
This section describes multiport circuits such as multithrow, matrix, and diversity 
switches. These switches have higher complexity than SPST and SPDT switches.
3.3.1	 Multithrow Switches
Multithrow, also known as single-pole N-throw (SPNT), switches are commonly 
used for active antenna beam steering, communication channel multiplexing, system 
redundancy, and filter bank switching. Basically, it consists of a common input port 
connected to N output ports through N SPST switches. Each switch is of reflective 
type and uses series-shunt device configuration, although several other configura-
tions are also possible. These switches are of broadband type, and Figure 3.10 shows 
a simple representation of a SP4T switch in series-shunt FET configuration. In this 
figure Vcn (where n = 1, 2, 3 and 4) is the control voltage and —
Vcn is its complimen-
tary. When Vc1 = 0 V, —
Vc1 = −4 V, Vc2 = Vc3 = Vc4 = −4 V and —
Vc2 = —
Vc3 = —
Vc4 = 0 V, 
the RF signal flows between the in and out1 ports and other three ports are isolated. 
Similarly by properly selecting control voltages, one can direct the RF signal from 
the in port to any other one or more output ports. Both PIN diodes and transistors 
have been used [19, 26, 54] to develop SPNT switches.
Figure 3.10  SP4T switch configuration using series-shunt FETs.

3.3	
Multiport Switches
79
3.3.2	 Matrix Switches
Matrix or N × M switches are required for electronic warfare systems and for 
satellite-switched time division multiple access (SS-TDMA) operation. They can 
be realized using the SPDT (1 × 2) switch as a building block or a combination of 
double-pole double-throw (2 × 2) switches [19, 23, 25]. Simple representations of 
2 × 2 and 3 × 3 crossbar switches are shown in Figure 3.11. The schematic of a 2 
× 2 switch is shown in Figure 3.12(a), which uses four SPDT switches and one RF 
crossover [19]. The performance of this switch is similar to the SPDT switch. Figure 
3.12(b) shows a block diagram of the 4 × 4 switch using four 2 × 2 switches shown 
in Figure 3.12(a).
3.3.3	 Diversity Switch
In a system when two antennas are connected to a transceiver as shown in Figure 
3.13(a), one requires a diversity switch, a double-pole double-throw (DPDT) switch, 
Figure 3.11  Cross bar switch configurations using series-shunt FETs: (a) 2 × 2 and (b) 3 × 3.

80
Switches
Figure 3.12  (a) 2 × 2 switch configuration using FETs/HEMTs, (b) Schematic of a 4 × 4 switch.
or two SPDT switches. These switches must exhibit low insertion loss, positive volt-
age operation, and high-power handling capability. A diversity switch is a four-port 
component, and generally the transmit port handles medium to high power levels 
and maintains good isolation between transmit and receive ports. These circuits have 
independent DC voltage control for each path. Figure 3.13(b) shows a schematic of 
a DPDT switch using CMOS transistors in series configuration.

3.4	
High Isolation Switches
81
3.4	
High Isolation Switches
There are several techniques one can use to improve the isolation in switches, 
including using low OFF state capacitance FETs [42], employing traveling wave 
technique using tuning inductors [9], and realizing a band-rejection filter in the 
operating frequency range [49]. Basically, in these schemes either the OFF state 
capacitance of the switching devices is tuned out or their effect is minimized. In 
all these schemes, the insertion loss of the switches more or less remains the same. 
Figure 3.14 shows a simplified version of a SPST switching using band-rejection filter 
technique to improve the isolation in the operating frequency band. FETs 1, 2, and 
3 constitute a conventional SPST switch, and T-shaped R-C-R network is added to 
it for improving isolation in the OFF state. Under first-order approximation, the 
values of R-C-R network can be calculated from transistor’s ON state resistance 
and OFF state capacitance using the following equations [49]:
	
f0 =
1
2p 2Coff 1Coff 3Ron2R 	
(3.8)
	
RC = 2Ron2 ⋅ (Coff1 + Coff3)	
(3.9)
where f0 is the center frequency of the operating band and the switch is assumed 
to be terminated into 50-Ω input and output impedance. With this method, the 
isolation was improved by more than 15 dB over about 20 percent bandwidth in 
the C-band [49].
Several factors, including the inductance of bond wires and lead frame, ground 
inductance, and coupling between the RF line and the surrounding package lead 
frame, affect the isolation of a plastic packaged switch circuit. The reduction of 
return path for current flow in the packaged chip minimizes the inductance and 
therefore improves the isolation performance. The use of thinner dielectric substrates 
Figure 3.13  (a) Configuration of a diversity switch, and (b) simple DPDT switch using CMOS 
transistors in series configuration.

82
Switches
(chip, pedestal, and PCB) and larger diameter vias also lower the ground inductance. 
Finned RF line (i.e., placing vias on both sides of the RF line) or CPW configured 
RF line lowers coupling between the RF line and the surrounding lead frame.
Example 3.2
An SPDT switch uses two GaAs HEMTs mounted in shunt across a transmission 
line (Z0 = 50 Ω) and spaced a quarter wavelength apart at 10 GHz. The HEMT EC 
model parameter values are Ron = 2.7 Ω for ON state, and Coff = 0.25 pF and Roff = 3 
kΩ for OFF state (Figure 2.9(b)). Compare the insertion loss and isolation at 10 GHz 
with conventional shunt-mounted switch design when only one transistor is used.
Solution
The overall ABCD matrix of two admittances Y mounted in shunt across a trans-
mission line (Z0 = 1/Y0 = 50 Ω) and spaced a quarter wavelength apart is written as:
	
[A] =
1 0
Y 1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
0
jZ0
jY0 1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
1 0
Y 1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
=
jZ0Y
jZ0
j(Z0Y2 + Y0) jZ0Y
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	
Converting this to S21:
Figure 3.14  (a) Circuit configuration of the improved isolation FET switch, and (b) its equivalent 
circuit in the OFF state.

3.4	
High Isolation Switches
83
	
S21 =
2
A + B/ Z0 + CZ0 + D 	
Thus, the insertion loss or isolation can be expressed as:
	
IL (or Isolation) = 1/ S21
2 = 1
4 A + B/ Z0 + CZ0 + D
2
	
For insertion loss, both HEMTs are in OFF state, ω = 2πf = 6.283 × 1010 rad/s.
Y =
1
Roff
+ jwCoff =
1
3 × 103 + j6.283 × 1010 × 0.25 × 10−12 = 3.33 × 10−4 + j0.0157
(
)Ω−1
A =	 D = jZ0Y = −0.7854 + j0.0166
B =	 jZ0 = j50
C =	 j(Z0Y2 + Y0) = j[50(3.33 × 10–4 + j0.0157)2 + 0.02] = −5.228 × 10–4 + 
j7.7 × 10–3
IL =	0.25|2(−0.7854 + j0.0166) + j + 50(−5.228 × 10–4 + j7.7 × 10–3)|2 = 1.12 
= 0.5 dB
For isolation, both HEMTs are in ON state:
Y =	 1/Ron = 0.3704 Ω–1
A =	 D = jZ0Y = j50 × 0.3704 = j18.52
B =	 j50
C =	 j(Z0Y2 + Y0) = j(50 × 0.3704 × 0.3704 + 0.02) = j6.88
Isolation = 0.25|2 × j18.52 + j + j50 × 6.88|2 = 36488.64 = 45.6 dB
For a single shunt mounted device, the insertion loss and isolation are given by 
(3.5). For insertion loss,
Y = G + jB =
1
Roff
+ jwCoff =
1
3 × 103 + j6.283 × 1010 × 0.25 × 10−12
= 3.33 × 10−4 + j0.0157
(
)Ω−1
IL = 1 + 3.33 × 10–4/0.02 + 0.25(0.0157/0.02)2 = 1.157 = 0.63 dB
For isolation,
	
Y = G + jB =
1
Ron
= 0.3704Ω−1, B = 0
	
Isolation = 1 + 0.3704/0.02 + 0.25(0.3704/0.02)2 = 105.27 = 20.2 dB

84
Switches
Thus, the performance of SPST using 2 HEMTs spaced λ/4 is better than a single 
shunt mounted device.
3.5	
Broadband Switches
Most transistor-based switch circuits designed at the RF and the low end of the 
microwave frequency band generally do not use any matching or tuning elements. 
They work down to DC; therefore, they are ultra broadband. However, as the 
frequency increases, the insertion loss increases and the isolation decreases due to 
finite value of the capacitance of the switching device in the OFF state. To achieve 
broadband performance, the switching devices are connected in such a way that 
the effects of undesirable OFF state capacitance are minimized or they are tuned 
out by adding extra inductive elements. There are two widely used techniques to 
improve a switch’s bandwidth, insertion loss, and isolation [14–17]. In the first 
scheme, distributed or traveling wave circuit configuration is used. In this scheme, a 
combination of series and shunt FETs are used, as shown in Figure 3.15. Generally 
FETs employed have shorter gate length to realize low OFF state capacitance. The 
shunt FETs with the combination of high impedance transmission lines or spiral 
inductors form a low-pass filter or an equivalent transmission line structure having 
characteristic impedance close to 50 Ω. Basically the FET’s OFF state capacitance is 
incorporated into the transmission line by a distributed or traveling wave approach 
to match the circuit to 50 Ω. This topology provides improved ON insertion loss, 
OFF isolation, and VSWR over a wide frequency range.
Typical performance for broadband SPDT switches developed using GaAs FET 
monolithic technology includes insertion loss less than 2dB and isolation greater than 
24 dB over DC-20 GHz frequency range. At low frequencies, the series FETs located 
near the input port provide additional OFF isolation. More examples of broadband 
traveling wave switches using HEMTs and CMOS are described in later sections.
In the second technique, the OFF capacitance of the series FETs, used in the 
distributed approach, is resonated out with high impedance lines or spiral inductors. 
The switch is designed in such a way that the resonance frequency of this parallel LC 
Figure 3.15  Broadband SPDT switch configurations: (a) distributed using high impedance 
transmission lines and reflective, and (b) distributed using inductors and reflective.

3.5	
Broadband Switches
85
combination is near the high end of the operating band. This resonance has several 
beneficial effects. The enhanced high frequency “open” circuit of the OFF arm of 
the switch improves the switch isolation and also decreases power dissipation in 
the OFF arm, thereby improving the insertion loss. This resonating technique also 
allows the use of a larger periphery series FET. Increased FET periphery reduces 
ON state resistance, which improves switch insertion loss. Figure 3.16(a) shows a 
configuration of this type of SPDT switch, which is also of nonreflective type. Typi-
cal performance of this switch realized in monolithic technology includes input and 
output VSWR better than 2:1, insertion loss less than 2.5 dB, and isolation better 
than 60 dB over the 6–18 GHz frequency range. The limitation of this approach is 
that the bandwidth is restricted to about two octaves.
In order to improve dissipative loss in the high-impedance lines, a multilayer 
or ridged microstrip structure [90] as shown in Figure 3.16(b) can be used. In this 
structure, the strip conductor is fabricated on a thin polyimide dielectric layer, 
which is placed on top of the GaAs substrate. In this case the electric flux lines are 
more in the air and the structure resembles a suspended microstrip line, which has 
much lower dissipated loss than the conventional microstrip. The line loss has been 
reported to be reduced by a factor of two [90] by placing a microstrip conductor 
on thin low dielectric constant material layer (14-μm thick polyimide) between the 
conductor and GaAs substrate. Such lines have 25–30 percent lower line capaci-
tance in comparison to their counterpart on GaAs. This is another desirable feature 
Figure 3.16  (a) Broadband SPDT switch configuration using distributed tuned and 
nonreflective, (b) Low-loss microstrip configurations.

86
Switches
required to tuning out the transistor capacitance over larger bandwidths. This 
structure is especially useful for extending the switch bandwidth and lowering the 
loss in CMOS switches.
3.6	
High-Power Switches
For several communication and radar applications, one needs high-power han-
dling switches. The power stress applies to all switching devices, both PIN diodes 
and transistors. This section uses FET-based switches as a basis for the discussion 
with differences followed up later in the subsection on PIN diodes. The maximum 
power handling of switches depends on the maximum voltage that can be applied 
safely on the device in the OFF state and the maximum current limit of the device 
in the ON state. First, maximum allowed voltage and current limits applicable to 
the FET switch are determined, and then various techniques to improve the power 
handling capability of these switches are described. At the end of this section, the 
power handling of PIN diode switches is discussed.
First, the maximum voltage limit of a shunt FET in OFF state as shown in Figure 
3.17(a) is described. When a RF signal applied across this FET is connected to Z0, 
source, and load impedance, also known as system impedance, the variation of RF 
voltage for one period on the drain and gate terminal is shown in Figure 3.17(b). 
Here the gate terminal is RF open and biased below pinchoff, and the source ter-
minal is grounded. When the drain-gate and gate-source impedances are equal (in 
most switching the FET’s gate is placed in the middle of the drain and source pads), 
half of the drain voltage swing appears at the gate terminal. The high-voltage swing 
can either degrade the switch performance or destroy the FET. In the first case, for 
Figure 3.17  (a) Configuration of a T/R switch using a λ/4 impedance transformer, and (b) 
variation of the large RF voltages on the drain and gate terminals, over the time period.

3.6	
High-Power Switches
87
a positive half cycle, the total gate voltage should not fall below the pinchoff volt-
age VP (otherwise, the FET will not stay in the OFF state).
If Vc is the DC bias/control voltage applied at gate, then to satisfy first condi-
tion [14],
	
−Vc + VDmax
2
= −VP 	
(3.10)
here both Vc and VP are positive quantities. In the second case, during the entire 
RF cycle, the difference between the drain and gate voltages should be less than or 
equal to the gate-drain breakdown voltage VB; that is,
	
VDmax + Vc −VDmax
2
= VB 	
(3.11)
where VB is a positive quantity. From (3.10) and (3.11), the maximum allowable 
drain voltage and the required gate bias voltage may be expressed as
VDmax = VB − VP
and
	
Vc = VB + VP
2
	
(3.12)
The maximum power that can be transmitted for the shunt FET in the OFF 
state can be calculated as
	
Pmax = 1
2
VDmax
2
Z0
= 1
2
VB −VP
(
)
2
Z0
	
(3.13)
For low voltage applications, where VB >> Vc, from (3.12) and (3.13)
	
Pmax = 2 Vc −VP
(
)
2
Z0
	
(3.14)
When the shunt FET is in ON state, there is no voltage at gate terminal. The 
maximum power capacity is determined by the short-circuited current, which is 
nothing but the maximum drain-source current (Idss) of the FET and is proportional 
to the gate periphery. Again, if Z0 is the impedance level the switch FET sees in its 
low impedance state, then the maximum power handling is given by
	
Pmax = 1
2 Idss
2 Z0 	
or
	
Idss =
2Pmax
Z0
	
(3.15)

88
Switches
Equations (3.13) and (3.14) are used to design switching FETs for high-power opera-
tion. Based on the maximum power requirements and given breakdown voltage, 
the FET’s gate periphery is selected.
Based on (3.13) and (3.14), available bias voltages and breakdown voltage, the 
conventional switches can handle up to a few watts. Several methods have been 
employed to improve power handling capability of FET switches using low power 
switching FETs. These techniques include: (i) impedance transformation; (ii) stacked 
FETs; and (iii) LC resonant circuit. These methods are described briefly in the fol-
lowing subsections.
3.6.1	 Impedance Transformation Technique
This technique can be explained as follows. Consider a transmit-receive switch 
shown in Figure 3.17(a), and the transmitter-antenna switch is closed, i.e., FET1 is 
in OFF state. From (3.13), the maximum power handling can be improved by mak-
ing Z0 less than 50 Ω. If Z01 is the characteristic impedance of the λ/4 (at center 
frequency of the operating band) microstrip connecting the 50 Ω antenna terminal 
impedance to the switching FET1, then
	
Pmax = 25 VB −VP
Z01
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
	
(3.16)
Plots for minimum VB versus Z01 for VP = 3 V and Pmax = 5 and 10 W are shown 
in Figure 3.18. For Z01 = 30 Ω, Vc values for 5 and 10 W power levels are about 10 
and 12.5 V, respectively. For 50 and 100 W, the value of VP used is 10 V, which is 
a typical value for GaN HEMTs. Thus, for a fixed VB, Pmax can be improved by 
using a reduced Z01 value.
During transmission, the switch in the transmit arm is closed (shunt switching 
FETs are biased below pinchoff voltage) and the switch in the receive arm is open 
(switching FETs have no bias). The switching FETs in the receiver arm should also 
be able to handle the short-circuited current due to transmitter signal.
If Z02 is the characteristic impedance of the λ/4 microstrip connecting the 50 Ω 
antenna terminal impedance to the switching FET2, then from (3.15),
	
Idss = Imax =
100Pmax
Z02
	
(3.17)
Equations (3.16) and (3.17) fully specify the constraints on the switch FETs under 
high-power conditions.
If the FETs used in switches have about 250mA/mm Idss value, for 10 W power 
handling and Z02 = 100 Ω, the FET2 needs about 1.27-mm gate periphery to stand 
10 W of CW power. In all these design considerations, no thermal aspect has been 
included. The thermal design of high-power switches is similar to power amplifier 
design or PIN diode switches, as discussed in Appendix B. Due to λ/4 transform-
ers, such switches have narrow bandwidths. Switches with 10 W power handling 
more than 20 percent bandwidth have been demonstrated. Figure 3.18(b) shows a 

3.6	
High-Power Switches
89
Figure 3.18  (a) Variation of minimum breakdown voltage required for various λ/4 microstrip 
line characteristic impedance, (b) Photograph of a C-band SPDT monolithic switch.

90
Switches
photograph of a 10-W C-band SPDT switch. Here MESFETs in a shunt configura-
tion have been used. For higher isolation, an inductor was connected between the 
drain and source terminals to resonate out the drain-source capacitance. The circuit 
exhibited 1-dB insertion loss and 20-dB isolation over the 5- to 6-GHz frequency 
range. The measured input P1dB was 10 W (40dBm).
3.6.2	 Stacked FETs Method
The power handling capacity of FET switches is improved by using FETs having large 
gate periphery and by stacking N-FETs in series. GaAs MMIC switches designed 
using shunt FETs in series, as shown in Figure 3.19, can handle high power levels 
(10 to 100 W) [27–34]. If the RF swing voltage is evenly divided within the stack 
of N FETs, the power handling capability increases approximately as the square of 
the number of FETs stacked in series, and the maximum power is given [27, 32] by
	
Pmax =
N VB −VP
(
)
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
2
2Z0
	
(3.18)
where Z0 is the system impedance, and VB and Vp are the gate-drain (or gate-source) 
breakdown and the pinchoff voltage of the FET, respectively. Similarly when the 
operating voltage (Vc) is low and VB>>Vc for FETs stacked in series, maximum 
power is given by
	
Pmax =
2 N Vc −Vp
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
2
Z0
	
(3.19)
A double-pole double-throw switch designed using three stacked FETs in series 
having control voltage of 3V has achieved [44, 51] over 35 dBm power output at 
Figure 3.19  Schematic of a resistor bias network used in the stacked FET high-power monolithic 
switch circuit.

3.6	
High-Power Switches
91
1-dB compression point up to 2 GHz. The insertion loss and isolation were better 
than 0.6 dB and 25 dB, respectively. Another stacked structure [56] using a dual-
gate HFET and a triple-gate HFET achieved greater than 38 dBm input P1dB, an 
insertion loss of less than 0.6 dB, an isolation greater than 22 dB over the 0.5- to 
2.0-GHz frequency range.
3.6.3	 Resonant Circuit Technique
Techniques described here for improving power handling capacity of switches 
have several limitations for applications in wireless communication systems, which 
requires low-cost circuits and low supply voltage operation. The impedance trans-
formation technique, which uses two λ/4 transformers, occupies a considerably large 
area on GaAs chips. Above all, both techniques require FETs having large pinchoff 
voltage and high breakdown voltage. In order to overcome these limitations, a novel 
technique known as LC-resonant was introduced by Tokumitsu et al. [43]. This 
works well at low supply voltage and does not require high breakdown voltage FETs.
Figure 3.20 shows simple conventional series/shunt FET T/R switch and LC-
resonant circuit configurations. In the LC-resonant circuit switch configuration, 
the shunt FET4 in the transmit path and series FET1 in the receive path in Figure 
3.20(a) are replaced with a combination of FETs and LC-resonant circuit, as shown 
in Figure 3.20(c). The LC-resonant circuit consists of spiral inductors, MIM capaci-
tors, and two FETs, F11 and F12. In Figure 3.20(c), the capacitance Cs represents 
total FETs capacitance in the OFF state. When the FETs F11 and F12 are in the ON 
state, the switch between 1 and 2 is in the OFF state because of parallel resonance 
of inductor L1 and capacitance C1. Conversely, the switch between 1 and 2 is in 
ON state when the FETs are in the OFF state, due to series resonance of inductor 
L1 and C2 shunted by Cs.
Thus, in this scheme FET switchable LC resonator uses reverse control voltage 
scheme (i.e., FET switchable LC resonator is OFF when the FET devices are ON and 
vice versa). Thus, this technique uses a unique scheme of biasing T/R switches (i.e., 
Figure 3.20  T/R switch schemes for (a) conventional, and (b) improved power-handling 
configuration using LC-resonant circuit technique, and (c) configuration of the LC-resonant 
circuit. Biasing network is not shown.

92
Switches
only one control line for both transmit and receive modes because all FETs will be 
ON for the transmit mode and OFF for the receive mode). Now in the transmit mode, 
Pmax depends upon the current carrying capacity of the FETs, not the RF-voltage 
limitation as in conventional T/R switches. Thus, Pmax and linearity of LC resonant 
circuit-based switches can be enhanced by increasing the gate periphery of FETs.
The maximum transmit power, Pmax, of this scheme is given by [43]
	
Pmax = Z0
2
Idss
QL
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
	
(3.20)
where Z0, Idss, and QL are the system impedance, drain-source saturation current of 
the FET devices, and loaded Q of the T/R switch in the transmit mode, respectively. 
It was demonstrated [43] that by using this scheme and 1-mm devices, a value of 
10 W for Pmax can be obtained, as compared to 0.5 W for two stacked FETs. The 
device parameters used were Idss = 0.2 A/mm, and pinchoff voltage = −1 V, and the 
control voltage was 0/−2 V. The LC resonant circuit technique shows great potential 
for high-power operation for large gate periphery FETs.
3.6.4	 GaN HEMT Switches
AlGaN/GaN HEMT switch monolithic technology is primarily targeted for their 
high-power applications, including wireless and T/R modules for phased array radars 
at RF through millimeter-wave frequencies. Their CW power handling capabilities 
are on par with PIN diodes and have low DC power dissipation like GaAs and Si 
transistors. However, switches based on discrete PIN diodes (using hybrid, coaxial, 
and waveguide) can handle peak power levels in the kW range. The operation and 
design of an AlGaN/GaN HEMT switch is the same as GaAs MESFET/pHEMT. 
Both narrowband and broadband high-power GaN switches have been reported in 
the literature [91–98]. For narrowband SPDT switches, series-shunt configuration 
has been used, while for broadband applications traveling wave topology was used. 
Reported data on GaN HEMT switches have demonstrated much higher power 
handling levels (10–20 times) compared to other GaAs and Si transistor technologies.
An S-band 100-W MMIC SPST switch employing series-shunt/shunt terminated 
configuration was built using 0.4-μm gate GaN HEMT technology [92]. The break-
down voltage of the device was 150 V and the control voltage was 0 V/−80 V. The 
chip size was 1.7 × 1.2 mm2. The measured insertion loss, return loss, isolation, 
and power handling, at 10 percent bandwidth of S-band, were 1 dB, 17 dB, 21 dB, 
and 107 W, respectively. Broadband SPDT switches working over DC to 6 GHz, 
DC to 10 GHz, and DC to 18 GHz have been developed. Measured performance 
of a DC to 6 GHz switch demonstrated [98] insertion loss, return loss, isolation, 
switching speed, and P0.1dB power handling values of 1 dB, 10 dB, 20 dB, 40 ns, 
and 45W, respectively. The control voltage was 0 V/−60 V. The measured insertion 
loss, return loss, and power handling, for the DC to 18 GHz switch, were 1.5 dB, 
10 dB, and 8 W, respectively [96].
Figure 3.21shows a photograph of the 6-W 2–18 GHz SPDT switch [94]. Here 
GaN HEMTs in a series-shunt configuration were used. For higher isolation, a 

3.6	
High-Power Switches
93
high characteristic impedance microstrip line was connected between the drain and 
source terminals of the series device to resonate out the drain-source capacitance. 
The circuit was fabricated on SiC substrate, and the chip size was 3.4 mm2. The 
measured insertion loss was less than 2.2 dB and isolation better than 25 dB, over 
the 2- to 18-GHz frequency range. The measured input P1dB was greater than 7 W 
(38.5 dBm). Another version of this switch was realized in CPW configuration and 
demonstrated a similar performance [95].
3.6.5	 Power Handling of PIN Diode Switches
The power handling of PIN diode switches is limited by either heating caused by 
dissipated power or the diode breakdown voltage. A simple expression for the dis-
sipated power (PD) in a SPDT switch is given by [2, 6]:
	
PD = Pi Z0 1 + 0.5Rf / Z0
(
)
2
/ Rf
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
−1
for series 	
(3.21a)
	
PD = Pi Z0 1 + 2Rf / Z0
(
)
2
/4Rf
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
−1
for shunt 	
(3.21b)
where Pi, Rf, and Z0 are the incident power, on resistance of the diode, and the 
characteristic impedance of the line. If Rth is the thermal resistance of the device 
and Tm is the maximum operating temperature of the diode, the maximum allowed 
PD in the diode is given by
	
PD = (Tm − Ta)/Rth	
(3.22)
where Ta is the ambient temperature. The calculation of thermal resistance Rth 
of diodes and transistors, and other aspects of thermal design, are described in 
Figure 3.21  Photograph of a 2–18 GHz GaN HEMT SPDT monolithic switch. (Courtesy of Dr. E. 
Limiti.)

94
Switches
Appendix B. The maximum allowed temperature for PIN diodes is about 150°C. If 
the devices are thermally stressed above 150°C for a long period of time, the devices 
degrade due to induced metallurgical changes.
The maximum peak power, Pmax, a shunt diode can handle is given by [2]
	
Pmax = VB −Vc
(
)
2
8Z0
	
(3.23)
where VB is the breakdown voltage, and Vc is the magnitude of the control voltage 
applied to the diode. Thus, Vc = 0 results in maximum value of Pmax. A PIN diode 
with Rf = 1 Ω, breakdown voltage of 50 V, Vc = 2 V and connected in shunt con-
figuration across a 50-Ω line can handle about 5.8 W of RF peak power. For Rth = 
50°C/W and the case temperature of 50°C, the maximum CW power allowed is 25 
W. Thus, for this PIN diode the limiting factor is the breakdown voltage.
Since the peak power handling capability (PPHC) is proportional to the square 
of the breakdown voltage (∼ VB
2/8Z0), it is also proportional to the square of i-layer 
width W. Since PIN diodes can have W dimensions much larger (∼100 times) than 
transistor’s drain-source dimensions, the peak power handling capability of PIN 
diodes is much higher (∼104) than the FETs, assuming that the transmission medium 
used in the circuit fabrication does not affect the PPHC.
The average power handling capability (APHC) of a device depends on the power 
dissipated in the device and its area, assuming that the heat sink under the device 
removes all heat efficiently. Since the series resistance of a PIN diode is lower than 
for a transistor or Schottky diode and there is no rectified current flowing through 
the PIN diode under RF, the power dissipated in PIN diodes is lower than in a 
transistor. Therefore, APHC for PIN diodes is higher than for transistors, assuming 
that both devices have the same active area. The thermal design of control devices 
and components is discussed in Appendix B.
3.7	
Low Distortion Switches
One of the important characteristics of a switch is to have low-distortion charac-
teristics when controlled by low-DC voltages. Several nonlinear models [99–101] 
have been proposed to characterize the intermodulation products for GaAs FET 
switches. On the other hand, several novel techniques have been reported for improv-
ing the distortion in RF and microwave switches. These techniques include switch 
using LC resonators [43, 52], FETs having two kinds of pinchoff voltage [36, 39] 
and multigate structures [31, 40, 56]. The basic principle of these techniques is to 
maintain the same gate-drain voltage across the FET in the OFF state under the 
small as well as large signal conditions. The gate periphery is selected to handle the 
required power in the ON state of the FET.
Next we will explain the power limiting mechanism of an OFF FET and a com-
monly used technique to improve intermodulation products [40]. Figure 3.22(a) 
shows a shunt FET with a RF drain voltage cycle. When the FET is in OFF state 
and Vd is small, the drain and source electrodes are at about zero potential and the 

3.7	
Low Distortion Switches
95
gate electrode is negatively biased with respect to drain and source. Under nega-
tive cycle of the drain voltage, an equivalent circuit of the FET is shown in Figure 
3.22(b). In this case the RF gate voltage is given by
	
Vg = Vd
Cgd
Cgd + Cgs
	
(3.24)
When negative Vd is large and its value is less than Vg − VP, the RF current flows 
from the source to drain and the gate becomes more negative (Vc + Vg). However, 
at higher negative drain voltage swings the gate becomes positive with respect to 
drain, and the FET switches to the ON state. During the positive cycle of the drain 
voltage, an equivalent circuit of the FET becomes as shown in Figure 3.22(c). In 
this case when positive Vd is large and Vg is greater than VP, the RF current flows 
from the drain to source and gate becomes more positive and finally turns the FET 
to ON state. In both cases, the gate voltage follows the drain voltage and the volt-
age change depends upon the Cgd value. Thus, during negative RF cycle, the large 
value of Cgd will not allow the switching of the FET into the ON state, and a large 
Cgs (small Cgd) value is desirable for the gate voltage to become more positive during 
the positive RF cycle. Thus, a large value of Cgd during the negative cycle and a large 
value of Cgs during the positive cycle are desired to improve the power/distortion 
performance. These features are realized by using stacked FETs or multigate FETs. 
Also, a finite Cgd value in FETs is responsible for better distortion performance at 
higher frequencies than at DC.
Figure 3.23 shows a topology employing dual-gate FETs used to improve the 
distortion characteristics. Here external capacitors Cg1, and Cg2 are connected to 
meet the previously mentioned requirements. When the transmitter is ON, FET1 
and FET3 are in the ON state, and FET2 and FET4 are in the OFF state. During 
negative cycle, Cg2 keeps the upper gate of FET4 low negative and the FET stays 
in the OFF state. During positive cycle, the upper gate of FET4 becomes positive; 
however, another capacitor Cg1 keeps the lower gate low negative to prevent the 
Figure 3.22  (a) Shunt FET configuration with drain voltage swing, (b) RF gate voltage during 
−ve cycle, and (c) RF gate voltage during +ve cycle. Vc > VP, where VP is a +ve quantity.

96
Switches
FET4 turning into the ON state. This approach has been successfully applied to 
achieve higher intermodulation products when the FET’s control voltages are low.
3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits
Numerous switch circuits using Si, GaAs, and GaN technologies have been devel-
oped. The typical performance of PIN diode and transistor switches is described next.
3.8.1	 PIN Diode Switch Circuits
For switch applications, several PIN diode technologies including Si PIN diode, GaAs 
PIN diode, SiGe HBT PIN diode, and GaN PIN diode have been used [102–111]. 
The latter three are being pursued for monolithic integration. Examples of PIN 
diode switches are briefly discussed next.
Si PIN Diode Switch
PIN diode switches are based on packaged devices (pill and lead beam), chip devices, 
and monolithic integrated switch chip. Due to package and bond wire parasitic 
reactances, packaged PIN diode circuits have narrow bandwidths and high-power 
handling while the monolithic integrated switch has the ultrawide bandwidths that 
are suitable only for low-power applications. Si PIN diode switches are generally 
designed using hybrid MIC technology. A schematic of the SPDT switch using two 
integrated pairs of series-shunt PIN diodes is shown in Figure 3.24(a). Each diode 
has ON resistance and OFF capacitance about 2 Ω and 0.05 pF, respectively. The 
device is biased at 1.5 V with 20 mA current.
Figure 3.24(b) shows typical simulated performance of a SPDT switch using 
two integrated pairs of series-shunt PIN diodes. The insertion loss, isolation, and 
return loss over the 1- to 26-GHz frequency range were better than 1.4 dB, 40 dB, 
and 10 dB, respectively. At 18 GHz, the measured insertion loss was less than 1.0 
dB and isolation greater than 40 dB. The DC power consumption was less than 
Figure 3.23  SPDT switch configuration using single-gate and dual-gate FETs to improve 
distortion characteristics.

3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits
97
60 mW and switching speed was about 20 ns. The P1dB value was about 30 dBm. 
Integrated PIN diode chip switch has lower loss than MIC switches using packaged 
and chip diodes, or GaAs FET/HEMT MMIC switches.
GaAs PIN Diode Switch
One of the most popular control components for monolithic integration is the 
switch. GaAs PIN diode MMIC switches have demonstrated superior performance 
compared to Si PIN and GaAs FET/HEMT switches, especially at millimeter-wave 
frequencies. The low ON resistance and OFF capacitance of the small size GaAs 
PIN diode played a significant role to achieve insertion loss of 1 dB and isolation 
greater than 30 dB at 94 GHz [105]. The switching speed for millimeter wave SPDT 
switches was about 2 ns. Table 3.1 provides a summary of measured performance 
of some millimeter-wave SPDT switch examples.
Figure 3.24  (a) Schematic of a PIN diode SPDT switch biased using RF chokes, (b) Simulated 
PIN diode SPDT switch performance from 1 to 26 GHz.

98
Switches
SiGe HBT PIN Diode Switch
A 1–20 GHz SPDT switch based on the SiGe HBT PIN diode was developed [107], 
and its schematic is shown in Figure 3.25(a). The PIN diodes used have 50-μm2 and 
80-μm2 areas for the series and shunt diodes, respectively. Each diode has 2 mA 
current at the bias voltage of 1 V. In order to realize a compact size and broadband 
performance, bias resistors instead of RF chokes were used. Each bias resistor R 
has a value of 1500 Ω and was realized using 340 Ω/square polysilicon thin-film 
Table 3.1  Summary of Measured Performance of Millimeter Wave GaAs PIN SPDT Switches
Frequency (GHz)
Insertion Loss (dB)
Isolation (dB)
Return Loss (dB)
33
0.5
33
15
77
1.5
32
—
94
1.0
35
13
Figure 3.25  (a) Schematic of a PIN diode SPDT switch biased using resistors, (b) Photograph of 
the 1–20-GHz SiGe PIN diode SPDT switch. (Courtesy of Dr. R. Tayrani.)

3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits
99
resistors. For a switch in-out1 ON and in-out2 OFF, the bias voltages used were 
Vc1 = 0, Vc2 = −6.8 V, and Vc3 = 3.8 V. In this case diodes D1 and D4 are ON, and 
D2 and D3 are OFF. The total DC power consumption was about 22 mW.
The circuit was fabricated using the IBM 5HP SiGe HBT process. A photo-
graph of the 1–20 GHz SiGe PIN diode SPDT switch is shown in Figure 3.25(b). 
The chip size was 0.42 mm2. The ICs were tested on wafer with RF probes over 
1–20 GHz, and there was a good agreement between the measured and simulated 
results. The measured insertion loss and isolation were better than 1.3 dB and 40 
dB, respectively, demonstrating low insertion loss and high isolation for a MMIC 
switch. The measured switching speed, P1dB, and IP3 at 10 GHz were about 1 ns, 
19 dBm, and 30 dBm, respectively. The low-frequency limit was due to the i-layer 
thickness of the PIN diode. PIN diode switches were also developed using GaAs 
HBT process so that HBT transistor-based circuits could be integrated with PIN 
diode circuits on a single monolithic chip.
A monolithic high-power SPDT switch using PIN diodes with heterolithic micro-
wave integrated circuit (HMIC) technology was developed [108]. The circuit han-
dled greater than 1000 W of pulsed peak and 40 W of CW input power levels. The 
measured insertion loss was less than 0.5 dB and isolation better than 25 dB over 
the 0.5- to 6-GHz frequency range, representing the-state-of-the-art performance 
for SPDT switches.
3.8.2	 MESFET Switch Circuits
Numerous papers were published on MESFET switch circuits in 1980s and 1990s 
before HEMT technology took over. Progress on these circuits has been reported 
in previous sections. A few more switch examples are treated next.
Voltage-Tolerant SPDT Switch
A voltage-tolerant switch design to reduce the bias voltage sensitivity was reported 
by Cooper and Truitt [24]. Figure 3.26 shows the schematic of a voltage-tolerant 
nonreflective SPDT switch. In this approach the shunt FETs are DC blocked in order 
to have floating source electrodes. The circuit was designed to operate at L-band, 
and capacitor C value was selected to be 44 pF. The control voltages Vc1/Vc2 were 
4.5 V/0.5 V. Assuming 0.6 V Schottky barrier voltage drop between gate-drain/
source, the value of Vref is about 3.9 V [24]. When in-out 1 path is ON, FETs F1 
and F4 are in the ON state and FETs F2 and F3 are in the OFF state. In this con-
figuration, FETs F1 stay forward biased under voltage variations and the insertion 
loss remains constant until the shunt FETs F2 start conducting.
An L-band MMIC SPDT switch was tested. Measured insertion loss, return 
loss, and isolation were better than 1.3 dB, 17.7 dB, and 35 dB, respectively. The 
switching speed was less than 30 ns.
Broadband MMIC SPDT Switch
A broadband reflective SPDT switch was developed using the GaAs MSAG MESFET 
process [8, 9]. In order to meet insertion loss and isolation targets of 1.5 dB and 

100
Switches
40 dB, respectively, over the DC to 20 GHz frequency range, the series-shunt FET 
configuration shown in Figure 3.15(b) was selected. Its layout is shown in Figure 
3.27 and uses single series FET and three shunt FETs. The number of shunt FETs 
and the size of all FETs were optimized to meet the insertion loss and isolation tar-
get specifications. The periphery of series FET and shunt FETs were 150 μm and 
100 μm, respectively.
Typical measured data is shown in Figure 3.28. Measured insertion loss, iso-
lation, and return loss over the DC to 20 GHz frequency range were better than 
1.6 dB, 40 dB, and 20 dB, respectively. The corresponding values over DC to 26 
Figure 3.26  Schematic of a voltage-tolerant SPDT switch.
Figure 3.27  Physical layout of the DC-26 GHz MMIC FET SPDT switch. Chip size is 2.2 mm2.

3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits
101
GHz were 2.1 dB, 36 dB, and 12 dB, respectively. The measured values of P1dB and 
IIP3 were 22 dBm and 42 dBm, respectively. The switching speed was less than 12 
ns. The insertion loss variation was less than 0.3 dB across the −50°C to +125°C 
temperature range.
A nonreflective version of the previously described SPDT switch was also devel-
oped. The measured insertion loss and isolation at 18 GHz were about 0.7 dB and 
6 dB higher than the reflective SPDT switch.
An ultrabroadband reflective MMIC SPDT switch, using single series FET and 
two shunt FETs, has been reported [17]. The circuit was fabricated employing a 
0.35-μm gate GaAs FET process. Measured insertion loss, isolation, and return 
loss, over the DC to 40 GHz frequency range, were better than 3 dB, 23 dB, and 
10 dB, respectively.
3.8.3	 HEMT Switch Circuits
Numerous HEMT-based switches working from RF to millimeter-wave frequencies 
have been developed [112–125]. Dual-gate pHEMTs using 0.5-μm gate technology 
were used to develop high linearity SPDT and SP3T switches for wireless applica-
tions [116, 118]. The device configuration used was series-shunt. Typical measured 
insertion loss, return loss, isolation and input IP3 values, over the DC to 6 GHz 
frequency range, were less than 0.6 dB, better than 15 dB, greater than 19 dB, and 
55 dBm, respectively. A DPDT switch using series triple-gate pHEMTs was reported 
[118]. Typical measured insertion loss, isolation, and input IP3 values over the DC 
to 6 GHz frequency range were less than 1.1 dB, greater than 16 dB, and 53 dBm, 
respectively. The P1dB point was about 34.5 dBm for the DPDT switch.
In general for S-band SPDT switches using short-gate length pHEMT devices 
in series-shunt configuration, a triple-gate-based switch has about 0.1 dB higher 
insertion loss than for a dual-gate-based switch. Also, for a dual-gate switch inser-
tion loss is about 0.1 dB higher than insertion loss for a single-gate-based switch. 
Usually, the value of isolation and intermodulation products are higher for a mul-
tigate device than a single-gate device.
Figure 3.28  Typical measured performance of the MMIC FET SPDT switch.

102
Switches
An antenna MMIC switch using E/D-mode pHEMT for multiband applications 
was developed [117]. The values for Ron and breakdown voltage were 1.9 Ω and 20 
V, respectively. The antenna switch was comprised of two chips: SPDT switch for 
the low band (GSM) and SP4T for the high band (DCS/PCS/WCDMA). The device 
sizes were selected to obtain low insertion loss and high-power handling capability. 
For the GSM band (915 MHz) SPDT switch, the typical measured insertion loss, 
isolation, P0.1dB, and second and third harmonic levels were about 0.2 dB, 37 dB, 
37 dBm, −77 dBc, and −70 dBc, respectively. For the SP4T switch working over 
1.8–2.0 GHz, typical measured insertion loss, isolation, P0.1dB, and second and 
third harmonic levels were about 0.6 dB, 30 dB, 36 dBm, −70 dBc, and −69 dBc, 
respectively.
Stacked series-HEMT configuration for an antenna SPDT switch, as shown in 
Figure 3.29, was proposed for high-power operation by Numata et al. [114, 115]. 
Consider the control voltage is +2.4/0 V and Tx arm is OFF. Here —
Vc = 0. If the 
number of devices in each arm is N, then the input voltage (Vin) is equally divided 
among N OFF-state devices. If the device is symmetrical, the gate-source and gate-
drain voltages are Vin/2N. Suppose there is a DC voltage Vrf at the Tx terminal, 
the devices stay in the OFF state until Vin/2N is equal to Vrf + VP, where VP is the 
pinchoff voltage. In other words, a positive voltage at the drain terminal, approxi-
mately equal to the control voltage, keeps the devices in OFF state. In this case the 
maximum power handling of the switch is given as [114, 115]
	
Pmax =
2 N Vrf + VP
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
2
Z0
	
(3.25)
where Z0 is the terminal impedance. The capacitor Cb isolates the control voltages. 
The value of Rb is selected such that it keeps the Tx terminal voltage Vrf maximum 
when devices are in the OFF state and minimum when devices are in the ON state. 
The scheme is applicable to negative power supply also.
The selection of the number of devices depends on Ron and frequency of opera-
tion. Too large value of N results in high insertion loss and too large gate periph-
ery devices lowers the frequency of operation due to the large value of OFF-state 
Figure 3.29  A high-power stacked series-HEMT configuration for an antenna SPDT switch.

3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits
103
capacitance Coff. For L-band an optimum value of N is about 5. For N = 5, Vrf = 
2.4 V, Vp = −0.5 V, and Z0 = 50 Ω, the value of Pmax is about 3.6 W. For the GSM 
band (1 GHz) SPDT switch, the typical measured insertion loss, isolation, P0.1dB, 
and second and third harmonic levels were about 0.37 dB, 22 dB, 37.5 dBm, −67 
dBc, and −80 dBc, respectively. A similar performance was reported [115] for a 
modified version of stacked-HEMT configuration using adaptive-control-voltage 
generator (AVG) but with smaller chip size.
Traveling-Wave Switches
Traveling-wave switches (TWS) have been treated extensively in the literature [17, 
61, 113, 122]. Two types of n-section TWS are shown in Figure 3.30. Figure 3.30(a) 
uses series device and has the largest bandwidth (up to DC) with increased inser-
tion loss. Figure 3.30(b) uses a quarter-wave line section and has limited broadband 
with reduced insertion loss. A simplified equivalent circuit representation of a TWS 
with series FET is shown in Figure 3.31. The connecting high-impedance lines are 
represented by inductors. The inductors L and device OFF-state capacitances Coff 
form an artificial transmission line of characteristic impedance Z0 and is matched 
when it is terminated into its respective characteristic impedance value. Thus, the 
device capacitances are absorbed into the transmission lines. Since the line is low-pass 
structure and has very high cutoff frequency, the traveling-wave topology results in 
very wide bandwidth performance. Inductors are usually used for compact size at 
RF and low microwave frequencies, and high-impedance microstrip lines are used 
for low loss at millimeter-wave frequencies. For most applications, the number of 
Figure 3.30  Traveling-wave switch configurations: (a) series-shunt devices, and (b) λ/4 series 
line-shunt devices.

104
Switches
cells or sections (n) are 2 to 3 up to 20-GHz operation and 4 to 6 worthe wider the 
bandwidth. The circuit is matched to Z0 = 50 Ω, if
	
Z0 =
L /Coff 	
(3.26)
where Z0 is the characteristic impedance of equivalent transmission line.
A SPDT TWS with series HEMT was developed using a 0.15-μm pHEMT 
MMIC process [61]. In the SPST TWS with series HEMT, single transistor was used 
in series and four transistors were used in shunt. All transistors have 60-μm total 
gate periphery with four fingers. The control voltage was applied through 1500-Ω 
resistors. The chip size was 1 mm2. Measured insertion loss, isolation, and return 
loss over the 45-MHz to 80-GHz frequency range were better than 3 dB, 24 dB, 
and 8 dB, respectively. The input P1dB power level at 35 GHz was 20 dBm.
A SPDT TWS with quarter-wave line and three shunt devices was developed 
using a 0.1 μm pHEMT MMIC process [61]. The SPDT TWS was tested using RF 
probes. Measured insertion loss, isolation, and return loss over the 15- to 80-GHz 
frequency range were better than 3.6 dB, 25 dB, and 10 dB, respectively. The input 
P1dB power level at 35 GHz was 27 dBm.
A single device DC-110 GHz SPST TWS was developed using a 0.15-μm HEMT 
MMIC process [113]. The layout and schematic of this switch are shown in Figure 
3.32. The drain electrode was used for input and output ports, while the source 
electrode was grounded using four equally spaced sources via grounds. In the OFF 
state the structure may be represented by multiple microstrip line sections, each 
loaded with the device OFF capacitance. The switch was designed using 400-μm 
long gate finger. Measured insertion loss, isolation, and return loss, over the DC to 
110 GHz frequency range, were better than 2.6 dB, 22 dB, and 10 dB, respectively. 
Figure 3.31  Equivalent circuits for the series-shunt device TWS. The artificial transmission line is 
shown in the broken line rectangle.

3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits
105
The isolation increased monotonically from 22 dB at DC to over 40 dB at 110 GHz. 
At 40 GHz no degradation in the insertion loss was measured up to 26.5 dBm. Two 
of these SPST switches were combined using λ/4 sections to realize an SPDT switch 
[122]. The measured insertion loss was less than 2.1 dB, isolation better than 25.5 
dB, and return loss greater than 8.4 dB over the 38- to 80-GHz frequency range, 
representing state-of-the-art performance for a broadband SPDT switch.
Switch Matrix
Several examples of switch matrix using GaAs and InP HEMTs have also been 
reported [119, 121]. They were compact in size and have excellent performance. For 
similar gate dimensions (0.1 μm), InP HEMT had Ron, Coff, and fc values of 0.48 
Ω⋅mm, 0.394 pF/mm, and 842 GHz, respectively, while the corresponding values 
for GaAs HEMT were 1.12 Ω⋅mm, 0.294 pF/mm, and 483 GHz. Thus, for InP 
HEMT the fc value is about 1.74 times higher than for GaAs HEMT. This led to 
higher isolation for InP HEMTs when the insertion loss was kept the same by select-
ing the gate periphery in series-HEMT configuration to maintain a compact size.
Two different versions of a 4 × 4 switch matrix using a 0.1μm InP HEMT 
MMIC process were designed and tested. In the conventional approach, eight SP4T 
switches were used, while in the improved approach, four SP4T switches were used. 
In each design approach, a series-HEMT configuration as shown in Figure 3.33(a) 
Figure 3.32  Single-FET TWS configuration: (a) layout, and (b) schematic.
Figure 3.33  (a) SP4T switch using series-HEMT topology, and (b) improved 4 × 4 switch matrix 
configuration.

106
Switches
was used. The improved approach is shown in Figure 3.33(b). The measured inser-
tion loss for the improved approach was about 2.2 dB at 10 GHz and was about 1 
dB better than the conventional method. The return loss for the improved approach 
was about 11 dB at 10 GHz. Measured insertion loss and isolation, over the DC 
to 20 GHz frequency range, were better than 3.0 dB and 23 dB, respectively. This 
represents state-of-the-art performance for a 4 × 4 switch.
4P4T Switch
A novel 4P4T switch matrix for promising multi-input multi-output (MIMO) appli-
cations has been reported by Lee et al. [120]. It used four DPDT switches, where 
the DPDT configuration was based on series-pHEMT similar to the one as shown 
in Figure 3.13(b). The measured insertion loss and ports isolation of 4P4T switch 
were less than 2.8 dB and better than 20 dB up to 6 GHz.
Figure 3.34  (a) Photograph of the 60-GHz SPDT switch. (Courtesy of Dr. Y.P. Zhang.), (b) 
Photograph of the DC-70 GHz SP4T switch. (Courtesy of Dr. Gabriel Rebeiz.)

3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits
107
3.8.4	 CMOS Switch Circuits
In Si, the switching devices available are CMOS transistors, SiGe HBT, and SiGe 
HBT PIN diodes. SiGe HBT process is superior to CMOS by 2–3 generations (i.e., 
0. 18-μm SiGe HBT is comparable to 60-nm CMOS). SiGe HBT operates at higher 
voltages and has better dynamic range than CMOS [84]. Progress made in CMOS 
switches can be found in [126–140].
A photograph of the 60-GHz CMOS SPDT switch is shown in Figure 3.34(a). 
The core area of the switch was 0.02 mm2 while the chip area including test pads 
and connecting feed lines was 0.24 mm2, demonstrating compact size. The measured 
insertion loss at 60 GHz was around 1.7 dB. Figure 3.34(b) shows a photograph 
of the DC- 70 GHz CMOS SP4T switch. Ports 4 and 5 were terminated in 50 Ω. 
The core area of the switch was 0.06 mm2. The measured insertion loss up to 67 
GHz was less than 3.5 dB.
Traveling-Wave Switch
Traveling-wave switches using a similar approach as described for MESFET and 
HEMT were also developed for CMOS [75, 80–82]. A SPDT TWS using 90-nm 
CMOS technology with body bias technique working up to 110 GHz was reported 
by Chang and Chan [82]. The schematic of the proposed SPDT TWS is shown in 
Figure 3.35(a). It used single series and four shunt NMOS transistors. The gate 
peripheries of series and shunt transistors were 26 μm and 32 μm, respectively. For 
the in-out 1 channel ON and the in-out 2 channel OFF, the bias voltage used were 
Vc = 0 V, —
Vc = 1 V, Vb1 = 0 V and Vb2 = −2 V. When the in-out 2 channel ON, Vc = 
1 V, —
Vc = 0 V, Vb1 = −2 V and Vb2 = 0 V. The chip size including the test pads was 
0.59 mm2.
The circuits were tested from 10 MHz to 110 GHz using RF probes. The inser-
tion loss was less than 3 dB and isolation better than 48 dB up to 60 GHz. The 
insertion loss was less than 5.5 dB and isolation better than 40 dB from DC to 110 
GHz. With body bias technique, the insertion loss was reduced by 0.5 to 1.3 dB 
over the 30- to 110-GHz frequency range.
Transmission-Line Integrated Switch
A transmission-line integrated approach was proposed [135] to lower the insertion 
loss of a switch at millimeter-wave frequencies. In a series- or shunt-FET configura-
tion, the capacitance Coff of the device degrades the switch performance. A multistage 
stagger tuned shunt configuration mitigates the effect of OFF capacitance. Figure 
3.35(b) shows the schematic of a transmission-line integrated SPDT switch using two 
stages of LC-tuned transistors. Each NMOS transistor has 64-μm gate periphery 
and used body-floating technique. The series line T1 is a quarter-wave long, and 
shunt lines T2 and T4 have high characteristic impedances and their lengths are 
selected so that the capacitance Coff is tuned out at the operating frequencies. The 
combination of T2, T3, and T4 was selected to obtain the target bandwidth. It is 
desirable to place shunt lines on multilayer substrates [90] to reduce the capacitive 

108
Switches
Figure 3.35  (a) Schematic of the SPDT TWS using NMOS transistors with body bias, (b) 
Schematic of a transmission-line integrated SPDT switch.
effect and lower the loss. For the in-out 1 channel ON and the in-out 2 channel 
OFF, the bias voltage used were Vc = 0 V and —
Vc = 1 V.
The circuit was fabricated using a 90-nm CMOS process [135]. The chip size 
was 0.33 mm2. The measured insertion loss was less than 4 dB, isolation was better 
than 25 dB, and return loss was greater than 10 dB over the 50- to 110-GHz fre-
quency range. The P1dB value for the chip measured at 75 GHz was about 10.5 dBm.
4 × 4 Switch Matrix
A high isolation 4 × 4 switch matrix was reported by Shin, Kang, and Rebeiz 
[139]. The schematic of the switch is shown in Figure 3.36(a), and the SPST switch 
used as a unit block is shown in Figure 3.36(b). The switch matrix was realized in 
CPW medium having high isolation crossovers. The optional feature of the switch 

3.8	
Performance of Switch Circuits
109
includes on chip 50-Ω matched loads connected through 15-μm series transistors. 
The inductor L is a matching component. The SPST was realized in series-shunt-
series NMOS configuration. The optimized device size for all three transistors was 
50 μm. One can find more details including body biasing about this switch in [139].
The circuit was fabricated using 0.13-μm CMOS technology [139]. The chip 
size was 2.1 mm2. The control voltages were 1.5V/0V. The switch matrix having 
on chip termination load was tested using RF probes. The measured insertion loss 
was less than 3.7 dB, isolation was better than 45 dB, and return loss was greater 
than 10 dB over the 0.01- to 8-GHz frequency range. The measured input P1dB and 
IP3 values for the chip were about 10 dBm and 25 dBm, respectively.
3.8.5	 Comparison of Switch Technologies
Comparison of switch technologies is not as simple as it looks. The performance 
of a switch depends on various factors, including device performance (fc), substrate 
used for fabrication, insertion loss, isolation and circuit bandwidth requirements, 
and power handling or IIP3. Among multiport switches, reflective monolithic SPDT 
configuration is the most popular and is used for technology comparison here. Three 
frequency bands considered for comparison are narrowband (operating frequency 
less than 10 GHz), DC-20 GHz, and DC-60 GHz.
When the operating frequency is less 10 GHz, which is much less than fc for 
switch devices summarized in Table 2.7, a particular device has minimal effect on 
the switch performance. In this case SPDT switches designed around 5–6 GHz for 
small signal applications have insertion loss in the range of 0.5–0.6 dB and isolation 
greater than 20 dB. When power handling and/or technology integration of a switch 
become critical, then switch selection is appropriately made based on its application.
Figure 3.36  (a) Schematic of a 4 × 4 switch matrix, and (b) series-shunt-series SPST switch cell.

110
Switches
Next broadband switches are considered and typical performance obtained for 
different technologies is compared in Table 3.2. In a SPDT switch for broadband 
and/or high-isolation applications, one needs more shunt devices and connecting 
lines, which result in higher insertion loss. It may be noted from this table that 
in comparison to other technologies, the chip size in CMOS technology is much 
smaller due to fine dimensions of the circuit elements. Also, no pad dimensions were 
included in the CMOS chip areas.
3.9	
Novel Switch Configurations
Numerous novel switch configurations for PIN diodes, MESFET/HEMT, and CMOS 
have been proposed to enhance the switch performance. Some of them have been 
discussed in the previous sections. Others include filter-integrated switch and redun-
dant switch, and are briefly described next.
3.9.1	
Filter-Integrated Switch
The integration of filter and switch functions into a single chip has been proposed 
by many researchers [78, 141–143]. An optimum integration leads to smaller size 
and lower insertion loss for the integrated circuit. In the filter-integrated switch 
(FIS) topology, the capacitance Coff of the switching devices is absorbed in the filter 
elements. They reduce the length of the series lines and create shunt resonators with 
short-circuited stubs. The lines used in FIS have high characteristic impedance. Fig-
ure 3.37 shows a configuration of a filter-integrated SPDT switch. It uses two shunt 
transistors in each SPST switch along with two series lines and two short-circuited 
stubs. Basically this configuration is similar to the transmission-line integrated SPDT 
switch described in Section 3.8.4.
A Q-band filter-integrated SPDT switch was fabricated using 0.15-μm mHEMT 
technology [143]. The chip size was 2.0 mm2. The control voltages were 3.0 V/0 V. 
The FIS was tested using RF probes. The measured insertion loss was less than 1.0 
dB, isolation was better than 32 dB, and return loss was greater than 13 dB over 
the 35- to 45-GHz frequency range. No power compression was measured up to 13 
dBm of input power. The design of a 40-GHz filter-integrated DP4T switch based 
on 0.15-μm pHEMT was reported by Chao et al. [142].
Table 3.2  Performance Comparison of Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic SPDT Switches
Frequency 
Range  
(GHz)
Insertion  
Loss (dB)
Isolation  
(dB)
Return  
Loss (dB)
P1dB  
(dBm)
IIP3  
(dBm)
Chip  
Size  
(mm2) Technology
Reference
DC-20
<1.6
>40
>20
22
42
2.2
GaAs MSAG FET
[151]
DC-20
<1.5
>30
>15
23
—
2.0
GaAs 0.25-μm pHEMT 
[156, 157]
DC-20
<2
>25
>10
22
32
0.06
0.18-μm CMOS
[75]
DC-18
<1.5
>30
>10
38
—
1.9
0.25-μm GaN HEMT
[96]
1–20
<1.3
>30
>10
19
30
1.5
HBT PIN diode
[107]
DC-60
<3
>25
>10
27
—
1
GaAs 0.15-μm pHEMT
[61]
DC-60
<3
>48
>10
17
—
0.07
0.09-μm CMOS
[82]

3.9	
Novel Switch Configurations
111
3.9.2	 Redundant Switch
Redundancy to achieve high reliability and graceful degradation is often employed 
in military systems. In many redundant systems, parallel paths of components are 
provided, which can be switched in case of a failure in one of the signal paths. 
However, a failure in the switch will still destroy the system. Therefore, a redundant 
switch is required to enhance the system’s reliability.
A redundant switch based on GaAs MMIC technology was reported in the lit-
erature [144, 145]. The proposed redundant switch topology uses series and shunt 
combinations of switching FETs configured so that the circuit works with acceptable 
performance if some of the devices fail. Figure 3.38 shows a schematic of a SPDT 
redundant switch. The circuit was optimized by varying the FET gate periphery 
for each cell to obtain the best isolation, return loss, and the lowest insertion loss. 
Table 3.3 summarizes the calculated performance, based on MSAG process, for 
SPST, SPDT, and SPTT redundant switches. Basic switching arm block was the same 
in all three types. The insertion loss increases with the order of the switch. Values 
in parentheses correspond to the worst-case performance when 25 percent of the 
FETs in each arm were shorted at random. The performance degradation due to 25 
percent FET failure is marginal.
Reliability analysis of the redundant switch shows that reliability should be 
greatly improved as compared to conventional switches. For example, calculation 
shows that if one compares the two-FET conventional versus 10-FET redundant 
SPST switches, assuming that the probability of failure (over the mission time) of 
an individual is 0.001, the overall probability of switch failure was reduced from 
0.002 to 0.000013, a reduction factor of about 150.
3.9.3	 Switched Variable Power Amplifier
The output power of a multistage amplifier chain can be changed in steps by switch-
ing in and out amplifier stages and connecting using through lines as shown in Figure 
3.39. This configuration uses three low-loss SPDT switches; the power handling 
of switch 3 is the highest and that for switch 1 is the lowest. The P1dB value for the 
Figure 3.37  Schematic of a filter-integrated SPDT switch based on shunt devices.

112
Switches
Figure 3.38  Schematic of a SPDT redundant switch.
Table 3.3  Summary of Simulated Performance for SPST, SPDT, and SPTT Redundant MMIC 
Switches
Circuit
SPST
SPDT
SPTT
Frequency (GHz)
DC-12
DC-12
DC-12
Insertion loss, max. (dB)
1.0 (1.2)
1.2 (1.3)
1.6 (1.7)
Isolation, min. (dB)
35 (30)
40 (40)
40 ( 40)
Return loss, min. (dB)
18 (21)
22 (24)
13 (13)
Figure 3.39  Variable output power configuration of an HPA.

3.10	
Intermodulation Analysis of Switches
113
switch 3 is required to be 3–4 dB higher than the output power of the high-power 
amplifier (HPA). In this case, the maximum output power occurs when all the three 
switches are in position “A” and the net output power is HPA’s power minus the 
switch 3 insertion loss. In this case the connecting lines are isolated. However, in 
other two settings the output power levels are reduced by an aggregate loss of two 
switches.
3.9.4	 Switches with Integrated Control
To obtain high-speed operation with low-power dissipation in FET switches, the 
switch ICs have integrated on-chip drivers [46]. The primary objectives of the on-chip 
drivers are (a) to be compatible with TTL logic levels, (b) to have minimum GaAs 
chip size, (c) to achieve the same or better chip yield, and (d) to maintain overall 
lower cost. In these drivers both depletion-mode pull-up and enhancement-mode 
pull-down transistors are used. Depending on the application, a single or dual power 
supply for the logic gates is employed. The logic gate design is generally optimized 
by adjusting the sizes of FETs and voltage shift diodes to achieve correct voltage 
levels, low power consumption, and high-speed operation. The design of such driv-
ers is accomplished by using the SPICE program. These drivers are compatible with 
CMOS and TTL logic families, and their treatments can be found in [46]. Figure 
3.40 shows a simple driver circuit schematic using two power supply voltages.
3.10	 Intermodulation Analysis of Switches
One of the measures of nonlinearity of control circuits is intermodulation distor-
tion (IMD). For a single-carrier system, second- and third-order intermodulation 
distortion measurement known as IP2 and IP3, respectively, are performed. IMD 
Figure 3.40  A simplified driver circuit using two power supply voltages: VDD = 5V and VGG = −5V.

114
Switches
prediction relies on either accurate simulation or measurements. IMD simulation 
requires accurate nonlinear models and appropriate computer simulation algorithms. 
This subject has been treated in detail in [146–149]. The purpose of this section is 
to provide simple expressions to calculate IP2 and IP3.
3.10.1	 PIN Diode Switches
For PIN diode switches, approximate expressions for the second (IP2) and third (IP3) 
order intercept points expressed in dBm are given by Caverly [147–149] as follows:
	
IP2 = 34 + 20log Qsf
Ron
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(3.27a)
	
IP3 = 24 + 15log Qsf
Ron
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(3.27b)
where Qs is the stored charge in nanocoulombs, f is the operating frequency in MHz, 
and Ron is the ON-state series resistance. Qs ( = I0τ) is defined as the product of the 
DC current I0 and i-region minority carrier lifetime τ. For Ron = 1 Ω, I0 = 0.01 A, 
τ = 0.1 ns, Qs = 0.001 nanocoulomb, the values of IP2 and IP3 at 10 GHz are 54 
and 39 dBm, respectively.
3.10.2	 MESFET Switches
For FET switches, approximate expressions for the second- and third-order intercept 
points are given by Caverly [147–149] and are reproduced here:
	
IP2 = 2592Z0
3VbiIP
4
VP
3
1 −
Vbi /VP
(
)
6 / 1 + 2y
2 	
(3.28a)
	
IP3 = 648Z0
2Vbi
1.5IP
3
VP
2.5
1 −
Vbi /VP
(
)
4 / 1 + 3y + 3y2 	
(3.28b)
	
y = −
Z0
Rch
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟−jb
1 + jb
, b = wRbCg 	
(3.28c)
where Ip, VP, Vbi, Rch, Rb, Cg, and Z0 are the open channel or peak current, pinchoff 
voltage, built-in voltage, channel resistance, gate bias resistor, gate capacitance, and 
terminal impedance (usually 50 Ω), respectively. Units of IP2 and IP3 are in watts. 
Calculations of IP2 and IP3 using these relations agree well with the measured data.
In this chapter the design and performance of solid-state switches have been 
discussed. An overview of switch technologies has been described and the readers 

3.10	
Intermodulation Analysis of Switches
115
are referred to semiconductor foundries and switch manufacturers [151–159] for 
their products on this subject.
References
[1]	
White, J. F., Semiconductor Control, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1977.
[2]	
Garver, R. V., Microwave Diode Control Devices, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1978.
[3]	
White, J. F., Microwave Semiconductor Engineering, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1982.
[4]	
Davis, W. A., Microwave Semiconductor Circuit Design, New York: Van Nostrand Rein-
hold, 1984, Chap. 13.
[5]	
Bhartia, P., and I. J. Bahl, Millimeter-Wave Engineering and Applications, Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley, 1984, Chap. 8.
[6]	
Wolff, E. A., and R. Kaul, Microwave Engineering and Systems Applications, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley 1988, Chap. 12.
[7]	
Chang, K., Microwave Solid-State Circuits and Applications, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley 
1997.
[8]	
Chang, K., I. Bahl, and V. Nair, RF and Microwave Circuit and Component Design for 
Wireless Systems, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2002, Chap. 7.
[9]	
Bahl, I., and P. Bhartia, Microwave Solid-state Circuit Design, Second Edition, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chap. 12.
[10]	 Chang, K (ed.), Handbook of RF/Microwave Components and Engineering, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chapter 17.
[11]	 Lee, T. H., The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits, Second Edition, 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[12]	 Ayasli, Y., et al., “An X-Band 10 W Monolithic Transmit-Receive GaAs FET Switch,” 
IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1982, pp. 42–46.
[13]	 Ayasli, Y., “Microwave Switching with GaAs FETs,” Microwave J., Vol. 25, Nov. 1982, 
pp. 61–74.
[14]	 Ayasli Y., et al., “6–19 GHz GaAs FET Transmit Receive Switch,” IEEE GaAs IC Sym-
posium Dig., 1983, pp. 106–108.
[15]	 Tajima,Y., et al., “Broadband GaAs FET 2 x 1 Switches,” IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 
1984, pp. 81–84.
[16]	 Gopinath, A., and J. B. Rankin, “GaAs FET RF Switches,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 
Vol. ED-32, Jul. 1985, pp. 1272–1278.
[17]	 Schindler, M. J., and A. M. Morris, “DC-50 GHz and 20–40 GHz MMIC SPDT Switches,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-35, Dec. 1987, pp. 1486–1493.
[18]	 Lan, G. L., et al., “A High Performance V-Band Monolithic FET transmit-Receive Switch,” 
IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1988, pp. 99–101.
[19]	 Schindler, M. J., M. E. Miller, and K. M. Simon, “DC-20 GHz N x M Passive Switches,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 36, Dec. 1988, pp. 1604–1613.
[20]	 Pengelly, R. S., A. Ezzedine, and B. Maoz, “GaAs MMIC Switches for High Performance 
Applications,” RF Design, June 1988, pp. 19–24.
[21]	 Cazaux, J., et al., “A HEMT Monolithic Double Channel Attenuator with Broadband 
Characteristics and Wide Dynamic Range,” 18th Proc. European Microwave Conference, 
Sep. 1988, pp. 999–1004.
[22]	 Tutt, M., et al., “Monolithic Integrated Circuit Applications of InGaAs/InAlAs HEMTs,” 
IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1988, pp. 293–296.

116
Switches
[23]	 Gupta, R., et al., “Design and Packaging Approach for MMIC Insertion in a Broadband 
4 X 4 Switch Matrix,” IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1988, pp. 261–264.
[24]	 Cooper, S. W., and G. A. Truitt, “Voltage-Tolerant Monolithic L-Band GaAs SPDT Switch,” 
IEEE Microwave Symp. Dig., 1989, pp. 1113–1114.
[25]	 Schindler, M., and K. Simon, “A 2–18 GHz Non-Blocking Active 2 X 2 Switch,” IEEE 
GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1989, pp. 181–183.
[26]	 Pritchett, S. D., and D. Seymour, “A Monolithic 2–20 GHz GaAs PIN Diode SP16T 
Switch,” IEEE Microwave Symp. Dig., 1989, pp. 1109–1112.
[27]	 Shifrin, M., P. Katzin, and Y. Ayasli, “Monolithic FET Structures for High-Power Control 
Component Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 37, Dec. 1989, pp. 
2134–2141.
[28]	 Shifrin, M., Y. Ayasli, P. J. Katzin, “Monolithic Control Components Handle 27 W of RF 
Power,” Microwave Journal, Vol. 32, December 1989, p 119–122.
[29]	 Schindler, M. J., and T. E. Kazior, “A High Power 2–18 GHz T/R Switch,” IEEE Micro-
wave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1990, pp. 119–122.
[30]	 Bernkopf, P., M. Schindler, and A. Bertrand, “A High Power K/Ka-Band Monolothic T/R 
Switch,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits, Symp. Dig., 1991, 
pp. 15–18.
[31]	 McGrath, F., et al., “Novel High Performance SPDT Power Switches Using Multi-Gate 
FET’s,” IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1991, pp. 839–842.
[32]	 Katzin, P., et al., “High-Speed 100 + W RF Switches Using GaAs MMICs,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 40, Nov. 1992, pp. 1989–1996.
[33]	 Tokumitsu, T., and M. Aikawa, “Low Voltage, High Power T/R Switch MMIC Using LC 
Resonators,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 
1993, pp. 27–30.
[34]	 Miyatsuji, K., and D. Ueda, “A GaAs High Power RF Single Pole Dual Throw Switch IC 
for Digital Mobile Communication System,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 30, Sep-
tember 1993, pp. 979–983.
[35]	 Teeter, D., et al, “Ka-Band GaAs HBT PIN Diode Switches and Phase Shifters,” IEEE Int. 
Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1994, pp. 183–186.
[36]	 Uda, H., et al, “High-Performance GaAs Switch IC’s Fabricated Using MESFET’s with 
Two Kinds of Pinch-off Voltages and a Symmetrical Pattern Configuration,” IEEE J. 
Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 29, Oct. 1994, pp. 1262–1269.
[37]	 Sreenivas, A. I., “Semiconductor Control Devices: Phase Shifters and Switches,” in Hand-
book of RF/Microwave Components and Engineering, K. Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2003, pp.1099–1133.
[38]	 Lee, J.-L., et al., “Monolithic 2–18 GHz Low Loss On-Chip Biased PIN Switches,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 43, Feb. 1995, pp. 250–256.
[39]	 Ota, Y., et al., “High Isolation and Low Insertion Loss Switch IC Using GaAs MESFETs,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 43, Sept. 1995, pp. 2175–2177.
[40]	 Tanaka, S., et al., “A 3V MMIC Chip Set for 1.9 GHz Mobile Communication Systems,” 
IEEE Int. Solid Sate Circuits Conf. Dig., 1995, pp. 144–145.
[41]	 Seymour, D. J., et al., “CFET—A New High Quality MMIC Control Device,” IEEE 
Microwave and Millimeter Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1995, pp. 95–96.
[42]	 Blackwell, D. A., D. E. Dawson, and D. C. Buck, “X-Band MMIC Switch with 70 dB 
Isolation and 0.5 dB Insertion Loss,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter Wave Monolithic 
Circuits Symp. Dig., 1995, pp. 97–98.
[43]	 Tokumitsu T., I. Toyoda, and M. Aikawa, “A Low-Voltage, High-Power T/R Switch MMIC 
Using LC Resonators,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 43, May 1995, pp. 
997–1003.

3.10	
Intermodulation Analysis of Switches
117
[44]	 Kohama, K., T. Ohgihara, and Y. Murakami, “High Power DPDT Antenna Switch MMIC 
for Digital Cellular Systems,” IEEE GaAs Symp. Dig., 1995, pp. 75–78.
[45]	 Schwab, P. J., and M. F. Kelcourse, “A GaAs Drivers/Decoder Utlizing a Depletion Mode 
FET Process for Use in an SP4T Switch,” Microwave J., Vol. 38, Dec. 1995, pp. 88–96.
[46]	 Kobayashi, K. W., “A Monolithic HEMT Passive Switch with Integrated HBT Standard 
Logic Compatible Driver for Phased-Array Applications,” IEEE Microwave and Guided 
Letts., Vol. 6, Oct. 1996, pp. 375–377.
[47]	 Ingram, D. L., et al., “Q-Band High Isolation GaAs HEMT Switches,” IEEE GaAs Symp. 
Dig., 1996, pp. 289–292.
[48]	 Gotzfried, R., et al., “Zero Power Consumption Si/SiGe HBT SPDT T/R Antenna Switch,” 
IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1996, pp. 651–653.
[49]	 Imai, N., A. Minakawa, and H. Ozaki, “Novel High-Isolation FET Switches,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 44, May, 1996, pp. 685–691.
[50]	 Takasu, H., et al., “W-Band SPST Transistor Switches,” IEEE Microwave and Guided 
Wave Letters, Vol. 6, September 1996, pp. 315–316.
[51]	 Kohama, K., T. Ohgihara, and Y. Murakami, “High Power DPDT Antenna Switch 
MMIC for Digital Cellular Systems,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 31, Oct. 1996, 
pp. 1406–1411.
[52]	 Kawakyu, K., et al., “A Novel Resonant—Type GaAs SPDT Switch IC with Low Distor-
tion Characteristics for 1.9 GHz Personal Handy Phone System,” IEEE Int. Microwave 
Symp. Dig., 1996, pp. 64–650.
[53]	 Frounchi, J., and S. Harrold, “Very Fast GaAs HEMT Analog Switch,” Electronics Letts., 
Vol. 33, Aug. 1997, pp. 1499–1501.
[54]	 Smuk, J., and M. Shifrin, “Monlithic GaAs Multi-Throw Switches with Integrated Low-
Power Decoder/Driver Logic,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 1997, pp. 47–50.
[55]	 Alekseev, E., D. Pavlidis, and D. Cui, “InGaAs PIN Diodes for High-Isolation W-Band 
Monolithic Integrated Switching Applications,” High Speed Semiconductor Devices and 
Circuits Proceedings, August 1997, pp. 332–340.
[56]	 Masuda, M., et al, “High Power Heterojunction GaAs Switch IC with P-1dB of More than 
38 dBm for GSM Application,” IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1998, pp. 229–232.
[57]	 Madihian, M., et al., “A Sub-Nanosecond Resonant-Type Monolithic T/R Switch for 
Millimeter-Wave Systems Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 46, 
July 1998, pp. 1016–1019.
[58]	 Huang, F.-J., and K. O, “A 0.5-mm CMOS T/R Switch for 900-MHz Wireless Applica-
tions,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-36, March 2001, pp. 486–492.
[59]	 Lin, K.-Y., et al., “Millimeter-Wave MMIC Single-Pole-Double-Throw Passive HEMT 
Switches Using Impedance-Transformation Networks,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 51, April 2003, pp. 1076–1085.
[60]	 Kim, J., et al., “A High-Performance 40–85 GHz MMIC SPDT Switch Using FET-Integrated 
Transmission Line Structure,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Components Letts., Vol. 13, 
Dec. 2003, pp. 505–507.
[61]	 Lin, K.-Y., et al., “Millimeter-Wave MMIC Passive HEMT Switches Using Traveling-Wave 
Concept,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 52, Aug. 2004, pp. 1798–1808.
[62]	 Hilty, K., “Attenuation Measurements,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, 
K. Chang (ed.), Vol.1, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 434–452.
[63]	 Sundararajn, R., E. Peterson, and R. Nowlin, “Attenuators,” in Encyclopedia RF and 
Microwave Engineering, K. Chang (ed.), Vol.1, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 
452–480.
[64]	 Kaul, R., “Microwave Limiters,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, K. 
Chang (ed.), Vol.3, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2792–2801.

118
Switches
[65]	 White, J. F., “Microwave Phase Shifters,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineer-
ing, K. Chang (ed.), Vol.3, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2836–2849.
[66]	 Caverly, R. H., “Microwave Switches,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, 
K. Chang (ed.), Vol.4, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2991–2999.
[67]	 Fathy, A. E., “PIN Diodes,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, K. Chang 
(ed.), Vol.4, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 3858–3869.
[68]	 Yeh, M. C., Z. M. Tsai, and H. Wang, “A Miniature DC-50 GHz CMOS SPDT Distrib-
uted Switch,” Proc. Europ. Microwave Conf., 2005, pp. 193–196.
[69]	 Yeh, M.-C., et al., “Design and Analysis for a Miniature CMOS SPDT Switch Using Body-
Floating Technique to Improve Power Performance,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 54, Jan. 2006, pp. 31–39.
[70]	 Tanaka, S. et al., “Design and Fabrication of Multiband p-i-n Diode Switches and Ladder 
Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 54, April 2006, pp. 1561–1568.
[71]	 Tsai, Z. M., et al., “FET Integrated CPW and the Application in Filter Synthesis Design 
Method on Traveling-Wave Switch Above 100 GHz,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 54, May 2006, pp. 2090–2097.
[72]	 Chao, S. F., et al., “A 50 to 94-GHz CMOS SPDT Switch using Traveling-Wave Concept,” 
IEEE Microwave Wireless Component Lett., Vol. 17, Feb. 2007, pp. 130–132.
[73]	 Dogan, H., and R. G. Meyer, “Intermodulation Distortion in CMOS Attenuators and 
Switches,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-42, March 2007, pp. 529–539.
[74]	 Li, Q., and Y. P. Zhang, “CMOS T/R Switch Design: Towards Ultra-Wideband and Higher 
Frequency,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-42, March 2007, pp. 563–570.
[75]	 Jin, Y., and C. Nguyen, “Ultra-Compact High-Linearity High-Power Fully Integrated 
DC-20 GHz 0.18 mm CMOS T/R Switch,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 
55, Jan. 2007, pp. 30–36.
[76]	 Ta, C. M., E. Skafidas, and R. J. Evans, “A 60-GHz CMOS Transit/Receive Switch,” IEEE 
RFIC Symp. Dig., 2007, pp. 725–728.
[77]	 Lam, K., et al., “Wideband Millimeter Wave PIN Diode SPDT Switch Using IBM 0.13 μm 
SiGe Technology,” Proc. Europ. Microwave Integrated Circuits Conf., 2007, pp. 108–111.
[78]	 Tsai, Z. M., et al., “Analysis and Design of Bandpass Single-Pole-Double-Throw FET 
Filter-Integrated Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 54, Aug. 2007, 
pp. 1601–1610.
[79]	 Tomkins, A., P. Garcia, and S. P. Voinigescu, “A 94 GHz SPST Switch in 65nm Bulk 
CMOS,” Compound Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Symposium Dig., 2008, pp. 1–4.
[80]	 Atesal, Y. A., B. Cetinoneri, and G. M. Rebeiz, “Low-Loss 0.13-μm CMOS 50–70 GHz 
SPDT and SP4T Switches,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2009, pp. 43–46.
[81]	 Li, X. J., and Y. P. Zhang “Flipping the CMOS Switch,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, Vol. 
11, Feb. 2010, pp. 86–96.
[82]	 Chang, H.-Y., and C.-Y. Chan, “A Low Loss High Isolation DC-60 GHz SPDT Traveling-
Wave Switch with a Body Bias Technique in 90 nm CMOS Process,” IEEE Microwave 
Wireless Components Letts., Vol. 20, Feb. 2010, pp. 82–84.
[83]	 Lai, R.-B., J.-J. Kuo, and H. Wang, “A 60–100 GHz Transmission-Line Integrated SPDT 
Switch in 90 nm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Components Letts., 
Vol. 20, Feb. 2010, pp. 85–87.
[84]	 Thian, M., and V. F. Fusco, “Ultrafast Low 42–70 GHz Differential SPDT Switch in 0.35 
μm SiGe Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, March 2012, pp. 
655–659.
[85]	 Kuo, C.-S. et al., “V-Band High Isolation CMOS T/R Switch Fabricated Using 90-nm 
CMOS Technology,” Microwave Opt. Tech. Letts., Vol. 54, May 2012, pp. 1118–1123.

3.10	
Intermodulation Analysis of Switches
119
[86]	 Kumar, G., and A. Kumar, “Design of Low Loss, High Speed, and High Isolation Ka-Band 
SPST PIN Switch in Suspended Stripline Configuartion,” Microwave Opt. Tech. Letts., 
Vol. 54, August 2012, pp. 1808–1810.
[87]	 He, J., et al., “Analysis and Design of 60-GHz SPDT Switch in 130-nm CMOS,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, Oct. 2012, pp. 3113–3119.
[88]	 Li, X. J., and Y. P. Zhang “Design of Transmit/Receive Switches in CMOS,” in Ency-
clopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, J. Webster (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2012.
[89]	 Parlak, M., and J. F. Buckwalter, “A Passive I/Q Millimeter-Wave Mixer and Switch in 
45-nm CMOS SOI,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 61, March 2013, pp. 
1131–1139.
[90]	 Bahl, I. J., et al., “Low Loss Multilayer Microstrip Line for Monolithic Microwave Inte-
grated Circuits Applications,” Int. J RF and Microwave Computer-Aided Engineering, 
Vol. 8, Nov. 1998, pp. 441–454.
[91]	 Simin, G., Z.-J. Yang, and M. Shur, “High-Power III-Nitride Integrated Microwave Switch 
with Capacitively Coupled Contacts,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2007, 
pp. 457–460.
[92]	 Hangai, M., et al., “An S-Band 100 W GaN Protection Switch,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Micro-
wave Symp. Dig., 2007, pp. 1389–1392.
[93]	 Ma, B. Y., et al., “High Power AlGaN/GaN Ku-Band MMIC SPDT Switch and Design 
Considerations,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2008, pp. 1473–1476.
[94]	 Alleva, V., et al., “High-Power Monolithic AlGaN/GaN High Electron Mobility Transis-
tor Switches,” Int. J. Microwave Wireless Technologies, Vol. 1, 2009, pp. 339–345.
[95]	 Bettidi, A., et al., “High Power GaN-HEMT SPDT Switches for Microwave Applications,” 
Int. J. RF Microwave Comput.-Aided Eng., Vol. 19, Sep. 2009, pp. 598–606.
[96]	 Campbell, C. F., and D. C. Dumka, “Wideband High Power GaN on SiC SPDT Switch 
MMICs,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2010, pp. 145–148.
[97]	 Product Feature, “GaN MMIC Switch Handles 40 W from DC to 6 GHz,” Microwave 
Journal, Vol. 54, November 2011, pp.132–134.
[98]	 Product Feature, “GaN Switches Enable Hot Switching at Higher Power,” Microwave 
Journal, Vol. 55, January 2012, pp.134–136.
[99]	 Pla, J. A., and W. Struble, “Nonlinear Model for Predicting Intermodulation Distortion in 
GaAs FET RF Switch Devices,” IEEE Int., Microwave Symp. Dig., 1993, pp. 641–644.
[100]	Virk, R. S., and S. A. Maas, “Modeling of MESFETs for Intermodulation Analysis in RF 
Switches,” IEEE Microwave Guided Wave Letter, Vol. 4, Nov. 1994, pp. 376–378.
[101]	 Caverly, R. H., “Microwave and RF p-i-n Diode Model for Time Domain Simulations,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, July 2012, pp. 2158–2164.
[102]	Bellantoni, J. V., et.al., “ Monolithic GaAs p-i-n Diode Switch Circuits for High-Power 
Millimeter-Wave Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 37, Dec. 
1989, pp. 2162–2165.
[103]	 Heston, D. D., D. J. Seymour, and D. Zych, “100 MHz to 20 GHz Monolithic Single-Pole, 
Two-, Three-, and Four-Throw GaAs PIN diode Switches,” IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. 
Dig., 1991, pp. 429–432.
[104]	Kobayashi, K., et al., “GaAs HBT PIN Diode Attenuators and Switches,” IEEE Microwave 
Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1993, pp. 151–154.
[105]	Putnam, J., et al., “A 94 GHz Monolithic Switch with a Vertical PIN Diode Structure,” 
IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1994, pp. 333–336.
[106]	Putnam, J., et al., “A Monolithic GaAs PIN Switch Network for a 77 GHz Automotive 
Collision Warning Radar Structure,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 1997, pp. 225–228.

120
Switches
[107]	Tayrani, R., et al., “Broad-Band SiGe MMICs for Phased-Array Radar Applications,” 
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-38, Sep. 2003, pp. 1462–1471.
[108]	Boles, T., J. Brogle, and A. Rozbicki, “A Monolithic, 1000 Watt SPDT Switch,” IEEE Int. 
Microwave Symp. Dig., 2008, pp. 1285–1288.
[109]	Phudpong, R., et al., “An Absorptive Bandpass-Integrated p-i-n Diode T/R Switch for 2.5 
GHz WiMAX High Power Terminals,” MOTL, Vol. 54, Dec. 2012, pp. 2505–2708.
[110]	 Fields, W., “SP8T, 50 to 1000 MHz, 20 W Switch Design Using PIN Diodes in Plastic,” 
Microwave Journal, Vol. 56, Sep. 2013, pp. 140–148.
[111]	 Yang, J. G., and K. Yang, “High-Linearity K-Band Absorptive-Type MMIC Switch Using 
GaN PIN-Diodes,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Components Letts., Vol. 23, Jan. 2013, 
pp. 37–39.
[112]	 Mizutani, H., et al., “Compact DC-60-GHz HJFET MMIC Switches Using Ohmic Elec-
trode-Sharing Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 46, Nov. 1998, 
pp. 1597–1603.
[113]	 Mizutani, H., and Y. Takayama, “DC-110-GHz MMIC Traveling-Wave Switch,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 48, May 2000, pp. 840–845.
[114]	 Numata, K., et al., “A +2.4/0 V Controlled High Power GaAs SPDT Antenna Switch IC 
for GSM Application,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2002, pp. 141–144.
[115]	Numata, K., et al., “A High-Power-Handling GSM Switch IC with New Adaptive-Control-
Voltage-Generator Circuit Scheme,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2003, pp. 233–236.
[116]	 Gu, Z., et al., “High Power DPDT MMIC Switch ICs for Broadband Applications,” IEEE 
RFIC Symp. Dig., 2003, pp. 687–690.
[117]	Tosaka, H., et al., “An Antenna Switch MMIC Using E/D Mode p-HEMT for GSM/DCS/
PCS/WCDMA Bands Applications,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2003, pp. 519–522.
[118]	 Gu, Z., et al., “Low Insertion Loss and High Linearity pHEMT SPDT and SP3T Switch 
ICs for WLAN 802.1a/b/g Applications,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2004, pp. 505–508.
[119]	 Kamitsuna, H., et al., “A 10-Gbit/s Switch Matrix MMIC Using InP HEMTs with a Logic-
Level-Independent Interface,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2004, pp. 325–328.
[120]	Lee, C.-H., B. Banerjee and J. Laskar, “Novel T/R Switch Architectures for MIMO Appli-
cations,” IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2004, pp. 1137–1140.
[121]	 Kamitsuna, H., et al., “A Miniaturized Wideband 4 × 4 Switch Matrix IC Using Four 
InP-HEMT SP4T Switches,” IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2005.
[122]	Mizutani, H., et al., “Design Considerations for Traveling-Wave Single-Pole Multithrow 
MMIC Switch Using Fully Distributed FET,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 
48, April 2007, pp. 664–671.
[123]	Chao, S.-F., et al., “40-GHz MMIC SPDT and Multi-Port Bandpass Filter-Integrated 
Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 55, Dec. 2007, pp. 2691–2699.
[124]	Lai, R.-B., et al., “Topology Analysis and Design of Passive HEMT Millimeter-Wave 
Multi-Port Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 56, July 2008, pp. 
1545–1554.
[125]	Lee, J., et al., “Low Insertion-Loss Single-Pole-Double-Throw Reduced-Size Quarter-
Wavelength HEMT Bandpass Filter Integrated Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 56, Dec. 2008, pp. 3028–3038.
[126]	Hancock, T. M., and G. M. Rebeiz, “Design and Analysis of a 70-ps SiGe Differential RF 
Switch,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 53, July 2005, pp. 2403–2410.
[127]	Comeau, J. P., J. D. Cressler, and M. Mitchell, “Design and Layout Techniques for the 
Optimization of nMOS SPDT Series-Shunt Switches in a 130 nm SiGe BiCMOS Technol-
ogy,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2007, pp. 457–460.
[128]	Scuderi, A., et al., “A Stage-Bypass SOI-CMOS Switch for Multi-Mode Multi-Band Appli-
cations,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2008, pp. 325–328.

3.10	
Intermodulation Analysis of Switches
121
[129]	Park, P., et al., “A High-Linearity, LC-Tuned, 24-GHz T/R Switch in 90-nm CMOS,” 
IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2008, pp. 369–372.
[130]	Ahn, M., et al., “ A High-Power CMOS Switch Using A Novel Adaptive Voltage Swing 
Distribution Method in Multistack FETs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 
56, April 2008, pp. 849–858.
[131]	 Min, B.-W., and G. M. Rebeiz, “Ka-Band Low-Loss and High-Isolation Switch in 0.13-
μm CMOS,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 56, June 2008, pp. 1364–1371.
[132]	Wang, J.-H., H.-H. Hsieh, and L.-H. Lu, “A 5.2 GHz CMOS T/R Switch for Ultra-Low-
Voltage Operation,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 56, Aug. 2008, pp. 
1774–1782.
[133]	Ahn, M., et al., “A 1.8 GHz 33-dBm P 0.1-dB CMOS T/R Switch Using Stacked FETs With 
Feed-Forward Capacitors in a Floated Well Structure,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 56, Nov. 2009, pp. 2661–2670.
[134]	Cetinoneri, B., Y. A. Atesal, and G. M. Rebeiz, “A Miniature DC-70 GHz SP4T Switch 
in 0.13-μm CMOS,” IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2009, pp. 1093–1096.
[135]	Lai, R.-B., J.-J. Kuo, and H. Wang, “A 60–110 GHz Transmission-Line Integrated SPDT 
Switch in 90 nm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Components Letts., 
Vol. 20, Feb. 2010, pp. 85–87.
[136]	Uzunkol, M., and G. M. Rebeiz, “A Low-Loss 50–70 GHz SPDT Switch in 90 nm CMOS,” 
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 45, Oct. 2010, pp. 2003–2007.
[137]	Huynh, C., and C. Nguyen, “New Ultra-High-Isolation RF Switch Architecture and its 
Use for a 10–38-GHz 0.18-mm BiCMOS Ultra-Wideband Switch,” IEEE Trans. Micro-
wave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, Feb. 2011, pp. 345–353.
[138]	He, J., Y. P. Zhang, and Y.-Z. Xiong, “A 60-GHz Single-Pole-Single-Throw Switch in 
65-nm Bulk CMOS,” Int. J. RF Microwave Comput.-Aided Eng., Vol. 21, March 2011, 
pp. 190–198.
[139]	 Shin, D., D.-W. Kang, and G. M. Rebeiz, “A 0.01–8-GHz (12.5 Gb/s) 4 × 4 CMOS Switch 
Matrix,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, Feb. 2012, pp. 381–386.
[140]	Jeong, J., and Y. Kwon, “Design of High-Isolation Ka-Band Switch using Coupled Lines,” 
MOTL, Vol. 54, Nov. 2012, pp. 2528–2530.
[141]	 Lee, J., Z.-M. Tsai, and H. Wang, “A Band-Pass Filter-Integrated Switch Using Field-
Effect Transistors and its Power Analysis,” IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2006, pp. 
768–771.
[142]	 Chao, S.-F., et al., “40-GHz MMIC Switch and Multuple-Port Bandpass Filter-Integrated 
Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 55, Dec. 2007, pp. 2691–2699.
[143]	 Lee, J., et al., “Low Insertion-Loss Single-Pole-Double-Throw Reduced-Size Quarter-
Wavelength HEMT Bandpass Filter Integrated Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 55, Dec. 2008, pp. 3028–3038.
[144]	Bahl, I. J., E. L. Griffin, and D. A. Willems, “N-Way MMIC Redundant Switch,” Proc. 
European Microwave Conference, 1988, pp. 1011–1016.
[145]	 Bahl, I. J., E. L. Griffin, and D. A. Willems, “N-Way MMIC Redundant Switch,” Micro-
wave Opt. Tech. Letts., Vol. 1, May 1988, pp. 110–113.
[146]	Tucker, R. S., “Third-Order Intermodulation Distortion and Gain Comprsession in GaAs 
FET’s,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-35, May 1987, pp. 492–501.
[147]	Caverly, R. H., “Distortion in Broadband Gallium Arsenide MESFET Control and Switch 
Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 39, Apr. 1991, pp. 713–717.
[148]	 Caverly, R. H., “Distortion in RF and Microwave Control Devices,” Microwave Journal, 
Vol. 40, Dec. 1997, pp. 74–82.
[149]	 Caverly, R.H., “Microwave Switches,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, 
K. Chang (ed.), Vol. 4, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2991–2999.

122
Switches
[150]	Microsemi Corp., “MNM 4200 Nanomount TM PIN Diode Switches Datasheet/Applica-
tion Note 708.”
[151]	 Cobham MMIC Products, Blacksburg, VA
[152]	WIN Semiconductor GaAs 0.15 μm pHEMT Model Handbook, Taipei, Taiwan, 2003.
[153]	Skyworks Solutions, GaAs MMIC Products Catalogue, Woburn, Massachusetts.
[154]	MACOM, GaAs FET MMIC Control Products Catalogue, Lowell, Massachusetts.
[155]	Peregrine Semiconductor Corp., San Diego, California.
[156]	TriQuent Semiconductor, Hillsboro, Oregon.
[157]	Hittite Microwave Corporation, Chelmsford, Massachusetts.
[158]	RFMD, Greensboro, North Carolina.
[159]	CREE, Durham, North Carolina.

123
C h a p t e r  4
Phase Shifters
One of the important elements in a T/R module is the programmable multibit phase 
shifter. The scanning of the beam in phased-array radars is achieved by chang-
ing the phase of the RF signal fed to or received from each radiating element. For 
beam steering, programmable bidirectional-phase shifters are required to adaptively 
adjust transceiver phase in both the transmit and receive modes. Phase shifters can 
be implemented with either analog or digital control. In the case of analog control 
most phase shifters are based on the continuous voltage-control of a varactor or 
Schottky diode’s capacitance. Digital phase shifters have discrete values of phase 
shifts and can have a number of topologies. Active phase shifters based on the vec-
tor sum principle have also been developed.
The phase shifters for RF, microwave, and millimeter-wave applications are 
discussed in this chapter. For phase shifters, various technologies including Si and 
GaAs PIN diodes, GaAs FET/HEMT, and Si CMOS have been used. Design meth-
ods for several types of phase shifters and their performance are described. Their 
limited discussions may also be found in the old and recent literature [1–72].
4.1	
Types of Phase Shifters
The phase shifter is a two-port network in which the phase angle of the transmitted 
signal can be controlled by applying voltage to the solid-state devices. In a broad 
sense, there are two types of solid-state phase shifters—digital and analog—and 
they are realized using various configurations as shown in Figure 4.1. Phase shift-
ers are called digital when the differential phase shift can be changed by only a 
few predetermined discrete values, such as 22.5°, 45°, 90°, and 180°. On the other 
hand, in analog phase shifters, the differential phase shift can be varied in a con-
tinuous manner by varying the control voltage. Digital phase shifters find extensive 
applications in active phase-array antennas, while analog phase shifters are used in 
feed-forward amplifiers and for many other applications where variable phase shift 
is required. These are briefly described next.
4.1.1	
Digital Phase Shifters
Digital phase shifters can have a number of topologies, but the general principal is 
either that the signal is switched between two networks that have a fixed phase shift 
or the phase shift of a single network is controlled by switching elements in or out of 
the network. As shown in Figure 4.1, phase shifters can be either reflection-type or 

124
Phase Shifters
the transmission type. In the reflection-type phase shifters (RTPS), the basic design 
unit is a one-port network, and it is the phase shift of the reflected signal that is 
changed by the control voltage. In the transmission-type phase shifters (TTPS), the 
basic design unit is a two-port network, and it is the phase shift of the transmit-
ted signal that is changed with respect to a reference path by the control voltage. 
Generally, a different technique is optimum for each of these individual bits and 
also depends upon the bandwidth. Here bit is referred to predetermined discrete 
phase shift value.
The basic one-port RTPS can be converted into useful two-port components by 
using a circulator or a 3-dB hybrid/coupler. Because of the ease of integration, the 
hybrid-coupled RTPSs are more common. As far as the design of the basic one-port 
RTPS bit is concerned, one may use a switched-length type or a switched-reactance 
type of design. A switched-reactance RTPS is shown in Figure 4.2(a), where the 
reactance is capacitive.
There are three main configurations of solid-state digitally controlled TTPSs: 
switched line (simplest of all), loaded line, and switched network, and these are shown 
in Figures 4.2(b), (c), and (d), respectively. These phase shifters can be realized using 
both distributed and lumped elements. Switched network types use several differ-
ent approaches for network realization, as described in later sections. One of the 
popular configurations in this group uses low-pass/high-pass networks as shown in 
Figure 4.3. Here the digital phase shift is realized by using the phase lag property of 
the low-pass network and phase lead characteristic of the high-pass network, which 
are connected between two SPDT switches. In the low-pass/high-pass configura-
tion, there is special class of switched network known as an embedded-device or 
integrated-device type phase shifter, where the switching devices are integrated in 
the circuit and their reactances become part of the phase shifting low-pass/high-pass 
networks. Configurations of the embedded-device phase shifter based on transistors 
Figure 4.1  Various types of RF and microwave phase shifters.

4.1	
Types of Phase Shifters
125
as switching devices are shown in Figure 4.4. Another special class of TTPS, called 
amplifier type, uses transistors in an active amplifier mode. The phase shift is real-
ized by changing the gate bias voltages applied to transistors. This type of phase 
shifter consumes substantial DC power, is nonreciprocal, and cannot be designed 
using PIN diodes. The phase shifter configurations using lumped elements are suit-
able for both narrowband and broadband and for compact size applications. In 
monolithic phase shifters, the small bits are normally of an embedded-device type.
Generally, the digital bits in a multibit phase shifter have binary values (i.e., 
4-bit and 6-bit phase shifters have 22.5°, 45°, 90°, 180° bits and 5.6°, 11.25°, 22.5°, 
45°, 90°, 180° bits, respectively). Several different topologies for phase bits are used 
Figure 4.2  Phase shifter configurations: (a) reflection-type, (b) switched-line, (c) loaded-line, 
and (d) switched-network.
Figure 4.3  Switched-network phase shifter using low-pass/high-pass networks.

126
Phase Shifters
depending on the application. The 180° bit is commonly designed using a switched 
network or low-pass/high-pass topology as shown in Figure 4.2(d). A simplest 
topology for 90° bit is of reflection-type shown in Figure 4.2(a), and topologies for 
smaller bits are shown in Figure 4.4. More discussions on the selection of phase 
shifter topology for various bits are included in the later sections.
4.1.2	 Analog Phase Shifters
Analog phase shifters, where the phase shift is continuously varied by changing the 
capacitance of the device using control voltage, are also known as voltage variable 
phase shifters. The classification of analog phase shifters as shown in Figure 4.1 is 
the same as for digital phase shifters. Both reflection-type and transmission-line type 
phase shifters are used for analog applications. The reflection-type is more popular 
as an analog phase shifter. Varactor and Schottky diodes are commonly used as 
control devices. Analog phase shifters provide continuous phase shift up to 360° 
with lower insertion loss in comparison to digital phase shifters. However, analog 
phase shifters use biasing networks similar to PIN diodes and consume higher DC 
power than digital phase shifters.
Figure 4.4  Embedded-device phase shifters: (a, b) MESFET/HEMT based, and (c, d) CMOS 
transistor based.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
127
4.1.3	
Active Phase Shifters
Digital and analog phase shifters are operated in the passive mode and are bidirec-
tional. Active phase shifters, also known as amplifier-type phase shifters, are based 
on vector sum method. In this class, the phase shift is obtained by continuously 
changing the device gain using the gate control voltage. Here, also, one can obtain 
0° to 360° phase shift. Active phase shifters have complex circuitry; they consume 
large DC power and are unidirectional. They can have gain to compensate for the 
loss in other components.
4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
In this section the theory of basic phase shifter topologies is described. The analysis 
is applicable to both diodes and transistors.
4.2.1	 Reflection-Type Phase Shifter
The reflection-type phase shifter is an important class of phase shifters used for both 
digital and variable phase shifters, and it is suitable for narrowband and broadband 
applications. Numerous published papers include comprehensive information on the 
reflection-type phase shifters [73–91]. The basic concept of its operation is illustrated 
in Figure 4.5(a). A subnetwork with switchable reflection coefficient terminates a 
uniform transmission line. When the reflection coefficient is switched from Γ1 = ⎪Γ1⎪ 
∠ ϕ1 to Γ2 = ⎪Γ2⎪ ∠ ϕ2, the reflected signal undergoes a differential phase shift ∆ϕ = 
ϕ2 − ϕ1. In any state, the ratio of the reflected power to the incident power is given 
by ⎪Γ⎪2 and its value desired to be unity so that there is no loss associated with the 
phase shifting operation.
Figure 4.5  (a) Basic concept of reflection-type phase shifters, (b) switchable-reactance 
reflection-type phase shifter, (c) switchable-length reflection-type phase shifter, and (d) hybrid-
coupled reflection-type phase shifter.

128
Phase Shifters
Subnetworks providing the switchable reflection coefficients may be of two dif-
ferent types: switchable-reactance and switchable-length. In the switchable-reactance 
type, as shown in Figure 4.5(b), the reactance terminating the line is changed from 
inductive to capacitive by using an SPST switch. This configuration is commonly 
used in realizing reflection-type phase shifters. In the switchable-length reflection-
type phase shifter, as shown in Figure 4.5(c), an additional line length is added at the 
reflection plane by using an SPST switch. The differential phase shift, in this case, is 
twice the electrical length of the short-circuited line switched in by the SPST switch.
Transformation of a Reflection Phase Bit into a Two-Port Network
In most of the applications, the phase shifters are required to be two-port transmis-
sion networks. A reflection phase bit can be converted in to a two-port network by 
using a 90° hybrid as shown in Figure 4.5(d). Signals from the coupled and direct 
ports are reflected with a magnitude of unity, and the resultant signal appears at 
the output port. This topology require two identical phase bits and hence twice the 
number of devices. Since in this arrangement the power splits between the devices, 
the power handling capability is increased by a factor of two in the hybrid-coupled 
reflection-type phase shifter.
In order to achieve low insertion loss and flat phase response, the reflection-
type phase shifter topology employing a hybrid/coupler, as shown in Figure 4.6, is 
used. For the efficient operation of the reflection-type phase shifter, the required 
characteristics of a 90° hybrid/coupler are 3-dB power split, low insertion loss, 
good match, and 90° phase difference between the output signals over the desired 
bandwidth. With these properties, the reflections from identical terminations at 
the output ports will combine in phase with a magnitude of unity at the isolated/
output port. For broadband applications, a Lange coupler is usually used as a 90° 
hybrid/coupler.
Figure 4.6  Hybrid-coupled reflection-type phase shifter configuration.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
129
Analysis of Hybrid-Coupled Reflection-Type Phase Shifter
Consider Figure 4.6 in which port 1 is excited with a signal of unity magnitude and 
the reflecting switch reactances are at the output ports 2 and 3 of the coupler. The 
reflected signals arriving at port 1 cancel due to 180° phase difference and add in 
phase at port 4. Thus, the magnitude and phase of the transmitted signal at port 
4 is given by:
	
S21 = r 1
2 ∠−90° + r 1
2 ∠−90° = r∠−90° 	
(4.1a)
For a pure reactive terminating impedance, ⎪ρ⎪ = 1 and ⎪S21⎪ = 1. In an arbitrary 
terminated coupler, the transmission coefficient at port 4 is given by
	
S21
L,H = rL,H e
jφL,H =
ZL,H −Z0
ZL,H + Z0
	
(4.1b)
where L and H designate the switch’s low and high impedance states. When ZL = 0 
and ZH = ∞, the reflection coefficient will change from −1 to +1 and the phase dif-
ference between these two impedance states is 180°. Consider an arbitrary reactive 
represented by a capacitor C1 shown in Figure 4.7(a). Small sections of microstrip 
represent connecting lines, and the FET switch is assumed having negligible ON 
resistance Ron and OFF capacitance Coff. The phase shift is achieved by switching 
in and out the capacitor C1. For shunt C1, (4.1b) becomes
	
S21
L,H =
1/ jwCL,H −Z0
1/ jwCL,H + Z0
=
1 −jZ0wCL,H
1 + jZ0wCL,H
=
1 −jZ0wCL,H
(
)
2
1 + Z0wCL,H
(
)
2
=
1 −Z0wCL,H
(
)
2
−j2Z0wCL,H
1 + Z0wCL,H
(
)
2
	
(4.2a)
The transmission phase is given by
	
fL,H = tan−1
−j2Z0wCL,H
1 −Z0wCL,H
(
)
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
	
(4.2b)
The phase shift for an arbitrary reactive termination is expressed as
	
∆f = fH −fL = tan−1
−2Z0wCH
1 −Z0wCH
(
)
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥−tan−1
−2Z0wCL
1 −Z0wCL
(
)
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	
(4.3)

130
Phase Shifters
where Z0 = 50 Ω is the system impedance, CL = C1 and CH = C1Coff/(C1 + Coff). By 
adjusting the capacitor value, a desired phase shift is obtained. Another arrange-
ment for an arbitrary reactive termination is shown in Figure 4.7(b).
Example 4.1
A reflection-type phase shifter (Figure 4.7(a)) is designed using GaAs pHEMT 
MMIC process. The 3-dB coupler is assumed to be an ideal. The pHEMT is scable 
and represented by Ron = 1.5 Ω for ON state and Coff = 0.25 pF for OFF state. Cal-
culate the value of C1 required for 90° phase shift at 10 GHz when Z0 = 50 Ω. The 
effect of Ron may be ignored.
Solution
Here ω = 2πf = 2 × 3.1416 × 10 × 109 = 6.283 × 1010 rad/s.
When device is ON, CL = C1 and OFF, CH = C1Coff/(C1 + Coff).
For given a phase shift and Coff values, (4.3) may be used to calculate the required 
value of C1. However, (4.3) is complex and needs an iterative method to solve it.
Assume ϕH = ϕ + 90° and ϕL = ϕ, where ϕ is in the first quadrant. In this case, Z0ωCL 
> 1 and Z0ωCH < 1. Using ϕH = ϕ + 90° and ϕL = ϕ, the following relation is obtained,
	
−tanfcotf =
−2RH
1 −RH
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
−2RL
1 −RL
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥= −1
1 −RH
2
(
)RL
2 −4RHRL −1 −RH
2
(
) = 0
RL =
4RH +
16RH
2 + 4 1 −RH
2
(
)
2
2 1 −RH
2
(
)
	
Figure 4.7  Reflection-type phase shifter configurations using Lange coupler and FET switches: 
(a) series capacitor, and (b) series-shunt capacitors.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
131
where RL,H = Z0ωCL,H. Assuming C1 >> Coff and CH ≅ Coff = 0.25 pF
RH = 50 × 6.283 × 1010 × 0.25 × 10–12 = 0.785
	
RL = 4 × 0.785 +
16 × 0.6162 + 4 1 −0.6162
(
)
2
2 1 −0.6162
(
)
= 3.14 + 3.23
0.7676
= 8.3
	
CL = RL/(Z0ω) = 8.3/(50 × 6.283 × 1010) = 2.64 pF
If CL = C1 = 2.64 pF, for 90° phase shift the required value of Coff = C1CH/(C1 
− CH) = 2.62 × 0.25/(2.64 − 0.25) = 0.276 pF. In this case the HEMT’s periphery 
may be increased by 0.276/0.25 = 1.105 to obtain 90° phase shift or readjusted the 
value of C1 by iterative method.
It has been demonstrated [84] that 180° phase shift can also be obtained over 
a large bandwidth by switching a series network to a parallel network shown in 
Figures 4.8(a) and (b). In this case (4.3) becomes
∆f = fs −fp = tan−1
2Z0 wLs −1/ wCs
{
}
wLs −1/ wCs
{
}
2 −Z0
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
−tan−1
2Z0 1/ wLp −wCp
{
}
1 −Z0
2 1/ wLp −wCp
{
}
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
	
(4.4)
For broadband performance it is required that ∂(∆ϕ)/∂ω = 0 at all frequencies. This 
leads to
Lp 1 + w2LsCs
(
) 1 + Z0
2 1/ wLp −wCp
(
)
2
⎢
⎣⎢
⎥
⎦⎥−Cs 1 + w2LpCp
(
)
wLs −1/ wCs
(
)
2 + Z0
2
⎢
⎣⎢
⎥
⎦⎥= 0
	
(4.5)
This condition is satisfied at all frequencies when
	
Z0 =
Ls
Cp
=
Lp
Cs
	
(4.6)
From (4.4) and (4.6),
∆ϕ = 180°
In other words by properly selecting series and parallel networks, one realizes a 
broadband 180° phase shifter. In this case, switch parasitic reactances are assumed 
negligible.
The implementation of proposed series-parallel reflective circuit using FET-based 
switches is shown in Figure 4.8(c) and its equivalent circuits for ON and OFF states 
are shown in Figure 4.8(d). Based on (4.6), lumped elements given in Figures 4.8(b) 

132
Phase Shifters
and (d) are equivalent when Lb = Lp = Ls and Cb = Cp = Cs = Coff1. If the resonant 
frequency used is ω0, the circuit elements Lb, Cb, and Coff1 are calculated using the 
following relations:
	
Lb = Z0
w0 	
(4.7)
	
Cb = Coff1 =
1
w0Z0 	
(4.8)
Using the proposed method, a reflection-type GaAs MMIC 180° phase shifter 
attained 0.5–20 GHz bandwidth [84].
The reflection-type phase shifter topology has the following properties:
1.	 In ideal 3-dB hybrid/coupler, switching devices, and phase shifting net-
works, the input and output phase shifter circuit match depend on hybrid/
Figure 4.8  (a) Schematic of a reflection-type phase shifter, (b) schematic of series-parallel 
resonant reflective circuit with SPDT switch, (c) implementation of series-parallel resonant 
reflective circuit, and (d) equivalent circuits of proposed series-parallel resonant reflective 
networks.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
133
coupler’s match and are independent of phase shift value. The input/output 
reflection coefficient of the reflection-type phase shifter is the same as that 
for the hybrid/coupler.
2.	 The phase shift topology generally uses two switching devices and exhib-
its lower insertion loss for large phase bit values, as compared to other 
topologies.
3.	 As a first-order approximation, both insertion loss and return loss for a 
reflection-type phase shifter are independent of phase shift values.
A major problem with this topology is that most couplers do not have good 
match over a multioctave bandwidth. The calculated return loss for a Lange cou-
pler, at band edges in the 2- to 8-GHz band, is about 8.5 dB. Such poor coupler’s 
return loss values further deteriorate the return loss of a multibit phase shifter as 
well as its root mean square (RMS) phase and amplitude error values due to inter-
actions between the incident and reflected signals. At low frequencies, the Lange 
coupler length is very large, and it is usually folded several times in order to realize 
a compact chip size. The parasitic coupling between the folded sections and bend 
discontinuity reactance further deteriorates the coupler’s reflection coefficient.
4.2.2	 Switched-Line Phase Shifter
The design of switched-line phase shifter is conceptually the simplest. Figure 4.9(a) 
shows a topology of the switched-line phase shifter. Two SPDT switches are used 
to route the signal through one of the two alternative transmission paths having 
line lengths of 1 and 2. When the signal passes through the longer transmission 
line, it goes through an additional phase delay with respect to the short line. The 
phase delay is given by
	
∆f = b 2 −1
(
) = 2pf
vp
2 −1
(
) = 2p ere
l0
2 −1
(
) 	
(4.9a)
Figure 4.9  Switched-line phase shifter configurations: (a) conventional, and (b) using Schiffman 
section.

134
Phase Shifters
where β, f, vp, λ0, and εre are the propagation phase constant, frequency of opera-
tion, phase velocity, free space wavelength, and effective dielectric constant for 
the microstrip line. In this case it has been assumed that both lines have the same 
characteristic impedance. The insertion loss of a phase shifter of this type is equal 
to that of the two SPDT switches (plus any line losses that may be present). As can 
be seen from (4.9a), the differential phase shift ∆ϕ is directly proportional to fre-
quency. Thus, such phase shifters have narrow bandwidth characteristics.
However, switched-line phase shifter have an interesting feature in that they have 
constant time delay. Because of this characteristic, switched-line phase shifters are 
also called switchable constant time delay phase shifters. The time delay is given by
	
td =
2 −1
(
)
vp
=
2 −1
(
) ere
c
	
(4.9b)
where c is the speed of light. If εre is constant with frequency, time delay is constant. 
For TEM lines εre is replaced with εr, which is independent of frequency.
Resonance in Switched-Line Phase Shifters
One of the common problems in the design of switched-line phase shifters is caused 
by off-path resonances [9]. This may be explained by considering a specific example.
In a design of a 45° phase shifter at the center frequency of 1.5 GHz, the electrical 
lengths of 1 and 2 are chosen to be 160° and 205°, respectively. In this example, the 
SPDT switches based on PIN diodes are assumed. Each SPDT switch is represented 
by an Rf = 1 Ω in the forward bias (ON state) and a Cj = 0.2 pF in the reverse bias 
(OFF state). The equivalent circuit for the switched-line phase shifter, for 1 in the on 
path, is shown in Figure 4.10. The design works quite well at the center frequency, 
but if the frequency is varied to 1.25 GHz, the length 2 becomes 170.8° and, when 
associated with the reactances of 0.2 pF capacitor at each end, shows a resonance. 
A 0.2-pF capacitor has a reactance of about −j636 Ω at 1.25 GHz and adds up to an 
effective line length of about 4.6° at each end, resulting in a total electrical length of 
180°. This causes a resonance that is exhibited by a rapid change in the phase shift 
Figure 4.10  Equivalent circuit for switched-line phase shifter example.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
135
and by a peak in the insertion loss. When the signal is routed through the path 2, 
the resonance of the length 1 is observed near 1.58 GHz.
The insertion loss resonances thus limit the operating frequency bandwidth of 
such phase shifters. The resonances may be avoided by a suitable choice of electrical 
lengths of 1 and 2. For example, in the present case, β1 and β2 may be 50° and 
95°, respectively. Another method of avoiding these resonances is by terminating the 
OFF path by matched loads. However, this requires additional switching devices. 
In compact circuits when lumped elements in lieu of transmission lines are used, 
the resonance effect is not so pronounced due to their low Q values. By adjusting 
the Q of such elements, the bandwidth of such phase shifters may be achieved up 
to two octaves; however, the insertion loss becomes quite high.
Broadband Switched-Line Phase Shifter
The most common technique used to improve the bandwidth of a switched-line 
phase shifter is by employing a tightly coupled line, also known as Schiffman sec-
tion, in the delay path as shown in Figure 4.9(b). In this case the differential phase 
shift between the coupled-line section and the uniform line is constant over a larger 
bandwidth. The phase shifter realized using this scheme is also termed a Schiff-
man phase shifter. Bandwidth as large as one octave can be achieved. However, the 
resonance problem becomes more severe due to large bandwidth. The basic theory 
of 90° Schiffman phase shifter is described next.
Referring to Figure 4.9(b), the phase constant of the coupled-line section is 
given by [15]
	
f2 = cos−1 R −tan2 q
R + tan2 q
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(4.10a)
	
R = Z0e / Z0o and
Z0 =
Z0eZ0o 	
(4.10b)
where Z0e and Z0o are the even- and odd-mode characteristic impedances of the 
coupled line, respectively and θ is its electrical length. It is assumed that the mode 
of propagation in the coupled line is transverse electromagnetic (TEM) andZ0 is 
the system impedance. The differential phase shift in this case is
	
∆ϕ = ϕ1 − ϕ2	
because the phase constant ϕ1 of the reference line is larger than the coupled-line 
section. By properly selecting the values of R and θ a nearly constant phase shift 
∆ϕ = 90° can be obtained.
Example 4.2
Assuming that SPDT switches are ideal, R = 3 (which corresponds to 6-dB coupling) 
and the electrical length of the reference line is 3θ, calculate phase shift at f0/2, 2f0/3, 
5f0/6, f0, 7f0/6, 4f0/3, and 3f0/2, where f0 is the center frequency and θ = 90° at f0.

136
Phase Shifters
Solution
At f0/2, θ = 45° and ϕ1 = 3θ = 135°,
	
f2 = cos−1 3 −1.02
3 + 1.02
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥= 60°
	
	
∆ϕ = 135° − 60° = 75°	
Similarly,
At 2f0/3, θ = 60° and ϕ1 = 3θ = 180°, ∆ϕ = 180° − 90° = 90°
At 5f0/6, θ = 75° and ϕ1 = 3θ = 225°, ∆ϕ = 225° − 131° = 94°
At f0, θ = 90° and ϕ1 = 3θ = 270°, ∆ϕ = 270° − 180° = 90°
At 7f0/6, θ = 105° and ϕ1 = 3θ = 315°, ∆ϕ = 315° − 229° = 86°
At 4f0/3, θ = 120° and ϕ1 = 3θ = 360°, ∆ϕ = 360° − 270° = 90°
At 3f0/2, θ = 135° and ϕ1 = 3θ = 405°, ∆ϕ = 405° − 300° = 125°
It may be noted that by using a Schiffman phase shifter configuration, one can 
obtain ∆ϕ = 90±4° over an octave bandwidth.
Tighter coupling in the Schiffman section results in larger bandwidth with larger 
phase errors. Several variations of Schiffman section and other geometries have been 
analyzed and reported in the literature. Some of them are treated in Section 4.2.4 
on switched-network phase shifters.
4.2.3	 Loaded-Line Phase Shifters
Loaded-line phase shifters are used in hybrid and monolithic MICs for small phase 
bits like 11.25°, 22.5°, and 45°. The theory of operation of loaded-line digital phase 
shifters is well described in the literature [92–101]. The operation of such circuits is 
based on the loading of a uniform transmission line by a small reactance as shown 
in Figure 4.11. In this case the transmitted wave undergoes a phase shift ∆ϕ that 
depends upon the normalized susceptance b = B/Y0. The reflection caused by the 
susceptance is given by
	
Γ = Y0 −Y0 + jB
(
)
Y0 + Y0 + jB
(
)
=
−jB
2Y0 + jB =
−jb
2 + jb 	
(4.11a)
Figure 4.11  Circuit for illustrating basic operation of loaded-line phase shifter.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
137
The voltage associated with the transmitted wave is VT = VI + VR, where VI and 
VR are voltages of the incoming and reflected waves, respectively. The transmission 
coefficient T can therefore be written as
	
T = VT
VI
= VI + VR
VI
= 1 + Γ =
2
2 + jB =
4
4 + b2
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1/2
e−jtan−1(b/2)
	
(4.11b)
The phase difference introduced by the susceptance (phase of VI − phase of VT) 
may be written as
	
∆ϕ = tan–1(b/2)	
(4.12)
If the normalized shunt susceptance b = 0.2 (i.e., capacitive), ∆ϕ = tan–1(0.1) = 0.1 
rad = 5.73°. In this case the transmitted wave lags in phase as compared with the 
transmitted wave for b = 0. For inductive susceptance b = −0.2, ∆ϕ = −5.73°, the 
transmitted wave advances in phase with respect to b = 0. When the susceptance is 
switched from b = 0.2 to −0.2, the net phase shift is 11.46°.
Another important performance parameter here is the insertion loss (IL) caused 
by the reflected signal and is given by the magnitude of the transmission coefficient 
T. The insertion loss may be expressed as
	
IL = 20log
4
4 + b2
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1/2
= 10log
4
4 + b2
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(4.13)
As ⎪b⎪ is equal in two states, insertion loss has the same value in two states. For b 
= 0.2, IL = 0.043 dB. Although, in the present example, the value of insertion loss 
is not significant, the insertion loss becomes unacceptable for larger phase shift 
values. The high insertion loss or reflection loss is an unfavorable feature of the 
circuit shown in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.12  Configuration for loaded-line phase shifter and its equivalent circuit representation.

138
Phase Shifters
This drawback of reflection from the susceptance producing the phase shift can 
be overcome by using two identical susceptances separated by a quarter-wave line 
length. Such an arrangement is shown in Figure 4.12. The partial reflections caused 
by the two susceptances are equal in magnitude and out of phase (180° phase dif-
ference) when looking into the input terminals. Thus, these undesirable reflections 
cancel each other. Since the line length is quarter-wave at the center frequency only, 
such phase shifters have limited bandwidth.
Analysis of Loaded-Line Phase Shifters
The loaded-line phase shifters use two admittances Yi (= Gi + jBi) approximately a 
quarter wavelength (say, θ radians) apart along a transmission line of characteristic 
impedance Zt(=1/Yt). The subscript i has two values, 1 and 2, which correspond 
to the ON and the OFF states of the device. This circuit configuration can be ana-
lyzed using ABCD parameters for the uniform transmission line equivalent circuit 
shown in Figure 4.12. Equivalent Ye and θe may be obtained by comparing ABCD 
matrices of the two networks. An ABCD matrix of the transmission line of length θ, 
shunt-loaded by susceptances at either end, may be obtained by multiplying ABCD 
matrices of the shunt susceptance, of the line section, and of the second susceptance 
at the other end. This yields
	
A B
C D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥=
1
0
jBi 1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
cosq
jZt sinq
jYt sinq
cosq
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
1
0
jBi 1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
=
cosq −BiZt sinq
(
)
jZt sinq
j 2Bi cosq + Yt sinq −Bi
2Zt sinq
(
)
cosq −BiZt sinq
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥	
(4.14)
An ABCD matrix of the equivalent transmission line of length θe may be written as
	
A B
C D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥=
cosqe
jZe sinqe
jYe sinqe
cosqe
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥	
(4.15)
The equivalent transmission line length θe may be obtained by comparing the A 
terms in (4.14) and (4.15), as
	
cosθe = cosθ − BiZt sinθ	
(4.16)
When the circuit is assumed matched at the center frequency, from (4.16) the 
differential phase shift ∆ϕ is derived to be
	
∆ϕ = cos–1(cosθ − B1Ytsinθ) − cos–1(cosθ − B2Ytsinθ)	
(4.17)
The equivalent transmission line characteristic admittance is obtained by compar-
ing the ratios C/B, as

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
139
	
Ye = Yt[1 − (BiZt)2 + 2BiZtcotθ]1/2	
(4.18)
When θ = 90°, (4.16) and (4.18) may be written as
	
cosθe = −BiZt	
Or,
	
θe = π/2 + BiZt + (BiZt)3/6	
(4.19)
	
Ye = Yt[1 − (BiZt)2]1/2	
(4.20)
From (4.19), as expected, θe > θ for capacitive susceptance and θe < θ for induc-
tive susceptance. Also Ye < Yt, and its magnitude is independent of the susceptance 
type. Thus, if only the sign of Bi is changed (and its magnitude unchanged), Yt is 
selected so that the value of Ye is 0.02 S, the circuit can remain matched in both 
states of the phase shifter. For example, if b1 = B1Zt = 0.2 and b2 = B2Zt = −0.2, the 
corresponding equivalent electrical line lengths are θe1 = 101.54° and θe2 = 78.46°, 
resulting in a differential phase shift ∆ϕ = θe1 − θe2 = 23°. It may be noted that if 
(b1 − b2) is small, ∆ϕ is approximately (b1 − b2) radians. Also in the present case, 
Ye/Yt = 0.98. If the system impedance is 50 Ω, Zt should be 0.98 × 50 = 49 Ω. If Zt 
is retained as 50 Ω, it will result in an input VSWR of 1.02.
When the circuit is assumed matched at the center frequency, and the generator 
and load admittances are equal to Y0, using usual definitions of insertion loss (ILi) 
and the reflection coefficient (ρi), the following expressions are obtained (when Gi 
= 0):
ILi = −10log
cosq −Bi
Yt
sinq
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
+
Bi
Y0
cosq +
1
2Y0Yt
Y0
2 + Yt
2 −Bi
2
(
)sinq
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬
⎭
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
  (4.21)
ri =
Bi
Y0
cosq +
1
2Y0Yt
Yt
2 −Y0
2 −Bi
2
(
)sinq
cosq −Bi
Yt
sinq
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
+
Bi
Y0
cosq +
1
2Y0Yt
Y0
2 + Yt
2 −Bi
2
(
)sinq
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬
⎭
2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
1/2   (4.22)
The design equations that give the line impedance Zt, and the susceptance values 
B1 and B2 for the desired phase shift value, unity VSWR, and minimum insertion 
loss at the center frequency are derived by equating ρi = 0 for two bias states. We 
assume Gi = 0, which implies that the devices have negligible losses.
Closed-form expressions for B1, B2, and Yt in terms of θ and ∆ϕ are found to be
	
Yt = Y0sec(∆ϕ/2)sinθ	
(4.23)
	
B1 = Y0[sec(∆ϕ/2)cosθ + tan(∆ϕ/2)]	
(4.24a)
	
B2 = Y0[sec(∆ϕ/2)cosθ − tan(∆ϕ/2)]	
(4.24b)

140
Phase Shifters
Expressions (4.23) and (4.24) are simple relations that can be used to design a 
loaded-line phase shifter circuit.
There is a larger number of possible combinations of B1 and B2, depending upon 
the value of θ. Various designs for loaded line phase shifters differ to the extent that 
the susceptances B1 and B2 for two states of the phase shifter are realized by dif-
ferent circuit configurations. The design of three types of loaded line phase shifters 
has been described by Bahl and Gupta [97]. The three configurations considered 
were main-line device mounted, stub-mounted, and switchable-stub length type. 
The main-line mounted topology is shown in Figure 4.13, and stub-mounted type 
geometries are shown in Figure 4.14. These configurations use PIN diodes and FETs 
as examples. Selection of the optimum values of Z’s and θ’s is discussed in [97].
Example 4.3
A main-line mounted loaded-line type phase shifter is designed for operation at 
10 GHz using PIN diode chips. The PIN diode EC model (Figure 2.3) parameter 
values are Rf = 1 Ω, Ls = 0.003 nH, Cj = 0.1 pF, and Cp = Rs = 0. The two diodes 
are spaced 90° apart using a line of characteristic impedance Z0. Find the value of 
extra inductance that needs to be added and the line impedance Z0 needed to obtain 
a differential phase shift of 22.5°. Rf may be ignored for this design.
Solution
Here ω = 2πf = 2 × 3.1416 × 10 × 109 = 6.283 × 1010 rad/s and θ = 90°.
Figure 4.13  Main-line PIN diode mounted type loaded-line phase shifter circuit configuration.
Figure 4.14  FET-based loaded-line phase shifter circuit configurations: (a) stub-mounted type, 
and (b) switchable-stub length type.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
141
From (4.24), B1,2 = ±Y0tan(∆ϕ/2)
From (4.24b), B2 = −Y0 tan(22.5°/2) = −1
wL =
−wCj
1 −w2LCj
Or
−1 + w2LCj = −w2LCj →2w2LCj = 1 →L =
1
2w2Cj
=
1
2 × 6.2832 × 1020 × 0.1 × 10−12 = 1.267 nH
L = Ls + Le = 0.003 + Le = 1.267 nH
Le = extra inductance that needs to be added = 1.264 nH.
Y0 tan(11.25°) = 1/(6.283 × 1010 × 1.267 × 10–9) = 0.0125
Z0 = tan(11.25°)/0.0125 = 15.83 Ω
Impedance of the line between two diodes may be calculated from (4.23):
ZT = Z0 cos(11.25°) = 15.83 × 0.98 = 15.53 Ω
Main-Line Mounted Circuit
In this case, the switching devices are mounted directly across the main line. The 
idea is to use device’s high-impedance state capacitance Cj and low-impedance state 
inductance Ls for B1 and B2, respectively. However, it becomes necessary to add an 
external inductance Le in series with the device as shown in Figure 4.13. Suscep-
tances B1 and B2 are now given by
	
B1 =
wCj
1 −w2LCj 	
(4.25a)
	
B2 = −1
wL 	
(4.25b)
where L = Ls + Le. From (4.24) and (4.25), a relationship between Y0 and θ for ∆ϕ 
and Cj may be written as
	
Y0 = wCj
sin∆f
sin2(∆f /2) −cos2 q 	
(4.26)
For maximum phase shifter bandwidth, θ = 90°, in this case (4.26) becomes
	
Y0 = 2ωjCj cot(∆ϕ/2)	
(4.27)
This puts restrictions on the input-output system impedance unless Cj can be cho-
sen arbitrarily, which may become difficult because of the limited availability of 
switching device capacitances.

142
Phase Shifters
Because of these difficulties, this design configuration has not become very 
popular.
Stub-Mounted Type Circuit
In the stub-mounted circuit, as shown in Figure 4.14(a), switching devices (transistors 
are shown here) are mounted at the ends of two shunt-connected stubs separated 
by a line length θ. This configuration allows greater flexibility in circuit param-
eters. Stub characteristic impedance Zb and length θb are determined from device 
reactances Xl and Xh (in low- and high-impedance states, respectively) as follows
	
Zb =
Xl −Xh −XlXh B1 −B2
(
)
B1 −B2 −B1B2 Xl −Xh
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
1/2
	
(4.28)
	
tanqb = Zb 1 −XlB1
(
)
Xl −B1Zb
2
	
(4.29)
where Zt and θ may be selected for wide bandwidth. It has been reported [97] that 
the best bandwidths are obtained for θ ≅ 90°. These design methods make use of 
the device reactances only and assume the device resistances to be negligible.
The switchable-stub length type configuration was also studied [97] using PIN 
diodes and compared with a stub-mounted circuit. It was concluded that the stub-
mounted type circuit is suitable for nonideal PIN diodes, while the switchable-stub 
length type configuration is suitable when nearly ideal PIN diodes are used. At RF 
and lower microwave frequencies, to obtain the small size of the loaded-line phase 
shifter, the straight lines may be replaced with meandered edge-coupled microstrip 
lines similar to the Schiffman section, as described in Section 4.2.4. In this case, 
the use of the Schiffman section retains the bandwidth of the loaded-line phase 
shifter [96].
The design of three types of loaded line phase shifters was described by Bahl 
and Gupta [97]. The three configurations considered were main-line mounted, stub-
mounted, and switchable-stub mounted. Three loaded-line phase shifter circuits 
using stub-mounted configuration were designed, fabricated, and tested at 3 GHz. 
The circuits were fabricated in microstrip configuration on polystyrene substrate 
(εr = 2.55) as well as on alumina substrate (εr = 9.7). The PIN diodes used for the 
polystyrene substrate were HP 5082-3041, while for the alumina substrate they 
were HP 5082-3301 diodes. Measured results and theoretical values are summa-
rized in Table 4.1. The bandwidth was defined as the frequency range over which 
the phase error is less than ±2° and VSWR ≤ 1.2. The bandwidths for the loaded-
line phase shifters were about 20 percent and 10 percent for 22.5° and 45° phase 
bits, respectively.
4.2.4	 Switched-Network Phase Shifters
This class of phase shifters may be considered to be a conceptual evolution from 
switched-line phase shifters. A schematic of a switched-network phase shifter is 

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
143
shown in Figure 4.2(d). When the signal originally passing through network 1 
is switched to pass through network 2, a differential phase shift ∆ϕ = ϕ2 − ϕ1 is 
obtained. The switched-line phase shifter is a special case of a switched-network 
phase shifter with the two networks being sections of transmission lines of differ-
ent lengths. The main advantage of generalizing a switched-line phase shifter into 
a switched-network configuration is that one can design the variations of ϕ1 and ϕ2 
with frequency appropriately and obtain a wider bandwidth for the phase shift ∆ϕ. 
This has been illustrated in Figure 4.15, showing three different switched-network 
phase shift responses. Although LP-HP response shows much wider bandwidth, 
in practice it is limited due to parasitic reactances associated with L and C lumped 
elements.
Low-Pass and High-Pass
The most commonly used networks in switched-network phase shifters are the 
low-pass and high-pass filter configurations shown in Figure 4.16. The switched-
low-pass/high-pass filter phase shifter employs SPDT switches to switch the signal 
between a high-pass and a low-pass filter. Here, the phase shift is realized by using 
the phase lag property of the low-pass network and phase lead characteristic of the 
high-pass network, which are connected between two SPDT switches. Since this 
topology uses two SPDT switches in series, it has relatively higher loss than other 
configurations used for phase bits. Next, an analysis of switched-network phase 
shifters, based on low-pass and high-pass networks, is provided.
The normalized ABCD matrix of the network in Figure 4.16(b) may be written as
Table 4.1  Comparison of Experimental and Theoretical Results for Stub-Mounted Loaded-Line 
Phase Shifters
Phase Shifter Circuit
Substrate
Bandwidth (Percent)
Maximum Insertion  
Loss (dB)
Measured
Theoretical
Measured
Theoretical
22.5° bit
Polystyrene
21
19
0.64
0.55
45° bit
Polystyrene
11
9.6
0.8
0.75
45° bit
Alumina
7
9.2
0.8
0.7
Figure 4.15  Transmission phase response of switched-networks: (a) transmission lines, (b) 
LP-HP, and (c) constant phase shift structure.

144
Phase Shifters
	
A
B
C
D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
n
=
A
B/ Z0
CZ0 D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥=
1 jXn
0 1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1
0
jBn 1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1 jXn
0 1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
=
1 −BnXn
j 2Xn −BnXn
2
(
)
jBn
1 −BnXn
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	
(4.30)
where Xn and Bn are the reactance and susceptance shown in Figure 4.16 normal-
ized with respect to source/load or reference impedance Z0 and admittance Y0, 
respectively. The reflection coefficient S11 and the transmission coefficient S21 of 
the network are given here:
	
S11 = A + B −C −D
A + B + C + D =
j 2Xn −Bn −BnXn
2
(
)
2 1 −BnXn
(
) + j Bn + 2Xn −BnXn
2
(
)
	
(4.31)
	
S21 =
2 AD −BC
(
)
A + B + C + D =
2
2 1 −BnXn
(
) + j Bn + 2Xn −BnXn
2
(
) 	
(4.32)
The transmission phase is given by
	
f = tan−1 −Bn + 2Xn −BnXn
2
(
)
2 1 −BnXn
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	
(4.33)
When both Xn and Bn change signs, as shown in Figure 4.16(c), the phase ϕ retains 
the same magnitude but changes sign. Amplitude of S21 does not change. Thus, the 
phase difference ∆ϕ caused by switching between low-pass and high-pass networks 
is given by
	
∆f = 2tan−1 −Bn + 2Xn −BnXn
2
(
)
2 1 −BnXn
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	
(4.34)
For the phase shifter to be matched, ⎪S11⎪= 0, from (4.31)
Figure 4.16  Phase shift circuits for (a) a switched-line phase shifter: (b) low-pass, and (c) 
high-pass.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
145
	
Bn =
2Xn
1 + Xn
2 	
(4.35)
From (4.34) and (4.35),
	
∆f = 2tan−1
2Xn
Xn
2 −1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥	
(4.36)
Using these equations, Xn and Bn can be expressed in terms of ∆ϕ as
	
Xn = tan(∆ϕ/4)	
(4.37a)
	
Bn = sin(∆ϕ/2)	
(4.37b)
The T-configuration shown in Figure 4.16 may also be replaced by π-section 
filter topology shown in Figure 4.3. The filters have equal amplitude responses over 
the range of interest. The low-pass/high-pass phase shifter configuration is very 
suitable for both narrowband and broadband and where wider bandwidth and 
compact size are required. In addition to low-pass/high-pass networks, one can 
also use all-pass networks as described in Section 4.7. Figure 4.17 shows switched 
LP-HP phase shifter configurations using FETs.
Example 4.4
Design a switched-line type 180° phase shifter at 10 GHz using low-pass/high-pass 
networks. The SPDT switches are assumed to be ideal. The terminal impedance Z0 
= 50 Ω. Find the element values of low-pass and high-pass networks.
Solution
Here ω = 2πf = 2 × 3.1416 × 10 × 109 = 6.283 × 1010 rad/s.
Figure 4.17  Switched low-pass and high-pass phase shifter configurations: (a) simple T- and 
π- networks with series-switches, and (b) T-networks with embedded-FET and series-shunt 
switches.

146
Phase Shifters
Referring to Figure 4.16, the low-pass series inductor and shunt capacitor are repre-
sented by Ll and Cl, respectively. The high-pass series capacitor and shunt inductor 
are represented by Ch and Lh, respectively.
Using (4.37) for low-pass network,
	
wLl
Z0
= tan(∆f /4) →Ll =
50
6.283 × 1010 tan(45°) = 0.796 nH
	
	
wClZ0 = sin(∆f /2) →Cl =
sin(90°)
50 × 6.283 × 1010 = 0.318 pF
	
Using (4.37) for high-pass network,
	
1
wChZ0
= tan(∆f /4) →Ch =
1
6.283 × 1010 × 50 × tan(45°) = 0.318 pF
Z0
wLh
= sin(∆f /2) →Lh =
50
6.283 × 1010 × sin(90°) = 0.796 nH
	
Switched Microstrip Networks
The switched-network phase shifter shown in Figure 4.2(d) can be realized by 
many different ways. Network 1 is in the reference path, and network 2 is in the 
phase shift path. Several other geometries for phase shift network that provide 
constant phase with respect to the reference line or other reference structure have 
been reported [102–115]. Some of them include multiple Schiffman sections [103], 
cascaded Schiffman sections [104], Schiffman section with open stubs [105, 106], 
broadside-coupled disc structure [107], shunt λ/4 stubs [108, 109], T-shaped stepped-
impedance open-stub loaded-line [110], circular sectors structure [111], microstrip-
slot transitions [112], staggered multisection radial stubs [113], and many others 
[114, 115]. Among these and many others, modified microstip type structures such 
as T-shaped stepped-impedance open-stub loaded-line and circular sectors struc-
ture have larger bandwidth potential than multiple Schiffman sections topology.
Some possible combinations of various networks are listed in Table 4.2. In a 
broad sense, the switched-network phase shifter can be grouped in to three catego-
ries. In the first group, a transmission line is used in the reference path and the phase 
Table 4.2  Possible Combinations of Various Networks for Broadband Phase Shift
Reference Path
Phase Shift Path
1. Transmission line section
Stub-loaded line
2. Transmission line section
2-D modified microstrip
3. Transmission line section
Schiffman section/sections
4. Schiffman section/sections
Schiffman section/sections
5. Open-circuited coupled section
Short-circuited coupled section
6. p-network of transmission lines
Short-circuited coupled section

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
147
shift network consists of loaded microstrip line, as shown in Figure 4.18. Another 
configuration using microstrip-slot transitions is shown in Figure 4.19. In the second 
category, as shown in Figure 4.20, the phase shift path uses Schiffman sections and 
the reference path is comprised of transmission line section or Schiffman sections. 
In the third group, as shown in Figure 4.21, an open-circuited coupled section or a 
“π” network of transmission lines is used in the reference path, and a short-circuited 
coupled-line section results in phase shift. The third category networks are usually 
used to realize 180° phase shift.
The most popular switched networks for 180° phase shift are shown in Fig-
ure 4.21. The network in the reference path provides −90° and the network in the 
phase shift path provides +90°, so that the difference phase shift is 180°. In gen-
eral, open-circuited and short-circuited tight coupled lines are used for the phase 
shifter sections. The edge-coupled line sections are commonly replaced with either 
broadside-coupled sections or interdigital Lange couplers. Because of the inherent 
symmetry and broadband characteristics of coupled-line sections or Lange couplers, 
good amplitude balance and constant phase shift are achievable. As the use of via 
holes or ground connections through alumina substrates in MICs require additional 
processing, broadband radial line stubs, as shown in Figure 4.21(c), can also be used 
to simulate RF grounding without additional processing. When the open-circuited 
coupler is replaced with a “π” network of transmission lines, shown in Figure 4.21(a), 
the 180° phase shift becomes independent of the electrical length of the two net-
works. This will be discussed next. Figure 4.21(d) shows another broadband 180° 
phase shift configuration. Several different combinations of band-pass and all-pass 
networks to realize 90° and 180° differential phase shifts for broadband applica-
tions have been described [116]. These networks have more flexibility in fabrication 
Figure 4.18  Switched-network phase shifter configurations: (a) stub-loaded line, and (b) radial-
stub loaded line.
Figure 4.19  Switched-network phase shifter configurations using microstrip-slot transitions.

148
Phase Shifters
Figure 4.20  Several configurations for switched-network phase shifter using Schiffman 
sections: (a) standard Schiffman, (b) series connected Schiffman sections, (c) parallel connected 
Schiffman sections, (d) Schiffman section with open- and short-circuited stubs, (e) parallel-
series connected Schiffman sections, and (f) parallel-series connected Schiffman sections with 
Schiffman section as a reference path.
of switched network phase shifters. One of the most popular 180° phase bit uses 
Lange couplers and is shown in Figure 4.22.
Analysis of Ultra-Broadband 180° Phase Shift
An ultra-broadband 180° phase shift can be realized by using the phase reversal 
property of a tightly coupled (3 dB) 4-port network shown in Figure 4.23. In a cou-
pler when coupled and direct ports are switched from open circuit (ZT = ∞) to short 
circuit (ZT = 0), the transmission phase difference between the input and isolated 
ports changes from −90° to +90°. In the case of the short-circuited condition, an 
additional −180° phase is added, which brings the phase to −270° or +90°. Since 
tight coupling is required, a Lange coupler is generally used for this application. The 
S-parameters of a 4-port network shown in Figure 4.23 are given by
	
b1
b2
b3
b4
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎟
⎟
=
S11
S12
S13
S14
S21
S22
S23
S24
S31
S32
S33
S34
S41
S42
S43
S44
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎟
⎟
a1
a2
a3
a4
⎛
⎝
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟
⎟
⎟
	
(4.38)
or,

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
149
Figure 4.21  Broadband 180° switched-network phase shifter configurations: (a) open-circuited 
and short-circuited coupled lines, (b) π- network of transmission lines and short-circuited coupled 
line, (c) same as (a) where ground is replaced by radial stub RF ground, and (d) coupled short-
circuited stub and short-circuited coupled line.
Figure 4.22  Switched open-short circuited Lange couplers 180° phase shifter bit.

150
Phase Shifters
	
b1 = S11 a1 + S12 a2 + S13 b3 + S14 b4	
(4.39a)
	
b2 = S21 a1 + S22 a2 + S23 b3 + S24 b4	
(4.39b)
	
b3 = S31 a1 + S32 a2 + S33 b3 + S34 b4	
(4.39c)
	
b4 = S41 a1 + S42 a2 + S43 b3 + S44 b4	
(4.39d)
In a matched 3-dB coupler
	
S13 = S24 = S31 = S42 = −j /
2 	
(4.40)
	
S14 = S23 = S32 = S41 = 1/
2 	
(4.41)
	
S11 = S22 = S33 = S44 = 0 	
(4.42)
	
S12 = S21 = S34 = S43 = 0 	
(4.43)
Therefore the 4-port S-matrix becomes
	
S[ ] =
1
2
0
0
−j
1
0
0
1
−j
−j
1
0
0
1
−j
0
0
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
	
(4.44)
When ports 3 and 4 are terminated in open-circuit (i.e., ZT = ∞) and other ports 
are matched, a3 = b3 and a4 = b4 and a1 = b2, in this case, (4.39) through (4.43) 
reduce to
	
b1 = −j
2 b3 + 1
2 b4 	
(4.45a)
	
b2 =
1
2 b3 −
j
2 b4 	
(4.45b)
Figure 4.23  Two-port coupler configuration for phase shifter analysis.

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
151
	
b3 = −j
2 a1 +
j
2 a2 	
(4.45c)
	
b4 =
1
2 a1 −
j
2 a2 	
(4.45d)
By rearranging these equations, the 2-port S-parameters become
	
[S]open =
0
−j
−j
0
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(4.46)
Similarly, when ports 3 and 4 are terminated in short circuits, a3 = −b3 and a4 = −b4 
and (4.44) simplifies to
	
[S]short =
0
j
j
0
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(4.47)
Equations (4.46) and (4.47) illustrate that open to short switching leads to 180° 
phase shift, signals are combined, and ports 1 and 2 are still matched. This condi-
tion holds over a wide frequency range. However, poor match of the couplers limits 
the bandwidth of such phase shifters.
When the open-circuited coupler is replaced by a π or equivalent network of 
transmission lines, the 180° phase shift becomes independent of the electrical length 
of the two networks (i.e., π and short-circuited coupler). This results in a wider 
bandwidth. Figure 4.24 shows these 180° phase difference sections where θ = 90° 
at the center frequency.
The two networks are exactly equivalent for all frequencies except that the 
transmission phase difference between the two circuits is exactly 180° [45]. This 
can be seen by developing ABCD matrices for both networks. For the π network,
A
B
C
D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
p
=
1
0
Y0e
jtanq
1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
cosq
j2sinq
Y0o −Y0e
(
)
j Y0o −Y0e
(
)
2cscq
cosq
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
1
0
Y0e
jtanq
1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥	
(4.48)
Figure 4.24  180° phase difference sections: (a) +90° network, and (b) −90° network.

152
Phase Shifters
	
=
Y0o + Y0e
(
)
Y0o −Y0e
(
)
cosθ
j2sinθ
Y0o −Y0e
(
)
Y0o + Y0e
(
)
2 cos2θ −Y0o −Y0e
(
)
2
j2 Y0o −Y0e
(
)sinθ
Y0o + Y0e
(
)
Y0o −Y0e
(
)
cosθ
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
	
(4.49)
where Y0o = 1/Z0o and Y0e = 1/Z0e.
The ABCD matrix of the shorted coupled-line section is calculated from the y 
parameters as
A
B
C
D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
coupled
=
−Y0o + Y0e
(
)
Y0o −Y0e
(
)
cosq
−
j2sinq
Y0o −Y0e
(
)
−Y0o −Y0e
(
)
2 cos2 q −Y0o −Y0e
(
)
2
j2 Y0o −Y0e
(
)sinq
−Y0o + Y0e
(
)
Y0o −Y0e
(
)
cosq
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎥
  (4.50)
From (4.49) and (4.50)
	
A
B
C
D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
p
=
−1
0
0
−1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
A
B
C
D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
coupled 	
(4.51)
This result is independent of the electrical length thus independent of frequency. 
However, for tight coupling θ = 90° is required.
4.2.5	 Embedded-Device Phase Shifters
The embedded-device type phase shifters are very suitable for monolithic technolo-
gies such as MMIC and RFIC, where the device parasitic reactances are absorbed 
in the circuit design. Both PIN diodes and transistors are used in embedded-device 
type phase shifters. Hybrid technologies using packaged PIN diodes and transistors 
limit its usage due to device parasitic reactances involved and result in limited band-
width. A simple version of embedded-device (also known as device integrated) phase 
shifter is shown in Figure 4.25(a). When the series device is in the low-impedance 
state and the shunt device is in the high-impedance state, the circuit is represented 
by a simple ON state resistance of the series device. In this bias setting, the phase 
shifter is considered in the reference state. Neglecting the device parasitic reac-
tances, the phase shift is considered zero in this state. When the series device is in 
the high-impedance state and the shunt device is in the low-impedance state, the 
circuit is represented by a “π” network as shown in Figure 4.25(b), where CT is the 
parallel combination of Cs and the OFF state capacitance of series device (FET1 in 
this case). The circuit is analyzed as follows.
The ABCD matrix of any of the π networks shown in Figure 4.25(b) is 
given by

4.2	
Theory of Phase Shifters
153
	
A
B
C
D
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟=
1
0
1
jwL
1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
1
1
jwCT
0
1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
1
0
1
jwL
1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
=
1 −
1
w2LCT
1
jwCT
2
jwL −
1
jw3L2CT
1 −
1
w2LCT
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
	
(4.52)
The reflection and transmission coefficients are expressed in the ABCD coefficients as
	
S11 = A + B/ Z0 −CZ0 −D
A + B/ Z0 + CZ0 + D 	
(4.53)
	
S21 =
2 AD −BC
(
)
A + B/ Z0 + CZ0 + D 	
(4.54)
For a reciprocal and symmetric network, AD − BC = 1 and A = D, then (4.53) and 
(4.54) become
	
S11 =
B/ Z0 −CZ0
2A + B/ Z0 + CZ0
	
(4.55)
	
S21 =
2
2A + B/ Z0 + CZ0
	
(4.56)
Figure 4.25  (a) Embedded-FET phase shifter configuration, and (b) simplified LC network 
representation in π configuration.

154
Phase Shifters
Under matched condition,
	
S11 = 0,  B/Z0 − CZ0 = 0	
From (4.52) this leads to
	
1
jwCT
=
2
jwL −
1
jw3L2CT
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬
⎭
Z0
2
	
Or,
	
CT =
L
2Z0
2 +
1
2w2L 	
(4.57)
Equation (4.56) may be written as
	
S21 =
2
2 −
2
w2LCT
+
1
jwCTZ0
+
2
jwL −
1
jw3L2CT
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬
⎭
Z0
	
(4.58)
The phase shift is given by
	
∆f = tan−1
1
wCTZ0
+
2
wL −
1
w3L2CT
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬
⎭
Z0
2 −
2
w2LCT
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
= tan−1
2
wCTZ0
2 −
2
w2LCT
⎧
⎨
⎪⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎫
⎬
⎪⎪
⎭
⎪
⎪
= tan−1 wL
Z0
1
w2LCT −1
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬
⎭
	
(4.59)
From (4.57) and (4.59),
	
∆f = tan−1 wL
Z0
2
wL
Z0
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
−1
⎧
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎫
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎪
⎪
	
(4.60)
When
 
x = wL
Z0
,
 
(4.60) becomes
	
tan∆f =
2x
x2 −1
or x2 −2x / tan∆f −1 = 0
	
Solving for x,

4.3	
Multibit Phase Shifter Circuits
155
	
x =
1
tan ∆f /2
(
) = wL
Z0 	
or
	
L =
Z0
w tan ∆f /2
(
) 	
(4.61)
Substituting the value of L in (4.57),
	
CT =
1
wZ0 sin∆f 	
(4.62)
Thus, for a given phase shift, the values of L, Cs and FET1 size are selected using 
these relations.
4.3	
Multibit Phase Shifter Circuits
A multibit phase shifter is a cascade of n phase bits of phase shift values π, π/2,  π/22, 
. . . π/2n–1 radians. Depending on the application, the number of bits may vary from 
3 to 8. Most of the practical phased array systems use 4-bit phase shifters as a com-
promise between the insertion loss, size, cost, and the incremental improvement in 
system performance when a large number of elements are used. A 4-bit phase shifter 
gives 16 phase steps in increments of 22.5°, and thus any desired phase shift (under 
ideal conditions) can be obtained with an accuracy of ±11.25°. The individual phase 
bits can have the form of any one of the configurations described in Section 4.2. 
The choice of the type of circuit to be used for a particular bit depends on various 
considerations such as the frequency of operation, bandwidth, number of devices 
required, insertion loss, RMS errors, power-handling capability, size, and cost.
Generally, multibit phase shifters have binary bit values, and each bit may have 
a different phase shift configuration based on size and other requirements. When 
bits are cascaded in series, their order of connection and the return loss for each bit 
become important in order to maintain minimum possible interactions between the 
bits. The interactions between the bits drastically affect the transmission amplitude 
and phase flatness, and the value of the primary phase shift as well as their com-
binations. In order to minimize the RMS values of the phase shift and amplitude, 
the return loss better than 20 dB for each bit over the full bandwidth is required.
4.3.1	 RMS Errors
The performance of multibit phase shifters is evaluated by measuring the root mean 
square (RMS) phase and amplitude errors.
The RMS phase error is calculated as shown here:
	
RMS(f)P =
ei
2(f)
i=1
N
∑
N
	
(4.63)

156
Phase Shifters
where
εi(f) = ϕi(f) − Φi
εi(f) = phase shift error of state i as a function of frequency
ϕi(f) = measured relative phase shift of state i versus frequency
Φi = ideal phase shift of state i
i = 1, 2 . . ., N; phase state counter
The RMS amplitude error is calculated using the following relation:
	
RMS(f)A =
mi
2(f)
i=1
N
∑
N
	
(4.64)
where
μi(f) = Ai(f) − Ai
μi(f) = amplitude error of state i as a function of frequency
Ai(f) = measured insertion loss of state i versus frequency
Ai = measured insertion loss in the reference state versus frequency
For a 6-bit phase shifter N = 2n = 26 = 64, including the reference state.
4.3.2	 PIN Diode Phase Shifters
Most of the earlier work on multibit phase shifters was based on PIN diodes using 
hybrid MIC technology. The circuit size was large and its performance was nar-
rowband. Several multibit phase shifters were also developed using PIN diodes in 
monolithic form [117–120].
A 7- to 11-GHz 6-bit phase shifter based on SiGe PIN diodes was developed 
[118, 119]. The 180°, 90°, 45°, 22.5°, 11.25°, and 5.625° bits were linearly cas-
caded. The small 11.25° and 5.625° bits were realized by switching inductive and 
capacitive reactances. The schematic for small phase bits is shown in Figure 4.26(a). 
Figure 4.26  MMIC PIN diode phase sifter configurations: (a) 5.625° and 11.25° phase bits, and 
(b) 22.5°, 45°, 90°, and 180° phase bits.

4.3	
Multibit Phase Shifter Circuits
157
The 180°, 90°, 45°, and 22.5° phase bits employed switched low-pass/high-pass 
networks using PIN diode SPDT switches. The low-pass and high-pass networks 
comprised of T- and π-configurations, respectively. The schematic for these phase 
bits is shown in Figure 4.26(b). The 6-bit phase shifter was fabricated using IBM 
5HP SiGe process. The description of PIN diodes is given in Chapter 2. The chip 
size was 14.4 mm2. The control voltages used were ±1 V. The current for the phase 
shifter was 45 mA. The measured insertion loss and return loss were about 12 dB 
and 10 dB, respectively. Measured values of output P1dB and IP3 were 3 dBm and 
17 dBm, respectively. For 22.5° and 45° bits the phase error was less than ±5° and 
for 90° and 180° bits the phase error was less than ±10°.
4.3.3	 MESFET/HEMT Phase Shifters
Over the past three decades, multibit MESFET/HEMT monolithic based phase 
shifters received maximum attention. Embedded-device configurations for small bits 
became an integrated part of such phase shifters and are compact in size and have 
broadband characteristics. Numerous examples describing multibit GaAs MMIC 
phase shifters using both MESFET and HEMT technologies have been reported in 
the literature. Typical examples of phase shifters are discussed next, and multibit 
CMOS phase shifters are described in the succeeding section.
X/Ku-Band MESFET MMIC 4-Bit Phase Shifter
An X/Ku-band 4-bit phase shifter was developed [65] with 22.5°, 45°, 90°, and 180° 
phase states. A suitable topology was selected for each bit to provide an optimum 
performance and size. The topology was then optimized employing a simple FET 
model consisting of ON resistance and OFF capacitance where FET periphery is a 
variable. Finally, then the circuit was re-optimized using measured S-parameters 
data for FET sizes closest to standard FET cells (e.g., 50, 75, 100, 150, and 200 
μm). During the design of the compact and low-loss phase shifters, several tradeoffs 
were considered. These were: insertion loss, insertion loss ripple, RMS phase error, 
VSWR, and chip size.
The topology used in the 22.5° bit is of the integrated or embedded-FET type 
as shown in Figure 4.4(a), where the inductors were replaced with high impedance 
lines and the FET’s reactances become part of the phase shifting low-pass/high-pass 
filter networks. Here, for the reference state, FET1 and FET 2 are ON, and FET3 is 
OFF. This configuration has a lower insertion loss due to a single device in series. 
The configuration for the 45° bit was a modified version of the embedded-FET type 
topology shown in Figure 4.4(a), where resistors were used in series with the shunt 
lines to minimize the difference in insertion loss between the reference and bit ON 
states. This bit functions the same way as the 22.5° bit.
In order to achieve low insertion loss and 90° flat phase response, the reflection-
type phase shifter topology, as shown in Figure 4.7(a), was used. For broadband 
applications, a Lange coupler is usually used as a 90° hybrid. The 90° phase shift was 
achieved by switching in and out capacitor C1. A major problem with this topology 
is not having good match over large bandwidth. In order to get good match and flat 
phase response, the Lange coupler was modified. The Lange coupler’s conductors 

158
Phase Shifters
were placed on 3-μm thick polyimide atop the base GaAs. This configuration results 
in lower loss and better match than a Lange on GaAs. The coupler was folded and 
EM simulated.
The 180° bit design was of switched-low-pass/high-pass filter phase shifter type, 
shown in Figure 4.27. This design employed series-FET SPDT switches to switch the 
signal between a high-pass and a low-pass filter. The filters have equal amplitude 
responses over the range of interest. The low-pass/high-pass phase shifter configu-
ration is very suitable where an octave bandwidth and compact size are required.
On Chip Integrated Digital Control
To obtain high-speed operation with low-power dissipation in FET switches, the 
phase shifter ICs have integrated on-chip drivers. The primary objectives of the on-
chip drivers were (a) to be compatible with TTL logic levels, (b) to have minimum 
GaAs chip size, (c) to achieve the same or better chip yield and (d) to maintain overall 
lower cost. In these drivers, both depletion-mode and enhancement-mode transistors 
were used. The logic gate design was optimized by adjusting the sizes of FETs and 
voltage shift diodes to achieve correct voltage levels, low-power consumption, and 
high-speed operation. The design of drivers was accomplished by using the SPICE 
program. These drivers are compatible with CMOS and TTL logic families and 
their treatments can be found in [11].
The power supply voltage for the digital circuits was −5 V, and the logic input 
voltage is 0 V for “low” and 5 V for “high.” The logic inputs were converted to VC 
and —Vc to drive the switching FETs. The device control voltages were −4.8 V and 0 V.
Circuit Fabrication
The phase shifter circuit was fabricated using an ion-implanted planar refractory 
gate, multifunction self-aligned gate (MSAG) MESFET MMIC process [62] with 
multilevel plating (MLP) feature. MSAG features a full suite of active and passive 
Figure 4.27  Switched network 180° phase shifter bit.

4.3	
Multibit Phase Shifter Circuits
159
components fabricated on 4-in diameter GaAs wafers and was used to develop low-
cost, high-volume, high-performance, and highly reliable multifunction monolithic 
ICs for commercial and military applications. Because of its versatility in integrating 
microwave and high-speed LSI functions on a single chip, the process was named 
the multifunction self-aligned gate process. The MSAG® process eliminates the 
need for a gate recess, the single most important yield and reproducibility-limiting 
step. Each device type, which may include EFET, DFET, Schottky diode/limiter, 
low-noise FET, switching FET, power FET, and n′ implants, is optimized for its 
respective function. The phase shifter devices were fabricated using process 5 with 
three implants. The process included Au/Ge/Ni metallization for ohmic contacts, 
0.4-μm TiWN Schottky barrier gates, along with thin film and ion-implanted resis-
tors. The 0.4-μm TiWN gates were covered by a 0.8-μm overlay after planariza-
tion. The MSAG TiWN gate was extremely robust (survived 900°C rapid thermal 
anneal temperature), which resulted in MTTF of 100 years at a channel temperature 
of 150°C. A thickness of 2000 Å silicon nitride (εr = 6.8) was used for both MIM 
capacitors and passivation. The air bridges and bonding pads were 4.5-μm-thick 
plated gold.
In the MLP MSAG process, three layers of polyimide (εr = 3.2) were used: inter-
level dielectric (3 μm thick), inductor crossover layer (7 μm), and scratch protection 
buffer layer (7 μm thick) for mechanical protection of the finished circuitry. Three 
metal layers were metal 1 (0.5 μm thick), first plated gold (4.5 μm thick), and sec-
ond plated gold (4.5 μm thick). The multilevel plating (MLP) process allowed the 
designer to reduce overall chip size and lower resistive loss in passive components. 
Low capacitance metallization crossovers were achieved by a polyimide intermetal 
dielectric layer. Front side processing was completed by depositing a polyimide buf-
fer layer. The buffer layer provided mechanical protection of the circuit structures 
during backside processing, dicing, and subsequent assembly operations. Finally, 
the wafers were thinned to their final thicknesses, through-wafer vias were etched, 
and the backsides were metallized. The substrate thickness of the phase shifter chips 
was 125 μm. Figure 4.28 shows the photograph of the X/Ku-band phase shifter IC. 
The chip size was 2.6 mm2.
Figure 4.28  Photograph of X/Ku-band 4-bit phase shifter. Chip size was 2.4 × 1.1 mm2.

160
Phase Shifters
Test Data Summary
The typical performance of this X/Ku-band phase shifter was determined using 
on-wafer measurements to develop the performance charts that follow. Figure 4.29 
demonstrates tight correlation between the simulated and measured phase shift 
versus frequency, particularly over the design band of 10.7 to 15.5 GHz. The phase 
states shown are reference states, or all phase bits off; all primary bits of 22.5°, 45°, 
90°, and 180°; and two combination states of 270° and 337.5°, or the all phase bits 
on state. This collection of phase states yields a concise representation of the IC 
performance without the overhead of measuring and analyzing every phase state 
combination. The insertion loss, input return loss, and output return loss versus 
frequency and phase states are shown in Figures 4.30, 4.31, and 4.32, respectively. 
Over the design band, the insertion loss (Figure 4.30) of the X/Ku-band phase shifter 
is excellent at < 6 dB. In addition, the loss variation with respect to phase state is 
Figure 4.29  Measured and simulated relative phase shift versus frequency and phase state.
Figure 4.30  Insertion loss versus frequency and phase state.

4.3	
Multibit Phase Shifter Circuits
161
also quite good at < 1.5 dB, or an RMS amplitude error of less than 0.3 dB. As 
seen in Figures 4.31 and 4.32, the S11 and S22 magnitudes (input and output return 
loss) of this IC are < −10dB over all phase states.
The phase performance metrics of the X/Ku-band phase shifter are shown in 
Figures 4.33(a) and (b). In addition to Figure 4.29, Figure 4.33(a) shows the mea-
sured phase shift compared to the ideal phase value. Worst case, or peak phase 
error, over the tested phase states and frequencies is −6.0 to 8.0°. This figure dem-
onstrates the high degree of phase accuracy across the entire design band. Finally, 
Figure 3.33(b) shows the statistical figures of merit for this phase shifter: the aver-
age phase error and the RMS error. The average error is between −2.5° and 1.0°. 
The RMS phase error is < 4° across the operating band. Taken together the peak, 
average, and RMS phase errors are indicative of a very good, mature phase shifter 
design. However, these results were achieved on a first iteration with minor tweaks 
and represent the state of the art. The performance outcome of this X/Ku-band 
Figure 4.31  Input return loss versus frequency and phase state.
Figure 4.32  Output return loss versus frequency and phase state.

162
Phase Shifters
phase shifter is a strong validation of the topologies and methodologies employed 
in the execution of this design.
X-Band HEMT MMIC 4-Bit Phase Shifter
A large variety of HEMT-based phase shifters (chip and plastic packaged) are offered 
from MMIC venders including MACOM, Hittite, and TriQuint. An X-band 4-bit 
GaAs pHEMT digital phase shifter with integrated CMOS driver in a 4-mm PQFN 
plastic surface mount package is available from MACOM. The least significant bit 
(LSB) is 22.5°, and the circuit provides the phase shift from 0° to 360° over the 8- 
to 12-GHz frequency range. Typical phase shifter performance include insertion 
loss = 6.5 ± 1 dB, RMS phase error = 6°, RMS amplitude error = 1.1 dB, VSWR = 
1.8:1, P1dB = 25 dBm, and IIP3 = 40 dBm. More details for these phase shifters can 
be found in manufacturer’s data sheets.
Figure 4.33  (a) Relative phase response versus commanded state and frequency, (b) Statistical 
phase error versus frequency.

4.3	
Multibit Phase Shifter Circuits
163
4.3.4	 CMOS Phase Shifters
Numerous papers have been published [121–150] on Si CMOS multibit phase shift-
ers. In this section, some typical examples are discussed and compared with GaAs 
technology.
X-Band 5-Bit CMOS Phase Shifters
Schematic of a 5-bit phase shifter developed [146] using Si-SOI CMOS technology 
is shown in Figure 4.34. The topology employs switched network phase shifter con-
figuration with two SPDT and four DPDT switches. The DPDT switch is preferred 
to two SPDT switches because of potential lower insertion loss and compact size. 
The schematic of the DPDT is shown in Figure 3.13(b) (Chapter 3). The phase shift 
networks were designed over 8 to 12 GHz using low-pass/band-pass for 11.25° 
and 22.5° bits and low-pass/high-pass for larger bits. The 5-bit phase shifter was 
fabricated using 0.18-μm IBM 7RFSOI CMOS technology. A photograph of the 
X-band 5-bit phase shifter is shown in Figure 4.35. The chip size was 0.89 mm2. 
The control voltage was 0/1.8 V. The measured insertion loss, RMS phase error, 
and RMS amplitude error, over the 8- to 12-GHz frequency range, were less than 
10.8 dB, 6.5°, and 0.5 dB, respectively. The measured input P1dB was about 9.3 
dBm, and the power consumption was negligible.
Compact X-Band 6-Bit CMOS Phase Shifter
A compact X-band 6-bit phase shifter was developed using CMOS technology 
[147]. The topology employs switched network phase shifter configuration with 
two SPDT and four DPDT switches as shown in Figure 4.36. Basic schematic of this 
circuit is similar to Figure 4.34 with an added 5.6° bit at the input. The circuit size 
Figure 4.34  Schematics of phase shifting networks: (a) 5-bit phase shifter configuration, (b) 
11.25° and 22.5° bits, (c) 45° and 90° bits, and (d) 180° bit.

164
Phase Shifters
was reduced by using simplified low-pass/band-pass and low-pass/high-pass phase 
shift networks. The phase shifter was designed using the floating body technique 
for CMOS transistors over 8 to 11 GHz.
The 6-bit phase shifter was fabricated using 0.13-μm CMOS technology. The 
chip size was 0.88 × 0.58 mm2. The control voltage was 0/1.2 V. The measured 
insertion loss, RMS phase error, and RMS amplitude error, over the 8.5- to 10.5-
GHz frequency range, were less than 13.2. dB, 4.1° and 0.6 dB, respectively. The 
DC power consumption was negligible.
Ka-Band CMOS 5-Bit Phase Shifter
A 5-bit CMOS phase shifter consisting of switched LC networks was designed 
with 0.13-μm CMOS process [139]. The 11.25° bit employed hyperabrupt varac-
tor diodes and was designed to be used as a digital or an analog bit. All other bits 
used 0.13-μm CMOS transistors.
The 22.5° bit used delay lines, while the topology for 45°and 90° bits was the 
same and employed LC low-pass networks. The 180° bit was realized by two 90° 
bits. The schematic diagram for the 5-bit phase shifter is shown in Figure 4.37(a) 
and topologies for the 11.25°, 22.5°, and45° /90° are shown in Figure 4.37(b). For 
Figure 4.35  Photograph of the X-band 5-bit CMOS phase shifter. (Courtesy of Dr. J.-G. Kim.)
Figure 4.36  Schematics of the compact 6-bit phase shifter.

4.4	
Analog Phase Shifters
165
the reference state, the transistor T1 is ON and transistor T2 is OFF. For 22.5°, 
45°, 90°, and 180° bits, transistor T1 is OFF and transistor T2 is ON.
The circuit was fabricated using IBM 8HP process with eight metal layers. The 
fT for 0.13-μm CMOS transistors is about 95 GHz. The measured insertion loss at 
35 GHz was 14.8 +/− 1.7 dB over all phase states and return loss was better than 
10 dB. The RMS phase and amplitude errors were approximately 5° and 1 dB, 
respectively.
4.4	
Analog Phase Shifters
Analog or voltage controlled or tunable/variable phase shifters have numerous appli-
cations, including linearization of power amplifiers, phased array antennas, phase 
discriminators, beam forming networks, power dividers, and fine phase tuning of 
T/R modules [48, 151–157]. Analog phase shifters provide continuous phase shift 
with lower insertion loss in comparison to digital phase shifters. Both reflection-
type and transmission-line type phase shifters are used for analog applications. 
The reflection-type phase shifters have flat phase response with frequency, while 
transmission-line type phase shifters have linear phase response with frequency.
4.4.1	 Voltage-Controlled Reflection-Type Phase Shifters
Reflection-type phase shifters are normally used to obtain voltage variable phase 
shift. In Figure 4.7(a), if the device and capacitor C1 combination is replaced by a 
variable capacitor such as a varactor diode, as discussed in Section 2.7.2 (Chapter 
2), the phase shift is continuously varied by applying variable control voltage to 
the diode. Figure 4.38(a) shows schematics of commonly used voltage-controlled 
Figure 4.37  Schematics of phase shifting networks: (a) 5-bit phase shifter configuration, and 
(b) topologies for phase bits.

166
Phase Shifters
reflection-type phase shifters. In Figure 4.38(b), two diodes may have different sizes 
and are biased separately through voltage divider resistors to obtain linear phase 
shift with control voltage. This configuration has been used to obtain about 180° 
over the 6- to 18-GHz frequency range. The diodes can be Schottky, hyperabrupt 
varactor, or PIN.
4.4.2	 Voltage-Controlled Transmission-Type Phase Shifters
A varactor-loaded transmission line phase shifter can be treated as a distributed 
transmission line and represented by cascaded sections of lumped elements in T- or 
π-configuration, as shown in Figure 4.39. The transmission phase of n π-sections 
is given by [123]:
	
f21 = −ntan−1 w LC 2 −w2LC /4
(
)
2 1 −w2LC /2
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	
(4.65)
Assuming w = 2pf << 1/
LC,  where f is the frequency of operation and C is 
the diode capacitance,
	
f21 = −2npf
LC 	
(4.66a)
If the diode capacitance with control voltage is varied from Cmin to Cmax, the 
phase shift is given by
	
∆f = 2npf
L
Cmax −
Cmin
(
) rad.	
(4.66b)
Assuming Cmax/Cmin ratio of 4, at two extreme capacitance values, the charac-
teristic impedances can be written as
Figure 4.38  Schematics of varactor-tuned reflection-type phase shifters: (a) varactor diodes 
connected back-to-back, and (b) varactor diodes connected in parallel.

4.4	
Analog Phase Shifters
167
	
Z0max =
L
Cmax
=
2Z0 	
(4.67a)
	
Z0min =
L
Cmin
= Z0
2 	
(4.67b)
where Z0 is the system impedance. At the extreme capacitance values, the worst-
case return loss (RL) is given by
	
RL = −20log Γ = −20log
2 −1
2 + 1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥= 15.3dB 	
(4.68)
Figure 4.40 shows the phase shift variation with frequency of a π-low-pass 
type transmission-line phase shifter. In this case, the phase shift varies linearly 
with frequency.
Example 4.5
Determine the number of sections (n) and inductance value L required to obtain 
180° phase shift using π-network representation. The nominal capacitance values 
are C = 0.5 pF, and Cmin = 0.25 pF and Cmax = 1 pF. The operating frequency is 5 
GHz and the system impedance is 50 Ω.
Solution
Here Z0 = 50 Ω, f = 5 GHz, ω = 2πf = 2 × 3.1416 × 5 × 109 = 31.416 × 1010 rad/s, 
∆ϕ = π rad.
Figure 4.39  Schematics of varactor-tuned transmission-line phase shifters: (a) T-network 
representation, and (b) π-network representation.

168
Phase Shifters
Let w = 0.5/
LC , L = 0.25/(ω2C) = 0.25/(31.4162 × 1018 × 0.5 × 10–12)H = 
0.5066 nH
From (4.66b),
n =
∆f
2pf
L
Cmax −
Cmin
(
)
=
3.1416
31.416 × 109 ×
0.5 × 10−9
1 × 10−12 −
0.25 × 10−12
(
)
≅9
Thus, the values of L and n are 0.51 nH and 9, respectively.
Figure 4.41 shows a schematic of T-high-pass transmission-line phase shifter. 
The absolute value of phase shift of n sections of this structure is given as
	
∆f =
n
2pf
L
1
Cmin
−
1
Cmax
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ rad. 	
(4.69)
Figure 4.40  Phase shift versus frequency for different Cmax values.
Figure 4.41  High-pass transmission line phase shifter configuration using three unit cells.

4.4	
Analog Phase Shifters
169
Figure 4.42 shows the phase shift variation with frequency of T-high-pass type 
transmission-line phase shifter. In this case the phase shift varies inversely with fre-
quency. Thus, a properly selected combination of low-pass and high-pass sections 
can be used to realize a flat phase shift response with frequency.
Assuming the varactor’s capacitance variation given as
	
C =
Cj0
1 + Vc
Vb
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
	
(4.70)
where Vc is positive. Cmax is realized when Vc is zero, from (4.69) and (4.70),
	
∆f =
n
2pf
LCj0
Vcmin
Vb
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ rad. 	
(4.71)
This equation shows that a continuous linear with voltage phase shift can be real-
ized by using hyperabrupt varactors and high-pass transmission-line phase shifter 
configuration.
A high-pass transmission-line phase shifter shown in Figure 4.41 was designed 
on Rogers RT/Duroid using MACOM hyperabrupt varactors (MA46H120) and 
tested. The measured maximum insertion loss was 3.6 dB, and return loss was bet-
ter than 10.2 dB over full voltage variations (1–4 V) and 4.3- to 5.6-GHz frequency 
range. The values of phase shift were about 275° and 121° at 4.3 and 5.6 GHz, 
respectively. At 5 GHz, the phase shift variation was 44°/V. The phase deviation 
from the linear operation was within 4.2°.
4.4.3	 Analog Varactor Diode Phase Shifters
A variable reflection-type phase shifter with reduced size was reported by Abbosh 
[157]. In the proposed design, the length of the coupled-lines section was less than 
Figure 4.42  Phase shift versus frequency for different Cmax values.

170
Phase Shifters
0.1λ and the variable phase shift was obtained by changing the capacitance of varac-
tor diodes connected at the output ports. GaAs hyperabrupt varactor diodes with a 
biasing voltage range from 2 to 20 V were used to obtain 360° phase shift over the 
1.8- to 2.7-GHz frequency range. The phase range was 360° ± 15° with the inser-
tion loss less than 3.2 dB and the return loss greater than 10 dB.
4.4.4	 Analog CMOS Phase Shifters
Several versions of analog CMOS phase shifters have been reported in the literature. 
Some examples are briefly discussed next.
Reflection-Type Phase Shifter
A compact 0–360° variable RTPS RFIC was designed at 24 GHz using 0.18-μm 
CMOS process [130]. The quadrature hybrid used was of transformer-based lumped 
element. The reflection load consisted of π-type resonated varactor network, wherein 
two shunt MOS varactors were placed at the two ends of a series inductor. Two 
stages were cascaded to achieve variable 0–360° phase shift. The chip size was 0.33 
mm2, and the measured insertion loss was 11.2 ± 1.2 dB.
Transmission-Type Phase Shifter
An analog transmission-phase shifter was developed employing IBM 180-nm CMOS 
technology [123]. The circuit used multisections of low-pass π-networks, as shown 
in Figure 4.39, and MOS varactors with tunable capacitance range of 0.3–1.3 pF 
over a control voltage of 0–5 V. The design used a distributed amplifier, sandwiched 
between sections, for loss compensation. The measured return loss was better than 
10 dB over the 2.1- to 6-GHz frequency range. Continuous phase shift values of 
220°, 360°, and 660° were measured across 2.4–2.48-, 3.4–3.5-, and 5.73–5.83-
GHz bands, respectively.
Differential Phase Shifter
Differential phase shifters have also been reported in the literature. They were 
designed to have smaller chip size for the same phase shift value in comparison 
to single-ended phase shifter. Figure 4.43 shows schematic of a varactor-tuned 
transmission-line differential phase shifter. The analysis of this configuration can 
be simplified by placing an electric wall passing through the S-S point. In this case 
the phase shift is two times the phase shift given by (4.66b), due to two paths. For 
n sections, the phase shift is given by
	
∆f = 4npf
L
Cmax −
Cmin
(
) 	
(4.72)
Another differential phase shifter unit cell, where both inductor and capacitor 
are tuned, is shown in Figure 4.43(b). The equivalent circuit of this configuration 
is shown in Figure 4.43(c). The phase shift is given by (4.72), where

4.5	
Broadband Phase Shifters
171
	
L = L a −
1
w2Ca
	
(4.73)
Thus, by selecting properly the bias for the series diode, the value of series induc-
tor can be varied.
A four-cell differential phase shifter employing silicon-on-glass technology 
was developed, and the diode used was Schottky varactor [155]. The measured 
performance includes insertion loss of 2.3–3.7 dB, phase shift range of 180°, and 
IIP3 of 52 dBm.
In the analog phase shifters, the control voltage usually comes from a processor 
or other controller using a lookup table or other functionality that sets the appro-
priate varactor capacitances for a given phase shift value.
4.5	
Broadband Phase Shifters
The phase shifters discussed up to this point have narrow bandwidth—less than 50 
percent bandwidth. Several applications such as broadband phased array, electronic 
warfare, and broadband communications require multioctave phase shifters. The 
design of phase shifters with bandwidth greater than 50 percent poses a significant 
challenge because of poor match, large phase and amplitude ripple, and high SPDT 
switch loss. Although hybrid MIC technology can be used to develop broadband 
phase shifters, MMIC phase shifters, in general, offer smaller size and lighter 
Figure 4.43  (a) Schematic of varactor-tuned transmission-line differential phase shifter, (b) 
unit cell of inductor- and capacitor-tuned transmission-line differential phase shifter, and (c) 
equivalent circuit representation of (b).

172
Phase Shifters
weight, wider bandwidth, higher reliability, lower cost, and much better unit-to-
unit amplitude and phase tracking capability when manufactured in large volume. 
Monolithic technology is particularly beneficial to broadband phase shifters due 
to the elimination of the parasitic effects of bond wires and discrete components 
used in hybrid MICs. Phase shifters working up to two-octave bandwidth are dis-
cussed in this section. Progress in broadband MMIC phase shifters is summarized 
in Tables 4.3 and 4.4.
The phase shifter configurations suitable for broadband phase shifters are embed-
ded–FET type, reflection-type, low-pass/high-pass, switched networks, and switched 
all-pass networks. For broadband applications, switched networks are invariably 
used for 180-bit, and the switched all-pass networks type has been used for other 
phase bits. Excluding embedded-FET and reflection topologies, all other types use 
SPDT switches. Analytical comparisons of phase shift topologies for three different 
bands are given in Tables 4.5–4.7. Among these embedded-FETs, low-pass, high-
pass, and all-pass have the largest bandwidths, especially at RF and low microwave 
frequencies. Sizes given are for GaAs technology and low loss considerations. For 
CMOS technology, size is smaller and loss is higher.
The realization of broadband (up to two octaves) 45°, 90°, and 180° bits is very 
tricky. The potential topologies for 45° and 90° are of reflection-type shown in 
Figure 4.2(a) and switched LP/HP shown in Figure 4.3. Reflection-type has lower 
loss and phase error than LP/HP, while size and VSWR are comparable. Suitable 
topologies for the 180° bit are of reflection-type (Figure 4.2(a)), switched LP/HP 
(Figure 4.3), and switched network (Figure 4.2(d)). Due to imperfect devices, the 
reflection-type phase bit provides low insertion loss and small size, but results in 
Table 4.3  Summary of S/C-band MMIC Broadband Multibit Phase Shifters
Freq. Range  
(GHz)
No. of  
Bits
Insertion  
Loss (dB)
Chip Size  
(mm2)
Technology
Year [Reference]
2.0–8.0
2
6
8.1*
0.5-μm GaAs FET
1984 [32]
2.0–6.0
5
10
66.1*
0.5-μm GaAs FET
1989 [39]
2.3–3.8
4
4
2.6
0.4-μm GaAs MSAG FET
2008 [62]
2.0–8.0
4
7
6.0
0.4-μm GaAs MSAG FET
2009 [181]
* Do not have on-chip integrated digital circuits
Table 4.4  Summary of C-Ku-Band MMIC Broadband Multibit Phase Shifters 
Freq. Range  
(GHz)
No. of  
Bits
Insertion  
Loss (dB)
Chip Size  
(mm2)
Technology
Year [Reference]
4–20
5
14.0
43.4*
0.5-μm GaAs SAG FET
1989 [39]
6–15
5
17.0
14.4*
SiGe PIN
2002 [118]
6–18
5
14.1
16.0*
0.5-μm GaAs FET
1995 [45]
6–18
6
9.3
6.0
0.4-μm GaAs MSAG FET
2008 [181]
6–18
5
10.8
11.0*
0.5-μm GaAs HEMT
2002 [158] 
7–11
6
5.0
3.4
0.4-μm GaAs MSAG FET
2009 [181]
9–15
5
19.0
4.3*
0.18-μm CMOS 
2006 [124]
9–16
4
6.0
2.6
0.4-μm GaAs MSAG FET
2008 [65]
* Do not have on-chip integrated digital circuits

4.5	
Broadband Phase Shifters
173
higher phase error and VSWR values. The other two topologies use SPDT switches 
and lumped element/distributed networks and have higher loss and large size. How-
ever, they provide constant 180° phase shift and low phase error over greater than 
two octave bandwidth.
4.5.1	 GaAs MESFET/HEMT Broadband Phase Shifters
Many digital broadband phase shifters developed using MESFET and HEMT tech-
nologies have been reported in the literature. Digital phase shifter topologies are 
integrated low-pass/high-pass/all-pass for small bits, reflection-type for 45° and 90° 
bits and switched low-pass/high-pass or switched network for the 180° bit.
7- to 11-GHz 6-Bit Phase Shifter
Figure 4.44 shows layout of a 7- to 11-GHz 6-bit phase shifter. It used integrated 
low-pass/high-pass networks for the 5.6°, 11.25°, and 22.5° bits, integrated all-pass 
Table 4.5  Four-Bit Phase Shifter Comparison for Broadband Applications (2–8 GHz)
Phase Shifter Type
Bit Size  
(Degree)
Bit Error  
(Degree)
Insertion  
Loss (dB)
Return  
Loss (dB)
Size  
(mm2)
Bandwidth
Integrated low-pass/
high-pass
22.5, 45
±5, 10
<1
>18
<0.7
>2 octave
Reflection
90
±5
<2
>10
<1.8
<2 octave
Switched network
180
±5
<2.5
>18
<2.4
>2 octave
Switched low-pass/ 
high-pass
90, 180
±10
<3.0
>15
<1.8
<2 octave
Table 4.7  Multibit Phase Shifter Comparison for UWB (UHF-C-Band) Applications
Phase Shifter Type
Bit Size  
(Degree)
Bit Error  
(Degree)
Insertion  
Loss (dB)
Return  
Loss (dB)
Bandwidth
Integrated low-pass/
high-pass
5.6, 11.2, 22.5, 45
±2, 3, 5, 10
<1.5
>18
<3 octave
Integrated all pass
5.6, 11.2, 22.5, 45
±2, 3, 5, 10
<2
>15
<5 octave
Switched network
180
±5
<2.5
>18
<3 octave
Switched low-pass/
high-pass
90, 180
±15
<4.0
>15
<3 octave
Table 4.6  Six-Bit Phase Shifter Comparison for Broadband Applications (4–18 GHz)
Phase Shifter Type
Bit Size 
(Degree)
Bit Error 
(Degree)
Insertion 
Loss (dB)
Return  
Loss (dB)
Size  
(mm2)
Bandwidth
Integrated low-pass/
high-pass
5.6, 11.2, 
22.5, 45
±2, 3, 5, 10
<1.5
>18
<0.6
>2 octave
Reflection
45, 90
±10
<2
>10
<0.8
<2 octave
Switched network
180
±5
<3.0
>18
<1.5
>2 octave
Switched low-pass/ 
high-pass
90, 180
±10
<3.5
>15
<1.2
<2 octave

174
Phase Shifters
for the 45°, reflection-type for the 90° bit, and switched low-pass/high-pass for the 
180° bit. The circuit was optimized using the same design methodology as described 
in Section 4.3.3. The chip was fabricated by employing 0.4-μm MSAG FET process. 
The chip size was 3.4 mm2.
Measured performance of the 7- to 11-GHz 6-bit phase shifter is shown in Figure 
4.45. The insertion loss and return loss over the target frequency range were better 
than 5 dB and 13 dB, respectively. The RMS phase and amplitude errors were less 
than 4.5° and 0.5 dB, respectively. The insertion loss and return loss over all phase 
states and over 7–11 GHz was less than 6 dB and better than 10 dB, respectively.
2- to 8-GHz GaAs MESFET Phase Shifter
The 2- to 8-GHz MMIC four-bit phase shifter was designed with 22.5°, 45°, 90°, 
and 180° phase states. A suitable topology was selected for each bit to provide an 
optimum performance and compact size. During the selection of each bit topol-
ogy of the compact and low loss 2- to 8-GHz phase shifter, several tradeoffs were 
Figure 4.44  Physical layout of the 7- to 11-GHz 4-bit MMIC phase shifter.
Figure 4.45  Measured performance of the 7- to 11-GHz MMIC phase shifter: (a) insertion loss, 
input, and output return loss in the reference state, and (b) RMS phase and amplitude errors 
versus frequency.

4.5	
Broadband Phase Shifters
175
considered, including insertion loss, RMS phase error, return loss, and chip size. 
The design was optimized as described in Section 4.3.3.
The topologies used for the 22.5° and 45° bits are of the integrated all-pass 
filter networks as shown in Figure 4.4(a). In order to achieve low insertion loss and 
flat 90° phase response, the reflection-type phase shifter topology shown in Figure 
4.7(a) was used. The 180° bit design employed SPDT switches to switch the signal 
between a short-circuited Lange coupler (+90°) and a broadband band-pass phase 
shift network (−90°) is shown in Figure 4.46. This phase shifter configuration is 
very suitable where multioctave bandwidth and 180° phase shift value are required. 
The phase shifter IC has on-chip drivers.
The phase circuit was fabricated using MSAG FET process [62]. Figure 4.47 
shows a photograph of the 2- to 8-GHz 4-bit phase shifter IC. The chip size was 6 
mm2. The substrate thickness was 125 μm.
Figure 4.46  Switched network 180° phase shifter topology.
Figure 4.47  Photograph of 2- to 8-GHz four-bit phase shifter. Chip size was 3.0 × 2.0 mm2.

176
Phase Shifters
Performance of the 2- to 8-GHz phase shifter was determined using on-wafer 
measurements. Figure 4.48 demonstrates tight correlation between the simulated 
and measured phase shift versus frequency over the 1.5- to 8.5-GHz design band. 
The phase states shown are each primary bit (22.5, 45, 90, and 180°), and two 
combination states (270° and 337.5° [all bits on]). This set of phase states yields a 
concise representation of the IC performance without the overhead of measuring and 
analyzing every phase state combination. Insertion loss and input return loss, and 
output return loss, for the reference and various states versus frequency are shown 
in Figures 4.49, 4.50, and 4.51, respectively. The insertion loss (Figure 4. 49) of the 
2- to 8-GHz-band phase shifter is excellent at < 8 dB over the operating band. In 
addition, the insertion loss variation with respect to phase state is also quite good 
at < 1.5 dB, or an RMS amplitude error of less than 0.6 dB. As seen in Figures 4.50 
Figure 4.48  Measured and simulated relative phase shift versus frequency and phase state.
Figure 4.49  Insertion loss versus frequency and phase state.

4.5	
Broadband Phase Shifters
177
and 4.51, the S11 and S22 (input and output return loss) are < −6 dB and < −10 dB, 
respectively, over all phase states. Over most of the band, they are better than 10 dB. 
Finally, Figure 4.52 presents the phase shifter average and the RMS phase errors. 
The average error is between −4.5° and 3.5° across the operating band, while the 
RMS phase error is < 10°. The insertion loss and RMS phase error over the 2.2- to 
7.4-GHz frequency range were better than 7 dB and 6°, respectively. This perfor-
mance represents the state of the art in broadband phase shifters.
6- to 18-GHz 6-Bit Phase Shifter
Numerous phase shifters for the 6- to 18-GHz frequency band have been reported 
[33, 34, 45, 158]. Figure 4.53 shows a layout of a 6- to 18-GHz 6-bit phase shifter. It 
Figure 4.50  Input return loss versus frequency and phase state.
Figure 4.51  Output return loss versus frequency and phase state.

178
Phase Shifters
used integrated low-pass/high-pass networks for the 5.6° and 11.25° bits, integrated 
all-pass for the 22.5° and 45° bits, and reflection-type for the 90° bit. The 180° 
bit design was of switched +90° and −90° phase shifter type. This design employs 
SPDT switches to switch the signal between a short-circuited Lange coupler (+90°) 
and an open-circuited Lange coupler (−90°). This phase shifter configuration is very 
suitable where multioctave bandwidth and 180° phase shift values are required. The 
phase shifter IC has on-chip drivers.
The circuit was optimized using the same design methodology described in 
Section 4.3.3. The chip was fabricated by employing 0.4-μm MSAG FET process. 
Figure 4.52  Statistical phase error versus frequency.
Figure 4.53  Physical layout of the 6- to 18-GHz 6-bit MMIC phase shifter.

4.5	
Broadband Phase Shifters
179
The chip size was 6 mm2. Measured performance of the 6- to 18-GHz 6-bit phase 
shifter is shown in Figure 4.54. The insertion loss and return loss over the target 
frequency range were better than 9.3 dB and 10 dB, respectively. The output return 
loss at 6 GHz was about 8 dB. The RMS phase error and amplitude error were less 
than 5.8° and 0.7 dB, respectively. The phase shifter performance represents the 
state of the art in broadband phase shifters.
4.5.2	 Broadband CMOS Phase Shifters
Most of passive phase shifters reported for the CMOS technology are narrowband 
(i.e., bandwidth less than 50 percent). Many passive phase shifters developed using 
the CMOS technology have circuit topologies similar to MESFET/HEMT phase 
shifters. However, for wideband applications, one needs multioctave bandwidth 
phase shifters. Techniques used for wideband phase shifters can also be used for 
CMOS phase shifters. They are required in wideband phased arrays being devel-
oped for multiband beam forming applications using CMOS technology. Since the 
cost of CMOS technology–based phase shifters is affordable due to compact size 
and low-cost production, one may also use active or directional phase shifters. 
Bidirectional requirement for phase shifters may not be as critical as reported pre-
viously. However, large DC power consumption in large arrays may be hard to sell 
for active phase shifters. Active CMOS phase shifters are discussed in Section 4.8.
A 7- to 12-GHz CMOS phase shifter is described, and the performance of 
X-band CMOS phase shifters is compared with other technologies in Table 4.8. 
It may be noted from this table that in comparison to GaAs-based MMIC phase 
shifters, the Si MMIC phase shifters have much higher insertion loss because of 
the low resistivity of bulk silicon. However, the chip size in CMOS technology is 
much smaller due to fine dimensions of the circuit elements.
Figure 4.54  Measured performance of the 6- to 18-GHz MMIC phase shifter: (a) insertion loss, 
input, and output return loss in the reference state, and (b) RMS phase and amplitude errors 
versus frequency.

180
Phase Shifters
7- to 12-GHz 6-Bit CMOS Phase Shifters
Multibit arrangement of a 6-bit phase shifter developed using 0.18-μm CMOS tech-
nology is shown in Figure 4.55 [138]. The topology employed switched network 
phase shifter configuration for 90° and 180° bits and embedded-device topology 
for smaller bits. In the 90° bit, the phase shift was obtained by switching a parallel 
resonant circuit to a λ/4 line. The phase shift networks in switched network were 
of low-pass/band-pass type for 180°. In all bits the inductors are replaced with 
meander and folded high impedance line sections. In the embedded-device topol-
ogy for 11.25°, 22.5°, and 45° phase bits the values of L1, L2 and sizes of transis-
tors T2 and T3 were calculated in terms of the required phase shift, ∆ϕ, by using 
the following relations:
	
L1 = Z0 tan(∆f /2)
2pf0
L2 =
Z0
4pf0 tan(∆f /2) 	
(4.74)
	
C2 = sin(∆f)
2pf0Z0
C3 = tan(∆f /2)
pf0Z0
	
(4.75)
where C2 and C3 were the OFF state capacitances of transistors T2 and T3, respec-
tively. f0 and Z0 are the operating center frequency and terminal impedance, respec-
tively. The circuit was optimized by using EM simulated data for inductors and 
microstrip lines.
The 6-bit phase shifter was fabricated using 0.18-μm TMC’s CMOS process 
with six metal layers and top thick metal. The chip size was 1.9 × 1.0 mm2. The 
control voltage was 0/1.8 V. The measured insertion loss, RMS phase error, and 
RMS amplitude error, over the 7- to 12-GHz frequency range, were less than 18.8 
dB, 8°, and 0.9 dB, respectively. The return loss was better than 10 dB over the full 
band. The DC power consumption was negligible.
4.6	
Ultrawideband Phase Shifters
The phase shifter configurations, suitable for bandwidths greater than two octaves 
are embedded device, reflection-type, switched low-pass/high-pass, switched net-
works, and switched all-pass networks. The biasing networks used in the design of 
Table 4.8  Performance Comparison of GaAs and Si CMOS X-Band Phase Shifters
Frequency 
(GHz)
Number  
of Bits
Insertion 
Loss (dB)
RMS  
Phase  
Error (°)
RMS 
Amplitude 
Error (dB)
Chip Size 
(mm2)
Technology
Year 
[Reference]
7–11
6
< 6
<4.5
<0.5
3.4
GaAs MSAG FET
2009 [181]
7–11
6
<11
<3
—
8.4
GaAs FET
1990 [41]
7–12
6
<18.8
<8
<1.1
1.9
0.18-μm CMOS
2009 [138]
8–12
5
<10.8
<6.5
<0.5
0.89
0.18-μm CMOS SOI
2012 [146]

4.6	
Ultrawideband Phase Shifters
181
PIN diode phase shifters generally limit the bandwidth to less than two octaves. The 
embedded device type is suitable only for small bits, the reflection-type has poor 
match and large size at low frequencies, switched low-pass/high-pass has high loss 
and resonance problem, and switched networks is suitable only for 180-bit and has 
poor match and large size at low frequencies. Excluding embedded FET and reflec-
tion topologies, all other types use SPDT switches, which can have bandwidth from 
DC to 100 GHz. Thus, the transistor is not the limiting factor in ultrawideband 
phase shifters. It is the passives that limit the bandwidth due to finite frequency 
characteristics. The all-pass lumped-element filter networks have the largest band-
width potential. Multisection all-pass filters have desirable characteristics such as 
equal ripple and good match over an ultra-wide frequency range, especially at RF 
and low microwave frequencies. Switched all-pass networks type has been used 
up to 5 octaves. Phase shifters based on all-pass networks working above C-band 
frequencies might have limited frequency range due to parasitic reactances associ-
ated with the lumped-element inductors and capacitors. However, by careful selec-
tion of lumped-elements and their accurate EM simulations, the frequency range 
of switched all-pass phase shifters may be extended up to 20 GHz or beyond. One 
may also use scalable models for lumped-elements or space mapping technique with 
EM simulated data to optimize such circuits.
In general, the insertion loss of SPDT switched-network based phase shifters is 
high because the switching devices are in series with the transmission path and its 
insertion loss increases with frequency. If the SPDT switch has an insertion loss of 
1.5 dB at 18 GHz, using two of these will result in insertion loss greater than 3 dB 
for the phase shifter bit. However, the insertion loss of SPDT switches below 6 GHz 
is less than 0.5 dB, and the implementation of switched-network phase shifters for 
broadband applications becomes more attractive. Multisections of series/shunt of 
lumped-element inductors and capacitors result in larger bandwidth at the cost of 
Figure 4.55  Schematics of phase shifting networks: (a) 6-bit phase shifter line up, (b) 180° bit, 
(c) 90° bit, and (d) 5.6°, 11.25°, 22.5°, and 45° bits. The 5.6° bit did not use the L2 inductor.

182
Phase Shifters
increased insertion loss due to low Q of these elements as compared to distributed 
circuit elements such as microstrip. For multibit designs, the SPDT switch should 
have return loss greater than 20 dB to maintain low RMS phase and amplitude 
errors. One may use embedded FET all-pass filter phase shift configurations for 
22.5° and smaller bits and switched all-pass filter phase shift configurations for 
45° and larger bits. In this way, for an ultrawideband (UWB) 6-bit phase shifter 
working from S- to Ku-band, one can keep the insertion loss in the range of 15–16 
dB. However, using lumped elements for the filters makes this technique more suit-
able for low frequency and broadband applications. In order to further reduce the 
size, it has been shown that FET switches can be directly integrated into the filters, 
and the FET parasitic capacitances can be absorbed into the filter network. Such 
circuits can be designed for multioctave bandwidth applications, depending on the 
bit size. The theory of all-pass network (APN) phase shifters, using single section 
to multisections, is well documented in [159–163].
A configuration for an UWB all-pass network phase shifter is shown in Figure 
4.56. Each stage comprised of APNi and APN′i with transition frequencies piωi and 
ωi/pi, respectively. The differential phase shift between two APN is given by
	
∆f =
∆fi(w)
i=−n
i=n
∑
	
(4.76)
where
	
∆fi(w) = 2tan−1
w
piwi
−piwi
w
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟−2tan−1 piw
wi
−wi
piw
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟	
(4.77)
Figure 4.56  UWB phase shifter configurations: (a) using all-pass networks (APN), and (b) APN 
with high-pass network (HPN) and low-pass network (LPN) for improved phase error.

4.6	
Ultrawideband Phase Shifters
183
Other relationships between the bandwidth, phase error, and APN elements are 
discussed next. If ωL and ωH are the low and high end of the frequency range, ω0 is 
the center frequency, the frequency ratio R, and resonant frequency ratio between 
adjacent stages Rω, given below:
	
w0 =
wLwH 	
(4.78)
	
R = ωH/ωL	
(4.79)
	
Rw = wi+1
wi
=
wi
wi−1
= e(lnR)/N 	
(4.80)
where N = 2n + 1 is number of stages. Higher is the number of stages lower is the 
phase error.
All-pass network phase shift configurations are shown in Figure 4.57. For Figure 
4.57(b) the APN elements are given here:
	
Li =
Z0
piwi
,
Ci =
1
piwiZ0
	
(4.81)
	
Li¢ = piZ0
wi
,
Ci¢ =
pi
wiZ0
	
(4.82)
where Z0 is the port impedance. The value of pi depends on the phase shift, phase 
error, frequency ratio, and the number of stages [162]. This approach gives UWB 
performance with acceptable phase error. It was proposed [162] that the phase error 
is further reduced over UWB by using high-pass and low-pass networks at the input 
as shown in Figure 4.56(b). A photograph of the ultrawideband 3-bit hybrid phase 
shifter is shown in Figure 4.58. Each bit used discrete surface mount packaged 
transistors and passives.
Figure 4.57  All-pass network phase shift configurations: (a) low-pass/high-pass type, and (b) 
high-pass/high-pass type.

184
Phase Shifters
In multioctave bandwidth (greater than three octaves) phase shifters, there are 
several tradeoffs that must be considered. These include the following:
1.	 Insertion loss;
2.	 Insertion loss ripple;
3.	 RMS phase and amplitude errors;
4.	 VSWR;
5.	 Bandwidth;
6.	 Size.
The potential topologies are embedded FET and switched all-pass networks. 
All-pass phase shifters have ultrawideband capability. However, at high frequencies 
(above C-band) the parasitic reactances associated with the lumped elements limits 
the bandwidth performance. The circuits become more or less band-pass phase 
shifters. They are more suitable at RF and low microwave frequencies and become 
ideal choice for broadband phase shifters working below 2 GHz.
Multisection all-pass network based phase shifters to realize greater than decade 
bandwidth have been reported in the literature [162, 163]. In order to reduce the 
phase error of an all-pass phase shifter, T-type high-pass and π-type low-pass 
networks were proposed [163]. Then, 90° and 180° phase shifters were designed 
employing aforementioned techniques and fabricated using printed circuit hybrid 
method and were experimentally evaluated. In the case of the 90° phase shifter, 
the measured insertion loss, return loss, and phase error were less than 2 dB, bet-
ter than 13 dB and 7°, respectively, over the 60-MHz to 2.1-GHz, whereas for the 
180° phase shifter, the measured insertion loss, return loss, and phase error were 
less than 1.5 dB, better than 10 dB and 8°, respectively, over the 90-MHz to 2.2-
GHz. In both cases the amplitude error was less than 0.5 dB. These phase shifters 
demonstrate the possibility of realizing UWB multibit phase shifters working over 
more than two decades bandwidths. However, using this methodology, extending 
the bandwidth to higher frequencies may become challenging because of the para-
sitic reactances associated with lumped inductors and capacitors.
The 6- to 18-GHz broadband phase shifter design as shown in Figure 4.53 was 
also extended to 4- to 18-GHz and 2- to 18-GHz using the same topology. The 
Figure 4.58  Photograph of the ultrawideband 3-bit hybrid APN phase shifter. (Courtesy of Dr. 
Koen Mouthaan.)

4.7	
Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters
185
measured insertion loss and return loss got worse (3–4 dB) at the frequency edges. 
The measured insertion loss, input return loss, output return loss, and RMS phase 
error values at 4 GHz were 11 dB, 5 dB, 7.5 dB, and 6°, respectively. The phase 
shifter response over the 6- to 18-GHz frequency range was very similar to the one 
shown in Figure 4.54. In order to improve the return loss and RMS errors of the 4- 
to 18-GHz and 2- to 18-GHz phase shifters, 3-dB attenuator pads were placed at 
the input and output. With attenuators, the return loss over the full band was better 
than 14 dB and the worst-case insertion loss was 17 dB; however, no improvements 
in the RMS phase and amplitude errors were observed.
4.7	
Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters
Basic topologies for the millimeter-wave phase shifters are the same as used at 
microwave frequencies [120, 164–170]. In other words, reflection-type, loaded-
line, switched-line/network, and embedded device configurations have been used 
in the millimeter-wave phase shifters. At millimeter-wave frequencies, the device 
parasitic reactance plays a significant role in the selection of suitable phase shift 
topology. Therefore, accurate device models along with EM simulations of passives 
are essential to design accurately such circuits.
4.7.1	
PIN/Schottky Diode Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters
A Q-band 4-bit phase shifter based on InGaAs PIN diode technology has been 
reported [120]. The MMIC phase shifter comprised of 22.5°, 180°, 90°, and 45° 
bits and cascaded in series. Each bit was of switched-line type, which has lower 
passive circuit loss. The phase shifter was optimized using a 3-D EM simulator. 
The PIN diodes have ON state resistance Ron = 1.5 Ω and OFF state capacitance 
Coff = 0.02 pF with cutoff frequency fc = 5 THz. The 4-bit MMIC phase shifter was 
fabricated on InP substrate. The PIN diodes were biased through inductors. The 
chip size was 2.48 × 0.87 mm2.
The Q-band phase shifter was tested using on-wafer RF probes from 46 to 49 
GHz. The control voltage was ±1.28 V, with DC current and power of 40 mA and 
51 mW, respectively. The measured insertion loss, return loss, RMS phase error, 
and RMS amplitude error were less than 6.1 dB, better than 10 dB, 7.6°, and 1.2 
dB, respectively.
A 3-bit Schottky diode MMIC reflection-type phase shifter was developed at 
V-band [168]. At 62.5 GHz, the insertion loss, return loss, and RMS phase error 
were less than 12.6 dB, 9 dB, and 2.7°, respectively. A W-band phase shifter using 
loaded-line approach with PIN diodes was reported by Nguyen [169].
4.7.2	 MESFET/HEMT Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters
Most of millimeter-wave phase shifters developed based on MESFET/HEMT tech-
nologies have been narrowband. Examples of Ka-, Q-, and W-band phase shifters 
are briefly discussed next.

186
Phase Shifters
Ka-Band MESFET/HEMT MMIC Phase Shifters
A 30-GHz 4-bit MMIC phase shifter was studied for optimum performance and 
size. Several combinations of reflection-type, loaded-line, switched-line, and embed-
ded-device configurations were investigated. In this study, the transistor used was 
MSAG MESFET, and the microstrip line was placed on polyimide for lower loss 
[171]. Table 4.9 gives a summary of this comparison. Since the return loss for each 
bit was kept greater than 25 dB, in the arrangement of four bits when they were 
cascaded, interactions between the bits had minimal effect on the phase shifter 
performance. During the optimization, the return loss for all of the 16 states was 
kept better than 20 dB. Based on this invetigation an optimum topology for the 
4-bit phase shifter was obtained as shown in Figure 4.59. The circuit was laid out 
and the chip size was about 5 mm2. Simulated insertion loss and return loss for 
the reference states and all bits ON are shown in Figure 4.60(a). Phase shift versus 
frequency for the primary bits is shown in Figure 4.60(b). The simulated insertion 
loss, return loss, and RMS phase error at 30.2 GHz, were less than 4.2 dB, better 
than 20 dB, and 2°, respectively.
Several versions of 4-bit switched-line phase shifters for Ka- and Q-band appli-
cations have been reported [164–167] and are shown in Figure 4.61. The imbalance 
between the ON and OFF state insertion loss can be minimized by properly select-
ing the transistor sizes. Figure 4.61(a) shows a conventional switched-line phase 
shifter using series-device SPDT switches, and Figure 4.61(b) shows another version 
where the phase shift lines are modified by adding open-circuited stubs to obtain 
the desired phase shifter responses for 45° and 90° bits. In Figure 4.61(c), there are 
only three transistors used in each bit to reduce the insertion loss. The insertion 
Table 4.9  Comparison Between Different Phase Bit Types for Narrowband Millimeter-Wave 
Applications
Parameter
Phase Shifter Bit Type 
Reflection
Loaded Line, 22°, 
and 45° Bits Only
Switched Line
Embedded Device
Insertion loss/bit (dB)
≅1.5
≅0.5
≅2.5
≅3
Loss imbalance
Medium
Small
Small
Small
VSWR
Excellent
Excellent
Good
Good
Number of FETs
2
2
4
3–5
Size
Medium
Medium
Large
Small
Figure 4.59  An optimized 4-bit phase shifter configuration at Ka-band.

4.7	
Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters
187
loss can also be reduced by increasing the RF impedance of the device in the OFF 
state by connecting a high-impedance line across the drain and source terminals 
to tune out the OFF capacitance. In a multibit phase shifter, smaller bits including 
a 45° bit may also be realized in loaded-line topology instead of switched line to 
reduce the insertion loss.
The circuit shown in Figure 4.61(b) was fabricated and tested. It used series-
shunt 0.15-μm HEMT SPDT switch sharing common electrode to reduce parasitic 
capacitance. Shunt HEMT is not shown in this figure. Each device used has a gate 
periphery of 100-μm with Ron resistance and Coff capacitance values of 9 Ω and 
0.01 pF, respectively. This circuit was fabricated on GaAs substrate. The chip size 
was 2.5 × 2.2 mm2. The measured insertion loss, return loss, and RMS phase error 
Figure 4.60  (a) Simulated insertion loss and return loss versus frequency for an optimum 
30-GHz phase shifter, (b) Simulated phase shift for the primary phase bits versus frequency for an 
optimum 30-GHz phase shifter.

188
Phase Shifters
from 33 to 35 GHz were less than 14.2 dB, better than 12 dB, and 5°, respectively. 
Major contributors in the insertion loss are the eight SPDT switches.
Q-Band HEMT MMIC Phase Shifter
A 3-bit 0.2-μm HEMT-based MMIC phase shifter designed from 43 to 45 GHz 
had a chip size of 2.8 × 2.0 mm2 [166]. All bits used switched-line configuration for 
the phase shifter. The SPDT switch used series-HEMT configuration. The MMIC 
chip was fabricated on 100-μm thick GaAs substrate. The control voltage was 0/2 
V. The measured insertion loss, return loss, and RMS phase error from 43 to 45 
GHz were less than 8 dB, better than 12 dB, and 7°, respectively. The DC power 
consumed was negligible.
W-Band HEMT MMIC Phase Shifter
A 4-bit 0.15-μm HEMT-based MMIC phase shifter designed at 94 GHz had a 
chip size of 3 × 1.5 mm2 [170]. The 22.5° and 45° bits were based on double-stub 
loaded-line phase shifter. The 90° and 180° phase bits were of reflection-type and 
were placed at the input and output, respectively, of the cascaded 4-bit phase shifter. 
Figure 4.61  Switched line phase shifter configurations.

4.7	
Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters
189
The measured insertion loss and RMS phase error were less than 16 dB and 2.1°, 
respectively.
4.7.3	
CMOS Millimeter-Wave Phase Shifters
Excellent progress has been made on millimeter-wave CMOS phase shifters for 
phased array radar, automotive radar, point-to-point communication, UWB, and 
frequency-modulation continuous-wave (FMCW) system applications. Most of mil-
limeter-wave CMOS phase shifters use circuit techniques similar to those used for 
microwave/millimeter-wave phase shifters described in the previous sections. These 
circuits device sizes are small, passives are EM simulated for accuracy, and they are 
narrowband. Examples of millimeter-wave CMOS phase shifters are discussed next.
Ka-Band 4-Bit CMOS Phase Shifter
A Ka-band 4-bit phase shifter designed using 0.12-μm SiGe BiCMOS technology 
has been reported [133]. The circuit used 22.5°, 45°, 90°, and 180° bits, and their 
configurations are the same as shown in Figure 4.37. A photograph of the Ka-band 
4-bit phase shifter is shown in Figure 4.62. The core chip size was 0.12 mm2. The 
measured insertion loss, return loss, RMS phase error, and RMS amplitude error 
at 35 GHz, were less than 14.5 dB, 10 dB, 4°, and 1 dB, respectively. The measured 
input IIP3 at 35 GHz was about 21 dBm, and the power consumption was negligible. 
A differential version of Ka-band 4-bit phase shifter was also developed [133]. The 
measured insertion loss for this circuit was about 3 dB lower than the single-ended 
version described in Section 4.3.4.
V-Band 3-Bit CMOS Phase Shifter
A 65-GHz 3-bit phase shifter for short-range communication links was developed 
[145] using 0.045-μm CMOS SOI process. The phase shifter comprised of 45°, 90°, 
and 180° bits, and its schematic is shown in Figure 4.63. The embedded-device topol-
ogy was employed for the 45° and 90° bits. The 180° bit was realized by using a LP/
HP switched-network phase shifter configuration. The phase shifter was designed 
Figure 4.62  Photograph of the Ka-band 4-bit CMOS phase shifter. (Courtesy of Dr. Gabriel 
Rebeiz.)

190
Phase Shifters
over 60 to 67 GHz. The phase shifter was integrated with a LNA at the input. The 
total chip size was 1.2 × 0.55 mm2.
The measured insertion loss, return loss, RMS phase error, and RMS ampli-
tude error at 65 GHz were less than 6.5 dB, better than 10 dB, 2.5°, and 0.3 dB, 
respectively. The measured return loss, RMS phase error, and RMS amplitude error 
over the 60- to 67-GHz frequency range were better than 8 dB, 2.5°, and 13 dB, 
respectively. The measured input P1dB was about 6 dBm, and the power consump-
tion was negligible.
W-Band 5-Bit CMOS Differential Phase Shifter
A W-band 5-bit differential phase shifter designed using 0.12-μm IBM 8HP SiGe 
BiCMOS process has been reported [149]. The circuit used 11.25°, 22.5°, 45°, 90°, 
and 180° bits, and their configurations are shown in Figure 4.64. The topology 
employed for the 11.25°, 22.5°, 45°, and 90° bits was of embedded-device to maintain 
low insertion loss. Since the insertion loss for the 180° bit using switched-network 
phase shifter is high, differential 180° phase shift bit was designed using a Gilbert 
cell as shown in Figure 4.64(b). The 11.25° bit was basically used to reduce the 
RMS phase error. The measured RMS phase error and amplitude errors of the 5-bit 
cascaded phase shifter over the 74- to 84-GHz frequency range were less than 11° 
and 1 dB, respectively. Simulated insertion loss was 8.0 ± 1.5 dB.
In summary, for the same functionality the CMOS RFIC phase shifters have 
smaller size and higher loss when compared with GaAs MMIC phase shifters.
4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
Phase shifters described so far are operated in the passive mode. Transistor-based 
amplifiers have been used to realize novel active phase shifter circuits [24–26, 28, 
31, 58, 172–179]. Such phase shifters are operated in active mode (i.e., they can have 
gain also). These phase shifters are unidirectional and were not used in T/R mod-
ules because one needs separate phase shifters in transmit and receive paths. Active 
Figure 4.63  Schematic of the 65-GHz 3-bit phase shifter.

4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
191
phase shifters based on CMOS technology are compact in size and have low-cost 
potential. In this case using separate phase shifters in transmit and receive paths 
has minor effect on the cost of CMOS based T/R modules. However, an increased 
DC power consumption may be a serious issue for some applications.
The active phase shifters may be grouped into three categories: dual-gate FET/
HEMT, switchable amplifiers, and vector modulator based. These are briefly 
described next.
4.8.1	 Dual-Gate FET Phase Shifters
Dual-gate FET/HEMT active phase shifters [24] are based on the principle of volt-
age variable gate-source capacitance of a transistor. In this circuit, the second gate 
(nearer to the drain electrode) of the dual-gate device is used as the signal input, 
and the first gate (nearer to the source electrode) is used as the phase shift con-
trol. A schematic a dual-gate FET/HEMT active phase shifter is shown in Figure 
4.65(a). It consists of input and output matching networks and a tuning reactance. 
Figure 4.64  Schematics of 80-GHz 5-bit differential phase shifters (a) 11.25°, 22.5°, 45°, and 
90° bits, and (b) 180° bit.
Figure 4.65  Active phase shifter configurations: (a) dual-gate FET, and (b) switchable amplifier.

192
Phase Shifters
Since the gate-source capacitance of a transistor provides a limited phase shift, a 
series inductance is connected between the first gate and ground. The inductor’s 
reactance value is selected so that it results in maximum phase shift with voltage 
variable gate-source capacitance. A continuous variation of phase shift up to 70° 
was reported with a 3-dB gain from 11.9 to 12.2 GHz [24].
This type of active phase shifters has not been very popular because it has 
several limitations, including narrow bandwidth, restricted phase shift range, and 
large circuit size.
4.8.2	 Switchable-Amplifier Phase Shifters
Switchable-amplifier type phase shifters are based on the concept of switchable net-
works. A block diagram of a switchable-amplifier phase shifter is shown in Figure 
4.65(b). It consists of an SPDT switch, two identical amplifiers, one phase shift net-
work, and a power combiner. The input signal is split, amplified, phase shifted, and 
combined at the output of a 3-dB power combiner. In this case, the signal is using 
only one path at a selected time; therefore, the power combiner introduces 3-dB 
plus loss in the circuit. Since amplifiers with gain are used in the circuit, this 3-dB 
loss is not considered a limiting factor in this design. Removing SPDT switch may 
also be considered. In this case, the inputs of two identical amplifies are connected 
together. At any time, when the amplifier is OFF (i.e., the transistor is pinched off), 
the device offers high input impedance and low loading effect on the other ampli-
fier. The output combiner may also be replaced with a lower loss SPDT switch.
A desirable feature of a switchable-amplifier phase shifter is that the phase 
shifting part is independent of the rest of the design. Broadband amplifiers and a 
power combiner/SPDT switch may be used to design UWB active phase shifters.
4.8.3	 Vector Modulator Phase Shifters
There are several schemes used for active phase shifters based on vector modulator 
or vector sum principle. A vector modulator is a circuit that is capable of indepen-
dently varying the amplitude and phase of the input signal. The concept of vector 
modulator-based active phase shifter is shown schematically in Figure 4.66.
Schematic of a simple vector sum phase shifter circuit realization is shown in 
Figure 4.67(a). The input signal, 1 ∠ 0°, is divided into two equal parts by using a 
3-dB 90° hybrid. These two signals having a phase difference of 90° are amplified 
Figure 4.66  Concept of realization of a phase shifter using active vector modulator.

4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
193
by variable-gain amplifiers and finally combined by using an in-phase power com-
biner. If the phase shift required from the phase shifter is ϕ, the gains in the upper 
and lower signal paths are adjusted as K cos ϕ and K sin ϕ, respectively. For the 
reference state, if the amplifier in the lower signal path is switched OFF, then the 
differential phase shift ϕ is obtained when gains are set proportionally to K cos ϕ and 
K sin ϕ. In this case, the output voltage Vo, magnitude R and phase ϕ are given by
	
Vo = 1
2 K(cosf −jsinf) 	
(4.83)
	
R = 1
2 K(cos2 f + sin2 f)1/2 = 1
2 K 	
(4.84)
	
f = tan−1 −sinf
cosf
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟= −f 	
(4.85)
In order to realize the active phase shifter, one can use variable-gain amplifiers 
[180] or variable attenuators as described in Chapter 5. A possible variable-gain 
amplifier was realized by using a segmented dual-gate transistor, as shown in Figure 
4.68. The total gate periphery of a dual-gate device is divided into several sections, 
in which the signal gate 1 connection is common to all of these sections and control 
gate 2 is broken into several segments, one corresponding to each of the sections. 
Each section is switched ON and OFF by the control voltage gate 2. Figure 4.68 
shows four sections, and assumes segments A, B, C, and D have gate peripheries of 
Figure 4.67  Active phase shifter configurations using (a) two variable amplifiers, and (b) four 
variable amplifiers and 180° phase shift.

194
Phase Shifters
400, 200, 100, and 50 μm, respectively. Thus it uses a total of 750 μm gate periph-
ery. As a first-order approximation, the gain of the device is proportional to the 
gate periphery; the gain can be varied by switching ON a particular segment or a 
combination of segments. Considering 50-μm segment as one unit, the relative gain 
can be varied in different units from 20 log (50 μm/50 μm) = 0 dB to 20 log (750 
μm/50 μm) = 23.52 dB. The gain ratios exhibited excellent repeatability and were 
independent of temperature variations [31].
The configuration shown in Figure 4.67(a) is limited to less than 90° phase 
shift. For differential phase shift greater than 90°, from (4.85) cos ϕ becomes nega-
tive. This requires 180° additional phase in the circuit as shown in Figure 4.67(b). 
Another solution is to use a balun in the input as shown in Figure 4.69.
Figure 4.67(b) consists of a power splitter, 3-dB hybrid, 180° phase shifter, 
power combiner, and four variable-gain amplifiers. The input signal, 1 ∠ 0°, is 
Figure 4. 68  A variable amplifier using segmented dual-gate transistor.
Figure 4.69  Active 0–360° phase shifter configurations using baluns in the input: (a) four 
channels and variable amplifiers, (b) vector representation of (a), (c) two channels and four 
variable amplifiers, and (d) two channels and variable phase shifters.

4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
195
divided into two equal parts, amplified and again split by a 3-dB 90° hybrid. The 
two signals at nodes 1 and 3 have a phase difference of 90°. The voltages V1 and 
V3 at nodes 1 and 3 may be written as
	
V1 = 1
2 A −j 1
2C 	
(4.86)
	
V3 = 1
2C −j 1
2 A 	
(4.87)
Voltage V1 is amplified, and V3 is −180° phase shifted and amplified. The voltages 
V2 and V4 at nodes 2 and 4 become
	
V2 = 1
2 AB −j 1
2 BC 	
(4.88)
	
V4 = −1
2CD + j 1
2 AD 	
(4.89)
These voltages are combined by using an in-phase power combiner and the output 
voltage Vo = V2 + V4. In this case, the output voltage Vo, magnitude R and phase 
ϕ are given by
	
Vo =
1
2 2 AB −CD + j(AD −BC)
[
]	
(4.90)
	
R =
1
2 2 (AB −CD)2 + (AD −BC)2
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
1/2 	
4.91)
	
f = tan−1 AD −BC
AB −CD
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(4.92)
Thus, a variable 0° to 360° phase shift of the output signal can be obtained by 
adjusting the gain of four variable-gain amplifiers.
Three other schemes for a continuously variable 0° to 360° phase shifter using 
baluns and vector sum method are shown in Figure 4.69. The balun can be of active 
type, or transformer or Marchand. In Figure 4.69(a), the input signal is split by 
a balun and then by two 3-dB 90° hybrids to create four channels. Following the 
same procedure as described earlier, the 360° phase shift is obtained by the sum 
of four vectors —A, —B, —C, and —D, which depend on the gains, A, B, C, and D, and 
located in Figure 4.68(b). In this case, the output voltage Vo, magnitude R and 
phase ϕ are given by
	
Vo = 1
4 A −C + j(B −D)
[
] 	
(4.93)

196
Phase Shifters
	
R = 1
4 (A −C)2 + (B −D)2
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
1/2 	
(4.94)
	
f = tan−1 B −D
A −C
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(4.95)
For 0°–90° phase shift the gains of amplifiers A and B are varied and ampli-
fiers C and D are OFF; for 90°–180° phase shift the gains of amplifiers B and C 
are varied and amplifiers D and A are OFF; for 180°–270° phase shift the gains of 
amplifiers C and D are varied and amplifiers A and B are OFF; and for 270°–360° 
phase shift the gains of amplifiers D and A are varied and amplifiers B and C are 
OFF. A hybrid active 0° 360° phase shifter has a gain variation of ±3 dB [26].
The design and performance of two other continuously variable 0° to 360° 
phase shifters using baluns and vector sum method have been described by Wu et 
al. [175] and shown in Figures 4.69(c) and (d). Analysis of these phase shifters can 
be performed the same way as described earlier. Tables 4.10 and 4.11 summarize 
the relationships between the variable gain and phase shifter performance. Both 
phase shifters were fabricated using TSMC’s 0.18-μm CMOS technology. A sum-
mary of the performance of these two active phase shifters is given in Table 4.12 
The “circuit 1” has lower insertion loss than “circuit 2,” while the “circuit 2” is 
small in size and has smaller loss variations over the full phase range.
In vector modulator phase shifters, each power split and combiner level results 
in a signal amplitude reduction by 1/
2  or 3 dB. Therefore, for such phase shift-
ers, fewer power splitting and combining steps will have lower insertion loss. In 
addition to low loss power splitters and combiners, the efficiency of amplifiers is 
critical for the success of vector modulator phase shifters. The book on RF and 
Table 4.10  Relationship Between Variable Gain and Active Phase Shifter’s Phase and Amplitude 
for Figure 4.69(c) “Circuit 1”
A1
A2
B1
B2
Phase ϕ
Amplitude R
A1
B2⎪tanϕ⎪
A1/1000
B2
0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 90°
A1B2 secf / 2 2
(
)
B1⎪tanϕ⎪
A2
B1
A2/1000
90° ≤ ϕ ≤ 180°
A2B1 secf / 2 2
(
)
B1/1000
A2
B1
A2⎪tanϕ⎪
180° ≤ ϕ ≤ 270°
A2B1 secf / 2 2
(
)
A1
B2/1000
A1⎪tanϕ⎪
B2
270° ≤ ϕ ≤ 360°
A1B2 secf / 2 2
(
)
Table 4.11  Relationship Between Variable Phase Shifts and Active Phase Shifter’s Phase and 
Amplitude for Figure 4.69(d) “Circuit 2”
ϕa
ϕb
Phase ϕ
Amplitude R
ϕ
ϕ
0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 90°
(A − B)/2
90°
0
90° ≤ ϕ ≤ 180°
(A2 + B2)0.5/2
ϕ − 180°
ϕ − 180°
180° ≤ ϕ ≤ 270°
(B − A)/2
0
90°
270° ≤ ϕ ≤ 360°
(A2 + B2)0.5/2

4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
197
Microwave Transistor Amplifiers by Bahl [180] includes comprehensive informa-
tion on narrowband and broadband amplifier design, fabrication, and performance.
In this chapter the theory, design, and performance of phase shifters have been 
described. PIN diode-, GaAs MESFET/HEMT-, and Si CMOS-based phase shifter 
examples for narrowband and broadband applications have been discussed, and the 
readers are referred to manufacture’s catalogues [181–185] for commercial products 
on this subject.
References
[1]	
White, J. F., Semiconductor Control, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1977.
[2]	
Garver, R. V., Microwave Diode Control Devices, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1978.
[3]	
White, J. F., Microwave Semiconductor Engineering, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1982.
[4]	
Davis, W. A., Microwave Semiconductor Circuit Design, New York: Van Nostrand Rein-
hold, 1984, Chap. 13.
[5]	
Bhartia, P., and I. J. Bahl, Millimeter-Wave Engineering and Applications, Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley, 1984, Chap. 8.
[6]	
Wolff, E. A., and R. Kaul, Microwave Engineering and Systems Applications, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley 1988, Chap. 12.
[7]	
Koul, S. K., and B. Bhat, Microwave and Millimeter Wave Phase Shifters, Norwood, MA: 
Artech House, 1991.
[8]	
Robertson, I. D., and S. Lucyszyn, S. (eds.), RFIC and MMIC Design and Technology, 
London: IEE, 2001.
[9]	
Bahl, I., and P. Bhartia, Microwave Solid-state Circuit Design, Second Edition, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chap. 12.
[10]	 Sreenivas, A. I., “Semiconductor Control devices: Phase Shifters and Switches,” in Hand-
book of RF/Microwave Components and Engineering, K. Chang (ed.), Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley, 2003, pp.1099–1133.
[11]	 Chang, K. (ed.), Handbook of RF/Microwave Components and Engineering, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chapter 7.
[12]	 White, J. F. “Microwave Phase Shifters,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineer-
ing, K. Chang (ed.), Vol.3, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2836–2849.
[13]	 De Flaviis, F., “Phase Shifters,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, K. 
Chang (ed.), Vol. 3, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 3810–3823.
[14]	 Marsh, S., Practical MMIC Design, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2006.
[15]	 Schiffman, B. M., “A New Class of Broad-Band Microwave 90-Degree Phase Shifters,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-6, April 1958, pp. 232–237.
Table 4.12  Summary of CMOS Fabricated “Circuit 1” and “Circuit 2” Performance
Parameter
“Circuit 1”
“Circuit 2”
Frequency (GHz)
15–20
15–20
Phase shift range (°)
0–360
0–360
Average insertion loss (dB)
5
12.5
Loss variations (dB)
± 5
± 2
Chip size (mm2)
0.72
0.58

198
Phase Shifters
[16]	 Hardin, R. N., Downey, E. J., and Munushian, J., “Electronically Variable Phase Shifters 
Utilizing Variable Capacitance Diodes,” Proc. IRE, Vol. 48, May 1960, pp. 944–945.
[17]	 White, J., “High Power, p-i-n Diode Controlled, Microwave Transmission Phase Shifters,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 13, March 1965, pp. 233–242.
[18]	 Schiffman, B. M., “Multisection Microwave Phase-Shift Networks,” IEEE Trans. Micro-
wave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-14, April 1966, p. 209.
[19]	 White, J., “Review of Semiconductor Microwave Phase Shifters,” Proc. IEEE, Vol. 56, 
Nov. 1968, pp. 1924–1931.
[20]	 Garver, R. V., “360° Varactor Linear Phase Modulator,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. MTT-17, March 1969, pp. 137–147.
[21]	 Garver, R., “Broad-Band Diode Phase Shifters,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 
Vol. MTT-20, May 1972, pp. 314–323.
[22]	 White, J., “Diode Phase Shifters for Array Antennas,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. MTT-22, June 1974, pp. 658–674.
[23]	 Lynes, G. D., et al., “Design of a Broad Band 4-Bit Loaded Switched-Line Phase Shifter,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-22, June 1974, pp. 693–697.
[24]	 Tsironis, C., and P. Harrop, “Dual-Gate GaAs MESFET Phase Shifter with Gain at 12 
GHz,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 16, July 1980, pp. 553–554.
[25]	 Gajit, Y., and H. C. Johnson, “A Continuously Variable Ku-Band Phase/Amplitude Control 
Module,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symposium Dig., 1981, pp. 436–438.
[26]	 Kumar, M., R. Menna, and H.-C. Huang, “Broad-Band Active Phase Shifter Using Dual-
Gate MESFET,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-29, Oct. 1981, pp. 
1098–1102.
[27]	 M. Caulton, M., et al., “PIN Diodes for Low-Frequency High-Power Switching Applica-
tions,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, June 1982, pp. 875–882.
[28]	 Vorhaus, J. L., R. A. Pucel, and Y. Tajima, “Monolithic Dual-Gate FET Digital Phase 
Shifters,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, July 1982, pp. 991–992.
[29]	 Ayasli, Y., et al., “A Monolithic Single-Chip X-band Four-Bit Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, Dec. 1982, pp. 2201–2206.
[30]	 Sokolov, V. et al., “A Ku-Band GaAs Monolithic Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-31, Dec. 1983, pp. 1077–1082.
[31]	 Hwang, Y., Y. Chen, and R. Naster, “A Microwave Phase and Gain Controller with Seg-
mented Dual Gate MESFETs in GaAs MMIC,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave 
Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1984, pp. 1–5.
[32]	 Ayasli,Y., et al., “Wide-Band Monolithic Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. MTT-32, Dec.1984, pp. 1710–1714.
[33]	 Boire, D. C., et al., “A 4.5 to 18 GHz Phase Shifter,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Sym-
posium Digest, 1985, pp. 601–604.
[34]	 Schindler, M., et al., “Monolithic 6–18 GHz Five-Bit Phase Shifter,” IEEE GaAs IC Symp. 
Dig., 1985, pp. 129–132.
[35]	 Andricos, C., I. J. Bahl, and E. L. Griffin, “C-Band 6-Bit GaAs Monolithic Phase Shifter,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-33, Dec. 1985, pp. 1591–1596.
[36]	 Maloney, P.R., M. A. Merger, and J. P. Sasonoff, “L-Band GaAs Transceiver Components,” 
IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1985, pp. 121–124.
[37]	 Chen, C.-L., et al., “A Low-Loss Ku-Band Monolithic Analog Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-35, March 1987, pp. 315–320.
[38]	 Caverly, R., and G. Hiller, “Distortion in p-i-n Diode Control Circuits,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-35, May 1987, pp. 492–501.
[39]	 Boire, D. C., et al., “4:1 Bandwidth Digital Five Bit Phase Shifters,” IEEE Microwave and 
Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1989, pp. 69–73.

4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
199
[40]	 Sharma, A. K., “Solid-State Control Devices: State of the Art,” Microwave Journal, State 
of the Art Reference, Vol., Sept. 1989, pp. 95–112.
[41]	 Moye, C., G. Sakamoto, and M. Brand, “A Compact Broadband, Six-Bit MMIC Phasor 
with Integrated Digital Drivers,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic 
Circuits Symp. Dig., 1990, pp. 123–126.
[42]	 Miller, P., and J. S. Joshi, “MMIC Phase Shifters for Space Applications,” ESA Proc. of 
International Workshop on Monolithic Microwave Integrated Circuits for Space Appli-
cations, ESTEC, Noordwijk, Mar. 1990.
[43]	 Krafcsik, D. M., et al., “A Low-Loss X-Band 6-Bit MMIC Phase Shifter Using MESFET 
Switches,” GOMAC Dig., 1991, pp. 355–358.
[44]	 Teeter, D., et al., “Ka-band GaAs HBT PIN Diode Switches and Phase Shifters,” IEEE 
MTT-S Int. Microwave Symposium Digest, 1994, Vol. 1, pp. 451–454.
[45]	 Boire, D. C., and R. Marion, “A High Performance 6–18 GHz Five Bit MMIC Phase 
Shifter,” IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1995, pp. 267–270.
[46]	 Hayashi, H., et al., “A High-Q Broad-Band Active Inductor and its Application to a Low-
Loss Analog Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol.44, Dec. 1996, 
pp. 2369–2374.
[47]	 Wallace, J., H. Redd, and R. Furlow, “Low Cost MMIC DBS Chip Sets for Phased Array 
Applications,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1999, pp. 677–680.
[48]	 Nagra, A., and R. York, “Distributed Analog Phase Shifters with Low Insertion Loss,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 47, Sep 1999, pp. 1705–1711.
[49]	 Hayashi, H., and M. Muraguchi, “An MMIC Active Phase Shifter Using a Variable Reso-
nant Circuit,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 47, Oct. 1999, pp. 2021–2026.
[50]	 Campbell, C. F., and S. A. Brown, “A Compact 5-Bit Phase-Shifter MMIC for K-Band 
Satellite Communications Systems,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 48, Dec. 
2000, pp. 2652–2656.
[51]	 Ellinger, F., R. Vogt, and W. Bachtold, “Ultra Compact, Low Loss, Varactor Tuned Phase 
Shifter MMIC at C-Band,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 11, Mar. 2001, 
pp. 104–105.
[52]	 Penn, J. E., “A Broadband, Four-Bit, Ka-Band Phase Shifter,” Microwave J., Dec. 2001, 
Vol. 46, pp. 84–96.
[53]	 Hayashi, H., T. Nakagawa, and K. Araki, “A Miniaturized MMIC Analog Phase Shifter 
Using Two Quarter-Wave-Length Transmission Lines,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 50, Jan. 2002, pp. 150–154.
[54]	 Ahn, H. R., and I. Wolff, “Asymmetric Ring-Hybird Phase Shifters and Attenuators,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 50, April 2002, pp. 1146–1155.
[55]	 Chang, W.-J., and K.-H. Lee, “A Ku-Band 5-Bit Phase Shifter Using Compensation Resis-
tors for Reducing the Insertion Loss Variation,” ETRI J., Vol. 25, Feb. 2003, pp.19–24.
[55]	 Kim, H., et al., “Millimeter-Wave CPS Distributed Analogue MMIC Phase Shifter,” Elec-
tronics Letters, Vol. 39, 13 Nov. 2003, pp. 1661–1663.
[57]	 Lee, S., J. Park, H. Kim, J. Kim, and Y. Kim, et al., “Low-Loss Analog and Digital Reflec-
tion-Type MEMS Phase Shifters with 1:3 Bandwidth,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 52, Jan. 2004, pp. 211–219.
[58]	 Chen, P.-Y., et al. “K-Band HBT HEMT Monolithic Active Phase-Shifters Using Vetor Sum 
Method,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 52, May 2004, pp. 1414–1424.
[59]	 Shiroma, G.S., R. Y. Miyamoto, and W. A. Shiroma, “A Full-Duplex Dual-Frequency 
Self-Steering Array Using Phase Detection and Phase Shifting,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory Tech., Vol.54, Jan. 2006, pp.128–134.
[60]	 Guo, Y. X., Z. Y. Zhang, and L. C. Ong, “Improved Wide-Band Schiffman Phase Shifter,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 54, March 2006, pp. 1196–1200.

200
Phase Shifters
[61]	 Keerti, A., J. Xiang, and A.-V. Pham, “High Power Linearized RF Phase Shifter Using 
Anti-Series Diodes,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 16, April 2006, pp. 
200–202.
[62]	 Bahl, I. J., and D. Conway, “L- and S-Band Compact Octave Bandwidth 4-Bit Phase Shift-
ers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 56, Feb. 2008, pp. 293–298.
[63]	 Morton, M., et al., “5 Bit, Silicon Based X-Band Phase Shifter Using A Hybrid High-Pass/
Low-Pass Topology,” Microwaves, Antennas & Propagation, IET, Vol. 2, Feb. 2008, pp. 
19–22.
[64]	 Yu, T., and G. M. Rebeiz, “A 24 GHz 6-Bit CMOS Phased-Array Receiver,” IEEE Micro-
wave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 18, June 2008, pp. 422–424.
[65]	 Bahl, I. J., and M. Dayton, “A Ku-Band 4-Bit Compact Octave Bandwidth GaAs MMIC 
Phase Shifter,” Microwave Journal, Vol. 51, June 2008, pp. 30–42.
[66]	 Bentini, A., et al., “A Novel Approach to Minimize RMS Errors in Multifunction Chips,” 
Int. J. RF Microwave Comput.-Aided Eng., Vol.22, May 2012, pp. 387–393. 
[67]	 Ciccognani, W., et al., “An Active Nonreciprocal Phase Shifter Topology,” Microwave 
Optical Tech. Letts., Vol. 54, July 2012, pp. 1659–1665.
[68]	 Yang, T., M. Ettorre, and R. Sauleau, “Novel Phase Shifter Design Based on Substrate–
Integrated-Waveguide Technology,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett.,Vol. 22, 
Oct. 2012, pp. 518–520.
[69]	 Yeung, S. H., “Design and Testing of a Single-Layer Microstrip Ultrawideband 90° Dif-
ferential Phase Shifter,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Comp. Lett., Vol. 23, March 2013, 
pp. 122–124.
[70]	 Li., W.-T., et al., “60-GHz 5-Bit Phase Shifter with Integrated VGA Phase-Error Compen-
sation,” IEEE Trans.Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, March 2013, pp. 1224–1235.
[71]	 Ellinger, F., H. Jackel, and W. Bachtold, “Varacter-Loaded Transmission-Line Phase Shifter 
at C-band Using Lumped Elements,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, 
April 2013, pp. 1135–1140.
[72]	 Lin, Y.-W., Y.-C. Chou, and C.-Y. Chang, “A Balanced Digital Phase Shifter by a Novel 
Switching-Mode Topology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, June 
2013, pp. 2361–2370.
[73]	 Hennoch, B.T., and P. Tamm, “A 360° Reflection-Type Diode Phase Modulator,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., January 1971, pp. 103–105.
[74]	 Dawson, D. E., et al.,“An Analog X-Band Phase Shifter,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-
Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1984, pp. 6–10.
[75]	 Wilson, K., et al., “A Novel MMIC X-band Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 33, Dec. 1985, pp. 1572–1578.
[76]	 Krafcsik, D. M., et al., “A Dual-Varactor, Analog Phase Shifter Operating 6 to 18 GHz,” 
IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1988, pp. 83–86.
[77]	 Upshur, J. I., and B. D. Geller, “Low-Loss 360° X-band Analog Phase Shifter,” IEEE 
MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1990, pp. 487–490.
[78]	 Lucyszyn, S., and I. D. Robertson, “Synthesis Techniques for High Performance Decade 
Bandwidth 180° Analogue Phase Shifters,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 
40, April 1992, pp. 731–740.
[79]	 Murphy, T. A., et al., “A Six-Bit GMIC Phase Shifter for 6–18 GHz,” IEEE MTT-S Int. 
Microwave Symp. Dig., 1992, pp. 1171–1174.
[80]	 Kato, T., et al., “L-Band Phase Shifter with Switching FETs for Phased Array Antenna,” 
IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1992, pp. 1527–1530.
[81]	 Lucyszyn, S., and I. D. Robertson, “Two-Octave Bandwidth Monolithic Analogue Phase 
Shifter,” IEEE Microwave Guided Wave Lett., Vol. 2, Aug. 1992, pp. 343–345.
[82]	 DiPaolo, F., “A Simple, High Yield 6 to 18 GHz GaAs Monolithic Phase Shifter,” Micro-
wave J., Vol. 40, April 1997, pp. 92–104.

4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
201
[83]	 Ellinger F., R. Vogt, and W. Bachtold, “Compact Reflective-Type Phase-Shifter MMIC 
for C-Band Using a Lumped-Element Coupler,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 
Vol. 49, May 2001, pp. 913–-917.
[84]	 Miyaguchi, K., et al., “An Ultra-Broadband Reflection-Type Phase-Shifter MMIC With 
Series and Parallel LC Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 49, Dec. 
2001, pp. 2446–2452.
[85]	 Ellinger, F., R. Vogt, and W. Bachtold, “Ultracompact Reflective-Type Phase Shifter MMIC 
at C-Band with 360° Phase-Control Range for Smart Antenna Combining,” IEEE J. Solid-
State Circuits, Vol. 37, Apr. 2002, pp. 481–486.
[86]	 Cheng, S., et al., “Compact Reflective Microstrip Phase Shifter for Traveling Wave Antenna 
Applications,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 16, July 2006, pp.431–433.
[87]	 Kwon, H., H. Lim, and B. Kang, “Design of 6–18 GHz Wideband Phase Shifters Using 
Radial Stubs,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 17, March 2007, pp. 
205–207.
[88]	 Lin, C.-S., et al., “Design of a Reflection-Type Phase Shifter Using with Wide Relative 
Phase Shift and Constant Insertion Loss,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 
55, Sept. 2007 pp. 1862–1868.
[89]	 Lin, C.-S., et al., “A Full-360° Reflection-Type Phase Shifter MMIC with Constant Inser-
tion Loss,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 18, Feb. 2008, pp. 106–108.
[90]	 Abbosh, A. M., “Ultra-Wideband Phase Shifters Using Short Section of Coupled Lines,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, Aug. 2012, pp. 2465–2472.
[91]	 Fang, H. Z. R., et al., “180° And 90° Reflection-Type Phase Shifters Using Over-Cou-
pled Lange Couplers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, Nov. 2012, pp. 
3440–3448.
[92]	 Opp, F. L., and W. F. Hoffman, “Design of Digital Loaded Line Phase-Shift Networks for 
Microwave Thin-Film Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-
16, July 1968, pp. 462–468.
[93]	 Yahra, T., “A Note on Designing Digital Diode-Loaded Line Phase Shifters,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-20, Oct. 1972, pp. 703–704.
[94]	 Yahra, T., “A Note on Designing Digital Diode-Loaded Line Phase Shifters,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-20, Oct. 1972, pp. 703–704.
[95]	 Davis, W. A., “Design Equations and Bandwidth of Loaded-Line Phase Shifters,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-22, May 1974, pp. 561–563.
[96]	 Sharma, A. K., and B. Bhat, “A Loaded-Line Phase Shifter Incorporating a Schiffman 
Section,” Int. J. Electronics, Vol. 40, May 1976, pp. 445–448.
[97]	 Bahl, I. J., and K. C. Gupta, “Design of Loaded-Line p-i-n Diode Phase Shifter Circuits,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-28, March 1980, pp. 219–224.
[98]	 Bahl, I. J., and K. C. Gupta, “Power Handling Capability of Loaded Line PIN Diode Phase 
Shifter Circuits,” AEU, Vol. 34, Nov. 1980, pp. 460–464.
[99]	 Atwater, H. A., “Circuit Design of the Loaded-Line Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. Micro-
wave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-33, July 1985, pp. 626–634.
[100]	Meschanov, V. P., et al., “Design Equations and Bandwidth of Loaded-Line Phase Shift-
ers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-42, May 1994, pp. 762–765.
[101]	 Tang, X., and K. Mouthaan, “Loaded-Line Phase Shifter with Enlarged Phase Shift Range 
and Bandwidth,” Eur. Microwave Conf. Proc., 2010, pp. 818–821.
[102]	Boire, D. C., J. E. Degenford, and M. Cohn, “A 4.5 to 18 GHz Phase Shifter,” IEEE 
MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1985, pp. 601–604.
[103]	 Quirarte, J. L. R., and J. P. Starski, “Novel Schiffman Phase Shifters,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-41, Jan. 1993, pp. 9–14.
[104]	Meschanov, V.P., et al., “A New Structure of Microwave Ultrawide-Band Differential 
Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 42, May 1994, pp.762–765.

202
Phase Shifters
[105]	Eom, S.-Y., et al., “Broadband 180° Bit Phase Shifter Using a New Switched Network,” 
IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2003, pp. 39–42.
[106]	Eom, S.-Y., “Broadband 180° Bit Phase Shifter Using a λ/2 Coupled Line and Parallel λ/8 
Stubs,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 14, May 2004, pp. 228–230.
[107]	Abbosh, A. M., “Ultra-Wideband Phase Shifters,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 
Vol. 55, Sep. 2007, pp.1935–1941.
[108]	Tang, X., and K. Mouthaan, “Design of a UWB Phase Shifter Using Shunt λ/4 Stubs,” 
IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2009, pp. 1021–1024.
[109]	Tang, X. and K. Mouthaan, “Phase-Shifter Design Using Phase-Slope Alignment with 
Grounded Shunt λ/4 Stubs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 58, June 2010, 
pp. 1573–1583.
[110]	 Zheng, S. Y., W. S. Chan, and K. F. Man, “Broadband Phase Shifter Using Loaded Trans-
mission Line,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 20, Sep. 2010, pp. 498–500.
[111]	 Yeung, S. H., K. F. Man, and W. S. Chan, “The Multiple Circular Sectors Structures for 
Phase Shifter Designs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 59, Feb. 2011, pp. 
278–285.
[112]	 Wang, Y., M. E. Bialkowski, and A. M. Abbosh, “Double Microstrip-Slot Transitions for 
Broadband ±90° Microstrip Phase Shifter,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., 
Vol. 22, Feb. 2012, pp. 58–60.
[113]	 Yeung, S. H., Q. Xue, and K. F. Man, “Broadband 90° Differential Phase Shifter Con-
structed Using a Pair of Multisection Radial Line Stubs,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 60, Sep. 2012, pp. 2760–2767.
[114]	 Sorn, M., R. Lech, and J. Mazur, “Simulation and Experiment of a Compact Wideband 
90° Differential Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, March 
2012, pp. 494–501.
[115]	Jin, X.-H., X.-D. Huang, and C.-H. Cheng, “Microstrip Stepped-Impedance Ring All-
pass Filter and Wideband 90° Phase Shifter,” Int. J. RFMiCAE, Vol. 24, March 2014, pp. 
191–195.
[116]	 Hunton, J. K., “New Differential Phase Shift Networks Combining All-Pass and Band 
Pass Elements,” IEEE Int. Microwave Symp. Dig.,1981, pp. 223–224.
[117]	Coats, R., et al., “A Low Loss Monolithic Five-Bit PIN Diode Phase Shifter,” IEEE MTT-S 
Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1990, pp. 915–918.
[118]	 Teshiba, M., et al., “A SiGe MMIC 6-Bit PIN Diode Phase Shifter,” IEEE Microwave 
Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 12, Dec. 2002, pp. 500–502.
[119]	 Tayrani, R., et al., “Broad-Band SiGe MMICs for Phased-Array Radar Applications,” 
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-38, Sep. 2003, pp. 1462–1471.
[120]	Kim, M., J. G. Yang, and K. Yang, “Switched Transmission-Line Type Q-Band 4-Bit 
MIC Phase Shifter Using InGaAs PIN Diodes,” Electron. Lett., Vol. 46, Feb. 2010, pp. 
225–226.
[121]	 Lee, H. D., et al., “A Ku-Band MOSFET Phase Shifter MMIC,” IEEE Int. Microwave 
Symp. Dig., 2004, pp. 191–194.
[122]	Hancock, T. M., and G. M. Rebeiz, “A 12-GHz SiGe Phase Shifter with Integrated LNA,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 53, March 2005, p. 977–983.
[123]	Lu, C., A.-V. H. Pham, and D. Livezey, “Development of Multiband Phase Shifters in 180-
nm RF CMOS Technology with Active Compensation,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 54, Jan. 2006, pp. 40–45.
[124]	Kang, D.-W., et al., “Ku-Band MMIC Phase Shifter Using a Parallel Resonator with 0.18-
μm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 54, Jan. 2006, pp. 
294–301.
[125]	Chu, M., et al., “A 5 GHz Wide-Range CMOS Active Phase Shifter for Wireless Beam-
forming Applications,” IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium, Jan. 2006, pp. 47–50.

4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
203
[126]	Wu, P.-S., et al., “New Miniature 15–20-GHz Continuous-Phase/Amplitude Control 
MMICs Using 0.18-μm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., 
Vol. 54, Jan. 2006, pp. 10–19.
[127]	Kang, D.-W., and S. Hong, “A 4-Bit CMOS Phase Shifter Using Distributed Active 
Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 55, July 2007 pp. 1476–1483.
[128]	Koh, K., and G. M. Rebeiz, “0.13-mm CMOS Phase Shifters for X-, Ku-, and K-Band 
Phased Arrays,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 42, Nov. 2007, pp. 2535–2546.
[129]	Zheng, Y., and C. E. Saavedra, “An Ultra-Compact CMOS Variable Phase Shifter for 
2.4-GHz ISM Applications,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 56, June 
2008, pp. 1349–1354.
[130]	Wu, J.-C., et al., “A 24-GHz Full-360° CMOS Reflection-Type Phase Shifter MMIC with 
Low Loss-Variation,” IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium Dig., 2008, 
pp. 365–368.
[131]	 Yu, Y., et al., “A 60 GHz Digitally Controlled Phase Shifter in CMOS,” Proc. 34th Euro-
pean Solid-State Circuits Conference, Sept. 2008, pp. 250–253.
[132]	Wu, J.-C., et al., “2.45-GHz CMOS Reflection-Type Phase-Shifter MMICs with Minimal 
Loss Variation Over Quadrants of Phase Shift Range,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
and Tech., Vol. 56, Oct. 2008, pp. 2180–2189.
[133]	Min, B.-W., and G. M. Rebeiz, “Single-Ended and Differential Ka-Band BiCMOS Phased 
Array Front-End,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 43, Oct. 2008, pp. 2239–2250.
[134]	Tsai, M.-D., and A. Natarajan, “60 GHz Passive and Active RF-Path Phase Shifters in 
Silicon,” IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium Dig., June 2009, pp. 
223–226.
[135]	Sarkas, I., et al., “Wband 65-nm CMOS and SiGe BiCMOS Transmitter and Receiver 
with Lumped I-Q Phase Shifters,” IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium 
Dig., Boston, MA, Jun. 7–9, 2009, pp. 441–444.
[136]	Biglarbegian, B., et al., “Millimeter-Wave Reflection-Type Phase Shifter in CMOS Tech-
nology,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 19, Sep. 2009, pp. 560–562.
[137]	Kim, S. Y., and G. M. Rebeiz, “A 4-Bit Passive Phase Shifter for Automotive Radar 
Applications in 0.13 μm CMOS,” IEEE Compound Semiconductor Integrated Circuit 
Symposium Dig., Oct. 11–14, 2009, Greensboro, NC, pp. 1–4.
[138]	Kang, D. W., B. H. Ku, and S. C. Hong, “Design of X-Band 6-Bit CMOS Phase Shifter 
for Phased-Array T/R/ Module,” Microwave Opt. Tech. Lett., Vol. 51, Oct. 2009, pp. 
2405–2406.
[139]	 Kang, D.-W., et al., “Single and Four-Element Ka-Band Transmit/Receive Phased-Array 
Silicon RFICs with 5-Bit Amplitude and Phase Control,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory 
Tech., Vol. 57, Dec. 2009, pp. 3534–3543.
[140]	Meghdadi, M., et al., “A 6-Bit CMOS Phase Shifter for S-Band,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory and Tech., Vol. 58, Dec. 2010, pp. 3519–3526.
[141]	 Wang, C.-W., H.-S. Wu, and C. C. Tzuang, “CMOS Passive Phase Shifter with Group-
Delay Deviation of 6.3 ps at K-Band,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 
59, July 2011, pp. 1778–1786.
[142]	 Shin, D. H., and G. M. Rebeiz, “A High Linearity X-Band Four-Element Phase-Array 
Receiver: CMOS Chip and Packaging,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 
59, Aug. 2011, pp. 2064–2072.
[143]	 Huang, Y.-Y., et al., “An Ultra-Compact, Linearly Controlled Variable Phase Shifter 
Designed with a Novel RC Poly-Phase Filter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., 
Vol. 60, Feb. 2012, pp. 301–310.
[144]	Gharibdoust, K., et al., “ A Fully Integrated 0.18-μm CMOS Transceiver Chip for X-Band 
Phased-Array Systems,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 60, July 2012, 
pp. 2192–2202.

204
Phase Shifters
[145]	 Uzunkol, M., and G. M. Rebeiz, “A 65 GHz LNA/Phase Shifter with 4.3 dB NF Using 
45 nm CMOS SOI,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 22, Oct. 2012, pp. 
530–532.
[146]	Cho, M.-K, D. Baek, and J.-G. Kim, “An X-Band 5 Bit Phase Shifter with Low Insertion 
Loss in 0.18 μm SOI Technology,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 22, 
Dec. 2012, pp. 648–650.
[147]	Sim, S., L. Jeon, and J.-G. Kim, “A Compact X-Band Bi-Directional Phased-Array T/R 
Chipset in 0.13 μm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 
61, January 2013, pp. 562–569.
[148]	 Sah, S. P., X. Yu, and D. Heo, “Design and Analysis of a Wideband 15–35-GHz Quadra-
ture Phase Shifter with Inductive Loading,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., 
Vol. 61, Aug. 2013, pp. 3024–3033.
[149]	 Kim, S. Y., et al., “A 76–84-GHz 16-Element Phased Array Receiver with a Chip-Level 
Built-in Self-Test System,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, Aug. 2013, 
pp. 3083–3098.
[150]	Kim, J.-H., and J.-W. Lee, “A Q-Band 4-Bit Active Phase Shifter Using 0.13 mm CMOS 
Technology,” MOTL, Vol. 55, Nov. 2013, pp. 2676–2680.
[151]	 Ellinger, F., H. Jackel, and W. Bachtold, “Varactor-Loaded Transmission-Line Phase Shifter 
at C-Band Using Lumped Elements,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 51, 
April 2003, pp. 1135–1140.
[152]	Bourtoutian, R., and P. Ferrari, “Tapered Distributed Analog Tunable Phase Shifter with 
Low Insertion and Return Loss,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 41, June 2005, pp. 852–854.
[153]	Hongjoon, K., et al., “Linear Tunable Phase Shifter Using a Left-Handed Transmission 
Line,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, Vol. 15, May 2005, pp. 
366–368.
[154]	Qureshi, J. H., et al., “A Low-Loss Compact Linear Varactor Phase-Shifter,” IEEE RFIC 
Symp. Dig., 2007, pp. 453–456.
[155]	Kim, S., et al., “A low-Distortion, Low-Loss Varactor Phase-Shifter Based on a Silicon-
on-Glass Technology,” IEEE RFIC Symp. Dig., 2008, pp. 175–178.
[156]	Lambard, T., et al., “A Novel Analog 360° Phase Shift Design in Ku and Ka Bands,” 
MOTL, Vol. 52, Aug. 2010, pp. 1733–1736.
[157]	Abbosh, A. M., “Ultra-Wideband Phase Shifters Using Short Section of Coupled Lines,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, Aug. 2012, pp. 2465–2472.
[158]	Miyaguchi, K., et al., “A 6–18 GHz 5-Bit Phase Shifter MMIC Using Series/Parallel LC 
Circuit,” Eur. Microwave Conf. Proc., 2002, pp. 71–74.
[159]	Adler, D., and R. Popovich, “Broadband Switched-Bit Phase Shifter Using All-Pass Net-
works,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1991, pp. 265–268.
[160]	Hangai, M., et al., “S- and C-Band Ultra-Compact Phase Shifters Based on All-Pass Net-
works,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 58, Jan. 2010, pp. 41–47.
[161]	 Tang, X., and K. Mouthaan, “Design Considerations for Octave-Band Phase Shifters Using 
Discrete Components,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 58, Dec. 2010, pp. 
3459–3466.
[162]	 Tang, X., and K. Mouthaan, “Design of Large Bandwidth Phase Shifters using Common 
Mode All-Pass Networks,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 22, Feb. 2012, 
pp. 55–57.
[163]	 Tang, X., and K. Mouthaan, “Large Bandwidth Digital Phase Shifters with All-Pass, High-
Pass, and Low-Pass Networks,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, June 
2013, pp. 2325–2331.
[164]	Bauhahn, P., et al., “30 GHz Multi-Bit Monolithic Phase Shifters,” IEEE MTT-S Int. 
Microwave Symp. Dig., 1985, pp. 4–7.

4.8	
Active Phase Shifters
205
[165]	Carandang, R., et al., “A Novel Q-Band Phase Shifter for Millimeter-Wave Phased Array 
Applications,” private communication.
[166]	Aust, M., et al., “GaAs Monolithic Components Development for Q-Band Phased Array 
Applications,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1992, pp. 703–706.
[167]	Maruhashi, K., H. Mizutani, and K. Ohata, “Design and Performance of a Ka-Band 
Monolithic Phase Shifter Utilizing Nonresonant FET Switches,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory Tech., Vol. 48, Aug. 2000, pp. 1313–1317.
[168]	 Jacomb-Hood, A. W., D. Seielstad, and J. D. Merrill, “A Three-Bit Monolithic Phase 
Shifter at V-Band,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. 
Dig., 1987, pp. 81–84.
[169]	 Nguyen, C., “Design and Performance of a W-Band Broadband Microstrip Phase Shifter,” 
Microwave J., Vol. 32, July 1989, pp. 91–96.
[170]	 Zuefle, K., et al., “Coplanar 4-Bit HEMT Phase Shifters for 94 GHz Phased Array Radar-
Systems,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1999, pp. 303–306.
[171]	 Bahl, I. J., et al., “Low Loss Multilayer Microstrip Line for Monolithic Microwave Inte-
grated Circuits Applications,” Int. J. RF and Microwave Computer-Aided Engineering, 
Vol. 8, Nov. 1998, pp. 441–454.
[172]	 Mondal, J., et al., “Phase Shifts in Single- and Dual-Gate GaAs MESFETs for 2–4-GHz 
Quadrature Phase Shifts,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. MTT-32, Oct. 
1984, pp. 1280–1287.
[173]	 Grajal, J., et al., “A 1.4–2.7-GHz Analog MMIC Vector Modulator for a Crossbar Beam-
forming Network,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 45, Oct. 1997, pp. 
1705–1714.
[174]	 Kim, S. J., and N. H. Myung, “A New Active Phase Shifter Using a Vector Sum Method,” 
IEEE Microwave Guided Wave Lett., Vol. 10, June 2000, pp. 233–235.
[175]	 Wu, P.-S., et al., “New Miniature 15–20-GHz Continuous-Phase/Amplitude Control 
MMICs Using 0.18-μm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., 
Vol. 54, Jan. 2006, pp. 10–19.
[176]	 Koh, K.-J., and G. M. Rebeiz, “0.13μm CMOS Phase Shifters for X-, Ku-, and K-Band 
Phased Arrays,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 42, Nov. 2007, pp. 2535–2546.
[177]	Koh, K.-J., and G. M. Rebeiz, “A 6–18 GHz 5-Bit Active Phase Shifter,” IEEE MTT-S 
Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2010, pp. 792–795.
[178]	 Asoodeh, A., and M. Atarodi, “A Full 360° Vector-Sum Phase Shifter with Very Low 
RMS Phase Error Over a Wide Bandwidth,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., 
Vol. 61, June 2012, pp. 1626–1634.
[179]	 Kim, S. Y., et al., “An Improved Wideband All-Pass I/Q Network for Millimeter Phase 
Shifters,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, Nov. 2012, pp. 3431–3439.
[180]	Bahl, I. J., Fundamental of RF and Microwave Transistor Amplifiers, Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2009.
[181]	 Cobham MMIC Products, Blacksburg, VA.
[182]	 Skyworks Solutions, GaAs MMIC Products Catalogue, Woburn, Massachusetts.
[183]	 MACOM, GaAs FET MMIC Control Products Catalogue, Lowell, Massachusetts.
[184]	TriQuent Semiconductor, Hillsboro, Oregon.
[185]	Hittite Microwave Corporation, Chelmsford, Massachusetts.


207
C h a p t e r  5
Attenuators
5.1	
Introduction
Attenuators are invariably used in radio frequency systems to adjust the gain of 
the signal. They can be of fixed discrete values (digital) or variable value. Digital 
attenuators offer precise attenuation ranges, good linearity, good thermal stability, 
and high-power handling capability. Digitally controlled components have the obvi-
ous advantage of compatibility with the processor controlling the system. They are 
integral parts of transreceiver (T/R) modules for active phased array radar. Voltage-
controlled variable attenuators are important control elements and are widely used 
for automatic gain control circuits. Analogue control has the advantage of simplicity 
and provides continuous gain control. They are indispensable for temperature com-
pensation of gain variation in amplifiers. The variable attenuators inserted between 
the gain stages in a subsystem provide variable gain and minimize the interactions 
between the stages that result in predictable amplifier performance.
The RF and microwave attenuators have been described in numerous published 
papers and book chapters [1–51]. An overview of attenuator technology, including 
analysis, design, and performance, and recent advances are treated in this chapter. 
Both digital and analog attenuators are discussed.
5.1.1	
Types of Attenuators
An attenuator is a two-port network with the setting that the amplitude of the sig-
nal between the output and input may be adjusted by a control voltage (DC bias). 
Various attenuator designs may be classified as shown in Figure 5.1. Attenuators 
can be designed for either digital or a fixed value or analogue control. Both fixed 
value and variable voltage attenuators use “T” or “π” configurations. Digital or 
step attenuators have binary-weighted attenuation values, and generally their val-
ues are 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 dB. Each configuration may be realized using PIN 
diodes, FETs/HEMTs and CMOS transistors. Digital attenuators have four types: 
switched-fixed resistor, switched-scaled device, switched resistor, and device-embed-
ded/integrated configuration. In the switched-fixed resistor type, two single-pole 
double-throw (SPDT) switches are used to switch the signal between a through 
line and an attenuating pad, as shown in Figure 5.2. This technique is best suited 
to larger attenuation values, and the attenuator arm can use a T- or π-type resistor 
network. As an example, the switched-scaled FET technique uses different sizes 
of FETs in two paths connected between the input and output ports, as shown in 
Figure 5.3. Here, FETs are employed as switchable low-value resistances using the 

208
Attenuators
Figure 5.1  Various types of RF and microwave attenuators.
Figure 5.2  Digitally controlled switched attenuator configurations: (a) π and (b) T.
Figure 5.3  Digitally controlled switched-scaled FET attenuator configuration.
Figure 5.4  Digitally controlled switched-resistor attenuator configurations.

5.1	
Introduction
209
fact that the ON-state resistance depends on the gate peripheries Wg1 and Wg2. The 
switched-resistor type uses T- or π-attenuators in which FET switches are used to 
switch the resistors in or out of the circuit, as shown in Figure 5.4.
The FET-embedded type attenuators are realized using a “T” attenuator topol-
ogy shown in Figure 5.5(a) in which the switching FETs become an integral part of 
the attenuator configuration. The shunt FET switches the shunt resistor in and out 
where the FET’s resistance becomes a part of the shunt resistor. The FET-embedded 
attenuator has compact size and low through insertion loss because there are no 
devices in series. Values of R1 and R2 are selected so that the circuit is matched to 50 
Ω at the input and output. In addition to the “T” configuration, “π” and bridged-T 
topologies are also used.
In an attenuator design, the selection of SPDT switches and resistors is critical. 
The SPDT switches have been described in Chapter 3. The resistors used are of 
thin film type. Smaller widths for thin film resistors have lower parasitic reactances 
and higher operating frequencies. In the design of attenuators, accurate models for 
resistors are used.
In designing attenuators for high-power applications, there are two consider-
ations, as discussed for switches in Section 3. The series transistors in the ON state 
must handle high currents, and shunt devices in the OFF state must not exceed the 
device breakdown voltage. This requires large periphery transistors in series and 
in shunt multiple transistors in series or multigate transistor like dual gate or triple 
gate. Also the control voltage must be used such that transistors stay in the ON and 
OFF states over large voltage swings.
Voltage variable attenuators (VVAs) can be of passive or active type. Passive 
VVAs are of reflection and transmission type. Active VVAs use some sort of ampli-
fiers employing transistors having bias voltages at both drain and gate terminals. 
Such components are very suitable for vector modulator phase shifters as discussed 
in the previous chapter.
Figure 5.5  FET-embedded/integrated attenuator configurations.

210
Attenuators
5.1.2	
Theory of Attenuators
Consider a “π” type attenuator configuration, as shown in Figure 5.6. The attenu-
ator is generally symmetrical and consists of three resistors, R1, R2, and R2. An 
important characteristic of an attenuator is that its input impedance should remain 
constant over any attenuation value, so that the attenuator remains matched over 
its operating frequency range. For matching, the impedance of the network to the 
right of AA′ (say, ZA) in parallel with R2 should equal Z0; that is,
	
1
Z0
= 1
R2
+ 1
ZA 	
(5.1)
where ZA = R1 + R2Z0/(R2 + Z0). Since V1 = I1ZA and V2 = I1R2Z0/(R2 + Z0), the 
attenuation ratio A = V1/V2 may be written as
	
A = V1
V2
=
ZA
R2Z0 / R2 + Z0
(
)
= R1 R2 + Z0
(
) + R2Z0
R2Z0
	
(5.2)
Since attenuation is expressed in positive dB, that is the reason attenuation is defined 
as V1/V2 instead of V2/V1 as a transfer function is generally designated. In this case 
the attenuation, expressed in dB, is written as 20 log A.
Substituting ZA in (5.1),
	
Z0
2 =
R1R2
2
R1 + 2R2
	
(5.3)
Or
	
R1 =
2R2Z0
2
R2 −Z0
(
) R2 + Z0
(
)
	
(5.4)
Eliminating R1 from (5.2) and (5.4)
	
A = V1
V2
= R2 + Z0
R2 −Z0 	
(5.5)
Figure 5.6  Resistive π network for an attenuator matched to Z0.

5.1	
Introduction
211
Resistance values R2 and R1 can be expressed in terms of the system impedance Z0 
and the voltage ratio A as
	
R1 = Z0(A −1/ A)
2
	
(5.6a)
	
R2 = Z0(A + 1)
A −1
	
(5.6b)
Figure 5.7 shows T, π, and bridged-T networks used for an attenuator design.
Example 5.1
Determine the resistance values of R1 and R2 for a 10-dB attenuator designed in 
the π configuration and 50 Ω system impedance.
Solution
Here Z0 = 50 Ω
For 10 dB = 20 log A, A = 1010/20 = 3.16
From (5.6),
	
R1 = 50(3.16 −1/3.16)
2
= 71.2Ω
R2 = 50(3.16 + 1)
3.16 −1
= 96.3Ω
	
Attenuation under matched conditions for the two other types of attenuator 
configurations shown in Figure 5.7 are given next.
For “T”:
	
A = V1
V2
= R1 + R2 + Z0
R2
	
(5.7a)
	
R1 = Z0(A −1)
A + 1
,
R2 =
2Z0A
(A + 1)(A −1) 	
(5.7b)
Figure 5.7  Resistive networks for an attenuator matched to Z0: (a) T, (b) π, and (c) bridged-T.

212
Attenuators
For bridged-T:
	
A = R2 + Z0
R2
,
R2 =
Z0
A −1 	
(5.8a)
	
A = R1 + Z0
Z0
,
R1 = Z0(A −1) 	
(5.8b)
And the matching conditions are for “T”:
	
Z0
2 = R1
2 + 2R1R2 	
(5.9)
For bridged-T:
	
R3 = R4 = Z0
Z0
2 = R1R2
	
(5.10)
These equations are valid for ideal resistor components. At lower microwave 
frequencies, the effect of resistor parasitic reactances can be neglected. In such a 
case, values of R1 and R2 needed for various values of attenuation using π- and 
T-configurations (for Z0 = 50 Ω) are calculated using aforementioned equations 
and shown in Figure 5.8. However, at microwave and millimeter-wave frequencies, 
accurate models for resistors as described by Bahl [52] are used.
Resistor values for various attenuations of T-, π-, and bridged-T networks are 
also summarized in Table 5.1. It may be noticed from Table 5.1 that for large attenu-
ation value R1 in the T-configuration and R2 in the π-configuration approach 50 Ω. 
This feature has been used to realize VVAs.
Example 5.2
Determine the value of attenuation when the value of R1 of the T-network is equal 
to R2 of the bridged-T network.
Table 5.1  Resistor Values for Various Attenuations of T, π, and Bridged-T Networks
Type
T
π
Bridged-T
Attenuation (dB)
R1 (Ω)
R2 (Ω)
R1 (Ω)
R2 (Ω)
R1 (Ω)
R2 (Ω)
0.5
1.4
868
2.9
1737
3
843
1
2.9
433
5.8
869
6
409
3
8.5
142
17.6
292
20
120
5
14
82
31
179
39
64
10
26
35
71
96
108
23
15
35
18.4
136
72
231
10.8
20
41
10.1
248
61
450
5.6
30
47
3.2
790
53
1531
1.6
50
49.7
0.32
7905
50.3
15760
0.16

5.1	
Introduction
213
Solution
From (5.6a)
	
R1T = Z0(A −1)
A + 1
	
From (5.8a)
	
R2B =
Z0
A −1 	
When R1T = R2B, Z0(A − 1)2 = Z0(A + 1), A = 3,
Attenuation in dB = 20 log A = 9.54 dB
The through line loss in the digital attenuators can be kept to minimum by using 
shunt only switching devices. However, for larger attenuation bit sizes, it is very 
difficult to maintain good return loss over larger bandwidths. In that case, one has 
to use “T” or “π” topology, which uses series switching elements and hence higher 
through loss. There is another approach one can use similar to loaded line phase 
shifters. In this case, two small identical bits (using shunt devices) are connected 
in series by using a quarter-wave long line. The design of this type of attenuator is 
based on the principle that any symmetric pair of shunt impedances spaced a quarter-
wavelength apart will have mutually cancelling reflections provided the normalized 
impedances are small compared with unity. This technique is especially beneficial 
at higher frequencies where quarter-wavelength lines become smaller.
Figure 5.8  Values of resistance R1 and R2 needed for attenuator design for various values of 
attenuation.

214
Attenuators
5.1.3	
Fabrication of Attenuators
Attenuators are generally fabricated using both hybrid and monolithic integrated 
circuit processes. In the monolithic category, both RFIC and MMIC techniques are 
used. MIC attenuators are based on PIN and varactor diodes. Devices used are in 
packaged and chip form. In MMICs, various different technologies are employed, 
including GaAs-based PIN diodes, HBT PIN diodes, FETs and HEMTs, and SiC-
based GaN HEMTs. Si-based RFIC mostly use CMOS and CMOS SOI. The com-
bination of thin-film resistors, active resistors, and the FETs parasitic resistance 
are used to set the attenuation value of each bit. High-power attenuators use pack-
aged PIN diodes and are realized using hybrid MIC technology, coaxial lines, and 
waveguides.
5.2	
Fixed Value Attenuators
Many different types of fixed value attenuators are being used in the RF and micro-
wave systems, to provide a fixed value of attenuation. The commonly used values are 
3-, 6-, 10-, and 20-dB attenuation. These components are available in chip, surface 
mount package, coaxial, and waveguide form. MMIC and RFIC technologies can 
also be used to fabricate fixed value attenuators.
5.2.1	 Attenuator Pad
Thin film and thick film hybrid technologies have been used to manufacture chip 
attenuator pads for low-power and high-power applications. Their performance 
is comparable with coaxial attenuators and used in commercial and military 
applications. In thin film hybrid technology, resistive thin films consisting of 
nichrome (NiCr) or tantalum nitride (TaN) are deposited on alumina substrate 
for low-power applications and on beryllia or aluminum nitride substrate for 
high-power applications. TaN is preferred to NiCr because it also provides self-
passivation that protects the resistive film. The substrate thickness normally is 
10-mil and provides a good compromise between the heat dissipation, disconti-
nuity reactance effects, and substrate handling. Figure 5.9 shows schematics of 
Figure 5.9  Schematics of chip attenuator pads: (a) patch geometry, and (b) T-configuration.

5.2	
Fixed Value Attenuators
215
chip attenuators. Typical characteristics for low-power attenuator pads are DC-24 
GHz frequency range, 1- to 20-dB attenuation range, return loss better than 15 
dB, 0.5 W power dissipation, and temperature variation less than 0.1 dB over 
−55° to 125° temperature range.
Thick film resistors are manufactured using various compositions of ruthenium 
dioxide (RuO2) paste and a screen printing process. Sheet resistance values rang-
ing from 1Ω to 10 kΩ per square are obtained by mixing RuO2 with silver (Ag) 
and palladium (Pd) conducting particles for values less than 100Ω/square, and by 
mixing RuO2 with Ag lead ruthenate and bismuth ruthenate for values higher than 
100 Ω/square. Commonly used base substrate materials are alumina, beryllia, and 
aluminum nitride. More detailed discussion on this subject is included in books 
such as [52].
5.2.2	 Temperature Variable Attenuator
A temperature variable attenuator (TVA) is used to compensate for the temperature 
variations in solid-state attenuators. They are designed the same way as the attenu-
ator pads as described earlier; however, the temperature coefficient of resistor films 
used becomes another design parameter. The rate of change of resistor value with 
temperature is known as the temperature coefficient of resistors (TCR) or simply 
TC and is expressed in percent per degree Celsius or parts per million per degree 
Celsius (ppm/°C). When the resistance increases with increasing temperature, TC 
value has positive sign, if it decreases, TC value has a negative sign. This property 
is used to design a TVA that is cascaded with VVA to maintain constant attenu-
ation over temperature. If the attenuation of a VVA increases with temperature, 
TVA is designed with negative TCR and specific attenuation over the required 
temperature range.
The resistor’s temperature dependence is given by
	
ROT = RRT + TC(TOT − TRT)	
(5.11)
where OT and RT denote the operating and room or ambient temperature, 
respectively. If a resistor has + TC value of 100 ppm/ºC, the resistance value 
will increase with temperature by about 1 percent at 125°C; when the ambient 
temperature is 25°C, a 100 Ω resistor at room temperature will be about 101 Ω 
at 125°C. Table 5.2 lists some of the thin- film resistive materials used in fixed 
value attenuators.
Table 5.2  Properties of Resistive Films
Material
Resistivity (Ω/square)
TCR (ppm/°C)
n+ GaAs
140
+2000
NiCr
50
+100
TaN
20
+50
Cr-SiO
100
−200
TiWN
11
+100

216
Attenuators
5.3	
Multibit Attenuators
One of the important elements in a T/R module is the programmable multibit digital 
step attenuator. The shaping of the beam and controlling of the side lobes in active 
phased-array radars (PARs) are achieved by changing the amplitude of the RF signal 
fed to or received from each radiating element. Multibit step attenuators employ 
cascaded digitally controlled attenuation bits and offer precise attenuation ranges, 
high dynamic range, good linearity, good thermal stability, and high-power handling 
capability. Generally, the digital bits in a multibit attenuator have binary values (i.e., 
5-bit and 6-bit with attenuation range of about 31 dB have 1-, 2-, 4-, 8-, and 16-dB 
bits and 0.5-, 1-, 2-, 4-, 8-, and 16-dB bits, respectively). Most large practical PAR 
systems use 6-bit attenuators as a compromise between the cost, size, insertion loss, 
and the incremental improvement in system performance when more attenuation 
bits are used. Large PARs rely on compact and low-cost monolithic programmable 
multibit attenuators to achieve minimum size, weight, power consumption, and cost. 
During the past decade there has been significant progress in programmable multibit 
attenuators. Many different technologies, including GaAs MMICs, Si RFIC, and 
MEMS, are being pursued to develop compact and low-cost attenuators.
In a multibit attenuator, the small 0.25-, 0.5-, 1-, and 2-dB bits are generally 
realized using a topology shown in Figure 5.5(a). The configuration for the medium 
bits (2–8 dB) is an extended version of the embedded-FET type topology and is 
shown in Figure 5.5(b). Here, an extra switching component is added to achieve 
flat attenuation over the broad frequency range. This bit functions the same way as 
the small bit. For the reference state, series FET is in the ON state, and shunt FET 
is in the OFF state. This configuration has slightly higher insertion loss due to the 
additional series FET. The 16-dB bit basically uses two 8-dB bits. Many times 8- 
and 16-dB bits use switched attenuator topology for better resolution and accuracy. 
The RC network shown in Figure 5.5 is optimized to maintain the attenuator’s 
linearity and a good VSWR.
The performance of multibit attenuators is measured in terms of insertion loss; 
return loss; and peak, average, and root mean square (RMS) attenuation errors. 
The low RMS attenuation error < 0.5 dB across the operating band is indicative 
of a very good mature attenuator design. The RMS error is calculated using the 
following relation:
	
RMS(f) =
mi
2(f)
i=1
N
∑
N
	
(5.12)
where
μi(f) = Ai(f) − Ai
μi(f) = attenuation error of state i as a function of frequency
Ai(f) = measured relative attenuation of state i versus frequency
Ai = ideal attenuation of state i
i = 1, 2 …, 16; attenuation state counter for a 4-bit attenuator.

5.3	
Multibit Attenuators
217
Next both GaAs and Si-based monolithic step attenuators are described.
5.3.1	 PIN Diode Step Attenuators
Digital multibit attenuators using PIN diodes as switching devices usually utilize 
a switched-T network, as shown in​ Figure 5.10. In this configuration the PIN 
diodes are not used as variable resistors, but as switches with ON resistance and 
OFF capacitance. In a multibit configuration, for each bit the resistors R1 and R2 
are sized and all bits are cascaded in series. Each bit is designed for the best pos-
sible return loss, generally better than 25 dB over the design bandwidth, in order 
to minimize the effect of interactions between the reflected signals. The bits are 
arranged in such a way that interaction between the bits are kept at a minimum. 
This configuration has fast switching speed, high-power handling capability, and 
low intermodulation products.
SiGe PIN diode-based MMIC multibit step attenuators have been reported in 
the literature [53]. A schematic of a 3-bit attenuator consisting of 1-, 2-, and 4-dB 
bits is shown in Figure 5.11(a). A single series PIN diode of area 50 μm2 was used 
as a switching device. Both π- and T-resistive networks were used for broadband 
match and MMIC realization. Polysilicon resistors with a sheet resistance of 340 Ω/
square were used. For PIN diode biasing spiral inductors as RF chokes, and 10 pF 
MIM capacitors as DC block and RF bypass were employed. The biasing/control 
voltage Vc (±1 V) was selected to minimize the DC current and MMIC chip size. 
A photograph of the broadband SiGe PIN diode 3-bit attenuator is shown in Fig-
ure 5.11(b). The chip area was 1.8 mm × 1.8 mm. The measured insertion loss and 
return loss over the 6- to 15-GHz frequency range were 6 dB and 10 dB, respectively.
There are some disadvantages of PIN diode step attenuators. Since devices 
have finite reactances and need RF choke for biasing networks, they have limited 
bandwidth and large size as compared to GaAs and Si transistor step attenua-
tors. PIN attenuators dissipate significantly more DC power than using transistor 
approaches.
Figure 5.10  Switched resistive T-network attenuator configurations.

218
Attenuators
5.3.2	 GaAs MMIC Step Attenuators
GaAs MMIC step attenuators are much preferred to PIN diode attenuators and have 
received much attention over the past three decades. Numerous broadband multi-
bit step attenuators have been developed covering DC to 20 GHz. Both FET and 
HEMT are being used. Figure 5.12 shows a schematic of a 4-bit attenuator where 
the least significant bit (LSB) is 1 dB. For each attenuation bit, the gate peripheries 
of FETs are selected to meet design goals. The FETs are switched between their 
ON and OFF states. The series FETs ON and shunt FETs OFF represent the low 
attenuation or reference (through) state. In the attenuation state, the series FETs 
are OFF and the shunt FETs are ON. In the reference state, the circuit is reduced 
to a parasitic resistance from input to output. In the attenuation state, the circuit 
reduces to a resistive T- or π-network matched to 50 Ω. The passive resistors values 
and FET sizes are selected in such a way that in the reference state the circuit has 
minimum possible attenuation and in the attenuation state each resistance (passive 
plus FET) value in the T-network meets the design value (as close as possible) as 
listed in Table 5.1. In both states the circuit is matched to 50 Ω. Combinations of 
Figure 5.11  (a) Schematic of a 3-bit PIN MMIC attenuator configuration, (b) Photograph of the 
broadband SiGe PIN diode 3-bit attenuator. (Courtesy of Dr. Reza Tayrani.)

5.3	
Multibit Attenuators
219
thin-film resistors and the FET’s parasitic resistance are used to set the normalized 
attenuation (attenuation above the through state loss) value of each bit.
In a 5-bit attenuator, with LSB of 0.5 dB, a 0.5 dB bit having the same circuit 
topology as for the 1-dB bit can be cascaded at the input. Similarly, in a 5-bit attenu-
ator, with LSB of 1 dB, a 16-dB bit (or two 8-dB bits) having the same topology 
as for the 8-dB bit can be added at the output. The topology shown in Figure 5.12 
has relatively high insertion loss in the reference state because of cascading of high 
loss SPDT switches. The chip size also becomes large.
In place of switched T- or π- attenuator configuration, a distributed T- topol-
ogy as a switched attenuator for large bits has been proposed [22]. A schematic of 
this configuration is shown in Figure 5.13. This has low insertion loss, good match, 
and low RMS amplitude error when used in a 4-bit attenuator working over DC to 
20 GHz. The 4-bit (1.5-, 3-, 6-, and 12-dB) attenuator was fabricated with MSAG 
process. Typical measured insertion loss and return loss values, for all attenuating 
states, were less than 5 dB and better than 12 dB, respectively. The attenuation 
accuracy was better than 0.5 dB, switching speed was less than 5 ns, and P1dB was 
greater than 26 dBm. The attenuation variation for the 4-bit attenuator was ±0.3 
dB ( or less than 0.1 dB/bit) across the −55 to +100 °C temperature range. This was 
a typical value observed for GaAs MMIC attenuators.
A 6-bit attenuator consisting of 0.5-, 1-, 2-, 4-, 8-, and 16-dB attenuation bits 
using MSAG process was developed. The total attenuation range was 31.5 dB with 
0.5-dB step resolution. In the design of a 6-bit attenuator, a suitable topology was 
selected for each bit to provide optimum performance and size. The topology was 
Figure 5.12  Schematic of a 4-bit attenuator.
Figure 5.13  Schematic of a broadband distributed switched network attenuator.

220
Attenuators
then optimized employing a simple FET model where FET periphery is a variable. 
Finally, the circuit was re-optimized using measured S-parameters data for standard 
FET sizes (e.g., 50, 75, 100, 150, 200 μm) closest to initially optimized FET sizes 
or using custom device models or accurate models provided by foundries. During 
the design process several tradeoffs were considered, including insertion loss in the 
reference state, insertion loss flatness, RMS amplitude error, VSWR, and chip size.
The attenuator topology was selected so that the maximum attenuation in the 
reference state at 20 GHz was less than 5 dB and compatible with existing compact 
attenuator footprint. The 0.5-dB bit was based on Figure 5.5(a) configuration; 1-, 
2-, 4-, and 8-dB bits have geometry similar to Figure 5.5(b), and 16-dB used two 
8-dB bits with some modifications. The FET sizes were optimized for low insertion 
loss and flat attenuation performance. The attenuator has on-chip TTL translators. 
Figure 5.14(a) show the layout of the 6-bit attenuator. The control voltages were 0, 
-5 V. The chip dimensions were 1.45 mm × 0.85 mm.
The measured performance of the 6-bit attenuator is shown in Figures 5.14(b) 
and (c). The insertion loss and return loss values are better than 5.2 dB and 13.5 
dB, respectively. Other notable performance characteristics for all states included 
return loss better than 12 dB and RMS attenuation error less than 0.5 dB. The 
“suck out” in the output return loss around 12 GHz was due to the cancellation of 
reflections between the bits. The attenuation variation for the 6-bit attenuator was 
less than ±0.4 dB across the −50°C to +130°C temperature range.
5.3.3	 Si CMOS Step Attenuators
A family of monolithic digital step attenuators based on CMOS technology has 
been developed. The monolithic technology used to manufacture these attenuators 
is CMOS silicon-on sapphire (SOS), also known as silicon-on-insulator (SOI). They 
have electrical performance at par with GaAs MMIC technology and integration 
capabilities of Si technology. These attenuators have high linearity, have low inser-
tion loss, operate at single positive power supply voltage, have high ESD tolerance, 
and are integrated with serial and parallel interface logic. Salient features of these 
attenuators are 4- to 7-bit, 20-MHz to 6-GHz frequency range, 2.0-dB insertion 
loss, P1dB in the 20-dBm range, IIP3 better than 50 dBm, return loss better than 
15 dB, ESD tolerance up to 2kV HBM, very low DC power consumption, single 
positive power supply, and integrated logic and drivers. By using dual power sup-
ply, the improvement in power handing capability by 7–10 dB has been claimed. 
The attenuator configuration used was of switched resistive π-networks shown in 
Figure 5.2(a).
A large attenuation range circuit using 0.13-mm SOI CMOS technology has 
been reported [54]. The design was based on T-attenuator configuration comprised 
of two series and 63 shunt devices to provide a large attenuation range. At 1.88 
GHz, the measured attenuator performance were insertion loss less than 0.6 dB, 
return loss better than 8 dB, attenuation range less than 55.3 dB, attenuation step 
about 1 dB, and P1dB about 21 dBm.
A photograph of the DC-20 GHz CMOS SOI 5-bit attenuator [51] with least 
significant bit (LSB) of 1 dB is shown in Figure 5.15. The chip size was 0.63 mm2. 

5.3	
Multibit Attenuators
221
Figure 5.14  (a) Layout of the 6-bit attenuator, (b) Measured typical reference state performance 
of the 6-bit attenuator. (c) Measured typical attenuation of 6-bit and all six bits together.

222
Attenuators
The measured insertion loss in the reference state was less than 7.6 dB from DC to 
20 GHz. The RMS amplitude error was less than 0.5 dB.
5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators
The selection of a voltage variable attenuator for the particular application depends 
on several factors such as insertion loss, return loss, attenuation range, linearity 
of attenuation with voltage, power handling, and distortion. The design of most 
voltage variable attenuators (VVAs) has been based on either T- or π-configuration. 
Also VVAs need complex drivers to adjust the manufacturing variations in devices 
or to make them for linear attenuation with voltage. The devices are operated in 
nonlinear resistance region, not in saturated mode (fully ON and OFF), and they 
have the tendency to produce higher intermodulation distortion and harmonic gen-
eration than step attenuators. VVAs are generally operated at lower RF input power 
levels and also have higher temperature variations than step attenuators. The high 
temperature sensitivity is due to higher variations in the device’s junction charac-
teristics with temperature in the nonlinear resistance region. Thus, the attenuation 
reproducibility with voltage and temperature in VVAs is inferior to step attenuators.
Both PIN diodes and transistors are used in the design of variable-voltage 
attenuators. In such circuits, device size or their characteristics are selected in such 
a way that their resistor values suitably vary with control voltage, and the circuit 
is matched to 50 Ω. In such attenuators, the resistor values in series as well as in 
shunt are approximated as close as possible, as shown in Figure 5.8. In other words, 
in a π-type attenuator, the series shunt resistor values of 5.8 Ω, 869 Ω for a 1-dB, 
17.6 Ω, 292 Ω for a 3-dB, and 71 Ω, 96 Ω for a 10-dB attenuation are realized by 
varying the control voltage. Such attenuators pose a major challenge to linearize 
the attenuation with voltage.
Figure 5.15  Photograph of the broadband CMOS SOI 5-bit attenuator. (Courtesy of Dr. J.-G. 
Kim.)

5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators
223
In this section, variable attenuators using PIN diodes and passive-mode MES-
FETs are discussed.
5.4.1	 PIN Diode Variable Attenuators
The fact that the resistance of the intrinsic layer of PIN diodes is a strong func-
tion of the DC bias current is employed for designing current-controlled variable 
attenuators at microwave frequencies. The variable attenuator consists of three PIN 
diodes represented by three resistors shown in Figure 5.7. The values of bias currents 
required to produce the necessary resistance values for R1 and R2 are obtained by 
using (2.2a) or by experimental measurements.
Several versions of PIN diode voltage variable attenuators have been reported in 
the literature. Figure 5.16(a) shows the schematic of a PIN diode attenuator employ-
ing π-configuration, where the series diode is replaced with two diodes connected 
back to back. This configuration results in low intermodulation distortion due to 
cancellation of harmonic products. The voltage Vc1, biasing diodes D1 and D2 
provide the variable resistance for full attenuation range. The second control Vc2, 
Figure 5.16  Two variable-voltage PIN diode attenuator configurations: (a) modified π-type, and 
(b) bridged-T type. (c) Bridged-T type variable-voltage PIN diode attenuator configuration using 
single control voltage.

224
Attenuators
adjusts the diodes D3 and D4 along with resistor R to obtain 50 Ω for high attenu-
ation values and provide good match for the full attenuation range. Spiral inductors 
are generally used as RF chokes. Another version of this circuit using bridged-T 
configuration with only two diodes is shown in Figure 5.16(b).
A simplified version of a bridged-T VVA using only a single control voltage is 
shown in Figure 5.16(c). Both diodes are biased at the same impedance. However, 
for the π-attenuator one needs D1-D2 impedance as low-high or high-low com-
bination. The quarter-wave line inverts the diode D2 impedance (i.e., the low D2 
impedance looking in to the 50 Ω resistors becomes high and vice versa). Because of 
the quarter-wave line, this configuration has limited bandwidth. Typical measured 
performance of this attenuator at 1.9 GHz includes 1.5 dB insertion loss, return loss 
better than 10 dB, 15- to 17-dB attenuation range, input IP3 better than 40 dBm, 
switching speed less than 5 μs, and DC current less than 10 mA.
5.4.2	 MESFET Variable Attenuators
For attenuators employing MESFETs in the passive mode, the basic device mecha-
nism used is the change in the low field resistance of a zero-biased FET controlled 
by the gate voltage. Three MESFETs may be connected in T or π configuration, as 
shown in Figure 5.17(a) and (b), respectively. The MESFETs may be modeled by 
a parallel combination of R and C, as shown in Figure 5.17(c) and (d), where the 
values of R1 and R2 vary as a function of the gate voltages. The value of R varies 
from zero-bias value (Ron) to a large value Roff when the gate voltage reaches the 
pinchoff voltage. The values of the capacitances C1 and C2 may be considered to 
be fairly constant with gate voltages. At lower microwave frequencies, the effect of 
capacitors can be neglected.
Referring to Figure 5.8, for the same R1, the π configuration has a lower attenu-
ation than the T configuration. The minimum value of R1 (= Ron) can be reduced by 
increasing the number of gate fingers (although C1 will also increase). Larger values 
Figure 5.17  T (a and c) and π (b and d) VVA networks using MESFETs and their equivalent 
circuits.

5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators
225
of C1 limit the dynamic range of attenuation at higher frequencies. From the point 
of view of dynamic range, the T configuration is better than the π configuration.
Numerous voltage variable attenuators (VVAs) based on MESFET have been 
developed. An attenuator with T-circuit topology (Figure 5.18) has been reported 
[6]. Gate widths of 600 and 200 μm were chosen for the series and shunt FETs, 
respectively. Input and output microstrip lines were connected to drain contacts 
of FETa and FETb, while source contacts were connected by a common air bridge 
that served as a connection to the drain contact of FETc. The source of FETc was 
grounded through a via hole. Isolation between the RF circuit and DC control circuit 
was achieved by thin-film resistors and FETd resistors that had 25-μm-wide gates.
Experimental results [6] have shown that this attenuator had a 12-dB dynamic 
range of attenuation over the 2- to 18-GHz frequency range and 17 dB over the 
2- to 12-GHz frequency range. Return loss was better than 10 dB, and minimum 
insertion loss was about 2 dB. The performance did not degrade up to 28 dBm of 
input power level.
A MESFET-based VVA, working from DC to 50 GHz, was developed [14] using 
a 0.5-μm GaAs MMIC process. Figure 5.19 shows a schematic of the attenuator. 
The circuit topology is similar to the distributed/traveling-wave technique used for 
broadband switches described in Section 3.5. At a minimum attenuation setting, the 
series FETs are in the ON state and the shunt FETs are in the OFF state. The series 
high characteristic impedance lines form an artificial transmission line with device’s 
OFF capacitance. Thus, the device capacitances are absorbed into the transmission 
lines to provide an equivalent 50-Ω line. A 50-Ω resistor in parallel with the series 
FET minimizes the effect of device capacitance at higher attenuation settings. The 
Figure 5.18  Schematic of a MESFET attenuator using T-type configuration.
Figure 5.19  Schematic of a variable MESFET attenuator configuration.

226
Attenuators
devices peripheries were selected such that it has minimum insertion loss in the 
reference state and matched under all attenuation settings.
In the MMIC design, the gate peripheries used for the series and shunt FETs 
were 750 μm and 200 μm, respectively. The chip size was 1.52 × 0.65 mm2. The 
attenuator’s performance was measured using on-wafer RF probes. The minimum 
insertion loss values were 1.8, 2.6, and 4.2 dB at 26.5, 40, and 50 GHz, respec-
tively. The return loss was better than 10 dB for all attenuation settings. The aver-
age attenuation range was about 35–37 dB. This circuit has been widely used as a 
commercial product.
Dual and Single Positive Voltage Variable Attenuators
The MESFET VVAs described earlier require dual negative voltages. It is also pos-
sible to operate these attenuators with dual and a single positive power supply by 
keeping source pads “floating.” In this case, a positive voltage (normally +5 V) is 
applied at source pads of the switching FETs through resistors (5–10 kΩ, in order 
to keep the DC power dissipation low) and variable control voltages of 0 to +5 V 
applied at the gate pads. In this case when gate voltage is 0 V and source voltage is 
+5 V, the gate is negatively biased below pinchoff (e.g., Vgs = -5 V) with respect to 
source pad, and the switching FET is in the OFF or high impedance state. When 
gate voltage is +5 V, gate and source pads are at the same voltage of +5 V (e.g., Vgs = 
0 V), the switching FET is in the ON or low impedance state. Figure 5.20(a) shows 
a VVA where two positive control voltages Vc1 and Vc2 are used. The remaining 
design is similar to the previously described design method. Figure 5.20(b) shows 
a VVA where a single positive control voltage Vc is used.
In order to use source-floating technique, RF and grounding ports have to be 
isolated, which is generally accomplished by using DC blocking capacitors and 
grounding bypass capacitors, which are not needed for negative supply operation. 
The selection of their values depends upon the lowest frequency of operation, as 
described in Section 2.9.2. Since on-chip MIM capacitors have small values, exter-
nal capacitors can be used to extend the low frequency response.
Figure 5.20  Two positive voltage variable FET attenuator configurations: (a) dual supply, and 
(b) single supply.

5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators
227
5.4.3	 CMOS Variable Attenuator
A CMOS voltage variable attenuator integrated circuit working over 1–3.5 GHz 
was developed [43]. The schematic is shown in Figure 5.21. The operation of the 
attenuator (Figure 5.21(a)) may be explained as follows. The active balun splits the 
input signal in to two signals: in phase (0°) and out-of-phase (180°) signals of equal 
amplitudes. Each arm has a source-follower buffer amplifier followed by a voltage 
variable NMOS switch. In the in-phase arm, the switch device M1 is in the ON 
state with minimum resistance, while in the out-of-phase arm the switch device 
M2 has the variable voltage to achieve variable attenuation. When M2 is turned 
off, the circuit provides minimum attenuation, and when the M2 is turned on, the 
attenuation is maximum.
A simplified attenuator model is shown in Figure 5.21(b), where a transistor is 
represented by a drain-source resistor Rds. In this model it has been assumed that 
the active balun and the buffer amplifier compensate the 3-dB power split loss. In 
this case, the voltage after power split still remains Vs instead of Vs /
2.  The ratio 
of the output voltage Vo across the load RL to input voltage Vs may be written as
Vo
Vs
=
RL Rds2 + 1/ jwC
(
)
RL Rds2 + 1/ jwC
(
) + Rds1 + 1/ jwC
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
−
RL Rds1 + 1/ jwC
(
)
RL Rds1 + 1/ jwC
(
) + Rds2 + 1/ jwC
⎡⎣
⎤⎦	
(5.13)
where ω is the operating angular frequency. The attenuation is expressed as
	
A = −20 log (Vo/Vs) dB	
(5.14)
Figure 5.21  (a) Configuration of a voltage variable attenuator, (b) simplified attenuator circuit 
model, and (c) voltage variable CMOS attenuator circuit.

228
Attenuators
When ⎪1/jωC⎪ >> Rds1 and Rds2, the attenuation may be written as
A = 20log
RLRds1
RL Rds1 + Rds2
(
) + Rds1Rds2
−
RLRds2
RL Rds1 + Rds2
(
) + Rds1Rds2
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
  dB.
	
(5.15a)
When both transistors have the same gate voltage (VGS = VC = 1.8 V), Rds1 = Rds2, 
both split signals are cancelled at the output and result in maximum attenuation. 
When M1 is in the ON state (VGS = 1.8 V) and M2 is in the OFF state (Vc = 0 V) 
so that Rds2 is very large, (5.15a) becomes
	
A = 20log RL + Rds1
RL
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥  dB. 	
(5.15b)
For RL = 50 Ω and Rds1 =15 Ω, the minimum attenuation is 2.28 dB. However, in 
practice, due to finite device reactance, the minimum and maximum attenuation 
values attainable may be different from the theoretical values under ideal condi-
tions. Accurate models available from foundries may predict more accurately the 
circuit performance.
Figure 5.21(c) shows the complete voltage variable CMOS attenuator integrated 
circuit. Test results for a CMOS attenuator fabricated with 0.18-μm CMOS technol-
ogy were reported over 1–3.5 GHz by Saavedra and Jackson [43]. The attenuator 
size was 0.58 mm × 0.28 mm. The measured minimum attenuation was 2.6 dB, 
return loss was better than 10 dB, and attenuation range was about 25 dB over 
1–2.5 GHz. The second harmonic level was less than −20dBc at 1 dB compression, 
and the measured IIP3 was 3 dBm.
Example 5.3
A CMOS voltage variable attenuator is designed using the configuration shown in 
Figure 5.21. The balun loss is compensated by the buffer amplifier’s gain, and the 
transistor’s capacitive reactances are very high compared to the variable Rds2 values. 
Calculate the attenuation values for Rds2/Rds1 = 1.5, 2, 5, 10, and ∝, and Rds1 = 10 
Ω. Also calculate the attenuation range. The system impedance is 50 Ω.
Solution
Here RL = 50 Ω, ⎪1/jωC⎪ >> Rds2 and Rds1/RL= 0.2. If K = Rds2/Rds1, (5.15a) becomes
A = 20log
1 −K
1 + K 1 + Rds1 / RL
(
)
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
= 20log 1 + K 1 + Rds1 / RL
(
)
K −1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
= 20log 1.2K + 1
K −1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
The calculated values of attenuation for K = 1.5, 2, 5, 10, and ∝ are 15.0, 10.6, 
4.9, 3.2, and 1.6 dB, respectively. The attenuation range is 15.0–1.6 dB = 13.4 dB.
5.4.4	 GaN HEMT Attenuator
A voltage variable attenuator fabricated using 1-μm gate AlGaN/GaN HEMT 
on sapphire substrate has been reported by Alekseev, Hsu, and Pavlidis [55]. The 

5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators
229
MMIC attenuator was designed in a π-configuration, similar to Figure 5.7, using 
100-μm gate periphery transistors. The pinchoff voltage was −7 V and the control 
voltage range was 0–15 V. The circuit was tested up to 25 GHz, and the measured 
attenuation range was from 5 to 35 dB over most of the band. The projected power 
handling capability was about 1.6 W; much higher power level achievable with 
other types of transistors.
5.4.5	 Linear Voltage Variable Attenuators
Since the FET’s channel resistance becomes very nonlinear with voltage near its 
pinchoff, it becomes challenging to design VVAs with linear attenuation variation 
with voltage over broadband. Several VVA configurations have been employed to 
achieve linear attenuation with voltage and are discussed next.
Look-Up Table Approach
Figure 5.22(a) shows a two-stage T- configuration of a variable voltage attenuator. 
Here, control gate voltages Vc1 and Vc2 are adjusted to get linear attenuation with 
Figure 5.22  (a) Schematic of a two-stage T-type VVA, (b) Photograph of the 24–32 GHz MMIC 
VVA.

230
Attenuators
voltage in the range of 30–40 dB by using the look-up table. Table 5.3 provides typi-
cal gate voltage values for a 10-dB attenuation range of a FET MMIC attenuator.
The analysis and design of a novel Ka-band linear VVA was reported by Daoud 
and Shastry [42]. The topology used was of band-pass π-network, where the device 
capacitance was tuned out using high-impedance lines. The circuit was fabricated 
using 0.15-μm GaAs pHEMT MMIC process and the chip size was 0.4 mm2. A 
photograph of the VVA MMIC is shown in Figure 5.22(b). The measured attenu-
ation range was 12 ± 0.5 dB with maximum insertion loss of 3 dB over the 24 to 
32 GHz frequency range.
Multi-FETs Method
Another GaAs MMIC linear attenuator with integral drivers was reported by Lizama 
et al. [13]. The attenuator schematic is shown in Figure 5.23. The gate peripheries 
of all FETs were optimized for linear operation with low reference state loss. The 
nonlinear behavior of device resistance was overcome by using two FETs (large and 
small periphery) in parallel for each resistor in the T-configuration. The periphery 
ratio for each combination was optimized to provide the best attenuation linearity 
with voltage. The control voltage for each FET was generated by applying a single 
control voltage to the on-chip driver circuit. The MMIC chip area was 0.9 mm × 
0.9 mm. The measured performance included 7.2 ± 1 dB/V linear attenuation, 2.5 
dB reference state loss, return loss better than 10 dB, and 12 dB attenuation range.
Another multi-FET approach using bridged-T topology was proposed by Maoz 
[20]. In the bridged-T topology approach the series resistor was replaced by four 
FETs of different peripheries placed in parallel. The shunt resistor was replaced by 
two FETs in parallel. Both shunt and series FETs were biased using resistive voltage 
divider networks. The through line maximum insertion loss was about 3 dB, and 
the circuit has excellent attenuation linearity with control voltage up to 6 V. The 
measured attenuation was 2 dB/V. The attenuation range was about 12 dB over the 
50-MHz to 8-GHz frequency range.
Table 5.3  Gate Control Voltage Values for Various Attenuation 
Values for Figure 5.22(a)
Attenuation (dB)
Vc1 (V)
Vc2 (V)
0
0
−3.74
1
−0.90
−3.60
2
−1.77
−3.50
3
−2.21
−3.45
4
−2.42
−3.36
5
−2.62
−3.26
6
−2.79
−3.20
7
−2.85
−3.15
8
−2.91
−3.10
9
−3.00
−2.90
10
−3.02
−2.73

5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators
231
Multi-FET with Voltage Shift Diodes
For variable voltage attenuators employing MESFETs in the passive mode, the 
MESFET is modeled by a parallel combination of resistor Rv and capacitor Cv, as 
shown in Figure 5.24(a), where the values of Rv and Cv vary as a function of the 
gate voltages. The value of Rv varies from zero-bias value (Ron) to a large value Roff 
Figure 5.23  Schematic of a T-type linear VVA.
Figure 5.24  (a) Variable impedance equivalent circuit of a switch FET, (b) ON-resistance 
variation of a 100-μm FET as a function of gate control voltage.

232
Attenuators
when the gate voltage reaches the pinchoff voltage. The values of the capacitance Cv 
remains fairly constant with gate voltages because the device electrodes constitute 
a large portion of this capacitance.
As discussed earlier, major disadvantages of variable attenuators include non-
linear attenuation with voltage and require a lookup table for attenuation settings. 
This limits its usefulness in many RF and microwave circuits. The ON state resis-
tance of the MESFET is a strong function of the gate control voltage. When nega-
tive control voltage is applied to the gate, the channel resistance increases linearly 
up to 2/3 of Vp and then increases exponentially and becomes nonlinear near Vp. 
Figure 5.24(b) shows this behavior. The zero bias resistance of a 0.1-mm FET is 
about 12 Ω. Here, linear increase of resistance does not mean linear attenuation 
(in dB) with control voltage.
Required values of series and shunt resistors versus attenuation are shown in 
Figure 5.25, for all three attenuator configurations. By comparing the realizable 
MESFET resistance versus voltage and required resistor values for the 0–15 dB 
attenuation range, it was concluded that it is not possible to design a linear voltage 
variable attenuator. The attenuator configurations also require two different con-
trol voltages. Next, a novel approach is described in which a FET is replaced with 
multi-FETs connected in parallel and biased using voltage shift diodes to extend 
the linearity of channel resistance beyond the pinchoff of the device.
For example, consider a set of four FET cells connected in parallel and biased 
through a diode network as shown in Figure 5.26. Here, diodes are used as volt-
age shifting devices. In this case, each diode provides a voltage shift of about 0.75 
V. All FETs are assumed to be the same size, and each has a gate periphery of 100 
μm. When several FET cells (which may have different size) are connected in par-
allel and biased with different gate control voltages, their net resistance is higher 
and becomes more linear with control voltage than a single FET (400-μm gate 
periphery) biased with a single control voltage. Figure 5.26 shows a variable gate 
voltage bias configuration. At low control voltages, the device series resistance Rds 
Figure 5.25  Variations of series and shunt resistors versus attenuation for three attenuator 
configurations.

5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators
233
is low because all cells are in parallel, while at higher control voltages the resistance 
increases as some cells are biased at pinchoff voltages. This is shown in Figure 5.27. 
The resistance can be adjusted by selecting a number of FET cells and their gate 
widths and voltages applied to each cell. For example, when four 100-μm FET cells 
are connected in parallel and biased using a scheme as shown in Figure 5.26, at low 
values of Vc the composite device series resistance is the same as for a single 400-
μm FET and increases with control voltage. At higher values of Vc, the composite 
device series resistance is the same as for a single 100-μm FET. In this topology, 
the device capacitance also remains almost constant.
Figure 5.28 shows a comparison between series resistances of the 100-μm, a 
400-μm, and variable voltage FET configuration shown in Figure 5.26 versus gate 
control voltage. At low control voltages the resistance of the variable voltage FET is 
equivalent to a 400-μm FET, and at higher control voltages the resistance is equiva-
lent to a 100-μm FET. Thus, by selecting proper FET configuration, gate periphery, 
and control voltage applied to each FET, it is possible to obtain series resistance 
as required for a linear variation of attenuation with control voltage. A nonlinear 
Figure 5.26  Variable gate bias voltage for different cells of a series switching MESFET 
configuration for an attenuator.
Figure 5.27  Variations of FET resistance of various FET cells and net resistance as function of 
control voltage.

234
Attenuators
device model with a scalable gate periphery feature is a suitable tool to accurately 
design linear voltage variable attenuators.
Series FET Configurations
There are several possible solutions for biasing of a series FET configuration as 
shown in Figures 5.29 and 5.30. One may note that by properly selecting the FET 
Figure 5.28  Comparison between series resistances of a 100-μm, a 400-μm, and variable 
voltage FET configuration versus gate control voltages. The control voltage for the variable 
voltage FET (new using four 100-μm FETs) is 2.25 Vc.
Figure 5.29  Variations of FET cell gate voltages in a modified FET (version A) switch 
configuration versus gate control voltage. VFET is the control voltage at gates of different FETs.

5.4	
Variable Voltage Attenuators
235
size, diode configuration, and the wiring arrangement, it is possible to choose bias 
control voltage to realize the required series resistances over the designed attenu-
ation range. For example, as shown in Figure 5.29, the first FET is fully ON until 
the magnitude of the control voltage is greater than 2 V. In Figure 5.30, the FET 
control voltages increase linearly.
Shunt FET Configurations
There are several possible solutions for shunt FET configuration, as shown in Figure 
5.31. In Figure 5.31(a) the control voltage is complimentary to the control voltage 
applied to series FET/FETs. Thus, in such attenuators, one needs dual voltage. In 
Figure 5.31(b), the control voltage is the same for both series and shunt FET/FETs. 
Figure 5.30  Variations of FET cell gate voltages in a modified FET (version B) switch 
configuration versus gate control voltages. VFET is the control voltage at gates of different FETs.
Figure 5.31  Shunt FET bias configurations for an attenuator.

236
Attenuators
However, one needs a fixed negative voltage at the gate, and the control voltage is 
applied to floating source/drain terminal. By using an inverter as shown in Figure 
5.31(c), one can use a single control voltage for both series and shunt FET/FETs.
Attenuator Design
For the linear voltage variable attenuator design, a bridged-tee configuration shown 
in Figure 5.32 was selected. As an example of 0–10 dB attenuation range, based on 
the resistor values required, proper FET configurations were designed. The series 
FET used four 100-μm FETs in parallel, and shunt FET’s periphery was 100 μm. 
Figure 5.33(a) shows the simulated attenuation versus frequency for various control 
voltages, and Figure 5.33(b) shows return loss. The dynamic range of the attenuator 
can be extended by optimizing the FET biasing schemes and FET sizes.
5.6	
Other Attenuator Circuits
In addition to the various attenuator circuits described here, several other configura-
tions for attenuators are being used. These are reflection-type attenuators, balanced 
attenuators, frequency-dependent attenuators, and phase-compensated attenuators. 
These components are briefly discussed next.
5.6.1	 Reflection-Type Attenuators
In a reflection-type attenuator configuration, two identical attenuators are placed 
at the output ports of a 3-dB quadrature coupler as shown in Figure 5.34. The 
terminating attenuator is designed using any topology described in the previous 
sections. The quadrature coupler used is usually a broadband Lange coupler. The 
distinct advantage of this topology includes better match under different attenua-
tion settings and large dynamic range. The bandwidth is limited by the coupler’s 
performance. The function of a reflection-type attenuator is similar to the reflection-
type phase shifter.
Figure 5.32  Bridged-T configuration for a voltage variable attenuator.

5.6	
Other Attenuator Circuits
237
Figure 5.33  (a) Attenuation versus frequency of the 0–10 dB voltage variable attenuator, (b) 
Input return loss versus frequency of the 0–10 dB voltage variable attenuator.
Figure 5.34  (a) Configuration of the reflection-type attenuator, and (b) two-port schematic 
representation.

238
Attenuators
A simple analysis of a reflection-type attenuator can be performed by using a 
90° branch line 3-dB hybrid as shown in Figure 5.34(b) [56]. In this case, attenua-
tors are represented by resistors. The S-parameters are obtained by using a three-
step procedure. First, the ABCD parameters are determined for both top and 
bottom sections of the circuit. Then, they are converted to Y parameters so that 
both branches are combined by simple addition operation. Finally Y parameters 
are converted to S parameters.
ABCD parameters for a transmission line and resistor are given next.
	
Line
[
]ABCD =
cosq
jZ0 sinq
jY0 sinq
cosq
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(5.16)
	
Resistor
[
]ABCD =
1
0
Y
1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(5.17)
where Y = 1/R and Y0 = 1/Z0. Using these relations and for θ = 90°, the ABCD for 
parameters
BOT
[
]ABCD =
A B
C
D
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥=
0
jZ01
jY01
0
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1 0
Y1 1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
0
jZ0
jY0
0
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1
0
Y2 0
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
0
jZ01
jY01
0
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥  (5.18)
where Z01 = Z0 /
2, Y01 = 1/ Z01, Y1 = 1/ R1 and Y2 = 1/ R2.
The Y parameters are calculated by using the following relations:
	
Y
[
] =
y11 y12
y21 y22
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥= 1
B
D (BC −AD)
−1
A
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(5.19)
The total Y parameters of the complete circuit shown in Figure 5.34(b) are 
given by
Y
[
]total =
Top
[
]Y + Bot
[
]Y =
0
jY0
jY0 0
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥+
2R1 / D1
−j2R1R2 / Z0D1
−j2R1R2 / Z0D1
2R2 / D1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
=
2R1 / D1
j Z0
2 −R1R2
(
)/ Z0D1
j Z0
2 −R1R2
(
)/ Z0D1
2R2 / D1
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	 (5.20)
where D1 = R1R2 + Z0
2. The final step is to obtain the S parameters by using the 
following relations.
	
S
[
]total =
S11 S12
S21 S22
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(5.21)
	
S11 =
1 −Y11Z0
(
) 1 + Y22Z0
(
) +Y12Y21Z0
2
{
}/ D2 	
(5.22a)
	
S12 = −2Y12Z0/D2,  S21 = −2Y21Z0/D2	
(5.22b)

5.6	
Other Attenuator Circuits
239
	
S22 =
1 + Y11Z0
(
) 1 −Y22Z0
(
) +Y12Y21Z0
2
{
}/ D2 	
(5.22c)
where D2 =
1 + Y11Z0
(
) 1 + Y22Z0
(
) −Y12Y21Z0
2
{
}.  After some manipulations, S param-
eters become
	
S
[
]total =
Z0 R1 −R2
(
)/ D3
j R1R2 −Z0
2
(
)/ D3
j R1R2 −Z0
2
(
)/ D3 Z0 R2 −R1
(
)/ D3
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
	
(5.23)
where D3 = (R1 + Z0)(R2 + Z0). When R1 = R2 = ZL, (5.23) becomes
S
[
]total =
0
j ZL −Z0
(
)
ZL + Z0
j ZL −Z0
(
)
ZL + Z0
0
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥=
0
jΓ
jΓ 0
⎡
⎢⎢
⎤
⎥⎥ where Γ = ZL −Z0
ZL + Z0
	
(5.24)
This shows that the circuit is matched and the attenuation is given by the reflec-
tion coefficient at the coupled ports. The same relation is valid for reflection-type 
phase shifters where the resistors are replaced with reactance networks. Under 
ideal conditions, the circuit is matched at all attenuation settings. The attenuation 
in dB is given by
	
A = −20 log[|(ZL − Z0)/(ZL + Z0)|]	
(5.25)
When ZL = 0, the attenuation is zero, and for ZL = Z0, the attenuation is infi-
nite. For example, when Z0 = 50 Ω and the values of ZL are 0, 5, 10, 25, 40, 45, 
and 50 Ω, the respective attenuation values are 0, 1.7, 3.5, 9.5, 17, and 25.6, ∞ dB. 
Recently, Bulja and Grebennikov [50] have described detailed practical aspects of 
the variable reflection-type attenuators. Figure 5.35 shows a photograph of the 
Figure 5.35  Photograph of a reflection-type attenuator using 3-dB coupler. (Courtesy of Dr. A. 
Grebennikov.)

240
Attenuators
reflection-type attenuator. The circuit used λ/4 transformer between the 3-dB cou-
pler and varactor diodes to improve the attenuation dynamic range. The measured 
attenuation range was greater than 36 dB, and the return loss was better than 11 
dB over the 2.3- to 2.7-GHz frequency range.
In order to realize 20 dB or higher attenuation, one needs a reflection coefficient 
less than 0.1. At millimeter-wave frequencies, it can be difficult to obtain such a 
low reflection coefficient. This has been mitigated by using a balanced configura-
tion, which is described next.
5.6.2	 Balanced Attenuators
In a balanced configuration, an attenuator is designed using any topology as described 
in the previous sections, and a pair of such identical attenuators is combined employ-
ing two 3-dB quadrature couplers as shown in Figure 5.36. The quadrature couplers 
used are usually broadband Lange couplers. For this application, the single-ended 
attenuator is designed for flat attenuation response and may not have good match 
to 50 Ω. The reflections from the single-ended attenuators are terminated in 50 
Ω. If one attenuator fails, the overall attenuation drops by about 6 dB, which may 
provide useful fault tolerance for some applications. The major advantages of the 
balanced topology vis-à-vis conventional topology are good input and output VSWR 
under all conditions of attenuation and insensitivity to mismatch in the subsystem. 
In addition, power handling capability of such circuits is increased by 3 dB due to 
power split by the coupler.
Figure 5.36  Configuration of a balanced amplifier using 90° Lange couplers: (a) schematic, and 
(b) PIN diode attenuators with biasing.

5.6	
Other Attenuator Circuits
241
This topology is very suitable for monolithic or hybrid implementations, where 
two matched MMIC attenuator chips are combined. Since the implementation of 
Lange couplers on thin GaAs or Si substrate has higher loss and reduced bandwidth 
compared to hybrid versions, MMIC balanced attenuators are limited to band-
widths less than two octaves. The Lange couplers use λ/4 long lines; the balanced 
attenuators will unfavorably result in larger size at lower frequencies. Below C-band 
frequencies, folded couplers or lumped element based 3-dB hybrids may be used.
Consider a balanced configuration as shown in Figure 5.36(a). As a first-order 
approximation, the couplers are assumed ideal (i.e., no loss in the couplers), the iso-
lated port has infinite isolation, and the split signals have 90° phase difference. The 
S-parameters of an attenuator and balanced attenuator (BA) are given as follows:
	
SV =
S11V S12V
S21V S22V
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥,
ST =
S11T S12T
S21T S22T
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(5.26)
where V and T represent attenuators A or B and balanced attenuators, respectively. 
The balanced attenuator (BA) is between ports 1 and 7.
The input signal splits between ports 2 and 3, and the split signals have 90° 
phase difference. The ports on the same end have the same phase whereas those 
diagonally opposite have 90° phase difference. At port 1, the BA’s reflected signal is
	
S11T = 1
2 S11A −S11B
⎡⎣
⎤⎦	
(5.27)
If S11A = S11B, S11T = 0; that is, BA is matched at port 1. At port 7,
	
S21T = 1
2 j S21A + S21B
⎡⎣
⎤⎦	
(5.28a)
	
S22T = 1
2 S22B −S22A
⎡⎣
⎤⎦	
(5.28b)
Again, if S22A = S22B, S22T = 0; that is, BA is matched at port 7, which is an out-
put port. The output signal is an average of two forward going signals. At port 4, 
the combined reflected signal is given by
	
1
2 j S11A + S11B
⎡⎣
⎤⎦	
(5.29)
and is absorbed by the resistor. Similarly, at port 6 the combined reflected signal 
is absorbed. If both attenuators have the same attenuation but ∆ϕ phase difference 
between them, then S21T becomes
	
S21T = 1
2 S21 1 + ej∆f = 1
2 S21 (1 + cos∆φ)2 + sin2 ∆φ
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
1/2 	
(5.30)
When ∆ϕ = 0, S21T = S21 and for ∆ϕ = 22.5°, S21T = 0.9808S21.

242
Attenuators
A balanced attenuator can also be realized using a scheme employing a Wilkinson 
divider/combiner with 90° phase offset 50-Ω line instead of a Lange coupler [46]. 
In this case, the reflected signals from two single-ended amplifiers have 180° phase 
difference across the isolation resistor R = 100 Ω. Thus the out-of-phase reflected 
signals are absorbed in the isolation resistor. Similarly, the reflected output signals 
are absorbed by the output isolation resistor. The through signals in the two paths 
have equal phase and add at the output. This topology minimizes the reflected signals 
at both the input and output terminals, and provides good VSWR, but has larger 
size due to quarter-wave lines and Wilkinson divider/combiner. The quarter-wave 
sections also result in narrower bandwidth than do using Lange couplers (i.e., 40–50 
percent versus octave bandwidth). In the balanced configuration, the effect of mis-
match on the attenuation, due to bond wires and package lead frame, is minimum. 
Figure 5.36(b) shows a balanced attenuator using PIN diodes.
5.6.3	 Frequency Dependent Attenuators
Frequency dependent attenuators are also known as gain compensation/amplitude 
equalizer circuits. Their primary application is to provide gain equalization in 
broadband amplifiers and traveling-wave tubes. In amplifiers, gain decreases with 
frequency (negative gain slope) due to the gain slope of the transistors, which is 
equalized by using negative attenuation slope circuit. This is illustrated in Figure 
5.37. The gain slope may be linear or parabolic or any other shape.
Figure 5.37  (a) Linear negative gain slope of an amplifier, amplitude equalization attenuator 
response, and resultant amplifier gain response with amplitude equalization, and (b) nonlinear 
gain response of an traveling-wave amplifier (TWA), amplitude equalization attenuator response, 
and resultant amplifier gain response with amplitude equalization.

5.6	
Other Attenuator Circuits
243
The purpose of an amplitude equalizer is to flatten the amplifier gain over the 
desired bandwidth as precisely as possible and add minimum possible attenuation 
where no gain compensation is required. In most applications, the gain compensation 
network (GCN) is placed at the input of the amplifier; however, in LNAs it is placed 
at the output. A GCN can be reflective or absorptive and is realized using a suitable 
combination of resistors and reactances. Schematics of typical GCN topologies are 
shown in Figure 5.38. The principle of operation is very simple. For example, in 
Figure 5.38(a), at low frequencies the reactance of capacitor C1 is very high in com-
parison to the resistor R1; thus, the resistor R1 provides all needed attenuation for 
gain compensation, while at high frequencies the capacitor shorts out the resistor 
and the circuit has minimum attenuation. Similarly, in Figure 5.38(b), the induc-
tor L2 provides low impedance at low frequencies and the resistor R2 provides all 
needed attenuation, and at high frequencies, the high impedance of L2 minimizes 
the effect of R2.
As an example, Figure 5.39 shows some commonly used gain compensation 
attenuator networks. Component values chosen are simply to demonstrate broad-
band operation over 1–8 GHz. Gain performance of these compensation circuits 
is illustrated in Figure 5.40. The values of circuit elements are selected so that the 
attenuation is about 6–10 dB over a three-octave bandwidth. Some of the attenua-
tion is due to reflected power. However, at the high end GCNs are reasonably well 
matched. Networks (i) and (iv) have similar responses. Networks (ii) and (iii) have 
higher attenuation values, but their slopes are different. The behavior of network (v), 
not shown in Figure 5.40, is similar to (iv). Network (vi) has a maximum attenua-
tion at the series resonance of the inductor-capacitor combination. The behavior of 
such networks may vary slightly depending on the frequency and the type of LRC 
component values and their parasitic reactances. The shape and the attenuation as 
per design required can be adjusted by a proper selection of the component values. 
First-hand analysis helps in selecting the GCN topology; however, in most cases, 
one has to depend on CAD tools to finalize the circuit component values.
Figure 5.38  Typical amplitude equalization attenuator circuits: (a) series, (b) shunt, (c) series-
shunt, (d) T-network, (e) π-network, and (f) lattice (balanced) network.

244
Attenuators
5.6.4	 Phase Compensated Attenuators
A constant phase with frequency in the multibit attenuator may be maintained 
by using the symmetry in the reference and attenuation paths. For example, in a 
switched T-type attenuator bit, keep the shunt resistor length small and the width 
and length of microstrip line in the reference path the same as that of the resistors 
in the attenuation path. The transmission phase may also be equalized by using the 
attenuator configurations shown in Figures 5.2, 5.5, and 5.13, or using a modified 
Figure 5.39  (a) Examples of commonly used gain compensation attenuator circuits. Resistors 
are in ohms (Ω), capacitors in picofarads (pF), and inductors in nanohenries (nH).
Figure 5.40  Gain response of resistive compensation circuits shown in Figure 5.39.

5.7	
Distortion in Attenuators
245
microstrip configuration. Instead of a simple microstrip section, one can use a 
loaded microstrip with conventional stubs or radial stubs or any other geometry 
that provides the same phase characteristics with frequency as that of the attenua-
tor network. However, in voltage variable attenuators, maintaining constant phase 
over different attenuation settings is challenging. One may use a VVA configuration, 
which provides relatively better phase characteristics.
5.6.5	 CMOS Attenuator with Integrated Switch
A 10- to 67-GHz four-bit attenuator circuit with integrated switching function, 
based on CMOS, has been reported recently [57]. The proposed circuit can be 
used as either a large attenuation range attenuator or a low-loss switch over a wide 
frequency range. The dual-function attenuator circuit conceptually is shown in 
Figure 5.41. This is a modified version of Figure 5.17(a), where an additional series 
transistor is connected between the input and output. The transistors M1, M2, 
and M3 in the reference state are ON, OFF, and ON; in the attenuation state are 
ON, ON, and OFF; and in the switch mode are OFF, ON, and OFF, respectively. 
To improve the bandwidth and to lower the loss, conventional π-and T-attenuator 
networks were modified to include the traveling-wave feature along with transis-
tor’s body-floating technique.
The dual-function circuit was fabricated using 0.18-μm BiCMOS technology 
with a chip area of 0.8 mm2. Over the 10- to 43-GHz frequency range, the mea-
sured performance includes reference state attenuation of 8.4–12 dB, attenuation 
flatness of 3 dB, attenuation range of 38–42 dB, isolation of 50–67 dB, VSWR of 2, 
and P1dB of 14 dBm. The circuit was tested up to 67 GHz with somewhat degraded 
performance [57].
5.7	
Distortion in Attenuators
In voltage variable attenuators, the devices behave as nonlinear current-controlled or 
voltage-controlled resistors and result in distortion. The improvement of distortion 
in attenuators has been proposed by using squeezed-gate FETS [58] and by using 
accurate device models and design methodology [59–64]. It has been shown that 
Figure 5.41  Schematic of a T-attenuator with a switch.

246
Attenuators
the factors affecting the distortion performance are the attenuation level, the device 
current capacity, and the frequency of operation. For PIN diode and FET attenua-
tors, approximate expressions for the second (IP2) and third (IP3) order intercept 
points are given by Caverly [60, 62] and are reproduced next.
5.7.1	
PIN Diode Attenuators
In PIN diode attenuators, the important parameters are the attenuation value (A), 
the diode’s i-layer thickness (W), and the frequency of operation. Approximate 
expressions for the second (IP2) and third (IP3) order intercept points for a π-type 
attenuator are given by Caverly [60, 62]:
	
IP2 = 1
32 pf W2
map
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
A
Z0 1 −
A
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
4  watt 	
(5.31a)
	
IP3 =
kT /e
6
pf W2
map
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
1.5
A
Z0 1 −
A
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
3  watt 	
 (5.31b)
where f is the frequency of operation, A is the power attenuation ratio, and other 
terms are defined in Chapter 2. It may be noted from these equations that IMD can 
be improved by making Z0 less than 50 Ω and using an λ/4 transformer as described 
in Section 3.6.1. Thicker i-layer results in higher values of intercepts points.
Example 5.4
As an example, consider a 3-dB PIN attenuator in a 50-Ω system. The Si PIN diode 
used has 100-μm thick i-layer. Calculate IP3 in dBm at 1 GHz and room temperature.
Solution
A = 10–3/10 = 0.5012
Z0 = 50 Ω
W = 100 × 10–4 cm = 0.01 cm
μap = 610 cm2/V-s
k = 1.38 × 10–23 J/K, T = 298 K, e = 1.602 × 10–19 C
kT /e = 0.1602
From (5.31b),
IP3 = 0.162
6
p × 1 × 109 0.01 × 0.01
610
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
1.5
0.5
50 1 −
0.5
(
)
3 = 128.85 W
= 30 + 10log(128.85) dBm = 51.1 dBm

5.7	
Distortion in Attenuators
247
5.7.2	
FET Attenuators
Consider a series-connected single-FET attenuator whose attenuation A is controlled 
by its channel resistance with gate voltage Vgs. Expressions for IP2 and IP3 are given 
by Caverly [61] as follows:
	
IP2 =
A2VP
3
18Z0
3IP
2 1 −
A
(
)
6
Vbi −Vgs
(
)
1 + 2y
2
	
(5.32a)
	
IP3 =
A1.5VP
1.5
2Z0
2IP 1 −
A
(
)
4
Vbi −Vgs
(
)
1.5
1 + 3y + 3y2 	
(5.32b)
	
y =
Vgs
Vds
= −
Z0
Rch
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬
⎭
−jb
1 + jb
, b = wRbCg 	
(5.32c)
	
A =
2Z0
Rch + 2Z0
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
	
(5.32d)
where Ip, Vp, Vbi, Rch, Rb, Cg, and Z0 are the open channel or peak current, pin-
choff voltage, built-in voltage, channel resistance, gate bias resistor, gate capaci-
tance, and terminal impedance (usually 50 Ω), respectively. The pinchoff voltage 
Vp is a positive quantity and for GaAs FETs Vbi = 0.75 V. Units of IP2 and IP3 
are in watts. The process-related parameters such as Vp and Ip for the device may 
be modified to improve the intercepts points. Larger values of Vp (thicker chan-
nel height) and lower values of Ip result in higher intercepts points. For example, 
a small size GaN HEMT device with very high Vp value has order higher values 
of IP2 and IP3.
Example 5.5
In a 3-dB FET attenuator, the device used is 0.5-mm gate periphery having Vp = 2.5 
V and Ip = 100 mA. The applied gate voltage Vgs is −1.25 V. The system impedance 
is 50 Ω,  so calculate IP3 in dBm at 1 GHz. Assume small signal operation, where 
y = 0.5. Also calculate IP3 when Z0 = 25 Ω.
Solution
A = 10–3/10 = 0.5012
Z0 = 50 Ω
Ip = 0.1 A
Vbi = 0.75, Vbi – Vgs = 0.75 + 1.25 = 2 V
From (5.32b),

248
Attenuators
	
IP3 =
0.50121.52.51.5
2 × 2500 × 0.1 1 −
0.5012
(
)
4
21.5
1 + 3 × 0.5 + 3 × 0.52 = 0.334 W
	
When Z0 = 25 Ω, it adds 6 dB to IP3 (i.e., IP3 = 25.2 + 6 dBm = 31.2 dBm).
Various types of attenuators developed using RFIC and MMIC technologies have 
been described in this chapter. The CMOS on SOS multibit attenuators have shown 
impressive performance and are commercially available. More detailed information 
on commercial attenuators can be found in data sheets [65–73].
References
[1]	
Hunton, J. K. and A. G. Ryals, “ Microwave Variable Attenuators and Modulators Using 
PIN Diodes,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-10, July 1962, pp. 262–273.
[2]	
White, J. F., Semiconductor Control, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1977.
[3]	
Garver, R. V., Microwave Diode Control Devices, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1978.
[4]	
Ananasso, F. G., “ A Low Phase Shift Attenuator Using p-i-n Diodes Switches,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-28, July 1980, pp. 774–776.
[5]	
Pavlidis, D., Y. Archambault, J. Magarshack, “Simple Voltage Controlled Phase Shifters 
and Attenuators for MMICs,” IEEE GaAs IC Symposium Dig., 1981.
[6]	
Tajima, Y., T. Tsukii, R. Mozzi, E. Tong, L. Hanes, and B. Wrona, “GaAs Monolithic 
Wideband (2–18) GHz Variable Attenuators,” IEEE MTT-S Symposium Digest, June 
1982, pp. 479–481.
[7]	
White, J. F., Microwave Semiconductor Engineering, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1982.
[8]	
Davis, W. A., Microwave Semiconductor Circuit Design, New York: Van Nostrand Rein-
hold, 1984, Chap. 13.
[9]	
Weller, K. P., N. Duttathriya and T. S. Lin, “Monolithic GaAs X-Band Balanced Dual 
Gate FET BPSK Modulator,” IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1982, pp. 75–78.
[10]	 Barta, G. S., K. Jones, G. C. Herrick, E. W. Strid, “A 2 to 8 GHz Leveling Loop Using 
a GaAs MMIC Active Splitter and Attenuator,” Proc. GaAs IC Symposium, 1986, pp. 
75–78.
[11]	 Barta, G. S., K. Jones, G. C. Herrick, E. W. Strid, “Surface Mounted GaAs Active Splitters 
and Attenuator MMIC’s Used in a 1–10 GHz Leveling Loop,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-34, Dec. 1986, pp. 1569–1573.
[12]	 Gupta, R. et al., “A 0.05 to 14 GHz MMIC 5-Bit Digital Attenuator,” IEEE GaAs IC 
Symposium Digest, Oct. 1987, pp. 231–234.
[13]	 Lizama, G., T. Andrade, and R. Benton, “1–6 GHz MMIC Linear Attenuator with Inte-
gral Drivers,” IEEE Microwave Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1987, 
pp. 105–107.
[14]	 Kondoh, H., “DC-50 GHz Variable Attenuator with a 30 dB Dynamic Range,” IEEE 
MTT-S Symposium Digest, June 1988, pp. 499–502.
[15]	 Adler, D., and P. Mariato, “Broadband Phase Invariant Attenuator,” IEEE MTT-S Sym-
posium Digest, June 1988, pp. 673–676.
[16]	 Cazaux, J. L., D. Pavlidis, G. I. Ng, and M. Tutt, “A HEMT Monolithic Double Chan-
nel Attenuator with Broadband Characteristics and Wide Dynamic Range,” Proc. 18th 
Europ. Microwave Conf., Sep 1988, pp. 999–1004.

5.7	
Distortion in Attenuators
249
[17]	 Sharma, A. K., “Solid-State Control Devices: State of the Art,” Microwave Journal, State 
of the Art Reference, Sept. 1989, pp. 95–112.
[18]	 Sun, H. J., W. Wu, and J. Ewan, “A 2–20 GHz GaAs MESFET Variable Attenuator Using 
a Single Positive External Drive Voltage,” Proc. 19th European Microwave Conference, 
Sep. 1989, pp. 1270–1275.
[19]	 Weiss, W., D. Pavlidis and G. I. Ng, “HEMT Control Circuits for Monolithic InP Appli-
cations,” Proc. 20th European Microwave Conference, Budapest, Hungary, Sep. 1990, 
pp. 429–434.
[20]	 Maoz, B., “A Novel, Linear Volatge Variable MMIC Attenuator,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-38, Nov. 1990, pp. 1675–1683.
[21]	 Markovic, Z. M., “Designing Frequency Dependent Attenuators for Broadband Microwave 
Circuits, Microwave J., Vol. 34, May 1991, pp. 242–260.
[22]	 Khabbaz, B., et al., “An Ultra Broadband DC-20 GHz MMIC Multi-Bit Digital Attenu-
ators with On-Chip TTL Control,” IEEE GaAs IC Symposium Digest, Oct. 1991, pp. 
239–242.
[23]	 Ali, F., S. Mitchell, and A. Podell “Low-Loss, High-Power, Broadband GaAs MMIC 
Multi-Bit Digital Attenuators with On-Chip TTL Drivers,” IEEE GaAs IC Symposium 
Digest, Oct. 1991, pp. 243–246.
[24]	 McGrath, F., and R. Pratt, “An Ultra Broadband DC-12 GHz 4-Bit GaAs Monolithic 
Digital Attenuator,” IEEE GaAs IC Symposium Digest, Oct. 1991, pp. 247–250.
[25]	 Kobayashi, K. et al., “GaAs HBT PIN Diode Attenuators and Switches,” IEEE Microwave 
Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1993, pp. 151–154.
[26]	 Goldfarb, M. E., and A. Platzker “ A Wide Range Analog MMIC Attenuator with Integral 
180° Phase Shifter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-42, January 1994, 
pp. 156–158.
[27]	 Walker, S., “ A Low-Phase Shift Attenuator,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 
MTT-42, February 1994, pp. 182–185.
[28]	 Krafcsik, D., F. Ali, and S. Bishop, “Broadband Low-Loss 5- and 6- Bit Digital Attenua-
tors,” IEEE MTT-S Symposium Digest, June 1995, pp. 1627–1630.
[29]	 Kang, W.-T., I. Chang, and M. Kang, “Reflection-Type Low-Phase Shift Attenuators,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-46, July 1998, pp. 1019–1021.
[30]	 Sarkissian, J. C., et al, “A Ku-Band 6-Bit Digital Attenuator with Integrated Serial to 
Parallel Converter,” IEEE MTT-S Symposium Digest, June 1999, pp. 1915–1918.
[31]	 Zolper, J. C., “Progress towards ultra-wideband AlGaN/GaN MMICs,” Topical Work-
shop on Heterostructure Microelectronics, Solid-State-Electronics, Vol. 43, Aug. 1999, 
pp.1479–1482.
[32]	 Higham, E., “Distortion in Voltage-Variable Attenuators,” Microwave J., Vol. 42, Dec. 
1999, pp. 86–95.
[33]	 Tao, X., “A Novel GaAs MMIC Vector Attenuators,” Microwave Optical Tech. Lett., 
Vol. 26, July 2000, pp. 96–98.
[34]	 Trent, C. R., and T. M. Weller, “S-Band Reflection Type Variable Attenuator,” IEEE 
Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 12, July 2002, pp. 243–245.
[35]	 Jang, B. J., “Voltage Controlled PIN Diode Attenuator with a Temperature-Compensation 
Circuit,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 13, January 2003, pp. 7–9.
[36]	 Bahl, I., and P. Bhartia, Microwave Solid-state Circuit Design, Second Edition, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chap. 12.
[37]	 Chang, K. (ed.), Handbook of RF/Microwave Components and Engineering, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chapters 16 and 17.
[38]	 Sun, K., M.K. Choi, and D. Weide, “A PIN Diode Controlled Variable Attenuator Using 
a 0-dB Branch Line Coupler,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Compon. Lett., Vol. 15, June 
2005, pp. 440–442.

250
Attenuators
[39]	 Hilty, K., “Attenuation Measurements,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, 
K. Chang (ed.), Vol.1, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 434–452.
[40]	 Sundararajn, R., E. Peterson, and R. Nowlin, “Attenuators,” in Encyclopedia RF and 
Microwave Engineering, K. Chang (ed.), Vol.1, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 
452–480.
[41]	 Setty, R. K., “Digital Step Attenuators offer precision and Linearity,” RF Design, Aug. 
2005, pp. 34–42.
[42]	 Daoud, S. M., and P. N. Shastry, “A Novel Wideband MMIC Voltage Controlled Attenu-
ator with a Bandpass Filter Topology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 54, 
June 2006, pp. 2576–2583.
[43]	 Saavedra, C. E., and B. R. Jackson, “Voltage-Variable Attenuator MMIC Using Phase 
Cancellation,” IEE Proc. Circuits Devices Syst., Vol. 153, October 2006, pp. 442–446.
[44]	 Dogan, H., and R. G. Meyer, “Intermodulation Distortion in CMOS Attenuators and 
Switches,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-42, March 2007, pp. 529–539.
[45]	 Dogan, H., R. G. Meyer, and A. M. Niknejad, “Analysis and Design of RF CMOS Attenu-
ators and Switches,” IEEE J. Solid-State Ciruits, Vol. SC-43, Oct. 2008, pp. 2269–2283.
[46]	 Bahl, I. J., Fundamental of RF and Microwave Transistor Amplifiers, Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2009, Chapter 21.
[47]	 Ku, B. H., and S. Hong, “6-Bit CMOS Digital Attenuators with Low Phase Variations 
for X-Band Phased-Array Systems,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 58, July 
2010, pp. 1651–1663.
[48]	 Paek, J. S., H. Y. Lee, and S. Hong, “Analysis and Design of CMOS Amplitude Modulator 
with Digitally Controlled Variable Attenuator,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 
Vol. 59, March 2011, pp. 727–740.
[49]	 Huang, L., “Highly Linear RF CMOS Attenuators and Switches,” IEEE J. Solid-State 
Circuits, Vol. SC-46, May 2011, pp. 1023–1030.
[50]	 Bulja, S., and A. Grebennikov, “Variable Reflection-Type Attenuators based on Varactor 
Diodes,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, December 2012, pp. 3719–3727.
[51]	 Cho, M.-K., D. Baek, and J.-G. Kim, “DC-20 GHz 5-Bit CMOS Digital Step Attenuator 
with Low Insertion Loss and Phase Error,” MOTL, Vol. 55, April 2013, pp. 762–764.
[52]	 Bahl, I., Lumped Elements for RF and Microwave Circuits, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 
2003.
[53]	 Tayrani, R., et al., “Broad-Band SiGe MMICs for Phased-Array Radar Applications,” 
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-38, Sep. 2003, pp. 1462–1471.
[54]	 Jeong, J., et al., “High Power Digitally Controlled SOI CMOS Attenuator with Wide 
Attenuation Range,” IEEE Microwave Wireless Components Letts., Vol. 21, Aug. 2011, 
pp. 433–435. 
[55]	 Alekseev, E., S. S. H. Hsu, and D. Pavlidis, “Broadband AlGaN/GaN HEMT MMIC 
Attenuators with High Dynamic Range,” Proc. 30th European Microwave Conference, 
GAAS 2000.
[56]	 Henkes, D. D., “Analysis of a Variable Attenuator Using a 3 dB Quadrature Coupler,” 
Applied Microwave and Wireless, 1999, pp. 44–56.
[57]	 Bae, J., J. Lee, and C. Nguyen, “A 10–67-GHz CMOS Dual-Function Switching Attenu-
ator with Improved Flatness and Large Attenuation Range,” IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory Tech., Vol. 61, Dec. 2013, pp. 4118–4129.
[58]	 Miyatsuji, K., et al., “A Technique for Improving the Distortion of GaAs Variable Attenu-
ator IC,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1996, 
pp. 43–46.
[59]	 Tucker, R. S., “Third-Order Intermodulation Distortion and Gain Comprsession in GaAs 
FET’s,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-35, May 1987, pp. 492–501.
[60]	 Caverly, R. H., and G. Hiller, “Distortion in p-i-n Diode Control Circuits,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-27, May 1979, pp. 400–408.

5.7	
Distortion in Attenuators
251
[61]	 Caverly, R. H., “Distortion in Broadband Gallium Arsenide MESFET Control and Switch 
Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 39, Apr. 1991, pp. 713–717.
[62]	 Virk, R. S., and S.A. Maas, “Modeling of MESFETs for Intermodulation Analysis in RF 
Switches,” IEEE Microwave Guided Wave Letter, Vol. 4, Nov. 1994, pp. 376–378.
[63]	 Caverly, R. H., “Microwave Switches,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, 
K. Chang (ed.), Vol.4, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2991–2999.
[64]	 Caverly, R. H., “Microwave and RF p-i-n Diode Model for Time Domain Simulations,” 
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 60, July 2012, pp. 2158–2164.
[65]	 Microsemi Corp., “MNM 4200 Nanomount TM PIN Diode Switches Datasheet/Applica-
tion Note 708.”
[66]	 Skyworks Solutions, PIN Diode and GaAs MMIC Products Catalogue, Woburn, 
Massachusetts.
[67]	 MACOM, PIN Diode and GaAs FET MMIC Control Products Catalogue, Lowell, 
Massachusetts.
[68]	 Cobham MMIC Products, Blacksburg, VA
[69]	 Peregrine Semiconductor Corp., San Diego, California.
[70]	 TriQuent Semiconductor, Hillsboro, Oregon.
[71]	 Hittite Microwave Corporation, Chelmsford, Massachusetts.
[72]	 Honeywell, Plymouth, Minnesota.
[73]	 Pasternack, Irvine, California.


253
C h a p t e r  6
Limiters
6.1	
Introduction
Apart from the switches, phase shifters, and attenuators discussed in previous 
chapters, a limiter is an important control component used at radio and microwave 
frequencies. A microwave limiter [1, 2], also known as a receiver protector, allows 
low-input power signals to pass through it with low insertion loss while attenuating 
the high-power signals above the receiver’s rated threshold power level. GaAs-based 
hybrid MICs and MMICs are widely used in commercial and military microwave 
systems. Due to the fine geometry used in MIC and MMIC transistors, these cir-
cuits are susceptible to damage from high-power spurious EM radiation from either 
microwave transmitters or the nuclear electromagnetic pulse. Especially LNAs in 
the front-end of the microwave systems need high-power limiting protection because 
these amplifiers can sustain only input power levels in the range of 10 to 20 dBm 
CW or 1 to 3 μJ of pulsed power.
Several different technologies are used to realize this component, including gas-
eous or plasma limiters, ferrite limiters, and solid-state limiters. Gaseous, ferrite, 
and solid-state limiters have input power limiting thresholds ranging from 30 dBm 
to 90 dBm (megawatt), −25 dBm to 50 dBm (100W), and 0 dBm to 80 dBm (100 
kW), respectively. An overview of limiter types is given in Figure 6.1. Only solid 
state device–based limiters are described in this chapter.
Several different devices are being used for limiters. In addition to Si PIN diodes, 
several other versions of PIN diodes have been developed for limiters and other 
control components. These include Si BiCMOS, GaAs PIN diodes, GaAs HBT base-
collector and vertical PIN diodes, and GaN PIN diodes. These devices are capable 
Figure 6.1  An overview of RF and microwave limiter technologies.

254
Limiters
of integration with other transistors for a higher level of integration. SiC-based GaN 
diodes have much higher breakdown voltage, current capacity, and power handling 
capacity than GaAs-based devices. Such diodes can handle four to five times more 
input power than GaAs-based diodes. All amplifiers work as limiters, as the devices 
go into saturation and the output power becomes constant with increasing input 
power. Limiters have been developed using waveguide, coaxial line, and planar 
microstrip or CPW. A planar PIN diode configuration is more suitable for MIC and 
MMIC limiter applications and has broadband performance.
Limiters are widely used in RF and microwave receivers, integrated services 
digital network, broadband multichannel receivers, instantaneous frequency mea-
surement receivers, and transceivers (T/R). The most common application of micro-
wave limiters is to prevent transmitter power in radars from reaching the receiver 
directly and burning sensitive input stages, which are usually low noise amplifiers 
(LNAs). Limiters are also used to protect the receivers from other nearby radar 
transmitters. These signals might be coming back from the antenna in a T/R mod-
ule originated from friendly/enemy radars, jammers, or other nearby transmitters. 
A limiter must self-activate and survive during protection, and it must withstand 
thermal stress caused by the high level of the incoming signal. Other applications 
of limiters are for reducing the amplitude modulation of swept-frequency oscilla-
tors and for reducing amplitude modulation in phase-detection systems. If a limiter 
has lower leakage level (5–7 dBm) and negligible distortion, it can also be used to 
enhance the dynamic range of a low noise amplifier.
The objective of this chapter is to provide a brief overview of RF and micro-
wave solid-state limiters. The reader can find more detailed information available 
in published literature [1–60].
6.1.1	
Limiter Characterization
An ideal limiter has no attenuation when a low-power signal is incident upon it, but 
has an attenuation that increases with increasing power (above a threshold level) 
to maintain constant output power. Input-output characteristics for ideal limiters 
(solid line) and practical limiters (dotted lines) are shown in Figure 6.2. Limiters 
are characterized by their insertion loss, threshold power level, flat leakage power, 
power handling, and recovery time. The limiter characteristics depend upon the 
circuit topology and the device/devices used. Any input power that appears at the 
Figure 6.2  Characteristics of practical and ideal limiters.

6.1	
Introduction
255
output of the circuit is termed flat leakage power, and in practical limiters it increases 
with input power. Usually multistage limiter designs are used to reduce the flat 
leakage power to 10–15 dBm levels. A combination of large size devices followed 
by smaller size devices in a multisection configuration has higher power handling 
capacity and lower leakage levels.
The recovery time is defined as the time required for the limiter’s insertion loss 
to return to within 3 dB of its low-level insertion loss following the cessation of 
the high-power pulse. In a typical radar system, this period corresponds to echoes 
from nearby targets, and a higher insertion loss in the receiver path may be toler-
ated. The recovery time is related to the PIN diode minority carrier lifetime τ. For 
a given τ, the recovery time is linearly proportional to the peak RF power applied 
up to some peak power level above which recovery time increases rapidly because 
of thermal heating of the diode. Measurement of the recovery time thus allows a 
nondestructive monitoring of the power handling capacity of a PIN diode limiter 
circuit. Recovery time for limiters using GaAs Schottky diodes is 10–100 times 
better than Si PIN diodes.
6.1.2	 Limiter Types
Solid state device–based limiters are designed with GaAs Schottky diodes, varacter 
diodes, PIN diodes, FET switches, and active transistors. There are several phenom-
ena exhibited by microwave semiconductor devices that may be used for limiting. 
These include rectification (Schottky diodes), capacitance variation with voltage 
(varactor diodes), RF conductivity modulation (PIN diodes), switching high to low 
impedance state (shunt FET switches), and device saturation with incident power 
(FET amplifiers). In all the five classes, the limiting mechanism is slightly different. 
These are briefly discussed next.
Schottky Diode Limiters
Rectification is the most commonly used limiting technique at RF and microwave 
frequencies. A basic circuit using two rectifying diodes (a), the I-V relationship (b), 
and the clipped sine wave (c) (obtained when the input is above the limiting threshold) 
are shown in Figure 6.3. Schottky-barrier diodes (not PIN diodes) can be used for 
rectification at RF, microwave, and millimeter-wave frequencies. The main problem 
in using this method is its very low power handling capability. The rectifying diodes 
have a very thin depletion layer (in order to have a sufficiently rapid turn-on time at 
microwave frequencies) and have a small junction area (in order to keep the device 
capacitance small). The resulting small volume of the device cannot protect it from 
burning out when very high power microwave signals are present.
Varactor Diode Limiters
Varactor diodes have a junction capacitance that is voltage-dependent and that 
responds rapidly enough to change the characteristics at microwave frequency. If 
two diodes are set parallel in opposite polarity as shown in Figure 6.4(a), the result-
ing C-V characteristic is shown in Figure 6.4(b). When these diodes are used in a 

256
Limiters
parallel resonant circuit, a reflection coefficient that varies as a function of incident 
power is obtained. At low-power levels, the varactor diodes capacitance is tuned out 
with inductor L and the circuit is matched. At high-power levels, the diodes present 
low impedance and the incident signal is reflected back to provide desired limiting. 
Also, some rectification occurs at high-power levels and provides additional limit-
ing. These limiters also suffer from low power handling capability and are not as 
popular as PIN diode limiters described next.
PIN Diode Limiters
RF conductivity modulation phenomenon is exhibited by PIN diodes when biased 
at zero voltage and subjected to high-power RF current signals. When a PIN diode 
is forward biased, the free-carrier concentration in the i-region is not perfectly uni-
form but, because of the limited lifetime of the carriers, has a shape shown in Figure 
6.5. Now suppose that the DC bias is removed and replaced by a short-circuit path 
(DC return) as shown in Figure 6.6(a). It has been shown by Leenov [3] that, when 
a large microwave current has been established, the distribution of the resulting 
Figure 6.3  (a) Basic limiter circuit using two Schottky diodes, (b) the resulting I-V characteristic, 
and (c) output voltage waveform for a sinusoidal signal.
Figure 6.4  (a) A combination of two antiparallel varactor diodes and inductor, and (b) the 
resulting C-V characteristic for ⎪V⎪ < ⎪V0⎪.

6.1	
Introduction
257
carrier concentration will be as shown in Figure 6.5. After the incident high-power 
microwave pulse ceases, the concentration of holes and electrons in the i-region does 
not disappear immediately but decays exponentially with a time constant equal to 
the average carrier lifetime. The large microwave current causes some partial car-
rier injection near the p+ and n+ boundaries during the forward-going half-cycles 
of the RF signal. Not all of this injected charge is withdrawn when the RF voltage 
reverses. The result is a trickling of electrons and holes into the i-region, and these 
get distributed as shown in Figure 6.5. This steady state distribution is attained 
after a few RF cycles and remains static during the remainder of the RF pulse, serv-
ing to conductivity modulate the i-region. During the transient period in which the 
charge is built up in the i-region, the PIN limiter provides relatively little limiting to 
the high-power RF signal. The RF signal passes through the PIN limiter with little 
attenuation during this spike leakage period, after which a relatively high attenua-
tion (limiting) is achieved and the small fraction of the power that passes through is 
called the flat leakage. This PIN diode limiting phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 
6.6(b). In order to distinguish clearly from the rectification-type limiting, it may 
be noted that for the limiter circuit shown in Figure 6.6(a) the PIN diode presents 
substantially the same conductivity to both forward-and reverse-going halves of the 
RF cycle. Low spike leakage, flat leakage, insertion loss, and high power handling 
capability are the key requirements for PIN diode–based limiters. PIN diode limit-
ers are also capable of handling much higher power levels than other diode limiters.
Figure 6.5  The i-layer carrier concentrations in a PIN diode for DC forward biased and high 
power RF excitation.
Figure 6.6  (a) A PIN diode limiter with video detector configuration, and (b) various waveforms 
in PIN diode limiter.

258
Limiters
FET Switch Limiters
The devices available in MMIC technologies can easily be integrated to realize mod-
erate power level limiters. Switching devices form another class of limiters [26, 37, 
38, 45]. Figure 6.7 shows a basic configuration of a shunt FET switch limiter with 
biasing circuitry. The biasing scheme is the same as described in previous chapters. 
The device is biased so that it is in OFF state. At low power levels, the minimal 
attenuation in the transmit path occurs. As the power level increases and exceeds 
the threshold level, the FET is in the ON state and incident power is reflected due 
to low device impedance. The voltage divider resistor network controls the dynamic 
gate voltage and allows the RF gate-source voltage waveform symmetrical at the 
gate between the source and drain terminals. Depending upon the pinchoff voltage 
for the switching device, the threshold level is 10–15 dBm for low pinchoff (1.5–2 
V) devices and 20–25 dBm for high pinchoff (4–5 V) devices. The control voltage 
adjusts the threshold level, and the device size affects the current capacity and hence 
the power handling capability.
An improved version of FET switch limiter is shown in Figure 6.8. It employs 
additional components such as detector diodes and antiparallel Schottky diodes 
at the output. When the devices are not conducting, the series inductor forms a 
π-network with device capacitors and matched to 50-Ω system. In this case, above 
the threshold level, the detector diodes bring the switch into conduction during the 
both positive and negative cycles of the RF signal, resulting in signal clipping. The 
Schottky diodes further provide signal clipping and result in leakage level of 10–15 
dBm. Such limiters have been demonstrated up to several hundred watts of pulsed 
input power levels. Because of improved Schottky diode limiters, FET switch limit-
ers are not commonly used.
Figure 6.7  Schematic of a FET switch limiter.
Figure 6.8  Schematic of a FET switch and Schottky diode limiter.

6.2	
PIN Diode Limiters
259
FET Amplifier Limiters
This class of limiter circuits is based on the output power saturation of a class-A 
transistor amplifier [46]. As the input power increases above the P1dB power level of 
the amplifier, the output power starts compressing sharply and saturation occurs, 
and no more output power increases with input power increase. The output power 
variations are generally reduced by cascading multiple amplifier stages. Both single- 
and dual-gate FETs have been used in the realization of FET amplifier limiters. Most 
FET amplifier limiters have been developed for instantaneous frequency measure-
ment receivers [10, 12, 13]. This class of limiters is not very popular because of 
high DC power consumption, limited input power dynamic range, high harmonic 
contents, large circuit size, and high AM-to-PM conversion. More details can be 
found in [25, 31, 34].
Among all five limiters described earlier, the PIN diode limiter is the most popu-
lar, followed by the Schottky diode limiter. Both PIN and Schottky diode limiters 
are described in the next sections.
6.2	
PIN Diode Limiters
Figure 6.9 shows a general schematic of a single-stage limiter circuit and its simpli-
fied equivalent circuit. The RF choke is for the DC return path. Nonlinear or large 
signal models for PIN diodes are required to accurately predict spike leakage and 
flat leakage characteristics. Large signal models for PIN diodes have been reported 
in the literature [27, 31, 32]. Limited linear and nonlinear models for diodes are 
also available in commercial CAD tool libraries. Next, an approximate analysis of 
PIN diode limiters and the design of limiter circuits are described.
6.2.1	 Analysis of PIN Diode Limiter
It has been shown by Leenov [3] that the resistance of the i-region of a PIN diode 
activated through a microwave current is given by
	
Ri =
W
Dap /2pf ⋅
1
(q /kT) ⋅1
Irf
	
(6.1)
Figure 6.9  (a) Schematic of a single-stage limiter circuit, and (b) simplified single-stage limiter 
circuit.

260
Limiters
when the i-layer width W is much less than the carrier diffusion length L (39.5 tmm,  
where τ is the average carrier lifetime in microseconds). In the preceding relation, 
Dap is the diffusion coefficient, W is in centimeters, and Irf is in amperes RMS. For 
Si diodes at room temperature relation (6.1) may be simplified as
	
Ri = W
f
20Irf
	
(6.2)
where Ri is in ohms, W is in microns, f is in gigahertz, and Irf is in amperes RMS.
Example 6.1
Show that for a PIN diode, the RF current required to obtain intrinsic resistance 
Ri = 1 Ω is much higher than the DC current. For a Si diode the i-layer thickness is 
50 μm, μap = 610 cm2/V-s, τ = 1μs and f = 1 GHz.
Solution
W = 50 μm
From (6.2)
Irf = W
f
20Ri
= 50 1
20 × 1 = 2.5 A(RMS)
From (2.2a) in Chapter 2,
I0 ≅
W2
2maptRi
=
50 × 50 × 10−8
2 × 610 × 1 × 10−6 × 1 ≅0.02 A
By comparing the values of current it may be noted that the action of a high-power 
microwave signal is much less effective in producing conductivity modulation of 
the i-layer than is a DC bias.
Limiter Voltage and Current
The peak voltage Vp and current Ip for a PIN diode shown in Figure 6.9 are given by
	
Vp = IpZ0 =
8PaZ0 	
(6.3)
where Z0 is the terminal impedance and Pa is the input available power. During the 
positive half cycle of the RF signal applied across the PIN diode, there is DC volt-
age drop VD = 0.6–0.7 V across the diode. In this case the PIN diode is ON and 
a charge starts to store in the diode junction capacitance. The maximum stored 
charge, qmax, happens during the positive half cycle. The current is flowing through 
the diode and the storage charge q are expressed as
	
is(t) = Ip sinωt	
(6.4)

6.2	
PIN Diode Limiters
261
	
q(t) =
is(t) dt
0
t
∫
	
(6.5)
and the maximum stored charge qm over the half period becomes
	
qmax =
Ip sin(wt) dt
0
T /2
∫
=
2Ip
w 	
(6.6)
where T is the time period. The equivalent DC current If is given by
	
If = q(t)
t
	
(6.7)
where τ is the carrier life time. The total series resistance Rf of the device is expressed 
as
	
Rf(t) = Ri(t) + Rs	
(6.8)
where Ri(t) is the time/current dependent forward resistance of the PIN diode given 
by (6.2) and Rs is the total contact resistance. Typical value of current dependent 
Ri for a Microsemi GC4751 PIN diode [58] is given by [47]
	
Ri = 0.011
If
0.782 	
(6.9)
where If is measured in A. When in Figure 6.9(b) the PIN diode is replaced with Rf, 
the AC voltage va across Rf and the output voltage vo are given by
	
va(t) = is(t) Z0
2 Rf (t)
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥	
(6.10)
	
vo(t) = VD + va(t)	
(6.11)
Leakage Flat Power and Spike Leakage Power
Closed form expressions for flat leakage power Pfl and spike leakage power Psl were 
reported by Yang et al. [47] and given next:
	
Pfl =
ReIp
(
)
2
2Z0
(CW) 	
(6.12a)
	
Pfl = VD
2
Z0
+
pVpVD
Z0
VD
(Pulsed) 	
(6.12b)

262
Limiters
and
	
Psl = Pfl +
pVpVD
Z0
VD 	
(6.13)
where
	
Re = p
2
3 Ri(qmax / t) + Rs
⎡⎣
⎤⎦	
(6.14)
Here Ri is corresponding to qmax value. The analysis of a multistage limiter was also 
discussed by Yang et al. [47].
Insertion Loss
The insertion loss of a limiter is specified under small signal conditions and depends 
on its simple series RC equivalent circuit. Figure 6.10 shows small signal equivalent 
circuit of a shunt PIN diode connected to input and output using bond wires. The 
inductor Lw represents the bond wire. Using the procedure as described in Section 
4.2.3, under matched conditions the value of Lw is determined equating with the 
ABCD matrix of a transmission line.
For an equivalent transmission line of characteristic impedance Z0, the bond 
wire inductance is given by
	
Lw =
1 −
1 −wCjZ0
(
)
2
w2Cj
	
(6.15)
From the transmission theory, the attenuation constant α is given by
	
a = Rw
2Z0
+
GpZ0
2
	
(6.16)
where Rw is the resistance of bond wire. When Rw = 0,
	
a =
GpZ0
2
=
Rf Z0
2 Rf
2 + 1/ wCj
(
)
2
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
=
wCj
(
)
2
Rf Z0
2
wCjRf
(
)
2
+ 1
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
	
(6.17)
Figure 6.10  Small signal equivalent circuits of a wire bonded PIN diode: (a) junction resistance 
and capacitance in series, and (b) junction resistance and capacitance in parallel.

6.2	
PIN Diode Limiters
263
For (ωCjRf)2 << 1, the attenuation constant or insertion loss, IL in dB, is expressed as
	
IL = 4.343(ωCj)2RfZ0	
(6.18)
Example 6.2
Consider a PIN diode having Rs = 0.9 Ω, Rf = 1.5 Ω @10 mA, Cj = 0.12 pF, τ = 5 ns 
and VB = 15 V. Calculate CW and pulsed flat leakage power levels, and insertion 
loss at 10 GHz. The input power = 20 W and Z0 = 50 Ω.
Solution
ω = 2πf = 2 × 3.1416 × 10 × 109 = 6.283 × 1010 rad/s, and Pa = 20 W
Peak voltage, Vp =
8PaZ0 =
8 × 20 × 50 = 89.4 V
Peak current, Ip = Vp/Z0 = 89.4/50 = 1.79 A
qmax = 2Ip/ω = 2 × 1.79/(6.283 × 1010) = 0.057 nC
If = qmax/τ = 0.057 × 10–9/(5 × 10–9) = 0.0114 A
As example, using (6.9)
Ri @ 0.0114 A = 0.011/0.01140.782 = 0.011/0.03 = 0.364 Ω
From (6.14),
Re = p
2
3[0.364 + 0.9] = 3.24Ω
CW flat leakage power, 
Pfl
CW =
ReIp
(
)
2
2Z0
= (3.24 × 1.79)2
100
= 0.336W = 25.3 dBm
Pulsed flat leakage power, 
Pfl
P = VD
2
Z0
+
pVpVD
Z0
VD = 0.72
50 +
p × 89.4 × 0.7
50
× 0.7 = 0.206W = 23.1 dBm
Using (6.18),
IL = 4.343(ωCj)2RfZ0 = 4.343 × (6.283 × 1010 × 0.12 × 10–12)2 × 1.5 × 50 = 
1.85 × 10–2 = 0.0185 dB
6.2.2	 Si PIN Diode Limiters in Microstrip Configuration
High-power and low-leakage PIN diode limiters use a cascaded or multistage con-
figuration of devices arranged in such a way that the first stage employs high-power 
diodes, the next stage medium power, and the final stage low power with thick, 
medium thick, and thin intrinsic layers, respectively. The final stage is also called 
cleaning stage, as it cleans up the incident power that gets past the preceding stages. 
The multistage configuration results in low flat leakage power level in the 13–15 
dBm range. PIN diodes are used for low- and high-power limiters, and both Si 
and GaAs PIN diodes are used. By selecting properly PIN diodes, one can design 

264
Limiters
suitable limiters meeting insertion loss, bandwidth, average and peak power han-
dling, leakage power, and recovery time requirements. Commercial Si PIN diode 
limiters in broadband microstrip circuits are available from a variety of vendors 
including MACOM [50], Narda [56], Aeroflex [57], and Microsemi [58]. Table 6.1 
summarizes 1–18 GHz limiter’s performance [50]. These circuits have better elec-
trical characteristics with reduced power handling requirements.
Limiting and spike leakage characteristics of PIN diodes with different i-layer 
widths for S- and X-band high-power applications have been studied [11]. The smaller 
the i-layer width was, the lower the spike leakage was, and 1.5 μm i-layer width 
resulted no spike leakage. A practical implementation of a two-stage limiter circuit 
using two shunt-mounted diodes spaced along a microstrip line is shown in Figure 
6.11. The diodes were mounted on the ground plane (after punching out holes in 
the substrate dielectric material). Flexible wire (or rectangular ribbon) leads provide 
mechanical stress relief in the connection of the strip conductor to the diode. In 
addition, by proper selection of lead lengths and sizes, series inductances are real-
ized that can be used to match to 50 Ω with shunt diode’s capacitance. The Si PIN 
diodes D1 and D2 had i-layer widths of 9.5 μm and 1.5 μm, respectively. The junc-
tion capacitance for the diodes was approximately 0.3 pF to realize good match to 
50 Ω system. The diodes were separated by a quarter-wave-long 50-Ω microstrip 
and a short-circuited high impedance (>>50 Ω) quarter-wave-long microstrip was 
used for diodes current return path. The circuits were designed at 3 and 9.4 GHz 
and tested at input power of 2 kW peak pulse with a width of 1 μs. At 3 GHz, the 
measured insertion loss, leakage power, and spike leakage values were about 0.8 dB, 
18 dB, and 23 dB, respectively. The pulse width of spike leakage was about 9 ns. 
The VSWR was less than 1.2. The X-band design had the insertion loss of 1.2 dB, 
and other characteristics were similar to the S-band limiter. As pointed out [32], in 
order to observe the spike leakage the signal must have nanosecond rise time, not 
microseconds. It was observed that the spike leakage increases with i-layer width, 
Table 6.1  Electrical Performance of Broadband Limiters at Room Temperature
Frequency  
(GHz)
Insertion  
Loss (dB)
VSWR
Average  
power (W)
Peak  
Power (W)
Recovery  
Time (ns)
Leakage  
Power (mW)
1–2
0.9
1.5
3
1000
1000
100
2–8
1.3
1.6
3
1000
1000
100
8–18
2.3
2.0
3
1000
1000
100
2–18
2.3
2.0
3
1000
1000
100
Figure 6.11  (a) Schematic of a two-stage PIN diode limiter, and (b) limiter implementation in 
microstrip configuration.

6.2	
PIN Diode Limiters
265
input power level, and frequency. Analysis for predicting spike leakage for thin 
i-layer PIN diode limiters has been also reported [32].
Figure 6.12 shows a schematic and its equivalent circuit representations of a 
three-stage limiter where the diode’s shunt capacitance is absorbed in the low-pass 
network using series inductors or high characteristic impedance lines to match to 
50 Ω over the wide frequency range. This configuration is similar to the traveling-
wave topology used for broadband switches, phase shifters, and attenuators. The 
three-stage limiter has much lower flat leakage power than a two-stage limiter.
6.2.3	 GaAs PIN Diode Limiters
Several limiter circuits using GaAs MMIC PIN diode technology have been reported 
in the literature [39–41]. Typical limiter configurations for GaAs PIN diodes are 
shown in Figure 6.13. Figure 6.13(a) shows single-stage diodes in antiparallel con-
figuration. This is the simplest configuration used for limiters for low-power appli-
cations. Single-stage double-shunt or stacked diodes shown in Figure 6.13(b) lowers 
the diode’s shunt capacitance. This topology permits the increase in the area of 
diodes and power handling capability. However, in this case, the flat leakage power 
is increased by 4–6 dB. The flat leakage is reduced by using two-stage double- and 
single-shunt diodes separated by a capacitor or by an inductor shown in Figures 
6.13(c, d). In the two-stage limiter, the first-stage diodes have much larger area than 
Figure 6.12  (a) Schematic of a three-stage PIN diode limiter, (b) equivalent circuit 
representation under small signal condition, and (c) under high power.

266
Limiters
the second-stage diodes because they handle much higher power levels. A two-stage 
limiter has slightly higher insertion loss than a single-stage limiter.
Key desirable parameters of GaAs MMIC PIN diode limiters are low insertion 
loss and flat leakage, high input power burnout or survivability, and small size for 
low-cost applications. Several limiter circuits employing vertical PIN diodes were 
studied [39] using configurations shown in Figures 6.13(a, b). The i-layer thick-
ness and breakdown voltage values were 1.2 μm and 40 V, respectively. The PIN 
diodes used had diameters of 15, 20, 30, and 50 μm, and measured catastrophic 
failure (burnout) input power level (CW) values were about 2.5, 5.6, 9, and 15.9 
W, respectively. The flat leakage values were 16–17 dBm and 22–23 dBm for single 
and stacked diodes, respectively. At 1 GHz, the insertion loss was negligible (< 0.1 
dB). In both single and stacked diodes configurations, the catastrophic failure was 
approximately at the same input power level.
Single- and Two-Stage Broadband GaAs PIN Diode Limiters
Broadband GaAs MMIC PIN diode limiters were developed for low-cost applica-
tions [40]. Both single-stage and two-stage limiters working over the 3–28 GHz 
frequency range were designed using vertical PIN diodes [39]. The diameter of the 
PIN diodes was selected to be 35 μm to handle more than 6 W CW input power 
levels. Figure 6.14 shows the schematics of single-stage and two-stage limiters where 
the diode’s shunt capacitance was absorbed in the low-pass network using series high 
characteristic impedance lines to match to 50 Ω over the 3–28 GHz frequency range.
The limiter circuits were fabricated using GaAs MMIC process. The breakdown 
voltage for the diodes was greater than 35 V. The chip sizes were 0.79 mm2 and 1.04 
mm2 for the single-stage and two-stage limiters, respectively. For the single-stage 
limiter, the measured maximum insertion loss and flat leakage, over the 3–28 GHz 
frequency range, were 1 dB and 22 dBm, respectively. For the two-stage limiter the 
Figure 6.13  GaAs PIN diode using antiparallel configurations: (a) single-stage, (b) single-stage 
double-shunt or stacked diodes, (c) two-stage double- and single-shunt diodes separated by a 
capacitor, and (d) two-stage double- and single-shunt diodes separated by an inductor.

6.2	
PIN Diode Limiters
267
measured maximum insertion loss and flat leakage, over the 3–28 GHz frequency 
range, were 1.4 dB and 17.5 dBm, respectively. In both circuits, the return loss and 
survivability CW power level were greater than 12 and 4 W, respectively. The inser-
tion loss at 10 GHz was less than 0.4 dB.
GaAs PIN Diode Variable Attenuation Limiter
A variable attenuator limiter circuit was developed for T/R module (see Figure 
1.10(a)) applications [21]. The circuit was designed to place between the LNA and 
circulator. The schematic of the variable attenuator limiter is shown in Figure 6.15. 
The variable attenuation was achieved by varying the control voltage applied to 
stacked diodes A. During the transmit mode, attenuation greater than 20 dB was 
introduced under matched conditions to prevent load pulling of the power ampli-
fier. When the receive mode is ON, no bias is applied to the limiter. This provides 
minimum insertion loss at low power levels and limiting protection for the LNA 
under incident high-power levels. Low insertion loss was obtained by resonating 
out PIN diode capacitances with the shunt high impedance line. The circuit was 
matched by using a quarter-wave-long line between the two sets of diodes.
X-and Ka-band variable attenuation limiter circuits were fabricated using mono-
lithic GaAs planar PIN diode technology. Typical measured insertion loss values 
were 0.5 dB and 1.4 dB at 10 GHz and 36.5 GHz, respectively. Input VSWR and 
variable attenuation range values were 1.5 and 20 dB, respectively.
6.2.4	 Matched Limiters
The limiters used in practice are normally of reflective type; however, in some 
applications such as multichannel receivers, matched limiters are required. Several 
Figure 6.14  Schematics of broadband PIN diode limiters: (a) single-stage, and (b) two-stage 
configurations.
Figure 6.15  Schematic of the PIN diode variable attenuation limiter.

268
Limiters
different configurations are possible, including a balanced limiter described later in 
Section 6.4.3. Figure 6.16(a) shows a two-stage matched limiter configuration [6]. 
Here diodes are separated by a quarter-wave-long line to cancel the reflections by 
the reactance of the diodes. Under small-signal conditions, the diodes present very 
high impedances, and the circuit is matched to 50 Ω, as shown in Figure 6.16(b). 
When the input power exceeds the limiting threshold level of the diodes, they pres-
ent very low impedances, the resistor switched in, and the circuit is matched at the 
input as shown in Figure 6.16(c). This topology is also known as matched unilat-
eral limiter. The measured performance of a unilateral limiter matched at 2 GHz 
has negligible (< 0.1 dB) insertion loss. The VSWR, saturated power, and leakage 
power values were 1.6, 25 dBm, and 10 dBm, respectively. By adding another sec-
tion of resistor-diode at the output of Figure 6.16, the circuit becomes bilateral and 
is shown in Figure 6.17. The analysis of this circuit is similar to the unilateral case.
Figure 6.18 shows matched bilateral limiter configuration using a 3-dB hybrid 
or Lange coupler. The operation of Lange coupler–based limiter is similar to the 
Figure 6.16  (a) Matched unilateral limiter configuration, (b) small-signal equivalent circuit, and 
(c) above threshold power level equivalent circuit.
Figure 6.17  (a) Matched bilateral limiter configuration, (b) small-signal equivalent circuit, and 
(c) above threshold power level equivalent circuit.
Figure 6.18  (a) Bilateral matched limiter configuration, (b) small-signal equivalent circuit, and 
(c) above threshold power level equivalent circuit.

6.3	
Schottky Diode Limiters
269
reflection-type phase shifter described in Section 4.2.1. Under a low-power condi-
tion, the diodes present very high impedances due to Cj (open circuit), and the input 
signal is reflected back and combines at the output port 4 with minimal loss under 
matched conditions. This is represented by Figure 6.18(b). When the signal level 
exceeds the limiting threshold power level, the diodes have very low impedances 
Rf, the signals are absorbed in 50-Ω resistors, and no signal appears at the output 
port. These circuits can also be realized using Schottky diodes.
Another configuration for a matched limiter using pairs of antiparallel diodes 
is shown in Figure 6.19. Under small-signal conditions, the diodes have very high 
impedance and the limiter circuit has low insertion loss. Under large-signal condi-
tions, the diodes have low impedance, parallel combination of L and C provides 
resonance, input signal is absorbed in 50-Ω resistors, and no signal appears at the 
output port.
6.3	
Schottky Diode Limiters
The operation of a Schottky diode limiter can be explained by referring to Figure 
6.20. In Figure 6.20, the second harmonic signal level as a function of input voltage 
is plotted at 2 GHz for a single and antiparallel diodes. These results were obtained 
using nonlinear model of Schottky diodes with the design data given in Chapter 
2. As expected, the second harmonic level for symmetrical antiparallel diode case 
is significantly lower under hard saturation conditions as compared to the single 
diode configuration. Figure 6.21 shows output voltages for three shunt resistor R1 
values when the input voltage is 3 V. The resistor R1 value is selected to provide the 
desired output voltage level and does not affect the harmonic levels.
As described in Section 2.7, the basic requirements for a Schottky diode are 
related to its performance in the ON and OFF states (i.e., low resistance and low 
capacitance, respectively). In the case of a Schottky diode operating as a limiter, in 
the ON state, the device should reflect most of the incident power and be able to 
dissipate the rest. In the OFF state, it should look like a simple capacitance with as 
Figure 6.19  Matched unilateral limiter configuration.

270
Limiters
small a value as possible that will be incorporated in to the matching networks over 
a large bandwidth. Since the Schottky diode limiter circuits use antiparallel devices, 
large reverse breakdown voltage is not required. From the equivalent circuit shown 
in Figure 2.24, under small signal conditions (Rj is very large), the diode looks like 
a series RC network with an impedance of
	
Z = Rs +
1
jwCj0
	
(6.19)
where Cj0 is the zero-bias junction capacitance. This looks like a simple capacitance if
	
1
jwCj0
>> Rs
	
Figure 6.20  Second harmonic performance of single and antiparallel Schottky diode pair 
limiters.
Figure 6.21  Output voltage of an antiparallel diode limiter for various values of the resistor R1 
when the input voltage level is 3 V.

6.3	
Schottky Diode Limiters
271
which is the same as
	
fc =
1
2pRsCj0
>> f 	
(6.20)
where f is the operating frequency. Since fc for Schottky diodes is in the range of 
THz, the diodes can be treated as simple capacitors for the small-signal matching 
networks operating at RF and microwave frequency. When the diode is function-
ing as a limiter, the device will be forward biased and its current will follow the 
following equation:
	
I = Is eq(V −I⋅Rs)/nkT −1
⎢⎣
⎥⎦	
(6.21)
The maximum power that can be dissipated by the diode may be limited by either 
the device’s thermal resistance and maximum channel temperature (150°) or by the 
maximum current that can be carried by the narrow anode finger gate length (typi-
cal maximum DC current value is 2 mA/μm). Since fc >> f, the gate length of diodes 
may be increased two to three times to handle higher currents without affecting 
the diode performance. The thermal resistance of single and multifinger diodes can 
be calculated using Cooke’s model [46, 61] as described in Appendix B. Since the 
diode dissipates power during only half of the RF cycle, the handling peak power 
can be twice the rated power for each diode. In summary, the Schottky diodes for 
limiter applications must meet the following requirements:
1.	 High cut-off frequency ƒc (= 1/2πRsCj0) in order to have minimum loss 
contribution;
2.	 Ability to withstand rectified current during limiting action;
3.	 Temperature rise less than 125°C (for maximum allowed channel tempera-
ture Tch = 150 °C) and base temperature of 25 °C.
6.3.1	 Analysis of Schottky Diode Limiter
A schematic of a Schottky diode limiter is shown in Figure 6.22. Here the diodes are 
assumed ideal devices. The diode’s junction capacitance and series resistance, under 
small signal conditions, are represented by Cj0 and Rs, respectively. At high-power 
levels, the diodes turn on and a significant fraction of the incident power (depend-
ing on the power level) is reflected back to the source. However, due to Rs and the 
rectifying action of the ideal diodes, a substantial fraction of the incident power is 
absorbed into the diodes. This absorbed power increases the channel temperature 
and may cause damage to the diodes. Thus, the diodes must be designed to handle 
this absorbed power and the high current passing through them. If RG = RL, the 
power Pa delivered to the diodes is given by
	
Pa = VG
2
4RG
	
(6.22)

272
Limiters
where VG is the RMS voltage across the source (generator) resistor RG. If Id is the 
RMS current passing through the diodes, and RG = 50 Ω, then VG = 50 Id and 
(6.22) becomes
	
Pa =
50Id
(
)
2
4 × 50 = 50
4 Id
2 	
(6.23)
Figure 6.22  (a) Schottky diode power limiter configuration, and (b) diode’s small signal lumped 
element equivalent circuit model.
Or
	
Id =
2
5
Pa 	
(6.24)
The peak current passing through the diodes under this condition will be 
Ip =
2Id
	
Ip = 2
5
Pa 	
(6.25)
Therefore, for 10-W CW operation, the diodes must be able to draw a peak cur-
rent of 1.26 A without failing. This means the diode channel as well as its physical 
structure must handle this current.
The power absorbed by the diodes under large-signal conditions occurs due to 
the rectification action of the ideal diodes and is given by Id
2Rs. The time average 
power dissipated in the diodes PD over one cycle is approximated by [30, 43]
	
PD = 2p
w
VpIp sin(wt) dt
0
p /w
∫
+
Ip
2Rs sin2(wt) dt
0
p /w
∫
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
= 1
p IpVp + 1
4 Ip
2Rs
	
(6.26)
where Vp is about 1.5 V (see Figure 6.21). Integration is carried out over a half 
period T
2 = p
w
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟ because each Schottky diode only conducts over one half cycle.

6.3	
Schottky Diode Limiters
273
The increase in diode junction temperature under large-signal conditions is 
given by
	
∆T = PDRth	
(6.27)
where Rth is the thermal resistance. Consider the input power level Pa = 5 W and 
Rs = 1 Ω, the total power dissipated PD in the limiter diodes is about 0.31W. If Rth 
is 120°C/W of the diode on the GaAs substrate placed on a heat sink, the increase 
in diode junction temperature is calculated to be about 46°C.
6.3.2	 Schottky Diode Design and Limiter Configuration
Figure 2.23 (in Chapter 2) shows the top and cross-sectional views of a single-finger 
Schottky diode. The Schottky diode area and limiter configuration determine its 
survivable power level of the circuit. In order to have higher current and power 
handling capability, long gate length anode for the diode is used. For high-power 
applications, multifinger and stacked diodes of 2-μm gate length for the anode 
has been used [43, 46]. As an example, for a 5-W limiter, the device configuration 
shown in Figure 6.23 comprises of a set of antiparallel diodes in shunt configura-
tion, and each diode set has sixteen diodes (2 eight diodes in parallel). Each diode 
has 2 × 12 μm2 area. Two of these sets are used in series (stacked diodes similar to 
shown in Figure 6.13(b)) to increase the voltage handling capability, which enabled 
an increase in the heat spreading area by a factor of four, consequently increasing 
the current and power handling capability without affecting the limiter loss. Typi-
cal measured Rs and Cj0 values for this structure are 1 Ω and 0.4 pF, respectively.
Cooke’s model [61] was used to calculate the thermal resistance of the limiting 
diodes. The thermal conductivity of a GaAs substrate as a function of temperature 
is given by
	
K(T) = 1.08T0.26 (W/cm°C)	
(6.28)
where the temperature T is expressed in °C. A thermal resistance of 120°C/W was 
calculated for the Schottky diodes shown in Figure 6.23. Thus, if the power dissipated 
Figure 6.23  Physical layout of a 5-W Schottky diode configuration.

274
Limiters
is about 0.5 W (approximately 30 percent higher than the calculated value in the 
previous section), the rise in the channel temperature is about 60°C. Burnout tests 
were performed [43] on diodes up to 5-W CW with no catastrophic failure observed.
6.3.3	 Broadband High Power Limiters
Many radar, EW, navigation, and communication systems require ultra-broadband 
high-power limiters with low insertion loss, fast recovery time, and low leakage 
output power. Currently available broadband 1–3 W limiter products [50, 58] have 
too high insertion loss (= 2 dB), long recovery time (=1000 ns), and high leakage 
output power (= 20 dBm). Bahl [62] proposed a novel ultra-broadband high-power 
limiter configuration that can handle greater than 10-W CW power and can be 
monolithically integrated on GaAs substrate as a standalone product or with low 
noise amplifier manufactured using MSAG process [43, 63].
A block diagram of the broadband high-power limiter MMIC is shown in Figure 
6.24. The limiter comprises a 50–12.5 Ω broadband transformer [64] at the input, 
a three-stage Schottky diode limiter circuit, followed by a 12.5–50 Ω broadband 
transformer. Stepping down the impedance to 12.5 Ω at the limiter location makes 
the shunt diode reactance/line impedance ratio very large, which allows the usage 
of large area diodes for high-power operation over ultra-broad frequency range. The 
three-stage limiter topology is shown in Figure 6.25. In the first stage, it consists of 
large Schottky limiting diodes to handle 40 dBm of input power, with the second 
stage of smaller Schottky limiting diodes to limit the leakage power below 20 dBm, 
and the third stage of much smaller Schottky limiting diodes to limit the leakage 
power below 14 dBm. The first stage limiting diodes use a series combination of two 
sets of diodes, and two of them are placed in antiparallel configuration. The sec-
ond- and third-stage limiting diodes use single-diode antiparallel configuration. The 
Figure 6.24  Configuration of an ultra-broadband 10-W CW limiter.
Figure 6.25  Three-stage Schottky diode limiter configuration.

6.4	
Monolithic GaAs Schottky Diode Limiter Circuits
275
selection of a suitable transformer that provides the minimum loss and the required 
impedance transformation over the desired frequency range is very important.
A broadband 10-W limiter using MSAG process [43, 61] was designed on 
3-mil thick GaAs substrate. Figure 6.26 shows the simulated insertion loss and 
return loss for the broadband 10-W limiter. The insertion loss is less than 1 dB 
and the return loss is greater than 10 dB over the 2–20 GHz frequency range. At 
the input power level of 10-W CW, the leakage power at the output is less than 
14 dBm. The recovery time for 10-W limiters with integrated LNA was measured 
on the order of 35 ns [44] as compared to μs for Si PIN diode limiters. Since 
there is no biasing network required in a passive limiter, the recovery time will 
be faster than 35 ns.
2–18 GHz Schottky Diode Limiter
A broadband limiter based on GaAs Schottky diode MMIC using two stages shown 
in Figure 6.14(b) was developed [59]. The chip size was 1.2 mm2. Typical measured 
insertion loss, return loss, and leakage power over the 2- to 18-GHz frequency range 
were 1.0 dB, 10 dB, and 13 dBm, respectively. The recovery time and CW power 
rating were 40 ns and 1 W, respectively. Since Schottky diodes do not generate 
minority carriers, they offer superior recovery and spike leakage performance, for 
medium-power applications, as compared to PIN diode limiters [59].
6.4	
Monolithic GaAs Schottky Diode Limiter Circuits
Schottky diode MMIC limiting amplifiers and integrated limiter/LNA have been 
developed and reported in the literature [20, 43]. These are described next.
Figure 6.26  Simulated insertion loss and return loss versus frequency of the broadband 10-W 
limiter.

276
Limiters
6.4.1	 Limiting Amplifiers
In EW systems, the received signal level from a threat transmitter may be as low as 
−80 dBm, and radiation levels from friendly transmitters may be as high as 30 dBm. 
The design of signal processing components for electronic support and countermea-
sures systems poses a great challenge to such a large dynamic range of signal levels. 
In such systems, a sophisticated signal compression feature is required to reduce 
the signal strength to a sustainable dynamic range. This characteristic is realized 
by using an output-limited amplifier. For example, in an instantaneous frequency 
measurement (IFM) discriminator, such amplifiers compress the dynamic range to 
about 6 dB, centered at approximately 6 dBm power level.
Limiting amplifiers are widely used in EW systems to convert an input signal 
with variable amplitude to an output signal with a nearly constant level. Since the 
input level may vary over a wide range (e.g., 50 to 70 dB), the small-signal gain of 
the amplifier must be large to provide the desired output power. Applications of 
limiting amplifiers include IFM receivers, frequency memory loops, and digital RF 
memories. In some cases, it is desirable that the waveform at the output of the lim-
iting amplifier be a faithful reproduction of the input sine wave waveform. These 
circuits are generally designed for bandwidths less than two octaves, where the 
second harmonic levels are kept low by using antiparallel diodes and linear ampli-
fiers, and other higher order harmonics are removed by using filters.
Various design approaches for limiting amplifiers include PIN diode/Schottky 
diode limiter cascaded with linear amplifier gain stages, transistor amplifiers driven 
into saturation, and dual-gate transistor amplifiers with the control gate used to keep 
the amplifier stages in the linear region. In the saturated power transistor amplifiers, 
a sharp power compression is needed above the 1-dB compression level, resulting 
in the required limiting. Among aforementioned limiting amplifier approaches, the 
limiting diode cascaded with linear amplifier is more popular. In a saturated ampli-
fier, the output waveform becomes square wave, and in a dual-gate transistor case, 
the limiting action is not instantaneous due to control gate circuitry.
Several limiting amplifiers using GaAs Schottky diodes and MESFET for IFM 
applications have been reported in the literature [12, 18–20]. They comprised limit-
ers at the input followed by multistage amplifiers. In limiters, Schottky diodes were 
biased to adjust the input threshold power. In amplifiers, the transistors were biased 
for class A and operated in linear mode.
Limiter Circuit Topology
The configuration of a six-stage limiter amplifier is shown in Figure 6.27. Each stage 
has a diode limiter section L and a two-stage linear amplifier A. The maximum 
output power level of the limiter is low enough to ensure that the amplifier always 
operates in a linear region, regardless of the input power levels. Under low-power 
conditions, the limiter has an insertion loss of 4 dB and the amplifier has a gain 
of 12 dB, resulting in a net gain of 8 dB. The signal levels at various points in the 
limiting amplifier chain are also shown in Figure 6.27 for a low-level input of −35 
dBm and a high level of +10 dBm; the output power level is fixed in both cases at 
+12 dBm. Thus, the limiting amplifier provides a fixed output level for input signal 

6.4	
Monolithic GaAs Schottky Diode Limiter Circuits
277
from −35 to +10 dBm or greater. In this configuration, additional stages can be 
cascaded to increase the small-signal gain to handle even lower input power levels.
The limiter circuit shown in Figure 6.28 consists of two parts: antiparallel diodes 
at the input and output in shunt configuration and a series bridge of four diodes 
for adjusting the threshold power level. For low-power levels, the series bridge acts 
as a T-type attenuator whose attenuation can be controlled by adjusting the diode 
bias voltage and resistor R2.
GaAs MMIC Limiting Amplifier
The unit-limiting amplifier was designed and fabricated using GaAs 0.5 μm MES-
FET MMIC process [19, 20]. The chip was optimized for required limiting power, 
low noise figure, and flat gain over the 2- to 6-GHz frequency range by properly 
selecting the diode networks and two-stage amplifier match. The Schottky diodes 
D1 and resistors R1 shown in Figure 6.28 were selected to provide about 4 dBm of 
output power under hard saturation conditions. The periphery of D1 was 80 μm. 
Under small-signal conditions, attenuation in the shunt diodes is negligible. The 
Schottky diodes D2 and resistors R2 were optimized to provide 4-dB attenuation 
Figure 6.27  A block diagram of a six-stage limiting amplifier with power analysis.
Figure 6.28  Shunt-series bridge-shunt Schottky diode limiter configuration.

278
Limiters
under small-signal conditions. The periphery of D2 was 32 μm. The amplifier 
employed 400-μm gate periphery FET in both stages. The substrate thickness was 
125 μm. A photograph of the unit-limiting amplifier is shown in Figure 6.29.
The limiting amplifier module was assembled using six unit-limiting amplifiers 
connected in cascade. The housing was a wave-guide structure with a cut-off fre-
quency of 13 GHz to prevent oscillations. The measured average gain of unit MMIC 
amplifiers was about 9.5 dB. The amplifier was operated using a 4-V power sup-
ply. Typical measured gain, noise figure, output power, second harmonic level, and 
return loss, over the 2 to 6 GHz frequency range, were 55 dB, 9 dB, 12 dBm, −25 
dBc, and 10 dB, respectively. Typical measured output power versus input power 
at 4 GHz is shown in Figure 6.30.
6.4.2	 10-W Limiter with Embedded LNA
To fulfill low-cost and large-volume production requirements, the integration of 
limiter and LNA functions on a single GaAs MMIC chip has been proposed [43, 
46]. A block diagram of the high-power limiter/LNA MMIC is shown in Figure 
6.31. The 10-W limiter/LNA design was a balanced configuration in which each 
Figure 6.29  Photograph of the unit-limiting amplifier MMIC chip. The chip size was 3.8 × 3.0 
mm2.
Figure 6.30  Transfer characteristics of the 6-stage limiting amplifier.

6.4	
Monolithic GaAs Schottky Diode Limiter Circuits
279
single-ended topology is comprised of a two-stage Schottky diode limiter circuit 
followed by a two-stage LNA. The Lange couplers of the balanced configuration 
provide a good input and output match at all power levels, minimize LNA noise 
figure degradation in the presence of an extreme source mismatch (e.g., radiator 
impedance mismatch at wide scan angles in phased array antennas), and provide a 
route for the reflected RF power to an “on-chip” 50-Ω load. The MMIC balanced 
configuration adds an extra 0.3–0.5 dB to the single-ended amplifier’s noise figure. 
Next, the basic device requirements are briefly described for the limiting circuit to 
withstand power levels of up to 10-W CW and the design of Schottky diodes.
Schottky Limiting Diodes
The two-stage limiter topology is shown in Figure 6.32. The first stage utilizes large 
Schottky limiting diodes (a) to handle the 37-dBm (half of 10 W due to balanced 
configuration) input power, and the second stage uses smaller Schottky limiting 
diodes (b), limiting the leakage power below 18–19 dBm. The limiter’s first stage 
employs two stacked diodes in antiparallel shunt configuration. The peak current 
pass through the first-stage diodes was about 0.63 A. The limiter’s second stage 
uses two diodes in antiparallel shunt configuration also. A third stage of much 
smaller Schottky limiting diodes may be used to further limit the leakage power 
below 14 dBm.
For this application, Schottky mixer diode with 2-μm gate length for the anode 
was used in order to allow higher current and power handling capability. The 
Schottky diode area and limiter configuration determine its survivable power level. 
The first stage comprises a set of antiparallel diodes in shunt configuration, and 
Figure 6.31  Configuration of a balanced limiter with two-stage LNA.
Figure 6.32  Two-stage Schottky limiting diode configuration.

280
Limiters
the diode size and layout are the same as shown in Figure 6.23. Each diode had 2 × 
12 μm2 area. Two of these sets were used in series to increase the voltage-handling 
capability, which enabled an increase in the heat spreading area by a factor of four, 
consequently increasing the current- and power-handling capability without affect-
ing the limiter loss. The second stage contains another set of antiparallel diodes in 
shunt configuration. In this case, there are 8 diodes and each has 2 × 8 μm2 area. 
Figure 6.33 shows the physical layout for the two-stage 5-W diode limiter.
LNA Design
The two-stage LNA configuration was selected based on a tradeoff between the 
LNA noise figure and the input TOI requirement of the receiver. In the LNA, each 
stage used large gate periphery FETs with series inductive feedback to provide a 
simultaneous match for a good VSWR, minimum noise figure, and power handling 
for the limiter leakage. The capacitive reactance of the limiting diodes was incor-
porated in the low-pass input-matching network of the LNA design.
The single-ended LNA design was based on MSAG 5N low-noise FETs [43], 
and the matching networks were optimized for minimum noise figure, flat gain, 
and minimum gain of 15 dB. Both stages used 600-μm gate periphery FETs, each 
FET employing 8 fingers and a 20-μm gate-to-gate pitch. The 600-μm FET size is 
selected to achieve the minimum noise figure and effectively handle leakage power 
from the diodes for high-power operation and higher IP3 performance. The FETs 
used in each stage have slightly different series feedback inductance values. Each 
FET’s gate was biased through a voltage divider network whose effective gate 
resistance was 1 kΩ, and the drain voltage was applied through a 60-Ω resistor. 
The gate and drain power supply voltages were −5 V and 5 V, respectively, so that 
the gate voltage was about −0.7 V (at 25 percent Idss) and drain voltage was about 
3 V. The circuit design was unconditionally stable. The 50-Ω termination resistor 
connected to the input Lange coupler was sized to handle power levels up to 10 W. 
The LNA design has been described in details in [43, 46].
Figure 6.33  Physical layout of the 5-W two-stage Schottky diode single-ended limiter 
configuration.

6.4	
Monolithic GaAs Schottky Diode Limiter Circuits
281
Circuit Fabrication
The limiter/LNA was fabricated using ion-implanted planar refractory gate, multi-
function self-aligned gate (MSAG) MESFET MMIC process [43]. The MSAG fea-
tures a full suite of transistors, diodes, and passive components fabricated on 4-inch 
diameter GaAs wafers. The devices were fabricated using the process 5 low-noise 
and Schottky mixer diode implants. The process included Au/Ge/Ni metallization 
for ohmic contacts, 0.4-μm and 2-μm TiWN Schottky barrier gates, along with 
thin-film and ion-implanted resistors. The 0.4-μm TiWN gates were covered by a 
0.8-μm overlay after planarization. A thickness of 2000-Å silicon nitride (εr = 6.8) 
was used for both MIM capacitors and passivation. The air bridges, microstrip 
lines, and bonding pads were 4.5-μm thick plated gold. The standard MSAG pro-
cess also used two layers of polyimide (εr = 3.2); interlevel dielectric (3 μm thick), 
and a scratch protection layer (7μm thick) for mechanical protection of the finished 
circuitry. The MSAG process was extremely robust and had an MTTF of 100 years 
at a channel temperature of 150°C. Figure 6.34 shows the photograph of the X-band 
10-W limiter/LNA.
Test Data
The limiter/LNA was tested on wafer using RF probes as well as by assembling die 
onto gold-plated CuW carriers for RF characterization. CuW material was chosen 
for good thermal conductivity and thermal expansion match to GaAs and alumina. 
The carrier 50-Ω input and output microstrip lines were printed on 15-mil thick 
alumina substrate. The 5-mil thick ICs were die attached using gold-tin (AuSn) sol-
der at 290°C on a pedestal in order to keep minimum bond wire lengths between 
the chip pads and the input and output microstrip lines. The estimated base plate 
temperature for power measurements was about 30°C. For comparison purposes, 
the simulated gain and NF are also shown in Figure 6.35. Typical measured perfor-
mance for the limiter/LNA circuit shows gain greater than 14 dB, NF < 2.7 dB, and 
Figure 6.34  Photograph of the 10-W limiter/LNA. Chip size is 14 mm2.

282
Limiters
return loss better than 20 dB over the 8.5- to 11.5-GHz frequency range. Typical 
measured output IP3 was about 30 dBm. The measured noise figure and gain for the 
packaged devices before and after exposure with a CW power level of +40 dBm for 
30 minutes were almost identical. The measured CW power handling was greater 
than 10 W. Another device was exposed to 40-dBm CW power signal for 30 min-
utes and tested before and after. Then the device was exposed at various increased 
power levels for 30 seconds and tested before and after. The measured data have 
shown that no catastrophic failures occurred up to 42.5-dBm (18-W) input power.
This concludes the step-by-step design example of an X-band integrated limiter/
LNA. The same procedure was applied to develop a C-band 50-W limiter/LNA. 
The limiter comprised of three stages and diodes were doubled. The MMIC was 
designed on a 3-mil-thick GaAs substrate. The measured noise figure and power 
handling were 2 dB and 50 W, respectively.
A 9–16 GHz monolithic limiter/LNA based on 0.2-μm gate InGaAs HEMT 
has also been reported [33]. Typical measured NF, gain, and survivability power 
level values were 2.1 dB, 12 dB, and 1 W, respectively.
6.5	
Other Diode Limiters
In addition to Si and GaAs PIN diodes and GaAs Schottky diodes, Si BiCMOS and 
GaN Schottky diodes have been used for limiters. BiCMOS and GaN limiters are 
briefly discussed next.
6.5.1	 BiCMOS Diode Limiter
Diode limiters were also developed for high power levels using standard 0.25-μm 
BiCMOS process [49]. Diodes used were of n-p junction base-collector type formed 
Figure 6.35  Typical measured and simulated gain and noise figure of the two-stage limiter/
LNA.

6.5	
Other Diode Limiters
283
from the bipolar transistor. Both S- and X-band limiter circuits used two stages 
and the total diode area for the X-band limiter was much smaller than the S-band. 
The S-band limiter has a chip area of 0.46 mm2, and the chip area for the X-band 
was smaller than 0.1 mm2. Typical measured insertion loss, peak pulsed power 
survivability (pulse width of 10 μs at 1 percent duty cycle), and flat leakage for the 
S-band limiter at 3 GHz were 1 dB, 600 W, and 18 dBm, respectively. The peak 
pulsed power survivability for the X-band limiter was about 60 W.
6.5.2	 GaN Schottky Diode Limiters
The operation of GaN Schottky diode limiters is the same as for GaAs Schottky 
diodes. A three-stage high-power GaN diode limiter was reported [65]. The circuit 
topology is shown in Figure 6.36. Here the input stage uses a stack of four antipar-
allel diodes to handle high input power levels, and the third stage reduces the flat 
leakage to 20–25 dBm. The inductors were used to absorb the device capacitance 
under small-signal condition to obtain negligible insertion loss. The measured CW 
threshold level, flat leakage, and power handling at 2 GHz were 13 dBm, 23 dBm, 
and 40 W, respectively.
In this chapter, a detailed treatment of PIN and Schottky diode limiters and 
integrated limiter circuits has been provided. The readers are referred to manufac-
ture’s catalogues [50–60] for commercial products on this subject.
References
[1]	
Lax, B., and K. J. Button, Microwave Ferrites and Ferrimagnetics, New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1962.
[2]	
Garver, R. V., and J. A. Rosado, “Broad-Band TEM Diode Limiting,” IRE Trans. Micro-
wave Theory and Tech., Vol. MTT-10, Sep. 1962, pp. 302–310.
[3]	
Leenov, D., “The Silicon PIN Diode as a Microwave Radar Protector at Megawatt Levels,” 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. ED-11, Feb. 1964, pp. 53–61.
[4]	
Brown, N. J., “Design Concepts for High-Power PIN Diode Limiting,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-15, Dec. 1967, pp. 732–742.
Figure 6.36  Configuration of a 40-W GaN Schottky diode 3-stage limiter.

284
Limiters
[5]	
Carter, J. L., and J. W. McGowan, “X-Band Ferrite-Varactor Limiter,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-17, April 1969, pp. 231–232.
[6]	
Chao, G., “A Matched Microwave Limiter,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 
MTT-18, May 1970, pp. 283–284.
[7]	
White, J. F., Semiconductor Control, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1977.
[8]	
Fukuda, S., et al., “A New Microwave Amplitude Limiter Using GaAs Field Effect Tran-
sistor,” IEEE MTT-S Microwave Symp. Digest, 1977, pp. 240–242.
[9]	
Garver, R. V., Microwave Diode Control Devices, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1978.
[10]	 Hamilton Jr., R. J., “Wide Band Dual-Gate GaAs FET Output Limiters,” IEEE MTT-S 
Microwave Symp. Digest, 1979, pp. 256–258.
[11]	 Hori, S., M. Kuroda, and K. Kanema, “High Power MIC Diode Limiters for S-Band and 
X-Band Radars,” IEEE MTT-S Microwave Symp. Digest, 1979, pp. 329–331.
[12]	 Hamilton Jr., R. J., et al., “Devices Vital to IFM Limiting Amplifiers,” Microwave Sys. 
News, Vol. 9, Sept. 1979, pp. 59–66.
[13]	 Zisserman, M., and Z. Turski, “Novel AGC Circuit Extends Limiter Performance,” Micro-
wave J., Vol. 24, Sept. 1981, pp. 65–70.
[14]	 Patel, S. D., and H. Goldie, “A 100kW Solid-State Coaxial Limiter for L-Band,” Micro-
wave J., Vol. 24, Dec. 1981, pp. 61–65.
[15]	 Goldie, H., and S. Patel, “An RF-Primed all-Halogen Gas Plasma Microwave High-Power 
Receiver Protector,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-30, Dec. 1982, pp. 
2177–2183.
[16]	 White, J. F., Microwave Semiconductor Engineering, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
1982.
[17]	 Adam, J. D., and S. N. Stitzer, “Frequency Selective Limiters for High Dynamic Range 
Microwave Receivers,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 41, Dec. 1983, pp. 
2227–2231.
[18]	 Crescenzi Jr., E. J. et al., “Wide-Band Limiting Amplifiers with Low Second Harmonic 
Distortion, Utilizing GaAs MMIC limiters,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Digest, 
1985, pp. 328–331.
[19]	 Bahl, I. J., E. L. Griffin, and E. R. Schineller, “GaAs Monolithic Limiting Amplifiers,” 
IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Dig., 1986, pp. 71–73.
[20]	 Bahl, I. J., E. L. Griffin, and E. R. Schineller, “Monolithic Limiting Amplifiers for EW 
Systems,” Microwave J., Vol. 30, Sept. 1987, pp. 205–209.
[21]	 Seymour, D. J., D. D. Heston, and R. E. Lehmann, “X-Band and Ka-Band Monolithic 
GaAs PIN Diode Variable Attenuation Limiters,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. 
Digest, 1988, pp. 255–258.
[22]	 Sharma, A. K., “Solid-State Control Devices: State of the Art,” Microwave Journal, State 
of the Art Reference, Vol. 32, Sept. 1989, pp. 95–112.
[23]	 Patel, S. D., et al., “Microstrip Plasma Limiter,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. 
Digest, 1989, pp. 879–882.
[24]	 Sahjani, P., and E. Higham, “PIN Diode Limiters Handle High-Power Input Signals,” 
Microwaves & RF, Vol. 29, Apr. 1990, pp. 195–199.
[25]	 Ozaki, J., et al., “C-Band GaAs MMIC Limiting Power Amplifier with Small insertion 
phase variation,” IEEE MTT-S, Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1991, pp. 331–334.
[26]	 McAdoo, J., et al., “A Terminal Protection Device for Gallium Arsenide MMIC Technol-
ogy,” GOMAC, 1991.
[27]	 Parra, T., et al., “Design of a Low Phase Distortion GaAs FET Power Limiter,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 39, June 1991, pp. 1059–1062.
[28]	 Higham, E., “Microwave PIN Diode Limiters,” Applied Microwave, Spring 1992, pp. 
88–93.

6.5	
Other Diode Limiters
285
[29]	 Vasile, C. F., “FET Adaptive Limiter with High Current FET Detector,” US Patent No. 
5,157,289, 1992.
[30]	 LaRue, R. A., et al., “Broadband Microwave and Millimeter-Wave 10 Watt CW Power 
Limiters,” 1993/1994 GOMAC.
[31]	 Parra, T., et al., “X-Band Low Phase Distortion MMIC Power Limiter,” IEEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. 41, May 1993, pp. 876–879.
[32]	 Ward, A. L., R. J. Tan, and R. Koul, “Spike Leakage of Thin Si PIN Limiters,” IEE Trans. 
Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 42, Oct. 1994, pp. 1879–1885.
[33]	 Huang, P., et al., “A 9–16 GHz Monolithic HEMT Low Noise Amplifier with Embedded 
Limiters,” IEEE Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Monolithic Circuits Symp. Dig., 1995, 
pp. 185–186.
[34]	 Nakamura, M., et al., “Over-30-GHz Limiting Amplifier IC’s with Small Phase Deviation 
for Optical Communication Systems,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 31, Aug. 1996, 
pp. 1091–1098.
[35]	 Trantanella, C., M. Pollman, and M. Shifrin, “An Investigation of GaAs MMIC High 
Power Limiters for Circuit Protection,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1997, 
pp. 535–538.
[36]	 Bogart Jr., T. F., “Limiters” in Electrical Engineering Handbook, Second Edition, R. C. 
Dorf, (ed.), Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997, pp. 140–147.
[37]	 Kaul, R., et al., “MMIC-Compatible Terminal Protection Device,” IEEE MTT-S Int. 
Microwave Symp. Dig., 1998, pp. 1679–1682.
[38]	 Kaul, R., “Microwave Limiters” in Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineering, J. G. Webster (ed.), Vol. 13, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 1999.
[39]	 Smith, D. G., D. D. Heston, and D. L. Allen, “Designing High-Power Limiter Circuits 
with GaAs PIN Diodes,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1999, pp. 329–332.
[40]	 Carroll, J. M., “Performance Comparison of Single and Dual Stage MMIC Limiters,” 
IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Digest, 2001, pp. 1341–1344.
[41]	 Smith, D. G., et al., “Designing Reliable High-Power Limiter Circuits with GaAs PIN 
Diodes,” IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 2002, pp. 1245–1247.
[42]	 Bahl, I., and P. Bhartia, Microwave Solid-state Circuit Design, Second Edition, Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley, 2003, Chap. 12.
[43]	 Bahl, I. J., “10W CW Broadband Balanced Limiter/LNA Fabricated Using MSAG MESFET 
Process,” Int. J. RF Microwave Comput.-Aided Eng., Vol.13, March 2003, pp. 118–127.
[44]	 Looney, J., D. Conway, and I. Bahl, “An Examination of Recovery Time of an Integrated 
Limiter/LNA,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, Vol. 5, March 2004, pp. 83–86.
[45]	 Kaul, R., “Microwave Limiters,” in Encyclopedia RF and Microwave Engineering, K. 
Chang (ed.), Vol.3, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2005, pp. 2792–2801.
[46]	 Bahl, I. J., Fundamental of RF and Microwave Transistor Amplifiers, Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2009.
[47]	 Yang, S.-S. et al., “A Novel Analysis of a Ku-Band Planar p-i-n Diode Limiter,” IEEE 
Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 57, June 2009, pp. 1447–1460.
[48]	 Givernaud, J., et al., “Microwave Power Limiting Devices Based on the Semiconductor-
Metal Transition in Vanadium-Dioxide Thin Films,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and 
Tech., Vol. 58, Sep. 2010, pp. 2352–2361. 
[49]	 van Wanum, M., and F. E. van Vliet, “A 58-dBm S-Band Limiter in Standard 0.25-mm 
BiCMOS Technology,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., Vol. 61, Aug. 2013, 
pp. 3034–3042.
[50]	 MACOM Coaxial Limiters, 2690–1013, 14 & 15.
[51]	 Application Note, 1959, Low Cost Surface Mount Power Limiters, Agilent Technologies, 
1999.

286
Limiters
[52]	 Application Note, 922, Applications of PIN Diodes, Agilent Technologies, 1999.
[53]	 Application Note, 957-1, Broadbanding the Shunt PIN Diode SPDT Switch, Agilent Tech-
nologies, 1996.
[54]	 Application Note, PIN Limiter Diodes in Receiver Protectors, Skyworks Solutions, 2008.
[55]	 Application Note, Design with PIN Diodes, Skyworks Solutions, 2009.
[56]	 Narda Limiters, Narda, Hauppauge, New York.
[57]	 Surface Mount PIN Diode Limiters, Aeroflex, Sunnyvale, California.
[58]	 Limiter Diodes, Microsemi, Lowell, Massachusetts.
[59]	 LML 221 Data Sheet, Litton Solid-state, Santa Clara, California.
[60]	 Pasternack, Irvine, California.
[61]	 Cooke, H. F., “Precise Technique Finds FET Thermal Resistance,” Microwaves & RF, 
Vol. 25, Aug. 1986, pp. 85–87. Correction of this paper in Microwaves & RF, Feb. 1987, 
p. 13.
[62]	 Bahl, I. J., “Ultra Broadband 10-W CW Integrated Limiter,” US Pattent # 7,724,484, May 
25, 2010.
[63]	 Bahl, I. J., et al., “Multifunction SAG Process for High-Yield, Low-Cost GaAs Microwave 
Integrated Circuits,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., Vol. MTT-38, Sept. 1990, 
pp. 1175–1182.
[64]	 Bahl, I. J., “Broadband and Compact Impedance Transformers for Microwave Circuits,” 
IEEE Microwave Magazine, Vol. 7, pp. 56–62, August 2006.
[65]	 Pantellini, A., et al., “Performance Assessment of GaN HEMT Technologies for Power 
Limiter and Switching,” European Microwave Integrated Circuits Conf. Dig., 2010, pp. 
45–58.

287
A p p e n d i x  A
Physical Constants and Frequency 
Band Designations
Permittivity of vacuum, ε0 = 8.854 × 10–12 ≅ (1/36π) × 10–9 F/m
Permeability of vacuum, μ0 = 4π × 10–7 H/m
Impedance of free space, η0 = 376.7 ≅ 120π Ω
Velocity of light, c = 2.998 × 108 m/s
Charge of electron, q = 1.602 × 10–19 C
Mass of electron, m = 9.107 × 10–31 kg
Mass of proton, M = 1.67 × 10–27 kg
Boltzmann’s constant, k = 1.380 × 10–23 J/K
Planck’s constant, h = 6.547 × 10–34 J-s
Conductivity of copper, σ = 5.8 × 107 S/m
Conductivity of gold, σ = 4.1 × 107 S/m
Table A.1  Lettered Radar Band Designations
Band Designator
Frequency Range
VHF
30–300 MHz
UHF
300–1000 MHz
L
1000–2000 MHz
μ wave
S
2000–4000 MHz
C
4000–8000 MHz
X
8000–12,500 MHz
Ku
12.5–18 GHz
K
18–26.5 GHz
Ka
26.5–40 GHz
Q
33–50 GHz
V
50–75 GHz
W
75–110 GHz


289
A p p e n d i x  B
Thermal Design of Devices
Both diodes and transistors have a maximum allowed operating channel/junction 
temperature, which if exceeded will reduce operating life to less than required. In 
addition, by operating at lower channel temperature the electrical performance will 
improve. The channel temperature is a function of both power dissipation and heat 
removal. Power dissipation, in general, in low-power switching devices is much lower 
than in high-power switching and limiting devices. Thus, in the design of power 
control components, it is very important to effectively take out the excessive heat 
generated in the device. The thermal design of control components is performed at 
two levels: active device and component assembly. A comprehensive treatment of 
thermal design is given in Chapter 16 of [1]. A brief description of thermal design 
tailored for control components is presented next.
Thermal modeling of semiconductor transistors can be performed by using 
numerical techniques based ANSYS Multiphysics software or by using simple ana-
lytic methods such as the Cooke model [2] to calculate the thermal resistance (Rth) 
for the transistor. Based on the device structure (active area, gate-gate pitch, unit 
gate width, and transistor size), the substrate properties, and the maximum chan-
nel temperature, the thermal resistance is calculated. The thermal resistance of the 
transistor or diode can also be calculated from the measurement of channel tem-
perature using the infrared (IR) technique, the liquid crystal technique, and the 
electrical characterization of the Schottky or pn-junction diode. Salient features of 
these methods are discussed in [1].
B.1	
Thermal Basics
Spreading or dissipation of heat occurs through conduction, convection, and radia-
tion. Since in solid-state devices, removal of heat is predominantly through conduc-
tion, devices must be mounted on good heat sinks to conduct the heat away. First 
consider that the chip/die thickness is small compared to its heat-generating surface 
dimensions. In this case, the heat flows in a vertical column from the top surface 
to the bottom surface, as shown in Figure B.1. The temperature difference between 
the top and bottom surfaces, ∆T, is approximately given by
	
∆T = Ts −Ta = PDh
KthA = r PDh
A 	
(B.1)

290
Thermal Design of Devices
where PD is the power dissipated, h is the die thickness, Kth is the thermal conduc-
tivity of the die/semiconductor material, ρ is the specific thermal resistance (= 1/
Kth), and A is the die area (A = W × L or πr2 in the case of a circular configuration). 
Here, Ts is the surface or channel (Tch) or junction temperature (Tj), and Ta is the 
ambient or room or heat sink temperature. Thus, for smaller values of ∆T, one needs 
thinner and larger chips with larger values of thermal conductivity. Table B.1 gives 
the thermal conductivities of several ceramics and semiconductors. The thermal 
conductivity of copper is also included for comparison. The thermal conductivity 
for most semiconductors is temperature dependent. The higher the temperature is, 
the lower will be its value.
Equation (B.1) may also be expressed as
	
∆T = PDRth °C	
(B.2)
where
	
Rth =
h
KthWL °C/W 	
(B.3)
and is defined as the thermal resistance analogous to the electrical resistance. When 
∆T is expressed in °C, the units of PD, h, A, and Kth are W, m, m2, and W/m °C, 
respectively, and Rth is expressed in °C/W. Units of h, A, and Kth may also be used 
as cm, cm2, and W/cm⋅°C, respectively.
Figure B.1  Device die with vertical heat flow configuration.
Table B.1  Typical Values for Thermal Conductivity of Ceramics and Semiconductors
Material
Dielectric Constant, εr
Kth(W/m · °C)
Alumina
10
37
AlN
8.8
230
BeO
6.6
250
GaAs
12.9
46
GaN
8.9
130
Si
11.7
145
SiC
9.7
350
Diamond
10
689
Copper
—
393

B.2	
Transistor Thermal Design
291
When the width of the heat-generating area of the die is comparable to the thick-
ness, the heat spreading occurs laterally as well as vertically, as shown in Figure B.2. 
As a first-order approximation, the heat flow from the surface may be considered to 
follow the rule of 45° thermal spreading angle as shown in Figure B.3. This means 
that the heat generated in the surface (assuming no other heat sources and heat flow 
is mainly due to conduction) flows down through the dielectric materials through 
expanding areas larger than the heat-generating surface as it approaches the ground 
plane, where the ground plane acts as a heat sink. In this case, heat spreading takes 
place on all four sides and (B.3) becomes
	
Rth =
h
Kth(W + 2h)(L + 2h) 	
(B.4)
In the case of PIN diode with radius r, the area in (B.4) becomes π(r + h)2.
B.2	
Transistor Thermal Design
The thermal design of multifinger transistors or diodes for high-power applications 
is as important as the electrical design. The parameters that most significantly affect 
the thermal resistance of the transistor are the substrate thickness, gate-to-gate 
separation, and effective gate length acting as a heat source.
B.2.1	 Cooke Model for Single-Gate Devices
Thermal modeling of semiconductor devices can be performed by using a simple 
analytic method such as the Cooke model [2]. The Cooke model uses the analogy 
between the heat flow and the electric field. In an FET, the heat source is primarily 
located in the channel under the gate. The thermal resistance of a single-finger FET 
(Figure B.3), Rth, is given as
	
Rth =
1
2KthWg
K(k)
K(k¢) 	
(B.5)
Figure B.2  Heat flow fields from a heat source.

292
Thermal Design of Devices
where Wg is the unit gate width, Kth is the thermal conductivity of the substrate 
material, and K is the complete elliptical integral of the first kind:
	
k = sech(πL′/4h)	
	
k′ = tanh(πL′/4h), L′ = effective gate length, h = die thickness	
A simplified expression for K(k)/K(k′) is given in [3].
B.2.2	 Cook Model for Multiple-Gate Devices
A multigate thermal model can be derived by treating heat flow in a multigate FET, 
shown in Figure B.4, as analogous to the capacitances of multiple coupled transmis-
sion lines. The expression for the thermal resistance is given by Cooke [2]:
	
Rth =
n /(ZKth)
p 2(n −1)
ln(M) −(n −2)
ln(P)
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
(°C/W) 	
(B.6)
	
P = 2
1 + sech pL¢
4h
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
1 −sech pL¢
4h
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
	
(B.7a)
Figure B.3  Heat flow fields in a single gate FET/HEMT.
Figure B.4  Multi-finger FET analogous to multiconductor microstrip.

B.2	
Transistor Thermal Design
293
	
M =
2 coshp S + L¢
4h
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟/ coshp S −L¢
4h
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1/2
+ 1
coshp S + L¢
4h
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟/ coshp S −L¢
4h
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1/2
−1
	
(B.7b)
where the thermal conductivity (Kth) of GaAs and SiC as a function of temperature 
are given by
	
Kth(T) = 1.08T–0.26(W/cm ⋅ °C)  GaAs	
(B.8a)
	
Kth(T) = 3.47
300
273 + T
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1.5
(W/cm ⋅°C)    SiC 	
(B.8b)
	
Kth(T) = 1.45
300
273 + T
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
1·3
(W/cm ⋅°C)    Si 	
(B.8c)
The parameters are defined as follows:
L′ = Effective gate length in microns
S = Gate-to-gate spacing or pitch in microns
h = GaAs thickness in microns
Z = Total gate periphery in cm
n = Number of gate fingers
T = Maximum channel temperature in °C
Thermal resistance of Schottky diodes was calculated using these equations 
for various diode dimensions and given in Table B.2. The other parameters are 
gate length = 2 μm, h = 125 μm, and GaAs substrate. Increasing the number of 
gate fingers increases the thermal resistance, and increasing the pitch decreases 
thermal resistance. Also the Rth value for a group of closely spaced heat sources is 
higher than the isolated heat source. The difference in the temperature, ∆T, from 
Table B.2  Thermal Resistance of Various Schottky Diodes on GaAs
Total  
Periphery (μm)
Number of  
Fingers
Pitch  
(μm)
Unit Finger  
Length (μm)
Rth (°C/W)
50
1
—
50
902
100
2
40
50
573
100
2
100
50
484
100
20
10
5
1558
100
20
30
5
864
200
20
10
10
780
200
20
30
10
432
400
20
10
20
390
400
20
30
20
217

294
Thermal Design of Devices
the bottom surface (carrier) to the top surface (channel) of the device is calculated 
using ∆T = Rth × PD, where PD is the net or total power dissipated in the device. For 
these calculations, the GaAs thermal conductivity is chosen based on the maximum 
allowed junction temperature of 150°C.
B.2.3	 Pulsed Operation
In many applications, including phased array radars, mobile communication, dis-
tance measuring equipment, portable-tactical-approaching guidance equipment, 
and pulsed-width modulators, the control components are used under pulsed opera-
tion. The design of such components under pulsed operation is very similar to CW 
operation except that the thermal requirements in CW operation are more stringent 
than in pulsed operation. Under pulsed operation, the electrical performance and 
reliability of solid-state devices are enhanced. Depending on the pulse width or 
length and the thermal time constant of the devices, the input power levels may be 
raised during pulsed operation without exceeding the device’s maximum junction 
or channel temperature, thus enhancing the reliability of the devices. When a device 
is subjected to pulsed operation, the channel temperature is given by
	
Tch = PDRth 1 −e−tp/t
⎢⎣
⎥⎦/ 1 −e−tr/t
⎢⎣
⎥⎦+ Ta 	
(B.9)
where τ is the thermal time constant, tp is the pulse width, and tr is the pulse repeti-
tion rate or duty cycle. The maximum channel temperature occurs while the pulse 
is on. When the pulse goes off, the die starts to cool down. If tr >> tp and tp << τ, 
the channel temperature becomes Ta.
For Rth = 10°C/W, τ = 1 ms, tp = 10μs, tr = 100 μs, Tch = 150°C, and Ta = 25°C, 
the maximum allowed pulsed power is given by
	
PD = Tch −Ta
Rth
1 −e−tr/t
1 −e−tp/t
⎧
⎨
⎩
⎫
⎬
⎭
= 125
10
1 −e−0.1
1 −e−0.01 = 12.5 0.1
0.01 = 125W
	
An approximate expression for the thermal time constant is given as
	
t =
2h
p
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
rC
Kth
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟	
(B.10)
where
h = die thickness
ρ = density of semiconductor
Kth = thermal conductivity
C = specific heat of semiconductor
Typical values of ρ, C, and ρC/Kth for GaAs, Si and SiC substrates are given in 
Table B.3.

B.2	
Transistor Thermal Design
295
B.2.4	 Component Assembly Thermal Design Considerations
When a PIN diode/MMIC control chip is bonded into a package or on a shim (pal-
let) or a carrier, several thermal resistance barriers may exist between the die and 
the final assembly used for testing or for the subsystem. These barriers may be a 
thin layer of die attachment solder or silver (Ag) filled epoxy; package base plate, 
carrier, or shim; air between the package or carrier and fixture; and the fixture’s 
base and heat sink. All these thermal barriers must be taken into account in the 
theoretical analysis of the device’s junction temperature. In some cases, the ∆T rise 
due to solder/package/fixture/heat sink may be higher than the ΔT due to the device/
die itself. Generally for high-power control components, the values of Rth and τ, and 
the suggested assembly steps are provided by the product manufacturers.
An MMIC/RFIC chip assembly using a heat sink is shown in Figure B.5. The 
power dissipated by an MMIC/RFIC is related to the device junction through air 
Table B.3  Typical Thermal Parameters of Commonly Used Semiconductor Substrates
Parameter
GaAs
Si
SiC
Unit
ρ
5.31
2.33
3.1
gm/cm3
C
0.35
0.7
0.75
W⋅s/g⋅°C
ρC/Kth
4.04
1.13
0.66
s/cm2
Figure B.5  An MMIC/RFIC assembly using a heat sink.
Figure B.6  Thermal equivalent model of an MMIC/RFIC assembly using a heat sink.

296
Thermal Design of Devices
or ambient temperature by the thermal resistances, as shown in Figure B.6, accord-
ing to the following equation:
	
PD =
Tch −Ta
RJC + RCS + RSA
	
(B.11)
where RJC, RCS, and RSA are the thermal resistances between the device junction–
case, case–heat sink, and heat sink–ambient, respectively. Power is measured in watts, 
temperature in °C, and thermal resistance in °C/W, and the ambient temperature 
usually is 25°C. RJC includes the GaAs or Si chip, die attach solder material, and 
case or carrier; RCS includes the package or fixture and silicon grease. Since the 
device carrier must make good thermal contact with the heat sink, silicon grease is 
generally used between the package or carrier and the heat sink to fill up the gaps, 
which reduces RCS by a factor of 2. From (B.11), the junction temperature is given by
	
Tch = (RJC + RCS + RSA)PD + Ta	
(B.12)
For given Tch, RJC, RCS, PD, and Ta, the smaller value of RSA becomes very impor-
tant in order to lower Tch. Thus, the design of the heat sink is critical in high-power 
circuits.
The power IC chips are generally soldered to carriers using 80-20 gold-tin pre-
forms, which are cut from sheets. The carrier material may be copper or CuW or 
CuMo. Copper has the best thermal conductivity, whereas CuW and CuMo have 
better thermal expansion coefficient match with GaAs and alumina. Generally, 
materials having better matched thermal expansion coefficients have lower thermal 
conductivity, but higher material, machining, and gold plating costs. All carriers 
or packages are plated with nickel and gold. In the case of copper carriers, one is 
limited to smaller chip sizes. Also, copper carriers need thicker nickel so that there 
are no cracks due to mismatch in the thermal expansion coefficients, and gold does 
not leach into copper at solder temperatures.
The thermal conductivity of commonly used gold-tin solder is 57 W/m ⋅ °C, 
whereas the thermal conductivity of silver epoxy materials Kidd AG-03HTL, Std 
Ablebond 84-1LMISR4 (∼Ablebond 8360), and Ablebond RP-316.1 are 300, 2.8, 
and 10 W/m ⋅ °C, respectively. Among these materials, Kidd AG-03HTL appears 
to be the best for packaging active devices or MMIC of RFIC chips.
References
[1]	
Bahl, I. J., Fundamental of RF and Microwave Transistor Amplifiers, Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2009, Chapters 16 and 21.
[2]	
Cooke, H. F., “Precise Technique Finds FET Thermal Resistance,” Microwaves RF, August 
1986. pp. 85–87. Correction of this paper in Microwaves RF, February 1987, p. 13.
[3]	
Garg, R., I. J. Bahl, and M. Bozzi, Microstrip Lines and Slotlines, Third Edition, Nor-
wood, MA: Artech House, 2013.

297
About the Author
Inder J. Bahl received his Ph.D. degree in electrical 
engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kanpur, India, in 1975. Dr. Bahl has more than 40 
years of experience working in the microwave field. 
Dr. Bahl researched and managed products including 
microwave and millimeter-wave integrated circuits, 
printed antennas, phased array antennas, millimeter 
wave antennas, and medical and industrial applications 
of microwaves. He joined the ITT Gallium Arsenide 
Technology Center in 1981 and launched numerous 
microwave and millimeter wave GaAs IC products 
for commercial and military applications. At Cobham 
(formerly ITT GTC/Tyco Electronics), he continued working on GaAs ICs as a 
Distinguished Fellow of Technology until he retired in 2010. Through his research 
publications and books, he is well recognized worldwide in the microwave field.
Dr. Bahl is the author or co-author of more than 160 research papers. He 
authored or co-authored 15 books and holds 17 patents. He is an IEEE Life Fellow 
and a member of the Electromagnetic Academy. 


299
Index
2–18 GHz Schottky diode limiter, 275
2- to 8-GHz phase shifters
defined, 174–75
input return loss, 177
insertion loss, 176
output return loss, 177
performance, 176
phase circuit fabrication, 175
photograph of, 175
relative phase shift, 176
4P4T switch, 106
4 × 4 switch matrix, 108–9
6- to 18-GHz 6-bit phase shifters, 
177–79
7- to 11-GHz 6-bit phase shifters, 
173–74
7- to 12-GHz 6-bit CMOS phase 
shifters, 179, 180
10-W limiter with embedded LNA
circuit fabrication, 281
defined, 278–79
gain and noise figure, 282
LNA design, 280
photograph of, 281
Schottky limiting diodes, 279–80
test data, 281–82
A
Active phase shifters, 190–97
characteristics of, 127, 190–91
configurations, 193
defined, 127
dual-gate FET, 191–92
phase and amplitude and variable gain 
relationship, 196
switchable-amplifier, 192
vector modulator, 192–97
All-pass networks (APN), 182–83
Amplifier-type phase shifters. See Active 
phase shifters
Analog phase shifters
characteristics of, 126
classification of, 126
CMOS, 170–71
defined, 123
varactor diode, 169–70
voltage-controlled reflection-type, 
165–66
voltage-controlled transmission-type, 
166–69
ANSYS Multiphysics software, 289
Attenuator pad, 214–15
Attenuators, 207–48
π type configuration, 210
balanced, 240–42
defined, 207
design considerations, 209
digitally controlled switched 
configurations, 208
digitally controlled switched-resistor 
configurations, 208
digitally controlled switched-scaled 
FET configuration, 208
distortion in, 245–48
fabrication of, 214
FET-embedded type, 209
fixed value, 214–15
frequency dependent, 242–44
introduction to, 207
multibit, 216–22
phase compensated, 244–45
reflection-type, 236–40
resistance values, 213
resistive networks for, 211
resistor values, 212
shunt only switching devices, 213
SPDT switch and resistor selection, 
209

300
Index
Attenuators (Cont.)
temperature variable (TVA), 215
theory of, 210–13
types of, 207–9
use of, 12
variable voltage, 222–36
voltage variable (VVAs), 209
Average power handling capability 
(APHC), 94
B
Balanced attenuators
configuration, 240
implementations, 241
with Wilkinson divider/combiner, 242
Biasing
distributed networks, 54
lumped L and C networks, 55
of PIN diodes, 50–58
of switching devices, 50–59
of transistors, 58
BiCMOS diode limiters, 282–83
Body floating techniques
double-well body-floating, 43
illustrated, 43
LC-tuned body-floating, 42
resistive body floating, 42
switched body-floating, 43–44
Bridged-T VVA, 236
Broadband 180° switched-network 
phase shifter, 149
Broadband CMOS phase shifters
7- to 12-GHz 6-bit, 179, 180
defined, 179
performance comparison, 180
Broadband distributed switched 
network attenuator, 219
Broadband high power limiters, 274–75
Broadband phase shifters, 171–80
C-Ku-band, 172
CMOS, 179–80
configurations, 172
four-bit comparison, 173
GaAs MESFET/HEMT, 173–79
multibit comparison, 173
overview of, 171–73
S/C-band, 172
six-bit comparison, 173
switched-line, 135–36
Broadband switches
configurations, 84
configuration using distributed tuned 
and nonreflective, 85
defined, 84
low-loss microstrip configuration, 85
MMIC SPDT, 99–101
performance, 84
C
Capacitances
channel, 28
drain-source, 28
parasitic, 28
Cleaning stage, 263
CMOS attenuator with integrated 
switch, 245
CMOS millimeter-wave phase shifters
Ku-band 4-bit, 189
overview of, 189
V-band 3-bit, 189–90
W-band 5-bit differential, 190, 191
CMOS phase shifters
analog, 170–71
broadband, 179–80
compact X-band 6-bit, 163–64
differential, 170–71
Ka-band 5-bit, 164–65
reflection-type, 170
transmission-type, 170
X-band 5-bit, 163
CMOS variable attenuator, 227–28
Compact X-band 6-bit CMOS phase 
shifters, 163–64
Complementary metal oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS)
4 × 4 switch matrix, 108–9
biasing of, 58–59
body floating techniques, 42–44
bulk transistor equivalent circuits, 44
control components, 1
low-powered chip, 13, 14
operation of switch, 40–41
switching speed of, 61–62
switch performance, 107–9
technology role, 4
transistor models, 44–45

Index
301
transmission-line integrated switch, 
107–8
traveling-wave switch, 107
Computer-aided design (CAD) tools
integrated, 6
microwave, 7
salient features of, 6
Control components
applications, 12–14
basic configurations of, 3
block diagram, 13
design of, 5–9
fabrication of, 9–11
history of, 1–2
passive elements, 8
timeline developments of, 2
types of, 2
Control devices
biasing of, 50–59
comparison of, 62
GaAs HBTs, 39
GaAs HEMTs, 36–38
GaAs MESFETs, 24–36
GaN HEMTs, 39–45
PIN diodes, 19–24
Schottky diodes, 46–48
switching speed, 59–62
thermal design, 289–95
transistor model scaling, 49–50
varactor diodes, 49
vertical heat flow configuration, 290
Cooke models
multiple-gate devices, 292–94
single-gate devices, 291–92
Coplanar waveguides (CPWs), 7
D
Differential phase shifters, 170–71
Digital phase shifters
defined, 123
reflection-type (RTPS), 124
topologies, 123–24
transmission-type (TTPS), 124
TTPS, 125
Distortion
in attenuators, 245–48
FET attenuators, 247–48
PIN diode attenuators, 246
Distributed biasing networks, 54
Diversity switch, 79–81
Double-well body-floating, 43
Dual-gate FET phase shifters, 191–92
E
Embedded-device phase shifters, 152–55
ABCD matrix, 152
configuration, 153
defined, 152
illustrated, 126
phase shift, 154
reflection and transmission 
coefficients, 153
F
FET amplifier limiters, 259
FET-based loaded-line phase shifters, 
140
FET switch limiters
defined, 258
improved version of, 258
schematic, 258
Filter-integrated switches, 110–11
Fixed value attenuators
attenuator pad, 214–15
temperature variable attenuator 
(TVA), 215
use of, 214
Flat leakage power, 255
Frequency band designations, 287
Frequency dependent attenuators
amplitude equalization circuits, 243
amplitude equalizer, 243
applications of, 242
defined, 242
gain compensation network, 243, 244
negative gain slope, 242
G
GaAs HBTs, 39
GaAs HEMTs
cross-sectional views, 36
defined, 36

302
Index
GaAs HEMTs (Cont.)
energy band diagram, 37
equivalent circuit models, 38
performance improvement, 37
signal switch models, 38
GaAs MESFET/HEMT broadband 
phase shifters
2- to 8-GHz, 174–77
6- to 18-GHz 6-bit, 177–79
7- to 11-GHz 6-bit, 173–74
overview of, 173
GaAs MESFETs, 4, 24–36
as bidirectional, 24
equivalent circuit models, 31
high-impedance state equivalent 
circuit model, 31
linear switch models, 26–32
model parameters, 23
nonlinear switch models, 33–36
operation of, 24–26
physical layouts, 25
scalable EC model, 32
switch configuration, 25
GaAs MMIC step attenuators
broadband distributed switched 
network, 219
performance, 220
schematic, 219
topology selection, 220
use of, 218
GaAs PIN diode limiters, 265–67
antiparallel configurations, 266
overview of, 265–66
schematics of, 267
single- and two-stage broadband, 
266–67
variable attenuation, 267
GaAs PIN diode switches, 97–98
GaN HEMT attenuator, 228–29
GaN HEMTs, 39–40
GaN HEMT switches, 92–93
GaN Schottky diode limiters, 283
GaN technology, 13
H
Heat flow fields, 291, 292
Heterojunction bipolar transistors 
(HBTs), 1
cross-sectional view, 39
defined, 39
GaAs, 39
Heterojunction field effect transistors 
(HFETs), 36
High electron mobility transistors 
(HEMTs)
4P4T switch, 106
attenuator, 228–29
biasing of, 58–59
defined, 36
device structure, 36
energy band diagram, 37
GaAs, 36–38
GaN, 5, 39–40
performance improvement, 37
phase shifters, 157–62
positive biasing schemes for, 59
SiC/Si GaN, 4
single positive power supply 
operation, 58–59
stacked series configuration, 102
switching speed of, 61–62
switch matrix, 105–6
switch performance, 101–6
traveling-wave switches, 103–5
High isolation switches
circuit configuration, 82
insertion loss, 83
techniques, 81
High-pass transmission line phase 
shifter, 168–69
High-power amplifiers (HPAs)
output power, 113
variable output power configuration, 
112
High-power switches, 86–94
configuration of T/R switch, 86
GaN HEMT, 92–93
impedance transformation technique, 
88–90
for low voltage applications, 87
maximum voltage limit, 86
PIN diodes, power handling, 93–94
resonant circuit technique, 91–92
stacked FETs method, 90–91
variation of minimum breakdown 
voltage, 89
Hybrid-coupled RTPS
analysis of, 129–33

Index
303
broadband performance, 131
configuration, 128
phase shift, 129–30
properties, 132–33
transmission phase, 129
I
Impedance transformation technique, 
88–90
Insertion loss
defined, 68
high isolation switches, 83
PIN diode limiters, 262–63
switched-network phase shifters, 181
in switch theory, 76
ultrawideband phase shifters, 181–82
Intermodulation distortion
analysis of switches, 113–15
defined, 68–69
MESFET switches, 114–15
PIN diode switches, 114
prediction, 113–14
Isolation
defined, 68
in switch theory, 76
K
Ka-band 5-bit CMOS phase shifters, 
164–65
Ku-band 4-bit CMOS phase shifters, 
189
L
LC-tuned body-floating, 42
Limiters, 253–83
BiCMOS diode, 282–83
broadband, electrical performance, 
264
characteristics of, 254–55
defined, 253
design of, 2
devices used for, 253–54
FET amplifier, 258–59
FET switch, 258
flat leakage power, 255
GaN Schottky diode, 283
ideal, 254
introduction to, 253–59
matched, 267–69
PIN diode, 256–57, 259–69
recovery time, 255
Schottky diode, 255, 269–75
technologies overview, 253
types of, 255–59
use of, 12, 254
varactor diode, 255–56
Limiting amplifiers
block diagram, 277
GaAs MMIC, 277–78
GaAs Schottky diode use, 276
limiter circuit technology, 276–77
six-stage, 277
use of, 276
Linear switch FET models
analytical, 26–30
capacitances, 28
equivalent circuit model parameter 
values, 32
inductance, 29–30
measurement-based, 26, 30–32
modeling methods, 26
ON and OFF state scalable equivalent 
circuits, 32
physical cross section, 26
physics-based, 26
resistances, 29, 30–31
Linear voltage variable attenuators
look-up table approach, 229–30
multi-FETs method, 230–31
multi-FET with voltage shift diodes, 
231–36
T-type, 231
Loaded-line phase shifters, 136–42
ABCD matrix, 138
admittances, 138
analysis of, 138–41
capacitive susceptance, 139
configuration for, 137
defined, 125
design of, 142
equivalent circuit representation, 137
equivalent transmission line, 138
FET-based, 140
inductance susceptance, 139

304
Index
Loaded-line phase shifters (Cont.)
main-line mounted circuit, 141–42
operation of, 136
phase difference, 137
PIN diode mounted, 140
stub-mounted, 142, 143
use of, 136
See also Phase shifters
Look-up table approach, 229–30
Low distortion switches
characteristics of, 94
shunt FET configuration, 95
SPDT configuration, 96
Low-noise amplifier (LNA)
10-W limiter with embedded, 278–82
design, 280
single-ended, 280
two-stage, 279, 280
Low-pass and high-pass switched-
network phase shifters
ABCD matrix, 143–44
configurations, 145
defined, 143
phase shift circuits for, 144
T-configuration, 145
transmission phase, 144
See also Phase shifters
Lumped element biasing circuit, 54–58
Lumped equivalent circuit models, 27
Lumped L and C biasing networks, 55
M
Matched limiters
bilateral configuration, 268
characteristics of, 267–68
unilateral configuration, 268, 269
See also Limiters
Matrix switches, 79
MESFET/HEMT millimeter-wave phase 
shifters
configurations, 188
as narrowband, 185
Q-band HEMT, 188
W-band HEMT, 188–89
MESFET/HEMT phase shifters
defined, 157
X-band HEMT MMIC 4-bit, 162
X/Ku-band MESFET MMIC 4-bit, 
157–62
MESFET variable attenuators
device mechanism, 224
dual and single positive, 226
schematics, 225
VVA networks, 224
Metal-insulator-metal (MIM) 
capacitors, 11
Metal oxide semiconductor field effect 
transistors (MOSFETs), 4
Metal semiconductor field effect 
transistor (MESFET)
biasing of, 58–59
bidirectional, 24
broadband MMIC SPDT switch, 
99–101
cross-section view, 4
equivalent circuit models, 31
GaAs, 4, 24–36
high-impedance state equivalent 
circuit model, 31
intermodulation distortion, 114–15
linear switch FET models, 26–32
nonlinear switch FET models, 33–36
operational, 24–26
phase shifters, 157–62
physical layouts, 25
positive biasing schemes for, 59
scalable EC model, 32
single positive power supply 
operation, 58–59
switch configuration, 25
switching speed of, 61–62
switch performance, 99–101
use of, 24
voltage-tolerant SPDT switch, 99
Microelectromechanical system 
(MEMS) devices, 2
Microstrip biasing circuit, 51–54
Microstrip lines, 7
Microwave integrated circuits (MICs),  
9
Millimeter-wave phase shifters, 185–90
CMOS, 189–90
MESFET/HEMT, 185–89
PIN/Schottky diode, 185
topologies, 185
Monolithic GaAs Schottky diode 
limiters
10-W, with embedded LNA, 278–82
defined, 275
limiting amplifiers, 276–78

Index
305
Monolithic microwave integrated 
circuits (MMICs), 1
assembly using heat sink, 295
defined, 9
design of, 7
fabrication technologies, 11
manufacturing of, 9
substrates, 10
Multibit attenuators
characteristics of, 216
GaAs MMIC step, 218–20
PIN diode step, 217–18
RMS error, 216
Si CMOS step, 220–22
See also Attenuators
Multibit phase shifters, 155–65
binary bit values, 155
CMOS, 163–65
MESFET/HEMT, 157–62
PIN diode, 156–57
RMS error, 155–56
See also Phase shifters
Multi-FETs VVA, 230–31
Multi-FET with voltage shift diodes
attenuator design, 236
defined, 231–32
series FET configurations, 234–35
series resistance comparison, 234
shunt FET bias configurations, 
235–36
variable gate bias voltage, 233
variations of FET cell gate voltage, 
234, 235
variations of FET resistance, 233
variations of series and shunt 
resistors, 232
Multioctave bandwidth phase shifters, 
184
Multiport switches
diversity, 79–81
matrix, 79
multithrow, 78
Multisection all-pass network based 
phase shifters, 184
Multithrow switches, 78
N
NMOS transistors
characteristics of, 41
cross-section, 5, 41
switching operations, 40
switching performance improvement, 
41
triple-well, equivalent circuits, 44
Nonlinear switch FET models
capacitance of varactors, 34
intermodulation distortion, 36
measured and simulated output 
power, 35
overview of, 33
parameter values, 35
parasitics, 34
representation, 33
reverse-bias breakdown, 34
Nonreflective switches, 71
N-type MOSFET (nMOSFET), 4
O
Organization, this book, 14–15
P
P1dB, 68
Passive component elements
illustrated, 7
overview of, 8
types of, 6
Peak power handling capability (PPHC), 
94
Phase-array antennas, 12
Phase compensated attenuators, 244–45
Phase shifters, 123–97
active, 127, 190–97
analog, 123, 126, 165–71
applications of, 12
broadband, 171–80
CMOS, 163–65
defined, 123
digital, 123–26
dual-gate FET, 191–92
embedded-device, 126, 152–55
loaded-line, 125, 136–42
MESFET/HEMT, 157–62
millimeter-wave, 185–90
multibit circuits, 155–65
multioctave bandwidth, 184

306
Index
Phase shifters (Cont.)
PIN diode, 156–57
reflection-type (RTPS), 124, 127–33
switchable-amplifier, 192
switched-line, 125, 133–36
switched-network, 125, 142–52
switched network 180° topology, 175
theory of, 127–55
two-port coupler configuration, 150
types of, 123–27
ultra-wideband, 180–85
vector modulator, 192–97
Physical constants, 287
PIN diode attenuators
distortion, 246
step, 217–18
variable, 229–36
See also Attenuators
PIN diode limiters
analysis of, 259–63
defined, 256–57
electrical performance, 264
GaAs, 265–67
i-layer carrier concentrations, 257
illustrated, 257
insertion loss, 262–63
leakage flat power, 261–62
limiter voltage and current, 260–61
matched, 267–69
schematics of, 259, 267
Si, in microstrip configuration, 
263–65
signal equivalent circuits, 262
spike leakage power, 261–62
three-stage, schematic, 265
two-stage, schematic, 264
See also Limiters
PIN diode phase shifters, 156–57
PIN diodes, 3, 20–24
biasing circuits, 52
biasing of, 50–58
digital multibit attenuators using, 217
equivalent circuit model, 22
GaAs, 23
GaAs switch performance, 97–98
generic biasing schemes, 51
geometries, 23
intermodulation distortion, 114
limiting and spike leakage 
characteristics, 264
low-impedance state, 21
lumped biasing circuit, 54–58
microstrip biasing circuit, 51–54
models, 21–22
nonlinear model, 24
operation of, 19–20
resistance, 20, 22
resistivity layer, 19
Si, 21–22, 23
SiGe HBT switch performance,  
98–99
specifications, 22
structure and conditions at zero bias, 
20
switching speed of, 59–61
use of, 19
PIN diode switches
performance, 96–99
power handling, 93–94
Si, 96–97
PIN/Schottky diode millimeter-wave 
phase shifters, 185
Pseudomorphic HEMT
defined, 36
device structure, 36
equivalent circuit model parameter 
values, 38
equivalent circuit models, 38
InGaAs layer, 37
signal switch models, 38
Pseudomorphic high electron mobility 
transistors (pHEMTs), 4
P-type MOSFET (pMOSFET), 4
Pulsed operation, 294–95
Q
Q-band HEMT MMIC phase shifter, 
188
R
Radio frequency integrated circuits 
(RFICs), 1
design of, 7
manufacturing of, 9
substrates, 10
Recessed-back FET, 45

Index
307
Reflection-type attenuators, 236–40
ABCD parameters, 238
configuration, 236
configuration illustration, 237
photograph of, 239
reflection coefficient, 240
two-port schematic representation, 
237
Y parameters, 238
Reflection-type phase shifters (RTPS), 
127–33
broadband performance, 131
CMOS, 170
concept, 127
configuration using Lange coupler and 
FET switches, 130
defined, 124
hybrid-coupled configuration, 128, 
129–33
illustrated, 125
major problem with, 133
one-port, 124
properties, 132–33
schematic of, 132
subnetworks, 128
transformation of reflection phase bit, 
128
voltage-controlled, 166–67
See also Phase shifters
Reflective switches, 70–71
Resistive body floating, 42
Resistors, attenuator, 212
Resonance, in switched-line phase 
shifters, 134–35
Resonant circuit technique, 91–92
RF and Microwave Transistor 
Amplifiers, 196–97
Root mean square (RMS) error
multibit attenuators, 216
multibit phase shifters, 155–56
S
Schiffman sections
switched-line phase shifters, 136
switched-network phase shifters, 148
Schottky diode limiters, 269–75
2-18 GHz, 275
analysis of, 271–73
antiparallel, 270
broadband high power, 274–75
circuit, 256
configuration, 272, 273–74
defined, 255
diode junction temperature, 273
GaN, 283
harmonic performance, 270
maximum power dissipation, 271
monolithic GaAs, 275–82
operation of, 269
schematic, 271, 272
shunt-series bridge-shunt, 277
three-stage, 274
ultra-broadband 10-W CW, 274
See also Limiters
Schottky diodes
defined, 46
equivalent circuits, 47
figure of merit, 48
junction capacitance, 48
lumped element model values, 48
parameters, 48
thermal resistance, 293
top and cross-sectional views, 47
Schottky limiting diodes, 279–80
Si CMOS step attenuators
attenuation range circuit, 220
family, 220
photograph of, 222
SiGe HBT PIN diode switches, 98–99
SiGe PIN diode-based MMIC multibit 
step attenuators, 217
Single-pole double-throw (SPDT) 
switches
broadband MMIC, 99–101
configurations, 74, 84, 85
defined, 2, 70
filter-integrated, 110–11
illustrated, 70
low distortion configuration, 96
nonreflective, 71, 73
performance comparison, 110
PIN diode, 98
realizations of, 73
redundant, 111, 112
reflective, 73
schematic of, 74
simulated insertion loss and isolation, 
74

308
Index
Single-pole double-throw (SPDT) 
switches (Cont.)
stacked series-HEMT configuration, 
102
traveling-wave, 104
voltage-tolerant, 99, 100
See also Switches
Single-pole N-throw (SPNT) switches, 
78
Single-pole single-throw (SPST) switches
defined, 70
illustrated, 70
realizations of, 72
schematics of, 75
See also Switches
Single-pole two-throw (SP2T) switches, 
77
Si PIN diode limiters, in microstrip 
configuration, 263–65
Si PIN diode switches, 96–97
Solid-state switching devices, 3–5
Solid-state transistors, categories of, 4
Squeezed-gate FET, 45
Stub-mounted loaded-line phase 
shifters, 142, 143
Switchable-amplifier phase shifters, 192
Switched body-floating, 43–44
Switched-line phase shifters, 133–36
broadband, 135–36
configurations, 133
constant delay time, 134
defined, 125
equivalent circuit, 134
phase shift circuits for, 144
resonance in, 134–35
Schiffman section, 136
See also Phase shifters
Switched microstrip networks, 146–48
Switched-network phase shifters
180° phase difference sections, 151
broadband, 149
configurations, 147
defined, 125
insertion loss, 181
low-pass and high-pass, 143–46
with low-pass/high-pass networks, 
125
microstrip networks, 146–48
with microstrip-slot transitions, 147
phase shift circuits for, 144
radial-stub loaded line, 147
with Schiffman sections, 148
stub-loaded line, 147
transmission phase response, 143
two-port coupler configuration, 150
ultra-broadband 180° phase shift, 
148–52
See also Phase shifters
Switched open-short circuited Lange 
couplers, 149
Switched variable power amplifier, 
111–13
Switches
broadband, 84–86
characteristics of, 68
configurations, 70
design of, 70–77
devices for, 69
filter-integrated, 110–11
high isolation, 81–84
high-power, 86–94
insertion loss, 68, 76
with integrated control, 113
intermodulation analysis of, 113–15
intermodulation distortion, 68–69
introduction to, 67–69
isolation, 68, 76
low distortion, 94–96
multiport, 78–81
nonreflective, 71
novel configurations, 110–13
P1dB, 68
parameters, 67–69
performance of, 96–110
redundant, 111
reflective, 70–71
technology comparison, 109–10
theory of, 75–77
traveling-wave, 103–5
types of, 70–72
wireless applications, requirements 
of, 69
See also Single-pole double-throw 
(SPDT) switches; Single-pole 
single-throw (SPST) switches
Switching devices
biasing of, 50–59
comparison of, 45, 62
qualitative comparison of devices, 62
Switching speed, 59–62

Index
309
experimental setup for measurement, 
60
of PIN diodes, 59–61
of transistors, 61–62
turn-off, 61
turn-on, 61
Switch matrix, 105–6
T
Temperature variable attenuator (TVA), 
215
Thermal conductivity, 290
Thermal design
basics, 289–91
component assembly considerations, 
295
Cooke model for multiple-gate 
devices, 292–94
Cooke model for single-gate devices, 
291–92
heat flow fields, 291, 292
overview of, 289
parameters, 291, 295
pulsed operation, 294–95
transistor, 291–95
Transistors
biasing of, 58–59
switching speed of, 61–62
See also specific transistors
Transistor scaling model, 49–50
Transistor thermal design
component assembly considerations, 
295
Cooke model for multiple-gate 
devices, 292–94
Cooke model for single-gate devices, 
291–92
parameters, 291
pulsed operation, 294–95
Transmission-line integrated switch, 
107–8
Transmission-type phase shifters (TTPS)
CMOS, 170
configurations, 124–25
defined, 124
illustrated configurations, 125
varactor-tuned, 167
voltage-controlled, 166–69
See also Phase shifters
Transmit/receive modules
C-band chip set, 14
chip set illustration, 13
phase shifters, 12
use example, 12
Traveling-wave switches
CMOS, 107
configurations, 103
defined, 103
equivalent circuits, 104
single-FET configuration, 105
See also Switches
Triple-gate FET, 46
Turn-off-time, 60
Turn-on switching speed, 61
Turn-on-time, 59
U
Ultra-broadband 10-W CW limiter, 274
Ultra-broadband 180° phase shift, 
148–52
Ultrawideband phase shifters, 180–85
all-pass networks (APN), 182–83
configurations, 182
defined, 180–81
insertion loss, 181–82
multioctave bandwidth, 184
photograph of, 184
See also Phase shifters
V
Varactor diode limiters
defined, 255–56
illustrated, 256
Varactor diode phase shifters, 169–70
Varactor diodes, 49
Varactor-tuned transmission-line phase 
shifters, 167
Variable voltage attenuators, 222–36
CMOS, 227–28
GaN HEMT, 228–29
linear, 229–36
MESFET, 224–26
PIN diode, 223–24
selection of, 222

310
Index
V-band 3-bit CMOS phase shifter, 
189–90
Vector modulator phase shifters
with baluns in the input, 194
concept of realization, 192
defined, 192
design and performance, 196
power splits and combiner levels, 196
schematic, 193
segmented dual-gate transistor, 194
variable gain amplifiers, 193
See also Phase shifters
Vertical heat flow configuration, 290
Voltage-controlled reflection-type phase 
shifters, 165–66
Voltage-controlled transmission-type 
phase shifters, 166–69
diode capacitance, 166
high-pass, 168–69
phase shift variation, 167–68
schematics of, 167
transmission line, 166
See also Phase shifters
Voltage-tolerant SPDT switch, 99, 100
Voltage-variable attenuators (VVAs)
active, 209
bridged-T configuration, 236
characteristics of, 222
CMOS, 227–28
configuration of, 227
defined, 222
design of, 222
GaN HEMT, 228–29
gate control voltage values, 230
MESFET, 224–26
passive, 209
PIN diode, 223–24
two-stage T-type, 229
See also Attenuators
W
W-band 5-bit CMOS differential phase 
shifter, 190, 191
W-band HEMT MMIC phase shifter, 
188–89
X
X-band 5-bit CMOS phase shifters, 163
X-band HEMT MMIC 4-bit phase 
shifter, 162
X/Ku-band MESFET MMIC 4-bit 
phase shifter
180° bit design, 158
on chip integrated digital control, 158
circuit fabrication, 158–59
defined, 157
input return loss, 161
insertion loss, 160
MLP MSAG process, 159
output return loss, 161
phase performance metrics, 161
photograph of, 159
relative phase response, 162
relative phase shift versus frequency 
phase state, 160
test data summary, 160–62

