©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 1 
 
 
 
 
A Social Training Lab Report 
 
  12 "Almost Magic" Topics That Keep 
a Conversation Going- and Spark 
Attraction in the Women You're 
Talking to… 
 
By Bobby Rio 
http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog 
 
 
 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 2 
 
 
12 topics for more fun, attractive, and "sexy" conversations 
with women… and how to skillfully introduce these topics into 
your conversations… 
 
 
I've been teaching men how to improve their conversation skills and learn to talk to 
women in an attractive way for several years now… and one question seems to keep 
coming up over and over again and over and over again… 
"What do I talk about?" 
Doesn't surprise you, does it? 
If you spent any amount of time in the dating world than it is highly likely that at some 
point you've experienced the frustration of running out of things to say, awkward 
silences, and struggling to find topics of conversation that are not flat out boring. 
I call this the "What do I Talk About" Syndrome. 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 3 
 
And it stems from the fact that most men have no clue what are good conversation 
topics to generate attraction in women. 
Sure, by now you probably realize that "interview mode" never leads to attraction.  
…But you're probably still wondering 'what the hell do I talk about to fill all that dead air 
with a woman- and what conversation topics will actually lead to her feeling attraction 
towards  me?" 
Conversation Ammunition  
Well, before I get into the actual topics… let's first talk about why it is so important to 
introduce the right topics into your conversations with women... 
I already mentioned "interview mode."  Interview mode usually stems from guys having 
no clue what to say next… so they revert to asking boring "fact based" questions about 
the woman's job, hometown, or family. 
"Do you have any siblings?"   
"Where did you go to college?" 
"What made you decide to be a nurse?" 
The main problem with these questions is that they are generic.  They don't separate 
you from the hundreds of other guys who have probably asked the same questions… 
nor do they ignite any emotions or feelings of attraction. 
Yet, because you don't know what topics to talk about… you continually let the woman 
lead you into this dead end trap of a conversation. 
Having a repertoire of topics that you can unleash at any moment allows you to remain 
in control of the conversation.  
If you read the "Gary Null Story" in my  The Small Talk Tactics report than you saw how I 
easily handed over control of the conversation to the woman- and was stuck talking 
about health food for the next hour. 
If you don't have the ammunition to keep a conversation flowing naturally towards 
YOUR OBJECTIVE… she will likely steer the conversation towards something "safe" and 
"boring."  (and you'll likely catch her giving one of your mates a hand job an hour later) 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 4 
 
But ultimately the most important reason to have pocket full of "sexy" topics you can 
whip out at any time is that it will provide you with a level of "conversational 
confidence" that will power you talk to a lot more women. 
The number one fear that holds most men back from approaching a woman they are 
interested in is the fear of awkward silences and running out of things to say…  And if 
you can inject your consciousness with a steady stream of topics… you'll be much more 
"quick witted" and this fear will eventually disappear… and you'll naturally find yourself 
talking to women wherever you are. 
What are the traits of good topics for conversation? 
Not all topics are created equal. 
And most will just bore her silly.   
She doesn’t want to hear about your job.  She doesn't care about 
how long you've lived in your current city.  And if one more guys 
asks her "Do you come hear often?" she will probably scream. 
So what are some traits of topics that she DOES want to talk 
about.  And more importantly… what are the traits of topics that 
will lead you to your desired outcome… ATTRACTION. 
There are six main traits that good topics possess: 
1.   A good topic should build rapport.  This means that the topic will allow you and the 
woman to relate to each other on some level.  It will give you an opportunity to build 
trust, and foster a connection with her.   Once a woman finds that you have some level 
of connection with her… she will let her guard down and be much more open to 
continuing the conversation. 
2.  A good topic should create an emotional state.  Most of us walk around in what I 
refer to as "a boredom trance."  The daily grind keeps us void of any real emotions.  So 
we hunger for emotions.  This is why the entertainment industry is a multi-billion dollar 
a year business.  It satisfies our craving for an emotional state.  If you choose topics that 
ignite these lost or repressed "positive" emotions, the woman you are talking to will be 
putty in your hands. 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 5 
 
3.  A good topic should make you three dimensional.   When a woman meets you she 
has trouble differentiating you from the hundreds of other hound dogs who have 
approached her over her life.  It is easier for her to group you in with all of them and 
reject you.   
This is why it is important that you immediately introduce topics that will create a 
unique identity for you.  It is even more powerful to add some contradictions to your 
identity.  (You are an  intellectual thinker- who also is an MMA fighter)  This will not only 
make you unpredictable… but it will allow her to imagine herself having fun with you in 
different types of scenarios. 
4. A good topic provides hooks to keep a conversation going.  Ultimately you want to 
get her to open up to you, express her emotions, and become invested in the 
conversation.  The best way to do this is provide hooks for you to chime in.  This means 
that a good topic acts as "bait" to hook her into becoming more emotionally involved in 
the conversation.   
5.  A good topic allows you to display your attractive qualities.   There are certain 
characteristics that women universally find attractive.  These characteristics include:  
pre-selected by other women, social proof, leader of men, worldly, passionate, fun, and 
adventurous.  The more of these characteristics the topic allows you to display – the 
better. 
6.  A good topic leads to sexuality.  If your goal is to create sexual attraction in a woman 
then ultimately you need to begin to build sexual tension.  And the topics of your 
conversation must allow you to do this.  This means that a good topic should be visceral; 
it should lend itself to touching, and should produce an undercurrent of sexuality.   
Based on these six criteria I'm sure some good conversation topics are beginning to pop 
into your head.   
But I'm going to make it even easier for you… 
I've come up with the 12 topics that best meet the six traits listed above.  These are 12 
conversation topics that you can inject into any conversation and immediately eliminate 
any boredom, fill awkward silences, and prevent yourself from stalling out- or running 
out of things to say. 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 6 
 
12 "Almost Magic" Topics That Keep a Conversation Going- and Spark Attraction in the 
Women You're Talking to… 
Here they are… 
1.  Glorified gossip 
Glorified gossip is where you tell the story of people you know and something that 
happened to one of them.   
This is the sort of thing PUA routines are based on.    
This is all about taking the "drama" of your friend's lives and turning into conversation.  
It is best to pick highly charged subjects that evoke strong opinions.   
Anything dealing with relationships, sex, weird twists… think "Jerry Springer."  The more 
twisted the better.   
I often tell the story of a friend who talked to a girl on the internet for almost a year on 
daily basis.  But every time they were supposed to meet something would come up.  
Later he found out that she was a bored housewife who actually lived thousands of 
miles away. 
2.  Unusual experiences 
Have you ever met someone famous or fascinating?   
Did something bazaar or intriguing ever happen to 
you or someone you know? 
When recounting the story do a steady mix of facts 
and emotions.  This means don't just recount 
events… get into the details of what you were 
thinking… how you were processing what was happening.   
How we react in certain situations reveals our true character.  So don't be afraid to let 
the woman into your thoughts. 
3.  Passions and interests 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 7 
 
As I said earlier… most people walk around in a "boredom trance" and never experience 
anything that even remotely resembles passion… So we crave it. 
And when we find someone who has genuine passion for something we are often awed 
by them. 
Passion also displays a level of certainty.  The fact that you are so passionate about 
something shows a woman that you have clear values.  It shows her that you can make 
up your own mind.  And it shows her that you have the confidence to make decisions. 
But beware… because so many of us lack passion in our lives- we feel threatened by 
other people's passion and often try to "shit test" them.  This means that a woman will 
often try to turn you against your passion to see if it is legitimate.  If you ever read The 
Fountainhead you know exactly what I mean. 
But don't let this stop you from discussing your passion.  Whether it is writing, art, 
music, movies, traveling, books, golf... 
4.  Early Struggles to get ahead 
People love stories of loss and redemption, home town boy makes good, and any sort of 
underdog story. 
These stories can include the time you beat up the town bully; or how you slept in your 
car for six days because you were dead broke...only to later get the job of your dreams; 
or your struggle with cold calling clients, moving to a new city, or your first time 
snowboarding. 
People are bored if you talk about what is currently happening to you or focus too much 
on yourself.  But if you have a story where you faced a big obstacle and overcame it- it 
will show the woman you're talking to that you are not the sort of guy who backs down 
from a challenge.  And will give her a chance to recount one of her past glories. 
>>> Watch latest videos and read latest articles at the new Make Small Talk Sexy blog. 
http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog 
 
 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 8 
 
5.  Early years and childhood 
Our childhood is a special place for all of us.   
Yet, we very rarely get a chance to talk about it.  When we do- it opens up a flood gate 
of emotions.   
 If something stands out vividly in your mind years after it happened it will probably be 
interesting to the person you're talking to. 
I went to a nightmare of a sleep-a-way camp when I was young… and can still capture 
the attention of a room recounting the horrors of that experience. 
You also want to ask her questions that will get her recounting her childhood 
experiences. 
Not only does talking about our childhood years bring out emotions many of us having 
felt in awhile… it also is a refreshing change of pace from our current reality. 
6.  Current pop culture 
This is sort of a "go to" topic.   It beats the weather, or 
"interview style" questions but should only be using sparingly to 
fill dead air or as a way to find hooks. 
It's best to ask her opinion on something like "Would you ever 
date The Situation from the Jersey Shore."   
You can also inject pop culture references into your conversation to create a sense of 
rapport.   
7.  Travel 
People love to talk about travel.   
They key here is to let her talk. Don't feel the need to jump in immediately and tell your 
stories or brag about where you've been.  Instead use it as an opportunity to dig deeper 
into her interests, desires, and passions, and world views. 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 9 
 
And have a couple your own "travel stories" ready.  Instead of just giving a laundry list of 
places you've been to… have one or two memorable stories from one of your recent 
adventures. (The more exotic the location the better) 
Travel is an attraction trigger.  Women are naturally attracted to men who travel a lot.  
It makes them seem worldly and slightly out of reach. 
8. Lessons you've learned 
Do you have any valuable anecdotes where you learned a good lesson?   
We all like to learn from the experiences of others.  
Since the object of your conversation is to create attraction it is best to tell the 
anecdotes in an amusing way.   
I often tell the story of a boss who used to ride me hard at work.  He gave me a lot of 
shit.  I recount some of the humorous (and exaggerated) accounts of what he would do 
to make my life miserable.  Later that same boss wound up recommending me for a 
promotion… and I realized he was testing me to see if I had what it takes.  I usually 
segue way into how women "shit test" men for the same reason. 
9.  Future ambitions 
It is best to use a story of your future ambitions to root a question or statement that will 
get her talking about hers. 
When a woman shares her future ambitions with you it somehow connects you to her.  
It is like she is letting giving you a little glimpse of her soul… and now that you've seen it- 
you share a bond with her. 
It is important to point out that anytime a woman is sharing her future ambition with 
you NEVER belittle her or crack jokes about it.  For many of us, no one ever gives us the 
opportunity to talk about our future goals and it is a really big deal for us. 
10.  Observations about her 
We all love to hear observations about us by people who don’t really know us.  

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 10 
 
 You can do this by cold reading her or just flat out telling her how she comes across.  
This usually opens up Pandora's Box and an entire conversation worth of material comes 
spilling out. 
This is a great "conversation steroid." 
This means that no matter what topic the two of you are discussing you can always 
insert your observation of her into it. 
For instance, if she is telling you about her recent trip to Africa… you can say "Wow.  
When I first started talking to you – you sort of gave off a really "princess" like vibe… its 
cool to see that you are not afraid to get a little wild and adventurous." 
Can you see how a statement like that will open up Pandora's Box? 
11.  Observations about your surroundings 
When talking to a woman it is usually fun to spend some time people watching.  This 
means you cold read the people around you… or even create "imaginary lives" for them. 
In order to use this effectively you need to become "quick witted" and get good at 
spotting humorous or ironic things. 
For instance, if you catch an older man with a really attractive younger date… you could 
say "Is he rich or is she a working girl?"   
Or you could turn it into a story and say something like "She moved out here to NY to 
become a model… but too much partying left her ass a little bigger than the agencies 
liked.. she thought about going back home to Tennessee… but that would be too 
embarrassing… so she convinced herself she is in love with Old Man Clementine over 
here…" 
12.  Music 
Bonding over a shared interest in music is a classic way to build rapport 
with someone.  This is especially true if you both like obscure bands or 
styles of music. 
But music can be an equally good topic of discussion even if you don't 
share similar tastes. 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 11 
 
This is because it opens up an ample opportunity for some cold reading.  Have you 
noticed that people who like certain types of music share certain outlooks on life? 
Certain commonalities? 
Tell her about.   
You can even use this as a way to start cold reading her. 
So, there are the twelve best topics of conversation for talking to women. 
Tips for implanting 
Once you know what sort of topics make for best conversations with women… it is time 
to start introducing them into your conversations. 
The best way to do this is through a technique I call "rooting." 
"Rooting" means you say something that plants the seed of what you are about to say 
next." 
For instance, if you want to begin talking about "early childhood memories" you could 
say something like: 
"You totally have this way about you that reminds me of my third grade teacher Mrs. 
Robbins.  Haha… I remember one time in that class…" 
See how you easily began talking about "early childhood memories" by simply rooting it 
by telling her she reminds you of your third grade teacher. 
Create a story folder 
 One of the best suggestions I can give you is create a folder on your computer titled 
"stories."  And whenever you recount a story that would fit into any of these topics 
discussed in this article- file it away. 
You can them pull the stories out and fine tune the details.  Add things that make the 
story funnier or more dramatic.  Don't be afraid to exaggerate.  She expects that you're 
probably exaggerating a bit anyway. 
Mix and Match four stories 

©2010- Bobby Rio           Visit:  http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog for latest videos and articles        Page 12 
 
The best way for you to begin remembering to begin telling stories and statements 
based off of the topics in this article is to begin by choosing four. 
Pick the four topics that resonate the most with you, and create four stories that will 
allow you to introduce the topic into the conversation. 
These will be your four "practice" topics so don't be discouraged if you mess up the 
story or if you begin to feel like you're repeating yourself. 
Once you get comfortable focusing on four topics- then you can begin to focus on some 
of the other topics I've outlined here. 
If you follow this advice and focus on keeping your conversations focused on the 
previous 12 topics you'll quickly find that your conversations begin to sparkle with more 
attraction, fun, and sexuality. 
>>> Watch latest videos and read latest articles at the new Make Small Talk Sexy blog. 
http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/blog 
 
And if you having trouble making women laugh or creating a fun and exciting mood in a 
woman watch this video: 
http://www.makesmalltaksexy.com/makeagirllaugh.html 
 
Enjoy, 
Bobby Rio 
 
 
 

