	  
 
 
 
Conversational Hypnosis Mastery	  
	  
	  
Transcript	  Manual	  –	  Part	  1	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
By	  Igor	  Ledochowski	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
©Street	  Hypnosis	  	  	  All	  Rights	  Reserved	  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
2 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Contents	  
 
DVD 1:  Conversational Hypnosis, Conversational Inductions & Instant Inductions........4	  
DVD 2:  Conversational Hypnosis Mastery Principles....................................................32	  
DVD 3:  Conversational Hypnosis Language Foundations ............................................66	  
DVD 4:  The Power of “Hypnotic Circles”.......................................................................93	  
DVD 5:  How to Read Other People like an Open Book ..............................................111	  
DVD 6:  Hypnotic Rapport & New “Magnetic Charisma” Techniques ..........................144	  
DVD 7:  Revivification & How to Lead any Conversation to Get Your Desired Results
......................................................................................................................................176	  
DVD 8:  How to Take Control of any Conversation Without Anyone Knowing What You 
Have Done....................................................................................................................216	  
DVD 9:  How to Isolate the Conscious Mind & Access the Unconscious Mind Directly
......................................................................................................................................242	  
DVD 10:  Secrets to Naturally Using Conversational Hypnosis in Normal Conversations 
without Sounding Weird................................................................................................266	  
DVD 11:  The Surefire Irresistible Induction & how to Powerfully use “Magic Moments”
......................................................................................................................................286	  
DVD 12:  Strategic Conversational Hypnosis & How to Use the “Dream Machine” for 
Maximum Effect............................................................................................................314	  
DVD 13:  Frames, Re-Frames & Unstoppable Frame Control.....................................337	  
DVD 14:  Super Persuasion - How to Lock People into Your Frame and Make Them 
Feel Good at the Same Time .......................................................................................363	  
DVD 15:  The 16 Hot Button “Super Drivers” that Force People to Act and How to Push 
Them ............................................................................................................................383	  
DVD 16:  How to Get Even More Leverage so People Feel Compelled to Follow Your 
Suggestions..................................................................................................................403	  
DVD 17:  How to “Reboot” any Stubborn Mind with the Objection Destroyer Method .431	  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
3 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 18:  Simple Hypnotic Persuasion Tactics You Can Easily Slip into Any 
Conversation ................................................................................................................463	  
DVD 19:  Persuasion Principles & Foundation Strategies to Weave into Your Master 
Plan for Hypnotic Influence...........................................................................................484	  
DVD 20:  How to Covertly Hijack Other People’s Conversations and Take them in the 
Direction You Want Them to Go...................................................................................506	  
DVD 21:  Getting Agreements, Getting Favors & Getting Sales – How to “Close” 
Absolutely Anybody......................................................................................................529	  
DVD 22:  The I.G.O.R. Method – How to Destroy Resistance to Your Influence for 
Guaranteed Results......................................................................................................550	  
 
 
The Conversational Hypnosis Mastery Seminar is the sole property of Street Hypnosis Publishing 
(including, but not limited to text, content, graphics, video and audio) and is protected by copyright as 
a collective work or compilation under U.S. copyright and other laws. You must abide by all additional 
copyright notices or restrictions contained in this law. 
YOU MAY NOT POST ON A WEB SITE OR CREATE A WEB FRAME AROUND ANY PART OF THIS SERVICE 
(INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, TEXT, CONTENT, PHOTOGRAPHS, VIDEO AND AUDIO). 
YOU MAY NOT COPY, REPRODUCE, DISTRIBUTE, PUBLISH, DISPLAY, PERFORM, MODIFY, CREATE 
DERIVATIVE WORKS, TRANSMIT, OR IN ANY WAY EXPLOIT ANY PART OF THIS SERVICE, EXCEPT 
THAT YOU MAY DOWNLOAD MATERIAL FROM THIS SERVICE FOR YOUR OWN PERSONAL, 
NONCOMMERCIAL USE AS FOLLOWS: YOU MAY MAKE ONE MACHINE READABLE COPY AND/OR ONE 
PRINT COPY THAT IS LIMITED TO OCCASIONAL ARTICLES OF PERSONAL INTEREST ONLY. 
WITHOUT LIMITING THE GENERALITY OF THE FOREGOING, YOU MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE ANY PART OF 
THIS SERVICE OVER ANY NETWORK, INCLUDING A LOCAL AREA NETWORK, NOR SELL NOR OFFER IT 
FOR SALE. IN ADDITION, THESE FILES MAY NOT BE USED TO CONSTRUCT ANY KIND OF DATABASE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
4 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 1:  Conversational Hypnosis,                 
Conversational Inductions & Instant 
Inductions 
 
Igor: 
Look at all these bright breezy faces. Good morning everyone. 
 
Audience: 
Good morning. 
 
Igor: 
How are we all doing? Is anyone excited? This is the whole stage 
hypnosis group, what’s going on here? 
 
 
We had a stage hypnosis training this year in Vegas and I see a whole 
bunch of you in the room and I’m a little scared now. Someone might take 
over the stage. 
 
 
It is dangerous when there are hypnotists in the room when I’m actually 
teaching. At the Vegas event during one of the exercises one of the guys 
comes up and his personal suggestion is to go up and try to hypnotize the 
trainer, so I’m going like this and he’s going like this and we’re both going 
into trance, it was very embarrassing. 
 
 
It sounds like we’re onto a rock and roll start already. Let me formally say 
welcome to everyone. Welcome to – what town are we in today? I think 
we’re in Los Angeles, right? 
 
 
This is a great place to do what we’re about to do over the next few days. 
Why? L.A. is kind of a social place, people like the whole connecting and 
networking, they never know who is going to be able to help them and 
how – my point is it’s a very social city and the things that we’ll be doing 
here are very social skills. Does that make sense? 
 
 
There are a couple of expectations I want you all to take with you. First, 
the stuff we’re doing here should be practical. You should be able to do it 
in public without embarrassment, and without getting caught. 
 
 
If you do any hypno-weirdness like and now, when, are you, sleeping 
deeply…whilst they’re writing out a ticket for your car, I will disavow any 
knowledge of you, exactly. 
 
 
What we’re looking for here is – the elegance in conversational hypnosis 
comes in its subtlety. The problem with subtlety is if you’re too subtle, 
nobody gets it, right? If you’re unsubtle, then everyone gets it and they 
don’t like. It’s a question of finding that perfect balance in between. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
5 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The beautiful thing is every one of you knows how to do this already, 
because you’ve had at least one conversation in which it’s worked. You’ve 
had at least one conversation where you felt yourself clicking and 
connecting with another person, have you not? Where it seemed like 
everyone else in the room drifted away, you had your private bubble and 
you talked about whatever it is you talked about. 
 
 
Has everyone had at least one conversation like that? 
 
Audience: 
Once. 
 
Igor: 
You have the capacity, you can recognize it when it happens, and you’ve 
done it before. The point of this training is not necessarily to teach you 
anything new as such, which is kind of weird because you paid a lot of 
money to be here, it’s more to get you back to that place consistently 
whereas in the past you may have gotten there accidentally. Does that 
make sense to you all? 
 
 
I had a chat with a whole bunch of you earlier on, as you were registering 
and a question that comes up a lot is this. Finally, why did it take you three 
years, four years to go and put on this course? 
 
 
The answer is very simple. There are a couple reasons. Number one, The 
Power of Conversational Hypnosis home study course was what launched 
Street Hypnosis, it’s what made us famous, it’s our flagship course, it’s still 
our best selling course. I’ve wanted to teach this course, believe it or not, 
really from the first day. 
 
 
The problem we had was number one it’s a 10-day course. I didn’t want to 
just give you a two day bit. I tried recently to teach the essence of 
Conversational Hypnosis in one day, and I just blew a lot of fuses. There 
are a lot of little bits that have to get involved, otherwise people go the 
inelegant route which is obvious and crass, or they become ineffective and 
either way it is not very useful. 
 
 
I needed extra time to get you to the point where you can do this stuff 
subtly, and it’s easier, it’s natural enough to do it that way. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
That means we needed some momentum. There are a lot of people in the 
room and we need a certain amount of people because you need to talk to 
different kinds of people. If you only have three people to work with, you’re 
going to get very used to a certain style and that’s not very useful to you. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
6 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The other reason is we’ve already got the home study course, and I 
thought – what’s the point of doing it all over again? Just listen to the 
tapes. What’s wrong with you? Just listen to the tapes, its fine. 
 
 
What I wanted to do is teach similar material, there’s going to be a whole 
bunch of new stuff we’re going to do here as well, but teach similar 
material in a very different way. How many of you, just out of curiosity, 
have the home study course already, the Power of Conversational 
Hypnosis? 
 
 
That’s most of you, that’s good. I don’t want to necessarily bore you and 
say here’s tape one, I’ll press play and come back in an hour, okay? 
Everyone got that? Okay here’s tape two, I’ll come back in another hour. 
 
 
That would be quite pointless and you’d probably feel cheated, and rightly 
so if that’s what we did. I want to teach the same core ideas, principles, in 
a very different way. Sometimes it won’t even look like the same thing. 
 
 
In that way, by getting different angles on the same concept, you’ll begin 
to understand it more clearly. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
Even if you’ve listened to it thoroughly, hopefully you’ll see, "Oh I 
recognize this, but it’s not the way I did it or it’s not the way I’ve seen it or 
thought about it before." That’s kind of my aim for you over the next few 
days. 
 
 
The final thing we want to be doing here is this is a Conversational 
Hypnosis mastery course. For me, mastery is all about being able to do 
stuff, not talk about stuff. I’m going to strip out as much of the theory as I 
can and I’m going to give you enough to get your intellects engaged and 
doing the right things and getting the results. 
 
 
In other words, this is all about what you do, it’s how you behave, it’s how 
you apply the skills and if you want to have more theories or more insights 
into some of the ideas that we start developing here and take it further, 
that’s really what the audio CDs are for. They’ll be compliments to each 
other. 
 
 
I don’t want to waste your time talking about ideas here that we won’t 
necessarily put into practice. I’d rather give you a foundation so that when 
you hear another idea you say, "Oh I get it, I can adapt what I can already 
do and add that piece in there too." Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
That way it’s much more useful to you, it’s a way of you taking these skills 
and actually using them and then having this other stuff around the edges 
you can add, kind of like for kids. I think Pokémon is the big thing, you can 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
7 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
add bits on top of each other. You have your base onto which you add 
whatever you want. You can take it whatever direction you want to take it. 
Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
There are a couple of expectations I’d like you all to have over the course 
of our 10 days together. The first one is, this is not therapy training. I mean 
that on both senses of the word. This is not necessarily an opportunity for 
you all to say I’ve had a really terrible childhood please help me. 
 
 
This is not an opportunity for free therapy, that’s not what we’re doing 
here. You can expect a lot of personal change to occur, it’s just the nature 
of what we do, but it’s not necessarily that I’m going to sit up here and say, 
"Let me show you how great I fix people." Because that’s not the purpose 
of what we’re doing here. 
 
 
On the flip side, this is also not hypnotherapy training. How many people 
here are hypnotherapists? Excellent, a nice mix. I teach hypnotherapy, I 
love hypnotherapy, I think it’s a fantastic force of good in the world and 
what you learn here will help enhance whatever you do anyway, in terms 
of your natural practice. 
 
 
We’re not certifying hypnotherapists here because that requires a specific 
skill, a specific focus, and certain ideas and concepts we won’t be 
touching on just because it would be beyond the scope of what we’re 
doing here. 
 
 
We could have this for six months and just get it all done, but I don’t think 
most of you have six months to just sit down in a room in L.A., no matter 
how nice it is, and do that. Does that make sense? 
 
 
If you have some questions about how to apply a particular idea or 
principle or something you’ve just done to hypnotherapy, if I can give you 
a quick answer I will happily do so, so feel free to ask it. If it’s more 
complex, is it okay if I just tell you that’s more complex, perhaps come to 
me on a break and I’ll do my best to elaborate on it, but it’s really beyond 
the scope of what we’re doing here. 
 
 
Is that okay with you all? Is that fair? That way we can keep rolling, 
because believe it or not I have a lot of stuff I want to put into the next 10 
days and I’d rather not keep any of it out. 
 
 
The other side in terms of what we’re doing here, everyone here is an 
adult, right? We have no toddlers in the room, or at least people with the 
emotional maturity of a five year old? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
8 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The reason I say this is this is an all adult learning environment and you all 
do what you need to do to get the best out of this training. My job is to 
facilitate that, to make it as easy as possible to answer your questions, 
prepare experiences for you, and put them together in such a way that it 
all makes sense at the end of the day, or actually not necessarily at the 
end of the day sometimes it’ll be a few days before it makes sense. 
 
 
In terms of how you get the most out of it, that’s really something that you 
know in terms of personal style. Are you a note taker? Take notes. Are 
you more into absorbing the moment? By all means, absorb the moment. 
 
 
If you need to go to the back of the room and have a stretch because 
you’ve been sitting down too long, by all means, get up and stretch. If you 
need to get up and get a glass of water there’s lots of water in the back of 
the room, help yourself. 
 
 
If you want to buy any product fine, knock yourself out. Go to the back of 
the room, beat the rush. The point here is, do what you need to do to 
make this the best learning environment for yourselves. Does that make 
sense? But please do it in a way that’s respectful of other people. 
 
 
If your best way of learning is to stand up here on stage and talk to 
everyone then it’s going to be like hello, that’s very nice of you, but can I 
teach now? We need to make sure we don’t necessarily interfere with 
other people’s learning styles as well. I think it’s pretty straightforward that 
way. 
 
 
Take care of yourselves, do what you need to do, please don’t be shy 
about it. I quite like having people just hang around the back, having a 
drink – I’m very relaxed about those sorts of things. As long as you’re 
respectful of other people, come in and go out quietly if you need to go 
out, you don’t suddenly get on your cell phone and start shouting at the 
back of the room, that sort of thing. 
 
 
Speaking of cell phones, does anyone have one of these weird and 
strange futuristic gadgets? Can I ask you even if you’ve already turned it 
off to pull it out and check it, look at it and push buttons to check what 
status it’s in? Sometimes our minds have this way of telling us something 
has happened that hasn’t. It makes the training much easier, airplane 
mode is good. 
 
 
Some people’s learning styles – they like to have a manual they can flip 
through and look at and so on – this is a very cutting edge course in the 
sense that I’ve rearranged all the things and put them in a different order 
and so on, the hard part is there is no manual as of yet. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
9 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What you will have is, by the end of the week, I’m going to give you my 
lecture notes, in other words the very things I use to keep myself on track 
as to what I’m going to teach you. They are basic notes. They should 
remind you of the highlighted experiences you’ve had. 
 
 
If you really like an exercise or an idea really strikes you that you want to 
remember it and so on, I strongly encourage you to write it down. Notes 
might be enough for you when you get them, and you might as well 
capture it on your own as well. 
 
 
If you haven’t brought anything to write with we have pens and paper at 
the back there. We’ve got lots of pads, got lots of pens so there’s lots of 
resources there for you all, there’s no reason you should miss out on 
anything. 
 
 
Is everyone cool with the general learning and training environment thing?  
 
 
Trainings will start at 9:00 am. each day, so I almost, always recommend 
people turn up early, half past 8:00 and so on. The doors usually open 
around quarter to 9:00 or something like that. 
 
 
I strongly recommend that you take your skills and you practice with the 
people in this group. Even if the doors are closed you’ll notice we have a 
nice foyer outside with nice comfy seats and sofas and so on, you can 
grab your coffee and sit there, chat, have a conversation – need I say 
more? 
 
 
It’s a great opportunity for you all to get warmed up into the spirit of what 
we’re doing here. Use your time here as best you can. If I was in your 
shoes then I would take every moment that I have here and invest it in 
increasing my skills. The more you do that the easier the next set of skills 
comes, and we’re going to do a lot of layering here. 
 
 
Conversational Hypnosis can look complex, because there are lots of little 
things that you do, but let’s put it this way. Does anyone here walk down 
the street? Have you ever walked down the street? Is that something 
you’re physically capable of? 
 
 
Do you have any idea how complex that is as an act? If anyone here has 
a question – sometimes that happens – does anyone have a friend in 
robotics? If anyone has a friend in robotics or you can go to You Tube and 
find out, it is incredibly difficult to create a robot that walks because there 
are a lot of things going on, and yet you do it without thinking about it. 
 
 
We want to make sure that each individual skill in Conversational 
Hypnosis becomes as automatic as the skills that you require for walking; 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
10 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the balancing point, the different muscle groups that are being engaged, 
the counter engagement, the vision – all those things get pulled in 
together to something that’s automatic to you now. 
 
 
 
Conversational Hypnosis will become automatic to you when all the pieces 
it’s made out of have been practiced to the point you don’t have to think 
about them anymore. Does that make sense? 
 
 
If you want to leave as a true master, and then take the time you’ll have 
here to re-practice the skills so they are automatic. Otherwise you can 
leave as an apprentice master that just has to do some more practice and 
then you get there. Make sense? 
 
 
We’ll work from about 9:00 am. to about 5:00 pm., that’s the official timing. 
Sometimes I’m going to reserve the right to run over a little bit too about 
half of five, something like that, if we need to spend a little time to finish 
something off. Like I said, I’d rather give you a little extra and make sure 
we finish all the pieces than you miss out on something. 
 
 
If you have other engagements please build that into your time so you 
have an extra half hour of practice time, a half hour to chill and let your 
mind settle down, or a half hour in here because we’re working on stuff 
here and you’ll still make all your appointments. Make sense? 
 
 
As we talked about a moment ago, this is the Conversational Hypnosis 
mastery program. The things I want to focus on here are really where the 
name Street Hypnosis came from, before Street Hypnosis became what 
now Street Hypnosis is, which is hypnotizing people on the street by 
making people’s hands stick to fridges and God knows what else. 
 
 
The idea came to me about 10 years ago, the idea that hypnotherapy is a 
great tool, I think it’s a fantastic thing that exists in the world, and it’s a 
tremendous source of good for people.  
 
 
Stage hypnosis, which is very entertaining – it can be very inspirational, a 
lot of hypnotists don’t realize that they live off of marketing done by stage 
hypnotists, because people see the show and say wow, that’s amazing! I 
wonder if hypnosis can help me through this? It’s a great proof of concept 
thing. 
 
 
We’ve got hypnotherapy on one side, we’ve got stage hypnosis and 
entertainment on the other side, both very valuable, I think, uses of 
hypnosis when applied well, but most people don’t spend their lives in 
therapy. Some I guess do, but most people don’t. 
 
 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
11 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Most people don’t spend their lives in a theater. Again some people do, 
but most people don’t. Most people spend their life on the streets doing 
day to day things, going to work, having a family, going to a restaurant and 
so on. 
 
 
I thought it was a tremendous shame that we couldn’t apply the power of 
hypnosis to all those areas in between as well. That’s really where the 
name Street Hypnosis came from, as well, the idea that you could use it in 
a bus, in a car, on a plane, in public or in private. Wherever you are, as 
long as there are other human beings around, you can do a form of street 
hypnosis; not necessarily to stick people’s hands to fridges, although we’ll 
teach you that too if you want, but this is more about making your way 
through life. 
 
 
You can walk through life with your head held up high so you can be an 
influence, a force of good in the world. You can influence others and leave 
them a little better off than before they met you, so that everywhere you go 
in the world you just left it a little better, people are a little bit happier, 
problems are a little bit harder to come by and so on. 
 
You have the capacity to do that. You all, of course, have probably met 
somebody at some point in your life that has been a turning point in your 
life, maybe a mentor, a teacher, a parent, a family member, and a friend, 
someone who maybe believed in you just at the right time you needed the 
believing in.  
 
Maybe someone who gave you a stern talking to just at the time when you 
may have been starting down the wrong path, or someone who gave you 
a second chance when really you didn’t deserve one, but you grabbed it 
with both hands anyway. Do you know what kind of things I mean? 
 
 
We’ve all had people like that in our lives, and if it hadn’t been for those 
people our lives would be impoverished right now, would they not? 
 
 
My hope is that at the end of these 10 days you choose to become a 
person like that. I can’t make you. It’s not my job to tell you what to do. 
Hopefully, as you see the kinds of things we’ll be doing here, as you get 
used to these hypnotic gifts you can give and the interactions and nature 
of the interactions you can develop, I’m hoping that will inspire you to want 
to do it for yourselves, just because you can. 
 
 
If you need an extra little carrot, it’s also a way that you can get more out 
of things in your own life. You see, there are two influence models out 
there in the world, there’s the win/win and the win/lose model, you may 
have heard of these. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
12 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The win/lose model is you have some and I don’t, and I’m going to take it. 
The win/win model is there’s plenty for everyone so if I help you get what 
you want, you’ll help me get what I want. It’s kind of how societies are 
built. 
 
 
The problem with the win/lose model is it only ever works on a trial basis, 
it’s far too small a scale for people to look forward to. Let me give an 
example that might bring it to life.  
 
 
We know the stereotype of a used car salesman, right? Is he a friendly 
professional person, he’s got your best interest at heart, he’ll sell you the 
best vehicle and if it really doesn’t match your personality or what your 
needs are, there’s no way on earth he’ll let you walk away with that 
particular car, right? That’s everyone's mindset when we say used car 
salesman. 
 
 
Yes, that’s right, there is, by the way. Of course you recognize that there 
will be many used car salesmen who will fit exactly that profile, right? Yet 
we don’t have that as a stereotype in our mind. Why?  
 
 
It’s because there are so many out there who are willing to make a sale, or 
put your interests at stake in order to get their own interests met first. The 
problem with this is its very short term thinking isn’t it? Once that one 
transaction is done, what happens next? 
 
 
Are you going to go back to that person who sold you the car whose 
engine fell out on the way home? No. The kind of influence that I’m going 
to propose over the next 10 days is the kind that takes a longer term view. 
The kind where you build up a relationship where people just want to do 
things for you because they know that the more they do for you, the more 
their life improves.  
 
Whether it’s emotionally, physically, intellectually or politically whatever it 
is, somehow things will improve and that’s why people like hanging out 
with you, and like helping you out as you go along. 
 
 
Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
Hopefully by the end of the next 10 days you’ll also have this appreciation 
of the win/win model, actually it’s a much easier way of moving through 
the world. The other version just gets you into a world of trouble. 
 
 
Has anyone see that famous hypnotic thief, he’s been all around the 
internet – if you’ve been to our website you may have seen it. It’s a guy, I 
think in Italy, who grabbed fistfuls of cash from a supermarket and ran, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
13 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
because he used his hypnotic powers to put someone in a trance and they 
didn’t know what happened until the end of the day, right? 
 
 
Sounds like wow – this guy has amazing powers, he must be really smart 
and good at what he does, right? I’m sorry, but that’s a little bit retarded. 
How much is he going to get from a supermarket till, and now he’s on the 
run from the police through the whole nation? How far is he going to get 
on $200? 
 
 
He’s going to really live the life of luxury isn’t he? Buy a private island, get 
security guards…do you see where I’m going with this? 
 
 
The reason I think it’s particularly insane what that person did is because 
the very same skill set could make him a six figure income easily, and 
ethically in a lawful way, either as a top class salesperson or as a 
hypnotherapist, I have a whole bunch of hypnotherapy friends that make a 
six figure income. 
 
 
It’s actually very straight forward to do once you switch your mindset into 
creating the whole system and things around you as well. My hope is that, 
at the end of these 10 days, you’ll have the skill to realize how silly 
someone would be to grab a handful of cash, because your capacity to 
produce income just goes through the roof by applying these skills of 
influence in an ethical way. You’re actually building a relationship that will 
be more than just a one trial event. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
With that as a backdrop, we’re going to start taking all your life 
experiences and reshaping them in a way that’s going to make this easy 
for you. Let’s face it; you all have been around for awhile, right? You didn’t 
suddenly appear, walk through the door and say, "Oh, where did I come 
from?" 
 
 
It’s important that whatever we do in here matches the experiences you’ve 
had over a lifetime, because then what we start doing becomes easy. I 
want you to realize that Conversational Hypnosis is both easy and natural 
when you do it your way. 
 
 
We all have a lifetime of experiences that show us exactly what we’re 
capable of. The irony is, sometimes the things we value the least are what 
teach us the most. 
 
 
As you know, I’m not an American. You may have noticed by my accent. I 
don’t live in the states. In fact, I flew all the way here from Asia a few days 
ago, that’s a long flight. When you have a long flight ahead of you and you 
have a security guard and there’s a queue of about 50,000 people in front 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
14 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
of you and you’re thinking; I’ve got to get through this before flying for 15 
hours? 
 
 
It’s not the most motivating or inspirational thought, you could say. I’m 
sitting there in the queue thinking, "Oh man, they’re moving across really 
slowly. They’re doing a thorough job of whatever it is they’re doing, maybe 
they’re making a cup of tea between each one." 
 
 
It’s really slow, and my mind is starting to go down in a, not so pleasant 
place, like I could do this. This is going to be boring and tedious, they’re 
going to ask these questions, I’m going to have to take my clothes off and 
put my clothes on, go through the metal detector and back again, take my 
shoes off and go back – man it’s going to suck. 
 
 
Somewhere in this whole process I started asking myself; what happens? 
See, I used to love flying. I used to adore flying. When I was a little boy, 
probably, from the age of five upwards, my father used to take us on a 
plane. Back in the day you had those plastic wallets with all your stuff in it 
and you were desperate to get onto the airplane – it was great, because 
you got to get through all the security gates without having to go through 
queues, it was like – I’m a VIP, a very short one. 
 
 
I used to love flying because to me it was exciting, it was adventure, I’m 
allowed to go to my grandmother’s house or an uncle’s house and spend 
the summer there – it was fantastic. 
 
 
Just getting to the airport might be a challenge because I had to jump out 
of the car three times to go to the bathroom because this is the journey, 
this is it. Of course you get to the airplane and the stewardess puts a little 
plastic bag around you and holds your hand, and you’re like, oh this is 
great. 
 
 
You walk through security and everyone else is unshaven trying to haggle 
with the security guard to get that pocket knife through and I just breeze 
through – goodbye. 
 
 
You see, the whole mindset was different inside. I was beginning to 
anticipate that things were about to come. We all the capacity of 
anticipating things that are going to come, don’t we? 
 
 
Sometimes it requires us to search our experience. For me it’s 
remembering my grandmother’s house in Austria, a huge garden. The 
best time to see this garden was in the mornings, just before dawn. It 
would be so quiet, not a soul would be around. The whole ground would 
be covered in dew and the crows would just be waking up. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
15 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
There’s a scent in the air, it’s almost impossible to describe but it was very 
pleasant. A peaceful scene no matter what age I was remembering it from. 
The funny thing is I almost didn’t know that the garden looked so different 
in the mornings, because I’d been to my grandmother’s house several 
years before I discovered it. 
 
 
One day I was playing in the garden, it was summertime, a bright sunny 
day, and noticed in the back of the garden, it was a big garden, that there 
was a big row of trees growing across right before the fences. I always 
figured the fence grew into the trees, but no, there’s a little space behind 
where these trees were, hidden away and sheltered. 
 
 
Being a little boy and curious of course, I had to find out what’s behind 
those trees. Of course, this is the age, in which you’re being told all kinds 
of myths, legends and fairy tales. Maybe there’s a cave that leads to that 
other land or a hole inside the tree; I wonder what I’ll find on the other 
side? 
 
 
When I turned the corner and looked I found this huge mound of Earth, but 
it wasn’t normal dirt. It smelled kind of like the way a forest smells when 
you walk off the path. It was a rich smell, this huge mound of dirt. 
 
 
I thought I knew exactly what it was I’d just discovered and I was excited. I 
ran up to my grandmother and said do you know you have a baby 
mountain growing in the back of your garden? 
 
 
I thought I knew what it was, but she had no idea what I was talking about 
so I had to drag her out and show her. She said, "No- no, that’s a 
composting heap."  
 
 
I said, "What’s that?"  
 
She said, "It’s the place that keeps this whole garden growing the way that 
it does."  
 
How does it do that? Do you really want to know? Well you better come 
out tomorrow morning and I’ll show you. That night I was very excited to 
discover what a composting heap would be. What would it do? It sounded 
kind of magical. I feel asleep and had a dream in which mountains 
became molehills, in which gardens flourished. 
 
 
In the morning I still was in that sort of hazy, warm, sleep place and my 
grandmother came in. I didn’t really fully wake up, even going outside, and 
that’s when I saw the garden for the first time. 
 
 
The crows were crowing. The sky was beginning to change color and 
there was a fresh smell in the air. My grandmother was going around 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
16 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
collecting weeds and slugs that had come out for the day, and then she 
put them on the compost heap and explained what it was. 
 
 
In here goes all the stuff, the stuff that would otherwise prevent a plant 
from growing. Over there we have herbal garden with berries and herbs, a 
few vegetables, got to keep it clear of the weeds or they won’t grow. It 
won’t bear the fruit we need it to. 
 
 
Most people throw away the weeds, try to destroy them, think they’re bad. 
They don’t understand. Weeds can make the bushes grow if you treat 
them in the right way. Let me show you. 
 
 
With that, we walked into the herbal garden and she showed me how to 
distinguish from the berry bushes and the weeds, how to pull them out by 
the roots. In time she taught me the uses of special tools, special tools to 
dig up the weeds without harming any of the other plants, letting them 
grow. 
 
 
That’s when the real magic happened. The weeds would go in the 
compost heap, the worms would eat the weeds, turn them into soil, rich 
fertile soil. The soil would go back on the bushes and they’d grow taller, 
faster, and straighter. 
 
 
People don’t often realize how they can use weeds to make their garden 
grow. I used to enjoy getting up at 5:00 o’clock in the morning, before 
anyone else was up and just watching the garden. In my mind I imagined 
that I could almost sense it growing, feel it, changing, and developing, 
something occurring inside the garden that I couldn’t quite grasp. 
 
 
 
All I needed to know was the air was cool and fresh and the birds would 
sing, and in time the sun would rise on a beautiful summer’s day. Perhaps 
the rains would come, feed the garden in a different way. All the time my 
eye would catch a glimpse of a weed here or there and I’d get excited, 
because now I knew what to do with it. 
 
 
Of course, summer time was filled with many things. It wasn’t just weeding 
the garden I’m sure, though most children would enjoy doing that all the 
time. There are many fun activities, we’d do. sometimes we’d go skiing at 
Easter or we’d go watch a music festival – I don’t know if you know this, 
but Salzburg in Austria has the world’s biggest music festival, all the big 
names from around the world come there. 
 
 
It’s particularly interesting because, as a kid, I never knew that was there. 
It wasn’t until I grew up that I realized something was there all the time 
that I didn’t even know to appreciate.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
17 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Standing in the queue of the airport lounge and thinking about those 
things, it was an important moment for me because it reminded me that 
we can kind of lose our own focus a little bit, can we not? When we focus 
our mind on one path or another, funny enough you tend to get what you 
focus on. Have you ever noticed that? You tend to get what you focus on. 
 
 
 
If we only focused on a few more things that we needed to focus on rather 
than the things we wanted to focus on, it’d make life a lot easier. Take for 
example, I don’t know, someone who goes to hypnosis training. Bear with 
me on this one I know it’s a little out there. 
 
 
If someone were to go into hypnosis training, what would they want to 
focus on? Their improving skill perhaps, something they did right? 
Perhaps they’d want to focus on their identity as a great hypnotist so even 
if they mess one or two things up along the way, that’s not a big deal, 
they’re too good for that. It happens. 
 
 
You know that even the greatest performers in whatever field, they have 
their off days, and they make mistakes. It’s not really a question of 
whether they make mistakes; it’s a question of what they do with them, 
how quickly they recover and what they learn from them that makes them 
great. Does that make sense? 
 
 
I’m going to encourage you to take on that mindset, that mindset of 
greatness which is not so much about making mistakes or not, because 
let’s face it I can guarantee you one thing – you’re going to make 
mistakes, a lot of them, over the next 10 days.  
 
 
I’ll guarantee you another thing; once you leave here you’ll make even 
more mistakes. The real issue really isn’t whether, or not you make 
mistakes, it’s what you do with them when they come. Does that make 
sense to you all? 
 
 
What we need to find out or what to do with them is to create a contrast. 
Contrast is a great way for the mind to make sense of things. Did anyone 
here ever see Jurassic Park? You have the big dinosaur that can only see 
movement? We’re actually pretty much the same in the sense that we can 
only distinguish things by distinguishing it from something it’s not, it’s 
contrast that’s going on, whether it’s on a subtle level or not. 
 
 
The contrast I’d like you all to make over the next few days is just from 
what you’re doing now, and what you want to be doing now. That’s it it’s 
as simple as that. To help us make the contrast we’ll start slowly and build 
up. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
18 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The way this morning is going to go is – how many people have trained 
with me before? You’ll be relatively familiar with the process we’re going to 
go through. We’ll start with some instant inductions and so on, so you’ll be 
relatively familiar with that already, and we’ll use that as a baseline. 
 
 
We’re going to start putting things a little bit different in there as well that 
are going to allow us to use our skills differently later on. Once we start 
evolving it we’ll start building the skill in a slightly different direction so by 
the time we come onto tomorrow and the day after you’ll be in a 
completely different country, let alone city. Does that make sense? Will 
that be fun to do? 
 
 
 
As always the first thing we need to do is get ourselves into the right 
mental space for being great hypnotists. To do that what I’d like you all to 
do is just stand up for me for a moment, and in the great tradition of 
hypnosis trainings, I’d like you to go around and meet everyone in the 
room. 
 
 
Be friendly, be conversational. You might even want to be a little hypnotic. 
When people meet, they ask a couple of normal questions – who are you? 
That’s a normal question people ask each other. What do you do, where 
do you come from, that sort of stuff – why are you here? 
 
 
Those are standard questions people ask each other. You can understand 
these questions many different ways, who are you is more than just your 
name, right? If you feel like exploring those other levels then, by all 
means, do so. 
 
 
The key thing I want you to focus on though is watch people as they 
answer. Just notice what you notice. Notice how the person you spoke to 
first is different from the person you speak to second. See if you can 
notice those differences. 
 
 
In other words, what is the contrast from one to the other? How are they 
behaving differently? How are they answering differently? 
 
 
The other thing – can you keep up with more than just two things like that? 
The other thing I would like you to do is also focus on what their reasons 
for coming here are. The reason for that is, you may realize, I’m a big 
believer in stealing, right, stealing in the sense of stealing people’s 
inspirations, aspirations. 
 
 
Someone might be here for a reason that’s just so amazing you say, "Oh 
my God, I’ve got to take that." Even though we’re in L.A. and this is the 
heart of the music district and all the rest of it, believe it or not you will not 
get arrested for stealing someone’s inspiration, it just goes. The CD set – 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
19 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you might get in trouble for that, but as long as you stick to their 
aspirations you’re in good shape here. 
 
 
I’d like you to go around, I’m going to give you all – there are about 100 
people in the room, so it’ll probably be enough with eight minutes to meet 
everyone in the room, right? Eight minutes to meet them all? Let’s take 
about eight minutes to meet everyone, ask them these questions, and 
spot how they behave differently, how they sound differently as you come 
across different people and notice if there’s anything they have you’d like 
to steal; not physical objects please. Off you go. 
 
 
The good news is you’ve passed the first test for whether or not you’ll be 
great conversational hypnotists; you can all have a conversation. That’s a 
good thing. 
 
 
I’d like to have a volunteer please. Who likes hypnosis? Anyone? Come 
on up. 
 
 
That’s it; just ask one of these guys to hold onto your bottle for you. Just 
come on up here. Raymond – is it Raymond? 
 
Ramon: 
It’s Ramon. 
 
Igor: 
Are you Spanish? 
 
Ramon: 
I’m Australian, from London. 
 
Igor: 
You came all the way from Australia to here? 
 
Ramon: 
No from London. 
 
Igor: 
London is a good place, I’ll take that.  
 
 
Look at me a second. That’s good. Take a deep breath, breathe out – 
sleep. All the way deeper, that’s right. Deeper, deeper still, all the way 
down. That’s it, you’re doing great. Deeper and deeper. 
 
 
Settling back in your balance you’ll go deeper and deeper in trance, that’s 
right, getting more and more comfortable, feeling your own weight, feeling 
your own balance, going deeper into trance as you continue. That’s right, 
deeper and deeper still. 
 
 
As you continue to go into a very pleasant, comfortable hypnotic trance I’d 
like you to know that your unconscious mind is there for you, helping you 
to learn things and enjoy things, make the most of things. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
20 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Because you came up here and did a fantastic little demonstration with us, 
your unconscious mind is going to make this so easy for you; you’ll 
wonder how other people could ever have difficulty with hypnosis. You’ll 
know that’s happening right now because a good feeling will begin inside. 
 
 
When that feeling is strong enough, you’ll smile. It’ll spread across your 
face. There you go that’s it. It feels pretty good, doesn’t it? That’s it. On 
the count of three coming all the way back, one, two, three eyes open, 
feeling great. How are you doing? 
 
Ramon: 
Good. 
 
Igor: 
Good. Everyone give Ramon a round of applause. Stay here for a second. 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Now, I know a lot of you all have done this already because you all have 
been to the stage hypnosis training or something similar, so we’re going to 
go through similar steps but we’re going to start tweaking a few things 
along the way if we can and moving onto other things. 
 
 
What I need to know right now is how many people have not done any 
hypnosis before or any instant inductions before? Put your hands up – 
very good, thank you. 
 
 
What I want you all to do, and those of you who have done instant 
inductions before, especially this type, put your hands up for a second. 
Those who haven’t done it before look around. Make sure you partner up 
with some of these people at least once or twice through the course of this 
morning, because your progress will be that much faster when you do it 
with people who are familiar with it.  
 
You’ll also be able to partner with people who haven’t done this before to 
get a sense of how the inexperienced as well as the more experienced 
people operate, and that will give you more of a contrast to work with. 
Make sense? 
 
 
The very first thing we want to do as always, whenever we do hypnosis is 
we want to create the hypnotic context. We have the ABS formula which 
we’ll expand on a little bit more as we go along but the first thing we need 
in the ABS formula – we may as well write this down, just bear with me 
one second and we’ll use a little more time before releasing you into the 
wild. 
 
 
The A of the formula stands for absorb attention, right? We need attention 
in order to do hypnosis. We need attention to do conversational hypnosis 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
21 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
because when someone is having a conversation with someone else and 
they’re not listening to you, it doesn’t work so well. 
 
 
There are ways around that but really we’re not going to be focusing on 
that here. Initially we’re going to find ways of getting attention so we can 
do the work we want to do. Make sense? 
 
 
Right now I want to teach you very formal, direct simple hypnosis because 
if you understand the principles doing it overtly, then doing it covertly and 
conversationally becomes that much easier because you know where 
you’re heading with it. Does that make sense? 
 
 
By the way, it is a simple rule for all conversational hypnosis; in order to 
make something new simpler and easier to do, do it directly first, do it 
overtly first and then later on when you’re doing it conversationally you’ll 
find it much easier to navigate through and get the same kind of results. 
Make sense? 
 
 
The first to do is I want you to grab someone’s attention. The way we’ll do 
it is you notice how I’m touching his body physically? I’m invading his body 
space a little bit which puts his mind a little on alert. 
 
 
If I’m over here, this is a little bit distant for American or European 
standards but if you don’t know someone at all you’re a little bit distrustful, 
this would be kind of the distance people are at. People who you have a 
decent level of interaction with probably would be here with a comfortable 
space, friends might be a little closer here, and already you can feel a little 
– maybe even an emotional pressure. 
 
 
The minute I do this you’ll notice that and you’ll feel it inside yourself, 
something switches on. Your mind is saying; what’s going on? That’s the 
attention switching over, isn’t it? 
 
 
 
What I want you to do is focus all that attention on a simple activity so that 
he doesn’t have a filtering off down the wrong direction. The way I’m going 
to do this is just – look at me – very good, thank you. What I’m looking for 
is his gaze, you felt that right? 
 
 
I’m looking for his gaze to settle down. At first it’ll bounce around a little bit 
and eventually it kind of settles down, you might even see a slight pupil 
dilation but it’ll kind of become more steady, he stops wanting to move his 
eyes as much. Does that make sense? 
 
 
That’s the only thing I want you all to look for. You’ll find a new partner, 
you’ll actually find several, you’ll say just look at me – there you go. You’ll 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
22 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
just notice that settling down process. As a rule when the mind is sort of 
hyperactive the eyes will be hyperactive. When the mind is calm and 
focused, the eyes will be calm and focused. It’s a general rule of thumb. 
It’s not 100% true, but it’s true enough that we can use it as a very good 
guideline. 
 
 
Do you understand the first exercise? Is that easy to do?  
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
All right, off you go. Thank you. 
 
 
Is that easy to do? That’s easy to do right? I want to ask – can I borrow 
you since you’re close? Come on up. You’ve got the first step which is the 
looking in the eyes and so on, what I want you to do now is add something 
in called compliance. You want to test; how responsive is this individual 
being? 
 
 
If, for example, I ask what’s your name? 
 
Rohad: 
Rohad. 
 
Igor: 
If I ask Rohad, would you stand over here for a moment – is he being 
compliant? Is the mind generally accepting of what’s going on or is it going 
to be more rejecting or cautious and so on? Which is it? More accepting, 
you can see that, right? 
 
 
I want you to imagine I’m a typical used car salesman, you think I have not 
got your best interests at heart with what’s about to happen. Will you come 
over here for a moment? 
 
 
Do you see that? The hesitation – he’s complied, physically it’s happening, 
isn’t it? But do I have him where I need him to be yet? No. I need him to 
be more open, so that tells me I have to do a little bit more work. 
 
 
I want you to start looking out for these things. At this point we’re only 
going through the mechanics of an instant induction, so I’m not so 
concerned about what to do and how to solve it, but I want you to be able 
to spot it nonetheless. 
 
 
What we’re going to do now is we’re going to put the compliance and 
attention things together. As you go around the room with the same 
exercise, you’ll meet someone and say, "Hey, how are you doing; stand 
over here for a moment."  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
23 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You’re going to watch for their level of compliance. Mentally what I want 
you to do, for three partners I want you to be compliant and nice. The 
fourth partner I want you to be skeptical or not too sure about – not like I 
don’t trust you, not acting obvious, just think about someone you don’t 
quite trust and bring that feeling out, but still try to be socially polite. 
 
 
You’ll still come stand over there and so on but you’ll have that feeling 
inside, does that make sense? To mix it up a little bit you can choose at 
what position you put that distrust. You can start with that and then do 
three trusting ones, you can mix in the middle, but the pattern I want to 
have is three trusts and one distrust, kind of mixing it up so no one knows 
what to expect but they start looking for it. Does that make sense to you 
all? 
 
 
Very simply you’re going to ask someone to – stand over here for me, 
would you? You’re going to watch – what was that? You’re going to watch 
and then go to the exact same place, hands on his shoulders, invade his 
body space just a little bit – it’s not like we’re up here going, hello… 
 
Audience: 
You need to buy him a drink first. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. That’s the wrong kind of hypnosis, right? Apparently I think the 
ladies are particularly harsh about that stuff. You do invade that person’s 
space, but not too much, then eye contact, thank you very much, then you 
wait for that moment when the face settles, the eyes settle in, and you 
know you’ve set the context well enough for what we’re about to do. 
 
 
 
Does that make sense you all?   
 
Audience: 
What I like to do is put just one hand on the shoulder, it feels more 
organic. 
 
Igor: 
The question over here is he prefers to have one hand on the shoulder 
because it feels more natural, more organic as he would say. I’m finding 
with that, I really have no problem with that. 
 
 
 
I like two hands purely because I really like to take charge of the person, I 
want to see where their boundaries are, but in certain situations I’d agree, 
I’d just be one handed. Although we won’t be using this mechanics, at 
times I’ll even go to a slightly different style of doing the induction just 
because it fits the scene, but for the moment I want to keep it very clean. 
 
 
If you feel more comfortable as a hypnotist doing it one handed that’s fine, 
I don’t mind. The key thing is do you have all of their attention? Not some 
of it, but all of it? Does that make sense? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
24 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Is that easy to do? Off you go, just spend a minute doing that. Thank you 
so much. 
 
 
So was that easy to do? Did you all spot the person when they’re being a 
little bit skeptical, a little bit cautious, and a little bit hesitant? Can you see 
these things happening? It’s not rocket science. 
 
 
This is important because when it comes to conversational hypnosis these 
very same signals will be occurring, right? You’ll need to know when it’s 
time to present your ideas and they’ll be accepted, or when it’s time to do 
a little bit more work before you introduce your idea because they’re not 
there yet. 
 
 
Anyway, let’s just keep that in mind. We’ll keep that three cycle on, one 
cycle off routine for the rest of the morning, just to keep you sharp and on 
your toes, to keep your eyes open for that, but we’ll still carry on practicing 
mechanics. Is that okay with you all? 
 
 
I’ll need another person, can I borrow you? Give him a nice round of 
applause.  
 
 
We’re in exactly the same boat as before – would you stand over here for 
me please? It’s the same thing again, just look in my eyes for a moment, 
that’s it just focus all the way, there you go, good. Now why did I have to 
say that? Those in the front of the room will most likely be able to tell. 
 
 
I’m getting a lot of shifting going on, he’s not naturally settling down so I 
need his mind to settle down more so I’m just saying that’s right, just focus 
on me fully, or something along those lines. 
 
 
Do you see how you really begin to read the person’s signals very clearly? 
Once it’s pointed out to you it seems like a no-brainer, but a lot of people 
miss this stuff because they’re trying to rush to do the induction, the 
hypnosis, and they miss the very things that tell them whether the person 
is ready for it or not. Make sense? 
 
 
You make sure you have it, and then very gently – this is just mechanics 
for now – what I want you to do is take the back of your hand, cup it on the 
back of her head, and then just bring it into your shoulder. I want you to 
test it for balance when it’s here. Do they give you the balance? If I go 
back here I have the balance right? Do your own balance for a second – if 
I step back I don’t have the balance. 
 
 
Do it very gently, you don’t want to have too much disorientation going on. 
If you suddenly whip back and they’re on your balance they’ll say, "Oh my 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
25 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
God what’s going on here?" – great induction, not so good for the 
insurance people. 
 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ What if you’re extremely short and they’re extremely tall? 
 
Igor: 
The question is; what if you’re extremely short or they’re extremely tall? 
For the moment just find people you can work with in terms of their size in 
the room. There are solutions in terms of doing instant inductions, 
personally just so you know I’m not teaching instant induction to do instant 
inductions, I’m using this as a vehicle to teach you hypnosis, right? 
 
 
If you want to have a solution to that I’ll happily add one on, if we have 
time at the end. It’s very easy, but the primary reason for doing this is for 
you to become a better hypnotist, not for you to go out in the streets and 
do this stuff, though you could very well do this at lunchtime if you wanted 
to. Maybe get a little reduction on your bill? 
 
 
Did you have a follow up? 
 
Audience: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
Very good. When you work with someone wearing glasses like I am right 
here, the glasses have a tendency to be crushed against the shoulder or 
chest or something like that, so ask them to take them off or take them off 
yourself, that’s just a little safety tip. 
 
 
The speed we’re going right now it really won’t matter that much but if 
you’re actually going to do an instant induction for real, it’s really important 
little bit of safety in terms of what they’re wearing. Make sense? 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Right now are we just walking through the physical motions? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, right now it’s just walking through the physical motions. Once again if 
you would step over here for me please, just focus on me – that’s right all 
the way, focus, and that’s it. 
 
 
All you’re doing now is notice how I’m just doing a slight rock back to test 
whether or not she follows, do I have her balance or not? That’s all I care 
about. 
 
 
 
Why, incidentally, do I care about the balance? Any ideas? Trust, right? 
It’s trust and compliance again. It’s a second test. Do you trust your 
balance with someone you don’t trust? Would you give your balance to 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
26 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
someone if you didn’t like them or you felt they would be abusive in some 
way? No. 
 
 
That’s why all these little corporate trust exercises have people falling 
backwards and so on and the rest of it. Balance is a great indicator, a 
great litmus test, for trust. That’s exactly what I’m doing here. 
 
 
It’s not the only one, of course, like anything it can be faked, but it’s a very 
good one, especially, in a more impromptu situation where people haven’t 
prepared something. It’s a good rule of thumb, again. 
 
 
 
Do you understand the exercise everyone? Easy to do? Another follow 
up? 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Could you maybe just explain so they don’t yank on your 
head? 
 
Igor: 
Yes this is just to explain about yanking on someone – we’re not doing 
anything other than gently guiding their head into your shoulder for now, 
we’ll talk about the mechanics of why we’re doing this later. Right now all I 
care about is as gently as possible guiding their head to your shoulder and 
then testing for balance, that’s it. 
 
 
Easy to do? One more thing… 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ How do you deal with resistance? 
 
Igor: 
What if you have that third person that is now resisting for whatever 
reason, because it’s part of the exercise? 
 
 
This is just an exercise right now so ignore it, carry on through to the 
shoulder and if the resistance is still there in the balance you’ll notice that 
too. You’ll carry on exactly the same way whether or not you have full 
compliance, all I want you to do is observe that you don’t have it and that it 
feels different and that different things are occurring as a result. Does that 
make sense? 
 
 
Let’s go and do that now and spend a few minutes, off you go. Thank you 
so much. 
 
 
Do we have everyone back? Okay. So far we’ve been playing with 
attention, would it be fair to say that there are a lot of nuances to what kind 
of attention you have? Would that be fair to say? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
27 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We’ve only begun to skim the surface of this. We’ll be looking at this sort 
of thing a little more fully as the days progress. The next part of the ABS 
formula in terms of creating hypnosis easily is B which stands for bypass 
the critical factor. 
 
 
The critical factor is just that part of the mind that likes to reject ideas, say 
no, and shut off. It keeps the person safe, it helps them analyze certain 
events, but it also keeps the person limited, it keeps them the same. Make 
sense? This is the nutshell version; there are other nuances of it too. 
 
 
There are other ways to bypass the critical factor; we’ll be looking at most 
of them over the course of the next 10 days. There’s language, frame 
setting, interactions and so on. The simplest, quickest, and in some 
respects the easiest, the one we’ll be focusing on right now, is shock or 
surprise. 
 
 
Basically, the mind does not know what to do with the new information for 
awhile so the filters go off, they pop into a little trance for awhile to figure 
out what’s going on, and when they’ve made up their minds they come 
back out again.  
 
 
You can help them make up their mind in the process. Does that make 
sense? What we’re going to do now is we’re going to practice the shock, 
but we’ll do it safely. Can I borrow you another second? You’ll be the right 
height for me. 
 
 
The reason I used Alex here is because I don’t want you to shock Alex this 
way. He’s come a long way to see us, and it’s just not nice. Did you like 
that? A little bit of a shock, wasn’t it? 
 
 
Hopefully, that is the only time you’ll ever see something like that being 
performed. When I talk about shock all I’m talking about is when you have 
the hand on the back of their head, maybe just a tiny little thing. All I’m 
going to do is just tap – you see there’s the tiny little nudge, nothing more 
than that. I do not want whiplash. That was a little more dramatic than I 
thought it would be, right? 
 
 
What we’re going to do now is once you have the compliance – stand over 
here for just a second. At this point you should be distrusting me. I 
negated it. 
 
 
You go through focusing and so on, all you do now is you just practice a 
few times. You don’t even have to guide it all the way through, you just 
practice tipping the head forward. You notice how on its own it doesn’t go 
very far, all I’m doing is using my middle finger, you can use any finger, it 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
28 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
doesn’t matter which one it is, the point is I’m just moving it forward, I’m 
just tapping it, I’m just giving a tiny jolt. 
 
 
Let me just emphasize the smallest of the jolt that’s involved. The more 
fragile the individual the less is required of you. Especially the more fragile 
they are and the bigger and heavier you are, the less is required of you. 
Let me just emphasize that for safety reasons. 
 
 
We had one gentleman in one of the mentoring groups who was huge and 
he said I can’t do these inductions – that’s because he usually tore 
people’s heads off in the process. I had to fix that but it worked out pretty 
well. 
 
 
From here, just a tiny little thing here. Just do it three or four times so 
nobody feels bad, on the fourth or third time just guide the head in and 
notice – I am not forcing his head in on the initial go, I’m not going like this 
and making it come all the way down – no. 
 
 
I’m providing the jolt, and then I’m just steering his body into position. 
Does that make sense? That’s a very important thing. It looks – do you 
want to see what the whole thing looks like? 
 
 
Just stand over here a second. Look at me. Sleep – all the way – deeper, 
that’s right. There you go, deeper, deeper and deeper. Now it looks like I 
forced his head onto my shoulder, doesn’t it? I did not. Let me 
reemphasize that – that is not what I did, I created a slight jolt and whilst in 
that state of what the hell is going on, I guide his head. In other words I 
create like a funnel and I gently guide into the shoulder. 
 
 
You can go deeper still. That’s it – all the way back- one, two, three- wide 
awake. Nice job, well done. 
 
Alex: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Give him a nice round of applause. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Do you understand the mechanics of that? 
 
 
The way I’d like you to practice it is the way we did it here a moment ago. 
The set up is the same as we did before, we still have a few people again 
being non compliant, all I want you to do is have that little tap on the back 
of the head, do it three or four times so you’ll see them readjust their 
balance slightly. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
29 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It should not be a massive shift; it should just be a little jolt. Once you’ve 
seen that three or four times, then time it so that as soon as that jolt 
occurs you just gently continue that momentum toward your shoulder, and 
it is gentle. Is that easy? Do you all know what you’re doing? 
 
 
If people have eye glasses on, now would be the time to ask them to 
remove them. If you want to leave them in your chairs that’s fine, 
otherwise its good practice when you meet someone to say, "Let me just 
take care of these glasses." Put them in your pocket whilst you do this, 
hand them back again afterward. Easy everyone, off you go. No need to 
use any words, just for right now we’re practicing the physical motion. Off 
you go. 
 
 
Okay. We have one more little thing to add onto here, so we’ll be back to 
this in a second. Before we do that though, some of you all are already 
getting ahead of the game and just going straight into the induction. The 
mechanics – you’re not used to doing the mechanics, right? 
 
 
By the way if you want to jump ahead and do the instant induction I really 
don’t mind, you may as well, right? I can’t stop you from being faster than 
I’m capable of teaching. 
 
 
What we’re going to do now is just do the full thing in a whole package, in 
other words a simple instant induction that goes from A to Z and basically 
does all of this. What’s the one thing that’s missing here in the ABS 
formula? 
 
 
Actually S stands for sleep. Yes I know. Can I borrow a volunteer again 
please? Anyone will do. Just pick on you, just take a chance. Oh this one 
has glasses, what do I do now? May I borrow your glasses? Thank you. I’ll 
put them here for the session. 
 
 
Always when you’re borrowing someone’s eye glasses make sure they 
know where they go so they know it’s going to be safe, no one is going to 
sit on them, they’re not going to get lost and so on. 
 
 
It’s a pre-occupation that people like me have. You don’t want them 
thinking about the safety of their eye glasses while you’re trying to do your 
induction. 
 
Audience: 
Actually, I’m more comfortable with them over here. 
 
Igor: 
That’s fine. I like that. Actually this is important. Why? It creates a clear 
slate for us to do what we’re about to do. The eye contact isn’t as 
important, what’s important is can you see them settling down? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
30 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
If they can’t make out your face even this close distance, just say that’s 
right just look in the general direction and focus your attention on that 
general image. It just takes the pressure off them. You just want a focal 
point of attention; it doesn’t have to be specifically the eyes, although as 
we’ll come onto, there are reasons why that can help too. 
 
 
We’ll have him stand over here for a moment, thank you very much. All 
we’re going to do is – I wonder if you can spot the difference between 
what we’ve been doing up to this point unofficially and what we’re going to 
be doing here now. 
 
 
Just look in my eyes. Sleep, all the way. That’s right, all the way. Deeper, 
deeper, that’s right you’re doing great. As you go back to your own 
balance standing on your own two feet you’ll go deeper and deeper now, 
that’s right. As you stand on your own two feet, balancing deeply in trance, 
balancing deeply in trance, balancing properly in trance that’s right, very 
good. 
 
 
As a result, of you entering trance so quickly, easily, naturally and with so 
much enthusiasm your unconscious mind already knows what to do. It’s 
the same thing you’ve seen other people do up here and that is to make 
this easy for you. 
 
 
As easy as it’s been for you to experience hypnosis, you can make being 
a hypnotist just as easy. Your unconscious mind can go ahead now and 
formulate your own perceptions in such a way that will make picking this 
stuff up so easy, a breeze. 
 
 
You’ll know its happening because you’ll have a really good feeling. When 
that really good feeling gets strong enough your whole face will smile. 
That’s it, there you go. One, two, three wide awake. 
 
 
Good job, well done. Give him a round of applause. Just stay here for a 
second. 
 
Audience: 
I have a question. The question is, we watched your instant inductions that 
you sent out and I attempted it on my wife – she did. I got her down but 
she immediately rebounded. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. We’ll talk about that right after this commercial break. We’ll talk about 
that exact same situation. If I haven’t answered you after the break, then 
please ask it again. For now though does everyone understand the 
mechanics of what we just did? Is that clear? What I want you to do is 
exactly that. What were the two things I added?  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
31 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
One was the word sleep, and the other one was I kept talking to him 
afterward. There’s a reason for both those things. Sleep is very simple, it’s 
a stimulation, and it’s telling the unconscious mind what to do at that 
moment of what’s going on. 
 
 
The next thing I want you to do very simply is just repeat the word deeper. 
Is that easy to do? Can you all remember two word; sleep and deeper? If 
you’re really advanced you put them together, sleep deeper, deeper sleep. 
Is that easy to do? 
 
 
I just want you to note the experience on both sides of the fence when you 
do it that way, and after the break we’ll start looking at the mechanics, the 
principles included in that, and how that might start being relevant for 
conversational hypnosis. The question he just asked is especially 
important for that. 
 
 
Give him a nice round of applause and then go do that. 
 
 
How was that? Good fun? Work well? I had a quick break, we just ran 
over a little bit but I thought it would be better to just keep that piece 
together. Is it alright if we have a 10 minute break rather than a full 15 
minute one? 
 
 
There’s water in the back and of course all the comfort breaks you need. 
After the break what we’ll do is we’ll start breaking down the principles 
involved in what you’re doing so you can start applying them outside of an 
overt hypnotic context. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Before we do that, are there any urgent questions or can we just handle 
that after the break? Urgent questions come on up… 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ What do you mean by stimulate the unconscious mind? 
 
Igor: 
The question is; what do we mean by the S part of the formula – I did not 
write the phrase completely – stimulate the unconscious mind. We have to 
give the unconscious mind some kind of instruction, something to activate 
hypnotically, otherwise all this stuff is just a party trick, right? Great 
question. 
 
 
Unless it’s a quick one regarding what we just did, let’s just save those 
questions until after we come back and I’ll give you a proper question and 
answer  then. Sound good? 
 
 
All right, let’s take a quick break. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
32 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
DVD 2:  Conversational Hypnosis Mastery 
Principles 
 
Igor: 
Welcome back everyone. Who has any questions or comments on what 
we’ve done so far, anyone? Everyone is too shy. Come on up. 
 
Audience: 
One thing I noticed when I was doing the resistance part, it’s something 
that occurred to me, and I was wondering about your take on essentially 
resisting hostile hypnosis, if you will. 
 
 
When I would visualize the person in front of me that was going to do the 
induction, even though I would let them follow through I would 
automatically in my own sense of feeling it out, I would view them as 
predatory. I mean they’re working on the mechanics so I let them do it, but 
I was totally not under. 
 
♦ What would your perspective be on this? 
 
Igor: 
If I can work the question through, are you saying that would thinking of 
someone else being more predatory be a shield or defense against being 
hypnotized by someone you don’t want to hypnotize you? Is that kind of 
the question? 
 
Audience: 
Absolutely! 
 
Igor: 
Really, the key to not being influenced by someone else when you don’t 
want to be is your critical factor it’s the very thing that allows the influence 
factor to break down. 
 
 
There are again sneaky ways around all that stuff, everything has a 
counter shall we say, but in general terms if you activate your critical factor 
– however you activate your critical factor – that’s what prevents the whole 
transition from occurring. 
 
 
You can do it through breaking trust, you can do it by analysis, you can do 
it by asking questions, you can do it by rejecting ideas out of hand and so 
on. How you do it is really up to the individual. I could conceptualize an 
individual for example who has shall we say such a terror of predators that 
the idea of being a predator puts them more under their spell than less. 
 
 
It could be also the opposite. In other words for you clearly thinking 
someone was a predator clearly crossed that trust boundary and at that 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
33 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
point your critical factor comes up and says nope, nope, nope. Make 
sense? 
 
Audience: 
Absolutely. 
 
 
 
Igor: 
The key isn’t how you visualize the other person, in terms of it has to be a 
predator, it has to be this or it has to be that it’s whatever you need to do 
to view the other person as no longer a valid source of information or a 
healthy method for you shall we say. Does that answer your question? 
 
Audience: 
Definitely, thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you, that’s a great question. Any other questions? Come on up, you 
can come either side that’s fine. I will walk with you and we’ll see who gets 
there first – oh man you’re fast. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ I was just wondering in what context would you go ahead and 
start this? 
 
Igor: 
The instant induction? That’s another great question, how and when do 
we use instant inductions? I think that’s an awesome question. I’m going 
to give you two answers. Feel free to hover around because you may want 
to have a follow up. 
 
 
The first answer I’m going to give you is a cheating answer which is, it 
doesn’t matter in the sense that we’re not teaching instant inductions to 
use instant inductions, they are going to be a way of understanding 
principles that we’ll later be able to do conversationally. Make sense? 
 
 
The second answer, which is really the answer you’re asking for, is really 
you use it anytime that you require hypnosis to occur, and the context 
allows for a formal induction. 
 
 
You could use it for example in a hypnotherapy session. In our 
hypnotherapy trainings we teach instant inductions first thing. Why? If 
you’re going to do things semi formally then it saves time, you have a 10 
second induction versus a 10 hour induction, you actually get to do the 
work more quickly. 
 
 
If you’re doing walk up street hypnosis and stuff like that, again if you have 
permission and the context allows for it you can do that. I even know 
people who will do instant inductions on unsuspecting people, either 
people they know or strangers. I would be much more wary of doing that 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
34 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
though, for several reasons; one it’s disrespectful, you’re forcing an 
experience on someone that they haven’t acceded to, and number two it 
can get you into a lot of trouble. 
 
 
There is one hypnotist I know out there, who likes to do these things, puts 
people in weird statue positions and so on. It’s very entertaining and 
inspirational, but he has no permission to do so, which means from time to 
time he gets into fisticuffs as well and has to run like crazy to get out of the 
situation. 
 
 
People do strange things. My rule of thumb, which you’re welcome to 
follow, is do you have permission for an overt induction? At which point go 
ahead and do an instant induction and you’ve got a great context and so 
on. 
 
 
If that permission hasn’t been formally presented then consider covert 
hypnosis being more appropriate for the venue, because it’ll be more 
respectful of allowing the person to find their own solutions or answers to 
things, or just not doing it – how about doing something radical, I 
apologize for this crazy notion – how about we ask for permission? 
 
Audience: 
What a concept. 
 
Igor: 
I know. Would you like to be hypnotized? No. Okay. Does that answer 
your question? 
 
Audience: 
Yes, thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you that was a great question. Any other questions or comments on 
what we’ve done so far? Come on up. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ For the instant induction that we did just now, it’s a physical 
shock, is there a conversational equivalent that does an 
instant without using body shock? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. There’s several ways of doing it. We may get a chance – the quick 
answer to that is use surprise rather than physical shock. We won’t be 
covering things like mind bending language, although that’s exactly what 
it’s designed to do among other things, that would be a great road to take 
it in, but anytime you have some kind of surprise present you’ll have the 
same context and you can run it in the same direction. 
 
 
The other answer to that, which we’ll get onto on I think the third or fourth 
day, when we come to the concept of magic moments, magic moments 
aren’t quite as fast as instant inductions, they may take a whole of like two 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
35 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
minutes, but they again create the exact same context as a shock 
induction would do. 
 
 
The way I view magic moments is it’s my indirect, covert, shock induction. 
 
Audience: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
The same rules we just talked about apply to those as well, but we’ll come 
onto that more. 
 
 
Any more questions, comments, praise, gold nuggets, cash? I collect gold. 
Currencies are a little bit dodgy right now. If you have any spare gold or 
silver I’m not going to be picky, right? 
 
Audience: 
Just no Euros. 
 
Igor: 
No Euros, they’re going down the tubes baby, oh no.  
 
 
Does this make sense as a concept, the ABS formula? Did you all get a 
chance to experience it, even if it was in a mild form, either as the subject 
or the hypnotist and see different things? 
 
 
You already noticed that when this starts breaking down, that’s when the 
problems start coming in. If you for example have someone who is a little 
distrusting, a little skeptical, a little bit too critical of what’s going on, if you 
don’t get to bypass the critical factor properly you can sense it. Your 
hypnotic session is going to be unsatisfactory. 
 
 
If you spotted it ahead of time you’ll know what to fix, if you didn’t, then 
you’ll go – what did I do wrong? Does that kind of make sense? 
 
 
Two reasons I think this is important –  
 
1. One, there’s a lot of hypnotists out there that miss these obvious 
signals, they’ll see them but they ignore them because they’re too 
busy thinking the induction is magical and will do it all for them, or 
they miss it because they’re so wrapped up in doing the induction 
they delete the clarity of what’s going on. 
 
2. The other thing that can happen is people will see it, but it doesn’t 
really trigger them. Meaning they don’t know what it means so 
they’ll ignore it. It’s actually straightforward we’ll find out, right? You 
have now a contrast to fit it against.  
 
 
There are a couple other things we’re doing in fact you’ve been doing 
which are just as important as this. These are some of the fundamental 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
36 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
key principles in conversational hypnosis and everything you’ve been 
doing physically will translate to a conversation in some way or another, 
we just have to find the right mechanisms for doing that. 
 
 
The first principle we’ve just been covering is the agreement principle. 
Agreement–think of the mind as having two basic functions, two formats 
essentially, which are mutually contradictory, when one is on the other one 
is off, and vice versa. One is the mind that says no, that rejects 
information, one is the mind that says yes and accepts information or 
looks for reasons to accept it. 
 
 
Someone can present you with a car or a new dress or a shirt and say do 
you like it; if you’re picking out things to like, well the buttons are good – 
right? You may not like the shirt but the buttons are good, you may not like 
the shirt but you’re looking for things to accept, you have the yes part of 
the mind switched on. Does that make sense? 
 
 
If you’re saying oh the shirt has got a little smudge on the corner, this shirt 
might be perfect except for that smudge – you’re looking for rejection. The 
mechanisms are fundamentally different. 
 
 
We want them to be in agreement mode, because when they’re in a yes 
mindset the critical factor is pretty much being bypassed, it’s looking for 
reasons to accept rather than reject or deny ideas. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
In terms of how we’ve been doing it physically, this is called compliance 
testing. We’re looking for physical compliance and the quality, the nature 
of that compliance will give us a clue as to their mindset. 
 
 
You saw quite clearly when Rohad was a little hesitant you saw the 
hesitation, right? You saw the slight stiffness in the way he was walking 
towards it compared to the way he got up on the stage. Why? We were 
missing the agreement or we had partial agreement and we had too much 
of the negative mindset, and it just told me the critical factor is still active. 
 
 
It’s not a bad thing, right? It can be overcome, we can do things to soften 
the situation and make it easier and more acceptable and so on, but we 
have to do them or else we’re taking our chances. In other words we’re 
stacking the deck against us rather than for us. Does that make sense to 
you all? 
 
 
This is going to happen in every conversation that you have. There are 
many different ways of building agreement, whether it’s yes sir, whether 
it’s physical motions, whether it’s agreement, whether it’s universal 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
37 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
experiences – lots of little tactics and techniques, we’ll cover many of them 
here, some of them are on the audio program as well. 
 
 
The point is; this is a fundamental principle without which it starts going 
pear shaped, it becomes very difficult to predict whether, or not something 
will work. This is especially true of a conversation. It’s truer, of a 
conversation than with more overt hypnosis, because the physical stuff in 
the overt hypnosis can sometimes override some of these mechanisms. 
 
 
In conversations you do not have that luxury so you want to be sensitized 
to what kind of compliance am I getting? Are they following along 
smoothly, or am I getting some kind of resistance? Make sense? Are there 
any questions or comments on that so far? 
 
 
The next thing is authority, this is another important principle. This is a 
strange one because we both need it and don’t want it. Authority comes in 
many packages. The problem is that some of the packages that authority 
comes in have a strong polar reaction by people. 
 
 
The classic authority thing might be the uniform, the police officer, the 
person in charge, the principal, the father figure if you want to use more 
Jungian archetypes.  
 
 
The advantage of that type is if someone responds very strongly in a 
positive way to an authority figure, that’s great, you’re straight into the 
mind, they’re responding to you; it carries with it a lot of this opening up of 
things. The problem is, if you have these classic mannerisms of authority 
and the other person has a polar response, they don’t like authority.  
 
They feel oppressed by it, their personal perceptions of like are that 
authority is out to harm them, over control them and so on, then the very 
thing that could open the doors for you could very well shut in your face. 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
The interesting thing about authority though is that authority does not have 
to be the classical type. It can be. I don’t know if you know this, there’s an 
isolate study where they had a person wearing a security uniform in a 
shopping mall who would walk up and down the streets telling people to 
pick up random bits of litter. 
 
 
They found that when a security guard was doing it, I can’t remember 
what the percentage was, but a reasonably high percentage of people, like 
60%-70% of people would pick up the litter and put it in the bin, even 
though he’s outside of his jurisdiction and has nothing to do with anything. 
They’re responding to the uniform, as compared to say, a guy in jeans and 
a t-shirt. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
38 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The interesting thing is; if a person in a suit says the same thing, he has 
exactly the same reaction. The percentages don’t vary very much at all. 
People say your dress doesn’t matter and so on, you shouldn’t judge a 
book by its cover and so on, well it turns out that’s not the case, people 
will judge you by how you’re dressed and how you present yourself in that 
sense. 
 
 
The authority of course will switch according to context too. If you’re with a 
bunch of skateboarders dressed like this, you may well trigger an opposite 
reaction like we just talked about. 
 
You need to be viewed as an authority of some sort with the other person. 
You are a source of information, of facts and of experiences that are valid, 
but you want to be careful as to understanding what context you’re in 
again. What the person that you’re facing, what their associations are, 
what culture they’re facing and so on, because you may end up adopting 
something that looks like a stereotype of authority, but doesn’t actually 
work for that particular individual. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
The reason I’m spending so much time talking about authority is because 
let’s face it; when I was up here asking people to stand over here and 
move and so on, it’s very clear who the authority in the interaction is, 
right?  
 
 
Does it mean I’m lording it over someone, that I am imposing my will – oh 
you slave you will do what I say? No, and it’s important you understand 
the distinction so you don’t start coming across that way. You can still 
have the respect that comes with authority. People will still follow even 
though you don’t have any of the overt trappings. 
 
 
A lot of people will hide behind overt trappings rather than just stepping 
into the genuine thing. What is genuine authority then? If not the suit that 
you’re wearing, although that’s something people will instinctively respond 
to in our culture, what is it that is authority, any ideas? We have personal 
values between other people I think that’s part of it. Confidence – that’s 
going to be a very important thing, but what do we mean by confidence? 
 
 
 
Two people are lying there sleeping, which one is confident? The way 
they’re standing, right? Am I confident right now? I’m kind of faking it a 
little bit. There are clues in how people move and stand that will tell you as 
to what their confidence is; is that fair? 
 
Audience: 
Authority is really what you know about yourself. 
 
Igor: 
So authority is what you know about yourself? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
39 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
Like, in certain situations I know I am the authority. 
 
Igor: 
In certain situations he knows he’s the authority, in other situations who 
knows. What’s going on here – whoever has the strongest frame. 
 
 
These are all true, by the way, you’ve all identified aspects of it. I’d like to 
offer you a very simple way of looking at it that will hopefully, make it very 
clear. You’ll be able to tell across the board whether or not someone is 
formally the leader of a group, you’ll still be able to spot the authority, and 
you’ll be able to switch it on and off whenever you need it. Would that be 
something worth exploring? 
 
 
This is just how I look at it. The very simple way of looking at it is, 
recognize that at some level, as sophisticated as we’ve become, we are 
still mammals, and we share the same trait as mammals. Mammals have 
a hierarchy. You’ve heard about the alpha dog in the pack, the alpha wolf, 
or the alpha male I think is the classic version of this, right? 
 
 
There are signs, in terms of every mammalian group, that will be a 
hierarchy that emerges, one will be at the top, some will be at the bottom, 
and everyone else will shuffle somewhere in between and it’ll be very 
clear levels in terms of.  
 
For example, wolves and dog packs, there’ll be a pecking order of who 
gets to eat first and who has to wait until last and so on. 
 
 
Without going into this in too much detail, this is a useful thing. First, it will 
always happen. Every group that you’re in, no matter how let’s hug the 
world they are, how open and flat their structure is, a natural leader will 
always emerge, someone the other people will look toward for leadership, 
for direction, for approval; even if it’s not acknowledged consciously. Does 
that make sense? 
 
 
It will always happen. You will always see the same kind of signals 
occurring. The second thing to realize is, it’s not always important to be at 
the top of the pack. There are advantages to being at the bottom, or 
somewhere in the middle too. It’s a question of understanding where you 
need to be given the level of interaction you’re in. Does that make sense 
to you all? 
 
 
What are some of the advantages? We can clearly see the advantage of 
being in the top, people do what you say, you’re the alpha male, or female 
in this sense. What’s the disadvantage of being at the top? 
 
Audience: 
There are more expectations. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
40 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
A lot of attention, there’s always expectations, pressure and responsibility, 
so that kind of goes with authority as well. The flip side, when you’re at the 
bottom of the pack part of the reason people choose that position is 
there’s less pressure, there’s less challenge, but they’re still included in 
the pack so there’s more safety than being on their own. 
 
 
Some people would rather be on their own than at the bottom of the pack, 
other people will quite happily go to the bottom of the pack because it’s 
less responsibility, less effort involved and so on. 
 
 
The other advantage is that knowing the difference in terms of behaviors 
and so on, if you’re not challenging someone’s authority you can borrow it. 
This is what for example the – let’s use the word captain I guess – in a 
particular group, whether it’s monkeys or dogs or human beings – there 
will be a second and third in command. 
 
 
Again, it can be totally unacknowledged consciously but that person will 
draw their authority from the main leader, and not have to have the same 
pressures as that person. Does that make sense? Do you see how that 
works? How do we recognize it in the animal kingdom? What kind of traits 
would you see? A pecking order, so when something gets done one 
person gets to go first, one person has to wait until the end – it’s usually 
the pleasant things, right? 
 
 
What else will you tend to sense? The way they behave, so specifically 
what kind of things would you see? 
 
Audience: 
Posture and tone. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Shall we talk about the person who is at the lowest end of the 
pecking order in a pack? Will be stand in the middle of the pack and shout 
out loud and make crazy movements? No; as a rule space will define, 
space and volume will define what level someone is at, as a rule. In 
human society we’ve evolved to other things as well. 
 
 
For example, if I’m sitting here now I can talk to you very confidently right 
now. There’s nothing changed in terms of my voice, has it? No? What am 
I doing? What is my body language trying to do? It’s trying to avoid using 
up space. 
 
 
It might be that I’m just cold. This is the position that some people try to 
conserve use as well, but the message that’s coming across is this person 
is not in his territory, or he’s not confident, he feels somehow threatened; 
versus if I’m a little bit more relaxed. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
41 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
This is, by the way, you’ll see this happen a lot more in the teenage 
circles, and that’s because when people go through their teenage years 
they become very, very sensitive to ideas of status, they don’t necessarily 
think about it, it’s more of an instinctual thing. You’ll see a lot of teenagers 
do something like this, have you seen that happen? 
 
 
 
This is an overcompensation of status signals, isn’t it? When they’re not 
feeling it internally they’re trying to show to the world oh, I’m kind of in 
charge of this whole thing, and they’re overcompensating. 
 
 
We need to be aware of all these things. Why? It lets us read a person. It 
doesn’t necessarily let us read a room very easily, but we can get a sense 
of what are the dynamics at play? If you don’t know the dynamics it’s very 
difficult to join them or reshuffle them. 
 
If you don’t know that someone is – let’s say you’re doing street hypnosis, 
there’s a very simple concept, right? You’re doing some stuff, you’re doing 
inductions and whatever, and a person walks up and says do that with me. 
 
 
He might seem very friendly. Do you have the person in the right place? 
No, because he’s saying I am going to run this interaction. You can’t do 
that as a hypnotist, you can’t lead their attention somewhere unless 
they’re following. Does that make sense? Do you see why it’s important to 
understand these things? 
 
 
At the same time, let’s say you have the same group and the person is 
saying like – hypnosis is cool. Do you want to try it? Okay…who do you 
hypnotize? The second person. You just got authority from the group’s 
leader. 
 
 
I could come in, standing there and say hypnosis is a cool thing, you’d 
really enjoy it, let me show you something here. Do you see the change in 
my mannerisms? Over here I’m showing I’m not going to challenge 
authority, why would I? All I need to do is get my work done. 
 
 
As I move across I’ll change slightly. It’s only a slight opening, but you 
notice how now the signals are going across? Am I going to be challenged 
over here? No, because by challenging me he’s challenging the 
acknowledgment of this person, right? Do you see how that works? 
 
 
It’s a relatively sophisticated idea but I’ve seen the word authority being 
bandied about a lot in the hypnosis circles, and it’s usually a very primitive 
thing which is, basically, point your finger and say sleep. I’m hamming it 
up a little bit of course you realize. 
 
 
The principle is very important but I’d like you all to start thinking about it in 
a slightly more three dimensional way with more depth, because you don’t 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
42 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
have to be at the top of that pecking order in order to get the job you need 
done, done. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
Sometimes it’s actually more useful to have lower status than a higher 
status. When might that be, any ideas? 
 
Audience: 
You’re not seen as threatening. 
 
Igor: 
You’re not seen as threatening, right? Let’s think about this in terms of 
sales. We have the chief honcho, the CEO or something like that; are you 
going to threaten or vie that person for leadership? No. You’re going to 
have to join that person because otherwise, you may win the argument 
and not get anywhere. 
 
 
Having said that, with certain individuals they won’t respect you unless 
you win the argument; do you see how it starts getting more complex? 
The point is now you can start looking for these things, you can start 
judging them and if one approach hasn’t quite worked out, you turn to the 
other approach and see how that one works out. 
 
 
You have things to test, which brings us – this is not directly a hypnotic 
principle but it very kind of is, this is very important, we started the day 
with this. It creates contrast. It’s through contrast that you’ll know what 
impact you’re having. 
 
 
If someone just shows you a photo and says this is the reaction you got, 
it’ll mean very little overall. You can make some educated guesses but the 
thing that will tell you what it is, is the contrast. If someone is like this in a 
photo, is he in trance? If a second ago he was like this and then he’s like 
this, is it more likely he’s in trance? It’s either that or he has narcolepsy. 
 
 
The contrast is going to be a really, good friend to you which means from 
the moment you start an interaction you need to be looking at what’s the 
general thing? You can’t be looking at every little thing because your mind 
would keep track of all those things, but you will notice shifts, things that 
are occurring. We’ll work more on that as we go along. 
 
 
As we do some exercises in a moment’s time I want to be aware of how 
much agreement you’re getting, how much compliance, and what are your 
relative status levels? 
 
 
It doesn’t matter what they are, just spot what they are. Incidentally you 
can still be the authority without being the top dog in the pack. Just sya let 
me show you some things that are very cool, you’ll really enjoy this, and 
then you slowly bleed into a point where you are the authority, where 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
43 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
they’re following what you’re doing and the status symbols are switched, 
but you’re doing it step by step in a non threatening manner. 
 
 
Does that make sense to you all? We will get a chance to practice all this, 
be assured. The part about assuming authority will be built into the 
exercises. What I want right now just as a simple idea is can you get this 
as a concept? The concept is straight forward, yes? 
 
 
The second thing is what I’m going to have you focus in on the rest of 
today. Before you do anything with it I want you to just be aware of it. 
Without awareness it’s very difficult to do something because you haven’t 
got a context to put it into, right? 
 
 
 
Context provides a contrast that tells you what’s going on. You’ve heard 
me talk about hypnotic context a lot if you’ve got any of her products and 
stuff like that. But in context there’s no hypnosis, because you do hypnosis 
differently in a hospital than in a bar room or on a street than with your 
friends than in an airplane – physically they might look very similar but 
there will be slight shifts that happen. 
 
 
True masters of hypnosis will typically make the adjustments 
unconsciously. They’ll notice – I’m not quite ready to do the induction yet – 
so you’ll hear them chat a bit more or talk about this stuff or do this other 
thing; why? Because their instincts are telling them the context isn’t right 
yet. They’ve spotted certain things but they’re not aware of it, it’s just 
experience has given them that pattern. 
 
 
I’d like you to start getting that pattern right now. In conversational 
hypnosis the biggest thing that goes wrong is people focus on the 
language, the words that they’re saying, and then they go blind or deaf 
and they don’t know what’s going on.  
 
 
It’s impossible do to do anything with the language unless you have 
somewhere to put the language, right? Like, it’s impossible to have a meal 
unless you have a person there, or a mouth to put the meal in. It’s 
impossible to store a bit’s just an empty space, what put it in. If it’s just an 
empty space, what do I do with it? There’s no container, it doesn’t make 
sense. 
 
 
We will come back to this. If by day three we’re not answering that 
question more fully, please feel free to ask again. Are we all good with the 
authority strategy so far? 
 
 
It’s just a strategy so far. Who here feels confident that they can spot at 
least some of these things going on in regular interactions? Not fully 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
44 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
analyze exactly what’s going on, just spot that there’s something going on 
and a relative shift going on and changes happening. 
 
 
In terms of the induction you just did a moment ago, I’d like you to just 
take these principles so far and mentally run yourself through the instant 
induction you did. You saw agreement and compliance being present did 
you not? You saw it more importantly when it was absent, did you not? 
 
 
Think about the authority. You notice that some people that approached 
as hypnotists had more of this than others, would that be fair to say? If you 
can spot this in others the next step is can you spot it in yourself? Can you 
think back on some of the inductions you did, perhaps with some people 
you felt more comfortable for whatever reason? I’m assuming there’s an 
answer to that we’ll come onto and you had more of this with them than 
with others.  
 
Can any of you think of that when you were doing inductions? Some 
people you felt more authority with than others? Through the contrast we 
get to feel that out. The next principle again, something we’ve been 
covering just now in the instant induction, is the idea of overload. 
Remember, we want to bypass the critical factor right? 
 
 
One of the things the critical factor cannot do is to think of too many things 
at once. We’re going to put a lot of concepts in a simple box, so in one 
respect the critical factor can be part of your attention span and that can 
only handle seven plus or minus two bits of information. 
 
 
If there’s too much stuff going on, you cannot do that consciously. Driving 
a car is impossible to do while conscious, did you know that? That doesn’t 
necessarily mean you get drunk to drive a car, but it’s all happening 
outside of your awareness. 
 
 
If you’re from Europe – I’m from Europe – so you have a manual gear 
shift, you have the pedals there to maneuver, you have the mirrors, you 
have to check where you are in relation to other cars, speed and 
speedometer – there are a lot of things going on. If you don’t think it’s 
happening just recall the first time you ever drove a car and the bucking 
bronco that resulted. 
 
 
 
That’s an example of trying to do something consciously that should be 
occurring unconsciously, and that’s what we’re aiming to do, get all these 
skills unconsciously, and in terms of overloading this is a great method of 
bypassing the critical factor. Again we’ll come onto this conversationally, 
but how did we overload the person here in the physical inductions? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
45 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We used shock and surprise. We used loss of balance, even though it was 
only partial and possibly, depending on how well you set it up, a lot of 
instructions that needed to be followed. Stand here just like this, look at 
me, take a breath, look here, focus clearly – there are a lot of instructions 
that have to be followed, make sense? 
 
 
Versus for example stand over here, look – am I using overload at that 
point? I can still be hypnotic, overload is not necessarily a universal 
principle, but it’s a very good one and one we’ll be using in conversations 
too. 
 
 
Let’s see what other things we did. Let’s look at the actual induction we 
did in terms of its mechanics, in terms of what’s going on. Those of you 
who have seen the instant induction videos will already be familiar with 
this, but this is in answer to your question. 
 
 
When you do the instant induction you’ll notice that normal regular 
consciousness is here. Let’s say this area down here is unconsciousness 
– for want of a better word we’ll call it trance for now – when the person is 
overloaded or receives some kind of shock or surprise, something that 
doesn’t fit its normal pattern, it’s going to do something with it. 
 
 
Because there’s no pattern up here to be able to deal with it, the person 
will dip into trance for awhile. Trance is basically, amongst other things, a 
vehicle that allows us to open up realities and test other ways of being 
things and seeing things and so on. That’s why we learn quicker in trance 
than out of it, because we’re open to newness versus trying to fit it into 
oldness. Does that make sense? 
 
 
It spikes into trance trying to make sense of this all. If nothing else occurs 
at that point, the person will naturally return to regular consciousness. The 
whole thing might take up to a second, two seconds at best; it’s very rare 
that it goes beyond that and it’s usually less than that. 
 
 
People will spike into a trance and then slowly emerge, which is exactly 
what it is you said you saw. You saw them going down and coming back. 
In the absence of anything else this is how 90% of the instant inductions 
will go.  
 
Occasionally, someone will formulate an idea of what hypnosis is about, 
either because they’ve already experienced it with other people, they’ve 
been preconditioned, or they’ve seen other people do it so they’ve been 
prepared in other ways, so they’ll stay in trance all by themselves because 
it meets an internal expectation. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
46 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
For most people however, in order to keep them in trance you will have to 
do something to prevent them from popping back out. What do you think 
that might be? A deepener, exactly that’s what deepeners are there for. 
Deepeners are there to stabilize the trance experience, to prevent the 
emerging phenomenon.  
 
As a rule, trance is not stable. It goes in little cycles. If left alone, that cycle 
might cycle back up. Suggestions might allow that cycle to go further 
down, or intensify the state. When you said the words deeper, deeper, 
deeper; who here noticed it had more of an effect on them as a subject 
than if someone didn’t say that at all? 
 
 
That’s not particularly elaborate suggestions is it? The rule of thumb is, 
with any kind of instant induction, with any kind of shock, surprise, or 
overload if you’re using that principle, they will return back to their regular 
normal state of being unless you do something to guide them deeper into 
the experience. Does that make sense?  
 
 
That’s the part you missed out on you didn’t deepen. Deepening is very 
simple, that’s right, just go deeper, deeper, deeper enjoy it and so on. You 
may need to put a reason in there for keeping them in there, because the 
other thing that will happen here is if they don’t want to accept your 
suggestions because they don’t feel safe for example, up they come 
again. 
 
 
Does it kind of make sense in terms of the experience you just had this 
morning if nothing else? Would that be fair? 
 
 
Is there a way to put deepening on autopilot? Yes there is, would you like 
to explore it? We’ll do that in a moment. We’ll come onto that literally after 
we finish this segment here. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Is there a way to put this on autopilot? 
 
Igor: 
Sure. We’ll actually come onto the whole process we’ll do something 
physical in a moment. The purpose of what we’re doing right now very 
simply is I want you to recognize that even though you only spent half an 
hour doing the mechanical bits around hypnosis, do you recognize that 
there’s a lot of content in terms of the principles you’re applying? Would 
that be fair to say? 
 
 
Can you actually see yourself, when you review the performances you had 
here a moment ago, can you spot when you actually applied one of these 
principles? Importantly also, when you did not, and hence didn’t quite get 
the same kind of result as other people? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
47 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Again, we need to have those contrasts so you know which direction to 
head in, because I’m not going to be there forever holding your hand 
saying let’s do it this way, let’s do it that way. You’re going to be able to 
develop your own experiences and in conversation contrast is what keeps 
you on track. Make sense? Good. 
 
 
There is going to be one more principle that we’ll throw in, do you want to 
do that now? We’ll do that in a minute. Let’s go to your question in terms 
of creating deepness. 
 
 
Before we can make deepness automatic, we need to know what a 
deepener actually is, in other words experience different ways of doing 
deepening, would that be fair? Then you’ll have control of one skill you 
can put on autopilot. 
 
 
What I want you all to do is very simple, put all your bits and pieces down 
and stand on up. I’d like a volunteer if I may. Thank you for volunteering. 
 
 
Stand over here John, just look at me. Take a deep breath in- breathe out, 
all the way and sleep, that’s right. Deeper, deeper and deeper still. As you 
maintain your own balance you go deeper into trance. That’s it.  
 
 
Every time you feel this, I’d like you to go deeper and feel more 
comfortable. That’s right deeper and deeper. In a moment I’m going to 
move you around slightly, you’ll be perfectly on balance and you’ll be 
totally safe. Just follow along as you move your arms slightly, totally safe, 
totally on balance. That’s right. 
 
 
Deeper, that’s right. Deeper, there you go, deeper still. Because you’ve 
come up here John and you’ve volunteered you get a gift. Everyone gets a 
gift. I’m Santa Claus – only a little bit less in the middle. 
 
 
What I’d like you to do is have your unconscious mind go ahead and 
search out all the experiences where learning something was easy, 
because it was fun, because you forgot that you were learning something 
just because you wanted to do it. 
 
 
You did it again and again and again, and each time it became easier and 
more fun. At some point you kind of mastered it. Other people thought; 
how do you do that? It’s easy you just do it. 
 
 
You’ll know you’re finding those experiences because a good feeling 
develops inside. Do you feel that good feeling? That’s right, there you go. 
That feeling is going to be your guide throughout the course of this 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
48 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
seminar, making sure you master conversational hypnosis. Each time 
you’re going to get better. 
 
 
You don’t know necessarily how or why you’re getting better, but you’re 
going to enjoy it in the same way you did back then. It’s just going to be 
fun, all that’s going to be a resource to you in helping you understand this. 
 
 
You don’t need to know how it’s going to happen you just need to feel 
good whilst you’re doing it. You can do that, can you not? That’s it. There 
you go, there it is. There you go. I’ll turn you slightly. You’ll be nice and 
deep in trance. There you go, very good, a little more than that, there you 
go, very good. 
 
 
Is that difficult to read? I’m going to count from one to three, and on the 
count of three you’re coming back fully alert and these suggestions going 
even deeper as you continue to jump to the next exercise. 
 
 
To give your unconscious mind a real chance to prove to you that it exists, 
which by the way it does, allowing you to do things that will amaze you – 
you get to look forward to that now, can you not? One, two, three wide 
awake. 
 
 
Good job, well done. Thank you so much give him a nice round of 
applause. 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
You don’t have to do a bit in the middle, that’s just a freebie because he 
was being so kind. Once they’re in trance and you keep them for a bit, just 
make some general suggestions about learning. I’m going to give you 
advice now though – keep them very short. Why? 
 
 
The exercise will be very short and if you’re halfway through when I call 
you back the other person doesn’t get a chance to have a go. Does that 
make sense? Just keep it very short, some general things about learning, 
if you’ve learned things in the past you can learn things in the future, easy 
as that, and you can do it. 
 
 
The key thing I want you to focus on is number one; did you see some 
kind of agreement or compliance going on, yes? Let me get some 
feedback here, did you see agreement and compliance? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Was there a clear distinction in authority, in terms of someone being more 
in charge of the process than someone else? Not in terms of value of the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
49 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
individual, not in terms of who is more important or anything like that, just 
in terms of who is directing the interaction – would that be fair to say? 
 
 
Was there a context in which the hypnosis could occur, in which it was 
appropriate to do what we were about to do? Did we see some kind of an 
overload? Did we see deepening maneuvers? 
 
 
The deepening maneuver itself is very simple, we’re using another 
hypnotic principle, it’s called the law of associations. You may have to 
bend sideways to read that. 
 
 
The law of associations is, basically, the primary level at which the 
unconscious mind reasons. If two things happen at once, they are the 
same thing, they become bonded. Think of your unconscious mind, your 
experiences, as being sticky. When something happens to touch onto it it’ll 
stick, it’ll stay there’ll be a bond. It might be a weak bond or a strong bond 
it doesn’t matter there will be a bond at the unconscious level. 
 
 
You can exploit that bond. You can enhance that bond and make more of 
it. What was the association? What was the bond we did with John? The 
touching and deeper, right. 
 
 
Does touching people mean they’ll go deeper into trance in normal 
everyday world? No? You’ve touched hopefully hundreds of people in your 
lifetime without them zoning out to the floor and you’re saying what the 
hell is going on, am I Midas? 
 
 
Yet, did it feel pleasant? Did you see the physical changes as a result of a 
touch? Is this beginning to answer your question yet – not entirely, but 
beginning to? We associated one event to another and the unconscious 
mind ran with it because it already had an experience of both occurring at 
the same time. Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Just a comment. I’ve had this done to me before… 
 
Igor: 
Do you want to get on the microphone? Then everyone else can hear you 
as well. 
 
Audience: 
I’ve had this done to me before and the person kind of – and it was so 
hard, it put me to the ground. 
 
Igor: 
Can I just borrow you? This is kind of an important thing. Normally this 
comes out after the exercise but we may as well deal with this. Let’s 
imagine that James is in trance, and the way you put him in trance is 
whatever put him in trance. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
50 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now I’m going to say deeper, deeper, deeper. Is that the same experience 
he had going into trance? No. By the way you can actually do deepeners 
that way, but it requires set up because the association isn’t there yet. 
What association is normally there when people do this sort of thing to 
you? 
 
 
It’s jogging, it’s alerting, it’s putting more energy into your system which is 
precisely the opposite of what we want. Now, if I’m doing a hypnotic blitz 
in a normal conversational setting I might well do that – you’re a great 
person, you can really do this – you’ve seen coaches and other speakers 
do this, give each other a pep talk and almost beat each other up while 
they’re doing it – it works there. Why? 
 
 
The context allows it. The association is already predisposed over 
lifetimes of learning. Don’t violate the associations you can pretty much 
assume are going to be there. A gentle touch will usually be enough. 
Why? Because that’s how people normally respond and relax in these 
open minded sort of ways. 
 
 
Recognize by the way that there will be an occasion where a more 
vigorous sort of association and a more vigorous sort of tap might be the 
right thing. Let me give you a hint – it’s not now. Does that make sense to 
you all? 
 
John: 
 
♦ Can you do another association?  
 
You said as you find more balance you’ll get deeper. That’s another 
association. 
Igor: 
Yes. John was saying the second thing I did was say as you find your own 
balance you’ll go deeper, which answers your question even more fully 
before I was ready to do it – you’re too good. That was a second 
deepening mechanism as well, and that was more out of laziness for me 
because I didn’t want to hold your weight up the whole time. 
 
 
Does that make sense to you all? Is the exercise very clear? You’re going 
to do the exactly same thing, while they’re in there make them feel good, 
say something general around learning, nothing too long, and then a 
gentle touch. 
 
 
As a rule the more in trance someone is, the more sensitive they become 
in terms of physical experience, hence a very slight touch will usually be 
more than enough. 
 
 
Do I have a quick question here? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
51 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ When you were inducing John, what was the overload that 
allowed you to tap him on the back of the head? 
 
Igor: 
Let me make it a little easier for you; the touch on the back of the head 
was the overload. I was overloading him a little bit with locus, focus, 
breathe in- breathe out and sleep. There were a lot of instructions going 
on there. I knew he was going to slightly expect it, so I didn’t want him to 
know when it was going to happen. It’s a question of timing on the 
overload too if you want a complete answer, but the major portion of it was 
the tap, the shock is the overload. 
 
 
Is everyone good? Another quick question? Give John a nice round of 
applause in the meantime. 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ It’s just something I noticed; so in other words overload 
happens while you’re setting the hypnotic context, it’s 
interwoven within, correct? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. The main thing we want to do here, and this is something we’re going 
to get into more and more as we go along, nothing is done individually. 
We’ll do these things individually to get used to them, to create a contrast 
so you know where they’re at, but conversational hypnosis is everything 
happening at once, there is no difference. 
 
 
When someone is watching it they should be going I don’t see it, I don’t 
know what’s going on. It’s all blending together. The analogy I like to use 
is the idea of pencils – this is not a pencil but if you imagine a nice thin 
pencil, I could probably snap it in half, right?  
 
 
If I had two or three of them could I snap those in half? It’d be a little more 
effort but I’m strong like bull, I can do it 5, 10, 20 of these things in a 
stack? No. You have enough pencils you can have a tank roll over them 
and they’ll carry the weight. Does that make sense? 
 
 
That’s what we’re looking to do here in conversational hypnosis. Each one 
of these elements is a pencil you put through your conversations. It’s very 
simple to weave in, it’s invisible, but when enough of them have been 
stacked up together it’s irresistible. But hey everyone, you haven’t even 
finished the first morning yet, so take it a little easy on yourselves, will 
you? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
52 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s just do the exercise, instant induction, go with a deepener, associate 
a touch to the deepener to see how easy it is, give them something nice at 
the end and bring them back. Do two or three people if you can, you’re not 
going to have very long. You’ll have two minutes to do three people, so 
speed will be of the essence right now and then we’ll come back. Off you 
go. 
 
 
Was it fun? Were your hypnotists relatively competent? Did you enjoy 
being put in trance by someone else? 
 
 
So I noticed something else happening, and I wanted to point it out 
because this is what I hoped was going to start happening; who noticed as 
a subject when someone was saying deeper, deeper and that sort of stuff, 
who noticed that the hypnotist just knew exactly when to say it? You said 
that’s it, that’s exactly when I needed to hear it. 
 
 
Why this half of the room? What were you all doing over here? 
 
 
What’s happening right now is something called the reinforcement or the 
feedback loop. Whenever something occurs in hypnosis, you want to jump 
in it. You’ve heard of the hypnotic triple, when you repeat something three 
times it’s the magic number in conversations but in terms of trance you 
really have much more leeway to go beyond that. 
 
 
You’re reinforcing a particular response by putting more attention on it. 
You know the old saying where attention goes energy flows? By putting 
attention on something you’re reinforcing it, you’re feeding a loop back into 
it. 
 
 
What a little more than half of you were doing, and you may not have 
noticed this, is you’re saying deeper as their balance is shifting more, as 
they’re relaxing more. It’s actually augmenting something that’s already 
occurring. 
 
The reason I mention it now, rather than before, is now that you’ve done it 
I want you to start paying attention to it, so you’re spotting it as it occurs 
and creating this whole feedback message. They respond to you 
somehow, you latch onto it, you do more of it, it happens again, you do 
more of it, it happens again. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Repetition and reinforcement are keys in all forms of hypnosis, especially 
conversational hypnosis. The question will be; how can you then repeat 
certain ideas so it doesn’t break the conversational context? You want to 
be able to repeat yourself without sounding like a broken record. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
53 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
When you repeat yourself in the right way, it won’t sound like a broken 
record, and they’ll still get the message. It’s just a question of figuring out 
how do you repeat yourself so it’s not too obvious. 
 
 
Of course sometimes you’ll repeat yourself more obviously than others, it’s 
just a question of how can you repeat yourself so it’s not too obvious? Do 
you see what I mean? 
 
 
Can I have a volunteer who likes to be in hypnosis, anyone? I’ll use you 
for a second. Have we put you in trance yet? Not officially. There we go, 
we may as well complete the circle we had from before. 
 
 
Look at me, take a deep breath in, breathe out, sleep, all the way down, 
deeper, that’s right, deeper still – you’re doing great. Finding your own 
balance will help you go even deeper now, more relaxed. The more 
relaxed you feel the deeper you go, the deeper you go the better you feel. 
The better you feel the deeper you go, the more you relax. 
 
 
All of you can relax but this one part here, just put this one hand up there 
and make a fist, nice and strong. That’s it, nice and strong. The more 
strength that’s in that arm the more you relax. 
 
 
Locking this arm straight, locking it out rigid like a concrete bar, like an iron 
bar, steel that will not bed. You relax and you feel better in here the more 
this is stiff, tense, and rigid, stiff, tense, rigid, feel it happening now. Very 
good. 
 
 
When you feel that hand being so stiff, so rigid that it will not move no 
matter how hard you try, feel it, bring a life of its own becoming stiffer and 
stiffer, just go ahead and test it. Try to bend that up and notice you cannot. 
Stiffer and stiffer; feeling better inside. Stiffer and stiffer; feeling better 
inside. 
 
 
Come on, you can do better than that. Really try, come on. Try and bend it 
and find that you cannot. Relax it all the way. You did a great job. An 
example of how your unconscious mind can operate outside your 
consciousness. 
 
Another way to do this is by learning, by making it easy to become a great 
hypnotist. You’ve already seen some people up here discover how 
learning occurs. You know what’s happening, don’t you? 
 
 
That good feeling will come inside you as well. That’s it, you can feel it 
now. When it lights all the way so that you can’t help but smile, you’ll know 
you’re ready to come back out because your unconscious mind, that’s 
right, has prepared you to make it so easy to become a hypnotist its 
unreal. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
54 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
There you go. A little more than that – then your eyes will flutter open all 
by themselves. That’s amazing, isn’t it? Good job. Well done, thank you. 
Give him a nice round of applause. 
 
 
Was there any repetition involved there, any reinforcement, feeding back 
things that were going on there? We’ve added a few more little things 
now. 
 
 
Remember, the law of association works in many different ways. One of 
the ways that it works, and this is something you’ll be practicing in a 
minute, and this is going to be one of the most crucial things in 
conversational hypnosis, we’ll show you tomorrow how to work with it, is to 
develop a reference experience. 
 
 
Reference experiences are experiences people have had, and you’re 
going to use them to build a different experience for them through the law 
of associations. 
 
 
For example, has anyone here ever fallen asleep and had their arm go 
numb, anyone, maybe a leg or something? I had this once, I was sleeping 
on a sofa, it was a couple of years ago now, I feel asleep, my leg fell 
asleep right along with me, had a knock on the door and I woke up but my 
leg didn’t. 
 
 
It was the most interesting experience getting from my couch to the front 
door. My leg wasn’t working. I could kind of walk on it because part of it 
was working but the knee wouldn’t lock so I had to hobble. It was very 
interesting. 
 
 
Now that you have that experience as an idea, if someone needed to 
perhaps develop pain control, isn’t it easier when the unconscious mind 
already has an idea of what kind of things it can do to get there? Wouldn’t 
that be fair to say? 
 
 
In terms of fear, has anyone here ever touched something concrete? Has 
anyone here ever tried to bend an iron bar, even on a door or something 
like that, you feel the solidity of it? You’ve felt the solidity of an iron bar, 
you’ve felt the un-bendingness of it as opposed to a piece of paper? 
 
 
Strong like a piece of paper doesn’t quite cut it, does it? We’re using 
natural associations as reference experiences to enhance the effect that 
we want. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
It looks like we’re doing a few trivial things really, right? But there are 
already a lot of layers of principles involved in that. Those principles are 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
55 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the key things, because if you can translate those principles into a 
conversation then you will be unstoppable as a conversational hypnotist. 
 
 
If you have the illusion that it’s all about what you say, then you’ll be very 
confused because you won’t know why it works sometimes and it doesn’t 
others. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
The words are just a way of putting the principles into action, and that’s it. 
There are a couple other things we did there which we’ll talk about 
afterwards but I think it’s more important you all have an experience of 
this. 
 
 
The steps are very simple. You can all do an instant induction, is that 
correct? You can all do some kind of a deepener, whether it’s a touch or 
counting something out for them and so on, would that be fair to say?  
 
 
Actually, would you like to have a new deepener that’s a very important 
one for hypnosis in general? We may as well throw it in there because 
otherwise it’s just a nice little parlor trick, would you like that? The principle 
is very simple. Can I have a volunteer, anyone? Look at you. Do we have 
agreement here? Me! Come on up, give him a round of applause. 
 
 
We’ll keep this short and sweet because I just want to get the principle out 
very quickly. The idea is very simple. The more someone goes into the 
trance the easier it gets. They’re learning, their bodies are climatizing, it’s 
adjusting, so it’s easier to get them deeper by bringing them out and then 
back in again. Make sense? 
 
 
Let me show you what I mean. Have a look at me, and sleep, all the way, 
deeper, that’s right, deeper still. The deeper you go the better you feel, the 
better you feel the deeper you go. In fact the deeper you go the better you 
feel, the more you go into trance. That’s right. 
 
 
In a moment I’ll count to three and on the count of three you will open your 
eyes feeling alert, feeling fresh. When I say the word sleep you will close 
your eyes and drop into a state as deep as this and even deeper. This will 
happen every time. At the count of three your eyes will open, you’ll feel 
alert. When I say the word sleep your eyes will close and you’ll go even 
deeper than this each and every time.  
 
That will continue to happen every time we count. Bob your head if you 
understand. Very good. One, two, and three. Very good. You enjoy that? 
And sleep. That’s it, very good. Deeper and deeper still. You’re doing 
great. This time you go deeper. Your unconscious mind will naturally start 
finding resources to make learning hypnosis a real breeze for you, which 
means you will feel even more wonderful as you go into a trance. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
56 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Consciously you have no idea what’s going on other than that you feel 
good, unconsciously you can start to find all the resources you need to 
truly master hypnosis in ways that will surprise even you. 
 
 
One, two, three eyes open – and sleep. All the way, that’s it there you go, 
finding your own balance each time. Deeper and deeper each time, one, 
two, three. Very good. 
 
 
Are you enjoying that? Very good and sleep. All the way, that’s it, deeper 
each time. Find those resources, getting stronger still. By the time we 
count to three a few more times you will feel so good inside you’ll take that 
feeling right to the outside and you just can’t wait to get a hold of someone 
and do some hypnosis because it feels right, this is natural. 
 
 
One, two, three eyes open – and sleep. I like that. That’s almost there. 
Third and last time, this time’s the charm – one, two, three wide awake. 
Good job, well done. Let’s go find him a partner. Off you go. Give him a 
nice round of applause. 
 
 
I kind of over repeated a little bit. Could you see the clear distinction of 
each cycle, coming back and going back into trance a little deeper? Did 
you notice how he was also responding to suggestions? When I changed 
the suggestions about deepening, now it’s no longer about a deeper 
experience but actually about other stuff happening as well, did you notice 
him coming back differently also? 
 
 
Was suggesting working at some point? Was something beginning to 
work? This is the kind of stuff, we’re starting to get into now and what I’d 
like you to do is very simple.  
 
1. Number one; find a partner, put them in trance, instant induction – 
easy to do, right?  
 
2. Number two; deepen in whatever way you wish to for a couple of 
seconds to stabilize the trance.  
 
3. Number three; I would like for you to repeat a fractionation at least 
three times, no more than five just for time reasons. You can go all 
day if you want but it gets very tricky at that point. 
 
Do it at least three times, no more than five, just get that process of in and 
out, in and out. The key things are, when you count or whatever the signal 
is, eyes open out in the room. Now, it’s a slight nuance I put in there, 
you’re welcome to put it in there if you want to – you will feel alert, or you 
feel awake. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
57 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’m not saying you will be alert or you will be awake, but you will feel it. 
What that allows for him to do – it won’t always happen – but what it 
allows him to do is rather than popping back into consciousness before he 
goes down, is to hover around or even stay just off the mark of it. 
 
 
This allows you to do all sorts of other interesting things later, but no need 
for that now. You’re welcome to use it, and if it’s too much to think about 
don’t worry about it, a simple induction, a simple deepener, fractionation– 
so far so good. Once you’ve done your third round of fractionation just do 
something simple like the steel bar.  
 
Once again there’s no rocket science, we’re just using reinforcement, 
repetition and a reference experience. That’s easy, isn’t it? 
 
 
Get them to test it and when it’s been tested – just a little trick, when you 
say okay forget about it and relax, shake their arm out a little bit because 
sometimes the muscles will actually lock and they’ll find it a little difficult to 
figure out how to relax it again. So, a little bit of movement by shaking it 
out will help their muscles remember how to relax. 
 
 
Does that make sense to you all? Any questions on the exercise? 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ What’s fractionation? 
 
Igor: 
When Lester was up here just now and he was going into trance and out 
of trance and into trance and out of trance, did you see that bit? That’s 
fractionation. It’s very simple. 
 
 
We’ll talk about what’s happening there and why after you’ve done it, but 
we don’t want to talk about it too much we just want to do it and get the 
feeling of it and then we’ll throw the principles out some more. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ What stops that…post suggestion? So like, if you were to say 
sleep again now, would he go into trance? 
 
Igor: 
Nothing unless you suggest it. I left it ambiguous in that this time it’s for 
real, so coming back out, but we can find out, are you willing to play? 
Sleep – I guess its working. 
 
Because you’ve gone as deep as you have, and thank you Lester for 
really letting us play with this – that’s right, all the way now Lester – I’d like 
your unconscious mind to find an even better gift for you right now. 
 
 
That feeling you had a moment ago, you may as well double or triple it so 
that you feel it so strongly that when you come out of hypnosis in a 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
58 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
moment you can’t help but bring that into every interaction because it’s 
just so good. 
 
 
One, two, three – wide awake. 
 
 
I guess it does. Don’t worry about it too much this is not what we’re 
looking for right now, that was just to answer your question. Right now 
we’re developing principles and the principles will be used in 
conversational hypnosis in time. Make sense? Everyone cool? Find a 
couple partners and let’s just do it. 
 
 
Who enjoyed that by the way? Was that good? No? We’ll come back to 
you in a minute. 
 
 
Can you see these principles beginning to work in practice? Can you start 
seeing them interacting, playing out in front of you in little gestures and 
little things they say or do, or even things you feel and experience 
yourself? Would that be fair to say? 
 
 
The next thing to do, if you want to think like a true master hypnotist, is 
what happens when you start combining the principles? For example, a 
couple of you pulled me over for problem clients – what if you combined 
the contrast – contrast is how we can tell what’s happening in the world. 
 
 
If there were no contrast we’d be deaf, dumb and blind and we’d be 
without sensation, so its the contrast that allows you to have something. If 
you doubt me, who here has a wristwatch? Who here feels their 
wristwatch during day to day activities? Who here feels it when they take 
their wristwatch off again after awhile? Doesn’t it feel weird and empty? 
 
 
The contrast you’re feeling because your body has become acclimatized 
to something. Doesn’t that make sense? What if the contrast that 
someone is making is what’s in terms of what’s not working? 
 
 
I’m not really that relaxed, I’ve got pain – what are they looking at for 
contrast points? Is that going to enhance the trance experience or not? It 
may be discomfort. Basically, you’re contrasting against the critical factor, 
against things to reject experiences. 
 
 
You mix the contrast principle with the critical factor, what do you have? 
You’ve got a great block to hypnosis, which kind of answers your question 
once again from earlier on. 
 
 
What if, however, and by the way, there’s a reasonable portion of people 
who will do this instinctively it’s their learning style. It’s not a bad thing, it’s 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
59 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
they learn by contrasting against information on what’s not working and 
what’s wrong, and what isn’t right and so on. 
 
 
Is that going to help you put them in trance? What would you want to 
contrast against? Would it not be fair to say that if they’re contrasting 
agreement against what they can accept that suddenly the whole thing 
turns around? 
 
 
As a rule if someone comes up to you and says it’s not working or I can’t 
be hypnotized, someone has tried before and it hasn’t worked. A few 
things can go wrong. 
 
i. Number one, probably the context wasn’t set in the first place. They 
had a poor hypnotist that did a rush job.  
 
ii. Number two on the list, is they’re contrasting they’re looking for the 
wrong information.  
 
They’re having an experience, it’s just every time they have the 
experience because they’re contrasting against what’s not working they’re 
using their trance to reinforce not going into one. Do you see how that 
works? How might one switch that principle around so it’s working in your 
favor? 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Can you make an association? 
 
Igor: 
An association to what? 
 
Audience: 
The more you focus on the problems the deeper into trance you go. 
 
Igor: 
It can do it, but even if you get over the critical factor the association might 
not take. Does that make sense? It’s something worth playing with 
absolutely and I’ll show you how to elaborate that which is a lot of fun, but 
as long as you keep that in the back of your mind it’s worth a test and if it 
doesn’t work out you’ll know where to go next. 
 
Audience: 
Re-direct their focus to something they have to agree with, such as 
breathing or blinking. 
 
Igor: 
Oh she’s a quick one – you have to redirect their experience to something 
they have to agree with, in other words breathing or blinking or that sort of 
thing. 
 
 
I’d like to go one step further. Why? If all you’re doing is redirecting to 
something they have to agree with like blinking they’re short. Mentally 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
60 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
they’re adding something but it doesn’t mean anything, it’s that but we 
have to get rid of somehow. Does that make sense? 
 
 
What if we get them to contrast against something that is working, no 
matter how small? There’s one thing we know absolutely for a fact, there 
is no homeostasis in terms of an absolute experience that is unfaltering 
and unchanging.  
 
 
We are constantly in flux. We are constantly relaxing more or creating 
more tension. It cycles. Even in trance remember, the trance is not 
perfectly level, it’ll cycle even though it might trend towards a direction. 
Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
The answer is; if you get them to contrast against that portion of the cycle 
where it’s already working, they can’t deny that experience of it having 
worked a little bit. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Of course, if they’re really true hard core testers, which is again a good 
learning style, it’s a useful thing in some environments - they’ll say yes, 
but it’s not enough. If that happens, what might you say at that point? How 
might you handle that just using the principles we know so far or any other 
principles I really don’t mind. 
 
Audience: 
This is increasing. 
 
Igor: 
You’re very close I actually would go with that first and see if it takes.   
 
Audience: 
Agreeing with them it shouldn’t be enough. 
 
Igor: 
You’re so close. This is coming into what we’ll do later with frame control. I 
might as well give you all a chance, go on. 
 
Audience: 
Beyond enough, what would be enough?  
 
Igor: 
Going on to mind bending language, that would work great at that point 
but we’re not handling mind bending language here so I’m going to use a 
slightly different approach. 
 
Audience: 
A little takeaway. 
 
Igor: 
Right, like you just can’t have it? 
 
Audience: 
I guess you can’t feel that sensation, the comfort of trance and so on 
 
Igor: 
That will work great with certain personalities. You have to read the 
person. Some people will feel dejected. If there’s dejection, they don’t feel 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
61 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
good enough, that’s part of the pattern that’s creating the contrast. You 
don’t want to use that because you’re going to feed into their pattern of I’m 
not good enough. 
 
 
If on the other hand they’re challenge oriented, they’re going to say I’ll 
show you buddy. Again, do you see how you have to be able to read the 
interaction very carefully to see where we’re going with this? 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Couldn’t you integrate it by telling them the discomfort is part 
of the process? 
 
Igor: 
Integrate it so the discomfort is part of the process absolutely. Allow me to 
just put you out of your misery to some extent. By the way this is great, the 
ideas you all are coming up with, all of them will work in a certain context. 
 
 
The key idea we’re trying to get towards is, what’s the key problem when 
someone says, I feel a little bit but it’s not hypnosis, but it’s not enough, 
but – what’s the key problem there? 
 
 
It’s not good enough. They’re denying their own experience as being the 
right experience. We’ve got to switch that key idea around. I really like 
where you were going with this, you were so close. 
 
 
What if you said it’s not enough yet, or we’re not there yet. What does the 
yet allow them to do? Right, so it allows them to delay the testing, the 
contrasting with the failure, until later. 
 
 
Something happens with time. There’s a nice little bit of research when it 
comes to time which is that when things happen in the present moment, 
people look for effort. They look at how much it would cost them to do this 
particular thing. 
 
 
For example, if I said to you all who wants to buy my new course right 
now? You’ll say how much does it cost? That’s probably utmost on your 
mind. 
 
 
Next year I’m going to release a course on making hypnosis 10 times 
easier, it’s not ready yet. Who would be interested in that? 
 
 
What’s happening right now is by projecting into the future people tend to 
focus on the benefits of something. Make sense? Now is the cost, future is 
the benefit. It’s just part of how most people tend to think. 
 
 
If you can delay their testing to the future that’s what the word, yet, is 
doing it’s not the word that’s all powerful it’s what it does inside the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
62 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
person. If you can delay them testing it until afterwards you’re doing two 
things; number one they’re no longer looking at the present cost, the 
present cost being this is not working, the effort involved, what do I have 
to do to make this work? 
 
 
Number two you’re switching their yes mind on, because in the future 
you’re looking for benefits. You’re switching it on in the present moment, 
which means now the contrast is more likely to work. 
 
 
These are all of course tendencies, we’re stacking the deck, but do you 
see where we’re going with this? Do you see how mixing principles 
together can give you a hell of a lot of leverage when doing hypnosis? 
Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
This is important because when doing formal hypnosis you will come 
across people who have those very mindsets, and you need to get 
through that. In a conversation it might be easier to put someone in trance 
because they don’t know that it’s not working, right? 
 
 
You’re not doing anything, so they can succeed before they know anything 
has happened. But even then, if you spot the same pattern, you need to 
know how to break it. The way you break it is very simply by getting them 
to contrast against success, and if you need to project them into the future 
where they’ll put their testing in, and that way you’re setting them up to 
look for benefits, look for successes rather than failures.  
 
Does that make sense? Do you see how that cycle works? 
 
 
It’s kind of involved, but the good news is, there are people in this room 
that will think hypnosis isn’t working for them. Please try to find them, and 
be gentle when you do, you don’t want to break them straight away of that 
habit, someone else might want to have a go too. 
 
 
Be polite.   
 
Audience: 
If they’re contrasting things, are you really bypassing their mind? 
 
Igor: 
There’s a difference between analysis and contrast. You can’t experience 
anything without contrast. If you put for example a dot right on the pupil of 
the eye where the light goes in, within 30-60 seconds, your brain will no 
longer see that dot. Why? Because the image moves with the iris, so it just 
deletes it. You cannot have that sensation, that’s what sensory deprivation 
tanks do and all that stuff. 
 
 
The unconscious mind still needs contrast, it’s just we’re not evaluating 
the contrast, we’re not analyzing it. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
63 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The second thing you need to realize is that trance isn’t an on or off 
switch, it’s a sliding process. At the beginning, you’ll have a lot of 
conscious activity and some unconscious activity suppressed to the 
conscious stuff. Then you’ll have the next stage will be conscious activity 
slows down, unconscious activity is enhanced. 
 
But, it’s more by permission of the conscious mind, and over time the roles 
reverse; consciousness is at some level absent, the experience is still 
there, they may still have memory, but they’ll go with the experience more 
smoothly, the sliding scale they’re going through. 
 
 
In a conversation it’s rare you’ll reach that bottommost level where 
everything becomes absolute reality, and you don’t want it to either 
because it skews the conversation in ways you don’t want it to. 
 
 
It’s a sliding scale and you want to be able to work at each level of that 
scale, rather than just at the end of it. Does that make sense? Everyone 
cool; are you liking this? 
 
 
Do you notice how the exercises are straightforward, pretty simple, right? 
Do you notice how there’s a lot inside them in terms of anything you do 
that’s hypnotic is packed with principles, and those are the things I want 
you to pay attention to, because the principles make hypnosis actually, 
and the principles make conversations hypnotic. Make sense? 
 
 
There’s one last thing I just want to add very quickly, we don’t need to 
spend much time on it, but now is the time to do it before we come back 
after lunch. Stuff has to happen in the brain in order for anything to occur 
whether, its hypnotic or anything else. Hypnosis is not an automatic 
formula, hypnosis is not instant success, hypnosis is a process and it has 
to be processed by something. You have to sometimes give them time to 
process. 
 
 
Ironically, it depends on what you’re doing. The mental processing 
principle shall we say, says you’ve got to just pause and give people a 
chance to absorb the suggestion, absorb the idea. 
 
 
All too often I hear people rushing through suggestions and none of it 
sticks because there’s just too much. But of course you can see clearly 
that this will go against another principle we’ve already talked about, 
haven’t we, the overload principle? So which one is right? 
 
Exactly; it’s just a question of when. It goes right back down to what is the 
context? What’s going on right now? What do you want to go on? You 
overload primarily to bypass the critical factor. You allow mental 
processing time primarily to stimulate the unconscious. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
64 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Sometimes you’ll start by overloading and once you’ve got to the right 
point there’s this beautiful moment of pause where suggestion just rests 
and it sinks in. 
 
 
You might go back to overloading again just as consciousness becomes 
more active and you can repeat the cycle, you can fractionate those 
cycles just like anything else. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
This is very important because we are moving at a relative pace here. I 
don’t’ want you to think it’s all got to be speed hypnosis, now, because 
conversations do take their time and there’s some things you’ll have to 
place in very carefully in one conversation that you won’t even play with 
until maybe a few weeks or months have passed. 
 
 
We’re looking at the long term here right now. It just depends on what the 
relationship is like, what the situation is like, what you’re doing, and so on. 
Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
Principles work, sometimes certain principles when put together will make 
it work less, for example the contrast versus the critical factor, and if that 
happens just find out what is the dynamic going on inside that person and 
then you can start switching it around. Does that make sense? Any 
questions on that as ideas go? 
 
 
The important thing is; these principles I want you to refer them back to 
something you’ve actually done or experienced. Has anyone here actually 
presented to you even just today a suggestion that came too soon, like 
you didn’t quite know what to do with it? Did anyone have that 
experience? 
 
 
That’s the mental processing part. Some people – by the way, sometimes 
resistance is just the hypnotist going too quickly. Anyone here have a 
sense at some point that you were thinking too much and that you’d 
followed too easily and they weren’t really leading you all that well, 
anyone? 
 
 
That’s the absence of overload. There’s a balance point to be found for 
each individual at different levels. That’s what we’ll come onto tomorrow 
when we start talking about reading people and so on. 
 
 
You all felt yourselves being led by someone, you felt competent or you 
wanted to follow along, right? And you felt some people that you didn’t feel 
safe in their hands, didn’t really know what they were doing and thought, I 
don’t know about this stuff I just make it up and pretend to go along with it 
but nothing is really going on? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
65 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
That’s the authority principle. I want you to take all these principles and 
take it back to something that’s occurred to you, something you’ve actually 
done, because after the break we’re going to come onto the language. 
 
 
We’ll play lots of different language games, and initially they won’t have 
much purpose other than to get used to the language, but the important 
thing is when we start applying the language, the language is absolutely 
irrelevant. Let me reemphasize this – the language is totally irrelevant. In 
fact, it’s counterproductive unless it’s expressing these principles for you. 
 
 
If it’s expressing these principles then the language makes sense, 
because whether you’re using power words or trance words or whatever 
words you’re playing with, it’s doing something for you now, something 
very purposeful. 
 
 
If on the other hand you’re just throwing those words out because that’s 
what the course said you should do and you’re just reading the script out 
and all the rest of it, then sometimes it will work and sometimes it will not. 
 
 
The times it will work is when you’ve accidentally got the right context and 
all these things are working for you – beautiful. The times it will not is 
when somehow accidentally you have violated an important principle and 
you can’t fix it until you start looking at the interaction and asking yourself; 
what principle is missing? Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
As you go to lunch I’d like for you all to do two things if we could; number 
one, reflect on your experiences here this morning and see how you can 
attach one of these principles to at least one experience you’ve had so far. 
This was an example of someone having good authority, or this was an 
example of when I had good authority relative to the person I was working 
with. 
 
 
Here’s an example of when I got good compliance or when I didn’t; 
contrasting the things. Go through the list and find at least or two 
reference experiences. 
 
 
The next thing I want you all to do is think about; how might I try and do 
this in a normal conversation? Don’t try to do any of it, I mean if you really 
have to I’m not going to stop you, I’m not going to be there at lunch 
looking over your shoulder, but observe normal conversations. 
 
 
Have a chat with someone and say wait a second, was that a bit of an 
authority thing going on here? Am I agreeing with him? Is this agreement 
going on well? Is he agreeing with me? Am I complying with his ideas? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
66 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Did I have it for awhile and then lose it? That would be the contrast 
principle alerting you to what’s going on. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
I’d like you to take the time to have conversations, to get to know each 
other over lunch but in the back of your mind, I want you to filter for these 
principles, because you’ll see they happen – they cannot, not happen. 
 
 
If there’s another human being present, it will happen at one level or 
another, does that make sense? We’ll come back from lunch and we’ll 
start playing with the language, but it’ll be a context that is, actually useful. 
 
 
Thanks everyone, off you go. 
 
 
 
DVD 3:  Conversational Hypnosis                    
Language Foundations 
 
Igor: 
Welcome back everyone. How was lunch? Do you feel nourished and 
nutritionized? It’s a word – not a good word, but it’s a word. 
 
 
Who had fun this morning? Did you all learn some things this morning in 
terms of the hypnotic process and so on? Hopefully, I’m sticking true to my 
word that I’m teaching you things you’ve already seen before. If you’ve 
been to a course before, or if you have the home study course, there 
shouldn’t be that much that’s new in terms of what we’ve done. 
 
 
Do you see it from a different perspective? Can you see it from a different 
angle now. Would that be fair to say? Hopefully, you see much greater 
detail in how hypnosis works and how it’s put together. 
 
 
I’d like to do that and start getting into the hypnotic language a little more 
today. We spent some time on the mechanics and the principles. And 
language is a very important tool that we have because it allows us to 
express the principles. Does that make sense? 
 
 
More importantly, words will direct the mind in a way that will allow a 
principle to be activated or deactivated, depending on what you’re doing. I 
guess the easiest way of doing this would be the fun way. 
 
 
Everyone put your pens and papers down and stuff like that. If you have 
drinks please put them somewhere safe. I recommend putting them on the 
side of the room rather than on your chair because they might get 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
67 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
bumped. At least put them under a chair rather than on a chair or next to a 
chair. 
 
 
If you do put them on the side remember which one is yours, because a 
lot of coffee cups are very similar and you may like each other, in which 
case feel free to swap fluids, but otherwise make sure you know which 
yours is. 
 
 
Everyone please put your cups to the side and make sure it’s out of the 
way so people don’t knock it. Then stand up please. Make sure you have 
that over there otherwise, it gets knocked into the microphone and won’t 
be such a healthy thing. 
 
 
What I’d like you to do is just warm up, get yourself into the whole mood. 
We need to start being able to use language in a way we don’t think. The 
problem about using language on purpose is that we start thinking too 
much about it and it starts sounding awkward or stilted or scripted or fake. 
 
 
Has anyone here ever been called by a tele-salesperson? Has anyone 
ever had a call like that? Can you tell in the first five seconds that this is a 
telesales person? 
 
Audience: 
Within the first word. 
Igor: 
Within the first word right. What tips you off? 
 
Audience: 
It’s robotic. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly, it’s something about the voice. The rhythm is wrong. The tone is 
wrong. The emphasis is wrong. It’s not how normal people speak and it’s 
not how natural people speak. 
 
 
Once we start playing with the language, we can’t do it in a way that isn’t 
natural, because then you’re practicing the wrong thing. Does that make 
sense?  
 
 
We’re going to start playing with something. Get yourself in a state of mind 
where it’s almost impossible to think, which means your conscious mind is 
not interfering anymore. To do this we’re going to play an age old favorite 
game a lot of you have played this with me before. 
 
 
I’d like you to walk around the room, point at things in the room and with 
full conviction say what they are not as though they were the thing they 
are not. This is not an elephant, I hope you’ll agree – this thing is not an 
elephant? So I hope you’ll not go, "It’s an elephant." There’s no conviction 
there. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
68 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I need you to say it loudly and proudly, and move from object to object in a 
way that you don’t really have time to think about it. This is an elephant. 
This is a cartoon. This is an airplane and here we have some swallows. 
Point at them. Name them things they are not as if they were those things, 
with absolute and full conviction. Make sense? Hopefully not too much – 
off you go. 
 
 
I love what you all are doing. This is a, let me think, priceless painting. 
That’s the wrong way of thinking. We’re trying to develop a mindset where 
you don’t have to think too much about what you’re doing.  
 
 
What we want is three things; we want conviction, we want volume and we 
want you to speak before you know what’s going to come out of your 
mouth. If you say the wrong thing and accidentally name it the right thing, 
fine. If you say the same thing twice because it just slipped out, fine. This 
is not about being right it’s about doing it the right way. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
I want to hear volume. I want to hear you all walking around. I want to see 
you all pointing as soon as one thing is out of your mouth. You’re already 
pointing at something else and forcing yourself to go a little bit faster than 
your brain can keep up with. Does that make sense? Off you go. 
 
 
Whatever it is you’ve just been doing to get that pace going and get that 
volume up, notice how the room got louder? That’s because you’re doing 
it the right way. Do you notice how your brain feels like someone put a 
spinner into the works. And it won’t quite spin the right way? Did everyone 
notice that? 
 
 
You want that because, at that point, the only part of you that can respond 
is your unconscious and that’s the part that we need to respond, is it not? 
Would that be fair to say? 
 
 
What we’re going to do now is we’re going to start playing with language, 
but again we don’t want you thinking about this. We want it to be part of 
the natural way you’re speaking. Whatever you did inside your mind to do 
this, you’ll be doing it the same way in this exercise. Make sense? 
 
 
What we’re going to do now is – remember the law of association? One of 
the basic fundamental principles in the way the mind reasons and the way 
the unconscious reasons? 
 
 
What we’re going to do now is we’re going to start activating the law of 
association using what I call power words. Power words do many things at 
the same time. For a moment, at the simplest level, it activates that law of 
association by combining two things that are not necessarily the same. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
69 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
In order not to tax your brains with trying to be hypnotic and doing it all in a 
scripted, fake sort of way, I want you to be totally irresponsible. I want you 
to combine things with absolute abandon that have absolutely nothing to 
do with each other, because you can. 
 
 
All you’re going to do is, we have two parts, x and y, that need to be 
combined together. This carpet is here because God made me. Hopefully 
you will sense there’s a slight flaw in my logic, yes? If you do not, then I 
have something to sell you which is going to be very expensive, and I 
think you will like a lot. 
 
 
I want you to walk around the room and have half conversations with 
people. When you meet someone say anything that comes to your mind. 
The rule is the first thing that comes to your mind, whether internal or 
external, you’ll say. 
 
 
Well I noticed your t-shirt so I’ll say, That t-shirt has writing on it because - 
and you can attach anything else in. I saw blue, I thought sky – so 
because the sky is blue. I’m not analyzing it, I’m just having something 
trigger straight into it and I’m not even thinking about it. 
 
 
The key here is it should not make sense. It should be as random as 
possible. Your brain should be strained and hurting thinking what’s going 
on here. I don’t know what to say. You should feel like you’re about to put 
your foot in your mouth and say the wrong thing. In fact, you should from 
time to time be saying the wrong thing because that’s part of the way the 
unconscious works. Does that make sense? 
 
 
 
In time you’ll be able to navigate through that. We’ll talk about that in a 
moment. In the meantime walk around the room, meet people, and I want 
you to trade. They’ll say something because something, you’ll say 
something because something, and then you’ll move on and do it again. 
 
 
Do you want to have another demonstration of what I mean by that? I’m 
standing here because the ceiling is humming. There are people in the 
background making noise because the camera is turning. The sky is blue 
because there’s a heaven underneath the carpet. 
 
 
Honestly I have no idea where this comes from. Do you get the idea? This 
is random and the idea is to not make sense? Yes? Easy to do? 
 
 
I’d like you to literally trade sentences with someone. They come back at 
you, "Oh, that’s interesting thank you very much." Move on to someone 
else, as many different people. You’ll have two or three minutes. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
70 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I want speed. I want conviction again, so that it’s coming out with full 
energy. Not, "Hmm, the carpet is here because….there’s tape on the 
floor." Can you see that I’m completely violating the mental state we’ve 
spent so long developing? Would that be fair to say? 
 
 
I want conviction, I want volume, and I want the same enthusiasm. If 
you’re rolling in the aisles laughing, you’re in the right place. As soon as 
you’ve said your piece, they’ve said their piece and move on and do 
someone else, as random as it gets. 
 
 
Was that an easy exercise to do? Did you enjoy that? Now we’re going to 
add another one. We’re going to go with the same principle only this time 
we’ll go with the word as, x as y, or sometimes as x happens, y happens. 
 
 
As I’m standing here, you’re over there. I’m so sorry. I’ll try harder. 
 
 
As the pixies ate my brains… 
 
 
As a tree in the back of the room, it’ll rain tomorrow. Do you see how it’s 
the same kind of thing? As can be used as a because. It can be used as 
an as, soon as, as you’re doing this, this will happen, as you’re looking at 
me your brains will start melting, a little bit, maybe. 
 
 
It’s the same idea as before. You’re just using a different bridge to link the 
two together, so the effect will be slightly different. Make sense? Are you 
ready to play that game? Is that easy? 
 
 
Add a little just to make it more interesting, just because you can, would 
that be fair? I want you to use both at the same time. Because the carpet 
is here, and as you’re listening to me, the sky will continue to turn greener 
as the day goes on. That was two as’s, I’m good. 
 
 
The key here is to not make sense, to be as random as you can. Let the 
world around you inspire you or random thoughts inspire you. You’re 
going to use one because and one as in the same general flow of the 
thing. Once each person has one of each out, then you go. Then you go 
on and talk to someone else.  
 
 
Easy to do? Off you go. 
 
 
I’m going by the general volume in the room and the difficulty of getting 
you back, this has been easy so far, right? Let’s add one more, x and y. 
It’s very simple, the word, and, is a natural linkage – the carpet is there 
and there is a room. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
71 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Again, it doesn’t have to be great. It doesn’t have to be clever. It doesn’t 
have to be funny. Whatever occurs to you just say. I want it to have one of 
each thing.  
 
 
Because you’re listening to me, outside there is a car in a traffic jam and 
he doesn’t like it. As you’re listening to that traffic jam sound, everything 
else becomes smaller than it was. 
 
 
Again, we don’t care about what the content is, we care about using 
because, and, and as, as a sense of linkage and flowing through different 
things. The place your mind should be feeling, is like at the edge of a 
precipice and you’re about to fall over at any point. 
 
 
If it feels more like you’re sort of chilled out and going yes, because the 
room is dark…and the sky is gray…as you hear me…the world will fall 
apart…that is way too casual.  
 
 
You need to be at a point where you really cannot think and you do not 
know what is going to come out of your mouth until it’s out there and it 
surprised you. Does that make sense? 
 
 
You may be thinking you’re training language but there might be 
something else going on too. You can decide. All three easy – is that too 
easy? Do you want to have something a little bit more to spice it up a bit? 
Yes? No? Maybe so? 
 
 
All right. Just throw in, at any point that you want, the word imagine. 
Again, you see where this is going? You have four ideas that you’re 
presenting. Is that easy enough? Off you go. 
 
 
Good, are you all enjoying yourselves? Is it interesting stuff? 
 
 
We’ve got the basic four. These would be the power words, in case you 
were wondering. They do a lot of things but above all else, they allow you 
to sound hypnotic, which is kind of nice, right? 
 
 
We have one more to throw in there just so you’ll have five to start with. 
The word 'means' or 'which means' is the same principle as the others, x 
means y. You’re listening, which means you are really interested. 
Although, I’m sorry, that made sense. 
 
 
We’re going to make life a little easier now. We’re going to start using this 
a little more purposefully than to just sound like you’ve taken a little bit too 
much acid in your youth.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
72 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The way we’re going to do that is to talk about something called trance 
scenes. Remember, one of the core principles we’ve been talking about 
this morning is the idea of associations or reference experiences, right? 
How do you know what a table is? You need to, when you hear those 
sounds, you need to make a connection, and you need to open a filing box 
inside your mind where all your experiences of tables are included. 
 
 
It just says that this isn’t a table until you start putting things on it, and then 
it becomes table like, because I’ve just put a table like feature on it. Does 
that make sense? I’m using it as a table. 
 
 
The word itself, the sound is just a sound. That’s why someone could 
swear at you in Japanese and you’ll say, "Thank you very much. That’s 
very kind of you to say." It’s just a sound. 
 
 
If I start cursing at you in English you’ll be offended, but it’s just a sound. 
The offense comes from all the associations you’ve built up over time, 
including people’s reactions to them – like oh, that’s a bad thing, I wouldn’t 
take that if I were you, and so on. Does that make sense? 
 
 
We want to start using those reference experiences hypnotically, 
especially in a conversation. Those are the building blocks of their 
experience and if you can pull the right building blocks together you can 
recreate a different experience, one they may not have had before. 
 
 
We’ll keep it very simple at first, the trance themes are themes. They’re 
ideas that are loaded with, shall we say, experiences or reference 
experiences that are trance like in nature. 
 
 
 
If you have enough of these trance theme experiences at the same time, 
the person is more likely to be in a trance or more likely to slip into one by 
accident. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Let me ask you this in terms of your own experiences. What kinds of 
things did you experience when you started slipping more towards a 
trance? I’m not even saying you had to be in a full deep trance at any 
point today, but when you were more towards it, closer to it than not, 
would it be fair to say that you were relaxed, or more relaxed than before? 
Would that be fair to say? Yes? No? Maybe so? 
 
 
Does anyone disagree with that one? Okay. Now I want to make a point 
here; relaxation is a trance theme. It is not a trance prerequisite. You can 
do amazing things in hypnosis without any relaxation existing whatsoever. 
It's just a theme that makes it more likely and easier to achieve. Does that 
make sense? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
73 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Who here found their mind getting a little more focused on what was being 
suggested or what was being done? Anyone? A little more focus, a little 
more honed in on the individual or the suggestions? Did anyone feel more 
comfortable or calm? Yes? These aren’t the only trance themes, but are 
four simple ones we can have. 
 
 
If someone is feeling relaxed, focused, comfortable and calm, do you think 
it’s going to be easier to switch them into a trance than when they’re in a 
normal day to day state, or whatever they’re doing? Would it be easier to 
do that? 
 
 
We now want to start using our power words, our language, to start 
moving them in certain directions specifically and on purpose, which is the 
direction of trance themes. The way we’re going to do this is very simple. 
 
 
We’re going to start and use the x part of the equation here with any 
experience. It really doesn’t matter to me what it is right now, that is 
verifiable to them. It could be something they see, something they hear, 
something they feel, it might be as cheek as saying you can feel my touch. 
Of course you can, because I’m touching. 
 
 
It doesn’t matter where it comes from, the point is it’s got to be something 
they can verify for now. Then you’re going to use your because, your and, 
imagine, whatever it is, and you’re going to somehow plug in a trance 
theme. If it doesn’t happen to be too eloquent, I don’t care. 
 
 
It could be something as simple as, the carpet is lying on the ground 
because it’s time for you to relax, and the humming of the lights can make 
you relax even more. As you’re starting to relax – the words are starting to 
happen, so you may as well use it – feel the comfort that it brings. Imagine 
that comfort growing even more, which means you get to focus in on your 
own experiences for awhile. 
 
 
Is this sounding a little more hypnotic? But this is easy to do, isn’t it? 
Actually you may find this easier to do than coming up with random stuff, 
because that’s what your mind is designed to do, to make meaning out of 
things. 
 
 
Is this an easy exercise? The only thing you want to keep in mind is the x 
should be something they can verify reasonably. If you see them already 
relaxing you can use that as part of the x, and the y is just going to be one 
of the trance themes. 
 
 
You’re going to keep going and going and going, as long as you feel good. 
Go ahead? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
74 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Can we switch the order of the words? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. You can use them in any order you want, and you can use 
them as often as you want. You can use them twice in a row, three times 
in a row – if it fits I don’t care. There are no constraints on you all now. 
 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Do you have to do all five and then move on? 
 
Igor: 
For now yes, and then we’ll go from there. For now we’re going to do the 
same exercise, so you want to get these five in somehow. Once you’ve 
said your piece with these five and somehow got at least some of these 
trance themes in, they’ll do their piece and you’ll move on to someone 
else. 
 
 
This is still training wheels for now but we’re building up towards 
something more practical. Easy to do? Any other questions? Very good, 
off you go. 
 
 
Easy to do? Notice how that was actually easier to do, although you were 
doing more than being totally random and trying not to make sense. 
Would that be fair to say? That’s because your unconscious mind is on 
your side. It knows how to make meaning of things, so though it should be 
more difficult to stay within the parameters of meaning, it’s something so 
natural to you it’s actually easier to do than not. We’ll be using those same 
parameters as we go into conversational hypnosis. 
 
 
I want to do a slight tweak on this exercise, just add a little bit more to 
make it more interesting. Would that be all right with you all? 
 
 
So far we have the X's representing one thing, which is something they 
can verify like something they can hear, feel, sense in some way, and the 
y is being a trance theme – anyone of these. It doesn’t matter if it’s those. 
It can be anything really but the point for now, it’s something sort of 
hypnotic in nature. Make sense? 
 
 
What would happen if both the X's and the Y's were a trance theme? 
People would be relaxed because they want to relax, don’t they? And 
when they’re relaxed don’t they feel more comfortable? As there is comfort 
included in relaxation, just imagine how much more focused people can 
get on relaxing deeply, which means relaxation is more than just comfort, 
it’s a natural sense of focus that anyone can do, is it not? 
 
 
Does that make sense? Easy exercise? Off you go. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
75 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
How was that? Are you having fun with this? Even though it’s just an 
exercise right now and not an induction, who is starting to feel a little more 
relaxed? Anyone? Who is starting to feel a little more comfortable in 
general? 
 
 
We realize we’re only doing an exercise here. There’s no hypnosis yet, 
right? Is it me? We’re just chatting with people. We’re just playing with 
language. I think, whatever effect, it isn’t that you’re not having yet, would 
you like to have a little bit more of that effect you’re not having? Only if it’s 
possible, because if it’s not you may as well just do it and pretend it hasn’t 
happened. 
 
 
That’s the advanced seminar. 
 
 
What I want to introduce to you now is another concept. We have the idea 
of power words, and this is simple, right? There are many different power 
words, these are just simple ones I’ve brought out for you to get used to 
now. We’ll talk about how to find more in time. Then we have some simple 
trance themes.  
 
 
Again, there are lots of trance themes, but these are simple ones you can 
start getting used to. Then we can start applying more and more trance 
themes as we go along. 
 
 
What I’d like to do now as a way of enhancing trance themes that a lot of 
people don’t think about, and it’s something by the way that your very 
portion of the country in the USA is exceptionally good at. I call these 
reference similes. 
 
 
They’re similes that enhance whatever it is you’re talking about. Of course 
in the Southern USA, part of everyday speech is to use a lot of these kinds 
of similes. He was more careful than a long tailed cat in a room full of 
rocking chairs. It’s a very vivid metaphor and presents a vivid picture. 
 
 
The kind of similes I want you all to use now are the ones that basically 
have reference experiences that match these trance themes as closely as 
possible. For example, with relaxation if you talk about a wet dishcloth, 
that’s kind of relaxed, isn’t it? If you want to have someone be as loose 
and limp as a wet dishcloth, that has a very vivid picture which has or 
incorporates the idea of relaxation within it, does it not? 
 
 
Let’s take some other type of things. That’s an object, what about a 
situation? Has anyone here ever lain in bed in the morning and it’s time to 
get up and you’re so comfortable you don’t want to get out? Has anyone 
ever had that, or is it just me? I know it must be just me. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
76 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Again, it’s a simile. You can listen to me because it’s easy to relax, just 
like when you’re lying in bed in the morning and it’s so comfortable you 
don’t want to get up, and all your muscles just relax like a wet dishcloth. 
 
 
Do you see how we’re augmenting the reference experience by providing 
this vivid mental picture, or vivid experience they can build up inside the 
person? Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
The kind of categories I have in mind, and these are more for helping you 
think about it, it really doesn’t matter what category something belongs 
into. We can talk about certain objects. Shall we write these down so you 
have something to think about? 
 
 
We can talk about objects, right? Relaxation, the dishcloth is an object that 
has a quality of relaxation, does it not? If we had calm, what might be an 
object or a scene? What about a sunset? That can be calm or calming, 
can it not? 
 
 
Do you see how it augments the whole thing? We have a scene or a 
situation which could also be used as a reference simile. Lying in your 
bed, that’s a situation, a scene you can draw for people which will bring 
the idea of relaxation, calm to them. 
 
 
How about certain activities or actions? Again, they’re like similar 
situations, in a sense, that you could have someone lazing by a pool, 
floating down a stream, like a leaf being blown through the wind. Do you 
see how these are all metaphors or similes that still incorporate the 
essence of the trance theme, the essence of the experience that you want 
them to have? 
 
 
It augments the word on its own, and brings it to life even further. Make 
sense? Of course, you have personal experiences, so if you know 
something about the personal experience or their personal history, you 
can throw those in as well. 
 
 
Let’s just play a little game before we do this as an exercise, shall we? 
Give me some kind of simile or metaphor or situation, an object or an 
experience, an activity or something that is associated with focus, where 
the reference experience of focus would be coming out. Any ideas? 
 
 
Laser, somebody is talking about having a laser like focus. That’s a simple 
simile. What other things? Sitting in a cinema? When people sit in a 
cinema you focus in on the screen. It’s like sitting in a cinema, it’s 
comfortable, it’s relaxing, and yet you’re totally riveting to what’s going on, 
right? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
77 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What other things or situations can get you focused? You’re flying the 
plane, so you’re the captain? Provided it’s in someone’s reference 
experience that would be a great one, if it’s not in their reference 
experience they might say oh. 
 
 
What you could do is you could switch around, "It’s like you’re the captain 
of an airplane and everyone is relying on you." Do you see the difference 
here? In one, it’s like flying a plane, well if I haven’t experienced flying a 
plane I might not know what it means. If I want to elaborate the situation, 
and everyone is relying on you, that already implies a higher care, a 
higher focus and so on. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
You can also go to other things. What about focus like a tiger stalking its 
prey? You have a whole world of experiences to choose from. Does this 
idea of similes make sense and how these similes are going to augment 
your trance themes to build up a richer experience for them? Does that 
make sense? Any questions? 
 
 
We’re going to make the exercise a little more interesting now. We’ve had 
the trance themes on both sides of the equation. We’ve had the verifiable 
experience on the x side and a trance theme on the y side, right? 
 
 
What we’re going to do now is for the x side of the equation, you can use 
any experience that they will have to essentially accept or agree to in 
some way, which could be something that they’re sensing right now, it 
could something they’re feeling, something they’re seeing, or something 
they’re hearing. 
 
 
It could be something you know they will believe. It could be something 
you know is going to happen, like the sun rising tomorrow. It could be 
anything that is acceptable to that person, including a trance theme, 
because who doesn’t like to relax? 
 
 
Which means the relaxation becomes easier when you focus on the 
comfort that it brings. It’s just like a tiger stalking its prey, only the prey 
you’re stalking will be increasing comfort and relaxation, the inner calm 
like a monk that’s been meditating for years. 
 
 
Do you see how much richer your whole interaction now becomes? Can 
you feel that? If you look around the room, you’ll actually notice that 
everyone has become a lot quieter just by talking about these things. It’s 
opening up these reference experiences inside of us and we can’t help but 
recreate the same experiences. 
 
 
It’s a lot of fun and it’s very interesting. To make life easier or more 
interesting, this time I want you just to choose a partner and go through 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
78 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
two or three cycles of these things. The order is irrelevant, two or three 
cycles so you get to do it longer now. 
 
 
Because you’re doing it longer, you also have more things you can do. 
You have more variety to play with as well. Does that make sense to you 
all? Any questions about this? You can do it standing up, sitting down, 
walking around. I really don’t mind which way you do it, as long as you 
have those key elements; the reference similes, the trance themes, the 
power words, and you’re mixing it all into a nice, simple, hypnotic 
interaction.  
 
 
Well, pseudo hypnotic, since you’re not really putting them in trance yet, 
are you? Off you go. 
 
 
Are you getting used to this language stuff? Is it coming out a little bit 
more smoothly now? Here’s the irony, have you found that the more of 
these things you’re doing at the same time, actually the easier some of it 
gets because you have more ways of expressing yourself? Would that be 
fair to say? 
 
 
The key here is, it is something you have to practice, you have to do a lot 
of to have all the different directions to go in. These are exercises to build 
your confidence and build your ability to do this up so the more you do it 
the easier it becomes. It’s as simple as that. 
 
 
You should also find that it’s relatively natural the way you’re doing it this 
way, rather than trying to memorize some phrase or throw it in there from 
time to time and so on. You should be able to generate these things 
spontaneously as the situation demands. 
 
 
I’d like to focus on a couple more things. They’re kind of technically power 
words but a little different. I call these modifiers, they’re also from the 
street hypnosis deck for those of you who have it or are interested in it. 
 
 
Basically, if I say to you, "You will relax." I’m taking a bit of a risk there, 
aren’t I? For example, part of the risk might be that it’s too authoritarian. 
We talked about the wrong kind of authority might set people off. It might 
be a question of I don’t know how to relax – you will relax – but I don’t 
know – and you have that interplay going on. 
 
 
It becomes easier to suggest something if it’s done in a way that they can’t 
really disagree with, and then as the unconscious mind starts responding 
to suggestion you can make it more and more firm like that’s what you 
were talking about all along. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
79 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The ones I’m going to focus on right now are called softeners, or language 
softeners. We’ll do an exercise in a second. 
 
 
So we have five softeners here, just to give you some variety. These are 
words that take the certainty out of what you’re saying and make it a little 
more difficult for people to decide whether or not they can disagree with 
this yet. In other words, softeners – kind of imagine it this way. 
 
 
Remember the critical factor is a guardian standing at the gate, stopping 
people from coming in? A language softener is the equivalent of someone 
rubbing themselves in baby lotion so when it tries to grab him, they’re 
going to slip out and still get through. Kind of a kinky graphic metaphor, 
you’re welcome to it. 
 
 
At least you won’t forget it, right? 
 
 
I could talk to you about how everyone likes to relax, because relaxing is a 
wonderful thing, and as you relax and feel more comfortable, it’s like just 
drifting on a comfortable day. It’s as easy as a cloud drifting across the 
sky. 
 
 
If I add some language softeners though, your critical factor gets switched 
off all that much more because it’s harder to argue with it. People might 
like to relax. If they could relax deeply and experience that relaxation 
thoroughly, then perhaps they’d gradually feel the comfort that relaxation 
can bring, just like drifting on a lake on a warm summer’s day. 
 
 
Gradually people respond with relaxation. Maybe you could relax in a way 
that finds its own rhythm inside of you and you can be to experience that 
relaxation whenever you need to feel comfortable. 
 
 
Now wouldn’t that be an interesting way of speaking to people? You’re not 
really forcing any experience onto them, and yet the likelihood is, it’ll 
happen anyway because you’re opening up all those reference 
experiences and it draws inside their mind. Wouldn’t that be fair to say? 
 
 
Do you like that? Is that a nice little thing you can throw in? I kind of 
overused it a little bit just to show you what you can do. You don’t have to 
use them but you could use them, whenever you might think there is a 
usefulness for them. Gradually introduce them into your vocabulary 
wherever you think it might be useful. Could you do that? 
 
 
Perhaps. That is the right answer, very good. That’s a simple concept. 
You can just add that onto whatever we’ve been doing so far. Let’s just 
keep track of where we’re at. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
80 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We have power words. The layers run smoothly, right? We have the idea 
of trance themes that give us something to focus the mind towards, to 
bring experiences to life inside people so you can start shaping their inner 
experience for whatever purposes you need, whether it’s therapy, 
relaxation, influence, persuasion, it really doesn’t matter for now. 
 
 
We have the reference similes which actually make these so much more 
powerful. They bring them to life. It’s like an iron bar, a bar of steel. Do you 
see why we said that earlier on before when we did the demonstration this 
morning? 
 
 
Now we’re introducing the idea of softeners to make the message more 
acceptable. Especially when you think you’re in front of a critical audience 
or an audience more likely to reject ideas. You load up on the softeners in 
the beginning and gradually ease out of them as you continue. Make 
sense? 
 
 
Shall I add one more thing in there because that’s an easy thing to throw 
in? Would you like that? 
 
 
The final concept I want to talk about in terms of language is the idea of 
hot words. Remember, how do we understand what a particular word 
means? We have to build up associations around it, right? 
 
 
It would be fair to say that the words that have been around the longest in 
our own lives are the ones that have built up the most reference 
experiences, right? It’s kind of like the pearl that’s been in the ocean the 
longest is the largest, because it’s collected the most amount of shells 
over time, as time went by. Make sense? 
 
 
As a rule, hot words tend to be those words that you first learned as a 
child. They tend to be shorter and smaller. I assume that none of you the 
first 
word 
out 
of 
your 
mouths 
was 
something 
like 
antidisestablishmentarianism, maybe. 
 
 
It will be simple concepts like me, you, baby, cry, happy. Do you see how 
they’re much more loaded? For example, this is kind of a grim example 
but I kind of like to use it, maybe because I’m a bit grim. What’s the 
difference between saying the baby died or the baby burned to death. 
That’s harsh; do you feel the emotion of that? 
 
 
What if I say the infant perished in the flames. Consider; I’ve said exactly 
the same thing haven’t I? Content wise it is exactly the same thing. The 
information is the same isn’t it? And yet you respond more powerfully to 
one than the other. Why? Because baby has stronger associations, has 
richer associations, has more emotional associations than infant. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
81 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Infant is a word we use to dissociate from the baby-ness of it. We describe 
it as a smaller version of whatever that race is. It has fewer associations, 
less emotive associations. It’s more dissociated and more distant. We can 
handle the concept of an infant perishing in flames than that of a baby 
burning to death. Do you understand what I mean by this? 
 
 
I apologize for the grim metaphor, but I like to use it because it just really 
demonstrates powerfully what I mean by hot words. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
Luckily, you can use this in the reverse as well, in terms of the positives 
you put inside people’s minds. The baby lived forever, yeah!  Phew, got 
out of that one. I am not teaching you anymore. 
 
 
I’d like to introduce you to a couple of universal hot words, that you can 
kind of pepper into anything you do, on the understanding of course that 
this is just a tiny example of a vast vocabulary. If you want to pick up more 
hot words, do you know where you go to find them very easily? Talk to 
children. 
 
 
They’re the ones using them. They’re the ones who have the most 
sensationalism built up to them. The other place you can go are the places 
we normally don’t want to go because we consider ourselves too good for 
that, we’re talking about the lower brow press, like the National Enquirer 
which is, of course, the font of all wisdom and has a great deal of truth 
inside it. 
 
 
The way it’s written is almost exclusively using hot words, so it’s easier to 
read. Have you ever noticed that certain articles, like Cosmopolitan for 
example, for the ladies in the room, it’s easy to read because they focus 
more on the hot words than the longer more erudite words which are 
harder for us to read because we have less facility with them, we’re less 
used 
to 
them. 
 
 
Of course, certain circles like academia, they’re used to these words 
more. They’re used to speaking with these words more easily than with 
hot words, because they stopped using them, felt they were too dumbed 
down. 
 
 
Again, your audience will require different language as you go through it. 
Do you have a question? 
 
Audience: 
I was just going to comment on that.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
82 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
♦ So, we can go from maybe short like powerful hot words to 
more eloquent longer words, depending on the audience? 
 
Igor: 
The answer is yes, although you still want to be using both. 
 
 
Remember as a rule, hot words will have a stronger emotional drive 
behind them and if you want to have a stronger emotional drive, even a 60 
year old academic will respond to them because they’ve still built up all 
those reference experiences. 
 
 
The way you might want to use it though is you may want to change the 
mixture of them. Even though you’re talking about academics, you might 
start talking about the intellectual rules of a friendly interaction are vastly 
superior to the uninitiated examples of small children. I don’t know. 
 
 
The point is, I’m using primarily the vocabulary they’re used to but I’m then 
weaving in simple words like friendly, easy, natural, and so on. That fits 
that context as well. The experiment was performed using natural 
reagents so that we could easily tell which group would respond more 
fully. Do you see how I can still weave those in? 
 
 
Is it all one or all the other? What blend or mix do you use? The blend fits 
the audience. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
By the way, if there are any teachers in the room, it’s a great way of 
teaching as well. You start with a simpler vocabulary and over time you 
gradually introduce a more complex vocabulary so it kind of transitions 
naturally from one to another. It’s just a simple teaching point if you are 
teaching languages. If you’re not, then it’s free anyway. 
 
 
The kind of hot words you can start playing with, you’ve heard me use 
quite a few of them, and again please bear in mind these are just really 
simple examples. There’s no magic in them. They’re not any better than 
anything else you might use. They just fit the kind of themes that we’ve 
been talking about today. 
 
 
With all of these you can add the ‘ly’ and make them more useful, like 
friend and friendly, wonderful and wonderfully, gentle and gently, soft and 
softly. That gives you a little more scope on how to use them. Does that 
make sense to you all? 
 
 
 
Now we’re using our more emotionally loaded vocabulary. And by the 
way, where do emotions come from? The unconscious, right? Do you 
choose your emotions on purpose? Today I’m going to be very happy – 
yes I’m happy now. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
83 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Some people can do that by the way, but it’s only because they’ve created 
the same internal reference experiences and when they say today I’m 
going to be happy, their unconscious mind says well okay. It becomes a 
self suggestion. 
 
 
Most people have to do something to be happy. For example, think of 
positive memories, recall when they have good experiences, talk to a 
friend they like. In other words, you’re self simulating your own association 
on that word to feel differently. Ultimately, it’s your unconscious mind 
producing or generating the emotion. Does that make sense to you? 
 
 
When you start using hot words, this vocabulary here, you’re triggering 
those associations straight away. Culturally speaking, in terms of people 
who speak English versus people who don’t, you can have a pretty good 
idea of how people will respond to these. 
 
 
Now these aren’t universal. Someone who has been jilted and been 
stabbed in the back by a friend will probably respond toward friend very 
differently because that’s been mixed into the associational set. Make 
sense? 
 
 
I’d be lying to you if I said this was a universal, always perfectly true every 
time and so on. We are stacking the deck. It’s another little pencil in our 
set, it may or may not be the one thing that makes a difference, but at 
least you’ll have more choices. Make sense? 
 
 
Here’s the exercise. What I want you to do is again go back, use the 
power words as a base. Use the trance themes as a base. Use your 
similes to enrich those two things. And this time add into the mix modifiers 
to soften it and make it easier to swallow, sugar coat the pill, and hot 
words to bring more emotion into it, to make it more impactful in the way 
the message is received. Make sense? 
 
 
Would you like an example of what I mean? 
 
 
Only listen to me gradually. As you relax your mind enough to feel this 
wonderful sense of knowing what’s going on, because everyone knows 
how to relax and make connections easily. Now, gently allow your mind to 
feel whatever relaxation begins to occur now, so that you can easily turn 
that relaxation into enough comfort that you might gradually begin to feel 
good. 
 
 
It’s a friendly sensation, relaxing; and feeling as though you’re drifting on a 
cloud. It’s like waking up in the morning and feeling that warm glow of 
lying in bed and knowing you can stay there as long as you wish. It’s easy, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
84 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
a gentle feeling of relaxation, focusing your mind on how easy all this stuff 
is. That makes sense doesn’t it? 
 
 
Do you understand the exercise? Don’t think too much though. Find a 
partner and let’s spend a few minutes apiece. Let’s go through a couple of 
those cycles. Then we’ll come back and we’ll finish up before we have a 
break. Off you go. 
 
 
All right everyone, did you enjoy the exercise? Who here feels that they 
sound a little bit more hypnotic now? Anyone? Thinking about the person 
you just did the exercise with, did they not sound like a genuine, qualified 
good hypnotist just in terms of the language that was coming out? 
 
 
We haven’t even done any formal hypnosis yet as far as language goes, 
but already you’re flowing more smoothly, right? You should also find that 
this stuff is coming spontaneously; just the ideas are flowing by 
themselves. Would that be fair enough to say? 
 
 
It’s actually easier to do it this way than that random pointing exercise we 
did earlier on, right? It should also be easier to do this than trying to 
memorize a script or even read a script. 
 
 
I don’t know if you know this, but reading a script is something that takes a 
lot of training. Hollywood actors spend years developing the skill of 
memorizing and reading scripts.  
 
 
What makes us think, as hypnotherapists, we can just sit there and say all 
right, now you’re relaxing, relaxing, relaxing, all the way now. I mean isn’t 
that how we read unless we’ve prepared ourselves for something or we 
know the script already? 
 
 
I don’t like scripts and the reason I don’t like scripts is partly because it 
becomes cheesy, playschool acting, and partly because it limits your 
scope.  
 
 
In conversational hypnosis it is impossible with a script, it is downright 
impossible, because there’s no conversation. You can give someone a 
lecture, maybe a hypnotic lecture we’ll come onto those things, and you 
can memorize that lecture. That will work, but a conversation is impossible 
to run hypnotically because it requires interaction and that’s going to 
destroy your script like that. 
 
 
I’d much rather have you understand the principles involved and do it 
anytime, anyplace, anywhere, and fit it right into the conversation. Isn’t 
that a much more sensible way of approaching things? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
85 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Do you get a sense that you understand the language now? There’s a lot 
of richness here. There’s a lot of depth and exploration, and I strongly 
recommend that you do explore this. This exercise in itself is the core of 
what we’ll be doing here in terms of this style of conversational hypnosis. 
This is another style we’ll talk about in the advanced section. 
 
 
Essentially we have a guiding theme. That’s the power words. That’s what 
pulls everything together. It’s the cement that holds the building together. 
Make sense? 
 
 
Around that cement we’re going to fill that in with the trance themes. The 
trance themes are the purpose of your communication. In this case, it’s 
something simple like relaxing, feeling good, focusing and so on, but it 
could be to improve learning, and it could be to motivate someone towards 
something. It could be to excite someone about a vision of the future, it 
could be anything. 
 
 
For the moment though we’re focusing on relaxation and comfort because 
we’re still finding our feet when it comes to the whole trance thing, make 
sense? We flesh the very same things out with the reverse, the mirror 
image of that, which is the reference similes, the similes that breathe life 
into your hypnotic themes. 
 
 
You can sit there, and it’ll work – you know the old school hypnosis? 
Relax, relax, relax, sleepy, sleepy eyes, heavy sleepy droopy – it works. 
I’ve done it and it works pretty well. It’s very boring, but it works. It has its 
place. I strongly recommend that if you haven’t done so already, you go 
and hypnotize at least one person just through sheer force of repetition. 
It’ll teach you a lot of valuable lessons.  
 
 
This makes it much richer, and this allows it to start becoming more 
conversational. It begins to get more conversational, doesn’t it? Then you 
use things like your language softeners, your language modifiers, and that 
kind of creates more acceptability in terms of what you’re doing, right? 
 
 
Then you make sure you include your hot words. Your hot words create 
another context which fills a whole thing up and now every part of your 
communication is going in one direction, which is whatever your hypnotic 
outcome happens to be. Does that make sense? 
 
 
This is going to get the heart of the kind of conversational hypnosis we’ll 
be focusing on over the next five days. Another kind will be in the 
advanced program, which is different, but this is the heart of it and this is 
what’s going to make it conversational and very, very powerful. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
86 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We’ve got the power words which run through the center, right? The 
power words; because, and, which means and so on, right? Then you 
have your trance themes which give those power words purpose. You 
don’t just glue, glue to itself for the hell of it – maybe you do – but the point 
of glue is to put things together. That’s what the trance themes are about. 
 
 
The reference similes are just a way of enhancing the trance themes, to 
bring them to life more, to make them more potent. Then we have the 
language modifiers. In this case, we just focus on language softeners to 
make it more acceptable, to soften the impact of the message.  
 
Finally, we complete the picture by adding more emotion by focusing more on the 
 
hot words that are more emotive, that are responded to more powerfully at 
 
the unconscious level because it just has more reference experiences. 
Make  sense? 
 
 
Those are the key maneuvers that I want you all to understand, and if you 
learn nothing else in the next 10 days, this on its own will make you more 
influential, more persuasive, more charismatic than really most things that 
you’ll come across out there, this on its own. It is really worth spending the 
time and the effort to make this an absolute natural way of communicating 
for you. 
 
 
For me it’s harder to turn it off than to turn it on, it just feels natural to 
speak this way now. Does that make sense to you all? Once you’ve got 
this, then we can start learning more complex structure and that’s what 
tomorrow will be about. So you can make these things more powerful, 
have more impact with them still, and maneuver things in different 
directions. 
 
 
In other words, the thing that’s missing here is a process. That’s what 
tomorrow is going to be more about. For the moment, you get this idea. 
It’s straight forward and with practice you’ll get better at it. 
 
 
Audience: 
He found himself, as the hypnotist, speaking this way would zone him out 
as well. 
 
Igor: 
You’re just ahead of the crowd. Do you want to come up since it’s a little 
bit longer so then everyone can share in the bounty of your experience? 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Is that less likely to happen with something that’s not so 
focused on relaxation, calm, comfort and all those sorts of 
things? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
87 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
The answer to your first question is, really it depends on not the focus of 
the trance themes, that’s not the important element. The important 
element is your purpose. In other words, what are you trying to achieve? 
 
 
If your purpose is you need someone to be more in this sort of trance, 
then it’ll happen more. If you need someone being more like, "Yes, I’m 
going to go for it." – then it’ll happen less. In other words it’s called going 
first. We’ll get into that after the break. And you’re putting yourself in the 
position first psychologically, physically, emotionally and so on that you 
need the other person to be in so it’s easier for them to follow in. 
 
Audience: 
That’s much more important than the actual language patterns that 
you’re using? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. 
 
Audience: 
Okay, because that’s what I found even after a sentence or two. I felt 
myself almost really zoning out and then I could see him doing it and then 
I kind of lost track of what I was saying. 
 
Igor: 
Later in the week when we get to the irresistible induction, this will make a 
lot more sense, and there’s a reason it’s called the irresistible induction – 
here’s a hint – because it’s hard to resist. What you’re talking about lies at 
the heart of that, yes. 
 
Audience: 
Great, thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you so much. All right everyone, let’s have a quick break – okay go 
ahead. 
 
Audience: 
You were mentioning before that with a hot word, for example, let’s say 
you say friendly to someone who had been back stabbed and they would 
react negatively. 
 
Igor: 
They might, it depends on if they associated it with friend and now it 
becomes a tainted concept and so on, but yes. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ If they have that sort of counteractive reaction, what is 
something, as a hypnotist, you can do to counteract what 
they’re going through? 
 
Igor: 
That’s an excellent question. Basically, you used the wrong word you 
should notice you’ve got a reaction. We’ll get more into how to spot 
reactions as we go through, it just tends to tell you that whatever you did 
was not quite right. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
88 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The simple answer is you switch. You cycle through a different 
vocabulary. In other words you start using different words. If you spotted 
the actual thing or phrase or word that you used that made them react so 
badly, then you just drop it from your vocabulary and use other phrases. 
 
 
Guardians, people assisting, people who assist – you might use 
metaphors or similes to do that. You can still go down your original track 
you just avoid pressing the hot button. 
 
 
Sometimes you want to press the hot button on purpose it’s a way of 
deflating. In other words, taking out the taint or the original sting. That’s 
something we’ll talk more about in therapy and so on. There’s ways of 
doing that as well. 
 
 
Ultimately the simplest way of doing it is when you spot the phrase that’s 
causing problems, stop using it and focus on different language that is 
being more emotive and so on. Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Yes, thank you. 
 
Igor: 
That was a good question. 
 
Audience: 
Another way to diffuse the situation would be an objective, trustworthy 
friend.  
 
Igor: 
It can work great, and again it’s just something you can experiment with. 
There’s no hard answer to this. It’s a simple question of, you know what 
the problem is and you know what to avoid, which is that particular 
problem.  
 
Now you can go down the irresistible suggestions route where you start 
stacking other associations around the term to make it more acceptable. 
For example the happiness of a trustworthy friend – now you have 
happiness and trustworthy worked in, but if trust is still part of the issue 
that might still reinforce. 
 
 
You can go wrong with everything you do, but you’re more likely to go 
right. What we’re trying to emphasize is this is about stacking the deck. 
This is not about absolute 100% sure fire guarantees because if you 
believe in those things, unfortunately that’s just not how life works. 
 
 
Plenty of people will promise you this one thing will always work 100% of 
the time, guaranteed and so on, but it doesn’t really exist in the world. 
What you can get to is very close to that, and that’s what we’re doing right 
now. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
89 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Audience: 
Thank you, Igor. I just wanted to comment on what you said a second ago. 
My wife and I are relatively new hypnotherapists, we were trained initially 
in directive script-driven hypnotherapy. 
 
Igor: 
Get out! 
 
Audience: 
We’ve been studying the mind bending language and the conversational 
hypnotherapy course, as well. 
 
Igor: 
This is like alcoholics anonymous for script readers. My name is James; I 
haven’t used a script in 10 weeks.  
 
[Applause-laughter] 
 
Hi, James. 
 
Audience: 
A quick couple of points. One, I wasn’t taught your H+ in my original 
course. I find that as I go into trance, as I’m working with somebody and I 
have been very distinctly, that I’m much more effective. 
 
Igor: 
I agree. We’re coming onto that after the break by the way. 
 
Audience: 
Secondly, I hit hot buttons all the time and have negative reactions. That 
usually helps me help them better. 
 
Igor: 
Sure. As a hypnotherapist it is your job to find the hot buttons, right? In 
ordinary conversations it may be the polite thing to do to avoid the hot 
buttons. It really just depends on context again, doesn’t it? You’re 
absolutely, right. I don’t think having hot buttons – even if they’re negative 
– is a bad thing. You just need to know what they are and what the 
consequences are.  
 
Do you want to come up? 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Can we think of that as a distant relative to fractionation? 
 
Igor: 
Are you talking about the hot buttons? 
 
Audience: 
Yes, hot buttons. 
 
Igor: 
The idea of going back to a hot button which is negatively charged or even 
positively charged, and coming back to it and cycling back to it over time, 
could you think of that like fractionation? Yes, I encourage you to think 
more of those thoughts. They are very good thoughts. For conversational 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
90 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
hypnosis you’re in exactly the right place. In fact, you’re probably in day 
four already, so you may as well take a break for a while. 
 
Audience: 
I’m having more like an ethical question about hypnosis, because the way 
I see it you teach the good side of hypnosis. 
 
Igor: 
Then there’s the evil top hat wearing, monocle, sleep now… 
 
Audience: 
No, not like that. It’s more easy what I found out to, for example, scare 
people or draw a negative picture of something and then say well if you’re 
scared don’t do that and make them follow you. 
 
Igor: 
Let me address that first, I’m sure there’s a follow up question. The idea 
that fear is easier to achieve than something like confidence or courage or 
something like that, as a rule it’s true, and I believe there’s a survival 
reason for that. 
 
 
The species that was more cautious was less likely to jump out and go, 
"Oh, what’s this thing with big sharp teeth?" Fear kept us alive more, so 
we tend to respond to fear. You can see this a lot. For example, I don’t like 
this a lot, it’s a personal opinion. You all can make up your mind as you 
wish – I don’t like the news, especially the TV news, because they use a 
lot of fear to create drama. They use the fear drama to drive ratings so 
people actually watch the news, because they need those ratings 
otherwise they don’t make their cash. 
 
 
Over time the news has evolved into an increasingly fear based 
messaging service, make sense? They need that attention and fear is a 
great attention grabber. In normal everyday life many people find exactly 
the same thing. They get a strong reaction with fear, and because it’s 
easy, or relatively easy to fear monger, to grab attention with fear and 
attach things onto it. It becomes a tool like, don’t do that behavior or there 
will be fear attached to it. 
 
 
The up side to it – and this is going back to the win/lose win/win model, is 
that over time we tend to avoid people that scare the bejesus out of us. It’s 
not a healthy way of creating long term interactions. 
 
 
Even though in the short term they can do damage, or in an enforced 
situation like for example a family situation or you’re in a cult and you can’t 
leave physically, it can do a lot of damage I agree. But the good news is 
switching to the other version, the light side might feel like it takes longer 
initially, but actually its staying power is much longer.  
 
 
Actually, I feel it’s a much more valuable and productive tool overall 
anyway. Does that make sense? You have a follow up anyway? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
91 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Audience: 
I completely agree with that. We’re actually colleagues. I’m doing 
international law, but toward the end of the course you find out there’s only 
evil people remaining and you actually see that the world is ruled by evil 
people and that’s the whole thing. If you want to get to power you get in 
bed. 
 
 
I actually want to do it through the good side, but if that evil side is 
stronger… 
 
Igor: 
To use a quote from Star Wars; is the dark side stronger? No, quicker, 
more seductive. It’s true, it’s easier to get the hang of controlling people 
through fear. It is a lot easier. People instinctively develop these skills. 
 
 
Is it better? No, in the long run it’s actually a lot harder to do because that 
fear will come back and bite you as well. Yes, I can’t force anyone to 
behave one way or another. I can tell you though, and hopefully, the 
experiences you’ll have here over the next week or two will demonstrate to 
you that it’s more effective and in the long run you will be more effective 
when you go down a different route.  
 
The win-win model versus the win-lose model. You have to carry your own 
ethics. Ultimately you’ll make mistakes along the way too, everyone does, 
right? You may mean to do something really nice for someone and then 
you’ll do something accidentally, which is not so pleasant and you’ll learn 
from that and you’ll move on. Maybe you’ll do better as a result. That’s just 
part of being a human being. 
 
 
Thank you for addressing that. One last thing then we’ll have a break. 
 
Did you want to come up? 
 
Audience: 
I was going to make a comment that like my niece, she doesn’t listen to 
anything when you tell her don’t do this, don’t do that, so I actually wanted 
to tell her when she boils water in the microwave that you have to be very 
careful because it will explode in your face. 
 
 
The way I told her was, I said, "Do you want to hear a story about a man 
who melted his face off?"  
 
 
She said, "Oh my God, what happened?"  
 
 
I said, "Well, he put a Pyrex dish to boil water in the microwave, 
pulled it out and it exploded in his face." 
 
 
Then I had her attention and she was completely absorbed, but then I took 
the negative and turned it into a positive. I said, "So what you want to do is 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
92 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
put a wooden spoon or something in the water and that will dissipate the 
heat to a point where it’s not going to explode." 
 
Igor: 
Giving the mind somewhere to go, that is other than the fear, an escape 
from fear. This is actually a very valuable point. We may as well address 
this although we’re coming more into this later in the week, and it touches 
the same point. 
 
 
As a rule, and actually research backs this up, if all you have is a message 
of fear and a general instruction like, for example, don’t do this, people 
ultimately will be afraid and will fail. It’s not very motivating. 
 
 
If you give someone an initial message based on fear but then you give 
some very clear action steps out of that, people will be very strongly 
motivated and actually complete the action sequence if the steps are clear 
and precise enough. Does that make sense? 
 
 
What you were doing there again, it leaves a clear view inside the mind. 
It’s not like I’m stuck in fear and I’m going to be afraid of boiling water for 
the rest of my life, which is what the original message is – it can explode in 
your face – it’s actually creating a chain of action out of it so there’s safety 
again. 
 
 
How many people here are afraid of crossing the road, anyone? Just me? 
 
 
Exactly, that’s the point – why aren’t we as a rule afraid of crossing the 
road? Because we have a chain of action that allows us to control the 
situation. The fact is though, we do feel fear. On the roads out here which 
aren’t really designed for people to cross them, you stand at the edge 
going, "I want to cross this thing, but I don’t know." Somehow I have this 
little angst thing going on. 
 
 
That’s because part of your mind is telling you, we don’t have a process 
for this road. I have no wooden spoon to lead me out of this one, so you’re 
stuck in that loop. Does that make sense? 
 
 
This is just as a general aside; if you are going to use fear then you want 
to create a simple loop out of it so it leads to a better place rather than 
keeping them stuck in that one. That’s the biggest problem I have with fear 
mongering, it doesn’t really lead anywhere, and it just leads to more and 
more and more. 
 
 
Do you ever see these pity fests where someone says, "Oh my life 
sucks.", 
 
 
"My life sucks more, my life is so terrible."? These are loops? We 
have a habit of getting into loops no matter what we do. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
93 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Rather than having fear or misery loops, how about creating different 
kinds of loops? Happiness, motivation and success loops. They’re just as 
powerful loops. We’ll come onto loops later as we go on. 
 
 
Right now we’ve overstayed our time for the break and I can see a lot of 
people need a few minutes just to chill, so let’s take a 15 minute break and 
be back here at – we’ll be starting here at 5:00 on the dot, so be back here 
at 10 till, would you please. 
 
 
DVD 4:  The Power of “Hypnotic Circles” 
 
Igor:    
Let’s start launching into this and getting a little bit more hypnotic with 
what we’re doing and creating some performance skills. 
 
 
 
The language that we have is hopefully starting to flow reasonable well 
 
now. Is that fair to say? What we’ll be doing now is, I want you to think of 
 
this as the base. This is the foundation on which you build your house. 
 
You do not need to build a conversational hypnosis house on this specific 
 
foundation, but it happens to be a very good one, a very solid one on 
 
which you can do so. Does that make sense?  
 
 
I’m going to ask you all to try to remember five or six key concepts and 
introduce them as richly and distinctly as you can over the next few days 
so they become second nature to you. In fact, I would encourage you to 
overly use them. Overdo them initially so that when you stop doing them 
as intensely, they’ll still be part of a natural conversation and they’ll be 
there for you when you need them. Does that make sense as well? 
 
 
The one thing you’ll find is that in here, it’s relatively easy to be obvious. In 
other words, people will realize you’re doing something because they’ve 
had the same training as you. However, here’s an idea I’d like you all to 
just contemplate, which is, how far would you have to go out there with 
normal people, that don’t even know that you’re hypnotists, before they 
realize something actually is going on? It’s an interesting idea, isn’t it? 
 
 
Do you think it’s going to be further than it would be in here, or less far? 
You don’t need to answer it right now. Don’t answer it now. Keep it inside 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
94 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
your mind. The real reason I’m saying this, by the way, is because it’s not 
important what we think right now, it’s when we go out and experience it 
that matters. Isn’t it?  
 
 
So if you go out and you really try – I mean I’ve had people really try hard 
to get people to notice something weird is going on, and they found at one 
point they hammed it up enough that people noticed. I wonder where that 
point will be for you in your interactions. That’s the main question I have.  
 
 
What I want to do now is start ingraining this and started adding some 
more performance themes. I’d like you to get into groups of five or six 
people. Grab some chairs and create a circle. It’s called a hypnotic circle 
because it’s a circle of hypnotists. That’s a circle. Not a square. We’re not 
doing hypnotic squares again, all right just so you know; triangles, stars or 
any polygonic things. 
 
 
Grab four or five other people. Get yourselves in a nice circle and as soon 
as you’ve done that, please keep the volume down and tune back in 
because I’ll show you what we’re going to start doing with this. We’re 
going to start building things up, but let’s get ourselves into formation first. 
Do that as quickly as you can so we can actually do the exercise. Off you 
go. 
 
 
Here’s what we’re going to do as a warm-up. We’re going to start putting 
more things into this now. I want you to start off with where we left off, 
which is, we’ll have some power words, some trance themes, throw in 
some reference similes, add in some language softeners from time to 
time, sprinkle in some hot words to build up the emotional content and so 
on. Make sense? 
 
 
You can have the words we’ve been talking about here. Just throw them in 
and ingrain them so they’re natural to you. The way we’re going to do this 
is, we’ll have one person – so right now, let’s say it will be James. He’s 
going to speak to the group as though it was one individual. He’s going to 
present a string of hypnotic ideas to his group. It might be two, three, four. 
It really doesn’t matter.  
 
 
The one thing he’s not going to do is he’s not going to hog the time and 
spend the next half hour waxing lyrical. Literally, it will just be, you know, 
"It’s funny how people can relax because relaxation is as easy as 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
95 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
watching clouds drift by.", all right? That’s a nice simple little hypnotic idea 
he’s presented there.  
 
 
When he’s made a few of these things, not too many, he’s going to pause, 
look significantly at the person to his left. In this case, it’s Arthur. Arthur, of 
course, when he stops drooling from his own trance process, will notice 
he’s being looked at by James and he’ll go. "Oh, gotcha." Then he’ll pick 
up where James left off. 
 
 
He might present something along the lines of, which means – now he’s 
talking to this group as being the subject – which means you can relax 
even further, only begin to feel the comfort as you focus like a laser on 
how good it feels.  
 
 
All right, can you hear all the things we’ve talked about so far? He’s only 
made two or three hypnotic ideas and presented them. Then once he’s 
done that, he’s going to look significant at Yuichi, who’s going to go, I 
know it’s my turn. You’re going to keep going around and around and 
around, and I wonder who is going to last the longest.  
 
 
In case you’re wondering, the inner ability to speak shows that you have 
won. So when you’re just sitting there going, "I’d really like to say 
something, but I feel far too good to speak." You just won the game. Of 
course, the next person gets second prize and so on. Just keep going 
around and around and see what happens with that. Is that easy to do? 
 
 
As a hypnotic circle, you’re doing everything you’ve done so far, but now 
you’re going to start listening and interacting with other people as they 
present their ideas, too. And it’s going to keep going around and around, 
but you’re not going to stop until I bring you back. Okay, everyone, off you 
go. 
 
 
How was that? Did you enjoy the exercise? Yes? Remember everyone, all 
we’re looking for right now is only two or three hypnotic phrases before the 
next person because the flow of ideas around the circle is going to be part 
of the important thing. So it’s not how long can you go on your own, 
although we will come to that, believe it or not. It’s what’s happening.  
 
 
Let me put it this way. How many people here notice other people 
presenting, suggesting and you thought. "Wow, I like that, I’m going to 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
96 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
write it down and put it in my script."? This is one way we learn as 
hypnotists. We begin to glean ideas or presentations or suggestions from 
other people.  
 
 
To the extent that you let other people have their time there as well, it 
allows you to start borrowing their ideas. Borrowing something that they 
throw out like it’s not even interesting, but to you it might be that one 
phrase, like wow, that’s so good. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Once you can do it here, then what happens is out there you’ll see 
hypnotists, whether it’s a stage hypnotist or you buy a home study 
program from someone (hint), you see a hypnotherapist or you have other 
hypnotic friends, you watch them work and you’ll begin to start lifting 
elements of what they’re doing because you’re already spotting patterns, 
awarenesses and so on. Does that kind of make sense to you all?  
 
 
You’ll start hearing these things. You’ll hear the patterns going on, the 
processes, power loops and all these things that become very clear to you 
when you have both. Outside, you can learn how to receive it, so you’re 
going like, "Okay, I get this; this is good." So you learn how to evaluate it 
from experience, rather than from the intellect. Not this should be good, 
but rather this shouldn’t work, "But wow, it works good."  
 
 
At the same time, you can reproduce it with other people and that creates 
a really powerful circle of improvement. Do you like the exercise so far? 
Would you like to learn how to improve it a little?  
 
 
Most of you, believe it or not, are already doing this, which is what makes 
me very happy. It makes me very happy because you’re doing it 
automatically, spontaneously, unconsciously. In other words, you’re 
already twigging into the right part of your mind to make this stuff happen.  
 
 
We’re going to do exactly the same exercise again. This time, just for 
variety’s sake, let someone else begin and maybe go in the opposite 
direction. Just so that you have a little bit of variety going on. As you’re 
going through the circle, you’re going to do exactly the same exercise, 
only you’re going to add one thing or one performance element. 
 
 
I want you to start paying attention to what’s called the hypnotic voice. You 
have your normal everyday speaking voice. It’s how you speak to your 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
97 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
friends. You also have, shall we say, the bedroom voice. The one you use 
for that significant person that lets them know that they better stop writing 
in their report.   
 
 
Hypnotists have a voice like that too, only it doesn’t enter the bedroom. 
Just so you know. As a rule, it’s important to have a different voice 
because it creates a different set of associations, so that ultimately just 
switching your voice tone will already let people who know you go, "Oh, 
now I’m going to start going into a trance." Hence, the relationship of 
trance becomes cemented over time.  
 
 
Here, the simplest way of doing that is simply learn to speak slower, lower, 
in a sort of rhythm.  We’ll accentuate each of these things as we go 
through – and pause. This is why it was important in the previous exercise 
that you don’t just stop speaking and let that be the person’s cue. You 
stop speaking and you look at the next person.  
 
 
Otherwise, you’ll pause and they’ll start talking over you and you’ll go, 
"Damn you, curse you, next time I’ll talk fast enough that you can’t put 
anything in there." This is not a competition like that.  
 
 
You’ll say your piece. You’ll be brief, but you’ll say your piece. And you 
can pause in the middle of it if you want and then carry on a little bit more. 
Then you’ll turn to the person next to you and you’ll look – actually in this 
case, you’ll look this way because you’re going the other way. Does that 
make sense to you all? 
 
 
So we’re looking for the same elements, just slower, lower, some pauses 
and if you can do this, this is the idea you’re trying to create. The things 
that you are saying are more significant. They’re more important than 
anything you normally say. The things that you are saying are more 
important than the things that ordinarily are said. Do you hear the 
difference? 
 
 
So slower, lower, maybe a little deeper if you can get your voice deeper. I 
know some people, it’s just the way your throat is shaped you have higher 
pitches. That’s fine. But slower, lower, a little deeper if you can do it and 
try to give a sense of urgency, that sense of importance, a sense of 
significance into what it is that you’re saying. Does that make sense? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
98 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You’ll hear it in different ways from people around you. So listen to how 
they do it because perhaps they’re doing something that you could add to 
what you’re doing, to improve it. Make sense? Any questions? All right, 
everyone, off you go.  
 
 
I like this part of the day because it’s a lot quieter. It’s a lot calmer. No 
need to shout to get everyone’s attention. It’s important that we can 
develop different rhythms in the way that we speak to people. The reason 
for that is because you need people to go through different emotional 
experiences. If all you have is one simple rhythm, then all you’ll get is one 
type of response.  
 
 
To the extent that you can enhance your rhythms and change the tonality 
of your voice, people can begin to respond to you in a different way. It’s 
like going to a zoo and seeing all the different sights. Some will amaze 
you, some will make you laugh, some just make you smile.  
 
 
The key to being a great hypnotist is the ability to help transition people 
through experiences because when they have the right set of experiences, 
they will always be influenced by you in a positive manner. That makes 
sense, does it not? 
 
 
Now the interesting thing is, as a hypnotist, you need to be able to spot 
when you’re having the impact that you desire, do you not? To the extent 
that you can see people going into trance, you know that you’re doing the 
right things. You’re saying the right things and they are responding by 
experiencing a trance.  
 
 
Whether it’s an overt, deep trance or more conversational trance, it does 
not matter. What matters is that you can begin to direct their experiences 
through pleasant experiences and know that it’s occurring. That the 
outcome you have in mind is continuing to happen. It’s easy to do when 
your eyes are open and your ears, and to some extent even your feelings.  
 
 
Now that we’ve spent the greater portion of one day focusing on language 
and things you can do, I’d like you to experience something different on 
how little you need to do to get more results. So that less creates more 
impact, not more, less.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
99 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
To do this is very simple. In a moment, but not yet, I’m going to ask you to 
find a partner, someone that you do not know. I’d like for you to silently, 
without any words, sit down opposite your partner, decide who will be the 
hypnotist first. 
 
 
 
Then all the hypnotist is going to do is observe the other person 
studiously, whilst maintaining this internal sense of calm equilibrium. 
Whenever this other person does anything that looks even remotely like 
trance, you’ll say the magic words "That’s right." 
 
 
Have you done this before? Now you might not think you know all the 
signals to look out for yet. And it really doesn’t matter because whenever 
they do anything that looks even remotely like hypnosis to you – and the 
operative word is remotely. You can just say, "That’s right. - That’s right. -  
That’s right." Just notice what happens.  
 
 
Now you’re all feeling a particular way right now. I’d like for you to only 
stand up and make eye contact with one other person as slowly as you 
maintain the feeling you have inside right now. You can’t move too quickly. 
You must maintain what you already have and build on that.  
 
 
So with that thought in mind, stand up slowly, find your partner, choose a 
hypnotist to go first, sit down and then just observe. Sit down and then just 
observe. Whenever you see anything that looks remotely like hypnosis, 
then just look at them meaningfully and say, "That’s right. - That’s right. -  
That’s right." 
 
 
How was that for you all? Was that interesting? Who enjoyed themselves? 
Exactly, that’s right. Who wants to come up and just share a little bit of 
your experience and what you noticed was going on in terms of what 
happened there? Who noticed how this had a bit of an effect on you when 
you were the subject, just a small effect? Yes, so what kind of things 
happened to you all? 
  
 
Audience: 
I was matching and mirroring his body language and his breathing, which I 
noticed deep in his trance but also deep in my own trance as well. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
100 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
So you’re skipping ahead to tomorrow. Curse you! Good job. I like it, yes, 
very good, kind of a profound interesting experiences, right. Come on up, 
and we’ll come onto you in a second.   
 
James: 
I was gone totally. 
 
Igor: 
Anyone in the same place James was? Hang on a second. You were 
saying less. You’re not speaking to people. How does this work? 
 
James: 
I noticed very clearly both – I’m certain mine were, but his eyes glazed, 
which to me is a clear sign of trance. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. Did anyone else notice these things? So where were we this 
morning? That’s an interesting idea, isn’t it? Oh yeah, but it’s not this. 
Maybe I’m over here. I could be looking for this, but I don’t think I am. 
Well, maybe – no, maybe not. Well, this was certainly interesting, but that 
can’t have been it. I might be thinking of this.  
 
 
Do you understand the idea of the feedback loop and the reinforcement of 
an experience at a different level now, more than this morning? Would that 
be fair to say? All you did just now was the feedback loop, was it not? All 
you did was reinforce in as minimalistic a way as you could, a trance 
experience, did you not?  
 
 
You had a more profound impact by doing less. Why? Because you’re 
focusing on one principle and doing it thoroughly. Now I’d like you to get 
hopefully, a new appreciation for these principles. Everything we have 
talked about so far can be taken to this extreme and further. You have a 
lifetime of exploration just in what we’ve done today, and this is only Day 
1. Isn’t that something to think about? It was a profound experience, 
wasn’t it? Go ahead. 
 
Audience: 
My partner, right when I was hitting a perfect spot, instead of, "That’s 
right." she went, "Hmm." And I dropped all the way. It was the first time a 
trance has felt delicious. 
 
Igor: 
I wonder why? Good, top of the class. Notice how much of your 
suggestion is coming out of the thing you’re not saying. Would that be fair 
to say? People rush to get clever with the language, and you can do great 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
101 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
stuff with the language, but do not be in a rush to do that because in doing 
so, you will miss everything that hypnosis is really about. 
 
 
It’s kind of like having an amazing horse, and all that people are focused 
on is what an amazing mane this horse has. Then they shave off the hair 
and they make a mane and they run around town, look, I have a horse. 
You can’t ride it anywhere.  
 
 
The thing that made it interesting to look at, the thing that made it powerful 
as a symbol, is the horse. The mane is just that little part of the horse that 
people focused on, that grabs their attention, but without a horse, the 
mane is useless. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So only explore the language as quickly as you’re doing everything else. 
So with that thought in mind, I’d like you to rejoin the circle. I would like 
you to begin the circle by recalling the experience you’ve just had. When 
you feel the way you felt, then you begin to speak.  
 
 
You can use your power words. You can use the trance themes. You can 
use your reference similes. You can even use your language softeners 
and your hot words. As much or as little as you like, but only as slowly as 
you do this. 
 
 
If from time to time someone does something vaguely hypnotic, that’s 
right, you can write the script. That’s right. For those of you who wish to be 
a little more advanced, there’s the advanced version called very good. 
Your circles should be fundamentally different this time around than the 
last time around. If they’re not, then you need to go back to basics. Is that 
fair?  
 
 
So find your way back to your original circle, but only as slowly as you 
maintain this stately, calm, focused feeling you have inside. Then begin 
the circle again. Off you go.  
 
 
May I add one more thing to this? We may as well, seeing as it’s going to 
be fun. As you sit down in your circles, I would like for you to add one 
more thing. Is that okay with you? Remember, you’re only adding this 
extra thing as slowly as you have everything else in place. This is just 
icing on the cake. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
102 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’d like you to give your group a hypnotic gift. I’d like for one of the trance 
themes that you have to remind them of someone that they love, some 
thing that they love and some experience that made them feel good. It 
does not matter what it is, provided you feed it into your trance themes at 
some level.  
 
 
Now different people will have different ones. You will hear a lot of 
variations. Just notice what happens as the circle continues. Is that okay? 
Begin now. 
 
 
I have a couple of questions for you before we begin the final exercise of 
the day. The first question I have for you is, how was that exercise 
different from essentially doing exactly the same thing just moments 
before? Anyone?  
 
Audience: 
As a hypnotist, I’m always concerned with my clients, what I’m saying to 
them and getting their eyes closed. It was interesting in the other exercise 
how it was just the opposite. Having my eyes open and saying nothing 
was more.  
 
 
Therefore, how that reflected here was I really wasn’t concerned about 
what I was saying and if there were pauses or spaces, which normally I’m 
just like, I don’t want so many pauses.  
 
Igor: 
So that shows that you’re doing hypnosis from the right place. Incidentally, 
you’re about 90% to what we’ll end up calling the irresistible induction, but 
we’ll come onto that in a few days. Good job.  
 
 
What else did you all notice? Do you want to come up? We’ll go over here 
first. So what else did you notice? 
 
Audience: 
I think, in our group at least, you helped us change our belief system. The 
belief system was that hypnosis is about language and is about leading 
somebody. What we all found was because of previous exercise, we in 
fact, many of us had closed our eyes and even put our heads down, and 
we had instigated the same level of trance and the same influence over 
the other person.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
103 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So just sitting there, even as a group, even when we had those pregnant 
pauses, even as we handed off between the four partners, the trance state 
didn’t really dissipate.  
 
Igor: 
No. In fact, it probably got stronger. 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Now – where were we again? Do you feel a little bit of that?  
 
Audience: 
Fractionating. 
 
Igor: 
Well, kind of. That’s what the pauses do. What you felt during the pauses, 
especially in conversational hypnosis, you will need it.  
 
Audience: 
To create the space. 
 
Igor: 
There is no problem with being paused or silent inside of a conversation, 
provided it’s flowing correctly. There are many conversations you’ve had 
that were just thoughtful, I think is the word. So let’s make people more 
thoughtful, shall we? Good job. Thank you. 
 
Audience: 
Also, just outside of even the pauses and the fractionation, I think I found 
within our group that after we had experienced the sensation ourselves of 
the calm that we’d just done with the partners, that having that calm being 
within everyone within the group just made it easier to do everything in 
general. Like the going first thing.  
 
Igor: 
Did anyone else notice this? This is – and I’m very glad you all are starting 
to bring this up because this is the beginnings of the whole H+ principle. 
Who here is familiar with the idea of H+? I’ll detail it very quickly anyway 
just in case there are a few newbies, fresh faces. 
 
 
You may know this is a significant theme of my work. Seeing as we have a 
nice circle, we may as well put it in there. H+ essentially is the intense 
desire for the other person to experience something hypnotic, to induce 
trance, coupled with the intense desire for that person to have a significant 
positive event, to experience something positive.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
104 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now you’re not expecting it from them, like you need it to feel good about 
yourself. You just really want it for them. You know the difference because 
you’ll feel different inside. What you just described is that feeling. You 
don’t care. In fact, you described exactly the same thing. You no longer 
care about their response in terms of - are the eyes open, are the eyes 
closed? Are they doing this, or are they not? It’s irrelevant. It is all 
irrelevant.  
 
 
H+ is both a shield and a sword. It’s a shield in the sense that it protects 
you from your own performance anxiety, from trying too hard, from 
thinking too much.  
 
 
It’s a sword, in the sense, that it allows you to influence the other person 
more profoundly because all your sub-communications, all your nonverbal 
behavior, your tonality and so on – which we’ll come onto more tomorrow 
– are aligned with a simple message. Have this experience now, and 
that’s all there is. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
 
We will be evolving this concept through the 10 days together. If you take 
nothing else but this, this is what makes great hypnotists. In fact, the one 
hypnotist I really got this from was someone that, honestly, was a terrible 
hypnotist. His language was awful, pacing, tonality, everything just terrible, 
but he got amazing results. He got results he should not have been able to 
get. I was sitting there going, "How the f—k did you do that?" He got 
amazing results.  
 
 
 
The difference is that he was just there. He was one of these people who 
just had this expansive, positive feeling, and he just knew he was going to 
get results. He just wanted it, and there was no doubt in his mind. He just 
felt right about it and he got it. He got amazing results. This is the key to 
everything.  
 
 
Going back to the point from over here earlier, your ethics is built into that 
as well. It’s all one big happy parcel. You’re more successful when you are 
more ethical because it comes from the same place. Does that make 
sense to you all? 
 
 
Let me see if I can get this hum down. Is this hum from the speakers or 
the lights? That’s weird. It’s my hypnotic hum. All right, go ahead. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
105 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
I think I’m going to say something that’s very much with the H+. I found 
myself more trusting of me and the others. The rest of it didn’t matter. 
What I said didn’t matter it was going to happen, period! It just was there. 
 
Igor: 
That’s what distinguishes the nervous, shy, I’m not so confident in myself, 
I’m the beginner at this, please be nice to me, hypnotist and really the old 
hands experienced one. They just know it’s going to happen.  
 
 
It’s easy to say, "Oh, I just know it’s going to happen.", but that doesn’t 
help you. Now you have a reference experience. Who here thinks they 
can find their way back to this? Not necessarily every time, not necessarily 
instantly, but someday, from time to time, and maybe increasingly if you 
keep looking for it.   
 
 
That’s a good proportion. For the rest of you, keep tuned because there’s 
a way of accelerating that. Sound good? One last thing, go ahead. Let me 
just double check that this is on. There you go. Just take it. There you go. 
 
Audience: 
I’m probably saying the same thing that’s been said, but differently. It’s 
almost like creating a sphere of trust through the H+ that my experience 
was whatever is going to happen is going happened over there already, 
and I’m just there helping support the space for it to occur naturally. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. That’s exactly right. I think Erickson had a great quote for this, 
which I really love. 
 
 
Your job is just to provide the scenery in such a way that they’ll naturally 
respond with whatever phenomena, results, etc. that you would like them 
to respond with. That’s it. Your job is not to force their acting. Your job is 
just to provide the scenery.’ They’ll do the rest, and they’ll do it quite 
spontaneously. Do you like that idea?  
 
 
So what we’re going to do now is I’m going to give you a little bit of 
homework. Oh no. Notice what things got loaded into that word, right? 
How about some home play or some hotel play? Although that has 
different benefits doesn’t it? 
 
Audience: 
You have our attention. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
106 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Remember the H+, I really want something good to happen for you. The 
homework, the home play, hotel play, whatever it is, whatever you want to 
call that, I don’t mind, it’s going to be very simple. It’s, basically, to 
reproduce something you did in here today, but outside of this seminar 
room so that this does not become the space in which hypnosis occurs. 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
It could be something you do in the lobby. It could be something you do 
just outside of here. It could be something you do in the streets, in 
someone’s car – with consent, if you please. For the moment, feel free to 
stick to people within the seminar. Just find someone and tonight and 
tomorrow morning – preferably both – just do a simple induction on the 
person.  
 
 
That’s going to be very straightforward. You’re going to start always with 
the H+, that feeling you created. If you have to spend some minutes just 
going, "That’s right." for a while, that’s okay. Then I’d like you to do the 
instant induction we did earlier today.  
 
 
Grab their attention and look at them. If you want to throw in a few, that’s 
rights, in there just to build the atmosphere, that’s good. Sleep, deeper 
and deeper, fractionate if you will. It’s pretty much what we did this 
morning, only this time I’d like you to pay extra attention to the principle’s 
you’re employing.  
 
 
Like a good cook, I want you to enjoy the feast of hypnotic principles that 
you’re including in whatever that you’re doing. Don’t rush it. There is no 
rush. There is no time limit on this. Make sense?  
 
 
Once you have them in trance, I’d like for you to give them a gift. It’s a 
very simple gift. It’s an easy gift to give, and it’s one that you’ll be giving 
each other over and over again. I would like for you to get them to recall a 
person that they are close to, someone that they love. It can be a friend, a 
family member, a lover, a husband or wife, a spouse, a child, a pet, but a 
individual that they are closely connected to in a very positive way. Does 
that make sense? 
 
 
You will know that the person is thinking about this person sufficiently 
because something very subtle will begin to occur. It’s something in that 
direction. Once you have that, then just maybe put in a simple suggestion 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
107 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that they can have this experience again anytime they wish to. Something 
general like that. Memorize it, remember it and come back to it anytime 
you want. Bring them out of trance, and you’re done.  
 
 
If you wish to repeat it a few times just for practice sake, fine. By all means 
do it, but I’d like you to do it at least once between now and us coming 
back tomorrow and doing the training. Does that make sense? I’d like for it 
to not occur inside this room. Does that also make sense? Let me explain 
why.  
 
 
Some time ago in China, a young man moves to Beijing, the capitol city. 
He’s the new boy in town, and as would happen, of course, he gets 
bullied. He’s the new one. He’s got all the mannerisms of someone who’s 
coming to new territory. Bullies look out for the weaker members of the 
pack and that’s what they prey on.  
 
 
Luckily for him, one of the other students sees what’s going on and it’s too 
late to stop it but afterward, he says, "You should come with me to the 
Kung Fu school." Luckily, he’s in China and there’s a lot of it.   
 
 
He introduces him to the school and life transforms for him. He learns how 
to kick, how to punch and how to move, yell and shout. He feels good 
about himself. In fact, he feels so good that he practices diligently every 
day. He’s at the school, he’s doing his things, his school grades and 
confidence improves.  
 
 
The bullies are outside of his mind now they never come back, because 
he’s different now. He’s different purely and simply because he’s putting 
his energies into other things. 
 
 
Time passes, he grows older, grows strong, faster, better at what he does. 
One day he comes home from school to his parents who run a small store 
in the outer district of Beijing. As luck would have it, this particular day 
they had become the target of a local gang for extortion, money to 
maintain their store, you know, protection and all that.  
 
 
The boy, now a young man, thinks he knows what to do. He says I’ll take 
care of this. The two thugs are in there, so he kicks them around a bit and 
throws them out. He thinks he’s resolved the problem. Of course, two 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
108 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
hours later, they turn up and it’s bigger boys this time, more of them, so he 
can’t resolve this problem.  
 
 
The shop gets damaged and the protection money goes up. He doesn’t 
know what happened. I mean think about it. He spent years training to 
kick, to punch, and he can’t deal with this situation. Now many people at 
this point would be despondent and might give up, but he didn’t 
understand. He went into this sort of spiral of thoughts. He turns to his 
instructor and says, "What happened? What can I do?" 
 
 
The instructor is a wise man, and he says, "The problem is that here you 
learned how to build your confidence. That’s what this school is about. 
You know how to kick, you know how to punch, you know how to move 
well, and to be fair, you’ve done really well because you practiced 
diligently. You have built your confidence and that’s great. You can take 
care of yourself. But this is something different."  
 
 
"In this kind of situation, there are times in life when it’s not about how fast 
you move, how hard you can kick or how high. It’s about how invisible you 
can be. Now I can’t teach you to be invisible. For that, you need to go to 
my trainer, my master. Now I warn you, he doesn’t take many people on. 
He doesn’t take people on who are just here one day and off the next. He 
is a hard taskmaster. You think you have trained hard with me, you will 
train harder than you’ve ever trained before, and it will be worth every 
single moment of it, if he accepts you." 
 
 
So he writes down an address on a little bit of paper, a small letter of 
introduction, and full of hope this young man goes to the streets of Beijing 
in a rundown area, but it’s okay because he has the skills. He’s okay 
walking down the street. He knocks on the little door. In time an old man, a 
little disheveled, opens the door and asks what he wants. 
 
 
He presents this card very politely. He explains that he’d like to learn to 
train with him. In kind of confusion he says, "I was told that you can show 
me how to be invisible." He still doesn’t know what that means. It’s kind of 
crazy, isn’t it to be invisible? But he respects his teacher. Especially in 
China, the relationship from pupil to teacher is very important. He respects 
the teacher. He trusts in him enough that he’ll try this out.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
109 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The old man reads the card and slams the door in his face. He knocks 
again. No answer. He comes back the next day and knocks on the door. 
The old man opens the door, takes one look at him and slams the door in 
his face. He comes back a third day, a fourth, a fifth. He loses count of 
how many days he comes back, every day after school. It becomes almost 
like an obsessive ritual. Knock on the door, slam in the face. Oh well, 
come back tomorrow. 
 
 
One day he’s just getting ready to knock on the door, when who would be 
walking down that street? The thugs that broke up his family’s shop, and 
there are a few of them. He’s a little afraid now. He doesn’t know what to 
do. Whatever he could do, they know where his family’s business is. Plus 
there are more of them this time, and they’re pretty big.  
 
 
Can he move quickly enough, fast enough, strong enough? Can he do it? 
He’s kind of paralyzed with all these thoughts and ideas. He doesn’t know 
what to do. Of course, they spot him a mile off and they still remember the 
cheek that he had, so they pin him up against the old door and things are 
starting to look a little unpleasant.  
 
 
The door opens and the old man smiling says, "Oh, you found my 
student." Of course, they can’t resist. Here’s an old man. They start 
jabbing him and poking him, and he’s apologizing. I’m very sorry, very 
sorry. He tries to come outside to show them how sorry he is, and wouldn’t 
you know it, being an old man he trips over his own feet, falls down right 
into one of them. He goes rolling on the ground. He tries to grab onto 
them. He falls down and accidentally pokes him in the eyes. He gets up 
and says, "I’m really sorry."  
 
 
He stands up a little bit too quickly and the other guys are coming in to 
push him out of the way. He gets cracked on the nose, and it’s bleeding 
everywhere. Next thing you know, he’s apologizing to that person. He 
accidentally bumps into the other person and he’s just apologizing 
everywhere. 
 
 
Eventually, the thugs get a little embarrassed. He’s an old man, he’s being 
awkward, and they’re just fooling around. Eventually, they throw a few 
more jabs at him and say, "You’re a crazy old man. Ha, ha, ha."  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
110 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
He goes, "Yes, I’m sorry, I’m so clumsy. My mother didn’t really like me as 
a child. I’m very sorry. I’ll make it up to you, but I have no money. I’m just 
sorry." 
 
 
So they poke him a few more times and throw a few more insults and then 
they go.  
 
 
The boy is totally confused. What just happened? He looks at the old man 
and says, "You know, thank you for coming out, but really you shouldn’t 
have." Right now he’s having a few doubts, right? He’s an awkward old 
man. What the hell could he teach him about Kung Fu, right? He thanks 
him for trying his best, but he really wants to learn about how to have the 
invisible Kung Fu. He doesn’t understand how that’s even possible.  
 
 
And they start walking and he says, "Just follow me." They start walking 
down the street and he says, "You know my teacher is very good. He’s 
fast, powerful. Maybe he can move so fast that no one can actually see 
you move. I guess that would be the secret technique. No disrespect, but 
you’re old and you don’t really move that well anymore. What’s this all 
about?" 
 
 
The old man listens and nods his head and says, "The secret to invisible 
Kung Fu is not that you cannot be seen. It’s that people don’t understand 
what it is that they see. I can show you how to do this, but you’ll have to 
practice and you’ll have to have dedication. Are you willing to learn?"  
 
 
 
The student says, "Yes. I will learn." He still doesn’t know what it is, but it 
sounds interesting.  
 
 
"Practice begins every morning at 9am sharp. I expect you to be here at 
8:30. I will not brook lateness." The boy says, "Okay, very good, anything 
else I should know?" He goes one more thing, "Let’s go have a drink and 
get to know each other properly, a non-alcoholic drink because there’s 
training tomorrow." 
 
 
 
So in the spirit of the wise old man, I’d like to invite all of you to have a 
non-alcoholic drink, a few snacks and get to know each other. As you walk 
through these two doors in a moment’s time, you’ll find there should be a 
nice spread of things that we’ve prepared for you as a gift.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
111 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Don’t expect it every day. It’s a gift from me to you, but it will be a nice way 
for you all to get to know each other. Have a chat. Have, dare I say, a 
conversation and we’ll see you all again tomorrow.  
 
 
We’ll start at 9am sharp. If you wish to be here at 8:30, well, who am I to 
stop you? Thank you very much. 
 
 
 
 
DVD 5:  How to Read Other People like                
an Open Book 
 
Igor: 
Good morning, everyone. How are you all doing? Who had fun last night? 
Anyone starting apply this stuff outside there somewhere? I hear that 
someone did a particularly interesting thing yesterday. They started to run 
with their skills, and rather than just doing the exercise we did yesterday 
with bringing someone they love back and so on, I call this the inner smile. 
 
 
Rather that just doing this with people in the seminar, which is safe and it’s 
good to do out there, this person started to do it with complete, random 
strangers. Would you come up here for a moment please? Give them a 
round of applause. 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Your husband and the team that you were with were so impressed, that 
they got you a little gift. So give her a round of applause, everyone. Great 
job! Seriously, I think it’s an awesome thing when you all start taking these 
skills and using them. It’s a risk, isn’t it to go up to a complete stranger. 
Come on up. Do you want to tell me the story because I think people will 
be excited by it? 
 
Audience: 
Right here? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, there you go. 
 
Lori: 
Actually, I had two opportunities. We took the trolley to Manhattan Beach. 
A whole bunch of us did and there were some ladies there that were also 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
112 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
doing a 10-day seminar on something with educational testing, which I 
think is folly anyway. Anyway, they weren’t real impressed with hypnotists, 
so on the way back we ran into them again.  
 
 
I had a couple of them. We were just chit-chatting so I went ahead and did 
something from New York with the fingers crossed. I did that with them. 
 
 
Then later Shaun, my husband and I went to the grocery store to get some 
meat. The gentleman and I were talking and, of course, when I ordered 
the salami, he said, "This is a whole bunch."  
 
I said, "That’s okay, I’m in town for two weeks."  
 
He said, "What are you doing in town for two weeks?" Well, that opened 
up the door. 
 
I asked him, "Have you ever had any experience with hypnosis?"  
 
He said, "No."  
 
I said, "Well, do you have a moment."  
 
And he said, "Sure." So I pulled him out from behind the counter and did 
the instant induction on the shoulder and then the arm straightening out. 
 
 
His buddies in bakery were sitting there going, "What the hell?"  
 
He got done and he was like, "Man, can you come back once a day and 
give me just a little…?"  
 
 
It was kind of interesting. It was kind of just a joke because I’m so shy.  
 
Igor: 
You kind of got carried away with the moment, right? 
 
Lori: 
That’s right. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see what you all can pull off isn’t that amazing? Give her a round 
of applause. 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
So now that you’ve done your first couple of instant inductions in the wild, 
did you enjoy it? 
 
Lori: 
I did enjoy it. I’m real excited about it. I’m like a big sponge right now, just 
kind of soaking this all in. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
113 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
The last question – because I’m sure everyone here is wondering this as 
well is - did it work. I mean on real people who didn’t know it was coming? 
 
Lori: 
Yes, the gal couldn’t get her hands apart and she was like, "Whoa, that 
was something else." Then he just went out. He went right on my 
shoulder. I got him to balance. Even when I woke him up, he was like, get 
this arm down. I’m like, take a deep breath, relax and shake it out. He was 
like, "Come back once a day. I’m here Monday through Friday. Show 
some more stuff."  
 
Igor: 
That’s amazing. That’s a great story. 
 
 
Now that we’ve had that little warm-up, did anyone else do anything 
exciting last night? Do you want to come up and tell everyone? Are you 
allowed to tell people without getting arrested? 
 
Audience: 
Someone puked seven times, but it wasn’t me. We went out to West 
Hollywood. One of our friends who isn’t here today, he puked seven times, 
but we were out in Hollywood. 
 
Igor: 
What did that do to you? 
 
Audience: 
We only had two hours’ sleep, but that’s okay. We didn’t really follow your 
suggestion, so that was bad of us. 
 
Igor: 
What are you doing up here then? So you went out to a bar? 
 
Audience: 
We went out to a club in West Hollywood, Cassadra. They had the back-
up singer for formerly known as Prince. One of our friends’ friends’ friend 
was there. 
 
Igor: 
Is this an induction? 
 
Audience: 
Yes, it is. Sleep! Then we started talking and she was asking what I did. I 
didn’t tell her my real job. I said, "I’m a master hypnotist." She goes, 
"Really" and got curious about it. I told her a little bit about hypnosis. She 
was curious about it. Then I said, "Hey, do you want to try it?" She’s like, 
"Yeah sure." 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
114 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The sound was blazing because the people were loud and stuff like that. I 
started having her comply. I said, "Move over here so you can hear me.", 
and things like that. So I got the compliance. Then I did the five-word 
induction. Some people know it; some people don’t. Then I dropped her 
instantly. I said, "The deeper you go, the better you feel; the better you 
feel, the deeper you go." 
 
 
Then I gave her some general suggestions because she wanted to have 
more motivation, more passion and all that stuff. I also gave her other 
suggestions like you’re going to have a wonderful night tonight. Maybe I 
shouldn’t have. She was smiling the whole night and things like that. She 
was wonderful and she was dancing and all that stuff. That’s why we didn’t 
get home until 4:30 this morning.  
 
Igor: 
It was a wild and crazy life. I won’t even ask. We did say hotel play, didn’t 
we? 
 
Lori: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Great job. Well done. Give him a nice round of applause. Thank you.  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
Alex: 
My name’s Alex. I don’t have my name tag today. This is not something 
that happened last night. It’s actually something that happened in London 
when I took Igor’s Street Hypnosis course actually.  
 
 
A friend of mine, Bob Cobb, who I’m sure you’ve seen in some of the 
videos. We went out for a night of being a force for good and I approached 
three women at a fairly noisy bar. It was a patio actually. I asked if they’d 
ever been hypnotized, if they wanted to get hypnotized and if they were 
interested in the power of the mind. 
 
 
They all pointed to one woman. In this group, there was a medical doctor, 
an accountant and a scientist. Very much critical thinking type people 
obviously. The accountant said, "Well actually my friend, the scientist, has 
an extreme phobia; claustrophobia, so bad that she can’t ride elevators or 
go on subways."  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
115 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So Bob and I, basically, tag teamed her. We did a double induction. He did 
most of the therapy side. I just came in and out whenever I felt it was 
appropriate while I was talking to the medical doctor and the accountant. 
 
 
About 10 minutes after Bob had finished up, she said, "Do you all want to 
go for a ride on the subway?" We were blown away by how easy it was 
and again, the context was a bar, so no one’s there ready to get therapy 
for a serious condition like that. 
 
 
By learning how to create a context and the frame for them to be involved 
in this process, you can do amazing things in the most amazing places. 
This medical doctor, it was great for her to be there because here’s a 
person who, firsthand, realized the power of hypnosis in a non-clinical 
place. Nothing up your sleeves, but impromptu- bang- bring your tools with 
you and you can change people’s lives in 10 minutes.  
 
Igor: 
Good job. Thank you. Hopefully, some of these stories are giving you all 
some ideas of what to do with this stuff. I’m not the school of hard knocks. 
I’m not going to force you to go out there and do anything in particular, but 
I would encourage you to put yourself in a position where it can happen. 
 
 
How many of you actually did an instant induction with a little hypnotic gift 
that we talked about last night, out there somewhere, maybe in the lobby, 
maybe in the street, in the restaurant or something like that with other 
people, maybe about half of you? Let me ask you, who actually did the 
exercise, how did it feel to do it outside of the training room? A little 
awkward at first, would that be fair to say for some of you or was it pretty 
straightforward? Excellent! 
 
Lori: 
For me, I think it was almost easier because everybody in this room has 
some experience, probably a lot more experience than me, so I feel 
somewhat judged. Whereas this deli guy, he’s just a deli guy. It’s either 
going to work and he’s going to be thrilled or it’s not going to work and 
he’s going to go, "Well, so much for hypnosis." and I’ll never see him 
again because I’ll go to a different store next time. 
 
Igor: 
If nothing else, yes, it worked. Come back, please. 
 
Lori: 
Exactly. So for me, it was kind of just throw caution to the wind, just take a 
deep breath. Your voice is going through my mind. I think what really 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
116 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
clicked, yesterday was the one where it really doesn’t matter what you say 
it’s more your demeanor, just be patient, make the eye contact and get 
them to focus.  
 
 
I was able to do that. It was weird because you said out in the bar, at the 
grocery store, there are people walking around, the lights are on, his 
buddies are right over next door, so it’s not like you have to be in a dark, 
quiet corner or something. 
 
Igor: 
Right. You can just do it normal everyday life. This is something very 
important. Thank you for bringing that up. Both Alex and Lori did exactly 
the same thing. The words really weren’t the important part of the process. 
The context that you’re creating is the important part.  
 
 
How do you create the atmosphere? How do you create that situation 
where people can step out of normal, everyday life into what we’ll call a 
hypnotic reality, in which unusual things can occur. Where they can relax 
deeply and have wonderful experiences. Where they can overcome a 
lifetime of phobias in 10 minutes?  
 
 
You have to create that context, and the place that comes from really is 
you. It comes from inside of you. Who would like to learn or find shortcuts 
to make that whole thing happen more quickly and more easily, anyone? I 
mean otherwise, we can get the coloring books out and have like the evil 
top hat and monocle hypnotist. There’s a great little picture.  
 
 
The first thing we’re going to do is I want you all to find one other person in 
the room at least, maybe two if you have time, but it will be a real quick 
exercise. I want you to give them a hypnotic gift – the inner smile.  
 
 
Remember, the inner smile is an instant induction, a couple of 
fractionations or a couple of deepeners so you can have a nice deep 
thing. Only take a minute or two at most. Really, it doesn’t take very long 
at all. Once you have them there, I want you to get them to recall or 
remember or have an experience of someone they love. A person, a close 
friend, a pet, something that makes them feel like they’re connected to the 
other individual. Make sense? 
 
 
You’ll know that you have it right because they’ll be smiling from ear to 
ear. You want to build it up, whatever you do, with your attitude, with your 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
117 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
language, with everything you have until they are smiling from ear to ear. 
Then remind them that they can have this experience any time they want. 
Then bring them back. Then it’s your go. Easy to do, off you go. 
 
 
Good. Who’s smiling from ear to ear? Anyone? Is that good? Let me ask 
you a question. What did you notice about the person that you’re about to 
hypnotize before you actually went over and shook their hand and met 
them to do your induction? Anything?  
 
 
Now the reason I ask this is because it’s pretty common. We blank out 
portions of our experience because we only focus on what we think is 
going to be important, maybe the handshake, maybe the actual induction, 
the setup and so on. Does that kind of make sense to you all?  
 
 
What I’d like you to do is to get sensitized to what happens before the 
formal hypnosis begins. 'Cause that’s going to tell you where their 
unconscious mind is at. Does that make sense to you guys? Now, I don’t 
know about you, but when I first came across the idea of calibration – 
people have different names for it. I like to call it unconscious signals.  
 
 
So when I first came across this idea of unconscious signaling, I was 
overwhelmed. I mean, how am I going to read all these things? What does 
it mean? The tiny little flick of a finger, maybe they had an affair when they 
were four years old. Right? How am I supposed to make sense of all this 
stuff? It took me a while to start figuring out. 
 
 
And there is a couple of things you should know, the first thing you should 
know is whilst people – and this is absolutely true - different people will 
have different behaviors which are idiosyncratic. And that will tell you how 
that person’s thinking at that point in time and how they’re feeling and that 
sort of stuff.  
 
 
However, the thing that very few people in the hypnosis industry talk about 
– I don’t even know if they know it – is that there are a lot of very standard 
signals that are just part of human nature. In other words, whether you’re 
sitting in the jungle or you’re in New York or you’re in Paris, you will get 
the identical self same signals unless their culture suppresses them for 
cultural reasons. Does that make sense to you all? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
118 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So the easiest way to recognize these things is to know what to look for. 
One of the ways to do this is called cementing. You just, basically, chop 
their body parts up – not physically please. No blood in the room. You just 
spend some time observing different parts of the body and how they 
behave. It’s actually very easy when you do it this way. 
 
 
So rather than trying to see everything at one, which is quite difficult, you 
just kind of focus on different parts and then you’ll notice – it’s kind of one 
of these weird things. Like when you buy a new car or a new dress or 
something very important to you and it suddenly pops up everywhere. 
Wherever you’re walking, it’s like, what the hell? Why are all these people 
wearing my clothes? 
 
 
It’s because your mind’s become sensitized to it. It needs to look for 
information now because it’s important. The same thing will happen to 
body language. So I’d like to spend some time, if it’s okay with you all, 
sensitizing you to body language so you can start finding out what things 
mean. Would that be okay with you all? 
 
 
So here’s what we’re going to do. It’s going to be very, very simple. We’re 
going to move around and these are going to be quick exercises, so 
please keep your ears attuned so I can move onto the next phase each 
time. Essentially, all you’re going to do is you’re going to move around and 
you’re going to meet someone. Shake them by the hand. Say, "Hi. How 
are you doing? Great to meet you. Nice talking to you." and then off you 
go.  
 
 
The content of the conversation is actually relatively unimportant, and it 
should be brief because you want to meet as many people as possible to 
get a pattern developing. Does that make sense? 
 
 
The first time we do this, I’d like for you to focus only on their legs, so 
everything from below the torso, the legs and their feet. It’s going to be a 
little bit weird to go up to someone and say. "Hi. How are you doing. It’s 
very nice to meet you." I’m actually really okay with that. It’s going to be a 
little bit artificial, but I want you to look only at their legs and feet and 
notice whatever you notice.  
 
 
It depends on far we can take it in terms of what we do, but their legs will 
tell you a lot about a person. You may not be able to make sense of it yet, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
119 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
and that’s fine, but at least you’re starting to notice things. Does that make 
sense? All right, stand up and find some people.  
 
 
All right, this is great. We’re going to carry on the same exercise, only this 
time I’m going to make a little refinement, if I may, which is I’d like you to 
watch what happens, the difference between when you first approach 
someone in terms of what their legs do, when you’re actually meeting that 
person, and when you’re about to leave that person. 
 
 
So I want you to notice if a change occurs in any of those phases. If it 
does, great! If it doesn’t, that’s fine too. Just observe what occurs. Does 
that make sense to you all? The important times are the approach, the 
duration whilst you’re doing something and the exit. Make sense to 
everyone? Carry on please. 
 
 
Did you notice some interesting things? Any kind of patterns? Did you 
notice how when you approach someone, there’s a little difference when 
you’re actually talking to them? Did anyone here notice that when the 
person’s about to leave, their legs leave first? Did anyone notice that? So 
before they say, goodbye, they’ll do something along the lines of, well, it 
was nice talking to you, and their feet are already moving towards 
somewhere. 
 
 
This is going to be very important. Unfortunately, today we don’t have – I 
mean we could spend literally a few days just showing you the standard 
body language for different kinds of responses. Today, I just want to get 
you sensitized to get the feel for it, and then we’ll start using that in a very 
practical way to actually set the hypnotic context.  
 
 
However, beyond what we will be able to achieve today, I want you to 
really pay attention to these things because over time, you will notice 
these patterns. You’ll go, my God, this is so easy. Does that make sense? 
You’ll know what’s going on at that point. So we’ve got the legs relatively 
sorted. Is that fair to say? We can see things happening with the legs.  
 
 
Let’s pay attention to the torso. The torso can rotate. It can flex, I guess, 
forwards and backwards. It can have all kinds of different things. So again, 
I’d like you to pay attention to the torso as you approach the person, as 
you interact with the person and as you leave, and notice if there’s any 
particular pattern that you can start detecting.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
120 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
They won’t be identical with everyone because their emotional state will 
be different on the approach, interaction and exit, but there will be certain 
things that will start coming out. Does that make sense? Approach- 
interaction- exit and off you go.  
 
 
Just a quick question and then we’re going to carry on with the same 
exercise in a moment. How many of you are noticing the legs just by 
accident, even though you’re actually looking at their torso? Hands up. 
Good. That’s about half of you in the room. Excellent!  
 
 
Those of you that are not noticing the legs, you don’t have to make an 
effort to do it. But as you’re looking at the torso, if your eye happens to 
catch a glimpse of the legs and you see the same sort of patterns as 
before. Well, your ability to see things or recognize unconscious signals 
has just become a little richer.  
 
 
Don’t try to force it, but if it happens, smile to yourself and know that 
you’re doing the right thing. Make sense? Off you go.  
 
 
Excellent! Are you enjoying that so far? Did that make it a little bit more 
interesting? All right. The same exercise, if you happen to catch the legs, 
that’s fine, we’re going to focus on the torso a little bit more. This time I 
want you to randomly, inside your mind, switch between the person that’s 
in front of you, is someone you really like and someone that you really 
dislike.  
 
 
 
The important thing here is that it’s the emotional feelings. Now socially, 
you’re still going to be doing the whole shaking hands and being polite and 
so on, but mentally, emotionally I want you to either like or dislike them as 
you begin the approach. Decide before you see that person how you’re 
going to feel next. And notice if anything happens differently now as you 
do the same exercise. Is that okay with you? Off you go.  
 
 
Was that interesting? Are you seeing a bigger difference now than a 
moment again, than in the previous exercise, yes? So it’s not a big 
difference, but people still act friendly. Are you seeing more of a different 
now though than in the previous exercise that we did pretty much exactly 
the same way? Just very little? Okay, fine.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
121 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
For some people it will be more obvious than with others. Remember, 
we’re looking for the contrast principle. It’s when things change that they 
tell what’s going on. It’s not about what’s happening in the moment. It’s 
when it changes that it tells you, "Oh, this is a little different." There’s a 
question over here. So when he thinks about a person he really doesn’t 
like, his smile tends to go away. Yes? Or sometimes people have a forced 
smile or something like that.   
 
 
We’ll come onto the face and those areas later. Right now, we’re still 
focusing on the torso, the body as the main part, and we’ll build up these 
other parts as well. It’s a good thing to spot inside yourself. Go ahead, 
Cassie. 
 
 
So Cassie is finding that when she approaches someone that she didn’t 
like, or was thinking that she didn’t like, the torso starts turning away. It’s 
almost like you want to have as little exposure to them as possible. Like, 
hello nice to meet you over there. Did anyone else find that sort of thing 
happening?  
 
 
It’s a very common thing. Torso and feet will tell you much more about 
what a person generally feels than their facial expression as a rule, and 
actually their words and their tonality because these things we have more 
awareness of and, therefore, we tend to control more. Does that make 
sense to you all? Do you find these things interesting and useful? All right. 
 
 
Let’s do the same thing again now, but let’s focus on the arms. Let’s make 
it actually the arms and hands. When you’re doing this in terms of real life, 
I encourage you to treat the arms and hands separately. The hands – I 
don’t know if you know this – have you seen that little homunculus brain 
model? It’s a little picture of a man, and it’s in proportion to how much area 
of the brain is dedicated to processing information from that.  
 
 
For example, the eyes have a lot of information, so the eyes are huge, the 
face is huge, the lips are massive, but their hands are enormous as well. 
Arms are quite skinny. The back and the torso are relatively small. So the 
arms and the feet have a lot of receptors in there. A lot of the brain is 
linked to these things.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
122 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So the hands will give you a lot of information about someone, as well as 
their feet. Does that make sense? For the moment, I want you to just pay 
attention to their arms and their hands, just in general. This is something 
that will become even more obvious to you when you’re sitting down, 
when you’re having casual conversations. You can see it right now as I’m 
talking to you. Do you see how my hands are doing things as I’m talking? 
These will all tell you some things.  
 
 
For example, if I’m talking to you and I’m not going to change anything 
about my posture or about my tonality, about my rate or anything like that. 
Do you notice how you perceive me differently just because of what I do 
with my hands? So would you say I am confident right now, or less 
confident? Less, but nothing’s really changed about me.  
 
 
Now have I become more confident or less confident in the last few 
seconds? More. Do you notice how instinctively, you can already tell a lot 
about a person? It’s just that we don’t pay attention to these things that 
consciously. So now we want to create more awareness of these things so 
that it becomes more of a factor in how we evaluate what someone’s 
doing. Does that make sense? All right, everyone. 
 
 
So same exercise again. Pay attention to arms and hands. If you happen 
to catch a glimpse of the torso and the legs, that’s fine. Remember, you’re 
going to mix and match people that you like and dislike. Don’t tell them 
which they are. Just project someone that you like or someone that you 
dislike onto that person so they can see different behaviors and 
mannerisms. Make sense? Off you go.  
 
 
How was that? Interesting? Are you noticing certain things with the hands 
and the arms again? Go ahead. Do you want to come up? It makes it 
much easier because then everyone can hear as well and we don’t have 
to repeat everything. 
 
Audience: 
I was noticing that it was hard for me not to mirror the other person. So if 
they seemed to not like me, I didn’t like them. If they liked me a lot, I liked 
them more.  
 
Igor: 
I want you to just really pay attention to what she was just saying because 
this is really important. Did anyone else notice this? When someone really 
likes you a lot, you can’t help but like them back. I’m talking about the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
123 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
emotional stuff. The physiology just comes out, as a result of it, versus if 
someone really doesn’t like you, you kind of like give them the cold 
shoulder.  
 
 
Do you realize where that expression comes from? People know it’s the 
cold shoulder. The shoulder of the person you don’t like. Let’s say I don’t 
like Emma, I’m going to turn my back to them. That’s an example of 
someone I don’t like. It’s a physical expression of it. The emotions drive 
this whole thing. This is what we’re coming onto in a very short moment of 
time. This idea of matching and mirroring, who has come across this?    
 
 
You want to adopt similar body language. We’ll come onto that in a 
second. We adopt similar body language to people that we’re in rapport 
with and so on. So to get more rapport, we’ll adopt their body language. 
The problem is if the emotions aren’t in the right place, the emotions drive 
behavior.  
 
 
If you really dislike someone, you’re like okay, I’m going to mirror you now. 
It comes out so forced and awkward and weird that there’s a 
miscommunication there, and people actually will take a greater offense at 
inelegant matching and mirroring. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So we need to let the emotions drive the behavior, which is what we’ll be 
getting into with the – who’s heard of the instant rapport technique? We’ll 
come onto that later on today, and it’s really built into the whole concept of 
H+. When you have the emotions in the right place, then your physiology 
or behavior will go into the right.  
 
 
When your behavior is in the right place, then everything is locked into 
position where you have what Emma just talked about which is, people 
can’t help but like you. All I want to do this morning is do those three 
magic things. How can you create the right mental state, the emotional 
state to make it happen? What are you going to do physically to ensure it 
happens? How are you going to cement the whole process in so it’s a 
natural part of the interaction? 
 
 
Those are the three key things so that ultimately, my aim is that you all 
can do something that, for me, used to be a myth. It took me years and 
years to figure out how to do this. Then I promise we’ll come to you in a 
moment. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
124 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Audience: 
No problem. 
 
Igor: 
Back in my early days of training hypnosis, NLP and stuff like that, I used 
to hear this myth that one trainer was out there somewhere, who could 
walk into a restaurant or crowded room, mind his own business eating his 
food. Suddenly, people from across the room would come over and start 
talking and chatting with him like they were his best friends and he did it 
just by matching and mirroring their body language.  
 
 
So I tried it and it didn’t work very well. However, there is a way to make 
exactly that happen. And once we finish this segment here in terms of 
getting used to the body language, would you like me to show you how to 
do that?  
 
 
It’s not a cure all. In other words, there are certain types of people that it 
will not work with – and we’ll talk about that when we get onto it – but with 
maybe 80 or 90% of the people you meet, it will work, and you’ll have 
more friends than you can know what to do with. Sound good? So let’s 
just get onto your question or your comment quickly, and then we’ll carry 
on with this. 
 
Audience: 
Just a quick comment. I would find that what would happen to me when I 
ran into somebody that didn’t like me, I would actually do some things with 
my hands that would change their whole attitude. I’ve caught myself doing 
it unconsciously and I’m going oh, that’s interesting. I’m actually changing 
their attitude toward me. 
 
Igor: 
So you have a behavior that’s designed to, shall we say diffuse whatever 
tension is between the two of you. That’s very true. Do you see how useful 
this stuff is starting to become? Again, we’re doing conversational 
hypnosis. Why are you talking about hands and feet? Look, I’m doing 
conversational hypnosis with my foot. But all these things are part of how 
you have a conversation. 
 
 
This is how you converse with people. So if you don’t have these things 
aligned with what you’re talking about, well then, you might be a snake or 
a salesman who people don’t trust because there’s something not quite 
right about what they’re doing. You may mean very well, but if things are 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
125 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
not quite lining up, well the whole message becomes awkward. It doesn’t 
become very impactful. Does that kind of make sense to you all? 
 
 
So we need everything to come together. This is just another one of those 
pencils we’re going to be into our set so that when we have the whole 
package, it becomes just really powerful. So go ahead. 
 
Audience: 
Thanks. A quick comment. I just noticed that people that I knew or had a 
relationship with usually grip my hand harder, but I was noticing the 
difference of people from different countries or even regions of the U.S., 
even people that I already have a really good relationship with that are not 
exactly American, not to grip as hard.  
 
 
It was odd how I think some bigger men treated me more daintily, even 
though I saw them grip other people’s hands more hard. I was just noticing 
the difference of southerners versus northerners.  
 
Igor: 
Just to point something out, which is actually kind of important, a 
handshake is not a universal signal. In other words, it’s a socialized signal, 
which means you’ll get a lot of social varieties. Different regions will be 
using a more firm handshake.  
 
 
Maybe like in farming country, people are used to working out, so their 
handshake becomes firmer. In other areas, it might be less so. In Asia, 
they don’t shake hands, so you’ll get some dead, limp fish kind of 
handshake.  
 
 
It’s a cultural thing. People tend to judge other people by their handshake, 
and believe it or not, that is the worst thing to judge another person by 
because that has something to do with their culture. And it has nothing to 
do with their inner state, their emotions, or their mindset and so on. Does 
that make sense to you all? 
 
 
So that’s an excellent thing to notice that the things we actually put most 
attention to in terms of how we evaluate the other person, when we’re first 
meeting them, very often are the worst things to evaluate them by 
because they have the least amount of information about that person. 
Make sense? Excellent spot! Thank you. Go ahead. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
126 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
What I’m finding is that I see a lot of individual variations in what’s 
happening, or I don’t see any variation at all. I’m having trouble discerning 
patterns.  
 
Igor: 
So give me an example of what you mean by no variation at all. 
 
Audience: 
Well, when we were doing the arm exercise, it seems to me that everyone 
pretty much holds the left arm straight out here. I don’t really see much 
variation in what’s happening with the shaking arm either. Similarly, with 
the legs - well actually, the opposite problem with the legs. You’ll see this 
pattern, you’ll see this pattern and it seems like there’s too much variability 
for me to discern a pattern. 
 
Igor: 
Great. This is, by the way, true with the whole body. It gets even worse 
like that. If you get overloaded with patterns, then you just go down and 
focus more on the smaller elements, like foot position and so on. 
Something that will make your life easier and, by the way, remember we’re 
just walking around shaking people’s hands, so not all the natural signals 
will come out at this point.  
 
 
This is more to get you all sensitized to seeing things, so we can start 
pulling out patterns as we go along. Do you all want to have a quick 
example just in terms of the three things we’ve dealt with so far? The legs, 
the torso, the arms and hands, simple patterns you can start spotting. 
You’ll see them more when people pay less attention, and you’ll probably 
spot them in yourselves as well as you do that. Would that be useful to 
you?  
 
 
Let’s run through them very quickly. Again, as I say, we could probably 
spend three or four days just talking about body language and universal 
patterns. You can sit down if you want, but honestly, this is going to be a 
very quick thing. You may as well just wait then.  
 
 
By the way, notice this is also a pattern right here. There are people who 
are willing to wait it out and there are people who want to sit down. There 
are people who want to take notes. So the patterns are constantly flowing, 
and I’ll just wait.  
 
 
All right. So here are some very common patterns that you can just have 
off the top of your legs. Not your legs. That’s a nice Freudian slip off the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
127 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
top of your head. The first pattern is leg position. The legs will tell you 
where the mind is going. Has anyone know someone who when they’re 
driving a car and they look at something else, their hands go towards – 
like say there’s an accident or something like that or there’s a cute little 
puppy on the side of the road – their hands go towards it and so does the 
car? 
 
 
The legs do the same thing. The legs will show intention. So in terms of 
meeting someone, if someone’s legs start pointing away from you, what 
that’s saying is the person wants to leave. If they do that on actually 
meeting you, they’ll have an uncommitted foot, for example. That means 
that either the person wants to stay a short time for whatever reason. If 
they want to stay for a short time, it might be because he’s in a hurry, or it 
might be because he doesn’t like you. 
 
 
Now the key is you can’t tell the difference yet. It’s only the beginning of 
an indicator. There will be other things you have to look for to add onto it 
to be able to determine it’s more likely that they dislike me than that they 
want to leave because they’re in a hurry, or vice versa. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
When someone’s got an uncommitted foot, basically, what they’re doing is 
mentally they’re already leaving. So either you can shorten your 
interaction or if you determine from the other signals that they don’t like 
you, you have a little bit more work cut out to make them comfortable. 
Make sense?  
 
 
That has to do with distance. If they stop at a further distance, they tend to 
feel less comfortable around you, but this also has a lot of cultural 
variation. For example, in India, they have almost no concept of personal 
space. When I used to do coaching, this used to be a very interesting 
thing when we worked with international executives. There used to be a lot 
of cultural issues to do with, basically, just body language. People didn’t 
realize it.  
 
 
Imagine this. I was doing this in Malaysia. You have a Malaysian woman 
who’s Muslim, with the full shard and everything, so a very traditional 
Muslim. You have an Indian gentleman. Very smart in what he does, but 
has almost no awareness of personal body space. So he’s touching, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
128 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
hugging and invading that person’s body space. For her, the comfortable 
distance was probably twice of what it would be for a Western person.  
 
 
Can you see the working relationship breaking down just from that level 
alone? So personal space is a very important thing, and it tends to be 
cultural as well. Everyone has some level of personal space, but it tends 
to be cultural. As I say, the Indian thing tends to be more of an extreme 
case. In Muslim cultures, like Arabic cultures, the personal space is much 
closer, but there is a defined space between friendship and distance. 
 
 
Incidentally, things like men holding hand’s is perfectly acceptable in the 
Arab world. It’s actually quite natural. Whereas, of course, in Europe and 
North America, as a rule, you’d think, why would you all hold hands? 
Okay, fine. It’s very progressive. But it means very different things.  
 
 
So again, notice how things we would spend most time focusing on – the 
hand holding – actually tells us the least amount, unless we know the 
cultural background. So distance and leg position will tell you how they’re 
feeling towards you in terms of territory.  
 
 
The body from the neck down to here is mostly soft stuff. So when people 
try to protect this it’s because they’re unconsciously feeling stressed or 
threatened in some way. So you’ll notice something, for example, 
happening at a party. When someone enters someone else’s space – say 
you’re throwing a party. You’ll notice something very interesting happen, 
especially if it’s a guy on guy because of the whole mammalian conflict 
thing. 
 
 
Guys typically, when they come in, you know, you knock on the door, you 
open the door, you go, "Hi and welcome. I’m the host." The other person 
will typically say something like this, "Hi, thanks for welcoming me."  
 
 
What they’re doing is unconsciously, they’re acknowledging this is not my 
territory. Allow me in. So the torso does that. The thing that we’re most 
familiar with, of course, if we don’t like someone is we’ll turn our back onto 
them.  
 
 
Part of the reason for this is we’re protecting the vital organs. So if you’re 
talking to someone, the more their torso is turned away from you, the less 
committed they are to the interaction. In other words, this has to do with 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
129 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the foot thing. They might be getting ready to leave. The other thing that 
could be happening is they’re protecting themselves. They feel under 
threat and so on.  
 
 
You can see this a lot, for example – is anyone in here a parent, has 
teenagers or kids and they tell them off? Have you ever noticed that when 
you start telling your kids off, they’ll do something like this? They’ll become 
very protective. Again, they’re protecting those areas, or they’ll turn away, 
they’ll shield. Make sense? Do you see how the torso tells you a little.  
 
 
It can happen very casually. If I’m having a normal conversation and you 
say something I don’t like, I might say, "No, I don’t agree with that."  
 
 
Did you see what happened there? It can be very subtle. It might just be 
that they’re raising the shoulder, I’m protecting myself. Eye blinks still 
happen the same, but we haven’t gone into eye blinks yet.  
 
 
With arms, again, it’s more to do with the motion of the arms. If I’m taking 
up very little space and I’m doing everything else quite the same way, 
what is this telling you about who I am and what I’m doing in terms of my 
stress versus comfort levels? If my arms are more open and relaxed and 
expansive, versus my hands are everywhere.  
 
 
Do you see how each of those things – you can already read those 
signals. I mean I’m exaggerating them so you can see them, but they give 
you some very valuable information.  
 
 
Now here’s the key thing when reading body language. The main thing 
you can focus on when it comes to universal signals are basically stress 
and comfort. It’s not truth or lies. It’s not agreement and disagreement. It’s 
stress or comfort. Now stress tends to accompany certain things. For 
example, if someone lies, they tend to be more stressed because it 
requires more energy, more effort and they’re afraid of being caught. It’s 
not universal.  
 
 
Some people are very good liars. In fact, they believe their lies themselves 
and it makes for even better lies. Comfort, someone may be telling the 
truth and be stressed just because the situation makes them stressed. For 
example, in an interview. if you ask a tough question, they give you the 
truthful answer, but they feel stressed by the emotion of the situation so 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
130 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
they might be giving you a stress signal, which you would be making a 
mistake to interpret that as a lying signal. Does that kind of make sense to 
you all? 
 
 
Another thing you can see in the torso, especially when people are sitting, 
is tension. Body tension is accompanied by stress. So if you start talking 
about things that someone finds, shall we say, is a vulnerable spot for 
someone, long before they push back, you’ll see something like this. 
Either they will tense up and the motion will stop. This is where arms 
become very useful. When the arms stop moving, when the arm starts 
freezing, then you know something’s going on.  
 
 
Again, I’ll give you something; this is heuristic rule of thumb but again, this 
is not a universal thing, just to give you an example. If you ever see – this 
is something I got from a guy named Joe Navarro, who’s an FBI agent. 
He’s very well known and knows body language very well.  
 
 
If you ever see a child doing a normal children thing, an adult walks into 
the room and suddenly this child becomes very still, you know that there’s 
some big problem between that child and that adult. I’m not saying it’s 
necessarily abuse, although it may well be. It may be emotional abuse. It 
may be physical. The child might be terrified of the adult.  
 
 
That’s again to do with motion. We are programmed as fight or flight. It’s 
actually incorrect. It’s actually fight, flight or freeze, of which freezing is the 
first response. Fleeing is the second response. Fighting is the last 
response.  
 
 
So when you see people suddenly freeze, you know that you’ve hit 
something that’s threatening to them. This is a great thing to do say in a 
negotiation or as a hypnotherapist. You’re talking about different topics 
this, that and the other. You might be making a point in terms of, let’s say, 
the cause of something and everyone’s chatting away, and suddenly the 
motion slows down.  
 
 
If you’re not looking for it, you might just carry on because they didn’t say 
anything. But you can see, suddenly, they’re stiffening or you’ll see them 
drawing back slightly. Is this useful for you?  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
131 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’ll give you one thing in terms of the head, than I’d rather you all just 
experiment with the head and the other features a little bit before we go 
into that. So with the head, a nice little signal for comfort is the tilting of the 
head.  
 
 
 
People who tilt their head to one side as a rule are kind of comfortable. 
They’re relaxed and so on. Usually when people are listening, "Oh, that’s 
interesting." That’s fine. The minute they start getting stressed, their head 
will straighten out again.  
 
 
In terms of other tilts, as a rule, head down protects the throat, so that 
tends to be more of a stress response, a fear response and so on. Head 
up exposes the throat. People tend to be more confident. It’s a signal of 
status of and so. There’s a slight – and again, it depends on what else is 
going on at the same time. 
 
 
For example, if I’m doing this, you can all clearly see that this is a lower 
status response. I’m saying, I’m more meek, I’m not challenging. I can do 
exactly the same thing and just a shift in my expression, for example, will 
mean something very different. If I do the same thing but I lean forward 
and I frown, do you see how that has a very different effect. 
 
 
So the head tilt on its own doesn’t mean this person is feeling frightening, 
shy, stressed or whatever it is. It could also be a sign of aggression. Partly 
because this is the hardest part of the head, so they’re exposing the 
hardest part of their head before getting into conflict. Again, do you notice 
how these signals come with other things combined? Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
So you can’t just look, aha, I saw their fingertip moving; therefore, he is 
not memorizing the alphabet. You can’t do that. You have to first, take a 
whole class of responses together, and then put them in terms of these 
are universal kind of responses. Then each individual has idiosyncrasies. 
Some people prefer to do some things than others.  
 
 
For example, a big difference between men and women, a big sign that 
people are getting stressed is they’ll touch their neck area. As a rule, men 
will play with their collar or if they have a tie on, they’ll play with their tie. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
132 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Even just preening is often a sign of stress. Actually, it’s not a preening, 
but again, that’s why you have to have the whole thing. 
 
 
Women will very rarely touch the back of their neck. As a rule, women will 
touch the front of their neck, right just below the Adam’s apple, that little 
dimple there, or they’ll tend to touch over here, unless, of course, they’re 
pregnant, in which case the hand will go down here. Do you see where 
we’re going with this? 
 
 
Again, it’s where the mind goes the body has certain ways of following 
along with it. Is this useful to you? I wish I could spend more time with you 
doing this, but hopefully, that’s going to get you started on the whole 
journey of reading people more clearly. Being able to see the difference 
between these universal signals across cultures, and these are cultural 
signals.  
 
 
Like the handshake is a cultural signal, and those Idiosyncrasies. In other 
words, an individual has their own behaviors and so on that will, again, 
form patterns that allow you to see where that person’s at. That last 
version will take time for you to discover. That first version you’ll get 
instantly within making eye contact with the other person. Is that useful to 
you?  
 
 
All right. Let’s stand up and carry on. All right, everyone, so now what I’d 
like you all to do is very briefly – we’ll just very briefly, because we spent 
more time talking about body language, I’d like you to go around and do 
the same meeting people drill. Only this time I’d like you to focus on head 
tilt and head rotation.  
 
 
Where is their head rotation? Where is their head tilted? Up, down, side to 
side, left to right and so on. Does that make sense? Off you go.  
 
 
All right, everyone. Great. Are you ready to move onto the final one? The 
final one is actually, again, two separate areas. Again, when you have 
time, I would encourage you to explore on your own. So spend maybe a 
day just focusing on one of these areas, and then the next day on another 
area and so on. It’s a great way to get sensitized to this. 
 
 
The two areas that I want you to focus on finally are the lips and the eyes. 
Basically, 80% of the expressions that you have on your face will come 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
133 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
from either the lips and the eyes. They provide a lot of information. There 
are other places, like the forehead and the jaw and so on, and they are 
important. But really if you’ve got the lips and the eyes, it gives you a very 
clear, very quick picture of the other person.  
 
 
Once you have more time to develop this on your own, spend a day just 
focusing on the eyes or the lips on your own. Again, you’ll start seeing 
very interesting things coming out. Easy?  
 
 
Again, when you’re looking for the lips, when you’re looking for the eyes, 
see if the peripheral vision, the rest of your sight will still capture other 
things. Where are their foot positions? Where is their torso position? 
What’s the rotation of their head? What are their hands doing? What is the 
quality of the movement that they are expressing?  
 
 
Does that make sense to you all? Off you go.  
 
 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ 
Do you have any tips in terms of, I guess, how do I put it, basically, 
cleaning up whatever your own projections might be onto a person so that 
you can read their calibrations? 
 
Igor: 
Oh, your projections. In other words, how you’re seeing the other person? 
 
Audience: 
Yes, exactly. Because I notice that as I’m shifting states, I’m having 
trouble actually picking up someone else because what I’m projecting, 
whether it be friendliness or whether it be the other way. 
 
Igor: 
This is where the particular version of this exercise will make it a little bit 
harder because if you’re feeling friendly, you’ll start ignoring certain things. 
When you’re feeling unfriendly, you’ll start ignoring other things. That’s just 
part of human nature. You encoded some behaviors into those two states. 
 
 
So, when you want to have a real clear sense of how people are 
responding, neutrality is the best state to have. The difference here, in 
terms of the exercise, the reason you want to have those emotional states 
is partly so that you’re giving other signals to people as well and that helps 
there. Does that help, somewhat? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
134 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
All right, so it’s part of the drill that there’s a little bit of confusion so that 
everything else… 
 
Igor: 
It will happen. Yes. Hence, the idea of if you still have the emotional thing, 
but all you have to do is focus on one thing, you’ll be able to bust through 
that fog and still see it. 
 
 
For example, with the legs, if you find that you can’t see their legs in 
general and then just focus on his left foot. Everyone you meet, even 
though I don’t like you, I’m only looking at your left foot. That’s interesting 
what he’s doing with his foot. Oh, you’re great. I like you. Well, that’s nice. 
The more you zero in on one simple activity, the more your mind can have 
that through whatever emotions you’re projecting. Does that help? 
 
Audience: 
Yes, actually it does. 
 
Igor: 
Great. 
 
Audience: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
There was another one.  
 
 
Audience: 
 
1. How much of the body language is universal? 
 
2. How much is it specific to the individual? 
 
3. How much of it is dependent on the context?  
 
Igor: 
Yes, it is. That would take us literally four or five days to talk about, 
because there’s a stock of standard behavior’s that are human trait. In 
other words, you’ll see a lot of these in – if you want an interesting place to 
study these things, look at monkeys, apes and their standard behaviors. A 
lot of them have carried on through to us.  
 
 
Those will be standard behavior’s, that are just biological, unless they’re 
suppressed and we’ll talk about that later. 
 
 
Then you have cultural behaviors, and the easiest way to tell those is go 
to an alien culture, like Asia or India or some of the Arabic nations or 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
135 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
maybe Africa. Go to a culture that’s so totally different from your own that 
you’ll have what’s called culture clash. You’ll see that things mean 
different things, and they’ll be very confusing at first.  
 
 
Then you suddenly realize, hang on a second, I made all these 
assumptions and they’re cultural assumptions. That’s the second answer. 
Traveling really helps you with that one. I know you like to travel. 
 
 
The third one is in terms of idiosyncrasies. Whatever’s left will tend to be 
an idiosyncrasy. There might be something that you’ll notice happening a 
lot, and then you might ask yourself is this a cultural thing or is this a 
biological thing? Then traveling will help you build a bigger profile. Does 
that help? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. One follow-up, for example, if I’m doing this, I’m not necessarily 
defensive. It’s just very comfortable posture for me. 
 
Igor: 
This is a classic one. Arm crossing can be a sign of defensiveness 
because you’re shielding, but it doesn’t have to be. If the temperature is 
cold, it’s contextual. People are keeping warm. It could be habitual. In 
other words, it’s an idiosyncrasy when someone gets, for example, into 
lecturing mode. Okay, let me tell you about so and so. In that case, it’s a 
habitual thing. 
 
 
As I say, the things that most people pay attention to – this is why I have 
problem with many body language books because they’ll tell you things 
like, this person is closed.  
 
 
Actually, no crossed legs are a sign of comfort. Someone who is stressed 
will tend to have legs open and maybe even hide their legs behind their 
chair. Think about it. Which looks more relaxed to you right now? Where 
do I look more at ease? Like this, or like that?  
 
 
Of course, if I’m doing this, that’s another thing. Do you see how you can’t 
pinpoint one behavior and say that’s what it means? It’s qualities being 
expressed amongst other things. 
 
Audience: 
So the point is, my understanding is that when you’re calibrating, you just 
can’t make an assumption that’s general for everyone. The crossing the 
legs may be defensive for that particular person.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
136 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Yes. The thing you can make a general assumption about is, stress 
versus comfort. That is the only level you can make a universal judgment 
on. Stress versus comfort. 
 
 
There are a couple of other signals. We’ll talk about one of them in a 
moment if we, hopefully, get to it. But as a rule, that’s the baseline of 
human experience. Stress and comfort, that’s the parasympathetic 
nervous system versus the sympathetic nervous system. Beyond that – 
and even within at, you don’t know what that stress means. Is it a stress or 
dislike? Is it the stress of a threatening idea? Is it the stress of their own 
pressure or just are they just a stressed person?  
  
 
It becomes a more complex game. All I can do right now – because 
otherwise we’ll take time away from the conversational hypnosis, which 
really is our focus here – is to introduce you to these ideas, give you some 
tools for getting sensitized to it. My recommendation is do not label these 
experiences yet. Just notice them.  
 
 
Right now just notice that some people have their legs back and some 
have them forward. Some people meet you like this, and some people 
meet you like this. Some people will meet you like this. Just notice these 
things, and over time those patterns will start making more sense to you 
because you’ll have larger reference experiences. Does that make sense 
to you all? 
 
 
That will take time to build up. Either that, or I’ll put on another seminar for 
four or five days to do these things, but that will not be now because that’s 
not what we’re doing here. Does that make sense to you all, there’s only 
so much I can fit into one particular thing? 
 
 
Very quickly now, let’s just move around. Just two minutes to check eyes 
and lips, and then I’ll show you how to use that and put it all together. 
Okay, off you go.  
 
 
How did that go for you all? Interesting? Does anyone want to come up 
and tell me what kind of things you spotted with the eyes and lips? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
137 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
The thing I noticed on the eyes is that initial eye contact, you do whatever 
you do, and if you take a moment and maintain a little bit longer contact, 
people kind of go like this. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. Did anyone notice this? If your eye contact is a little bit longer, 
there’s a social norm, and by the way it will change across cultures – not 
nations, culture. The North America and South America will be a little 
different and vice versa and so on. Has anyone here heard of the hypnotic 
gaze induction? We’ll be using that later on. This is exactly the effect. 
 
 
Did you notice if someone looks at you for too long, you have that little 
sense of like being a little startled, like a rabbit in the headlights? What’s 
going on here? 
 
Audience: 
What’s interesting is what happens even after that startled thing. They’ll 
either come back with a smile or they’ll... 
 
Igor: 
Or, they’ll pull back even further, right? This is very important. Its one way 
you can do an instant induction, without doing an instant induction. You 
can do it conversationally. That little startled effect is the equivalent of 
pulling someone on their head, pushing the hand out or yanking their arm 
or whatever kind of instant induction you want to do. 
 
 
Of course, what matters is what you do at that point. When that little 
startled effect, is you can give them a non-verbal suggestion of friendship. 
For example, would you like to know how to do that? Come back quick 
after the break because that’s exactly what we’re doing.  
 
 
Before we do that, however, let’s just take a few more comments or things 
you all noticed. What other things did you all notice or questions you 
have? Come on up. Did anyone read that body language? I think that’s 
one of comfort, isn’t it? 
 
Audience: 
You didn’t talk about breathing at all. I personally use it as a huge 
indicator. Like I listen more than I watch. I can feel a lot of tension in 
people’s breathing. Where they hold their breath and when they feel 
comfortable just breathing normally. 
 
Igor: 
I agree. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
138 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
I was wondering why you didn’t bring it up at all. 
 
Igor: 
Partly because it’s part of the torso and partly because breathing tends to 
be more idiosyncratic, especially if they have breathing patterns that they 
fall into. As a rule, breathing will be against stress or comfort. Stress 
breathing is tenser, shallower and tends to be faster. Comfort breathing, 
you’ll have more like a sigh and tends to be a longer exhale and so on. 
 
 
These are things that we’ll start looking at more when we do more 
inductions as well. I’m just separating them for a little bit later, but it’s 
something you’ll start noticing as you look for torso rotations because the 
shoulder will lift and move with their breathing.  
 
 
A little hint by the way everyone. If you are checking for people’s breathing 
and the person is a female, please don’t do this. Nice lungs. Unless you’re 
married to the person or maybe dating them. Does that help you? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
We’ll come onto breathing as we deal with more formal inductions as well. 
Come on up. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ If you’re not going to be looking at their lungs, especially on a 
woman, can you look at the collar bones? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, but again, it depends on how they perceive your line of sight. If they 
think it’s dipped a little bit, then you have the same issues. My preference 
is to catch the lift in the right of the shoulders in the peripheral vision. So 
as I’m looking at you, I can still see the right of her shoulder. It can be a 
little trickier sometimes, depending on clothing, but as a rule it can be 
done. 
 
 
Sometimes you can spot it from the belly. Some people breathe very 
clearly from the belly, but again, you have the same sort of issues. If you 
start staring at someone’s belly, they might think you’re staring at their 
crotch and you might have an interesting evening. Does that make sense? 
 
 
 Come on up. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
139 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
I found this before in different events they were kind of looking at you, or 
even look past you.  
 
♦ Is there a way to bring the attention back? 
 
Igor: 
What would be the purpose of getting their attention back? 
 
Audience: 
Just to engage in a conversation to move into a process of… 
 
Igor: 
Sure. What requires you to have eye contact in order to have a 
conversation? 
 
Audience: 
I don’t know. 
 
Igor: 
What he’s describing is actually a valid point. We talked about 
idiosyncrasies before and cultural norms. Eye contact is another one of 
these eye cultural norms. A lot of people will judge other people by eye 
contact they’re supposed to look away and so on. Believe it or, the reverse 
is the case.  
 
 
When someone is lying to you, they’ll probably usually lock eye contact for 
longer precisely because they believe that liars don’t make eye contact. 
So if someone is normally talking to you like this and suddenly they carry 
on like this again, did you see how the contrast of behaviors? That means 
something rather than anything else. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Turning back to what he was talking about, a lot of people require eye 
contact in order to make a conversation. It’s just how they grew up. 
Parents might say, look at me when I’m talking to you and so on. But a lot 
of people don’t. A lot of people will turn their head and listen.  
 
 
So when you’re saying something important, then you might find people 
looking away, just glancing down slightly and really listening, and maybe 
do something like this. So they’re processing what you’re saying. The 
reason I’m mentioning this is, it’s an idiosyncrasy. It is not a barrier to 
communication. If you require it for communicating, it diminishes your 
ability to interacting with people.  
 
 
Can you force eye contact? Yes. By the same token, a lot of people find it 
uncomfortable maintaining eye contact, which is exactly why we use it 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
140 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
hypnotically to lift the levels of discomfort to destabilize the critical factor. 
Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
  
 
♦ How would you more internalize the skill of reading body 
language? 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! The first thing I would recommend you all do is break the body 
down into parts like we’ve said. Start with the feet - Go on the Internet to 
see if you can find it, there’s a little picture called the homunculus. 
Although it might get a cross from esoteric arcana as well, it’s a different 
kind of homunculus, no magic involved.  
 
 
It’s basically a figure of a little man and the limbs are drawn in proportion 
to how much brain area is dedicated to processing that. So they’ll have 
large feet. They’ll have skinny legs. They’ll have a skinny torso. They’ll 
have a rather extended phallus. It’s true. 
 
 
Their hands will be huge. Their lips will be massive. The eyes will be 
massive. The ears will be large and the rest will be relatively small. This is 
going to give a good sign of where to find signals.  
 
 
So if you break the body down on those things, you’ll have the feet, then 
the legs you’ll spend separate time. Torso will be separate time. You may 
want to even separate the shoulders from the torso. Their shoulders will 
give you some information, too. Arms and movements as well, so you can 
spend some time looking at positions, but also at some time looking at the 
motions, hands, face and so on.  
 
 
Initially, you’re doing that, and your aim is to do it with no judgment. In 
other words, just notice how people move, how people stand, how people 
sit, how people behave. Stay out of judgment. Don’t say, this person is 
shy, this person is in love, this person hates me, this person likes me and 
so on. Stay out of that. An easy way to do that is for people watching, sit in 
a café somewhere, sit in a restaurant and just watch people. Make it your 
mission of the day to watch different parts of their body. That’s the first 
way. 
 
 
Next the only question to ask yourself is instinctively, do I think this person 
is comfortable or uncomfortable? When I see that foot, does that tell me 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
141 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that they’re comfortable in the interaction, or someone who’s 
uncomfortable? Not that it means anything in terms of whether they like or 
dislike the person and they agree or disagree with a statement. It might be 
they’re in a hurry or whatever it is. These things aren’t important.  
 
 
You just get used to judging levels of comfort based on behavior. Then 
over time what happens, is its kind of like, have you ever heard of the 
Italian film director, Fellini, basically, 90% of his films is just eyes. The 
whole film is – he really likes eyes, and that’s a great film, by the way, to 
watch to get used to eye behavior. 
 
 
How can you tell a film that’s almost silent, just by how people are 
glancing at each other? It’s because you’re already an expert at reading 
that kind of body language. Does that make sense? So once you have 
your clear filter and you see the different behaviors that are available, and 
then you start evaluating whether it looks more comfortable or less 
comfortable. Then you can start going to the area of making some 
judgments, some test judgments, shall we say.  
 
 
I think this person’s more this or more shocked or more surprised or 
enjoying it or not enjoying it and so on. But then always test it. So you 
keep watching to see the other things that are happening to confirm it. 
Does that make sense?  
 
 
So if you think that person is having a great time, but you start seeing 
signals of stress and then you think, why are all these stress signals 
coming on? It just becomes an instinct over time. 
 
 
Either that, or come to my next course. I tell a lie. I haven’t actually got 
one ready, but I’m beginning to feel that maybe I should make one ready. 
Right? Does that help you? Thank you. Go ahead. 
 
Audience: 
I want to make sure that I’m coming away from the exercise with the 
correct takeaway. What I’m gathering is that it’s important for us to isolate 
the body so that we become aware and sensitized to those particular 
movements, but then really not to draw any conclusions until… 
 
Igor: 
I would stop you at that point. The purpose is absolutely correct until you 
got to the point until. The rest is actually to me irrelevant. I just happen to 
answer the question because he wanted to progress it. There’s no other 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
142 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
purpose than that for me in terms of what we’re doing here. I will show you 
how to use the stuff you’ve done so far after the break.  
 
Audience: 
I just want to make sure that… 
 
Igor: 
You’re in the right place. What I’m trying to avoid is getting into the idea of 
judgment or what things mean, specifically because it’s more complex 
than initially meets the eye. All right? 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Do you have any tips in terms of focus of the eyes, whether it 
‘Y’ division, diffused vision or specific sort of tight vision? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. The answer is experiment. 
 
Audience: 
Okay. 
 
Igor: 
Of course, peripheral vision, seeing things from the corner of your eye and 
so on is my preferred status how I do my H+, how I’ve developed my 
ability to do hypnosis and it allows you to capture more of the general 
movement. But specific vision is useful too because then you can see 
small changes, especially if you’re looking out for them or you expect them 
because you know the person relatively well. 
 
 
I wouldn’t say one is better than the other. Experiment and have the 
flexibility to go through the range. 
 
Audience: 
Thanks. 
 
Igor: 
Has this been useful to you? Has it been interesting at least?  
 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ What about hands in the pockets? 
 
Igor: 
Hands in the pocket. All right, very quickly, as a rule – and you can see for 
yourself. Am I more comfortable right now as I’m speaking, or more 
comfortable now? What about this? What about this? As a rule, hands in 
pockets are a sign of discomfort, as a rule. Again, there are exceptions to 
every rule. Thumbing – having your thumbs inside your pockets, this is a 
low status signal as a rule.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
143 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Again, you see a lot of the skateboarders doing this, so it could be a 
cultural thing too. But as a rule, these are signs of lower status, unless of 
course – this is a very male thing – if you’re a male, and you have your 
thumbs tucked into your belt, this is a pointing at a certain area of the 
body. At that point, it becomes a dominant signal.  
 
 
So as a rule, if people have thumbs in their pockets, it tends to be more 
lower status, so more stress response shall we say. Hands in pockets in 
general, give or take, it tends to be toward that direction. It’s very rare that 
people have their thumbs out and their hands in. So it’s really about what 
the thumbs are doing rather than what the hand is doing except, of course, 
for the thumb tuck, which has a slightly different interpretation.  
 
 
By the way, don’t think it doesn’t happen. It doesn’t mean that people walk 
around like this. Look at me. They might go through and go, yeah. Do you 
see what I just did there? It looks like a casual movement. This is the thing 
about body language. A lot of these things look causal. They don’t just sit 
there going, no, look I’m doing this. It will be just a casual thing, like I’m 
just going to tuck my pants up a little bit, but really it’s an unconscious 
signal to get attention to a certain part of the body. Make sense?  
 
 
The same thing we talked about the neck touching. They’ll be going like 
"Robin, Hello." (Igor over obviously touching his neck) It will happen 
sometimes when someone’s really stressed. They’ll be more like, they’ll 
be talking and laughing and it will be a fleeting gesture. Which is why we 
want to get used to just observing before we do anything else.  
 
 
If we rush into judging and evaluating, then it just becomes a lot more 
difficult to do anything with it. Does that make sense to you all?  
 
Audience: 
This is not so much a question per se. It’s just something that just popped 
into my head that I was going to offer. There’s a TV special… 
 
Igor: 
Lie to Me? 
 
Audience: 
No. It’s actually Desmond Morris, the human animal.  
 
Igor: 
I haven’t come across that. Desmond Morris, the human animal 
apparently talks about these sorts of things? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
144 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Audience: 
Yeah, he’s an anthropologist, and he actually, I guess, traveled the entire 
world. It’s produced by the BBC. I guess you can find it. I watched it. It’s 
pretty old at this point, but it’s interesting because he goes throughout the 
entire world, he shows animals and people in different parts of the world 
and one of its hand gestures.  
 
 
In Europe or in Italy they do this. It’s the horns of the bull, they don’t do 
that. Then he goes to Venice boardwalk, shows people walking around 
and then he shows people in the supermarket, so I guess men will do this 
if they’re interested in women. 
 
Igor: 
Hence, you can’t get a clear signal of what exactly it means. 
 
Audience: 
It’s an interesting thing that I guess if you’re more interested in this topic, I 
found it really fascinating.  
 
Igor: 
Great. Thank you. Check him out. I haven’t heard of him, but it sounds like 
exactly the stuff we talked about here. If you’re willing to troll through it, 
there’s a lot of research and academia about exactly these sorts of things. 
Anthropology and sociology are the two places to look at it. As I say, it’s a 
bigger field. So it’s not something we can cover in just a couple of hours. 
 
 
Hopefully, this gives you a sensitization for it, and more importantly an 
awareness of things that are happening so you can spot those things. Is 
that fair to say? If you’ve got that, then you have exactly what you need 
from this morning’s session.  
 
 
Let’s take a 15 minute break now. Let’s do it anyway. Let’s be back here 
at 10 to, I think it’s 11 to start again. Thanks.  
 
DVD 6:  Hypnotic Rapport & New “Magnetic 
Charisma” Techniques 
 
Igor: 
All right, everyone. Welcome back again. Did you enjoy the morning 
session in terms of just opening your eyes up to how people move and 
behave and their body language and so on? Just to emphasize, in terms 
of unconscious signals, these things can mean a lot of different things. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
145 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
We’re going to look at some of the very robust ones that you can actually 
use now.  
 
 
The most important thing right now is can you observe these things 
happening? During the break, for example, did you notice people more 
fully? Did you notice their movements? Did you notice how they were 
standing? How they would hold themselves in relation to you or in relation 
to other people? If you can start just observing those things, even if it’s in 
piecemeal, like okay, I’m going to focus on legs and feet today or arms 
and hands or torso, head, shoulder and that sort of stuff, it begins to 
sensitize you.  
 
 
That’s really all we need for the purposes of what we’re going to be doing 
here in conversational hypnosis. Does that make sense? So don’t think 
that you have to do something to get into this whole, I must know what it 
all means and so on. Is it useful? Absolutely. Do you need it for what we’re 
doing here? No. It’s enough to get a general sense of where they’re at and 
notice that someone is making shifts, changes. Make sense? 
 
 
Those changes will alert you to what’s going on. It will make more sense 
as we go into the more conversational hypnosis. The key thing here is, 
can you observe changes, and can you observe them specifically? It’s not 
like something changed, but I don’t know what it was. You can say, "Oh, 
his leg moved. " And you can show that sort of thing. 
 
 
As a rule of thumb, which part of the body do you think is the most 
honest? Legs, eyes, face, feet, pupils? As a rule of thumb, actually it’s the 
leg. The further away it is from the face, the more honest it tends to be. 
Why? Because it’s more unconscious. We’ve been socialized. You go to 
Auntie Ethel Beard, who has a full beard, you’re a little five-year old, you 
have to kiss her on the face, and you’re like, I won’t do it.  
 
 
What do your parents say? Well, put a brave face on. Smile at your aunt. 
So we put this big smile on and say, "Hello Auntie Ethel, it’s so nice to see 
you." We’re socializers. 
 
 
So whilst all these signals are unconscious, the thing to realize is we can 
consciously interfere with them as well. If we know that hand wringing is a 
sign of tension – which, by the way, it is – then you find yourself doing this 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
146 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
in an interview. All right, I must put my hands down and relax them. We 
can interfere with the signal. Does that make sense? 
 
 
The thing is though, if you interfere in one area, it will pop out somewhere 
else, like in the legs or something like that. Does that make sense to you 
all? So as a rule, the legs and feet will be the most honest. Then there’s 
the torso, arms and hands and finally it will be the face and the head 
because that’s what we’re most used to putting a social veneer over, shall 
we say. 
 
 
Having said that, the face and specifically the eyes – like a lot of you were 
saying – have a lot of very valuable information. It’s very important. The 
way we navigate through the world is through our senses, but we’re also 
navigating through a social world.  
 
 
In order to understand how the world works, unless you’re living alone in 
the jungle, in which case it’s just whatever you project onto that jungle, as 
soon as other people come in, you need to have a relationship with them. 
Whether it’s 'the' relationship or it’s a relationship of friendship or any other 
kind of relationship, you are relating to those people at some level. It’s part 
of being a social animal. 
 
 
So what we end up doing is we send out these little signals, very subtle 
signals. I like to call them pings, like a submarine sonar device, and that 
little ping, to get a message back so you get a sense of what’s going on 
right now. You walk into a room and start acting weirdly, what do people 
do? They give you a social signal that you’re misbehaving, that you’re 
awkward or that they’re being distrustful in some way because maybe 
you’re on drugs or something like that. 
 
 
These are the social signals, the stigmas, that we’re afraid of when we do 
something a little bit more outrageous. We’re afraid of violating that social 
code. Does that make sense to you? So these signals are very, very 
important because they let us know what’s real and what’s not real. Of 
course, it’s real in the hypnotic sense. It’s real because we believe it to be 
real. It can be by the constraint and it can be something that enhances us 
in terms of society and so on.  
 
 
There is a specific signal that I think is incredibly important, and I really 
don’t know why more people don’t talk about this. It’s relatively well written 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
147 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
about in the academia. It’s a universal signal that is something you’ll see, 
basically, in every culture around the world, except one, and that’s 
because they suppress it on purpose. We’ll talk about that in a moment.  
 
 
It is a signal that you’ll see in colonies of monkeys and apes. So it’s a 
mammalian signal. It basically separates us and them. It is a signal that 
says, you’re one of us, or are you one of us? Presenting the signal at the 
right time begins that pinging process where people get to test each other 
out unconsciously to find out is this person a friend or a potential threat? 
Would you like to learn what the signal is and how to use it? Or shall we 
go back to our coloring books? 
 
 
Before we get into the signal, there’s something very important, which is, 
there are different kinds of people out there in the world in terms of who 
you may want to have an interaction with. And the signal is not magic. In 
other words, it will work with some and not with others, and I’ll show you 
what I mean by that.  
 
 
There’s a group of people out there, believe it or not, who are totally and 
utterly oblivious to you. They don’t even notice you. Unless you do 
something to draw attention to yourself, they don’t even see you. So all 
the signaling in the world will do absolutely no good at all. You can’t start 
the pinging process unless they’re actually aware of you. 
 
 
If you’re walking in a crowd, the only way they’re going to be made aware 
of you is if you do something to grab attention in some way. So the 
oblivious people can be converted in some ways. We’ll talk about some 
sneaky ways of doing that if you want.  
 
 
As a rule, unless they’re somehow like half aware of you, there is no 
interaction going on at that level, as long as you perform within social 
boundaries. As soon as you break social boundaries, it pulls awareness. 
Other people’s awareness will pull their awareness and so it goes in that 
direction. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
Remind me later to talk to you about how to make oblivious people aware 
of you.    
 
 
The second type of people you’ll come across, I’ll call these open. These 
are people, who don’t know you but are open to knowing you. I other 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
148 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
words, you’re walking down the street and you will exchange signals. 
They’ll test - do I know this person well enough to stop and have a chat? 
They don’t know they’re doing this. It’s not a conscious thing. Some 
people are more open than others, of course. In other words, they may 
actually actively seek to engage with you.  
 
 
Other people will be more reserved. They’re open to an interaction, but 
they don’t know you. So they’re not entirely oblivious to you. They’re kind 
of half oblivious to you. They walk in their own little private trance, but as 
soon as there’s a signal of that whole rapport pinging process starting up, 
they’ll go, oh, all right, sure. Make sense?  
 
 
There’s a third type of people. These are a lot tougher to work with, 
although there is something you can do here as well. They are specifically 
closed for whatever reason. For example, they may not like you. They 
may know you and they may not like you, and they may not want to know 
you. It happens. Not to me, but it happens.  
 
 
Other examples of this might be an attractive woman in a nightclub or a 
bar will tend to be more closed. Why? Because people are constantly 
coming up to her, do you see how that works? A reverse situation, of 
course, if you are a celebrity, for example, male or female. Again, they 
tend to be more closed in certain circumstances because they don’t want 
people coming in crowding them. In other circumstances, they have to be 
open because otherwise they’ll get bad press. Do you see how that whole 
thing works? 
 
 
So in terms of closed individuals, let’s think more about people who are 
either personally so inhibited that they’re afraid of making contact with 
others. For whatever reason they already don’t like you, either because 
they know you already or they made a prejudgment about you. Or, the 
social circumstances dictate that they put a barrier up between 
themselves and other people; otherwise, they’ll get swamped by attention 
that they don’t know or don’t know how to cope with. Does that make 
sense? Those tend to be the three reasons why people are closed.  
 
 
Finally, we have the group of people who – I’ll call these active people. 
They’re actively seeking to engage you in some way. It might be because 
they’re trying to sell you something. It might be because they know you 
and they’re friends and they’re just being friendly. It might be just that – 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
149 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you find these people – they’re friendly, social people who just chat to 
strangers because they like doing it.  
 
 
As a rule, these are the four basic scenarios, you’ll fit into. Active people 
are very easy to engage with. Why? Because they’ll find you, in fact, 
sometimes ignoring eye contact is not enough. Closed people are harder 
to work with, precisely because they’re closed.  
 
 
As a rule, the way to work with closed people is you have to break their 
patterns. It’s a loop. There’s a pattern. Their minds are spinning through 
their patterns, and whilst that’s active it’s very difficult to get inside.  
 
 
The simplest way of opening up closed people is through; you stimulate 
part of the brain called the amygdala. The amygdala is part of the 
emotional center and attention centers, and essentially it decides should 
you panic or should you feel bliss right now. Should you be happy or fear? 
It’s a primitive part of the brain. I think its part of the mammalian brain if 
I’m correct. I’m not sure. 
 
 
What the amygdala does is it shuts down with increasing intensity the 
neocortex, which is the thinking part of the brain. It breaks your thinking 
loops. One of the ways to activate the amygdala is with mind bending 
language. It’s great for that, but not something we’ll cover here. Humor is 
fantastic.  
 
 
Have you ever noticed how a joke at the right time totally transforms a 
situation? Why? The amygdala is primed, it’s triggered, by the unexpected 
shocks, surprises, etc. Are you beginning to understand what we did 
yesterday a little bit more now?  
 
 
It’s the amygdala being triggered, which short circuits the neocortex, the 
normal thinking loops, which allows you to present different ideas that are 
accepted and become the new reality. In instant induction, of course, it’s 
called trance. Does that make sense to you? So the amygdala can be 
triggered with anything that causes surprise. Humor works on this. There 
is no joke that does not cause surprise. Otherwise, it’s called a bad joke. 
It’s true, isn’t it? 
 
 
Other ways would be surprise. For example, by stepping out of the social 
norms, breaking expectation, pattern interrupt. The classic pattern 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
150 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
interrupt, of course, is the handshake. Someone comes up, you try to 
shake hands and then you refuse, and they go, what’s going on? 
Depending on what happens at that point, will trigger either fight or flight.  
 
 
They’ll either get angry because they feel that they’ve been taken 
advantage of in some way, or they’ll smile and laugh because the pattern 
interrupt has been amusing in some way. With closed people, you need to 
break the pattern. You somehow trigger the amygdala and surprise, the 
unexpected is your route into doing that.  
 
 
Open people. This is people in their little private trances who don’t seek to 
disengage and aren’t seeking to actively engage either. That’s probably 
the greater part or the majority of people out there. Open people will 
respond to a cycle of that sort of popping. It’s like a little social ritual that 
happens unconsciously. Every human being has their own unique way of 
greeting someone else. Some will tip their heads, some will smile and 
some will shake hands. Those are all idiosyncrasies.  
 
 
I don’t know if this is a fact, but I know there used to be a great hypnotist 
out there called Dave Dobson. Have you heard of the 'unconscious hello'? 
I believe this is what the unconscious hello is, but I can’t say because I 
never saw him do it or seen someone else do it, but I believe what it 
essentially is as you meet someone, you reflect back onto them whatever 
nonverbal behavior they’re making as part of the greeting gesture. Hence, 
it feels like, oh, great, there’s a friend coming my way.  
 
 
Note it happens before the formal greeting, the formal touching of hands in 
the Western sense, or they give you the formal bow in the Eastern sense. 
It happens before all that. The evaluation has already occurred at that 
point. Does that make sense?  
 
 
Something happens before even that, something that allows that whole 
ritual to even begin. You can try this if you want. If you’re sitting in a 
restaurant and you’re looking around the room – I’ve tried it. They ignore 
you. They think that’s a little weird. Why? Because you’re not reflecting 
back onto them they’re greeting behavior.  
 
 
You can’t engage the greeting behavior unless you trigger it somehow. 
You’ve got to fit the greeting so they can engage that whole process so 
you have something worth reflecting back. Do you see how that works? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
151 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Would you like to know how to engage that greeting behavior? It’s so 
easy, it’s unreal. Most of you have done it already and didn’t even know it. 
I was kind of hoping that someone might spot this during the exercise 
earlier on. It’s so unconscious that most people don’t know it’s happening, 
but once you know what it is, it’s impossible to ignore. It’s called the 
eyebrow flash.  
 
 
Essentially, when two people that know each other meet, they’ll do 
something like this. Their eyebrows will raise. Typically, a smile will end up 
in the corners of their eyes as well. It’s not 100% correlated, but it’s a very 
typical add-on. Monkeys do this, apes do this and human beings do this 
whenever they meet someone, that’s part of the pack. Think about it.  
 
 
How many times have you walked down the street and someone goes like 
this and you go, "Me? Hi!" Of course, they’re waving to someone behind 
you. 
 
 
What you’re not responding to is this? Do you see how that’s very 
different? I’m putting on a little bit of poker face on purpose, versus this. 
Do you feel the difference? Do you see how it’s a lightening of the 
expression? The smile happens to be part of it as a result. As they’re 
lifting the eyebrow, that engages the greeting behavior.  
 
 
At that point, someone else will typically do the typical behavior. They 
might go like this, or they might go like this. It doesn’t matter what it is. The 
point is you’ve set the pattern going, so now you have a stage approach. 
Please understand that when I say flash, I don’t mean in the tradition 
sense. None of that please. It will get attention, but not the kind you’re 
looking for. 
 
 
So when you have the eyebrow flash, it engages the greeting behavior, 
and as soon as you get the greeting behavior, you can mirror it, as they 
call it, or reflect that behavior back onto them. That kind of solidifies it. 
They go, great, I somehow know this person. I feel close to this person 
somehow. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
You have to somehow trigger the greeting behavior so you have 
something worth reflecting back. Now if you do nothing but this – if you 
want to try this, feel free to do this. Go sit downstairs in the lobby for an 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
152 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
hour and do nothing but when someone comes in, you don’t have to put 
the hand up, you just go like this. I’m teasing. Come on up. You’ll be 
amazed how many new friends you make. People will come up to you and 
they’ll go, "Hi, how do I know you?"  
 
 
They’re responding to the eyebrow flash. They’re responding to the 
behavior - I’m part of this pack. I’m part of this group. Does that make 
sense? Go ahead. 
 
Audience: 
Might that be misinterpreted though. I don’t know if somebody’s like this. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, thank you so much. Did you all catch that? This is what the question 
mark is here about. This is, by the way, why there’s one country, in which 
the eyebrow flash is actually suppressed. If you do this in one particular 
country – and I’ll reveal the secret shortly – it will be taken as a crude 
sexual gesture, and you’ll be treated accordingly, either with great delight 
or great frustration, depending on if they like you or not. 
 
 
The country, by the way, is Japan. In Japan, eyebrow flashes are 
considered sexual. So it’s suppressed, although they still use them. The 
only people that eyebrow flashes are culturally acceptable with are 
children and very close friends. In the rest of the world, as far as I know – 
and this is people in jungles in Borneo and Africa or in Berlin and New 
York and everywhere – the eyebrow flash is a standard greeting behavior.  
 
 
There’s a difference though, and this is why it’s very, very important that 
we start with something before the eyebrow flash. You see, your eyebrows 
do more than just lift and return. They’re very expressive. For example, if I 
just lift one eyebrow or the extended eyebrow flash, which is really what 
you’re asking about, do you notice how it’s something very different from 
my doing this to my doing this? 
 
 
Do you see the difference? It’s still my eyebrows lifting; however, there’s a 
difference, in the quality of them lifting and my expression that goes with it. 
That creates a different suggestion and atmosphere. 
 
 
Eyebrow flashes in most cultures that I’ve come across can also be 
sexual. They can also be invasive. Typically, in a conversation, people will 
lift their eyebrows when they want the other person to answer a question. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
153 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Do you see what I mean? So eyebrows mean more than one thing. It’s the 
quality of the eyebrow.  
 
 
The context, then the quality and the expressions that go with it that will 
define it, whether it’s a greeting ping or something else. Just like maybe a 
submarine might have different tones to distinguish between different 
types of things. I don’t know if they do or not, you get the analogy. 
 
 
It’s very important that we do something before we engage in the greeting 
behavior or the greeting ping, the eyebrow flash, in order to ensure that it’s 
taken the right way. That it’s not a sexual signal, it’s not an aggressive 
signal. Although I’m not sure if that’s particular aggressive, but it’s not 
misunderstood.  
 
 
This is where your H+ comes in again. This thing here I like to call the 
inner smile. It’s kind of charming, isn’t it? You may have noticed that you 
spent some time today reminding people of people that they feel close to 
or connected to. Not in a sexual way, just in a friendship sort of way. Make 
sense?  
 
 
The reason for that is because state drives behavior. Your emotions drive 
your behavior. If you’re looking at someone and you go, "Whoa, I like that 
person.", it will change the quality of the eyebrow flash and it will be taken 
as a sexual come on. If you don’t know the person and you feel a little 
inhibited and you do your eyebrow flash, it will come off as incongruent. 
What’s this person doing? I don’t trust that person.  
 
 
There’s something weird about them. They may not even notice the 
eyebrow flash because believe me, very few people do. You got flashed, 
believe it or not, quite a lot today, but especially when you were doing that 
last exercise when you were looking for the eyes and lips.  
 
 
You still didn’t see it, right? It’s that unconscious. Yet it occurred at least 
half the time. It occurred when people were being friendly. It occurred 
virtually all the time when they’re really going into the role, but you still did 
not see it because it’s unconscious. 
 
 
So, we need to make sure that the state that we are in has none of these, 
shall we say, contaminating desires or intentions that would otherwise 
signal the wrong thing. Does that make sense to you? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
154 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
So here’s what we’re going to do in terms of an exercise. I’d like for you to 
experience this for yourself in a fun sort of way. We’re going to split 
yourselves into four groups. Can the front two or so rows go into this 
corner for me? Two and a half rows maybe. Then we’ll have another 
group over there by the tables, a third group by the water table there, and 
a fourth group over here.  
 
 
Just make it roughly equal numbers and turn your attention towards me, 
and I’ll show you a very cool exercise that you’ll enjoy. Just split 
yourselves up into groups.  
 
 
In a moment, we’re going to go through the mingling exercise again. You 
are free and welcome to say hello and meet and greet anyone in this 
room, anyone at all. Same group, different group, it doesn’t really matter. I 
would like for you to pay attention to two things. To how you feel when you 
meet these people and what expressions you’re seeing in terms of what 
body language you’re getting.  
 
 
This group over here, mostly gentlemen, but one or two ladies, I’d like for 
you all to be totally poker faced when meeting people. You can do 
everything expressively with your body that you want. You can be friendly, 
social and very nice, so nice to meet you. It’s really nice to see you. But 
your expression should be as deadpan as possible.  
 
 
Do you think you can do that with every single person, no expression? It’s 
like someone switched off your face, and all you can do is speak, you can 
be social, you can be nice, but be as deadpan as possible.  
 
 
The next group, you all over here, you’re going to be cool. You’re going to 
do the inner smile. Inside of you, I want you all to think of people you really 
like, people you’re really connected to, and just feel that. Whatever you 
do, whenever you meet people, just make sure you keep feeling that 
feeling as you’re meeting them. That’s all. Easy to do?  
 
 
You all, yes, you’ll like this. You all are the flashers. Please do not take 
any clothes off. The only parts of you I’d like to see flashing will be your 
eyebrows. Again, try to keep a neutral state so that literally the eyebrows 
are doing the thing, and just be normal, social, whatever it is.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
155 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The only thing you’re doing differently is you’re making a concerted effort 
to raise your eyebrows – and this is important – before you touch the other 
person’s hand or anything like that. In other words, the minute you see 
someone, those eyes go up. Simple, good.  
 
 
The final group over here, you all are going to have something very 
interesting to do. I’d like you all too just mirror the other person’s behavior. 
If you find it difficult keeping track of everything, the main things, the usual 
suspects and the big ones are head tilt – that’s a big one. It includes 
things like nodding behaviors so there’s rhythm and movement involved.  
 
 
Of course, the eyebrows are going to be a big one, and the lips. Eyes, lips, 
head are going to be the big ones you’re going to get information from, but 
it might be shoulders. It might be arms as well. It might be the legs. There 
might be a torso tilt. Some people give a little bow as they meeting 
someone. It’s just part of their greeting behavior.  
 
 
Whatever you do, you can meet them in a normal way, whatever you 
normally do, but as soon as you see their body language, I just want you 
to mimic it slightly or in a casual way. So it’s not like you’re going, I am 
now mirror man, which is very odd. The idea is to be very casual. You’re 
just going to have a little gesture there so it’s a natural movement to you.  
 
 
Does that make sense?  
 
 
If you have difficulty keeping track of everything that these people are 
doing, the usual suspects, the big three are eyes, lips, head tilt. Easy? All 
right, everyone?  
 
 
I want you to spend a few minutes now just meeting everyone in the room, 
and just noticing how you feel about meeting different people. If you wish 
to, at the end of the interaction ask them which of the four types they were 
so that you can get a sense of how meeting different types of people has 
affected you. Off you go.  
 
 
All right, folks, so as the last few people are sitting down, how was the 
exercise did you find it interesting? Do you want to come up? 
 
Audience: 
May favorite were the eyebrow people. I thought it would be disconcerting, 
but it’s very warm.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
156 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Was that whole sexual thing an issue at all? 
 
Audience: 
Not at all. It felt just very welcoming.  
 
Igor: 
Right. This is weird, you know, its coming, you know, it’s a manipulation. 
Well, not really, because people like making contact. The point is even 
though, you know, its coming, it’s an instinctive reaction, isn’t it? Our 
brains recognize the signals because our brains give these signals. So we 
can’t help but have that same sort of reaction.   
 
 
 
Now can you imagine – I’ll come to you in a second. Can you imagine 
doing this in a restaurant or in hotel lobby? If nothing else, just doing the 
eyebrow flash at the right time, and then we’ll add some behavior on top of 
that to enrich it. You’ll make more friends than you can count. They’ll go, "I 
don’t know this person, but oh my God, it’s like we knew each other 
forever."   
 
Audience: 
The pale faced fellows just felt so lifeless and dead. 
 
Igor: 
So this is the poker faced guys, right? 
 
Audience: 
Yeah, the poker faced guys. They were just so dead. It’s like; I don’t even 
want to talk to this person crawl out of your coffin, please. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Part of this is when people don’t like this, especially in a social 
setting, they’ll school their expression. They’ll be very reserved. It’s hard to 
read people. We feel insecure around them and so on. That’s part of what 
you’re experiencing there. It’s part of the signals of distrust or dislike. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So, we do not want to be poker faced when meeting people. Why? 
Because it doesn’t fit the social context. It’s actually giving the wrong 
signals out. Does that make sense? Thank you. Go ahead. 
 
Audience: 
Well, I was going to comment both about the inner smile and the eyebrow 
groups. The eyebrow group without that inner emotion, it was quite 
affecting. Like one person, I actually just completely turned away from. I 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
157 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
was like, whoa, a complete threat. It was just very interesting all the 
confused signals you got amongst all of them.  
 
 
It was also funny that, with being the inner smile myself, that when you go 
up to someone with it, even people that weren’t part of the group, you 
could see the inner smile come out on them too. Suddenly, it just 
completely changed what they were doing in the first place. 
 
Igor: 
Right. You notice when she’s talking about the inner smile, did you notice 
her eyebrow flash in the middle of that? That’s why we do it. That’s why 
we have it. That’s why it’s called the instant rapport technique. It’s really 
the inner smile. It kicks into gear our own greeting mechanism, and we 
can’t help but do it. So thank you. That’s an excellent observation. Go 
ahead. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ For the inner smile, were those the people who were flashers; 
or something else entirely? 
 
Igor: 
No. The inner smile is, you think of a person that you’re connected to. It 
could be a parent, a child, your children or a good friend. It might even be 
a pet, someone that you feel an emotional connection to, not a sexual 
one, but an emotional one.  
 
 
All you do is, as you approach people, you maintain that feeling inside 
yourself.  
 
Audience: 
So the key is to be able to summon that at will. 
 
Igor: 
The key is being able to summon that emotion at will, exactly right. 
Because that creates the emotional context, which will drive the behavior. 
Which is the eyebrow flash. Which will put the behavior in a correct 
context so the other people can actually read the signals congruently, as 
opposed to the mixed signals that she was referring to. 
 
 
Audience: 
So then all of the things being equal, the same eyebrow flash, whether 
given from that positive state that we should learn how to summon or 
given without it can have markedly different responses from the other 
person? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
158 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Does that answer your question? 
 
Audience: 
Yes.  
 
Igor: 
Thank you. 
 
Audience: 
The last thing is we’re doing this with people that we’re meeting for the 
first time. We’re trying to simulate that here in this room.  
 
♦ What about doing this with people that we see in the 
workplace on a regular basis? 
 
Igor: 
You’ll do this automatically. Do you want to know who likes and dislikes 
you at work? Yes? When you walk into work and say, "Hi, John.", "Hi, 
Jack." and so on, watch their eyebrows, seriously. The people that actually 
like you will go, "Hey, Jack.", "Hey, John." The people that don’t like you 
will go like this.  
 
 
Nothing in this world is 100% guaranteed, but this is about as close to a 
cast iron guarantee as you can get.  
 
Audience: 
It’s almost as if the first time you meet someone, it’s almost like a cast has 
been set.  
 
Igor: 
Yes. The first time you meet someone there’s a lot of research that shows 
that the first impression people have, their first opinion they form about 
something becomes very difficult to change subsequently. It can be 
changed. Absolutely, but it requires more effort.  
 
 
 
Once you set that initial eyebrow flash, the unconscious is, basically, 
saying you’re part of my group, you’re part of the pack, you’re accepted. 
The unconscious mind expects that so it acts accordingly.  
 
 
I’ll give you an example, if I may. Some years ago, I was at – funny 
enough – hypnosis training. There was a lady, who for some reason 
reminded me of my grandmother. There was just something about her. I 
couldn’t get it out of my head. Consciously, I did nothing and had no 
interaction with her. I didn’t talk to her or anything like that.  
 
 
At the first break, she comes up to me and says, "Hi, have you been to 
this course before? Have we met before? I just feel so familiar." By the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
159 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
way, this is what turned me on to the idea of the inner smile, or what we 
used to call the instant rapport technique. That’s what turned me onto it. It 
was my feelings – she looked like my grandmother.  
 
 
My feelings changed my sub-communications, my unconscious signals, 
and she responded to them. It was that initial moment – because I didn’t 
make eye contact with her at the time.  
 
 
Maybe I did something funky with my shoulder, I don’t know, but really it 
was just that one moment of recognition. Then I went, that’s weird, and 
carried on with what I was doing and just sat there quietly listening to the 
seminar or whatever. She came right up to me. So that first moment can 
have a huge impact. Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Absolutely. 
 
Igor: 
That’s why we want to do this before the hand touches the hand and the 
handshake in the Western sense, or in the more Eastern sense, the more 
formal bow and so on. Why? Because as you’re approaching the person, 
they are evaluating you. It happens before the handshake, which is why a 
lot of the rapport techniques are problematic because by the time they get 
to using them, it’s already happened or it hasn’t.  
 
 
Does that mean that you can’t shift things around? Of course, you can. 
There’s a lot of scope with this stuff, but the pattern has already been 
initiated. It’s more effort to move the river once it’s flowing than before it 
comes out of the shoot. Does that make sense to you? Does that answer 
your question? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. Those were a great set of questions. Let me just go over here, 
and then I’ll come back to you. Do some of you want to come this way? 
No, you can stay there, that’s fine. It feels unbalanced, like I’m pulled this 
way. 
 
Audience: 
We don’t want you to feel unbalanced. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. See, there’s a reason I like you.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
160 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
I was noticing with some people that their facial expressions and the way 
they held their bodies was almost choreographed, while other people were 
given the assignment and it felt natural.  
 
♦ What’s 
the 
distinguishing 
characteristic 
between 
the 
choreographed? 
 
Igor: 
Did you all notice it as well? Some people looked more unnatural than 
others? Some looked like they were forcing the behavior more than 
others. The key difference is state. How they’re feeling. If I’m feeling kind 
of neutral, like hi, I’m going to meet you now, my state is not aligning with 
my behavior.  
 
 
Feelings drive behaviors, we know this. This is one of the few golden rules 
that you can come across in psychology. Feelings drive behaviors. It 
doesn’t prevent behaviors from occurring, but it drives behaviors. 
 
 
So if you want to do this naturally, so you don’t come across socially 
awkward or weird or I don’t kind of get them, like a mixed signal thing, 
your feelings must support your behaviors, and this is a behavior. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Absolutely. 
 
Igor: 
By the way, you should have also noticed that the inner smile group – I 
think it was this group over here – were eyebrow flashing you without even 
realizing it. Did anyone notice that? That’s what we want to do. If you 
know it, if you’re aware of it, you can allow it to emerge more fully. You 
can encourage it because then your unconscious mind goes, "Great, I’ll do 
some of that stuff too." Do you see how that works? Please, go ahead. 
 
Audience: 
Yes, I was in the mirror group and one thing I found is that it felt like I was 
in the lucky group because it felt all natural to me. So I’m wondering if 
mirroring might not be like a first defense, survival strategy for me to blend 
in.  
 
Igor: 
It might very well be. Absolutely. You’ll find people who are very good at 
this tend to have a reason for being good at it. For example, someone 
during the break asked me who are the best body language experts?  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
161 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
As a rule, what I found in terms of the people I’ve met and I’ve learned 
from – and I mean formally as well as informally – those people who had a 
reason when relatively young to become sensitized to non-verbal 
communication, to body language, will be the best at it. 
 
 
I’ll give you some examples. Milton Erickson is a classic. He developed 
polio and was paralyzed from the neck down for about a year of his life or 
six months of his life. So he could barely speak to people. All he had left 
were his observational skills, and he became really good at that. That’s 
the only way he had of connecting with people or interacting with them 
was to observe them.  
 
 
Another example might be someone who grew up in a violent area or a 
violent household because their self-preservation instincts are now kicking 
in to figure out when is violence going to occur. When do I need to start 
protecting myself? When is it okay to just be relaxed? So those people will 
tend to have a stronger appreciation for nonverbals. 
 
 
Another class of people – this is part of what happened to me – will move 
to a new country where they don’t speak the language, so all they have to 
evaluate what’s going on around them is how people are physically 
responding to them. Does that kind of make sense? 
 
 
The people who are very good at this tend to have had a reason for 
developing this as a skill set and it’s just naturally gone through into 
adulthood. What I would like for you all to do is to develop it now. There’s 
no difference between now and earlier on. It’s just that earlier on you were 
guided more by your instincts because you had less thought going on.  
 
 
Whereas now, you might have thought interfering with it. Which is one of 
the reasons we talked about not judging or evaluating what it means for 
some time at least. You want to develop experiences first. Does that make 
sense? Does that answer your question? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. The other related thing, as I was just speaking to Victor at the break, 
explaining that calibration, if anything might be my weakness, but after this 
exercise, I consider it to be my strength. Perhaps I was doing it so 
naturally, I was just oblivious to the fact that I was doing it. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
162 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. Here’s the other thing. The strange thing is people think this 
should be more complex than it really is. They over complicate it and then 
it becomes unnatural again. As the gentleman who was here a moment 
ago was saying, "Oh, you’re hiding over there." As he was saying, it starts 
becoming unnatural when you start trying to do too much with it.  
 
 
This is a very natural function. It’s inside every single one of us to be able 
to do this and read the results of this. The problem comes when we think 
too much. It interferes with our signaling device. If I may give you an 
example of what I mean by this.  
 
 
Has anyone here read the book called, The Gift of Fear? It’s a very 
interesting book. It talks about how people’s survival instincts are good. 
There are two kinds of fears. The kinds of fear where you’re like, "Oh, I 
don’t know if I can do this." And the fear, which is so terrifying that you’re 
almost compelled to act in some ways. 
 
 
The second kind of fear typically happens when your unconscious mind 
has read a situation and something is terribly wrong with it, even though 
your conscious mind can’t accept it. An example is a lady got attacked in 
the stairwell of her home.  
 
 
Before the whole thing happened, she knew there was something wrong 
with this person, but he was being charming, he was being polite. So she 
felt kind of like well, socially I can’t be mean to this person because he’s 
so charming, he’s polite and he’s helping me out and so on.  
 
 
Of course, that’s part of what predators end up doing. If you look at the 
profile of serial killers and so on, a lot of them are very charming people. 
They are exploiting the social contract to cause people to ignore their 
defense or their warning signals.  
 
 
If you talk to people who have escaped or survived some unpleasant 
situations, most, if not all, of them will tell you that at some point, they felt 
something was wrong or not quite right, and they ignored it. They 
trivialized it, like, "Oh, it’s just probably me." Does that make sense? 
 
 
We have that inside of each of us. We have the ability to read people 
exquisitely well inside each one of us. The problem is our thought patterns 
get in the way. Our social construct, our social programming prevents us 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
163 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
from listening or interpreting the signals correctly because we’ll tend to 
ignore it. 
 
 
Now some of us are better at ignoring it than others. We spend a lifetime 
going, "No, I won’t listen to that. I’m not very good at this. I’ve probably got 
it wrong." Of course, at that point, it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. 
Does that make sense?  
 
 
So if nothing else – and thank you for bringing that up – if nothing else, I’d 
encourage all of you to just observe. Break it down if you need to so you 
have something worth observing, contrast one behavior with another, and 
not evaluate.  
 
 
If an instinct comes up about something, then go, "Oh that’s interesting." 
But do your best not to evaluate it. Don’t feel the pressure of having to 
evaluate it because that’s your cognitive processes. That’s all the stuff you 
already think you know interfering with the process. Does that make sense 
to you? Is this useful? 
 
Students: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you very much.  
 
Audience: 
I think you almost answered this. I just want to verify. Can you change the 
nature of the response by the nature of the inner smile that’s behind the 
eyebrow raise? In other words, if I’m thinking about my friend who I’ve 
known since we were kids. We stole cars together. We joined the Marine 
Corps together. 
 
Igor: 
Of course you did, as we all did. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ So if I’m thinking about him with my inner smile, is that going 
to change the response if I’m thinking about Jack Nicholson, 
who I’ve always wanted to meet? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, absolutely.  
 
Audience: 
 
♦ So that will change the response? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
164 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Remember, what we’re doing here is we’re sending signals of recognition, 
of greeting and so on and being part of the group. The more connected 
you can be to the person that is driving your inner smile, the more realistic, 
the more powerful, the more natural your greeting signals will be, and the 
better this whole thing will work.  
 
 
Why? Because you’re signaling intimacy. If you have a casual friend that 
you kind of like, you’ll give a more casual signal, shall we say the intensity 
of the signal reduces. I can’t give you anything hard in terms of the 
science of it because I’m not sure anyone’s really tested this, but my 
instinct would say that the weaker your connection is in terms of the 
emotions, the less meaningful the signal will be.  
 
 
Remember, it’s not just the eyebrows. It’s what happens with the eyebrow 
flash that designs it. It tells it whether it’s sexual or its greeting. Also, the 
intensity of that, I suspect, will also be altered by your emotional state.  
 
Audience: 
Okay, so if want to make somebody feel like we’ve know each other 
forever, I could think about my friend, Ron. But if I wanted to make 
somebody think I really want to meet you, I could think of Jack Nicholson? 
 
Igor: 
Yes and no, because it depends on how. Personally, I’d recommend you 
use your Ron signal because it says we’re good friends already. It 
presupposes the relationship. As opposed to the Jack Nicholson thing 
because what if you’re – and I’m not saying that you are – but what if 
someone was star struck.  
 
 
Yeah, Jack Nicholson, I’d really like to meet you. This is something we talk 
more about in the audio course, which I don’t want to spend too much time 
on here because this fixes the problem. These are rapport mistakes. 
 
 
One of the biggest mistakes people make in rapport is trying to get the 
other person to like them because now you’re expecting something from 
them. "Oh hi, are you okay, it’s all good, right?" You just did a great 
example of that. Do you see the non-verbals? "Leave me alone." "I’m 
being friendly, aren’t I?" We’ve all had this.  
 
 
We all have friends or acquaintances, shall we call them, who are so 
eager to please that they annoy us. They want to do you favors. You’re 
like, just leave me alone. Think about it. Isn’t that insane? If someone’s 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
165 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
going out of their way to help you, to do stuff for you, to make your life 
easier and you get annoyed by it? 
 
 
The thing that you’re getting annoyed by is the expectation. The loop is a 
self-esteem loop. They need your approval to feel good about themselves, 
so they need something from you. What you’re responding to is their 
wanting something or needing something from you. That’s what you take 
offense at. 
 
 
In the same way as a homeless person asking for money. They need 
something from you, and that’s what you feel imposed upon by. Or, the 
poor salesperson who’s trying to sell you something, rather than just 
letting you buy something. They need something from you. They expect 
something from you, and those, are the signals you’re responding too by 
being put off, by it.  
 
 
Of course, stars get the same thing. Think about it. It makes sense. Their 
fans need them to respond with affection, with love or whatever it is, and 
it’s imposing upon them. That’s the only reason I would use as a caveat 
with that because you don’t want to send signals of need, of expectation 
because that tends to turn people off. That tends to break rapport because 
people feel put upon.  
 
 
My recommendation is find someone inside your own experiences or a 
group of people. By the way, pets work as well. I often use one of my pet 
dogs from when I was a kid. It was a great dog. It was one of my best 
friends. Use that emotional connection because it presupposes a warm, 
intimate relationship.  
 
 
Sometimes people can’t handle that kind of warmth because they have 
personal issues as well. That will bump them into the closed category. In 
which case, it tells you something as well, something very valuable. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. Thanks a lot. That took care of it.  
 
Igor: 
Thank you.   
 
Audience: 
Actually, it was just an observation but it ties in. I was in the eyebrow 
group. Whenever I ran into someone from the poker faced group who I 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
166 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
had met before, and they didn’t flash back, I was like, "What the hell did I 
do?" 
 
Igor: 
Like, what the hell’s wrong with you, right? Schmuck, God, come on. 
Absolutely. May I do something a little mean to you just to demonstrate 
something? You all will see this as well. Come on up and just imagine we 
haven’t met in a long time, and go, "Hey, John, how’s it going. Good to 
see you again.", a normal friendly greeting, right?  
 
 
Notice the eyebrow flash and so on. Now I’ll ask you the same thing again. 
We haven’t seen each other for a while, we walk up to each other and 
we’re going like this. Did you see his reaction? I apologize for doing that to 
you because it’s not a nice thing to do, but you saw it coming. You knew it 
was a setup, right? There’s no person or a monster or anything like that 
involved. Yet he still responded. That was a powerful feeling, wasn’t it?  
 
 
You can tell it’s a powerful feeling. I didn’t even see what he did because I 
was looking the other way, and I know for a fact that his response would 
have been very strong, a strong physical gesture of shock, surprise, 
probably a little bit of disgust, body turning with like a quizzical look, 
maybe even a little slight sense of hostility. Would that be a relatively 
accurate read?  
 
 
I didn’t see any of that. Why? Because we might call this snubbing 
someone. It’s when the signals get reversed and we’re saying you’re not 
important enough. You’re not good enough. We’re directly attacking 
someone’s self esteem at that point. Does that make sense? 
 
 
I want to thank you for doing that because I know it wasn’t pleasant. Give 
him a nice round of applause for that. Is this stuff useful to you all? Sure, 
come on up. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ What do you do when you approach a group of people, like 
three or four people, versus one person who are doing the 
exact same thing? 
 
Igor: 
Yes and no, because you can’t. Watch when people approach a group of 
their friends. The eyebrow flashing and that sort of stuff happens as well, 
but what tends to happen is – not so much with large groups because 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
167 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that’s a very different dynamic - I’m talking about a group of three or four 
friends.  
 
 
What will tend to happen is they’ll flash across the group, and usually in 
the pecking order. In other words, they’ll flash across the group leader 
first, and then onto someone else, and then the last person will go, "Hi, it’s 
good to see you, too."  
 
 
In some social groups, it will be according to connection. So people will go 
with the person they like best first, and then the other people are more 
marginal, but it will tend to be around status or connections. Those are the 
two main things.  
 
 
If you don’t know the group already, then as you approach the group, what 
will happen is the group gets interrupted and they’re going to start turning 
towards you, like what is this interruption? Who dares to interfere with our 
group? Again, it’s a social, pack animal kind of response.  
 
 
At that point, again, one of the people in the group you’ll notice kind of 
takes charge of the whole thing. Other people will refer to him or her to 
find out how to respond to you, or they’ll take a slight dominance posture. 
In other words, they might take a step forward.  
 
 
They might be the one to raise their eyebrows toward you whilst everyone 
else kind of waits a little bit more passively. That’s the person you begin 
with and then you can again, flash the rest of the group and build that 
rapport with them. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So with groups, especially social groups, you want to play with the leader 
first and then the rest of the group. Do you want to know what to do if you 
mess that up and the group gets a little bit cold on you? 
 
Audience: 
Sure. 
 
Igor: 
You change the group. No, I don’t mean by leaving it. You change the 
group you are with. The way you do that is very simply. You all come on 
up here for a second. So let’s assume these guys are a group. Do you 
want to come up with them as well so we have nice little group? Stand 
over here so we can have the camera see your expressions. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
168 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s say they’re having a nice little chat. You’re a group, you know each 
other. You three know each other. There you go. That’s much better. 
Wow, friends? Oh yeah, all right. So they’re a group and you’re standing 
there talking. Let’s say we’re doing some street hypnosis or something like 
that, and for whatever reason, I get a sense of maybe I messed up my 
timing, maybe I wasn’t quite feeling it, or maybe they’re all closed. 
 
 
What I need to do now is change this group dynamic. Every time a group 
changes – in other words, there’s a reassignment of roles. In other words, 
people will start looking at who is now the group leader. If you want to be 
the group leader, the easiest way to do that is to say, "Hey, have you met 
my friends yet? Come on up and meet these guys, they are amazing."  
 
 
Now, I might not even know these people, but if I introduce them, here are 
my friends, "Say hello, don’t be shy, come on." Look at what just 
happened. Do you see how the group is starting to break up? "Go and say 
hi. These guys are really nice. You’ll enjoy this." 
 
 
Folks, turn this way a little bit. Let me show you something about what 
hypnosis can do. Did you see where their attention has just gone? Do you 
see how it automatically directs towards me? What I’ve done by bringing 
in a new group is I’ve broken down the old group’s social boundaries. I’ve 
increased their anxiety levels, because now they have to fight for status 
again. It’s just part of how a new pack merges.  
 
 
Whilst they’re busy trying to figure out where they fit in that pack, I now 
have the ability to take control of the group. I have now put myself in a 
leadership position by saying, "Everyone, come with me, let me just show 
you something." This is me now creating a new group.  
 
 
 
 
The other thing is I’m the one who’s put the two groups together. Provided 
I keep my mannerisms in the right place – in other words, in a high status 
and not offensive. Not like ha, ha, you all are schmucks and I’m the best, 
but high status. So I’m still polite but high status, and I begin to ease the 
social tension that meeting new people has.  
 
 
Now they’re looking towards me for guidance because I’ve just eased the 
tension that I actually created in the first place. Do you see how that 
works? You saw this happening instantly. Even though these guys know 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
169 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
each other to some extent, the minute I changed the group dynamic from 
where their minds were, where did they start looking? They started looking 
towards me for leadership.  
 
 
Why? Because they’re so busy trying to figure out what the pecking order 
is. And they need some guidance that will assist the whole process. This 
is kind of like doing an instant induction, isn’t it? There’s a little bit of 
shock, a little surprise, a little bit of, what’s going on here? A little bit of 
evaluating going on, and then I am presenting a very clear suggestion, a 
very clear message of how to understand this whole thing.  
 
 
You can call this an instant group induction, if you like. It’s really the same 
process, it just looks different. When you do this in a natural way – this is 
very important – you have to be very natural. If it’s forced, it looks a little 
awkward. Nobody even knows it’s happened. It’s just invisible because 
they feel one way and then they feel another way, and it’s just part of the 
interaction. Exactly.  
 
 
Does this make sense to you? Do you find this useful? Thank you. Let’s 
give these them a round of applause. Come on up. 
 
 
The question here is what happens if you leave the group after you’ve 
joined them? One of two things, groups go through phases or cycles. If 
you have allowed the new group to establish itself as a group, if you leave, 
the group will remain. In other words, they’ll remain as a group, and then 
you can rejoin them as part of that group as well. 
 
 
The natural pecking order will just shift to the next person being the 
natural person in charge. Whilst you’re gone, number two becomes 
number one and so on.  
 
 
If, however, you leave the group before they’ve had a chance to bond, 
connect as a group – and that can be anywhere from seconds to minutes 
to sometimes hours or days, depending on how you manage the group 
dynamics – then they’ll naturally separate again. They will go back to their 
original groups.  
 
 
Usually what will happen is, unless there’s a very dominant personality 
who will either take over the group or typically will just take over his group, 
he’ll say, "Nice meeting you.", and goodbye. The other thing that will 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
170 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
typically happen if no natural leader emerges straightaway is, they’ll be 
like a little socially awkward pause.  
 
 
Then they’ll have a chat amongst themselves and they’ll start chatting 
amongst themselves, and slowly they’ll drift off and there will be two 
groups standing next to each other very clearly. That’s what tends to 
happen. Make sense? 
 
 
Think about it. In terms of your own experiences, isn’t this the kind of stuff 
you’ve experienced for yourselves, you felt yourself, you’ve seen yourself, 
you’ve watched interactions and gone oh that’s interesting.  
 
 
Let’s do something practical with all this. How much time do we have? 
What I’d like you to do is two things. The first thing I want you to do is to 
walk around the room, and you’re going to do your three-step hypnotic 
rapport technique. You’ll meet someone new, eyebrow flash, greeting and 
all that sort of stuff, but what I want you to focus on in terms of what you’re 
doing right now is, I want you to do again, the inner smile induction, the 
hypnotic gift.  
 
 
So, instant induction, a couple levels of deepeners and then help them 
find a person. By the way, if you want to help them do an unconscious 
search to find someone they haven’t even thought about to be more 
connected to, even better. Let them find someone they’re really connected 
to, build it in, and then remind them that they can feel this way, have that 
connection any time they want or need to.  
 
 
Then, of course, someone will do that to you, and you might do that two or 
three times so you’ll have time to really ingrain that. A useful suggestion to 
present to people is to memorize the sensation, memorize the feeling. 
Memorize the sensation. Memorize the experience. You will need this 
reference experience. Without this reference experience, some of you will 
naturally be able to activate it, which means the whole hypnotic rapport 
technique is very easy.  
 
 
Others amongst you, though, aren’t that way. I’m not that way. I’m not 
particularly a social person. I’m actually relatively reserved in terms of my 
personal day-to-day life. It takes a lot of effort for me to switch on the inner 
smile to be able to engage and be social and so on. So it’s very useful to 
have someone be able to present you with a switch, so that when we get 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
171 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
onto doing the full method, it’s there for you. Does that make sense? 
Remember, like any hypnotic switch, the more you use it, the stronger it 
becomes.  
 
 
So do you understand the first part of the exercise? We’re just going to go 
around and do one or two, maybe three if you have time, just quick inner 
smiles with people. You, of course, will get them in return. Once you’ve 
had them done a few times, we’ll come back again and then we’ll add this 
into the full hypnotic rapport technique and, hopefully, you’ll see that this is 
actually a very powerful thing that you can walk out there and do instantly.  
 
 
If you did nothing but this and this was the only thing you got from the 
entire course, I personally think you got your money’s worth because it 
took me a long time to figure this stuff out. It is really, useful in terms of 
any interaction you have.  
 
 
Just to give you an idea of what this does, the power of conversational 
hypnosis course has been out for some years now, right? So we’ve gotten 
hundreds of emails, possibly thousands by now, of people asking, what 
about this problem and this problem? I’m trying to do this, but I’m getting 
this result and I don’t understand.   
 
 
I would say that in the region of somewhere between 80% - 90% of those 
questions people ask will not arise if you do this right. 80% to 90% of 
resistance, of frame wars, of status issues, of hostility, of all this sort of 
stuff does not even come up if you do this step right. Hence, we spend a 
little more time on it, and hopefully you’ll find that this is a valuable thing to 
spend time on.  
 
 
Would that be fair? Any questions before we start the warm-up exercise? 
All right, everyone, off you go. Warm yourselves up, and then we’ll come 
back and actually do the full hypnotic rapport technique. If you’re 
hypnotists, then just let them stay in trance a little bit. Just to clarify 
because I don’t think I made this clear completely. Right now all that 
you’re doing is:  
 
  1.  Instant induction.  
 
                   2.  Deepeners, preferably the fractionation deepener.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
172 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
  
3. The inner smile as a gift.  
 
 
Bring them back. They’ll do it to you and then you find someone else and 
go through those same three steps again. We’re not doing the full hypnotic 
rapport technique yet. We’re just building it up. We’re just warming up the 
inner smile so that it’s there for you when you need it. Off you go.  
 
 
How was that? Did you enjoy it? You should be thinking about happy 
people all the time. It’s great. The reason we spent more time focusing on 
the inner smile than the full technique is because this is what drives the 
whole thing. If you can get the inner smile right, honestly these two things 
will probably happen by accident, by default, if you get this part right. Even 
if it doesn’t happen by default, it will be so natural to do these things, that it 
will be part of the natural interaction, rather than a forced interaction to 
have these things.  
 
 
So it’s important and I really would encourage you to focus on this, and 
then these things will come through. Does that make sense? So when you 
go to lunch in a few moments’ time, really focus on this and see how 
naturally the eyebrow lift comes for you, the eyebrow flash. If your 
eyebrow flash is natural, you’ve got this right. If it feels awkward to you, 
chances are you’ve let go of this at some point.  
 
 
Does that make sense to you? This is a litmus test for you, and then it’s 
just a question of practice. Just put yourself through that routine and 
actually it will make you a happier person anyways.  
 
 
Think about it. If you spend most of your days thinking about people you 
really like versus all the stuff that pisses you off – where attention flows, 
energy goes. Which are you going to do? So you had a quick question or 
comment? Do you want to come up here? 
 
Audience: 
It’s actually a quick question.  
 
♦ The inner smile isn’t that the same thing as H+ or is there a 
difference? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, it is. It’s just another way of looking at the H+ thing. The H+ is slightly 
tweaked in the sense that I really want you to have a positive experience. 
And it’s going to be hypnotic. So that’s the spin, shall we say, to it. Think 
of it this way. It’s the same creature with a different mood.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
173 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Now one of you just reminded me that there’s this one little group of 
people we haven’t talked about yet, the oblivious ones. How do we force 
enough attention so we can get our greeting signal out to them? Would 
that be interesting to know? The answer is really it depends on the kind of 
context that you’re in. Are you in a large social context? Are you in a small 
social context? What kinds of tools are available to you? 
 
 
The two main things that you can focus on – we won’t have time to 
practice it. So if it’s okay with you, I’ll just tell you about them and you can 
play with it as you wish to. It’s not really part of the program here, but you 
may as well have it.  
 
 
The first one is if you’re in a social context where there’s a larger group of 
people, for example, say a golf club or a nightclub or a bar, or you’re at a 
cocktail party or something like that, the way to get their attention is very 
simple. It’s by getting the rest of the room to put attention to you, and it will 
naturally draw their attention. 
 
 
It’s kind of like have you ever done this when you were kids. You’ve gotten 
in the middle of a busy street and you go like this. People will pass and 
they’ll go like this. Eyes have a very strong effect on people. Does anyone 
here write sales letters or adverts in the paper or something like that?  
 
 
Would you like to have a way that would increase the likelihood that your 
letter will be read? If this is advert or your letter, put in the top corner a pair 
of eyes that are looking down at your text. You might even put a smile or a 
funky device here. If the eyes are angled to look at the text, it naturally 
draws attention towards it. We respond very powerfully to eyes. 
 
 
So if you can get the attention of everyone else in the room on you, then 
people’s attention will naturally turn towards you. Now you can do that 
through some antics, like a magic trick or whatever it is. Like a magic 
moment that draws attention. Like in street hypnosis, for example, the 
people who are too shy to go up to strangers and ask them if they want to 
do hypnosis. One simple trick for doing that using this principle is you do it 
with a friend.  
 
 
Like say, Tim and I are going out to do some street hypnosis. I’m too 
afraid to talk to everyone else so I’ll say, "Okay, Tim, let’s go do some 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
174 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
street hypnosis stuff." As soon as I do that with him, it’s only usual that 
everyone’s eyes get drawn to me. Here I can throw in my eyebrow flash 
and say, come in, watch this, and we’ve already engaged the whole 
process. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Another way you can do exactly the same thing is by being just a social, 
friendly person. Let’s say at a party, you’re the one that everyone knows. 
How do you do that? Well, you go up and you eyebrow flash them all 
because they’re the ones that are already open. You go to all the open 
people. You do your little eyebrow flash, your hypnotic rapport process. 
 
 
They think you’re an amazing person even though they’ve only spoken to 
you for about two seconds. It’s like, "Oh, it’s good to see you again." "I’ll 
see you in a bit." Then they’ll go, "Who the hell was that? I don’t know."  
 
 
Of course, then they’ll start following you around the room. He knows 
everyone here. You’re going off and meeting everyone else and they’re 
like, "God, I must have met him someplace." That is part of the context 
that you’re creating, isn’t it? Eventually, it’s just a matter of time that 
whatever group of people that are oblivious to you will notice because 
there’s an energy that will follow you as the attention follows you through 
the room. At some point, all they have to do is see attention gravitating 
somewhere, and they’ll naturally do this.  
 
 
At that point, as long as you’re aware of them, you can engage them in the 
full signal because now they’re open. Does that make sense?  
 
 
The final version is a little bit sneaky? Do you want it? It’s kind of sneaky 
though. I’ll warn you. Can I borrow you for this? This is particularly for 
strangers. Let’s say again you’re in a public space and this person’s totally 
oblivious to you. You can force a rapport ping from this person. You can 
rob them. You can throttle them. Yeah, that’s close. Violence helps. No. 
 
 
It’s to do with our social distance. This works better in an environment 
where space is okay. In a two hour metro, it can still work, but you have to 
understand what the social space divide around you happens to be. Right 
now, I’m outside of his social space. So let’s imagine you’re just watching 
some artwork or something like that. Excellent! 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
175 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now watch what happens when I come close enough. Did you see what 
happened just then? Even though he’s trying to ignore me, what 
happened was this, as soon as I step inside his private space bubble, his 
eyes shifted for a moment and then looked back again.  
 
 
He has to shift because he’s sensing someone has just invaded my 
space. Is this a threat? Is there something I’ve got to do about it? He 
instantly gets alerted and pays attention. As soon as he pays attention, he 
goes into the open category. Now I can do the whole eyebrow flash.  
 
 
Still, he’s a little hesitant, but as soon as he looks towards me, I can 
always look like oh, he’s engaging me and I’ll go, hey. Do you see how 
that works? So you’re actually forcing him to engage in greeting behavior 
with you. He’ll look to make sure that you’re not a threat and then he’ll go 
like this because he engaged me at this point. Do you see how this 
works? It is very sneaky, but it’s kind of fun. Thank you. Give him a nice 
round of applause.  
 
 
Did you like that? Was that kind of fun? So again, notice how we’re 
working at the same level as the hypnotic principles that we started 
playing with yesterday, and how on the surface level, everyone goes, 
yeah, sure. The idea of matching and mirroring makes sense, or the idea 
of nonverbal communication, that makes sense, but there are so many 
more layers to this. There’s a lot of depth to everything that we do. 
 
 
As soon as there’s a human being involved, there is a huge amount of 
depth that you’re capable of reaching, even with simple devices. All these 
little core techniques, like the rapport ping force or the group rapport thing 
that we talked about, and all these things. They’re just an extension of a 
very simple principle. The simple principle is this. We’re all mammals. We 
all belong to a group and whenever someone else comes along we’ve got 
to decide are they with us or are they with them?  
 
 
Our unconscious mind will send signals out to test to find out. If you pass 
the test, then you’re with us. If you do not, then you’re with them. Being 
with them is not a bad thing. It doesn’t mean you’re going to be hostile or 
anything like that, but you’re just not one of us. When you want to develop 
hypnotic rapport, you really want to be one of us.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
176 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So that’s the idea I’m going to leave you with as we go off to lunch. I can 
imagine that there will be some fascinating stories coming back after 
lunch, can you not? All right, everyone, did you enjoy this morning?  
 
Audience: 
Yes.  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
Thank you very much. I think you’ll enjoy this afternoon even more.  
 
 
It’s now a quarter past 12. We’ll be starting again at 1:45 on the dot. 
Please try to be here a little early, like, say, 1:30. We will start at 1:45 on 
the dot.  
 
 
Thank you very much.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DVD 7:  Revivification & How to Lead any 
Conversation to Get Your Desired Results 
 
Igor: 
Did you enjoy this morning’s session on, I guess we’ll call it hypnotic 
rapport and the unconscious signaling system. There are some fascinating 
things. Who here had a chance to play with this over lunch? Do you want 
to come up and talk? We might as well have everyone queue up on this 
side; otherwise, we’ll have weird things about who does what.   
 
Audience: 
I think this is the stuff I was doing anyway just working behind a bar. I was 
doing it anyway, but I never paid attention to the reactions. We went into a 
café, and there was a young lady sitting at a table. I gave her the 
eyebrows. I didn’t think anything about it, but then I sat down and 
something I never would have done before was pay attention to her after I 
had done that. Sure enough, she couldn’t stop staring at our table.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
177 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Right and by the way… 
 
Audience: 
I guess I wasn’t paying attention before. 
 
Igor: 
If you followed through, by the way, this is something very important. I 
remember when I first discovered the whole eyebrow flash. It was like, as I 
told you, I was going for the myth of the Master Hypnotist who can sit in a 
restaurant eating his noodles, and people walk up to him going, "You’re 
cool. I don’t know who you are, but your cool. I like you." Right?  
 
 
I couldn’t do it. I tried everything. I tried mimicking people’s posture, and I 
sat on the train until I got a crick in my neck. I tried rhythms, if someone’s 
got a movement, especially when they’re walking, that actually will still get 
a bit of attention, that’s quite good, But everything else, I just couldn’t do it. 
They were oblivious to me. 
 
 
Then I came across the whole eyebrow flashing thing. I was in a 
restaurant in London. It was Wagamama's, a Japanese noodles style 
restaurant. Big long benches and I’m sitting there eating my noodles. I did 
the eyebrow flash and someone like three feet across made eye contact, 
eyebrow flash and she eyebrow flashed back. I went, "Oh my God, this is 
working!" I ate my noodles and refused to look up.  
 
 
So if you’re going to do the eyebrow flash and you’re going to follow-up 
with this stuff, please do maintain contact to some degree. You don’t have 
to keep staring, but a friendly contact. That’s the follow-up. Remember, 
the eyebrow flash is just the invitation to treat. It’s the invitation for a 
greeting. The mirroring part – and that means you have to have some kind 
of non-verbal engagement. Maybe look at them and have a non-verbal 
conversation going on, if you like. That’s what continues this. This opens 
the door, but this keeps the door open. Does that make sense? 
 
 
If you think all you have to do is sit in the hotel lobby and go like this, did 
they see it? Tell me, are they looking? Then you’ve missed the object of 
the exercise.  
 
 
Great! What you’re saying just reminded me of that. Especially those of 
us, who are a little shyer, will be prone to do the thing, and that’s my 
technique, done, I’ll forget about it and hope that they come over and talk 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
178 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
to me. It doesn’t quite work that way. It doesn’t work that way for you 
either, does it?  
 
 
Normally, if you keep engaged after you’ve done the initial thing, that’s 
when they come over. By the way, you get great service like this in 
restaurants if you want to. It all comes down to again the purpose of the 
inner smile, is about intention. It is communicating an intention. The 
intention is I’m friendly, I will treat you well. You’re one of us, which means 
we’re going to protect you. You’re part of our group, and that gives you 
privileges. Does that make sense? 
 
 
You have to follow that up in terms of the intention. This is not a device to 
get people to like you and then go ha, ha, I’ve got it now. Now I’ll move 
onto something else. If you break the very intention, the very thing that got 
you there in the first place, well, you’re not carrying through. You’re not 
fulfilling on your unconscious promise. Does that make sense? Did you 
get the idea of what I’m talking about here?  
 
 
This is actually kind of important because really what you’re doing here is 
you’re making promises. And no one likes a person that breaks their 
promises, even if it’s an unconscious one. They come in with a certain 
expectation and now they’re being treated harshly. It’s kind of like what 
happened over here with Mike, is it? John. Close, sorry. What happened 
with John?  
 
 
You may have noticed I cheated a little bit as well because we had a 
friendly greeting first. The second time, I began a friendly greeting to make 
sure that he was in the program, and then ignored him. It’s actually worse 
than just ignoring him. I opened a promise, and then I canceled my 
promise. I didn’t fulfill my promise. Do you see how that works? That’s the 
other reason why I got a stronger reaction. I did that to cheat so I’d get a 
better reaction. Sorry.   
 
 
 
You have to fulfill on your promises, especially to the unconscious mind 
because that’s where, all the juju is. Does that make sense to you?  
 
 
Do you mind turning around sideways a little bit so we can actually get 
your handsome features? Wave hello to the camera over there, there you 
go. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
179 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
So our server was just walking across the restaurant, she looked our way 
and I gave a little flash. She stopped dead in her tracks and made a B-line 
for the table.  
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: 
Then the woman who was serving water, I gave her a flash and every time 
she came back to serve water, she lit up like a Christmas tree when she 
looked at me. It was fun. 
 
Igor: 
Its powerful stuff, isn’t it? It seems like a small throwaway thing, but 
honestly, if you do this and carry through, follow through on the implied 
promise, shall we say, this stuff will take you a long, long way. I wish I’d 
been sitting in a chair like you are right now and got it this easily because 
it took me a long, hard road to find this out.  
 
 
The irony is academia has know this probably in the ‘60s or so. Maybe 
even the ‘50s. Maybe even earlier, but those are the earliest references I 
found for it. It’s just that it’s buried away in some little archives. Someone 
thought, oh, this is interesting. Let’s move on.  
 
 
I’m going, WOW. When I found it, it was like I had found the secret Bible. 
The gold is all mine and I’m keeping it! Then you all had to go and take it 
off me.   
 
Audience: 
I made two observations. Dave and I went down to the Daily Grill 
downstairs. When I did the flash with the hostess, the first time she didn’t 
respond. She just had a poker face. The second time when I did the flash, 
all the sudden she lit up like a Christmas tree. That was the first 
observation. 
 
Igor: 
Can I just pause you there before you make the second one? 
 
Audience: 
Sure. 
 
Igor: 
What would your reading be of what happened there? She was what? 
 
Audience: 
Oblivious. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
180 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
She was oblivious. Actually, I’d say the first time she was somewhere 
between oblivious and closed. So oblivious, she didn’t know how to react 
to it. It caught her by surprise so she’s a little bit closed. Maybe she’s just 
in that humdrum, boring work mode and life’s getting on top of her and all 
the rest of it. She’s oblivious, maybe a little bit closed because she’s not 
engaging so much. 
 
 
She got the signal, so it works back in the unconscious. The unconscious 
is going, "Oh, hang on a second. This person just told me I’m part of his 
tribe, so I better pay attention here."  
 
 
The second time he did it, he confirmed. Remember we talked about 
fulfilling promises? He fulfilled on his promise. He followed through on the 
promise he made to her unconscious saying, "You’re still one of us, even 
though you were a little bit poker faced earlier on. Its okay, I still love you." 
That’s when she lit up. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So this comes down to trust. Some people need a couple of tests before 
they’ll start trusting. It seems like you had a little test that went there 
before the trust came through. Or it burst through that shell that she’d built 
up around herself for whatever reason. Excellent! That’s a nice 
observation. 
 
Audience: 
The second time was when our waitress came, I flashed her but Dave had 
a poker face.  
 
Igor: 
That’s interesting. 
 
Audience: 
Exactly. So when she was serving us, when she looked at me, she was 
lighting up. When she looked at Dave, she had a poker face. 
 
Igor: 
Right.  
 
Audience: 
Dave noticed that too. It was like, wow. It was night and day. It was like 
when she looked at me, she was smiling and all that stuff. When she 
looked at Dave, she was poker faced. 
 
Igor: 
It’s intense stuff. Do you see how powerful this stuff is? This is really the 
juice. I mean everyone – I’ve had hundreds of people talking about how do 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
181 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you build rapport and what’s the secret technique? What do you say, and 
what stories do you tell? It’s like, I flash the eyebrows.  
 
 
 
It seems ridiculously simple, but hopefully you understand that the 
behavior may be simple, but the context you’re embedded in is not. The 
intention has to still be there. The emotion that drives it still needs to be 
there. 
 
 
Once you get it right, once you get it natural, it’s pretty damned dramatic. 
You can’t miss it once you start looking for this. Did anyone else notice 
that sort of thing? It’s pretty obvious once it starts happening, right? So 
thank you. That’s an excellent observation.  
 
Audience: 
I think it’s terrific that he had the persistence to do it a second time when 
not being reciprocated on the first.  
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. I agree.  
 
Audience: 
I think there’s always a tendency to not want to try again because they 
didn’t reciprocate. 
 
Igor: 
Because then your own feelings are hurt. It’s like you better like me or 
screw you buddy. I’ll burn your house down.   
 
Audience: 
Exactly. 
 
Igor: 
I haven’t, yet. That’s why I have no house.   
 
Audience: 
I went to Subway for lunch and I made eye contact with the person that 
would prepare the sandwich. I flashed the eyebrow because I think I saw 
her do it first, or tried to do it in the way that was similar to how she did. I 
didn’t ask for it, but I think she gave me four extra slices of Swiss cheese.  
 
Igor: 
So cheese lovers amongst you… the eyebrow cheese flash. Thank you.  
 
Audience: 
Real quick, yes. So I went up to the front desk to ask a few questions 
about where some things are located in the area here, like banks and 
Internet and all that kind of thing. They saw my badge and the woman 
says, "Hey, are you with the hypnosis folks?" I said, "Yeah." "Oh, can I try 
it?" I was like, "Sure."  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
182 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Let me pause, you there one second. Was anyone else here already a 
hypnotist before they came today? When people first meet you, how often 
do you normally get asked or get people to volunteer and to say, "Can you 
hypnotize me when they first meet you, as a stranger." It is very rare.  
 
 
What you just experienced is something that a lot of people doing street 
hypnosis, that’s their biggest fear. It’s like, what if they say no? Because a 
lot of people do say no, what did I do wrong? How can I get past this? 
How can I make them want to do it?  
 
 
All right, sure I’ll do hypnosis with you. Why? Again, do you see what it 
means? You’re one of us, or one of them. As soon as she was one of us, 
well, then it must be interesting to do hypnosis. Hypnosis is an interesting 
field, but you’ve taken care of trust and comfort, the whole background to 
rapport, in one fell swoop. 
 
Audience: 
These people work here. They see that there are 100 people attending, so 
they must be figuring that there’s got to be something to this.  
 
Igor: 
Right. Which of these other 100 people did they approach? The one that 
flashed the eyebrows. Seriously, they know you’re a hypnotist. Did anyone 
come up to you and say, "Oh, I hear you’re a hypnotist and you’re in that 
whole convention thing. Can you hypnotize me, please?"  
 
Audience: 
Actually, it’s interesting. There were two people at the desk. The first one 
is the one that got talking to me. I was definitely flashing eyebrows back 
and forth with her. She was telling me about how a friend of hers quit 
smoking through hypnosis. The person next to her is the one that said to 
me, can you hypnotize me? She was not the one that I had any eyebrow 
interaction with. She just saw the two of us.  
 
Igor: 
Because you just created a sort of a group.   
 
Audience: 
Exactly. 
 
Igor: 
Remember what we talked about yesterday in terms of authority? When 
you have the leader of the group on your side, the other people in the 
group automatically will adopt you as well, which is precisely what 
happened.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
183 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Audience: 
That’s what happened. So then I said, "Why don’t you come out from 
behind and we’ll do this." I’m thinking to myself, "Okay, I’ve never done an 
instant induction with a stranger. Even if I did that with you and I never met 
you before, we were here in this context. This context doesn’t apply out 
there." 
 
Igor: 
So you think. 
 
Audience: 
Sure enough it went easily. I actually had her look in my eyes and I put my 
hands on her shoulders. I started to tell her to breathe more easily and all 
this. Then I reached behind her head. I asked her for permission actually. I 
put my hands on her shoulders. You don’t even have to ask for the 
permission to put the hand on the head.  
 
 
Once they’ve given okay to some kind of physical contact, virtually 
anything within reason is within reason. So she went straight onto my 
shoulder, and I started taking her to a nice place.  
 
Igor: 
Let me just emphasize something here. A complete stranger put their 
head on his chest like this and closed her eyes in public. That is not 
normal social behavior. Do you see the – it’s very difficult for me to really 
emphasize just how dramatic what it is we did this morning really is.  
 
 
Hopefully, these stories are bringing some of this to light because if you 
haven’t done it the hard road, which I have, you won’t necessarily know 
just how significant and how much easier this makes your life.   
 
Audience: 
Exactly. I don’t know about the effect of words, but for whatever it’s worth, 
I’m telling her the deeper you go, the more relaxed you feel; the more 
relaxed you feel, the deeper you go. I said, "I want you to go to a place 
where everything was right and everybody was getting along, and you felt 
perfect and everything was just going swimmingly and blah- blah- blah." 
 
 
Then when she came out and I asked her, "Where was that place." She 
said the beach. I never mentioned the beach. I never asked her to be that 
specific. I think I used swimmingly and that’s what triggered it, for 
whatever that’s worth.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
184 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Do you see going back to reference experiences like, words through 
association. They have all these associations attached. When he said 
swimmingly, of course it opens that category, which includes beach and 
that becomes a natural reference point to cross-reference into. Do you see 
how now when you know these little principles – and they are 
straightforward to understand – suddenly, it opens up your whole capacity 
of indirect hypnosis, doesn’t it?  
 
 
It’s your ability to talk about one thing, but really something completely 
different is happening at the same time. Doesn’t that open it up to you all? 
Good job. You just did a whole little conversational covert hypnosis bit 
within regular hypnosis, and they never even knew it. Good job. Thank 
you. Give him a round of applause. 
 
 
Do you want to turn sideways a little bit so that the camera can see you as 
well? 
 
Audience: 
Sure, I can turn sideways. We had a number of things to do, so I didn’t 
actually do a lot of specific interaction, but it was very interesting. I don’t 
generally like security people and police officers. I just don’t like them 
generally. They’re okay, but they have this authority thing that I don’t care 
for. I did it to several of those security officers, and I got more smiles 
coming back at me from the security officers and eyebrows raising back. I 
thought, ooh, that’s cool. 
 
 
The reason I’m up is because I did it to somebody that didn’t do it back to 
me. We were rushing up here. We were running late. We were in the 
elevator, and he was just sitting back. I didn’t do it back to him a second 
time. I guess I was the one that didn’t do it back, but he just kept looking at 
me out of his eyes, which was kind of interesting. 
 
Igor: 
Notice, you got someone who was slightly closed off. You might have just 
needed more of a surprise to open that person up. But the eyebrow flash 
itself might be enough of a surprise. What you’re describing, again, is 
probably similar to what happened over here with, was it Mickey who did it 
the second go? I can’t remember.  
 
 
Anyway, whoever did the double eyebrow flash thing and he’s sitting there 
going, "Do I know him? I don’t know what to do now. I feeling socially 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
185 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
awkward now because maybe I know this person and I’ve blanked him, 
which is not allowed."  
 
 
All these things are going through his mind and I don’t know this for a fact 
– who knows – but I suspect if you had done it again or given another 
friendly gesture, he might have lit up and gone, "Wow, I guess this guy’s 
really cool. I like him."  Again, there are no guarantees because if he’s 
really stuck in his closed loop, it’s his personal issue and you may need 
more to break through that ice. To be fair, people who are that closed are 
relatively rare in the world.  
 
 
So are you enjoying this? Was this a useful start to the day? Let’s see if 
you can take all this stuff further and go to a slightly different area. This is 
going back to what we talked about over here with swimming and so on. 
As hypnotists, we’re working with experiences. Those are our building 
blocks, right? You build the right sets of experiences, emotions, behaviors 
and all the rest of it flow out of that.  
 
 
Where do people store their experiences? In their unconscious in the form 
of memories. A memory really is a, shall we say, a conglomeration of 
experiences stuck together into a ball saying, that was a specific event 
and there were sights there and sounds, feelings, tastes, smells even. 
They’re all bunched together into this “memory.”  
 
 
When it comes to memory, there are three kinds of memories we can work 
with hypnotically. In conversational hypnosis – and this is different from 
hypnotherapy – we’re only interested in two of them primarily.  
 
♦ 
The first type of memory is called hyper-amnesia.  
 
 
Hyper-amnesia is, basically, recalling something very vividly. It’s increased 
memory recall. Those of you interested in forensic hypnosis and things 
like that well, hyper-amnesia is where all of that occurs.  
 
♦ 
The second level is called the revivification.  
 
 
The difference between hyper-amnesia and a revivification is hyper-
amnesia is increased recalled, but there won’t necessarily be that much 
affect. In other words, they won’t be feeling that much; they’ll just be very 
clear that it happened.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
186 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let me give an example, if I may. Can anyone here recall something that 
happened to them when they were younger, maybe in their childhood or in 
their early adulthood that was, at the time, pretty traumatic, pretty intense? 
When you think about it now, you know it occurred but it doesn’t really 
bother you? You might even laugh at how silly the whole thing is now. 
Does anyone have something like that in mind?  
 
 
 
Think about it. You can probably quite clearly recall the event, the details 
of it. Maybe the people involved, maybe even to the point where you’re 
pretty clear about who said what to whom or who did what to whom, but 
you’re missing the emotions of it.  
 
 
So you may have a clear memory, you may have hyper-amnesia in terms 
of the memory is very clear and the information is very clear, but the 
emotions have detached from it so you’re not re-experiencing the moment. 
You’re not reliving the moment. Does that make sense? 
 
 
In revivification, on the other hand, you’re actually reliving the moment. 
You’re being put back inside it. Who here enjoyed the inner smile? If you 
enjoyed the inner smile it’s because it wasn’t hyper-amnesia. You weren’t 
just recalling it factually. You were reliving it at some level. You were 
having the experience again. If you imagined your neurology being like 
lights on a Christmas tree, more lights were flashing up now. Make sense? 
 
♦ 
The final one is called the regression.  
 
 
To take out analogy to an absurd degree, in a regression you become the 
Christmas tree. In the regression, you go back to that age and you have 
no recollection of the future. In other words, you’re having that experience 
as if for the very first time, which brings up some very interesting 
paradoxes.  
 
 
Just a quick story– Everyone here know who Milton Erickson was, a great 
psychiatrist and doctor. He brought the field of hypnosis forward by 
immense degrees. There’s a great story of him doing one of his 
workshops with psychiatrists.  
 
 
This is in the ‘60s and ‘70s, and he has all these big-bearded psychiatrists 
crawling around on the floor being 5-year-old children because that’s part 
of his therapy for whatever reason. He decides to amuse himself so he’s 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
187 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
talking to one of the guys with a big bushy beard. He talks to him and he’s 
like, "What’s your name?"  
 
"Johnny."  
 
"How old are you, Johnny?" 
 
"Five."  
 
He goes, "Johnny, what’s that on your upper lip?" He’s got a big 
mustache, right?  
 
Johnny goes, "Its hair."  
 
He goes, "How did it get there? What is that? I mean do 5-year-old boys 
normally have hair on their lip?"  
 
"No."  
 
"So how did you get that hair on your upper lip?"  
 
Little Johnny thinks and he thinks, and suddenly it dawns on him and he 
goes, "I know! It’s from when I was older."  
 
 
In a regression, you don’t just have the experience, you actually have the 
full mental, shall we say, processing capabilities of a 5-year-old, a 10-year 
old, a 20-year old or wherever you were at that time in life. Does that 
make sense? 
 
 
If we were talking therapeutically speaking, we’re interested in these two: 
vivification and regression. That’s where we can create very powerful 
changes in people. In terms of conversational hypnosis, we’re interested 
in hyper-amnesia and revivification. We do not want regressions because 
really it’s too intense for a conversational covert environment. It’s pretty 
obvious when it happens.  
 
 
Did anyone ever see someone throw a temper tantrum? Don’t they look 
like a 5-year-old when that happens? Guess when they learned it? That’s 
an example of a partial regression. Part of their psyche, shall we say, 
regresses to five years old, and they behave that way. They feel that way. 
 
Then if you have that intellect stuff on top of it, and the intellect can’t 
explain how they’re feeling. They can’t explain their behavior, which is why 
you’ve got this weird disconnect. Does that make sense? That’s just a little 
aside. 
 
 
In terms of what we’re doing, in terms of conversational hypnosis, we’re 
interested in this. Now this is all a sliding scale. It’s not to say the 
phenomena in front of me, right now is a regression. It’s not a revivification 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
188 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
because his eyebrow is arched by 30 degrees to the left. It’s a sliding 
scale.  
 
 
Start with regular memories. Then they become very clear memories, 
hyper-amnesia. Those memories become so clear that you start to feel 
them. That’s a revivification. Then they become so real as you feel them, 
that it sucks you into it and all your experience, is that which is a 
regression? So it’s a sliding scale. A mild regression can look like an 
intense revivification, and so on. Do you see where I’m going with this? 
 
 
So we’re interested in hyper-amnesia and revivification, depending on the 
kinds of things we want to do. Whether we want to build experiences up, 
or if we’re going to have all the intellectual start-up things engage. hyper-
amnesia will be more intellectual because they can appreciate and 
evaluate the experience. Revivification will be a more emotional thing, 
because they can feel and engage or take the resources from that time. 
Make sense? 
 
 
What I’d like you to do is get together with a partner, and I want you to talk 
to them about a pleasant trance experience that they’ve had recently. 
You’ve been here for a day and a half now. You should have had at least 
one such event. Everyone here has had at least one trance-like 
experience that was pleasant.   
 
 
I’d like you to talk to your partner about that. Now as the hypnotist, whilst 
you’re talking about this, what I want you to do is take note of a couple of 
things. Take note of their body language. Head tilt, shoulders and so on, 
especially if it makes a dramatic shift. They might eyebrow flash in the 
middle of something they’re saying. They might suddenly go from talking 
about it to leaning forwards. Maybe their movements become more 
animated. Do you see where I’m going with this?  
 
 
So you’re looking for a sudden shift within that and their tonality. They 
might stress a certain word. They might lean on a certain word. They 
might emphasize something. When that occurs, I’d like you to listen for the 
word or the phrase they were using at that point in time.  
 
 
For example, I might talk about walking on the beach in Thailand. The sun 
was just so warm. What was it? So warm. By the way, it’s just because I 
recalled something there. When I recalled the actual sensation of walking 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
189 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
down that beach, my hands naturally just wanted to open up. It’s just a 
physical expression, and my tonality shifted naturally.  
 
 
That’s called a personal trance word or at least I call them personal trance 
words. They are little handles that people have screwed onto their 
experiences, which connect straight into that. Make sense? 
 
 
So I’d like you to collect their personal trance words and, if you can, the 
mannerisms that goes with them, too. That’s it for now. Stick with that 
partner, then we’ll come back and we’ll talk a little bit about that. Then 
we’ll throw in another round. Does that make sense to you? This whole 
thing should only take about, I don’t know, a couple of minutes each. So if 
I give you three or four minutes in total for both sides to do it, it should be 
plenty.  
 
 
You’re not interested in a whole dialogue about the whole thing. Just get a 
little bit of a description. The question you want to answer in your own 
mind is, can you mentally put yourself in the place they were at? Can you 
put yourself on my beach in Thailand right now? The answer you’re 
looking for is really actually no. All you know is one element of it. That it 
was warm.  
 
 
What do I mean by warm? Is it hot like an oven? Are we talking about a 
little bit warmer than in here, which is chilly? What do I mean by warm? Do 
you know the color of the sand? What kind of surf was there? Was the tide 
in or was the tide out? Were there people there, or was I on my own? You 
don’t know any of these details. So you need to find those out so you can 
create a mental picture of what I was experiencing. Does that make sense 
to you? 
 
 
In the process of doing so, just listen out for the personal trance words 
and see what comes out. Easy, off you go.  
 
 
So you’ve both had a chance to have a chat about the other person’s 
trance experience. Did you spot some personal trance words and 
mannerisms? Yes? I apologize. I thought you were asking a question 
there. Good. Actually, we’ll do that. We’ll go with you. Put your hand up if 
you spotted personal trance words and the themes and so on. Only half of 
you did? Go on now let me see those hands. Probably a lot of shy ones 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
190 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
are going, "I didn’t put deodorant on today. Don’t make me put my hand 
up." Good.  
 
 
So now that we have that, what are we going to do with this? The first 
thing to realize is that was a relatively normal conversation, wasn’t it? You 
could spot the same kind of things going on in an average, everyday 
conversation. If someone comes back from a holiday and you go, "Oh my 
God, how was it? Tell me about it."  
 
 
This is important to note because this is where we can start creating 
revivifications or hyper-amnesia conversationally, which is kind of the point 
of this whole training seminar.  
 
 
What I want you to do now is, let’s see, what’s the best of way of doing 
this? Okay, what we’re going to do is, you’re going to start assuming you 
haven’t seen each other for a while. It’s the same partner that you just 
worked with. I just want you to make the assumption so you can practice 
your whole hypnotic rapport technique. Make sense?  
 
 
 
We’ll start – this is not Human Resources – kidding. You’ll start with your 
inner smile. You’ll eyebrow flash. You’ll watch – very important – you’ll 
watch what happens right after the eyebrow flash, how they respond. Did 
they have a smile? Did they tilt their head? Did they do something with 
their hands?  
 
 
You’ll mirror that back as you’re sitting down and maybe shaking their 
hand as part of greeting. Make sense? So this is your starting point. 
 
 
Step two is you’re going to repeat essentially the same conversation you 
just had. Let’s call this exploring. We’re going to get some details from 
them. Really, you’re going to repeat what you just did, but we’re going to 
do it more purposefully so you can, shall we say, role play a regular kind 
of meeting. This time putting in all the things you want to be putting into 
practice. Does that make sense? 
 
 
All right, this is going to be fun. Step three I’m going to call H+. They are 
related, but they are different. Remember, it’s the same creature; different 
moods. All I want you to do – and in order for this to work, let me just 
emphasize, this is just a training exercise. This is not anything that you’ll 
necessarily be doing in real life in the real world.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
191 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
You’ll see why in a moment. It sounds like you’re a little bit strange if you 
try to do it in the real world. It could work, but it’s also got a good likelihood 
of just embarrassing you. So I’m just warning you right now.  
 
 
Once you’ve identified their personal trance word and some mannerisms 
that go with that, what I want you to do is mentally make a switch inside 
yourself. Go into your, what I would call H+. Intend to hypnotize them. 
Really want them to experience how good trance feels. Start feeling a little 
of that yourself.  
 
 
Do you remember yesterday when you did the, 'That’s right' exercise? 
Who recalls that one? That’s all you’re going to do right now. Remember 
that feeling you had yesterday and once you’ve had a chat with them 
about their trance experience and once you’ve got the information you 
want, switch yourself. Remember how you felt yesterday doing 'That’s 
right'. All you’re going to do is look at your partner and go,"That’s right, 
that’s right, there you go, that’s right, there you go, very good, that’s 
good."  
 
 
Is that easy? This is just the warm-up to doing a proper vivification, which 
will also work in the real world, in the real streets. For now I just want this 
as a warm-up to get you ready so you’re performing the vivification easily. 
And it’s going to be a lot easier for you this way. Does that make sense to 
everyone in terms of the exercise? You had a question? 
 
Audience: 
  
♦ Do you both tell a story and then do this afterward, or is it one 
way? 
 
Igor: 
All of this is going to happen with just one person. Let’s assume that Tim 
and I are working on this exercise. Is that okay with you, Tim? Do you 
want to come up just so we can show them a little bit of what I mean? 
 
 
So Tim comes up. I’m seeing Tim. How’s it going? Notice a little eyebrow 
flash and all the rest of it. Tim is sitting down. So tell me, "Have you had a 
trance lately?" The answer you’re looking for, of course, is yes. "Tell me a 
little bit about that."  
 
 
So now I’m asking him about the experience, right? Once I’ve had this 
conversation – he’s not asking me anything. I’m just talking to him and I’m 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
192 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
being fascinated by that. Once I’ve talked to him about his experience, 
what I’m going to do is go, "That was interesting. Thank you. That’s right, 
that’s right, that’s right, that’s it, that’s right, all the way, all the way there 
you go that’s good."  
 
 
That’s it. Once he’s finished his little cycle – we’ll give him a few minutes 
to enjoy that. Hello. Welcome back. Once he’s done that, I want you to 
pretend that you haven’t met yet, so you’ll both turn your backs to each 
other a little bit to break the social contact. Then it will be his turn as the 
hypnotist. So as soon as he sees you, it’s his turn to do the, there you go, 
eyebrow flash and all the rest of it. Now he directs me through the same 
experience. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So it will be entirely one-sided, you’ll break contact, go back into the same 
pair only this time the other person will be the hypnotist. Is that clear? 
Does that make more sense? All right. Thank you. Give him a round of 
applause. All right, everyone, off you go.  
 
 
Feel free to come up here. I’ll turn these things on. What kind of things did 
you all notice during that exercise? What happened? Anyone? Do you 
want to come up? 
 
Audience: 
One of the things that I noticed and I kind of have a question about, is how 
easily that just - slips into. My question is: 
 
♦ Is the trance that we’re in, in the trance of the class, make that 
more available? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. 
 
Audience: 
Okay. 
 
Igor: 
Let me just put a caveat on that. There are two reasons for that, just so 
you get the whole picture. The first reason is because you all have been in 
and out of trances a lot today. Actually in the last two days. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Which is similar to like, if you’ve got somebody and you’re 
bringing them in and out? 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. It is a fractionation.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
193 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The other thing is you have a social context here that allows for people to 
slip into more overt trances more easily. Make sense? The corollary to 
that though is – and this is what we’re developing here is – you’re creating 
the kind of context where you will absolutely get very profound 
conversational trances. They may not be like this, but people will be like 
this.  
 
Audience: 
In both cases actually, they were like that.  
 
 
Igor: 
Of course. Here they will be because, as I said, this context allows for it. A 
normal conversation doesn’t, so it’s relatively rare that will happen. We’re 
just taking each of the pieces and we’re polishing them, so you’re aware of 
how each piece feels in an ideal situation.  
 
 
Then when we put it together in a more live situation, little bits will go 
wrong here and there, but overall, the tendency will still be towards trance 
and have the same impact. Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
It does. Then the other thing that I noticed was the inner smile. To share 
from that place with the person you’re with, it’s like you just fall in love with 
them. 
 
Igor: 
Right. I agree. Actually that phrase falling in love with them, is actually 
very close to the term. In the old school, hypnotic rapport – what was it 
they used to call it? It was like infatuation or a seductive term. I can’t 
remember what the actual term was, but it’s a very intimate sort of feeling.  
 
 
Hence, I strongly recommend that if you’re going to take it – I mean we’re 
taking right now, the whole thing to the extreme. In normal day-to-day 
interactions, you’ll put a little bit of that charm on it and a little bit of that 
glamour, but not too much because it’s overwhelming for a lot of people.  
 
 
If you do too much of it, some people just will feel uncomfortable because 
it just seems like this is weird. Every time I go there, it’s like this crazy 
world I go into, and they can’t handle it yet. Over time, you may be able to 
fractionate them into that experience. But again, you want to see how 
much the individual, in the real world, in that context can handle before 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
194 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you up the ante a little bit. That’s just part of your responsibility as, I 
guess, an ethical human being.  
 
 
You don’t push people too hard because if you do, by the way, then you’ll 
go down the other road where you’ll have no friends because they’ll be 
afraid to hang out with you. It actually happens. 
 
 
Erickson – as much as I admire the guy – towards the ends of his days 
had very few friends. People were terrified of going to dinner with him 
because they’d find themselves passing the salt and pouring him some 
water without him ever asking for anything. He was using these non-verbal 
influencing skills. To him it was just fun, like a prank, but he was overdoing 
it and they were frightened by it.  
 
 
This is the other side of what you’re learning to do. You must understand 
that whilst it might seem tempting right now to make everyone in the world 
love you and you’re the best thing ever and so on, sometimes the best 
thing you can do is not. Does that make sense? It’s a balancing act.  
 
 
Sometimes you turn it on a little bit and that’s it. Sometimes you turn it on 
a little bit more. Sometimes you don’t do it at all. It’s a real balancing act, 
depending on who you are who you’re with, what the context is, your 
relative needs and so on. Make sense? 
 
Audience: 
It does. Then to be on the receiving end of that, I mean there was a real 
gentle sweetness and there was a little bit of – even in trance – a 
consciousness, like a choice point of how much permission am I going to 
give here. 
 
Igor: 
Right. That choice point is always there. Some people have learned to 
ignore it for whatever reasons, but it’s really inside everyone’s mind. 
Hence, you want to always treat your people with respect. You need 
integrity because when you violate integrity, at some point that choice 
point will go against you. It will automatically switch against you.  
 
 
You might get away with it once or twice, but after a while, as with 
Erickson for example, the choice point switched against him. The defense 
mechanisms people ended up having was, I’m just not going to hang out 
with him anymore. Does that make sense? Does that help? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
195 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you.  
 
Audience: 
Well, I was working with my exercise partner and I described my 
experience to him. He smiled and looked in my eyes and all the sudden, 
his eyes seemed very wide to me. Fascinating! I just felt myself going into 
a trance.  
 
 
My eyes closed and as I exhaled, he said, "That’s right." As he did that, I 
went into this expansive space that was all pink and blue lights. Diffuse 
light, not glaring, but very pleasant, it felt like a huge space and 
momentarily all the voices in the room went away.  
 
Igor: 
Welcome to hypno-land. What have we got here? We’ve got a visual 
hallucination and we’ve got a negative auditory hallucination, and this is 
just a normal conversation. It’s just part of normal everyday interactions, 
folks. It happens.  
 
 
It’s just that people don’t ascribe the same meaning to them when it 
happens normally. Thank you. That’s an awesome experience to have 
had, isn’t it? By the way, who here wants to know how to be able to 
achieve that within just a regular induction by saying actually very little? 
Anyone? On day four or five, I believe we’ll be coming onto that. So you 
better pay attention.  
 
Audience: 
Natalie had a physical experience in that she experienced warm energy 
running down both of her arms. I hadn’t heard that yet. I mean she felt it in 
my presence again just relating it. So I thought that was extremely 
interesting. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, the things that I found particularly interesting – apart from the little 
boogie I’m about to make for the phone – is the fact that you have now 
become associated to that experience enough that just by telling you 
about it, the experience happens again.  
 
 
Isn’t that interesting how that works? Because now he’s part of that whole 
conglomeration, so by talking about it, it reengages the same pattern, the 
same mechanism and, again, out comes that sort of energy type feeling. 
Awesome! Thank you. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
196 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Audience: 
I had a new experience with this one too, or maybe I’m just first aware of 
it. Mine involved going back to a time when I was riding horses. I was 
aware of the noise, but soon the noise was taken up by the sound of 
horses hooves and the horses huffing and puffing as we’re chanting.  
 
Igor: 
So it switched a meaning in your mind and became something else. 
 
Audience: 
That’s the first time I’ve noticed something like that. 
 
Igor: 
Do you all see how flexible the mind is? Everything you think is real, I’m 
sorry to tell you all, it’s like the blue pill from The Matrix. Everything you 
think is real is not. It is a hallucination generated by your brain. If for no 
other reason, think about it.  
 
 
Your senses – sight, sound, touch and so on – are converted to 
electrochemical signals to come up in through your nervous system and 
so on. Its electricity or chemistry depending on which part of the spiral you 
look at.  
 
 
Then it hits your brain and your brain has to make meaning out of all of 
this and give you something, an experience, that allows you to navigate 
through the world and survive and reproduce and do whatever people do. 
Make sense? But it isn’t real. If ever you’ve seen an optical illusion, it’s 
something that tricks your brain to see something that’s not there, that’s 
one of the reasons we can't quite figure it out. We know it’s not real, and 
yet somehow it still works. Does that kind of make sense? 
 
 
Hypnosis allows you to create different realities. Now we’re getting into 
some really kind of tricky stuff here because it really is. It allows you to do 
the kind of things that other people go to jail for and not even risk that 
because it’s all produced inside the brain anyway. Does that make sense? 
 
 
This also means you have a great responsibility. You don’t just mess 
around with people’s realities just for the hell of it. You’re doing it in an 
ethical way. In other words, in a way that is a genuine force for good for 
those individuals, in a way that frees them up to be a better human being, 
to achieve more things and so on.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
197 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
If along the way you happen to get something of what you want as well, 
it’s a win-win as far as I’m concerned. Everyone gets something positive. 
 
 
That’s where your integrity and your ethics are important, because you’re 
walking around in someone else’s mind and there’s a responsibility that 
comes with that. Does that make sense? Do you like this so far? Who 
here realizes that you’re not even at the end of Day 2 yet? Isn’t that 
something?  
 
Audience: 
My question is – my ultimate goal is the same thing that you were just 
talking about H+ essentially. What if freeing them up and giving them more 
choice actually destroys whatever their secondary gain was for having 
been limited?  
 
Igor: 
Then that’s something you need to give them a choice for. You can give 
the unconscious mind a choice before that happens. It’s like saying should 
people know what happened to them in their past? Well, that’s really up to 
them because some things they can’t handle yet. If you start freaking them 
out and causing them to have reactions, that’s not very healthy for them. 
 
 
If they ask for it and they know how to get through it, I see no problem with 
that. They’ve asked for that, they’re trying, they just don’t know their way 
around it. That’s a very different scenario to people just happily going on 
with their lives and then suddenly, life explodes in their face. And they go, 
I don’t think I want to live in this world. They might not emotionally be able 
to cope with that yet.  
 
 
You can, of course, massage things along a little bit by preparing 
someone to be ready for a bigger world, so to speak. But then it still takes 
them to a choice point where they decide - I now feel safe inside myself 
safe enough that when I see or feel or experience the limits of the world 
I’ve built around myself, that I feel constrained by it and I wish to get 
beyond it.  
 
 
You can’t push them outside of those boundaries because then you are, in 
my opinion, doing quite a bit of violating in terms of their own mental 
experience.  
 
Audience: 
Agreed, two things. Number one is you said they make a choice. 
Sometimes when I’m watching people’s body language, often times they’ll 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
198 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
go no, which means their unconscious mind is saying yes. I’m willing to 
make a choice, but the conscious part of me is not willing to make that 
same choice. 
 
Igor: 
You’ll get to realize this as well. When you say to people, "Are you willing 
to change?" They’ll go, "Of course." You’ll get both. Again, don’t stick with 
head nods and head shakes as an expressed meaning. You need a little 
bit of testing around those areas as well. Take everything as an indication, 
and then test it a little bit.  
 
 
Yes. You absolutely, get that and usually I’ll go with the unconscious 
response because it’s the one that has kept them safe, their entire life and 
will continue to do so. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ And you’re going to show us how to do the testing and all the 
rest of that sort of slow movement into those areas? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. That’s where I need you all to keep your eyes open in terms of their 
calibration and stuff like that. When there’s a dramatic shift, either they’ll 
increase tension or decrease tension, or stress response or something like 
that. It’s not all about tension. Sometimes it’s about stillness and so on, 
but then again, stillness is not the only thing. 
 
 
For example, when people go into trance, they tend to have less 
movement. Now do I look particularly stressed right now? Hopefully, the 
answer would be no. As opposed to – let’s say that we’re talking about 
something that is somehow psychologically threatening to me. Now I’m 
still moving less, but there’s a different quality to it.  
 
 
Can you see that? Those are the things you pay attention to. If you’re not 
sure, you reintroduce the same idea again, and if you get the same result 
again, then after two or three times, it’s like, all right, I get it. Let’s leave 
that one alone for a while. Does that make sense? 
 
 
In fact, I know one hypnotist, the aforementioned Dave Dobson, who is 
now passed away, sadly - that’s how he’d judge whether or not he’d work 
with a client. They’d come in for a session and he’d say, "Are you ready to 
make this change that you’ve come here for?" He’d check them out ahead 
of time and talk about things that they agree with and disagree with to get 
yes and no signals and so on.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
199 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Let’s say their head nod was a yes and the shake was a no – it doesn’t 
have to be, but let’s say that’s what it was. Then he’d go, "Are you ready 
to make this change?" They’d go, "Sure, absolutely." Or they would go, 
"Yes." 
 
 
So he goes, Great. Well, I have a sense that you really enjoy the marina. If 
you walk down this road for like half an hour to all the boats and so on, 
just go and hang around there for the next hour or two, and then come on 
back and we’ll have a chat."  
 
 
They’d come back and consciously they’re totally confused because they 
think they just said, "Yes, I’m ready to change." and you send them off to 
watch the boats. What the hell.  
 
 
Then they come back and he’d say, "Are you absolutely ready to change 
right now." They’ll go, "Yes." He’d say, "By the way, have you seen the 
flower garden over in this direction?" He might even do it two or three 
times. Eventually, they’ll come back and, of course, things are happening 
at the unconscious level right now. They’re here for a reason, so it’s 
percolating stuff. We’re talking more about therapy right now. 
 
 
Eventually, they’ll come back and he’ll say, "Are you ready to make this 
change?" They go, "YES, already!" He goes, "Oh good, come on inside. 
Let’s have a chat." 
 
Audience: 
Got it.  
 
Igor: 
Does that answer your question about testing? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. It’s actually very straightforward. By the way, do you see the 
congruity in his response? That’s how you test. It’s actually a lot easier 
than it sounds. Hence, we’re not going to be spending too much time on it. 
But if your field’s so closed, you can’t test. It’s as simple as that. Make 
sense? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. Can I ask my second thing? It’s quick. It’s easy. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
200 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ That’s right, when you’re saying that to the person, this works 
conversationally? 
 
Igor: 
No. Well, yes and no. If you’re doing it conversationally, then you’re 
moving, in my opinion, into an area of what I would call semi-covert 
hypnosis. In other words, people know you’re doing something, but they 
can’t figure out what it is. If they know you’re a hypnotist, they’ll probably 
have figured out that you’re hypnotizing them somehow. It’s just they don’t 
know what you’re doing, but it’s nothing they can resist. Make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So it would take you out of the covert category because, well, people 
know that you’re up to something, even if they can’t quite figure out what 
that something is. If you try to do it totally covertly, then you just come off 
a little odd because, why is this guy going 'That’s right' constantly. That 
doesn’t make sense.  
 
 
If you’re doing it on purpose, of course, and you’re fine with them realizing 
that something is sort of up, then that adds fuel. It becomes a frame, like 
something’s happening only I’m talking to your unconscious not your 
conscious. When we get to the conscious unconscious dissociation, that 
on its own can have a profound hypnotic effect. 
 
Audience: 
So it changes the context. 
 
Igor: 
It will change the context significantly. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Is there a classification of that type of 'That’s right' that works 
conversationally?   
 
Igor: 
How do you mean? You mean like saying okay, have I talked to you about 
your holiday? Okay, etc. 
 
Audience: 
Yeah, you see an unconscious response to something you are doing with 
them conversationally. You don’t have to say, 'That’s right', because it’s 
going to move them less covertly. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
201 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
If you want one of those things, the simplest thing you can do is to mirror 
the non-verbal trance response. Let’s say the thing you’ll be saying 'That’s 
right', to is that they’re blinking more often. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ So you just blink more? 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. You’ll talk and as soon as they start blinking more often, you’ll talk 
about I was tying my shoelace and it was a great day because I just 
figured out how to tie my shoelace for the first time. Then maybe they’ll 
take a breath in, and you’ll smile and go, and it took me forever (inhale) 
just to figure out how to tie a shoelace. I don’t know why. I was maybe a 
bit slow as a kid, who knows. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ So you’re communicating on the non-verbal channel?  
 
Igor: 
Exactly. You’re reinforcing what they’re doing that’s moving them towards 
trance.  
 
Audience: 
Awesome! Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
You’re welcome. These are great questions, everyone. Thank you. Give 
everyone a round of applause. Those were awesome questions. Do you 
want to come up? Come up on this side if you want, or that side, who 
knows? 
 
Audience: 
Hey, Igor. It occurs to me looking back on stuff that I’ve conversationally 
done revivification, but I did it for things that were unintentional. I did this… 
 
Igor: 
For negative things?  
 
Audience: 
Yeah, absolutely and I wound out getting a total… 
 
Igor: 
Have you ever heard of the term a pity fest? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
That is called a revivification by lots of very good hypnotists, who are both 
in lots of H- because they’re going, "Oh my life sucks." "Yeah, I had that 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
202 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
happen to me to." They’re constantly sucking each other down to a 
negative thing. They’re reinforcing the negative experiences.  
 
 
In some families, you’ll get a lot of these loops happening where people 
are reinforcing – see, you failed, and here’s another example of how you 
failed, and here’s another example of how you failed. So they’re revivifying 
failure. Not intentionally, not out of desire to harm. I guess the best phrase 
would be out of ignorance because they don’t realize the harm that that’s 
doing.  
 
 
Their intention is good in the sense that they want to protect, say, their 
child from making a mistake by reaching too high. They’re warning them 
like, you know that will go wrong. Then, of course, they’re creating a self-
fulfilling prophecy by revivifying and putting their attention more and more 
on failure, so that’s the cycle that gets reinforced and so on. Does that 
kind of make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Absolutely. 
 
Igor: 
But now, of course, as a great hypnotist, you have the power to change all 
that. Do you not? Oh, come on everyone, let’s try this again. You have the 
power to change all this, right? 
 
Audience: 
Yeah, right! 
 
Igor: 
That’s much better. You all were worrying me there for a moment.  
 
Audience: 
Here’s my question.  
 
♦ How would one deal with like an accidental abreaction? 
 
 
I mean in terms of say, I’m talking about a thing that may have happened, 
like a street fight or something along those lines. Someone’s listening to 
my story, and they’re envisioning a moment where they may have 
experienced a thing… 
 
Igor: 
Ask me again after the break, because we’ll need to do another couple of 
processes before I can answer that question properly. 
 
Audience: 
Cool. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
203 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Okay? 
 
Audience: 
Absolutely. 
 
Audience: 
So basically, you’re saying my father and step-mother were great 
hypnotists when they told me repeatedly about the things we did when I 
was with them. And my mother would get upset, because I could never 
remember the things that I did with her that were fun. Because they kept… 
 
Igor: 
They created a memory block on the fun experiences and a hyper-
amnesia of the not-so-fun experiences, if I understand you correctly. A lot 
of parents are very good hypnotists. There are people who are fortunate 
enough to have very positive hypnotists in their life. They’re a force for 
good, but let’s face it, in some families, the hypnotists aren’t the most 
eloquent with the way that they enforce or reinforce positive 
characteristics.  
 
 
Is anyone in here a hypnotherapist? That’s where you get your income 
from, right? Undoing the work of the accidentally negative hypnotist. 
 
 
Hence, the more people know about this stuff, the less likely it is that we’ll 
need a job. Sorry everyone, our job is to put ourselves out of action. Is 
everyone cool? 
 
 
Let’s do another exercise. Let’s just fulfill the promise that we’ve been 
building up. This is going to be a lot of fun. Let’s see how much for time 
we have. Okay, good. This is going to be a lot of fun.  
 
 
We’re going to start again with the hypnotic rapport. In other words, the 
inner smile, have a little eyebrow flash, a little bit of mirroring depending 
on what happens next. Again, explore the same scene with this person. 
For now you can kind of rush this step a little bit because you pretty much 
know it’s coming already. 
 
 
Now in Step 3, when we’ve got the H+, it’s not just going 'That’s right, 
that’s right', which would be in the real world a little bit obvious or a little bit 
freaky, like what’s going on here? We’re going to use the same energy, 
shall we say the same emotional state, the same mindset. So mentally, 
with your intention, you’re intending to start going 'That’s right, that’s right.' 
That’s what you’re mentally intending to do. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
204 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
What you’re actually going to do is you’re going to use what I call the echo 
effect. You’re going to echo back their phrases. You’re going to echo back 
their phrases in the order they came. Now if you’re familiar with the idea of 
actively listening, do not do that. Actively listening is where you re-interpret 
someone else’s words and stick your words in there. Instead; hence, 
opening completely different folders, shall we say, inside their mind. 
Different associations, you use their words, their phrasing, ideally their 
tonality and pacing if you can do that too. 
 
 
 
What is it you reflect? Well, let’s say that my experience was well, I was in 
the seminar room yesterday and John came up and he made me look at 
his eyes, and he said sleep and then I felt really, really comfortable. Do 
you see that if I were scripting out a movie, there are different little 
sequences going on in that movie? Does that make sense? 
 
 
Each one of these is something that you can echo back at them. So you 
were here yesterday, and there’s John. He asks you to look in his eyes.  
 
 
Has anyone noticed what I just did, by the way? I echoed, but I made one 
subtle change. I moved from the past tense to the present tense. So you 
were in this room yesterday. There is John. He asks you to look in his 
eyes. Do you see what we’re doing here?  
 
 
Present tense is more likely to revivify. In the past tense, you’re more 
likely to create hyper-amnesia. Does that make sense? Is everyone clear 
with that? 
 
 
If your language sticks in the present tense, you’re making the experience 
more immediate. You’re more likely to revivify the experience, bring it back 
to life for them. If your language remains in the past tense, even though 
they start recalling the event, they’re more likely to stay in hyper-amnesia. 
So, they’ll have clarify of recall, but the experience won’t be as intense for 
them.  
 
 
It’s a rule of thumb. It’s not 100%, of course, because different people will 
react differently in terms of how strong their memory is for them anyways. 
Does that make sense to you? So I’m going to echo these things. Then 
I’m going to echo them as though I’m still doing my explorer phase. I’ll say, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
205 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
"So, you’re in this room and John is there. He asks you to look into his 
eyes. He asks you to look into his eyes. So what happens next?" 
 
 
"I don’t know. I just kind of close my eyes and feel great."  
 
 
"So you’re in the room. John is there. He asks you to look into his eyes, 
and then something happens. You don’t know what it is, but you feel good 
don’t you?"  
 
 
Can you all hear my tonality shifting into that right kind of gear, shall we 
say? Can you all hear the language being reflected verbatim more or 
less? And then shift from the past to the present tense. It’s a 
straightforward process. The key here is to keep control of the 
conversation. To direct it yourself and to become very hypnotic in terms of 
your mannerisms and so on. So we’ll have the echo effect here, and tense 
refers to time rather than physiology.  
 
Audience: 
 
♦ So you start echoing right away? 
 
Igor: 
Typically, I’ll do a quick example of this. That will probably be easiest. 
Who here likes to do hypnosis? Who enjoys a good trance? Anyone who 
wants to do it? None of us, yeah. Come on up. Give him a round of 
applause. Have a seat. 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
How are you doing? Having fun? - I don’t know what I did. I volunteered. - 
I know it’s crazy, isn’t it? Who’d do anything like that? Can you think about 
a particular experience, like a hypnotic experience that you enjoyed? 
Maybe here recently?  
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Like when? Oh, you know what? Can we get a microphone? Can I have a 
hand-held? I’ll just take this one. I just turned the other one off, so there 
should only be one on right now. Are you still with me? I’ll hold it for you 
because you’re not going to have much chance to hold things very long.  
 
Audience: 
That’s nice. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
206 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Sorry - There’s a presupposition, isn’t it? So where was this experience? 
What happened? 
 
Audience: 
It happened just yesterday in the lobby.  
 
Igor: 
Hold on a second, you’re in the lobby? In the evening or in the daytime? 
 
Audience: 
It was light and then..It was night. 
 
Igor: 
At night. So it was yesterday evening, and you’re in the lobby. So what 
happens? 
 
Audience: 
I was the hypnotist.  
 
Igor: 
You were the hypnotist.  
 
Audience:    Yes. 
 
Igor:        
You were the hypnotist last night, and you had a profound hypnotic 
experience. Is that what you’re telling me?  
 
Audience: 
Definitely. 
 
Igor: 
Wow! How did that happen? 
 
Audience: 
I find it so funny, but when you’re doing hypnosis with somebody, you start 
entering a deep, profound state of trance yourself. 
 
Igor: 
So you start entering a deep, profound state. What actually happened in 
the lobby? Tell me about that.  
 
Audience: 
I was sitting with this guy. 
 
Igor: 
You’re sitting with someone. 
 
Audience: 
Yes. I was doing some word stuff with him. 
 
Igor: 
You were doing some word stuff with him, right.  
 
Audience: 
Finally, I noticed that I’d calmed down. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
207 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
You noticed that you’d calmed down. 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You calmed down. 
 
Audience: 
My voice changed really much. 
 
Igor: 
And you voice changed really much. Wow. You calmed down. Your voice 
starts changing. What else happens? 
 
Audience: 
I noticed not only his body was settling down, but I followed him in this 
manner. 
 
Igor: 
His body settles, and you start to follow him. You start to follow him.  
 
 
Let me just pause you there. Can you see the changes already occurring? 
 
 
By the way, as far as the conversational trance goes, I really don’t need 
more than this. I don’t want more than this. I mean we can take this 
further.  
 
 
I can break cover, shall we say, and go to semi-overt and with that, of 
course, get more eye closure and strange phenomenon and so on. But as 
far as a conversational trance goes, that’s all we really need.  
 
 
Did you see his breathing shifting? When he talked about the breathing 
shifting, he actually became more steady and deeper. Did you see the 
glazing of the eyes? Did you see the locking expression? Did you notice 
how his physical movements reduced to practically zero? That’s all we’re 
really talking about. Thank you very much. Give him a nice round of 
applause.  
 
 
So, that’s all we’re doing. Did you see the hypnotic rapport? Right? It’s a 
quick thing. It’s invisible to most people because it’s that quick, but 
hopefully it’s pretty much a no brainer to you guys, right now. I explored a 
little bit about stuff. Notice how, at one point, he was starting to take 
control of the conversation a bit too much,right? He was making a meta-

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
208 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
comment. He’s talking about what it’s like to go into a trance, which would 
have been a great conversation induction on me. 
 
 
Like, you know when you go into a trance, you have these experiences. 
I’m going, "Yeah, I actually do know that. That’s kind of nice." Right? It’s a 
great conversation induction, but then suddenly I realized, "Hey, I’m 
supposed to be the hypnotist here." - No.- So you have to take control of 
the conversation, and we’ll talk more in later days about how to control 
and direct the conversation.  
 
 
Then did you see me making the switch? You should have sensed it. I did 
it relatively overtly, so I didn’t try to subtly move into it. I pretty much 
switched over. Did you all see the switch happening? Did you all hear me 
echoing and reflecting back more or less verbatim what he was saying?  
 
 
Occasionally, I made a few switches, especially in tenses. Did you hear 
the tense switch as well, and the consistency of the tense switch? It’s 
straightforward, right? Come on up. It really is quite straightforward. 
 
Audience: 
You mentioned switching tenses, and it seemed like you switched back 
and forth on them a few times.  
 
Igor: 
I didn’t switch too much. He actually kept himself in the past tense more or 
less continuously. So occasionally, I switched back to the past tense just 
to catch him in the same place, and then go back to the present tense.  
 
Audience: 
Just to say, "Oh come on." 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. That’s exactly what it was. Okay? Is everyone clear with that? All 
right, so just spend five minutes apiece doing that. Really, you only need 
five minutes so you get a feel for it. Then we’ll have a break, and then we’ll 
come back and do some more hypno-magic. All right, everyone, off you 
go.  
 
 
Did you all enjoy that? Was that interesting? Now a couple of people have 
been asking me things like, what is the purpose of this, how are we going 
to use it in the real world and so on? The simple answer to that is we’re 
not there yet.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
209 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Remember, we are building reference experiences. We’re building skills. 
Until you have a skill of being able to put someone in a trance in a 
conversation, there’s no point in trying to do something with it because 
otherwise you’ll rush ahead and try to do the thing. You’ll miss the thing 
that makes it work. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So right now, just treat this as a skill-building exercise, and note the trance 
responses you’re getting. As long as you get that, you’re in good shape. 
Easy to do? Other then that, are there any questions or comments on 
what you’ve done so far? Do you want to come up here? 
 
Audience: 
A minor question about HR. Let me direct this a little bit differently. In more 
overt rapport skills, if you’re already in rapport with somebody and you 
already have a relationship with someone, I know for me if someone is 
trying to be clever and get rapport when they already have rapport.  
 
Igor: 
Then they mess it up. 
 
Audience: 
It’s clumsy. It’s awkward. 
 
Igor: 
I agree. 
 
Audience: 
It’s irritating. 
 
Igor: 
I agree. 
 
Audience: 
 
♦ Is there ever a time when HR would show up like that? 
 
Igor: 
No, because you’ve taken care of that with the inner smile. The inner 
smile, basically, is the fuel that drives it. What you’re describing is when 
people are consciously trying to do an unconscious activity. That’s what’s 
awkward. That always feels awkward or feels wrong and so on.  
 
Audience: 
Almost the opposite, like insulting. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. Because then it becomes mimicking rather than mirroring, and 
people really don’t like that. If your intention is clear – your intention is not 
to get one over on the other person. The intention is to just have a good 
interaction and your inner smile is strong. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
210 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In other words, you just feel that connection yourself and then your 
mannerisms will automatically be natural and correct. Your eyebrow 
flashes will come in. You might do a little bit of a little head nod or 
whatever it is that’s part of the interaction, and it will be natural. 
 
 
Your consciousness will be able to check them and go, "Oh look, I just did 
an eyebrow flash. That’s cool." We might even initiate or say, "Oh, it’s time 
for an eyebrow flash." But you don’t have to do it. It will do itself. If it feels 
awkward, it probably is awkward, in which case you’re not doing it the right 
way. You’re signaling awkwardness. You’re signaling fakeness rather than 
naturalness. Make sense? Does that answer your question? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Come on up. 
 
Audience: 
We were doing the induction, and we got to a point where we were trying 
to bring her to the present, and it kind of went back and forth and then 
transitioning from past to present, and then transitioning to – instead of 
using 'That’s right', just using the words that she was using. 
 
Igor: 
We’re not using 'That’s right' exactly. 
 
Audience: 
Right, but I couldn’t do it. I mean we did everything, and she just wasn’t 
responding because she was excited about the discussion. 
 
Igor: 
All right. This happens. Who were you working with?  
 
Audience: 
Alma. 
 
Igor: 
Do you mind if we use this as an example? Do you want to come up here 
just so we can have a demonstration of this?  
 
 
Basically what you’re describing, if I understood it correctly – we’ll see in a 
minute if I was right or not – is what happens if your partner is taking 
control of the situation or conversation for you. 
 
 
When you’re doing this, you must be running the conversation and they’re 
responding. It’s the verbal equivalent of the compliance thing. Does that 
make sense?  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
211 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
If you’re doing a street hypnosis thing and you say, "Stand over here." And 
they go, "Oh, I’ll stand over here for you. How about if I stand over here?" 
Are they in the right place? No. They are eager and enthusiastic, which is 
great, but they’re not following, they’re leading at this point. 
 
 
What you’re describing I suspect is an example of this. We will get more 
into how to do that, but I’ll show you a quick example of what I mean. Is it 
okay if we talk about this? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
What kind of situations were you all talking about? 
 
Audience: 
We were talking about yesterday and when we were doing the eye 
exercises. 
 
Igor: 
So this is yesterday, right?  
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So this is yesterday, and you were doing the eye exercises.    
 
Audience: 
Right. Where we were just staring at each other. 
 
Igor: 
Did you see what happened right there? Did you notice how she wanted to 
run on? It was yesterday, eye exercises, more and more and more. I did 
not allow that. I took one unit – and I like to use my hand as part of it. It’s 
kind of like a little stop signal. It’s not like, stop! I am now going to talk! It’s 
a more subtle version. It’s like, "Oh, let me just check. This was yesterday, 
is that right?" 
 
Audience: 
Yeah, it was yesterday.  
 
Igor: 
It was yesterday. Cool and what happened yesterday? 
 
Audience: 
We were doing the eye exercise… 
 
Igor: 
It’s the eye exercise yesterday, right? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
212 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Audience: 
Yeah, and we were just staring into each others eyes… 
 
Igor: 
Staring into each others eyes, right. 
 
Audience: 
Yeah, and we weren’t saying anything. 
 
Igor: 
You weren’t saying anything. 
 
Audience: 
No, but it was really relaxing. 
 
Igor: 
So it was yesterday, right? And who were you with? 
 
Audience: 
(Pointing.) What's your name? 
 
Igor: 
Oh, this person. 
 
Audience: 
Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
And you were looking into each others eyes. 
 
Audience: 
We’re staring into each others eyes. 
 
Igor: 
You’re staring into each others eyes.  
 
 
(By the way, do you see how we’re starting to switch now to the present?) 
 
 
We’re staring into each others eyes and it’s relaxing. 
 
Audience: 
It is really calming. 
 
Igor: 
Really calming; really calming. 
 
Audience: 
Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see those changes, the shifting already happening? Does that 
make sense to you now? The reason that it doesn’t happen otherwise is 
because if I let her run on with it, she’ll tell me about it. That’s more hyper-
amnesia, and then she can get excited about the fact that it happened. 
What I need is for her to really experience it; hence, a revivification. So I 
must take control of the conversation. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
213 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The first few seconds pretty much told me what was going on. The very 
first few seconds told me, "Okay, I need to control it right now before this 
freight train starts taking out of the station, and I’ll be waving going, wait 
for me, please." 
 
 
Also, you should notice that as soon as that happened, I only did it two or 
three times, a very small amount of times and then Alma’s unconscious 
recognizing the suggestion goes oh, I get it. No pressure. It’s the other 
way of doing this. Already, Alma started slowing down, the signals started 
coming through and the induction almost happened by itself at that point. 
Does that kind of make sense to you all?  
 
 
Do you want to come up and ask a question? Thank you. Just give her a 
nice round of applause for doing that.  
 
Audience: 
Something interesting that we found, me and my partner, was actually 
when I was telling my story, he was having a bit of trouble imitating and 
actually getting into my mode because he thinks in a different way. Like 
he’s very visual, and I was doing very auditory. 
 
Igor: 
So the trouble was in him reflecting the same language or sounding the 
same way? 
 
Audience: 
Yes, like reflecting the same language and sounding the same way both. It 
was kind of like he was interpreting it into himself and coming out of 
himself. 
 
Igor: 
May I ask who the partner was? Is that okay? 
 
Audience: 
Sure, it was Michael. 
 
Igor: 
Sure, so really the simple answer to that, in case it will help, is rather than 
reinterpreting the thing is literally take the words and imagine they’re like a 
magic spell. You’re just going to reflect them right back. Literally, the same 
words. It’s okay if you have difficulty with it initially to just say exactly the 
same thing.  
 
 
Here’s the secret, and this is actually where it helps you deal with 
situations like what just happened with Alma. If they’re saying too much 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
214 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that you can’t actually recall the words, so you have to start paraphrasing, 
then they’re running the conversation.  
 
Audience: 
I think that happened too, with us, actually. 
 
Igor: 
I strongly suspect. It’s one of the most common things that make this 
difficult to do. If they have said so much that you can no longer remember 
everything that they said and you have to paraphrase it, then they’re in 
charge of the conversation rather than you. You have a more fundamental 
problem to fix on the echoing effect. Does that make sense to you? Does 
that help you out as well?  
 
Audience: 
Yes, that makes it much easier. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. Thank you so much.  
 
Audience: 
I had just one more question.  
 
♦ So it’s all right to cut off after three or four words. It’s not too 
choppy? 
 
Igor: 
So is it all right to… 
 
Audience: 
To cut off after three or… 
 
Igor: 
So you want to cut someone off after three or four words. Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Audience: 
There you go. I guess that’s the answer. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. That’s a great question. Thank you. Come on up. Yeah, go on 
and give her a round of applause. 
 
Audience: 
When you did the demonstration with Alma, in order to take control – I just 
want to be sure that I am correct. You’ve been echoing her and stopping 
her gently.   
 
Igor: 
I’m stopping her gently from adding more words. 
 
Audience: 
Right. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
215 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
So I can echo what she’s just said. Exactly. 
 
Audience: 
That’s what you’ve been doing? 
 
Igor: 
That’s exactly right. 
 
Audience: 
That’s all? 
 
Igor: 
That’s it. I mean, really, that is the secret to the revivification. If someone’s 
trying to take over, they’re not doing it on purpose. It’s just that they’re 
getting carried away by the thing. You’ll find people who are very 
descriptive, who like talking. That’s how they socialize. They get carried 
away by their language, by what they’re saying, by the description they’re 
giving. They get excited by it and so on.  
 
 
 
Those people in particular you have to just pause and almost like they can 
reflect on what’s happened. It’s kind of like someone who’s gobbling up a 
meal. You say, no, just taste it. The pea itself is really nice. Does that 
make sense? The responses are straightforward.  
 
 
Did you want to do something quickly Mark, before we carry on?  
 
Audience: 
 
♦ How do you take control of the conversation where you 
actually aren’t the dominant party you’re not alpha in the 
relationship?  
 
Igor: 
Day five. Actually, the whole idea of how to take control of a conversation 
and interrupt them and so on, really, we’re going to focus on, on Day 5 
more. I hope I’m just giving you enough here to fix the most common 
issues here and then in the real world, there are many different reasons 
and many different ways why people will hijack conversations or take them 
over and so on.  
 
 
There are many different ways to fix that. And we’ll cover the more 
significant versions of those on Day 5, if that’s okay with you; otherwise, 
we’ll be doing too much at one point.  
 
Audience: 
I’m just trying to confirm, huh, to have this fit in my brain a bit. So if we 
were doing this in an overt way, we might just directly say, so you’re in 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
216 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
trance. I want you to step back into that earlier version of you or whatever 
and actually become that person and use the language. But we are in 
conversational language to re-associate... 
 
Igor: 
In NLP, they’ve minimalized this right down to a single phrase, which 
when done correctly is fantastic, but most people just think it’s magic 
words and they miss the nuances of it. The phrase itself is pretty smart. 
The phrase is, see what you saw, hear what you heard, feel what you felt. 
That’s the magic phrase. 
 
 
When you’re feeling confident, just go back to that day and just see what 
you saw, hear what you heard, feel what you felt. Some people just go 
bang, instantly to it. A lot of people are all right, fine, I’ll do my best, but 
they’re not really re-experiencing it.  
 
 
Essentially what we’re doing right now is a conversational way of getting 
someone to see what they saw, hear what they heard and feel what they 
felt. Then the experience comes to life inside them again. Okay? 
 
Audience: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
You’re welcome. Useful stuff… All right, everyone, let’s take a quick break. 
We’ve run over a little bit. Let’s take a 10 or 15 minute break.  
 
 
All right, everyone, off you go.  
 
 
 
DVD 8:  How to Take Control of any 
Conversation Without Anyone Knowing What 
You Have Done 
 
Igor: 
Welcome back. How are you guys doing? Are you enjoying yourselves so 
far? Good stuff? Let’s start taking this a little bit forward. I would like for you 
to start using this skill, to be able to revivify experiences you don’t even 
know they’ve had. Wouldn’t that be interesting? We’ll build a certain skill set 
that you’ll be using later on in the week.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
217 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
For now we’re going to start this very softly. Remember when we talked 
about the trance experiences. They gave you personal trance words and so 
on? Well, what I’d like you to do now is get together with someone else and 
we’re going to start the same way.  
 
 
We’re going to start with the HR, the hypnotic rapport. This time when you 
explore, I would like for you to ask them about a pleasant activity that they 
have done or would like to do. The kind of activity we’re looking for is 
something that is calming and soothing, rather than energizing and exciting. 
I mean things like maybe reading, relaxing on a beach, going for a walk, 
climbing a mountain – although that can be a little bit of both. 
 
 
So it’s a soothing, calming thing, a pleasant scene. They may have had the 
experience or they may just want to have the experience but they haven’t 
actually experienced it themselves. Does that make sense? We’re looking 
for something that a lower, calmer energy rather than a high and more 
excited energy. Although we can work with both, it just makes it a lot easier 
for now. Do you get the kind of scenes I’m talking about, or the kinds of 
experiences? 
 
 
Shout out some examples of the kind of stuff we’re talking about. A 
massage would be great. A vacation. What kind of vacation? A vacation to 
the beach, for example, to the Bahamas on a sailboat, chilling on a sailboat 
or scuba diving, excellent! So you’ve got a good idea of where we’re coming 
from with this. 
 
 
The key here is – this is the interesting part – it does not matter whether or 
not they’ve actually had the experience. What matters is that if they’ve had 
it, they’ve enjoyed it and it was pleasant. If they have not had it, they would 
like to have it and it’s something they could imagine what it might be like. 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
Now when we get to this area here, you will have really nothing to echo 
because they haven’t told you anything other than just the big picture. So 
now it’s up to you to create the experience by talking about things that 
would normally be there. Does that make sense? Here’s where you have to 
be subtle. Remember the language softeners?  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
218 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
If the item or the experience that you want to talk about does not absolutely 
have to be there as part of the experience that they are mentioning, then 
you need to soften them. Here’s what I mean.  
 
 
For example, on a beach, what would absolutely exist on a beach? Water. A 
beach without water is called a desert. So you’re pretty sure that there will 
be some water there. If there’s water there, what is likely to be there? Sky - 
waves. There will be sounds of water. It may be a rushing of or quiet lapping 
of the surf. You don’t know yet. Do you see the difference? 
 
 
Will there absolutely have to be a breeze? Have you ever been to a beach 
that has not had a breeze, anyone? So breeze is where we go onto the next 
step, which is very important, so thanks for bringing that up.  
 
 
If you want to introduce an item that is probably going to be there – we’re 
talking about things like a breeze, like sand, like sun. It’s very likely going to 
be there, but you’re not absolutely sure. Then you’re going to throw in your 
language softeners to make it more acceptable. Make sense? 
 
 
You can do it anyway you want. You can actually talk about it in the second 
person. Put yourself there on a beach. You’re in the present tense. It’s a 
beautiful day yada, yada, yada. Or, you can talk about your own 
experiences as though they’re having it; it doesn’t really matter so much. 
Let’s go with a simple version describe the thing to them.  
 
 
You’re at the beach. Perhaps there is sand there. Now watch their reaction, 
if they’re sitting there going like this, do you think they’ve accepted the idea? 
If they go like this, are they accepting the idea? Or, perhaps there’s 
something else. It is something else, isn’t it? Yes. What is it? Pebbles.  
 
 
Do you see where we’re going with this? Now you’re starting to combine all 
the skills we’ve been putting together so far. You’re using your language 
eloquently to describe a rich scene. You’re using your language softeners to 
offer possibilities and let them choose something, and once they’ve selected 
something, you’ll watch their body language to see which one they’re 
selecting. 
 
 
If you’re offering a possibility and you can see they’ve actually for it and you 
go, I think it might be pebbles, don’t you? They’ll go yes, that’s right. If they 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
219 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
say no, then go no, of course not. It isn’t pebbles. So whatever it is, you’re 
right. Make sense? 
 
 
If you’re not sure, then just ask them. Well, what is it? Well, it’s sand. It’s 
yellow sand. Great! Do you see where we’re going with this? The air has a 
certain temperature. Would I be right about that? I wonder if it’s warm or 
cool. You may even pause. I wonder if it’s warm or a bit cool? Which one is 
it?  
 
 
So, whenever there is a possibility that you’re wrong, you’ll throw in a 
language softener. Make sure that you stack the deck in your favor. Don’t 
start putting rhinos on the beach. Unless you’re going to Africa, it’s probably 
very unlikely that’s going to happen. Stick to things that are likely to be 
there, like warmth on a beach, like sand on a beach and so on.  
 
 
In a woodland environment, you’re likely to have green stuff, like leaves. 
You may have some fruit on the trees, maybe not. You may have some 
animals going by and you’ll probably have some dappled sunlight, but it 
doesn’t have to be that way. It could be winter, and it could be fir trees with 
needles rather than leaves. Do you see where I’m going with this? 
 
 
Every time that you’re not entirely sure – in other words, you can’t read the 
signals in terms of what they’re agreeing to, just ask them, which is it? Or is 
it something different? Smile and say, you can tell me, what is it? Its fir 
trees, that’s right. All those fir trees and there’s a smell, isn’t there?  
 
 
Other than that, you’re doing exactly the same thing. Present tense, the 
echo is now replaced by a description. You’re only ever going to offer one 
description at a time so you get to observe their reaction to see whether 
they’ve accepted the description or not.  
 
 
If it absolutely has to be there, like temperature absolutely has to be in the 
air, then throw it out there and the air is a certain temperature. If you’re not 
sure what it’s going to be, but it’s likely to be one thing over another – for 
example, it’s likely to be warm rather than cold or cool rather than warm – 
then you can put in a language softener. Maybe it’s warm. It could be warm. 
Perhaps it’s warm. I wonder if it’s warm. Do you see where we're going with 
this? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
220 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Then watch their reaction. If you still can’t tell, ask. Is it warm? No. Of 
course it’s not. Whatever they say then, you agree with. Of course, it’s not 
it’s cooler, isn’t it? Yes. It’s a cool temperature. Now I wonder if there’s a 
breeze there as well. Yes, there is a breeze, isn’t there? A cool breeze. How 
pleasant to have a cool breeze. Do you see where we're going with this? 
 
 
So really all we’re doing is we’re tying together a whole bunch of stuff we’ve 
been doing over the last few days and putting it together in one. Do you 
think you can do that? Do you want to see a quick example of the setup for 
it? I won’t do that whole thing because I want you guys to discover a little bit 
of it. Who would like to come up here and volunteer for the setup, anyone? 
You’ve already been up here. Come on up. Give her a round of applause. 
Have a seat. Are you good? 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
HR check? Yes? So, is there a scene or a holiday or some experience 
you’ve had that’s pleasant or something you’d like to experience that’s kind 
of pleasant and soothing? 
 
Student: 
I enjoy the mountains here in L.A. I enjoy the mountain views and standing 
on them. 
 
Igor: 
The mountain view in L.A. Have you been to the mountain view in L.A.? 
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. Which mountain view have you been to in L.A.? 
 
Student: 
Off in Bel Air. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. That’s all I need. I don’t want too much because otherwise I’ll 
accidentally go into revivification. Now I’m going to take the concept and I’m 
going to take it out of L.A. why? Because I don’t want to revivify too much of 
her experience, so I want to start creating new ones, so I’m going to stick 
with the theme of mountain experiences. 
 
 
So close your eyes and just experience something on a mountain, with a 
view. Perhaps it’s day time. Is it day time? And there’s that view. It’s so far, 
isn’t it? That’s right. That’s a pleasant view, isn’t it, on that mountain? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
221 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
There’s a certain temperature in the air. I wonder if it’s warm. Oh, it’s cool, 
isn’t it? 
 
 
Did you see the reactions? The question was I wonder if it’s warm, and the 
response was a very tiny slow shake. We’re doing what we just talked 
about. We’re just watching the nonverbal signals. They have a vested 
interest in telling you because the experience is quite nice.  
 
 
 
Whenever you’re ready, feel free to bring yourself back. Does that answer 
your question? 
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. Let’s give her a nice round of applause. I don’t want to do too 
much of it because otherwise I’m sitting here doing all the work, and I’d 
rather you guys explore different ways of doing it for yourself. As a rule, if 
you see too much it stifles you, because you’re trying to do what you saw 
rather than what you should be doing, which is doing it your own way.  
 
 
The keys are very simple. You saw the HR, the meet and greet. You saw a 
simple exploration. We’ve got a theme. This is a mountain theme in this 
case. An experience, shall we say. I’ve removed myself from the actual 
memory of the experience because I want to actually create an experience. 
You heard me switch scenes, switch pace, shall we say.  
 
 
In terms of the exercise, by all means, tell them to close their eyes and 
experience this. You can do it overtly, because these are just training 
wheels to something else right now. So I don’t mind if it’s not conversational. 
If you want to do it conversational, that’s fine too.  
 
 
Instead of echoing, now I’m describing. You heard the language softeners 
when I wasn’t too sure. I’m paying attention to their reactions so I know 
what’s wrong. If I’m not entirely sure, I ask a question and get a clear 
response. Does that make sense? Is that easy to do? Yes? No? All right, 
find a partner and spend about five or six minutes apiece because we want 
to take this further later on. Off you go.  
 
 
How was that? Did you enjoy that? 
 
Students: Oh, yeah.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
222 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Good experience? So you notice how now you’re taking more of a 
leadership role here. You’re starting to take risks when it comes to the 
suggestions you’re giving. Before it was pretty much risk free because you 
were working with their experience. Now you’re working through their 
experience. 
 
 
In other words, you’re using elements of their experience. Everyone has 
experienced coolness and warmth, right? Everyone has experienced a 
breeze or an absence of a breeze. Everyone has experienced comfort or 
discomfort and so on. So now you’re taking these building blocks of 
experiences to recreate something new, which may be related to something 
they’ve already had or something they wished they’d had and so on. Does 
that make sense? 
 
 
Now what we want to do is we want to start taking it a little bit further in 
terms of how much control we have of their inner environment. Do you have 
a quick question? Do you want to come up? 
 
Student: 
I had a little trouble. When I was asking the questions, I found myself going 
into interrogating mode, and I wasn’t doing the practice because it’s new to 
me. I’m learning to use a new tool and I’m using it all. 
 
Igor: 
I understand. What do you mean by interrogation mode? 
 
Student: 
Well, instead of asking him questions to get clues and observing him to see 
if the beach were warm or cold, and he gives me a physical or visual 
response that’s it’s warm. Instead of asking questions that would lead to 
getting the information that I was looking for, I started asking questions just 
to question him, to interrogate. 
 
Igor: 
Give me an example. 
 
Student: 
The water is cold. Then his response was no, it’s not. So it became a 
conversation, rather than an exercise covert. That’s what I’m saying. 
 
Igor: 
So you know when you ask those questions, right? So all you need to do at 
this point is throw in a language softener. Do you remember the language 
softeners from yesterday? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
223 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I wasn’t here yesterday. I think that’s what it is. I just got here today. Hi 
everyone. 
 
Igor: 
Hello. Say hello everyone. What we’ll do is we’ll put you together with one of 
the assistants to catch you up. This is where some of the language 
exercises we did yesterday were all about. There’s something we call 
language softeners. I’ll just go through it very quickly now. It will be a good 
reminder for everyone.  
 
Student: 
Okay. Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
You’re welcome. This is interesting, isn’t it? Is this the page we’re looking 
for? 
 
Students: No. 
 
Igor: 
Okay, better carry on then. Are these the experiences needed? No, but we 
do know what this means, right? I’m just checking. Did we cover this 
yesterday, yes? Hold on a sec, what about this, is that what we’re looking 
for? 
 
 
Do you see these words: maybe, begin to, could and so on? I would call 
these language softeners. They make things less concrete. So perhaps you 
can look at this thing and begin to make sense of it. Perhaps, begin to. You 
could look at this stuff and start introducing it into your questions, and that 
might help you to get a less, shall we say aggressive response.  
 
 
Maybe if you did that, they would start having an experience and evaluating 
for themselves, and then gradually you’d be able to actually read the signals 
rather than having to demand a respond. Does that make sense to you? 
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
We’ll make sure we catch you up on this stuff. 
 
Student: 
I promise to catch up. 
 
Igor: 
It will be easy. Believe me. Any other questions or comments? Come on up. 
 
Student: 
I’m just full of questions today. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
224 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
That’s a good thing. 
 
Student: 
This is more out of complete curiosity, and I think I already know the answer 
myself, but anyhow I just want a confirmation of it.  
 
Igor: 
Sure. 
 
Student: 
When you’re going into trance and you’re going through the visualization, 
but you might find that as you’re going into trance you actually go 
completely off topic in your mind. Like you completely lose everything the 
person is saying. Can you still get hypnotic gifts within that completely losing 
everything that they have? 
 
Igor: 
And what do you believe the answer to that might be? 
 
Student: 
I believe the answer is yes, but I just wanted to confirm that. 
 
Igor: 
I would agree with your answer. I would agree with it quite extensively in 
fact. 
 
Student: 
So it’s still a good sign of trance even if you just completely – your mind just 
completely erases all from it. 
 
Igor: 
What you are describing right now has to do with consciousness, rather 
than with experience. In other words, you’re quite capable of having an 
unconscious experience of one thing whilst consciously you’re in a 
completely different area, having something completely different.  
 
 
For those of you who want to have a daily example of that, have you ever 
felt really happy or really upset for no reason that you could figure out? It’s 
like I don’t know what’s wrong with me. I just feel bad. Or I feel great! Why? 
I don’t know. I just feel great. 
 
 
That’s when your conscious attention and your unconscious attention are on 
totally different things. That’s a classic example. In hypnosis, in fact we’ll be 
getting onto how to do exactly that later on tonight. So it’s very good. Go 
ahead. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
225 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I had quite an amazing experience when I was trying to talk about floating, 
the warm water, and Sean told me that I have to imagine something, like 
imagine that I have a suit that makes my body warm no matter what. It 
doesn’t matter what the water is.  
 
 
Then he asked me what I want and I said I want safe float. He said your suit 
will protect you no matter where you go. It was a total different meaning to 
the whole thing. It doesn’t matter what’s going on, I’m protected. I’m safe 
and comfortable and at ease. So he didn’t go for water cold or warm or 
breeze or no breeze. He just… 
 
Igor: 
So he’s gone the other direction, which is like, let’s not take any chances 
here. Let’s just give you what makes my reality real for you too.   
 
Student: 
Exactly and it worked too. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly because, again, you gave you an option in terms of, here’s a suit 
and, by the way, it can do this. Are you cool with that? Sure. If he had said, 
here’s a suit and you’ll be warm whenever, and you’re like I don’t like suits, 
at that point, I hope a hypnotist should be able to go, hang on a second, 
there’s something not quite right here.  
 
 
Or it could be something else. Like what? I don’t know. What is it that keeps 
you warm and safe? Oh, it’s like a blanket. That’s right, an underwater 
blanket. So you still have that negotiation going on. You have a lot of scope 
with this stuff, don’t you? That was an excellent experience. Thank you for 
sharing that. Come on up. 
 
Student: 
Well, we have a very nice experience. I’m just not 100% sure that we did 
what we were supposed to do.  
 
Igor: 
It happens. 
 
Student: 
It seemed to be that he kept going to his passed experience, as opposed to 
my creating a new experience based on an older experience. 
 
Igor: 
That’s fine. That will happen sometimes, especially if they’re so closely 
correlated. They’ll take themselves to that, as an example of what you’re 
talking about. There’s no big deal with that. The bigger issue is, have you 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
226 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
been able to create an experience inside their mind that they really haven’t 
told you much about? That’s the key thing. 
 
Have you all done something like that? Have you created an experience 
inside their mind that wasn’t there before and that they haven’t told you 
about. You’ve only gotten some loose, general directions about. In time you 
can actually do this where you just select experiences for them.  
 
 
Be it a mountainside or swimming in the water or whatever it is, and you 
give them enough selection and you observe which one they respond to 
best and go, I think today if I were you, I’d go to the mountainside. Inside 
they’re going, yes, I wanted to go to the mountains! Do you see where we're 
going with this? 
 
 
What I would like to do is explore some ways of making that a little bit more 
powerful if we could. Really, one of the main things we’re doing here is 
we’ve been taking their attention and moving it through the senses, haven’t 
we? To use the beach, for example, because that’s what we started with, at 
the beach we’ve got temperature of the air.  
 
 
We’ve got the sight of the ocean waves, the sound of the ocean waves. 
Perhaps we have some birds flying around, maybe some seagulls. Who 
knows? If there were some seagulls there, perhaps they would make some 
sounds, those cries that they do. 
 
 
Incidentally, do you notice what’s happening right now inside your minds? 
Who here is kind of experiencing a little seagull swirling around somewhere 
in the back of their mind? Do you see how subtle it can be? I’m just talking 
in theoretical terms, hypothetical terms, which are very difficult to resist. 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
Here’s what we started playing with the language of attention. Where 
attention goes, energy flows is the basic principle here. Where attention 
goes, energy flows. If you can move their attention onto something, it 
becomes real for them. If I can move your attention to the possibility of a 
seagull, it becomes more real, the possibility that you might consider a 
seagull somewhere floating over some beach. Perhaps that seagull 
becomes more real when you consider its wing span opening up, so it floats 
in the breeze. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
227 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You can consider that seagull in comparison to any other seagull you’ve 
seen in your life. Notice its graceful movements. Notice what just happened 
there? How much more vivid or real did that seagull become inside your 
mind in just that short little segment, anyone? Did it increase or decrease 
the, shall we say, reality tone on that idea of the seagull? Increase.  
 
 
Why? Did you notice how I’m cycling through their attention and focusing it 
back on the seagull in different ways over and over. Each time a little bit 
more energy goes into this mental seagull so it becomes a little bit more 
real. Do you see how that works? 
 
How can we grab their attention? What kind of language gets their 
attention? What kind of language moves direction? Notice. If I tell you to 
notice a seagull or perhaps you can notice a seagull, if I want to hedge my 
bet a little bit. Notice directs the mind, doesn’t it? What other words direct 
your mind? Imagine. 
 
Student: 
Compare. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a sneaky one. I like that one. Compare. Consider. Realize, that’s a 
good one too. Think. 
 
Student: 
Feel. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you very much. Now we’re going through the senses. See an 
experience. 
 
Student: 
Taste. 
 
Igor: 
Taste, of course, and then we have smell too.  
 
Student: 
Remember. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you, that’s an excellent one, very few people actually come up with. 
Remember. Recall. Remember some seagull that you’ve seen in the past.  
 
 
Remember that seagull and then compare it to the one that we might be 
seeing on this beach. Aside from whatever this seagull might be on this 
beach, consider the possibility that it’s floating on the breeze. Just think 
about what that would look like. Could you hear it crying? As you think about 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
228 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that seagull, can you just realize that it’s got a wide wing span? Notice how 
calmly it floats. 
 
 
Do you see how it just starts cycling through the same experiences and it 
begins adding more and more layers of reality onto it each time? Would it be 
fair to say that you got a sense of that? Yes?  
 
 
Notice, consider, realize, think, feel, see, really these words are not the 
important things. They’re just what we came up with here. What matters is 
the principle. These are all words that direct attention from one place to 
another. Make sense?  
 
 
So I’d like to experience a little bit with attention of language. Let’s not stick 
it into this induction just yet. The thing I want to do is, just go and find a 
different partner and just spend a minute or two moving the direction 
around. You can use these things nakedly if you want. Like notice the sound 
in the room. Feel the backs of your chair. So there’s an actual experience 
they’re having right now. 
 
 
You can also add your language softeners for more extreme experiences. 
Perhaps you can remember another time that you sat in a room. Maybe you 
might begin to smell or remember the smell or the taste of a favorite meal. 
Do you see where we're going with this? All I want you to do is cycle 
through their experience in terms of something they absolutely have to 
agree to, or will agree to in the softened form. That’s pretty much it. You can 
do sensations, things they feel here in the room, see here in the room, hear 
here in the room or even smell in this room– sniff, sniff. 
 
 
You can take a walk through their recollections, their memory and their 
thoughts. How might you do this? How will turn attention to their thoughts? 
Interesting idea, isn’t it? You can consider that idea for a while, can you not? 
Perhaps you can think about something that’s important to you. Maybe 
that’s something like the way people should be treated or should treat you. 
Most people think that it’s important to treat someone else well. I think 
you’re that kind of person.  
 
 
Of course, whilst you’re doing this, watch the other person. See if they’re 
agreeing with you. If you say, most people think that other people should be 
treated with respect and they go, ah well, then maybe this person doesn’t 
think that. Maybe some people deserve it and some people don’t. Who 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
229 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
knows? Just observe. You’re looking for a mental yes constantly, as you’re 
cycling through these things.  
 
 
The easiest thing to cycle through is the physical experience – see, hear, 
feel right now in the room. Then you have memories and recollections. You 
have universal experiences.  
 
4. How many people here had a bike when they were young or have 
been on a bike at least once in their life?  
5. How many people here learned to drive a car?  
6. How many people here went to school?  
7. How many people here made a friend when they were young?  
8. How many people here lost a friend when they were young?  
9. How many people here had an argument with a friend that they 
then made up with later?  
 
 
Some of you have never had an argument with a friend that you made up 
with again? Let’s try that again. How many people here had an argument 
with a friend and made up later? All right, I was just making sure about this. 
 
 
These are universal human experiences, aren’t they? So they belong on our 
list. We’re moving their attention to something, and they’ll agree to it. Does 
that make sense? So, the canned version of this is what people talk about. 
Oh, you’re sitting in the chair, you’re breathing, you’re feeling the sensations 
of this and you’re hearing my voice. All very well and good, but not very 
conversational, is it?  
 
 
We’re sitting on a bus and your shoes are untied, and one of your socks is 
rolled down. I mean at this point, you’d be forgiving the person for thinking 
that you’re a little bit autistic. You’re just listing facts that are apparently to 
everyone. It’s not a very conversational thing that you can do. 
 
 
To make it conversational, it’s okay to include some things that are in their 
current environment, but you want to go beyond that to mental experiences, 
to things they’ll agree with in terms of this, is how the world is and how the 
world works, recollections, universal experiences and that sort of stuff. Do 
you see where we're going with this? 
 
 
I’d like you to get really creative with this. Really have fun with this. The 
intention is not to create a trance – although it you want to get into the whole 
H+ thing, by all means, experiment to see if you can put them into a trance 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
230 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
just by having a lot of H+ and talking about experiences that they have to 
agree with and just see what happens. But that’s not the main purpose.  
 
 
The purpose is just that you’re using the language of attention to navigate 
their attention through their experiences. And just notice that you can do 
that and how rich a variety of experiences are available to you. Does that 
make sense? Go ahead, a quick question? If it’s not a quick question, do 
you mind coming up here so that we can all hear properly. Otherwise, I’ll 
just have to repeat it for everyone. Just come up front. That’s fine. 
 
Student: 
As we use this intentional language and the exercise is to first engage their 
senses about things that are in the room, and then we can expand beyond 
that and talk about these universal experiences. I thought that was a third 
category that you thought we could catch onto.  
 
Igor: 
There are many different categories and I invite you to find them all. 
 
Student: 
Okay. 
 
Igor: 
And then you can tell me afterward what it is I missed. 
 
Student: 
There’s something to be said for improvisational jazz. 
 
Igor: 
I agree with you. I think that’s a great metaphor. I’d stick to that one, or not. 
 
 
Okay, are you ready for the exercise? Just spend three or so minutes 
apiece one way. Just roll with it. You should find that at some point it might 
get a little awkward, and there comes a point where it just clicks, and it’s just 
impossible to not have something to say. See if you can find that point. Off 
you go. 
 
 
Did the exercise go well in terms of you guys responding to things like a bit 
of animation? Interesting stuff, right, do you notice how after a while you 
have an infinite variety of responses? The reason why people sometimes 
don’t know what to say, really has to do more with, that there’s so much 
choice. You don’t know where to begin. Not really what to do because 
there’s not enough choice. Would that be accurate in terms of your 
experience? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
231 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now I’d like to turn this into something a little bit practical. I should turn 
these things off actually so they don’t interfere. I’d like to turn this into 
something practical so we can finish up on something a little bit more 
practical at the end of the day. You’ll be familiar with this in different guises. 
Some of you have come across this as the concept of a piggyback 
suggestion or a piggyback induction. Some of you will come across this as a 
pacing and leading induction or something like that.  
 
 
The basic idea is this. You want to get them to a yes. Remember the 
compliance stuff we did at the beginning of Day 1? Can you stand over here 
please? Can you stand over there? You’re trying to get them to a yes to see 
the quality of the yes that you’re getting. Plus if they’re saying yes to these 
things, it creates an avalanche of agreement. So that when you start 
suggestion things like, their hands are stuck and they cannot move, their 
mind’s going to go, okay. Everything else was true too. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
That’s a classic example of pacing and leading. So you had to pace. Can 
you stand over here? It’s a little bit of a lead, but an experience they can 
refer to. You’re here and you’ll do this and these things are going on and 
that sort of stuff and so on, and now your hands are stuck.   
 
 
What the mind is doing is it’s going yep, yep, yep, yep, yep. The momentum 
has been built up. Over time, you’ll need less of these to get one of these. 
Eventually, all you’ll need is these. Does that make sense?  
 
 
Let me give you an example of the early days of where this came from. 
Again, Dr. Milton Erickson, a great hypnotist and an amazing hypnotherapist 
and psychiatrist. If you read his papers, there are huge volumes of them, but 
one of this favorite approaches to doing stuff is he’ll take a very detailed 
interview, like a personal history. What order were you born in terms of your 
family relationships and how many brothers and sisters do you have and 
that sort of stuff? The situation, the problem, and he’d take the shebang. 
 
 
Then he’d sit there and he had the time and could afford to do this. He’d sit 
there and sometimes up to a half an hour or an hour, he’d rattle just a list of 
facts that they told him. So your name is John. You live in so and so. You 
have a brother. He’s older than you by two years.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
232 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The person is going yes, yes, yes, yes. It’s just moving his whole mind down 
that one direction. Then at the end of this spiel, he says now you’ve come to 
me for help and I’m going to help you.  
 
 
What is that?  
 
Students: Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Can you see like a massive expectation? Now, there’s stuff he will do 
at the end of it. Sometimes he’ll put some shock in there. I can help you, but 
it’s going to be shocking, and when you hear it, you won’t want to hear it, 
but then you’ll think about it and you’ll really have to do it. These are all 
classic suggestions, and he’s built them on the back of a yes set. Make 
sense? 
 
 
 
The classic pacing and leading induction is normally when people say, okay, 
you’re sitting in this chair and you’re breathing in and out, and you’re 
blinking, so you’re going into hypnosis.  
 
 
Can you hear the yes, yes, yes, yes and one little lead? Then over a period 
of time, he can say, "And as you hear the sound of voice and the air 
conditioning humming in the background, you can feel even more 
comfortable as you continue deeper into trance. ", fewer of these, more of 
these. 
 
 
So the pictures starts slowing becoming more like this. Eventually, it’s like 
this, and then eventually it will be like this. You can keep cycling back to 
things they’ll agree to, especially if you’re not too sure of how they’ll 
respond, then you’ll do a couple of safety hedges and so on. 
 
 
There’s only one problem with this induction, as far as conversational 
hypnosis is concerned. Any guesses what that might be? Too long is part of 
it, but it’s pretty obvious. You’re sitting in a chair. You’re listening to me. 
We’re going back to the autistic induction from before, right? Not many 
conversations go this way. However, hopefully you’ll have discovered by 
now that with some of the intentional language, you can navigate through all 
kinds of experiences that people can have and must agree to.  
 
 
Consider the fact that you’ve been in here for at least two days, right? In 
those two days, you’ve had many different experiences. Some of them 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
233 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you’ve understood instantly. Some of them took a while in developing and 
understanding. Some of them you might even be a little clueless about. 
Perhaps you don’t quite know yet what it’s all about. The interesting thing is 
that you’re still here and you’re continuing to want to learn more. 
 
 
Now it’s not always been easy, but you’ve persevered enough to be here. 
Today, at the end of the second day, which means it’s going to get easier as 
time goes by because all the pieces are going to start to come together. 
Right now, you’re still collecting the pieces. The more those pieces come 
together, the easier it will start to be for you. 
 
 
Now I know you’ve had experiences of learning something in the past. 
Some of those things were very easy. Not because the subject matter was 
easy, but because your interest was high. You enjoyed it. You wanted to 
learn, and you learned, did you not? 
 
 
So learning is easy when you want it. I believe that you really want to learn 
hypnosis, maybe. Maybe enough to make it easier than you thought it would 
be. So as time goes by, you begin to find yourself doing hypnotic things and 
not even realizing until afterward just how good it was. Let’s face it, you all 
have a lifetime of experiences that you can remember, especially the 
enjoyable ones, and know that the more enjoyable things will come. 
 
 
Everyone knows that the difficult times are merely lessons waiting to be 
discovered. So whether you’re having lessons being discovered right now or 
some part of your mind is going to the past to relieve you of the burden of 
whatever happened back then, a lesson can be learned that makes your life 
easier, doesn’t it? 
 
 
Now you don’t need to know what that is yet. After all, you have an 
unconscious mind, do you not? It’s kept you safely protected from so many 
things. Some of those things you really didn’t need to think about and you 
still don’t, until your unconscious mind has taken those memories of difficult 
times and learned something. Learned enough that you can let it go and just 
feel good. Good enough to learn more. Make life easier.  
 
 
One of the greatest lessons that you can learn is that you have an 
unconscious mind. And your unconscious mind is great. It’s protected you 
all these years. Those accidents that could have been so serious, but you 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
234 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
survived. It healed you when you were sick or injured. It protected you when 
you didn’t know what to do.  
 
When you didn’t have the skills to cope with something, it made sure that 
you acquired them as time went by, and it’s continuing to do so right now at 
this moment. You’ve all come here to learn something, and yet, you never 
thought about why you were driven to learn hypnosis, of all things, that your 
unconscious knows an opportunity is here to grow as a person. 
 
 
When you grow as person, you connect more fully inside yourself, becoming 
more real as a person, a human being and the way we’re supposed to be. 
Confident, calm and strong, vibrant and charismatic, and above all else we 
have the capacity to learn so much. Nothing else comes close to the human 
capacity for learning. You’ve had a lifetime of lessons that you’ve learned. 
Some of them you didn’t like to learn. Yet you learned them regardless. 
Others you were thrilled to learn. 
 
 
The more you learn and grow, the safer life becomes because you have the 
capacity to take any situation and master it now. Things are happening 
inside, aren’t they? Perhaps your thoughts have slowed down, calmer 
inside. Maybe you even have a good feeling. That’s right. 
 
 
It’s good to have that good feeling. A sign from your unconscious mind that 
something good is happening, and you can feel that, can you not? Because 
something good is happening. I’m sure you’ll realize just how easy it is to 
trust your unconscious. Make positive, healthy changes. Grow as a person 
and learn. Think about it. You can’t, not learn. Even if you think you’re not 
learning, you’re learning something. You’re discovering something, and 
there are many ways to do this. 
 
 
The memory is a funny thing. Did you know the memory changes? Recalling 
an event from the past now is different to when it happened. Many people 
have found the joy of discovering the problems from the past change each 
time they recollect them because you change. So your relationship to the 
past changes now. 
 
 
I wonder how much better you can feel as you contemplate only enough of 
your past to feel good. How much better can you feel right now? To change 
the past by recollecting some of it with a quiet, calm, good feeling inside and 
all the time, things continue to occur outside of your awareness. Isn’t it nice 
to know that you get to enjoy it by a comfortable nap, a daydream, a night 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
235 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
dream, a dream in which a new personality emerges? The person you’ve 
always known you could be. 
 
 
You might not be aware that baby’s sleep more than they’re awake. Young 
children sleep less than babies but more than adults. In that special state, 
they get to dream themselves into being, making important connections in 
the brain, in their minds. It happens automatically. Each night when you 
dream, I wonder how often you’ll dream something that helps you grow and 
change, that makes you feel better and more capable?  
 
 
It’s happened before. You’re no longer the same person you were when you 
were five years old or two years old or 10 years old or 20 or any age. You’ve 
changed. You don’t know how most of those changes occurred. That’s a 
good thing because those changes can continue to occur outside of your 
awareness. All you need to notice is how good it is. How positive. How 
much better you feel and how much more of your past is different now. 
 
 
That kind of makes sense, doesn’t it? So I have an idea that you can talk 
about more experiences than just about their toes wiggling in their shoes or 
the seat of their pants touching against their skin. Not that these things are 
invalid. Like in a hypnotherapy clinic, they’re valid, aren’t they? You can do it 
quite easily and its great induction to use, but we’re here to use 
conversational hypnosis, aren’t we? 
 
 
Who here could imagine themselves having a pep talk with someone, 
someone they care about, in ways that are not dissimilar to what you’ve just 
experienced? Would there be two out there in terms of a normal 
conversation? It would require that I context. You don’t necessarily walk up 
to a stranger and do this, would you? But given the right context, the right 
setting and the right relationship – which is, after all, what we’ve spent so 
much time developing so far. Would this not be an absolutely appropriate 
conversation to have with someone?   
 
 
Is this making sense in a very different way to you right now? I know you 
have some questions. Some of you might not even want to ask them in 
public. So the only question I have is, do you want to ask the question first 
and then do an exercise, or would you rather just dive in whilst it’s all fresh 
in your experience? Do it and save all the questions until afterward? That’s 
what I thought. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
236 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So find a different partner. Maintain the state you have right now because 
that will help you do this. Then just see where it takes you. Remember, all 
you’re doing is getting some absolute yeses and adding some suggestions 
to the end. I’m not going to give you any more guidance on that because 
you know much more than I do about how you need to speak to people 
about this, don’t you? Off you go. 
 
 
Was this easy? Folks, was this easy? 
 
Students: Oh yeah. 
 
 
Igor: 
Easy to do? How do you guys feel so far? Who here feels like a good 
hypnotist? A competent hypnotist?  
 
 
Consider what’s happened, folks. How many days have we been together? 
Two days? Would you have guessed that you’d get this far after just two 
days of conversational hypnosis training? First, I would give yourself a 
round of applause, for you, because you guys did this. I can only work with 
what you guys have got. 
 
 
I’d like for you guys to really appreciate how far you’ve come because really 
it’s a little bit more interesting than you think. For example, who here knows 
how to do an instant induction? Instant induction is pretty straightforward. I 
mean if you don’t, please come and see me because we’ll fix it up pretty 
quickly. Sleep!   
 
 
Who here has a solid grasp of hypnotic language? Power words, hypno 
themes, some language softeners, some hot words. I’m not asking for an 
expert level or a mastery level yet. We’ve got a solid grasp and then that 
evolves with practice and experience. So we have hypnotic language. 
 
 
Who here thinks they have, again, a reasonable grasp of the hypnotic 
qualities? Things like H+, the ability to speak in a hypnotic voice. We call 
these performance skills. You know, pausing at the right time, letting them 
process stuff and so on. Yes?  
 
 
Who here understands? Again, the core hypnotic principles that we’ve been 
talking about in terms of the, well, I may as well show it. The ABS formula 
agreement, compliance, authority, contrast and context all these things, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
237 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
who’s got a reasonable grasp of these things? So we’ve got some hypnotic 
principles.  
 
 
Who here understands how unconscious rapport works? Do you understand 
that? Who here is reasonably confident that you can do it, not necessarily all 
the time, every way you want to, but in enough places that you can grow 
that skill? Yes? Let’s face it, we still have eight days to keep growing that 
skill, right?  
 
 
Who here has the ability to recognize unconscious signals and are starting 
to recognize what some of these things mean? Again, you don’t have to be 
an expert at this yet, but enough that you see more now, more of the world 
opened up to you now than it was before. Yes? 
 
 
Who here feels that they can just do an induction just by talking to someone, 
or even not even talking, but just by creating a feedback loop, anyone? Who 
here feels reasonable competent to bring back to life pretty much any 
experience someone’s had just by talking to them about it?  
 
 
So you can revivify, plus you can do it conversationally. Wouldn’t that be 
reasonably fair to say? Which is an extra skill by the way, that’s actually an 
extra complication. 
 
 
Who here feels that they can control or direct people’s attention to different 
things and hence, enhance it? You can even put that into a whole induction 
sequence so you can have what seems like a regular pep talk, but really it’s 
a whole pacing and leading thing. Yes, a reasonable control or grasp of the 
pacing and leading induction.  
 
 
This is just a summary of what we’ve been through so far. I mean there are 
a lot of other things I haven’t put on that list. How to create hypnotic 
phenomenon, like a stiff arm and locking that out. With the nuances within 
the hypnotic principle and so on, within the performance skill, the H+ and 
the unconscious rapport and so on, there are a lot of nuances within that as 
well. So this is just a little summary, but doesn’t it look like an impressive 
list? 
 
 
If this was the list of things you signed up for, for this course, wouldn’t that 
be pretty much like, well, that’s ticked off what I came here for? Guess 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
238 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
what? We have eight days left. This is only the foundation on which we will 
build all the stuff I actually want to do with you all.  
 
 
Personally, I really hope you’re excited because we’re going to go very deep 
down Alice’s rabbit hole starting tomorrow morning. So with that happy 
thought, I strongly recommend the same exercises you did yesterday for 
tonight. Do an instant induction and give someone an instant smile or an 
inner smile. Tomorrow morning do the same thing. The more we practice 
the inner smile it drives your hypnotic rapport. 
 
 
If you have hypnotic rapport, it’s the thing that creates the hypnotic context 
that allows you to do all this wonderful hypnotic juju stuff. If you have that, 
then honestly, all you have to do is look at someone and go 'That’s right'. 
The rest is history, personal history. 
 
 
So it’s really in your interest to take time and the effort to do this. I know 
you’re getting a little bit tired. It’s been a long day, but really this is a good 
time to do it. Drill it in and make it such a natural part of who you are, that 
switching it on is second nature to you. After all, let me ask you this. Is it 
pleasant having someone give you an inner smile? Is that a pleasant 
experience? Why not do more of it? It’s just an idea or one might say, just a 
suggestion. 
 
 
All right. I’ll see you bright and breezy tomorrow morning. Thank you very 
much. Is there a question related to this? Come on up. 
 
Student: 
The question is after building up some yeses, by using the notice and 
tension things, I took a chance, took a risk and just asked the person to sort 
of do the stuck feet induction. It kind of worked, at least from my perception. 
It worked because when I asked the person to move his feet, he didn’t move 
the feet, but after maybe five seconds he said, should I?  
 
♦ What do you do in this case? 
 
Igor: 
What’s the purpose? I mean if you’re talking about street hypnosis, there 
are a lot of things, which we’re not really talking about here. If you want, I’ll 
have to answer that separately because it’s not conversational hypnosis.  
 
 
Essentially, what’s happened is, as you said, you took a risk. You moved 
too fast. Another principle that may come in here is the Law of Success of 
Approximations. You just move across things bit by bit by bit. Now the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
239 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
chances are that you probably succeeded. One of the ways a suggestion 
can be taken is, that he forgets to move his feet or even forgets how to 
move his feet temporarily.  
 
 
We’ve all had this. I mean I had this once when I was driving a car and I 
forgot which one is the brake and which one is the accelerator. It was a very 
interesting moment. Luckily, my foot remembered at the last moment, so 
that was a very happy time. 
 
 
That’s a typical way people can respond, just a very quick rule of thumb on 
that sort of thing. I call it the wash, rinse, repeat formula. If a suggestion 
doesn’t take, wash your hands of it – in other words, let it go – rinse – so let 
them forget about it and go back to something that already worked to get an 
agreement again.  
 
 
So let’s say they felt good, so you go back to them feeling good and 
reinforce that. Then slowly build up to the repeat. So build up other things to 
repeat. We will talk about things like dissociation and imagery and all these 
other things to make it more vivid so the suggestion takes more fully so it 
becomes a stronger experience. Then that’s more likely to take as well. 
 
Student: 
Right, but I attached this thing to the emotion side of him. I sort of gave him 
a choice. If you want to break this nice feeling being grown inside of you, 
just move your feet, and he didn’t move his feet.  
 
Igor: 
So he succeeded then. 
 
Student: 
But then he said, should I? If I said try it and then my expectation is that he 
would have actually moved his feet. 
 
 
Igor: 
Honestly, it’s impossible to tell without actually seeing what’s happening at 
that point. Now we’re getting into little minutia. In terms of principles, you got 
a good result to start with. You can reverse it in terms of should I? Do you 
want to? No. Well, then don’t. That’s a simple way of dealing with it.  
 
 
You can enhance a suggestion by saying those feet are getting more and 
more stuck. Try to move them, but really the more you try, the better you 
feel and the more they get stuck. Then you just enhance that separation. 
You can put in a conscious/unconscious dissociation. So you think you want 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
240 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
to move those feet, but really your unconscious mind is going to keep them 
firmly stuck.  
 
 
Experience yourself watching you body and not moving your feet but 
wanting to. The more you try to move them, the more they don’t. Do you see 
there are a lot of places you can go with this? 
 
 
If you want to know more about that honestly, come to the walk up street 
hypnosis training that’s what we’ll be focusing on there. This is 
conversational hypnosis, which has more to do with the influencing, the 
being a force for good and that sort of stuff. I apologize and I’ll happily talk 
to you more in private about that, but it’s not part of this.  
 
Student: 
That’s fine. The memory of the walk up hypnosis course in London, I saw 
fresh today and I just couldn’t resist trying that.  
 
Igor: 
I understand that. As I say, I’ll happily talk to you about how to tweak that on 
that side, but it goes beyond the scope of what we’re doing here. 
 
Student: 
All right. Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
No worries. Any other quick comments or questions before we wrap up?  
 
Student: 
I have a question about trance. I once heard a stage hypnotist say that a 
strong mind goes into trance easier than a weak mind. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a re-frame. 
 
Student: 
 
♦ Do you believe that it’s a trick? 
 
Igor: 
It’s a re-frame. It just makes people more likely to respond. They think like, 
I’m not feeble-minded. No. The fact of the matter is what you require is their 
attention. If someone has good attention, then the chances of trance 
occurring are high.  
 
 
There is a mild correlation between intelligence and trance. That’s true, but 
beyond that, really it’s more a statement designed to motivate people to 
respond well, rather than anything else.   
 
Student: 
All right. So it doesn’t matter actually. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
241 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Yeah, I mean what’s a strong mind? What’s a weak mind? What the hell 
does that mean? Think about it. 
 
Student: 
When you go into your frames, for example, if someone is really confident 
and sure of what they’re doing, and he doesn’t have to prove anything to 
anyone. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! You ask that person if someone is really confident and sure of 
what he’s doing, are you confident enough to enjoy hypnosis now? 
 
Student: 
All right. 
 
Igor: 
Right. So I think this idea of a strong or a weak mind doesn’t fit with what we 
currently know about how the mind works. It’s not like a muscle in terms of 
you have good or bad memory. You have strong or weak attention. You 
have better or worse decision-making skills and so on. You can’t say a mind 
is strong or weak. It just doesn’t exist. Make sense?  
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. That was a great question. Sometimes we have to hand these 
things out, don’t we? 
 
Student: 
I have one very brief question. We were doing the redirection or the 
directing of somebody, I was taught that most people don’t visually imagine 
things. I’m fairly auditory, so I tend to go to that direction and afterward the 
person asked me directly. He said, "I’m more visual." 
 
Igor: 
In terms of visualizing, I’ll give you this very briefly. We’ll cover this more as 
we go into other things tomorrow. Everyone visualizes. You cannot, not 
visualize it’s just that some people are aware of their imagery and some of 
them are not.  
 
 
So, to take it all out of the equation then there are two things you can do.  
 
♦ 
One is perhaps you’ll even see the bird over there.  
 
♦ 
The other thing is just to take it out of the sensory realm and say, just 
consider your kitchen for a moment, consider your living room or consider your 
friend.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
242 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Think about that person. You know what they look like. Perhaps if you were 
there, you might even touch that person and notice a sensation of the 
contact with their coat or something like that. 
 
 
So you can describe everything you want in visual terms. It just doesn’t 
seem visual because you’re talking about thinking, memory, considering 
and so on. As long as you take the pressure off them actually having to 
recognize a visual input, most people will visualize it without realizing it. 
Make sense? 
 
Student: 
Yes. Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
In conversations, it happens all the time. Can you imagine that? I was there 
and this guy was standing here, and this other person was standing there. 
Then the person goes, what did you do to him? They’re seeing the same 
person, right? It’s just that unconscious mind is filling in the gaps. That’s 
pretty much how it works.  
 
 
DVD 9:  How to Isolate the Conscious Mind & 
Access the Unconscious Mind Directly 
 
Igor: 
Good morning, everyone. 
 
Students: Good morning. 
 
Igor: 
Who here feels good? How many of you did the inner smile yesterday or 
today? Okay, a few more of you. Those hands are starting to come up. 
That’s good. Remember, the inner smile is, apart from the fact that it’s fun 
and easy to do in terms of the induction itself, it is going to be the foundation 
of getting the H+ right, the hypnotic rapport right. That in itself, will take care 
of so many problems.  
 
 
You saw the gentleman who, basically, just with his hypnotic rapport had 
people asking to be hypnotized. Complete strangers. Now in the normal 
hypnosis world, that’s relatively rare, unless they’re like high school kids that 
just want to try things out, that people ask you for that. I strongly encourage 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
243 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you to really train that into you because whilst you’re here, you may as well 
use a room full of hypnotists to help you out with that.   
 
 
Are there any interesting stories from last night? Did anyone do anything 
interesting?   
 
Student: 
Good morning. Something interesting happened. I have no clue what it is. 
 
Igor: 
That’s always a good start. 
 
Student: 
I woke up this morning and felt like a different person.  
 
Igor: 
No, I hope it has nothing to do with me. Who are you? Did you pay for this 
seminar? 
 
Student: 
Yes, but I have been into hypnosis for a while. I’ve been in NLP a few times, 
but something clicked last night. I like to sleep and I wake up and go back, 
but something told me to just wake up and do stuff. I felt like a completely 
different person. 
 
Igor: 
Good for you. I think that’s worthwhile. Good stuff. 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Anyone else? 
 
Student: 
I had a strange experience where I was sleeping, my beeper went off on 
vibrate and it was right at my belt, except for I didn’t have any beeper there. 
It was clear as day. I must have hallucinated a beeper that went off. It 
buzzed for 10 seconds or so. I figured well, I better go look at it and answer 
the call.  
 
I got up and went around and found my phone, called my wife and she said 
she has just started reading a book and was thinking strongly about me.  
 
Igor: 
Wow interesting! Oh good we have some more people. Come on up. 
 
Student: 
The strangest thing happened yesterday while you were talking about the 
seagull.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
244 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Several decades ago, when I was a much younger man, I was able to 
visualize. I used to get auditory as well as pictures. Well, I haven’t done it in 
a great while. Yesterday you were talking about the seagull and I was sitting 
in the back listening and all of the sudden I’m seeing the seagull, total wing 
span outstretched and soaring, just gliding on the currents of the air, tail 
feathers rippling and guiding it.  
 
 
Then I hear the bird making a little sound. I’m hearing it several times over 
and over, I was dumbfounded I could not believe it. 
 
Igor: 
That’s awesome. See your unconscious has been able to do this all along.  
 
Student: 
Yes, but it hasn’t done it in a very long time. I was totally amazed. 
 
Igor: 
Great job.  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
By the way, this is one of the reasons I like the indirect method. Sometimes 
being direct is fantastic and it’s the right thing to do, but then as we get more 
and more into indirect suggestions, you’ll find that you can evoke these 
experiences. It’s very low risk in one sense, but the unconscious mind goes 
I’ll give you the pictures now, I’ll do this now.  
 
 
So it allows people to get an experience without having to feel the pressure 
too much over what if I can’t do it, which, of course, could interfere with the 
whole process. Does that make sense? Good stuff. Well done. Go on. 
 
Student: 
So I’m staying at that place – I don’t know if anybody’s from Los Angeles, 
but Englewood is a very interesting area here. It’s like Compton. Last night 
I’m going to the only grocery store that’s open and available for me to get 
cough stuff because I have bit of a sore throat.  
 
 
I’m coming out and there’s an older homeless woman standing there and 
she comes up to me and asks me for $3. I said, "I don’t have $3, but I can 
give you something better than that." She said, "What do you do?" I said, 
"I’m a hypnotist." I did the entire instant induction in the middle of the 
parking lot at Ralph’s with a homeless lady. 
Igor: 
Good job.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
245 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Homeless people of the world beware. All right, I like what I’m hearing. This 
is great stuff. Hopefully, you’re getting the sense now that the seminar room 
is just preparing you for something. It’s when you take it outside and you do 
things out there. That’s where it really counts otherwise you’ll be coming 
back to seminar after seminar after seminar – which I have no problem with 
as long as they’re mine.  
 
 
But it’s really about you developing your skills. It’s about you making this a 
part of how you communicate, how you do things, so life gets easier for you 
and it gets easier for the people around you, too. Does that kind of make 
sense? 
 
 
So what I want you to do now is just spend a few minutes looking at what 
we’ve got so far. On the first day, we really focused on hypnotic language. 
We’ve got the idea of the power words. Then we had the language 
softeners and we had the trance themes. We had the similes to really 
enhance the trance a little bit as well. So we’ve got the core of the language 
that takes people from one experience all the way to another experience. 
Make sense? 
 
 
This is very important. We’ve put our performance elements, which are like 
your H+, your tonality, your rhythm, your pauses, it kind of breathes life into 
what you’re doing. Otherwise, you’re just reading a script or reading from a 
book, which sometimes has an effect absolutely because the language can 
still work, and people can let themselves go into the ideas and so on, but 
you’re still taking a bit of a risk because it may or may not work the way you 
want it to. 
 
 
Then we’ve had two major inductions so far. The first one was the 
revivification and the second one was the pace and lead, if you recall. Now, 
do you recall the 'That’s right' exercise? That’s right, you do, don’t you? 
 
 
Essentially, what that is called is the utilization principle. The way I like to 
define it – it’s just a little easier for me to think about it – is the no fault/no 
failure. In other words, whatever happens is exactly the right thing.  
 
 
You’re encouraging what is already trance like and what isn’t trance like 
gets re-framed, it gets redirected into being trance like. Do you see how that 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
246 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
works? So, the utilization thing, the whole 'That’s right' response and so on 
only really works if you have the right context. That’s what your performance 
is about, your state, H+, hypnotic rapport and all that sort of stuff. Does that 
make sense? 
 
 
We’ll be coming back to this diagram and adding more things as we go 
along. I just wanted to give you a sense of where we’ve gotten so far.  
 
 
Do you notice how we talked about layering together different skills and 
creating this bundle that becomes very robust. If you start doing all these 
things at once, already you’ve got a pretty sophisticated hypnotic process 
for conversational hypnosis, don’t you? You can sit down and have a chat 
with someone and really blow their mind just with this alone. 
 
 
Now we’re going to add more things. We’re going to make that diagram look 
more complex, more sophisticated and so on. You can do all of these things 
at the same time. Just bear in mind you’re going to start getting to a point 
soon where you don’t have to do everything at the same time.  
 
 
I think the language and this core thread in the middle will always stay, but 
then you might spend more time utilizing whatever has happened. Or you 
might focus more on pacing or something. Or you might focus more on a 
revivification to get an experience up or whatever else we’re doing. 
 
 
Just because it’s on the diagram, just because you’ve learned it doesn’t 
mean you have to use it every time. Is that fair? We’re going to be adding 
more stuff today, If you want to use them all at the same time, great. Knock 
yourself out. It will be a lot of fun, and people will be puddles of 
consciousness on the floor, but you don’t have to. You’ve got to be able to 
grade it according to the situation that you’re in because not everything 
requires a shotgun. Make sense? 
 
 
What I want to do today is – let’s start it this way. Everyone stand up please. 
Put your pens and papers down. I think this is a good way to start the 
morning. Go around and find one person. Do the inner smile with them and 
then come back. You have two minutes to go both ways and be sitting in 
your seats again. Off you go.  
 
 
You should be on the second person by now. So is everyone smiling? Is 
anyone frowning in here? No? Good.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
247 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Yesterday we talked about the whole pacing and leading construction. You 
get them to acknowledge or agree to something. Yes, yes, this is true, this is 
true. Then you can add a suggestion, which they’ll kind of follow-up on. Did 
you enjoy that induction yesterday? 
 
 
Remember, the construction starts with mostly things that are absolutely 
true and verifiable to some degree. It’s true for them in their reality. Then 
just a few little suggestions that move them a little bit in one direction. Over 
time, you need fewer of these, and you can do more of these and they can 
be more dramatic. Eventually, you can be leading all the way, and they’ll 
pretty much just following along.   
 
 
We have a lot of different ways of doing this, don’t we? There are a lot of 
different things you can do it. You can pace some memories on 
experiences, universal experiences, on hopes and dreams, on values and 
beliefs, on current physical experience. All kinds of stuff, right? 
 
 
What I’d like to do now is for you guys to experience with something. The 
same exact construction, only now you’re going to go from normal 
experience, which will be the X, through the trance themes, which will be the 
Y. 
 
 
It’s really actually simpler than what you did yesterday because you have 
less things to think about. What kinds of things constitute normal 
experience? Things you’re seeing right now, doing right now, thinking right 
now. But you can also go beyond that, of course, into things that are normal, 
everyday awareness. We get up in the morning. We do our chores. We get 
dressed. We shower. We have normal, everyday realities. You talk to your 
friends. You go to work. You come back from work. You eat.  
 
 
What are some trance themes that might fit into a normal day but are a little 
different? Driving back from work and just being on autopilot. What else? 
Being deeply concentrated on something, like reading a book or a report of 
some sort. What else? Watching a movie. Exactly, do you get the idea that 
is coming through here? 
 
 
So what I want to do now is, again, this is not necessarily something you’re 
doing to conversation. You might even start weaving in a conversation if you 
want. I guess I don’t care too much if it’s a little overt so that you can get 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
248 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
used to the ideas. Or if you want to be more covert and just give somebody 
a little talk about some interesting things. It doesn’t matter to me. The point 
is I’d like you to just speak about normal experiences and moving towards 
trance over time, and you’re speaking mostly about trance themes rather 
than anything else. Does that make sense to you? 
 
 
Of course, whenever you switch to the X or the Y side of the question here, 
so the red side, you’re also going to switch mentally into your 'That’s right' 
experience. That’s our H+, shall we say. Make sense?  
 
 
So here, you can speak quite normally about normal things. Here, you will 
speak more hypnotically, more meaningful, more significantly about things 
that are more hypnotic in nature. The easiest way to do that is if you 
physically change your own state, the way you feel. 
 
 
Now remember how you felt yesterday or the day before while saying, that’s 
right, and now that feeling slows down a little bit. Does that kind of make 
sense? This is a practice vehicle for switching backwards and forwards 
between being in a normal state and being in a kind of hypnotic state in 
terms of being the hypnotist state. Make sense? That’s easy, right. 
 
 
So, just to make it a little more interesting let’s start the whole thing off with 
the hypnotic rapport, the inner smile. You just started it so you may as well 
use it, right? Eyebrow flash, mirror whatever they do right after the eyebrow 
flash to maintain that. Then just launch into your monologue essentially. 
They don’t have to do much other than just sit there and listen and go, 
"Yeah, I think its right." 
 
 
The key thing here, of course, is watch their body language. If you say 
something that does not match their experience or their way of processing 
reality, you’ll notice something. Maybe stiffness, maybe all the nodding they 
were doing up until that point suddenly stops. Something will change, and 
using the contrast principle you’ll know, hang on a second, I’ve just dropped 
off the map slightly.  
 
 
If that happens, just cycle back to two or three things that are safe, 
absolutely true. Then you’ll just pick it right back up again. Does that make 
sense? Can I show you? Should I show you how to make a mistake, or how 
people will respond? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
249 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’ll show you what happens when someone’s making mistakes. You’re 
talking about stuff – did you see it? That’s how he looks. All right, I’ll try it 
again. Did you see it? It can be subtle. Can we have a volunteer please, 
someone who hasn’t been up yet? Come on up. There you go. Give him a 
nice round of applause.  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Have a seat in the magic chair. How are you doing, Ralph? 
 
Ralph: 
Good, how are you? 
 
Igor: 
Fantastic! So are you enjoying yourself? 
 
Ralph: 
I am. 
 
Igor: 
Now we’re going to do just a very simple version. You know there are all 
kinds of things you do every day, right? You got up this morning and you 
probably washed, got dressed. Those sorts of things, right? But there are 
times when you feel comfortable too. Like a bed when you’re falling asleep 
at night.  
 
 
Of course, in the morning it’s time to get up again and get on with your day-
to-day stuff. I guess you start thinking about what be happening in the 
seminar and perhaps even thinking about the future. Was he thinking about 
the future? No, he was not.  
 
 
Do you see where I’m coming from here? We’ll try this again. Just to show 
you again, we’ll see if we can get the same reaction.  
 
 
So you got up this morning, you got dressed, you probably thought a little bit 
about the seminar and the stuff you were doing. Maybe you even thought 
about stuff that you might do in the future or something like that. 
 
 
Did you notice how – although he went yes to the general whole thing, he 
did a little head nod with everything, except thinking about the future? When 
you think about the future, you went very still. Then when I said right or 
wasn’t it something like that, overall I was correct, but I missed on the future 
thing because he probably wasn’t thinking too much about the future. Does 
that make sense? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
250 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
At that point, I just cycle right back. You know most important of all, it’s like 
normal day except, of course, you’re coming to a seminar, and you’re 
looking forward to learning some things. 
 
 
I guess yesterday you had some very pleasant experiences. Some of them 
were on your mind while you were relaxing as well. Not all pleasant 
experiences lead towards trance. That’s right. Do you see where we’re 
going with this? 
 
 
It doesn’t matter too much how you frame it, if it’s clunky or if it’s very 
conversational. It doesn’t matter to me. What matters is that you’re talking 
normal everyday experiences and then you make a switch towards more 
hypnotic experiences. Then you switch back for a little bit, switch forward 
again, back, forward, back, forward. Eventually, you’ll just stick with the 
trance experiences, and they’ll have a fantastic ride through the whole thing. 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
It can be subtle, but if you notice the sudden switch though, there’s a pattern 
that develops, if that pattern suddenly stops, chances are that you’ve 
missed a little bit in terms of what you’re saying. Make sense? At which 
point you cycle back to other things, but that doesn’t matter. The point is you 
just recycle whatever you just said beforehand, except the thing that didn’t 
quite work out. 
 
 
Honestly, even if you went past that, if you went through it, you still have 
enough momentum going. Ralph wasn’t particularly disappointed. I didn’t hit 
a really bad spot or anything like that. I could probably ignore it and carry on 
anyway, but you may as well train your perceptions and work with them. 
Does that make sense in general? Go ahead. 
 
Student: 
When you said to Ralph, "Not all pleasant experiences lead to trance.", that 
was like a deliberate sort of flub right, just to see if we can get a reaction 
from him that would deviate from the kinds of agreement-oriented reactions 
he was already giving. Is that right? 
 
Igor: 
No, that was just a statement. It’s just that the reaction was interesting. In 
fact, the reaction was particularly interesting because I’m guessing for Ralph 
most pleasant experiences will lead to trance. In which case I’ll go, "Of 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
251 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
course, for some people, all pleasant experiences lead to trance, don’t 
they?" Then it just intensifies because the… 
 
Student: 
It’s like a little fractionation. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. 
 
Student: 
That’s the thing. His face seemed to get surprised at that moment. When 
you said that, I actually started to think about it. I wondered about that.  
 
♦ Is there a trance reaction, a little trance induction from every 
pleasant experience?  
 
 
It’s possible there is. 
 
Igor: 
As I say, you’ll never know ahead of time how people will reaction, right? 
Everyone is different. Everyone thinks differently. The point is you’re getting 
very sensitive reactions now, right? You can always check. If you’re not 
sure, do you know what you do? You go, it seems like something surprising 
just occurred to you. What was that? 
 
Student: 
Well, what you said made me think about it because I didn’t know the 
answer. I didn’t know whether I should say yes or no. I had to think about it. 
 
Igor: 
So you don’t know whether all pleasant experiences lead towards trance? 
That’s interesting. 
 
Student: 
It is. 
 
Igor: 
I wonder if all pleasant experiences do lead towards trance.  
 
Student: 
I wouldn’t be at all surprised. 
 
Igor: 
You wouldn’t be surprised by that, would you? 
 
Student: 
No, I wouldn’t. 
 
Igor: 
Pleasant experiences… 
 
Student: 
It seems so. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
252 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Leading to trance. 
 
Student: 
Yes. It seems natural. 
 
Igor: 
That’s an interesting idea, isn’t it? 
 
Student: 
It is. That’s right. 
 
Igor: 
Very good.  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
That’s the danger of having a trained hypnotist on stage. Do you understand 
the drill a little bit better now? Is that clear to you? Are you ready to do it?  
 
Students: Sure. 
 
Igor: 
Off you go. 
 
 
Okay, let’s have everyone back. Good. How was it? Did you enjoy 
yourselves? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Do you have a question? Come on up. 
 
Student: 
Hello. 
 
Igor: 
Hello. 
 
Student: 
I had this discussion yesterday. It’s about basic values, which are given to 
us during our primary socialization, like belief, religion, whatever.  
 
♦ Is it possible to change those values in a human being? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. 
 
Student: 
For example, is it possible to convince someone not to believe in a god 
because those basic values you learn when you’re little. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
253 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Let’s put it this way. Everything is possible. The question is whether, or not 
it’s ethical. Who am I to tell someone what they should believe in, in terms 
of religion or things like that? If they problems with it, for example, if 
someone’s in a cult and you want to help them out of it or if they ask for help 
out of it, that’s something very different, but other than that, if someone 
wants to be a Mormon, Catholic or Muslim really, it has nothing to do with 
me. It’s their choice.   
 
Student: 
It’s their choice.  
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. 
 
Student: 
The continuation question, not only in religion but, for example, in relation 
towards property. Like you had the picture of the full world where everyone 
can share and the shortage. Sometimes you come across these people, 
and these values are so deep, often provided by religion or whatever, that 
you cannot convince them. They are completely contradictory.  
 
♦ What do you do then just avoid them? 
 
Igor: 
Let’s put it this way. First, it’s a question of judgment in terms of how is it 
affecting your life. If it doesn’t really affect you, then let them get on with it. 
It’s their thing. Fundamentally, everything is changeable. The brain is one of 
the most flexible things that we have.  
 
 
So, even deep-seated ideas and beliefs and so on all can be changed if – 
and this is where the ethics come in – if it’s appropriate, if it’s ethical for you 
to do so without imposing your view of the world on someone else. After all, 
why would my view of the world be better than anyone else’s. It’s not 
something I can impose? 
 
 
On the flip side is, it’s a question of how much effort you may have to put 
into it to make it happen. Someone who’s been in a cult from the day he 
was born and has all these things imposed upon him, and those thoughts 
are hauling him in, well, that’s going to take a little bit more effort than 
someone who’s just been to a weekend seminar and goes, well, that’s kind 
of interesting, but maybe, maybe not. There will be more effort involved. 
 
 
As to how to do that, well, that’s what the seminar is about. We are going to 
build the skills up towards this. So just give us some time, and we’ll start 
building some skills towards that. Then it’s just a question of: 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
254 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
1. Is it ethical for you to interfere in the other person’s life and beliefs 
and so on? 
 
2. If it is – like for example, they’ve asked for help but they don’t know 
how to help themselves – then how do you go about doing it, how 
do you set it up, how do you go from there and so on. 
 
Student: 
One last thing.  
 
Igor: 
Sure. 
 
Student: 
In my point of view, it would be ethical, for example, to help people to get rid 
of their fear. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, sure. 
 
Student: 
For example, fear of death. 
 
Igor: 
I agree absolutely! It’s a whole range of possibilities. I honestly can’t tell you 
what’s right and wrong. You’re all adults, right? All I can tell you is what my 
belief is, my point of view, and that is in terms of if the other person isn’t 
somehow self-harming or something like that, then it’s probably interesting 
to do something at least so they can find their own path.  
 
 
It isn’t being imposing and saying this is how you have to be. Its more, look, 
why don’t you find other ways of being? So they can find their own path and 
their own direction and so on. 
 
 
In general influencing circles again, if it’s a win for me and a win for you, 
everyone wins. That’s a great thing again. Beyond those things, though, 
well, it does get into very sort of tricky things. Religion especially is one that 
is especially tricky because if you have two people believing in two different 
religions that may be fundamentally different. Who am I tell say who’s right 
and who’s wrong? It’s not my job.  
 
 
If it interferes, I can take those things into fear with the things I’m doing and 
maybe put them to one side so that we can have a decent interaction, a 
quality relationship and those sorts of things. But that’s very different from 
having someone change fundamentally the way they interact with the world. 
Does that kind of make sense to you guys? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
255 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
If there is consent, of course, a lot more is possible and it’s easy to do. It 
might not be unethical because they’ve asked for it. Good luck to them. 
There was a hand over here somewhere. 
 
Student: 
In my opinion, I think that it would be easier to build within us flexibility to 
build the belief on our own that we can accept others the way they are. And 
they can change when they want to change because they’re living in their 
own ecological system and they have to deal with them.  
 
 
From my point of view, I may want to change them the way I think would be 
good for them, but unless they perceive the change being good for them, 
you wouldn’t have any value in my opinion. 
 
Igor: 
Right because you don’t know how it fits into their world. It might actually 
destroy their family relationships, and their life gets worse if you interfere too 
much in how they’re doing things. We’ll come more onto those sorts of 
things, especially on the more advanced part after we’ve had the day of 
rest.  
 
 
Just remember, the first few days – we’re in phase one right now - we’re 
building the core skills, the core ideas, the core maneuvers, the core 
foundations we want to use. Then we get into more of the advanced stuff 
and you start using those core ideas, those core skills in a way that’s 
hopefully going to be ethical and influential. So we’ll find the balance point.  
 
 
Now, going back to the exercise, do you want to come up? 
 
Student: 
Can you just clarify for me.  
 
 
Step one you’re pacing undeniable experiences, more or less. Anything 
that’s a bit, I guess, a judgment you’re softening with a softener.  
 
♦ When you kick into the trance themes, is it a quasi-pace, quasi-
lead?  
 
 
So, you’re calibrating, your jogging, it’s nighttime and it’s like oops. I mean, 
its daylight so you catch a reaction, which you’re trying to pace their 
reaction, but then are you trying to move them into a newish reality of 
leading? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
256 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. Again, in terms of what we’re doing here in the exercise itself, 
we don’t have to focus so much on the nuances. The key is, are you 
primarily focusing on normal experiences and are we focusing more on sort 
of trance or hypnotic kinds of experiences? On this side of the fence here, it 
has to be accepted.  
 
 
So having a, as you call it, quasi-lead, things they said like, for example, 
we’ve all lied in bed and not wanted to get up because its so comfortable.  
 
 
It’s warm between the sheets and you think, I should get up, but I’d rather 
stay here for a while. It’s a universal experience. It happens to be a trance 
theme, but it’s a universal experience, and I’m getting agreement from you 
guys. I know that you’re accepting the idea.  
 
 
If you accept that idea, you might accept other ideas as well. The rule of 
thumb is this. The more in trance someone is, the less logical your 
conclusions have to be. Now in the initial phases, logic has to be part of 
what you’re doing because they still have an active conscious mind, or at 
least it’s active enough. Until you’ve bypassed that critical factor enough, 
you need to stay within the realms of reason.  
 
 
As you go through here, you become increasingly – or you can – you have 
the freedom to jump increasingly across topics. Does that make sense to 
you guys? Remember, right now we’re just doing some practice exercises, 
some practice wheels to build up towards something much more interesting 
later on. Sound good? Shall we do something more interesting with it? 
 
Students: Sure. 
 
Igor: 
All right. Believe it or not, we’ve actually done the hard version here. We’ve 
talked and we paced about normal experiences. Then we’ve started pacing 
trance themes. So really we’re separating different kinds of experiences that 
people can have. Would that be fair?  
 
 
Did you notice how, as you speak more about trance experiences or trance 
themes, well, it tends to revivify trance. It tends to bring them more into that 
sort of experience. So what if we switched it around and we did exactly the 
same pattern, but now we start speaking about conscious experiences and 
unconscious experiences? Isn’t that essentially the same pattern with a 
different flavor, shall we say? Wouldn’t that be fair to say? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
257 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
What I’d like to do is just spend a few moments looking at that. What kinds 
of experiences are conscious? Give me some things. What does the 
conscious mind do? Eating? Sure. What kinds of things are obviously 
conscious? How about thinking? People think when they’re conscious, 
right? 
 
 
Analyzing. I’ll put that in brackets because a lot of writers – there you go, a 
to-do list. It uses a different way of thinking. What else? Reasoning. 
Absolutely! Problem solving, although I haven’t said that. Does the 
unconscious mind solve problems? It’s a specific kind of problem solving, 
right? Considering? Is that really a conscious activity? Learning it or trying to 
learn it? Do you see where we’re going with this? 
 
 
What other kinds of functions does the conscious mind do? By the way, are 
there any scientists amongst us here? So in terms of the mind, what does 
the conscious mind to? For example, it’s capable of processing seven plus 
or minus two bits of information. Has anyone heard that before?  
 
♦ 
Choosing 
♦ 
Deciding 
♦ 
Logic 
♦ 
Planning 
♦ 
Measuring 
 
 
So you’ve got a good idea of what conscious functions really are, right? 
There are many more, but this gives you a good starting point.    
 
 
Let’s turn over here then and look at the unconscious mind. What kinds of 
functions does the unconscious mind perform? 
 
10. [Breathing] (although you can breathe consciously as well, so I’ll 
put it in brackets) 
11. Body functions (heartbeat, blinking, etc.) 
12. Dreaming 
13. Emotions 
14. Eyebrow raises (I like that) 
15. Body language 
16. Instincts 
17. Imagining 
18. Habits 
19. Memories 
20. Autopilot (which is like habits but a little different) 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
258 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
21. Reactions 
 
 
 
So you can see we’ve got a full list of things that can happen here. Now 
we’re going to do the same induction process again. Again, it’s up to you 
how you deal with it. The simplest of all ways of doing this is you just list. 
Your conscious mind does this and this and this. Then switching your tone - 
meanwhile, your unconscious mind is running your body. Your heartbeat, 
your blinking, even your body language, the way it expresses itself without 
your knowing anything. 
 
 
Of course, your conscious mind is logical and reasonable. It solves 
problems with logic and reasons. The unconscious mind has imagination.  
 
 
Do you see where we’re going with this? You can have a very simple list 
that way. If you want to elaborate on it a little bit more in terms of making it 
more conversational, then introduce it in terms of like, allow me to tell you a 
little bit about how the conscious minds works and the unconscious mind. 
You’ve heard about the unconscious mind, haven’t you? 
 
 
Do you see where we’re going with this? It’s a very simple thing. It’s actually 
easier than the previous exercise you just did because we’re now focusing 
on conscious and unconscious activity. Easy to do. Make sense? All right, 
find a partner and spend five minutes apiece. Off you go.  
 
 
Who enjoyed the induction? Was that good? Can you begin to see how 
easy it is to slip this into a normal conversation? Yes, hopefully, because 
this is what it’s about. 
 
 
I’d like to talk to you about dissociation. What you’re seeing here is called 
conscious/unconscious dissociation. It’s a very famous induction made 
famous by Milton Erickson again. He made a lot of things famous. It 
essentially works this way.  
 
 
Our minds can either put things together or split them apart. Is anyone here 
good at taking things like criticism, for example? You’re good at taking 
criticism? You listen to it and you don’t get too emotional about it, right? So 
that’s a classic example of a useful form of dissociation.  
 
 
In other words, whilst being criticized, you dissociate from the emotional 
element of the message, and you only listen to the intellectual part so your 
intellect and your emotions are separated. Would that be fair to say? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
259 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Those of us who do not separate intellect and emotions during a moment of 
criticism, what do we experience? "Oh, my God, am I that bad?" Why? 
Because the message is impacting us on two different levels at the same 
time, do you see how that works? 
 
 
We can dissociate anything from anything else. We can dissociate an arm 
away from the body. That’s great for things like pain control and so on. We 
can dissociate concepts so they’re no longer the same. If you remember the 
fundamental way the unconscious mind reasons through association, in 
other words, putting things together.  
 
 
If it can associate, then, of course, it must be able to dissociate – move 
things apart again. Make sense? What we’re doing here is we’re 
dissociating the conscious mind from the unconscious. Of course, you 
realize when I talk about the unconscious mind that it’s just a story we made 
up.  
 
 
All that exists really is you. When we talk about the unconscious mind, it’s 
just a convenient label to lump together a whole bunch of concepts so we 
can handle them and work with them and so on.  
 
 
The unconscious mind is true because we make it true through suggestion 
and so on. Do you get where I’m coming from with this? The reason for that 
is just because the mind is much more complex than this simplistic model. 
But viewing it in this simplistic model gives us a lot of scope in terms of how 
we work with people and so on.  
 
 
So the conscious/unconscious dissociation is designed to take those parts 
of the experience that are the conscious reality, that little fence they put 
around reality, and what’s allowed to be true and what isn’t allowed to be 
true. We’re taking everything else and we’re separating them out so that 
one can sort of go to sleep for a little while and disappear for a little while or 
be put on hold for a little while and the other one can be explored more.  
 
 
That’s one way of describing trance, isn’t it, or hypnosis? Your normal reality 
is put on hold and you have the capacity to experiment with new realities 
and find out if one of them is better than the old one. Then you re-associate 
(also known as re-integrate) the two so that the new reality now makes the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
260 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
old reality a little bit bigger, a little bit better, a little bit more enhanced as far 
as that individual’s life is concerned. Make sense? 
 
 
The conscious/unconscious dissociation allows you to do that. But I’d like to 
think about this idea of dissociation in a more in depth sort of way. Let me 
give you an example of what I mean. 
 
 
It was in the summer and we did the first 'Walk-Up Street Hypnosis' event in 
London. It was a lot of fun. It was interesting. This kind of answers a little bit 
of the question that you had yesterday about the legs being stuck to the 
floor.  
 
 
One of the students was doing one of the stiff arm things with someone and 
the guy was saying, "But I can bend my arm, I can bend my arm. Look, I 
can bend my arm." So what do you do with that? 
 
 
That’s right, you can bend your arm, well done, for now. Then we have the 
whole pacing and the time thing so we’re looking for benefit rather than risk. 
We’re not there yet. That puts his mind on hold for a little bit. But why is he 
still able to bend his arm? What do you think is happening? He’s thinking 
about it.  
 
 
His arm is still associated with his intellect and his normal reality, and in 
normal reality, he can bend his arm. He’s got to be able to somehow 
dissociate some part of him, whether it’s the arm or something else, so that 
it’s no longer functioning in ordinary reality. Does that make sense? 
 
 
How do we do this? In this case, it was very simple. We created multiple 
things for him to focus on. So the first thing was, all right, there’s the arm 
and it’s doing its thing. Don’t worry about testing it, yet. We’re not there, yet. 
So the suggestions are beginning to start working. Meanwhile, I’d like for 
you as a mind to observe the body. You feel good inside as the arm gets 
stiffer and as the mind, just watch the body feeling better.  
 
 
Can you see what’s going on here slowly? We’re now separating the mind – 
his intellect, his normal way of functioning – from his body so we now have 
a mind body dissociation. The body can feel good and comfortable, but it’s 
now observing the effect. 
 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
261 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What happens if someone is observing something else happening? It’s 
dissociated, right? Plus this other thing is now no longer in his control. It has 
its own processes, right? If you watch a train going by, who here can stop a 
train with their mind, anyone? If you can, then please show me how you do 
that because that’s a very cool thing.  
 
 
The train runs on its own, it has its own momentum. It has its own 
mechanism. All you can do is watch it. So if he’s watching his body, what 
else is going on? If he’s dissociated from his body, his body can then run 
itself.  
 
 
Of course, at that point, their suggestion had the freedom to take. He started 
feeling the arm locking without him trying to do anything. You’re just 
observing the arm locking now and, of course, you’re stuck. At some point 
he just broke up and said I can’t believe this. Now you can accelerate the 
dissociation.  
 
 
So you’re watching that arm and it’s locked and you can’t bend it. Is that 
right? Yes. Do you normally do that? No. So that now accentuates the 
dissociation because it’s kind of a test for them to go, wow, this is not 
normal reality anymore. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
The conscious/unconscious dissociation – well, it’s just a very simple way of 
doing it, is actually a very versatile tool. It can be put into anything, whether 
it’s instant inductions or street hypnosis or overt hypnosis, or if it’s more 
covert hypnosis as well. Does that kind of make sense to you guys? 
 
 
We want to start using this because now we have the three fundamental 
processes that we’re going to be using. Well, maybe four actually. How 
about five fundamental processes?  
 
♦ We have the revivification induction.  
 
 
That’s a process for bringing things back to life, revivifying experiences. For 
example, if you want to create anesthesia, you can bring back to life 
experiences where something was numb, whether it’s someone going to the 
dentist and getting Novocain or someone falling asleep on an arm or a leg 
and end up going numb. Do you see where I’m going with this? 
 
♦ We have the pacing and leading construction where we’re slowly 
guiding someone towards a particular outcome.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
262 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
♦ We have the, 'That’s right' induction. 
 
 
The idea is utilizing whatever happens. Whatever happens is the right thing. 
It’s the right stepping stone for the next thing to occur. 
 
♦ Now we also have the conscious/unconscious dissociation. 
 
 
These are your primary tools. We’re going to be reorganizing them one way 
or another in order to create our inductions. Does that make sense to you 
guys? 
 
 
How might we take this basic principle and turn it into a more everyday sort 
of interaction, something you can talk to people about every day? Let’s face 
it, you’re not going to go and hang out with your friends and just say, "Okay, 
your conscious mind is this, your unconscious mind is that. Conscious this, 
conscious that. Unconscious this, unconscious that." 
 
 
Yes, we already know that. You talked about it last week, the week before 
that, the week before that, the week before that, the week before that and 
the week before that. 
 
 
You need to have some variety. Otherwise, it’s not very conversational. So 
do you have some ideas? We have an analogy. Excellent! Talking about a 
story and we’re about to come onto both of those things as we get to more 
of the advanced stuff. 
 
 
I want to stick to something very simple now. Really the same pattern we 
just did – the conscious/unconscious dissociation – it’s just we want to 
change the pattern a little bit in terms of changing the mood slightly. Notice 
how these two things are actually the exact same pattern. This is still 
conscious/unconscious dissociation, isn’t it? It just looks different. This is a 
more class conscious/unconscious dissociation. It just looks different from 
what you did before. 
 
 
So what other kinds of poles or bipolar experiences can we introduce that 
essentially have to do with consciousness and unconsciousness? Let me 
give you some examples. 
 
If you’re having a discussion with someone about the difference between 
being awake and being asleep, between how you process the information 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
263 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
whilst awake or whilst dreaming, about waking reality and how it works and 
dreaming reality and how it works, isn’t that a perfect vehicle for putting a 
conscious/unconscious dissociation? Doesn’t that fit? 
 
How about this? When you plan for something, you’re preparing inside your 
mind. You’re using logical steps. You think about it and so on. When you do 
it, how many times do you do things exactly as the plan requires, especially 
if other elements are involved? In other words, it’s a live interaction, like a 
conversation.  
 
Has anyone here ever planned a conversation they’re going to have? You 
think about conversations, right? You think about here is the message I 
want to get across and the things you want to say and so on, but the 
conversation never goes the way you kind of planned it out inside your 
mind, does it? You have to kind of make it up as you go along.  
 
So we’ve got planning versus doing. Spontaneity versus, I guess, 
preparation or scripting of some sort. By the way, this is one of the reasons 
that I don’t like scripts. Where do scripts belong? Where does hypnosis 
belong, especially conversational hypnosis? It’s got to be live and 
interactive.  
 
I have no problems with scripts as a concept because it allows you to 
prepare. It allows you to learn things and maybe take some ideas out and 
so on. It’s if you try to use scripts when you’re actually performing 
something, that’s when people get in trouble. Do you see where I’m going 
with this? 
 
So what other kinds of dichotomies are there that could be used for 
conscious/unconscious dissociation? By the way, a lot of the stuff that you 
talked about in this list here, rather than just throwing them out as a list, you 
can go into depth into each one of these things.  
 
Let me give you some examples of what I mean. Are there any people here 
in business? If you talk to people about different ways of solving problems, 
you can analyze a problem. Just find out all the different elements that are 
inside it and put them together in a list and weigh them and all the rest of it, 
versus creating or creativity. Ultimately, solutions have to be created. It 
something that happens that goes beyond all that analysis.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
264 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
The analysis is important, but when you start creating solutions, that’s when 
it gets interesting, isn’t it? We’ve all been creative, have we not? We’ve had 
something come up and suddenly we just know what to do. There was no 
analysis involved. You just know what to do.  
 
Can you hear the switch happening? Can you feel the switch going between 
conscious and unconsciousness? Should we go on with this? Do you want a 
couple more? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
All right. Let’s get a little bit more esoteric here, just to show you that we can 
have many different categories. In other words, this list could potentially be 
infinite, or close to infinite, in terms of how we split the world up- medicating 
versus healing. When you take pills, when you do things, we do them on 
purpose. You are medicating on purpose. You are consciously trying to 
influence how your body operates.  
 
 
Has anyone ever had a cut or a bruise? Has that cut or bruise healed? How 
do you do that? Antibiotics. That’s the medicating side right, but the 
antibiotics don’t heal the cut, they just prevent it from infecting. Do you see 
where we’re going with this? So pretty much in any profession, any social 
sphere 
that 
you’re 
in, 
anything 
like 
that, 
you 
can 
create 
a 
conscious/unconscious dichotomy.  
 
 
So what I would like you guys to do now is I’d like you to get together. Get 
yourself in groups of five or so. I want you to start brainstorming dichotomies 
in the field that you are interested in. 
 
 
If you’re in sales, then find out what kinds of dichotomies fit in your particular 
sales program. If you’re in therapy, well, the conscious/unconscious 
dissociation, of course, fits quite classically, but what other things will fit into 
that? Does that make sense?  
 
 
Out of curiosity, how many people here are in business? Okay. How many 
people here are in therapy? How many people here are primarily interested 
in some other ways of influencing people? What kinds of things? Just give 
me an idea. Computing stuff, is that what you do in terms of business? So it 
would be more like a business thing, like a sales cycle for computing is that 
right? Okay.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
265 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
What else? Entertainment. Teaching. Preaching. Teamwork, so like in a 
management and leadership sort of thing? So they’re co-workers. Anything 
else? Breaking into companies? Are you like getting a crowbar or do you 
mean like getting accepted by a company in terms of social engineering. 
Thank you. Seduction.   
 
 
Just so you know, we won’t be covering that as a topic itself here just 
because it tends to derail things, but if that’s of interest to you again, all 
these things can be used in these different areas. 
 
 
So I want you to find a group of like-minded people. Let’s put it this way, 
let’s have over here people who are more interested in business, sales and 
that sort of thing. Let’s have people over here who are into more social and 
more informal contexts, like social situations and so on. Go ahead. 
 
Student: 
(Person is too far from microphone, unclear.) 
 
Igor: 
Law? In terms of what, are you talking about advocacy, like standing in front 
of a judge and persuading. Or are you talking more about giving advice and 
having people take it? I’ll put that into a consulting model. Is anyone here a 
consultant who has to have people accept their ideas? Again, do you see 
how the different models apply? 
 
 
I’d like you to get into groups of about five or so people, and then start 
pulling out these dichotomies and what themes are within the thing that you 
do that have consciousness and unconsciousness already built into them, 
so that as you talk about them to people, you’re actually inducing a trance. 
Does that make sense? Yes?  
 
 
Go ahead and find some partners, and let’s just spend about 10 minutes 
doing that, and then we’ll go into a break. 
 
 
 
 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
266 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
DVD 10:  Secrets to Naturally Using 
Conversational Hypnosis in Normal 
Conversations without               Sounding 
Weird 
 
Igor: 
How are you all doing? Did you have fun with that? Did you come up with 
some interesting, shall we say dichotomies that you can start using, which 
would be conversationally appropriate given the context that you want to 
use it in, whether its classroom or it’s a boardroom or it’s a coaching 
consulting sort of relationship or a sales meeting? Really, it fits pretty much 
anything. Would that be fair to say? 
 
 
I was talking to a friend of mine named Russ. Some of you may have heard 
the interview I did with him recently. I guess you’d call him a Shamanic 
Yoga or Yogi. He’s an interesting character. He’s Canadian, living in Peru 
right now. He’s got a school out there. As you’d imagine a Yogi would do, he 
does an awful lot of meditating.  
 
 
I did a course with him at one point, and his whole thing about meditation is 
very simple. It’s about expanding your consciousness. Normally, you would 
have separation going on. Here’s me and here’s a chair and here are the 
other people in the room and so on, and we’re different. Of course, when 
you begin to meditate, you’re expanding your consciousness so that there is 
no difference between you and the chair. You feel differently because your 
ability to perceive the world is different. 
 
 
Of course, many people will experience this transformation as a kind of 
euphoric sensation. Bliss is often described when people enter this state. 
One of the simplest ways of doing this, of course, is when people stop their 
normal sort of thinking processes. This is me and this is the rest of the world 
and all the rest of it, and just allow a different part of the mind to take over. 
It’s a very interesting process. 
 
 
Some people require a lot of activity before they can get there, so that’s one 
of the reasons that yoga can be so useful because it physically tires the 
body. And the mind’s too tired to just hold anymore. It just starts to let go. 
We’ve all had this, haven’t we? We’ve all had the experience where we’ve 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
267 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
had a hard day at work, maybe. Or maybe it was on a holiday and it was a 
physical day. You know, you did some sports or climbing or a lot of walking. 
When we get home, what do we want to do? We just want to sit down 
somewhere. Lie down. 
 
 
It’s not even that, we just want to rest. You simply don’t want to think 
anymore. It’s more comfortable not thinking because then your mind and 
body can rest. What most people don’t realize is that they’re so close to one 
of these moments of bliss or euphoria. This oneness with the world around 
them, because when the mind stops making distinctions, it all becomes the 
same. That’s a very pleasant experience, when everything becomes an 
extension of you. 
 
 
People can have the strangest kinds of experiences when they’re resting 
this way. They can catch a glimpse of something – a carpet, a wall, a chair, 
another person – and as the boundaries become blurred, they can 
experience that differently. Maybe even as though it’s a part of themselves. 
It’s not such a crazy idea when you think about it. Children do it all the time, 
don’t they? 
 
 
They dress up in mommy or daddy’s clothes and make believe cowboys 
and Indians. Little do they realize that they’re learning, they’re growing as 
individuals. Children learn so quickly, in part because they can identify with 
something and for a while become it. Something inside them can make the 
learning process easier because there’s no need to think about it. And we 
all know that there is such a great capacity inside the mind that we can 
access when we think less. Isn’t that ironic?  
 
 
It’s not that thinking is not a good thing to do. Just like eating, there are 
times when it’s appropriate and there are times when it’s important to stop.  
 
 
So, Russ and I had a conversation. He said, "For me, when I begin to 
meditate, a calmness begins that makes me feel good. It doesn’t always 
have to be a pleasant feeling or sensation, but this time and usually it is. 
 
 
"When my thinking slows down, there’s a sense of expansion inside. It’s as 
if my brain had been kept inside a small jar and now the lid was off, the jar 
was gone and I was in a vast room, a real sense of freedom. There’s 
nothing in particular that you need to do in that room other than simply 
appreciate the freedom.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
268 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
"Then something interesting happens. Thoughts come and go, all thoughts, 
but they simply don’t appear to be yours anymore you can recognize them, 
but they’re somehow different now, new thoughts, fresh ideas. Other things 
can be just as appealing now." In this state, Russ reminded me, "You really 
can experiment with all kinds of ways of being or seeing the world yourself, 
all of us. 
 
 
"If you like it, just a little of that will come with you when the meditation ends. 
Someone who’s been to this other place cannot help but bring elements of it 
back to their normal, shall we say, everyday reality and look on the world 
differently because it’s not so much that the world has changed. It’s more 
that they’ve changed on the inside. That kind of makes sense, doesn’t it? 
 
 
"We all know that as we grow up, we go back to the same environments, 
the same things, the same habits and somehow they’re a little different now. 
The things we used to like doing really aren’t that enjoyable anymore. 
Things that we used to find difficult are just easy now. Do you know what I 
mean by that?" 
 
 
I always like talking to people like Russ. He has some very interesting 
frames of reference; shall we put it that way? He makes me think a little bit, 
or not, as the case may be. I apologize for digressing a little bit. I just had a 
little thought about Russ and I thought I’d share.  
 
 
We’d like to do some hypnosis now. Shouldn’t we? Who recognizes the 
process that we essentially went through just now? A few people. If I said 
the 'My Friend John' technique, would that be relatively familiar to you? In 
this case, it’s actually the advanced version, its call 'My Friend Russ'. If I 
catch you using My Friend Russ, then you’re in trouble because that’s only 
for meta-master, uber-chief hypnotists. In fact, I like that. I said it first. 
 
 
So the My Friend John (or Russ) technique is very simple. What we’re doing 
now is we’re beginning to introduce vehicles through which we can express 
ourselves hypnotically. Make sense? In a social context, we can’t suddenly 
break frame and go, "Okay, now I’m going to do something that is really 
weird and crazy, but you’re not going to notice because it’s kind of weird 
and crazy." 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
269 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
However, there are certain social acceptable vehicles or things that exist in 
normal interactions or conversations that we can borrow and transform into 
hypnotic vehicles. One of them is the anecdote. An anecdote is when you 
tell a story about someone else. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
My Friend John (or My Friend Russ TM) technique is essentially I’m telling 
an anecdote. I’m telling a story about a friend of mine. Now the experience 
my friend has or the experience my friends puts me through, in order for you 
to understand the experience, you have to follow along with it. Does that 
make sense? 
 
 
The classic way that the My Friend John technique is used is like well, I had 
a friend called John, and he went into hypnosis. At first he breathed more 
easily, and then this happened. It’s a great induction. It’s a fantastic 
induction. It will work in most social settings as well. It will work great in 
therapeutic settings and so on.  
 
 
The only problem I have is you’re actually overtly mentioning hypnosis, 
hence, it might trigger a train of associations, especially if people know that 
you’ve been to a covert hypnosis seminar. Don’t listen. Don’t look. As soon 
as you trigger their associations, then they’ll think, is he up to something? 
The answer, of course, is yes he is, but you don’t want them to know that. 
 
 
So what I’d like you guys to do is to do essentially the My Friend John 
technique, only we’re going to go back to what we just did a moment ago, 
and we’re going to start introducing our main patterns in the form of an 
anecdote, in the form of the experience someone else had.  
 
 
Did you all notice a revivification occurring in that induction? Yes? Did you 
guys notice a little bit of pacing and leading in terms of experiences that our 
normal everyday experiences and experiences that are a little different? 
Yes? 
 
 
Did anyone here notice utilization? In other words, when there are reactions 
occurring, that start being fed back in. In other words, when the room 
started getting calmer, a lot of you already had your eyes closed because 
you enjoy it. Some of you had your eyes glazed and looking forward like in a 
trance state. Then we started using that and talking about calm experiences 
and folks experiences and those sorts of things.   
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
270 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So, we’re using the experiences that we see. With a group, it’s a little harder 
to get feedback because there are a lot of you. So I have to wait until bigger 
shifts 
occur 
overall. 
Did 
you, 
of 
course, 
spot 
the 
classic 
conscious/unconscious dissociation as really the main theme running 
through all of that? Would that be fair to say? 
 
 
So you can do all these things, or you can do just some of them. It’s really 
up to you. What I’d like to do now though is find a partner and spend maybe 
five minutes apiece, seven minutes apiece talking to them about a friend of 
yours, about an experience that you can weave these things into. 
 
 
Now you can do this one of two ways. The first way you can do it is you can 
just make something up. You can make up your friend, John. Apparently, 
John knows a lot of people and has some really freaky experiences, given 
how many stories have been told about him.  
 
 
So you can actually do that, it’s a lot easier. It’s nice to get all the practice 
wheels and so on. However, I would recommend that if you can think of 
someone, that you use an actual person that you know. If you use a real 
person you know and an actual experience that person has had, you just 
accentuate the hypnotic qualities of it. Does that make sense? Go ahead. 
 
Student: 
 
22. Can you be involved in the experience? 
 
Igor: 
So, the question is can you be involved in the experience as well? 
Absolutely. I was involved in the experience in terms of what I was talking to 
you guys about. Sure. In fact, your friend John might as well just be your 
friend me, right? It works just as well.  
 
 
The beauty of having it someone else’s experience is that if that person is 
not present, then for some reason – have you ever noticed that when an 
author is dead his books become better? When a musician has died and 
especially in a violent car crash or in a drug-fueled binge, his music  
somehow gets better. 
 
 
I’m not quite sure what it is, but I guess as soon as that person gets 
removed from daily life, their status in our minds lifts up. We look for the 
better quality in them. They no longer have to be normal human beings. 
Hence, the My Friend John talks about another person who can now be 
flawless and you don’t have to treat him as a real human being.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
271 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Does that kind of make sense in terms of that? Also you can actually be 
included in that anecdote and be part of that interaction so that he said this 
to me and I felt this way and he said, "No, but I feel this when I do these 
things." So you can have that interplay. Absolutely. Does that make sense? 
 
Student: 
 
23. Could this be a time, when you hypnotize someone else and put 
them through trance? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. That’s the classic way that the My Friend John technique is 
being used. For the purpose of the exercise though, I’d like to get more 
conversational, more covert, so I’d like you to avoid the concept of hypnosis. 
 
 
If you avoid the concept of hypnosis, it doesn’t trigger a set of associations 
that makes people think, is this person possibly hypnotizing me right now? 
Do you see where I’m going with this? Now does that make talking about 
hypnosis a bad thing? Heck no. Especially when people hear hypnotist, 
well, what’s hypnosis about? Well, let me tell you about my friend John. 
When he goes into a trance, he does it this way. Then you do your induction 
that way too.  
 
 
So it’s just giving you more flexibility in terms of when and where you use it. 
Does that make sense to you guys?  
 
 
Now going back to the idea of why I’d like you to think of a real person to the 
extent that you can, first, your nonverbal signals will become more natural 
because if you think of a real person, it’s easier to describe them, their 
mannerisms and so on.  
 
 
Second, the story begins to flow a bit more because you know it already. 
You know what’s already happened to that person. You’re just accentuating 
the hypnotic qualities of that. You’re just taking a little bit of artistic license, 
shall we say. That’s actually very important because it brings the experience 
a little bit more to life for you and for the other person too. 
 
 
Thirdly, you can add details easily, that trigger a person into accepting that 
as a normal anecdote. So that they’re not over analyzing it. So they fall into 
anecdote listening mode and, hence, it opens up the whole, let’s fall into 
trance thing.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
272 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Do you remember some of the details I told you about Russ? They’re true 
by the way. He’s Canadian. He’s a Shaman. He does a lot of meditating. He 
now lives in Peru. He has a school there and we talked about things. 
Doesn’t that make him more real than if I say, I have a friend called Russ, 
and he goes into meditation this way? Do you see there’s a fundamentally 
different setup there? Does that make sense to you guys? 
 
 
The final reason, and possibly the most important reason why I would 
encourage you to use a real person rather than a made-up one is because if 
they ever find out what the actual story was, you don’t lose trust. If you 
make up a story and at some point they go, hang on a second, he was 
never there. He never did that. There’s a lot of trust issues involved there, 
and if they lose trust with you, especially if it’s in a conversational setting, 
then, honestly, it’s very difficult to get trust back afterward  
 
 
So my preference is to stick to things that are real, absolutely happened, 
true anecdotes. Accentuate the hypnotic qualities of it so if people ever 
should come across Russ and say. "Hey, are you Russ? Are you the one 
that Igor talked about? Well, he said that you did this."  
 
 
He goes, "Yeah, I guess I did." Versus, "No, I have no idea what you’re 
talking about. Igor? Who’s Igor?"  
 
 
"Huh?!?"  
 
 
Can you see what I mean in terms of the trust issues that it might evoke? In 
some context, it’s less important because people won’t expect it. 
 
 
For example, in a seminar, you don’t necessarily expect every story to be 
true, although my preference is that when I tell a story that isn’t true, I’ll 
make it obvious that it isn’t. Like on the first day, remember the invisible 
Kung Fu master. You realized that that was not something that actually 
happened to me. I did not move to Beijing. You realize that, right? 
 
Students:  
24. What? 
 
Igor: 
Have I lost trust now? This is very important. If I had pretended that it 
happened to me, then at some point you call bullshit, right? I lose a lot of 
trust. If I lose a lot of trust, then it kicks in your critical factor because now 
you’ve popped out of the story reality, and you’re starting to destroy the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
273 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
story because your integrity’s been violated. Let me put it that way. Does 
that make sense to you guys? You can move out of rapport and a lot of 
things are happening at that point. 
 
 
Now it won’t always happen this way. I’m just giving you my preferences 
and the reasons why I do it this way. You have to choose what’s appropriate 
for you and the context that you want to do it in. So you can either make up 
stories or use the My Friend John. Both will work. I’m just laying out to you 
my reasons for choosing one over the other. Does that make sense? Do 
you want to come up here? You may as well come up as well.  
 
Student: 
 
25. What about borrowing the story?  
 
 
Like, my friend Igor told me about his friend, Russ. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, absolutely. That’s a great one. In fact, I do that all the time. 
 
Student: 
Okay. 
 
Igor: 
In fact, you’re welcome to it.  
 
Student: 
I’m just worried about the TM thing.  
 
Igor: 
Oh, don’t worry about that. It’s just there’s a license fee. You have to pay 
me to use it. Did you have a follow-up as well? 
 
Student: 
 
26. What do you want to achieve with this exercise? 
 
Igor: 
So the question is, what do you want to achieve with this exercise? Right 
now it’s building skills still. We’re still on the skill-building stage. Up until 
maybe later on today or tomorrow, all we’re interested in is, can you put 
people into trances and maybe do some pleasant experiences with them 
conversationally, so they don’t realize what’s happened. They just feel like 
they’ve had a good conversation with you. 
 
 
In terms of using it practically, we’ll need to have things that we do within 
those conversational trances to be influential, persuasive and helpful and so 
on. Does that make sense? We’ll come onto those. We can’t do them all at 
once. Otherwise, we’ll overload. So we’re building a foundation, the skill set 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
274 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that allows you to put people in trances, and then you can start doing things 
with it. Make sense? 
 
Student: 
My question was, I’m not sure, I guess this kind of goes more maybe back 
to a story. But what if it’s like remembering a movie or a character in a 
movie that even they may have seen before, but you’re talking about an 
experience that character had. 
 
Igor: 
Sure. Everything works. It’s just a question of how you present it. In fact, 
we’ll come onto more things like that even as we go through. These are just 
variations of themes. We’re just starting a whole concept of how to create 
hypnotic vehicles right now.  
 
 
My Friend John is the classic one. It’s the simplest one to start with and as 
you get used to that, we’ll start evolving that into more interesting and 
unusual vehicles. Let’s just put it that way. Is everyone clear on that? Does 
everyone understand the exercise?  
 
 
Let’s take about five, six, seven minutes apiece. Put someone into a nice, 
pleasant trance. If you happen to use something like, I don’t know, the inner 
smile within, it’s not going to harm you, is it? So whilst you have them in 
trance, you may as well give them a little gift. The inner smile is the one 
we’ve been focusing on. You know how to revivify it in a smile, right? You 
may as well throw that in there as well somehow. Does everyone 
understand the exercise? Off you go. 
 
 
How was that? Did you enjoy it? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Wasn’t that something? Now notice how it’s ironic that you’re doing a lot of 
things at the same time, aren’t you? Look at this little diagram here. It’s kind 
of like a confusing bad hair day, and you’re doing it all at the same time. 
 
 
Ironically, isn’t that easier to do or feel easier to do that than some of the 
exercises you did in the first and second day? That’s because a lot of things 
like this thing here, the language is becoming intuitive. Now you don’t have 
to think about it too much. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
275 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Who here is still thinking about what power words, what hot words and 
similes and so on to choose? Is anyone thinking about that? A little bit? 
Yeah, but you missed the first day, so you’re going to catch up a little bit. 
You’ll catch up and it will become easier. The point is the more you do this, 
the easier it will get. All the extra layers you put on top of it well, they start 
getting more and more natural. Then its a question of, which one is going to 
be useful, given the interaction you have right now. 
 
 
So is there anything you want to comment on before we start elaborating on 
what we’ve done so far? Come on up. 
 
Student: 
Ralph and I were working together, and I was telling him about my own 
private hypnosis practice and describing Nicole and things like that. What 
was really interesting is that as I was describing it, at one point it became 
direct hypnosis. He said, "Hey, what’s the five-word induction that I did on 
Nicole." 
 
 
I said, "Oh, let me show you."  
 
 
I did the induction, and he fell right in and then did the deepener. 
 
Igor: 
It’s very naturalistic, isn’t it? 
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
This is something very interesting. I mean this is what I would call a semi-
covert induction. Everyone thinks that Milton Erickson was a covert 
hypnotist, and in many respects he was, but most of his work was actually 
semi-covert. In other words, people knew something was happening. It’s 
just they had no idea what it was.  
 
 
That’s exactly what you’re starting to do now. You’re blending covert 
hypnosis and overt hypnosis. One makes the other one easier. The other 
one’s a little faster. So you tell a story about someone doing an induction on 
someone and having a great trance, and then you do that with them and 
then it’s a lot easier. Why? Because they’ve already done it once. 
 
Student: 
Exactly. I believe I planted the idea at the beginning. I wasn’t planning to do 
a formal induction with him. But I said that Nicole was interested in hypnosis 
and hypnosis induction. So later on in the middle of the story, he said. "Oh 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
276 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
really, what’s that induction?" Then he could just naturally flow into it 
seeking the ideas. 
 
Igor: 
What he just did there – and this is something that is very useful for you 
guys – I call unconscious formatting. Think about it. If I tell you about a 
hypnotic process and I tell it to you in such detail and I’m observing you so 
I’ll know that you’re going through each step kind of with me as you’re 
thinking about it, at the end of it you’ll have the experience at least once 
already, will you not? 
 
 
So, when we do it again, you’ll know what response to give. If I talk to you 
about someone, "Oh, we did this instant induction and it’s great. This guy 
was there and he was keen. He’s a great subject because he was doing 
exactly what I was asking of him." 
 
 
Then he says that he waited patiently and I said, "Okay, look at me." And he 
focused on me intently. Then when the magic happens, you can always tell 
because people do this. It’s true. You’ll find out in a minute, but he did 
exactly the same thing as everyone.  
 
 
Now of course, what am I doing? I’m showing his unconscious mind how I 
expect him to respond. I learned this trick from a stage hypnotist, believe it 
or not, who did a TV show once and he told me about this. 
 
 
He did a TV show and did an instant induction on a person, a lady I think, 
I’m not sure, when he came on screen first. She was such a flop. I mean 
she just crashed out. He grabbed her and gently let her go down to the 
ground. Of course, the whole audience was stunned. 
 
 
Now after that pattern has been set, how do you think every other person 
responded with his trance inductions? As far as they were concerned, he 
was a hypnotic god at that point. Why not? Because they’ve seen one 
example, this must be how it happens. That’s how I’ll go with it. They have 
no other concept of how to respond. It’s not like they’re choosing to do it. It’s 
just that that’s how their mind is being formatted.  
 
 
In the classical literature, it’s called subconscious priming. You’re priming 
the mind, preparing it for a certain kind of response. It feels natural, intuitive 
and so on, but it’s being preselected ahead of time. Make sense? That’s a 
great example of priming, so thank you for that. Come on up. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
277 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Student: 
I actually found that exercise to be a great experience because not only - it 
wasn’t so much like we did touch on the theme and such, but not a lot of 
power words came out. It was like they weren’t needed because there was 
a lot of H+ going on.  
 
 
So, it was almost as if being in a regular conversation and it slipped together 
like a regular conversation, the whole thing, but it was like the feelings -  
usually with the story were intensified and that was it. It continued itself even 
after the story was finished, you could still feel that emotion through the 
interaction. 
 
Igor: 
The afterglow. What she’s describing, by the way, that’s exactly how 
conversational hypnosis feels. That’s how most people would describe it. It 
was just like a fascinating conversation. It was great.  
 
 
Notice the other thing, which is important and I’m glad you’re saying this 
because this is what we talked about on the very first day. Most people think 
that conversational hypnosis is about the language. Now the language is 
important. It has a very important function and role to play, but it’s not about 
the language. It’s about the context that you create. The language is a tool 
to help create that context. Does that make sense?  
 
 
So just memorizing the magic words will not do this for you. It’s creating that 
context and starting with the H+ and so on that does that. So thank you. 
That’s a comment to make. 
 
Student: 
No problem. 
 
Igor: 
Come on up. 
 
Student: 
What I noticed actually, last night, I was with my buddy, Tom, and he was 
actually describing to me an experience of him working with someone in 
trance. Obviously I’m aware of how you can talk about trance. It was the first 
time really that I profoundly felt myself going into trance, and being a 
hypnotist, I caught myself. Is he trying to induce me… 
 
Igor: 
Or, is it just a great story? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
278 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
Yeah. I don’t think he was. I think he was describing it to me and then the 
realization I had, is one of the things about telling a story about someone 
else. My Friend John is that it actually takes your conscious mind away from 
analyzing what’s going on. It’s a way of opening the gates to allow the 
suggestions to go right in, because I was so focused on the story, I actually 
caught myself going into trance.  
 
 
He said, "You’re getting more relaxed." He didn’t say I was. He said the 
person is getting more relaxed. 
 
Igor: 
He’s relaxed and he’s breathing. 
 
Student: 
Then I said, Dude, are you trying to hypnotize me?" 
 
Igor: 
That’s awesome. Again, this is a great example of how natural this stuff is. 
Does this feel natural to you guys? Yes, it is absolutely natural when you put 
all the pieces in place. If it was just saying, okay, tell a story and then just 
use your power words. Great!  
 
 
Then people would be going, "Okay, I had a friend called John and can you 
imagine John going into a trance now?" You can hopefully, hear that that’s 
not the way that people normally speak but it’s the way people normally 
speak when they’re focusing on structure in language. What part of their 
mind is focusing on that? It’s their conscious mind. 
 
 
 
Of course, their unconscious mind is the one that actually does the work. It’s 
how we speak. We don’t choose our words consciously. They just happen. 
Of course, you all recognize the conscious/unconscious dissociation 
beginning to occur here just as I’m explaining it. That’s the whole point. It 
should be so natural, so seamless and fluid. It’s just a fascinating 
conversation. 
 
 
By the way, this is why, what you were talking about again, which is, you’ll 
find people are doing this to you by accident quite often. You’ll ask yourself, 
"Are these people trying to hypnotize me right now." Or, is it just like, no, 
they’re just telling you something with such engagement themselves, that 
they’re accidentally creating H+. That’s sucking you into the whole thing. 
Make sense? So now you get to use it as a force for good whenever you 
want to, which is nice. Go ahead. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
279 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I didn’t think about any of that stuff. The only thing that I thought about is, I 
had an experience that I wanted him to convey with my story, which was the 
experience that the person had that I was telling about. I became so 
engaged in the story I was telling, but the one thing is I had the intention of 
the H+. The rest of it was out the window for me, and I really do think he 
was tranced, and he was experiencing what I wanted him to experience. 
 
Igor: 
You’re describing exactly the thing that we’re talking about. It sounds a little 
bit blasé when I say this, but when I say, I really don’t have any idea what 
I’m doing up here, I don’t mean that in the sense of I’m a fraud, ha, ha, ha. 
How foolish do you feel now? It’s more that I’m really not conscious of what 
I’m doing. My intention is, all right, I want to demonstrate a particular kind of 
induction and I’ll just deal with it. 
 
 
Sometimes the middle of an induction I get so carried away with it, I have to 
stop myself because I’m going somewhere completely different. I’m going, 
"Oh no, no. I meant to be showing them this. Oh, that feels really good there 
though." It’s just naturally taking me down one road or another. So you need 
to let yourself be carried away by your own processes. That’s what makes it 
easy. 
 
 
Do you recall that we talked about the H+ as both a shield and a sword? 
Well, this is how it works for you. When you create the H+, you’re kind of so 
carried away by it, it is easy. Now after the break, how would you like to 
discover a very simple induction, one which is so simple it actually requires 
no thought on your part whatsoever? It’s very enjoyable to do. It’s easy. You 
will never forget it.  
 
 
You will always know exactly what to say, and it will probably take people 
into deeper trances than they’ve ever experienced before. Would you like to 
discover that? 
 
Student: 
Oh yes. 
 
Igor: 
It’s something I call the irresistible induction, but before we get there… 
 
 
Does this sort of make sense? Yes? So what I want to do now is spend a 
little bit of time seeing how we can tweak the structure of a My Friend John 
technique until we have more vehicles, because we don’t want to be sitting 
there just talking my friend Jack, and here’s my friend Jill, and here’s my 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
280 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
friend John, and here’s my friend Bob. Do you know what I mean? The 
pattern becomes a little bit too easy to recognize over time.  
 
 
This is not to say that’s not a good pattern, it’s a fantastic pattern and I know 
people who use that, that do fantastically well. But, I like to have range so 
that you can express yourself hypnotically in many different environments. 
 
 
Then, when you don’t happen to have a real friend called John who 
happens to have had the experience you want to put other people through; 
you’ll be able to develop other vehicles and anecdotes that can still be used 
in the same way. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Here’s what I call hypnotic lectures. There are two kinds essentially, that I 
want to focus on with you guys. 
 
♦ Direct lectures 
♦ Indirect lectures 
 
 
A direct lecture is very simple. If you think about My Friend John, basically, 
you’re telling someone about an experience. In a direct lecture, you’re 
finding a topic that also allows you to give someone an experience. So a 
direct lecture, basically, allows you to find a topic that has a kind of a natural 
trance theme embedded within it.  
 
 
For example, does anyone here know who Franz Anton Mesmer was? Yes? 
Franz Anton Mesmer is the grand-daddy or the great-grand-daddy, if you 
like, of hypnosis. He develops what’s called Mesmerism. At the time, he 
thought some kind of magnetic fluid of influence passes between people. 
But really it’s the forerunner of what we now know as hypnosis, of course. 
Mesmer thought just by looking at an individual, something would begin to 
happen inside them, a transference of an experience.  
 
 
Do you see where we’re going with this right now? 
 
 
What other kind of topics would lend themselves to this sort of thing? 
 
 
Anyone heard of the Egyptian sleep temples or the soothsayers in Ancient 
Greece like, the Oracle of Delphi? These places are where people would 
predict the future or give advice. In order for the priests to be able to do this, 
well, they went into a trance. In the sleep temples, guess what they did? 
 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
281 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So if you want to talk to someone about solving problems in sleep, do you 
think that might be a useful historical fact to discuss? Or, if you want people 
to have inside inspiration, talk about, "Hey, if only we could go to the Oracle 
of Delphi." 
 
 
"What’s that?" 
 
 
"Well let me tell you."  
 
 
Do you see where we’re going with this?  
 
 
What other kinds of topics would lend themselves to a direct lecture. Which 
have embedded within it a trance theme so that you can just talk about 
hypnotic experiences without being so obvious about it or overt about it? 
 
 
The great psychiatrist, Milton Erickson - there’s a reason why a lot of 
hypnosis and NLP trainings talk about Milton Erickson all the time. Why? 
Because it allows them to put people in trance, it’s a perfect vehicle for it. 
Go ahead. 
 
 
Practicing Tai Chi, right? It’s an inner art and there’s a bunch of internal 
experiences happening and, as a result, of those you can talk about the shift 
to unconscious experienceness. Go ahead. 
 
Student: 
 
27. Can you use legends? 
 
Igor: 
I hope you do. They are some of my favorite things. In fact, after the break, 
if you like, I’ll show you how to use legends to give people amazing hypnotic 
gifts. By the way, legends, I don’t know if you realize this, legends and fairy 
tales in particular, are loaded with unconscious communication.  
 
 
There is actually one individual, one psychotherapist who argues, and I 
think quite persuasively, that one of reasons that teenagers nowadays feels 
so much angst compared to yesteryear is that all of our fairy tales have 
been cleaned up. 
 
 
Have you ever read the original Grimm’s Fairy tales? There’s a reason 
they’re called Grimm. But the theory goes like this. Inside of the story, which 
bad stuff happens, children get a chance to experience the world being 
messed up in a way that’s safe for them so they can process it. So when 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
282 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
their emotions actually come and meet them in real life at some point, they 
already know how to deal with it. It’s not the first time they’ve come across 
these things so they’re not as threatened by them. Does that make sense? 
 
 
As a hypnotist, I find that argument very persuasive, so please go out and 
scare children, with stories only. Legends are excellent.  
 
 
A sensory deprivation tank was all the rage in the ‘70s and still the subject 
of studies. Again, you can talk about scientific studies and research in this 
area, a phenomenal vehicle. 
 
 
He’s just stolen something from Ralph; music. Music is a great one, 
especially for people who are music lovers. Talking about how people get 
carried away by it or by great composers, like Mozart, who would hear 
music in his dreams. Or Bach, I think it was, who said that the problem isn’t 
coming up with new symphonies, the problem is having enough time to write 
them all down.  
 
 
Gypsy magic, absolutely. Especially if you have experience of what people 
actually do, the actual rituals and so on. Phenomenal! 
 
 
Straight-up hypnosis, we don’t want to use that word. That’s devil’s work. 
 
 
It’s been pointed out that some people will live their lives in accordance with 
their favorite children’s stories. I wouldn’t actually be surprised by that. We 
know that we have unconscious blueprints that define how we lead life. For 
example, did you know that most people – it’s not true of everyone – but you 
can tell how long someone will live often by the age of their grandparents 
when they were born?  
 
 
Grandparents become a blueprint for old age. If they were significantly 
older, like in their 60’s and 70’s when the child was born, old age looked 
really old and frail, so people tend to live less long. If you had young 
grandparents, in their 40’s say, then the mental picture of old age is a lot 
younger and a lot more vital, so people tend to live a little longer. That’s just 
an unconscious expectation, and I can actually see children’s stories setting 
up an expectation.  
 
 
What is not, if unconscious formatting, exactly as we talked about a moment 
ago? Can you tell me how that works? I wouldn’t necessarily say it’s a 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
283 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
universal thing, but I absolutely see that being a relatively influential part of 
how people make up their reality.  
 
 
So we have some more suggestions in terms of direct lectures? Sports and 
athletics, especially people in the zone and all that sort of stuff. So we’ve got 
a good handle on how a direct lecture works. Yes?  
 
 
So let’s have a look at the indirect lecture. The advantage of an indirect 
lecture is you can absolve yourself of responsibility. For example, let us say 
that we took Mickey’s suggestion and we were going to start talking about 
gypsy magic.  
 
 
Let’s say our audience is a corporate audience or a academic audience. 
Their initial impression might be, "Oh, gypsy magic, it must be all fakery." 
The critical factor may well switch on, so you don’t even have the ability to 
go through the process of influencing because the very topic might switch 
them off. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
What if you could distance yourself and your audience from the topic 
somewhat so that they have the freedom to not have to over analyze and 
reject the idea? Wouldn’t that be interesting?  
 
 
In an indirect lecture, essentially what we’re doing is we’re going to be using 
the same themes as in a direct lecture, only we’re going to put it into a 
secondary vehicle that talks about the indirect lectures.  
 
 
It’s not you talking about gypsy magic. It’s not you talking about athletics. It’s 
not you talking about sensory deprivation tanks. It’s a TV program you 
viewed that talked about this. It was an investigative report about gypsy 
magic, a film that centered around legends or maybe an article that you 
read about Egyptians’ sleep temples.  
 
 
There was this crazy seminar you attended where the lecturer decided to 
talk about this weird stuff. Do you see where we’re going with this? You’re 
now putting responsibility for the statements into somebody else’s mouth so 
if the credibility is at risk, it does not reflect on you. That extra level of 
divorce says they won’t have an argument with you whether or not that’s 
right. It’s just what other people believe; hence, there's no real argument to 
that. Sure if they believe that.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
284 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
How can you argue whether or not a TV program may report on gypsy 
magic or not? Does that make sense? So it allows the mind to have that 
extra layer of dissociation, and if they have a little layer of dissociation, they 
won’t need to argue with it as much. Hence, the critical factor won’t be 
engaged as much and so on. Do you see how the indirect lecture works? 
 
Student: 
 
28. Is that the equivalent of using the softening language to some 
extent? 
 
Igor: 
Yes although, of course, you can use the language throughout everything, 
but it has something similar. It’s also similar to using the My Friend John 
versus this is what happened to me. If it happened to me, you might argue 
and say, "Yes, but my life’s different." 
 
 
"Well, this is what happened to John."  
 
 
For some reason, people are less prone to argue with you. I think it’s 
because they’re more dissociated from the experience, so their intellect is 
less likely to engage critically with it. But there’s no research I’ve seen that 
will back that up, its just my personal theory on that. 
 
 
Student: 
Obviously, the feedback mechanism that you’re using to decide or 
differentiate between using direct and indirect comes from the person that 
you’re discussing with. So, as you begin to use a direct story, you can look 
at them and watch their body language and decide for yourself if it’s too 
conservative. Maybe going with gypsy magic directly was… 
 
Igor: 
Sure. Although personally, honestly, I think I’ll intermix those two quite 
happily. If I think that the topic I want to introduce is a little more risky, I’ll 
dissociate myself. I’ll distance myself by making it more indirect. On the 
other hand, a lot of times I’ll just give it up and present it directly, because I 
really don’t mind assuming the responsibility for it. 
 
 
It’s just giving you that choice. I guess you could do it the way you 
suggested, but personally the way I’ve just used it in the past has been, if 
the topic I wish to introduce, I have a feeling given the context I’m in, would 
be more risky or more apt to be criticized or analyzed, then I’ll indirect it one 
step by saying. "Oh, there’s a seminar or an article I read...", and so on.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
285 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
If the context is appropriate and I know the audience is warm to a particular 
theme – let say I’m speaking with a more New Age audience - and I’m 
talking about sleep temples, it fits their criteria, the way they look at the 
world quite neatly, so I’m happy to talk about it, because I know it will be 
accepted instantly. 
 
Student: 
 
29. Is there something more powerful about using the direct versus 
indirect because if there isn’t then why, not just always indirect?  
 
30. What are the benefits of using either one? 
 
Igor: 
At that level honestly, I’m not sure there is a big difference. It just gives you 
more variety. Sometimes it’s nice to actually be the author of some ideas. 
 
Student: 
Naturally. 
 
Igor: 
It’s more a question of you having choice and range. If you want to be 
indirect each time and just talk about things you’ve read and seen and so 
on, by all means, do so. I don’t think there’s going to be any big difference in 
terms of the impact it has on people.   
 
Student: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
You’re welcome. All right, you can see how the hypnotic lecture is just a 
variation of the My Friend John technique isn’t it? We’re now, not talking 
about individuals. We’re talking about ideas or historical facts or 
psychological facts or scientific facts or anything like that and at various 
levels of indirection. 
 
 
Now, we’re going to do the same exercise we did a moment ago. Find a 
different partner, only this time I’d like for you to present them with either a 
direct or an indirect lecture. If you want to mix the two by the way, you’re 
welcome to do that, too. Anything we’ve talked about so far – the legends, 
the sleep temples, anything that come to your mind feel free to explore it.  
 
 
Your overt purpose is just to inform or educate. The, this is something crazy 
I found, or this is something interesting or that reminds me of, I just heard or 
something I just did. Then just educate them or inform them in terms of the 
theme that you’re using.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
286 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Of course, your main purpose, your intention is to switch on your H+ and 
allow the revivification, the pacing and leading, the conscious/unconscious 
dissociation. All these things to weave through what you’re doing so you 
create a nice pleasant trance experience for them. Make sense? 
 
 
Now, if somewhere in the middle of that, you happen to slip into how 
connected people can be and how they can have people they love in their 
love and develop an inner smile. That might be okay. I can live with that, 
can you? 
 
 
Go ahead and have six minutes apiece, we’ll come back and then we’ll have 
a lunch break.  
 
 
 
DVD 11:  The Surefire Irresistible Induction & 
How to Powerfully use “Magic Moments” 
 
Igor: 
How are you guys doing? Good lunch? Are you ready for the irresistible 
suggestion? Who’s ready for the irresistible suggestion, anyone? 
 
Students: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Before we get onto that one…No, it’s true. I’d like you all to go around, put 
one person in trance, instant induction, really just for a minute, in a smile 
then come back. Off you go. 
 
 
Is everyone smiling here? Don’t worry, tomorrow we’ll start on the inner 
frown. Who wants to see the irresistible induction? Just you over here, if 
you guys want to have a break I’ll just chat with them, its fine by me. I’m 
building this up. Hopefully it’ll live up to it, right? 
 
 
Let me tell you a little bit about where this came from. Some years ago, as 
you know, I was going all around the world doing all kinds of crazy stuff to 
figure out how this little thing called hypnosis works. 
 
 
I was reading a book by Emile Coue about Emile Coue, who was one of 
the people I was looking at, at the time. Do you know who Emile Coue is, 
anyone? It has an accent, because it is French, yes? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
287 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Emile Coue was a French doctor at the turn of the last century, so the 19th 
century going into the 20th century. Just a little bit of trivia – he created 
affirmations. He recorded the very first self-improvement audio program. It 
was on one of those disc things, not a compact disc, before vinyl even 
existed. It was one of those wax phonographs. It’s very old. 
 
 
He used to work in a very interesting way. He had a ramshackle 
farmhouse in France and when patients would come to him, he didn’t just 
treat them in a modern version of the 50 minute hour where you come in, 
talk to you and off you go. He had a much more eclectic holistic way of 
dealing with people that I think was very interesting. 
 
 
One of the things, we have people do, is they turn up and have to wait 
around for a day to see the big doctor. Meanwhile, whilst they’re waiting 
for the big doctor, there’d be about a dozen or 20 other people running 
around in deep trances. I’m talking about people who would be sitting 
there like this all day, and other people doing post hypnotic suggestions, 
all kinds of stuff. 
 
 
Of course the atmosphere, it creates its own little H+, if you like. People 
are sitting there and they’re having their own reality, in terms of what is 
real and possible. It’s kind of eroding around their ears and they’re like, 
what the heck is all this stuff? It’s only a matter of time before they are 
perfectly primed for being great deep trance subjects too. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
In fact a lot of the old hypnotists, and what is now called faith hypnosis, 
started as parlor shows. People would come in small groups of 20-30 
people and demonstrate the power of the mind. It would be all kinds of 
cool and mesmeric things and so on. 
 
 
What a lot of people don’t know is, when they did these little shows they 
used to bring their favorite subjects with them to demonstrate stuff. They 
didn’t take people out of the audience. They just took their favorite 
subjects with them.  
 
 
I thought, wouldn’t it be great if we had that double whammy? Nothing 
induces trance as well as somebody who is already in trance, like in a 
deep trance. It just affects other people. 
 
 
It’s kind of impractical to have your personal trance monkey and have to 
cart them around everywhere. It doesn’t work so well, right? If nothing else 
there are problems with the visa’s and the vaccinations – it’s horrible. It 
struck me–there’s one trance monkey you can take anywhere you want. 
You can’t take me everywhere, but you can take yourself. The same thing 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
288 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
happens when you’re in a deep trance it has the same impact on other 
people. 
 
 
Here’s where the irresistible induction comes in. The irresistible induction 
is actually so simple it’s unreal. I kick myself sometimes for not having 
thought of it earlier. Essentially, you’re going to put yourself into trance. 
You’re going to recall how good trance feels. Then all you need to do is 
describe to other people what it feels like to go into trance, what changes 
are occurring inside yourself. 
 
 
Here is the bit that makes this super secret. You change the first person to 
the second person and now it becomes a suggestion.  
 
 
I’d like you to just put your feet flat on the ground and your hands in your 
lap so they’re resting comfortably. You might find a comfortable position 
that you’re resting in. Perhaps you’re aware of your breathing. Your arms 
have a certain sensation and it can change. Perhaps a little motion 
developing somewhere or even just the feeling of motion and all the time 
something comfortable begins to grow inside and you can relax and feel 
good. 
 
 
Your vision can soften, even behind closed eyelids. Your breathing is just 
so comfortable, deep, more even. It’s quite easy to breathe without any 
effort. Meanwhile, your mind calms down. An ease and peacefulness 
settling across your mind. Your thoughts quieting down, the strain of 
thinking drifting away, of course, thoughts can come but they’re not 
important now. You feel far too comfortable for that. That’s it, right there. 
 
 
Perhaps a sense of expansion begins, your mind extending as though in 
infinite space. Your breathing continues, and the comfort continues. You 
can consider something that makes you smile; a person you know and 
love, are connected to, a friend, family, child, parent, you know who. 
 
 
Recollections come to mind, it feels good. Wanting to smile and 
remembering how easy it is when you are with this person. How good you 
feel when you are there. How natural it all seems when you’re talking or 
just being around each other. 
 
 
Have you noticed your breathing yet? How comfortable it’s become? How 
good it feels inside? The quiet that you can experience now, where there 
used to be noise, and there it is again that memory, that person, that 
feeling of being connected to someone. It’s natural, no effort required. It’s 
just a good feeling, an easy feeling. 
 
 
Things feel right. You might as well remember it. Might as well remember 
it, so you can recall this feeling anytime you need to, anytime you want to. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
289 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
You might consider a situation in which you wish to hypnotize someone 
overtly or covertly in a conversation. Just considering that and notice how 
easy it is to smile, remembering, how good it feels to be connected and 
everyone has that inside. It’s such an ease, so easy to do. That’s it, 
allowing your mind to drift wherever it wants to knowing the glow of your 
inner smile is natural now. 
 
 
You can bring you back anytime you wish to. If you were to come out of a 
trance, you could do so only as quickly as that smile came with you, could 
you not? It’s important to bring whatever we have inside of us, out, so we 
can use it when circumstances require it of us, don’t you think? 
 
 
Here I go again, drifting off on my own ideas, when all you want to know is 
how do you do the irresistible induction? Once you’re all back again, how 
are you doing? Did you enjoy that? 
 
 
The induction is very simple. Let’s just give a couple pointers before you 
do it.  
 
♦ Number one, first and foremost, go into trance.  
 
By now you’ve had three or four days experience doing this, so just go 
with it, enjoy yourself. 
 
♦ Number two, track your own experience.  
 
 
You don’t suddenly just go from alert, awake and normal everyday 
consciousness, to being in deep trance. It can happen but we’re not 
looking for that right now. It can evolve. You’re kind of using that principle 
on yourself, aren’t you? You’re allowing it to begin, you put more attention 
on the things that are working, it works a little more and you go, "Wow, this 
is great." 
 
 
The irresistible induction is fantastic because you get paid by someone to 
do hypnosis, and then you get to do it on yourself. If you’re a therapist, this 
is a great way of doing it because they think they paid you to overcome 
their fears and pretty soon they’re going, "Wow, I’m afraid of that." – but 
not for long. 
 
 
You’re going to track your own experience. The important thing though is 
you’re going to describe your experience to someone else but in the 
second person as though you’re offering a suggestion. Make sense? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
290 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
For example, the first thing I felt when I sat down here was my breathing, 
so what did I say to you guys? You might be aware of your breathing. 
Then my arms had a light tingly sensation, so I started talking about that. 
 
 
There’s something very important you want to do here, there’s actually two 
things.  
 
♦ The first thing, this is how you can measure your delivery.  
 
In other words your performance is going to be very important, to the 
extent that what you’re saying helps you maintain or deepen the 
experience you have, that’s a good thing.  
 
If however you find yourself having to kind of rouse yourself out of what 
you’re doing or what you’re saying feels like it’s violating the feeling you’re 
having. In other words, it pulls you away from that, then you’re not 
delivering it correctly. Does that make sense?  
 
 
You have an in-built thing. For example, I’m going to do this incorrectly. 
You can feel a comfortable sensation in your chest. Can you hear the 
disconnect between how it should feel and what I’m saying? It actually 
forced me. It jolted me out of the experience. As you’re describing the 
experience in the second person as if it’s a suggestion, you want to do so 
only as slowly, deeply, smoothly – whatever verbal qualities you want to 
put onto it – that enhances it for you. 
 
 
It does not take away from it, it does not clash with it, it doesn’t wake you 
up or whatever it is. Does that kind of make sense? 
 
♦ The second thing you want to do, the next point here, is very 
important that you include language softeners here, for obvious 
reasons.  
 
Not everyone’s hands are going to start tingling just because yours did. 
You’re using language softeners to offer possibilities, and if they’re not 
accepting the possibilities – in other words when my hands tingled I don’t 
expect that all of your hands tingled. They might start tingling when I 
suggest it, but even then in a group like this it won’t happen for everyone. 
So I’m offering it as a possibility. I can build on the possibility in different 
directions. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Really, that’s all there is to it its four simple steps. There’s an advanced 
version, do you want to know what the advanced version is? I don’t want 
to overload you with details, it’s kind of tricky, but I’ll tell you if you want 
me to. Would you like me to do the advanced version? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
291 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
All right, but I warn you, you asked for this, so if you can’t do it, don’t add it 
on. In the advanced version you’re doing all of this plus – this is where it 
gets a little bit tricky – it’s tricky. I apologize. 
 
 
Oh, there’s a meta advanced version that makes it – actually beyond very 
good. This is very sophisticated, do you want that? 
 
Student: 
Of course. 
 
Igor: 
I warn you, you may not like this. Only speak on their exhale. Oh, that’s 
new. Only speak on their exhale. You’re creating a feedback loop now. 
When people exhale they tend to relax more so you are indirectly 
increasing that. Does that make sense? Is that an easy set of things to 
do? 
 
Student: 
 
31. Does ‘that’s right’ mean that I say ‘that’s right’ to my partner or 
only that I embody the attitude of ‘that’s right’ whilst I’m doing 
the induction process and so on? 
  
Igor: 
Honestly, there’s only one way I can answer that and that’s by saying, yes, 
it is. It’s a good question, thank you. Both, is best. 
 
Student: 
 
32. When you did it with us, were your eyes open or closed? 
 
Igor: 
They were mostly open but they were partially closed. 
 
Student: 
 
33. When you say mostly open but partially closed, do you mean 
that maybe your eyelids were drooping slightly at some point? 
 
Igor: 
Let me ask you this way; does it really matter? What matters, is that your 
eyes are open for long enough, that you can see responses in the subject. 
That’s the only thing that matters. 
 
 
If, along the way, your eyes are closed for a period or drooping along the 
way, whatever floats your boat. Honestly it does not matter, as long as you 
haven’t lost contact with the subject. That does matter. 
 
 
Who wants to have a go at the irresistible induction? Don’t everyone jump 
up at once after all this build up. What I want you to do is find a partner, 
and then quietly find your way. You may as well start the irresistible 
induction as you walk toward your exercise space, because you may as 
well start building that momentum inside yourself, might you not? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
292 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
By the time you’re sitting down, they think you’re about to start but you’ve 
already got a head start on them. Wouldn’t that be something? Find a 
partner, find somebody to work with, and spend maybe five or six minutes 
doing the induction then switch around. 
 
 
While you’re in there you might as well give them a gift. Whatever you 
want to give them is fine by me, whatever comes to mind right now. Are 
we good with that? Off you go. 
 
 
Okay, judging by the difficulty of getting you guys to come back again, I’m 
presuming that went pretty well. Who enjoyed that? Who had a good 
trance experience as a subject in that? Isn’t it amazing, hypnosis?  
 
 
The best part is you don’t have to think about anything, you don’t have to 
remember any vocabulary, you don’t have to remember any trance 
processes or any complex equations or formula. You just have to bring 
yourself along and have a good time. The rest  just happens by itself. Isn’t 
that pretty cool? 
 
 
It’s irresistible. It’s true, right? This is really the best way I can come up 
with for describing the power of H+. This is about creating the hypnotic 
context. This is one method of creating the hypnotic context. But do you 
see how this changes all your mannerisms, it changes the rhythms you 
speak in, it changes your pausing, your tonality – it even changes the 
vocabulary you select, right? 
 
 
If you’re doing it here in one induction, honestly, you should be doing it in 
all inductions. This is really part of this middle piece here. You know these 
little red circles? That’s really what you’re doing in those red circles. Do 
you see how that augments your performance much more? Do you see 
what I mean by that? 
 
Student: 
So, I’m kind of starting to plug this into how I would use this in the context 
of an interaction in business or any other situation where hypnosis is 
obviously not going to be talked about. 
 
 
I’m starting to realize for example if I’m trying to make a sale or a 
proposition to somebody I would go there first as if I was the one who 
wanted the product and describe to them in an indirect way how I would 
feel enjoying buying the car or the house or whatever. 
 
Igor: 
Let’s say you went for a simple ‘My Friend John’ technique. By the way 
we’re not even into the influencing processes, yet. We’re about to start 
that phase, but even if you just did a ‘My Friend John’ technique about 
how exciting it is to have this car. For example, say look, "Our last client, 
he wanted pretty much what you want. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
293 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
"When he looked at this car he was so excited. He could just – look at the 
leather. He saw the leather and his hand on he steering wheel and he 
knew when he was driving down the road, he’s got a real car on his 
hands." 
 
 
The language, the descriptions, the similes, they all come out of you being 
excited, doesn’t it? It’s congruent. It’s not like you’re just trying to get one 
over. If you can’t get excited about what you’re selling, then you really 
shouldn’t be selling it. Honestly, just find something else to sell or find a 
different career to get into. There are plenty still out there. 
 
 
That’s where the ethics of what you’re doing comes in as well. If you really 
love your product – have you ever noticed this? The people who love what 
they are offering, sell the best without really even trying, right? 
 
Student: 
If you believe in it, yes. 
 
Igor: 
You believe in it and that makes the congruency flow right through, it 
makes it flow naturally. 
 
Student: 
I really just wanted to make a comment. I just wanted to say how 
incredible that actually was for me, probably one of the best things we’ve 
done so far. Just having that sensation of completely letting go of 
everything you’re saying and feeling that absolutely fantastic with another 
person. It makes me realize what a fantastic thing we’re doing here. 
 
 
I really hope that everyone else experienced that too or will. It’s just that 
great. 
 
Igor: 
Give her a round of applause for that one.  
 
[Applause] 
Don’t worry, after this everything else is a disappointment. Anything else 
anyone wants to say or add? 
 
Student: 
It’s simply fantastic. 
 
Igor: 
Where have I heard that before, I don’t know? 
 
 
We’ve got a great tool for creating the hypnotic context, isn't that fair to 
say? It’s the whole going first principle and so on. I’d like to offer you a 
couple of other ways of doing it. Can I have a volunteer up here for a 
moment? Anyone will do. Give him a nice round of applause, would you? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
294 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You’ll enjoy this, its lots of fun. Just face the crowd over here. It’s funny 
you should ask that, because that reminds me of something. Let me just 
show you something really cool. 
 
 
Put your hand over there for a second, just point out, to twelve o’clock. 
Imagine that’s twelve o’clock. What I’m going to have you do is just start 
pointing around to – you know what? Use your other hand, it makes it 
easier. Point over to one o’clock, three o’clock, and so on and keep going 
around as far as you can until your body won’t turn any further. Feel free 
to turn your body with it. 
 
 
Oops, keep your feet locked on the ground, turn around and see how far 
you can point without actually moving your feet. Make it smooth, there you 
go. 
 
 
It’s going to about 8:30, almost 9:00. Go ahead and close your eyes now. 
What I want you to do is just imagine pointing out the same way, your 
fingers pointing out in your mind’s eye, and it’s going to go to 1 o’clock, 2 
o’clock or 3 o’clock and so on. 
 
 
Keep going past 6:00, 7:00, 8:00, 9:00– all the way back to 12:00. Once 
you’ve done a complete revolution, come all the way back again. Once 
you’re back to the starting point do the whole thing again, only this time 
when you get to 12:00 keep going as though your back was double jointed 
and you could go around a second time without unwinding. 
 
 
Of course you’ll have to do the double unwind back – nod your head when 
you’ve done that. All right, and do it again. The double wind up all the way 
through to 12:00 and then back all the way through to 12:00. Once you’re 
there just feel that stretch, like, "Oh, that’s pretty good." Then come back 
twice until you’re back to your starting position. Then nod your head. 
 
 
Do it a few more times and nod your head each time for me. One more 
time, good, now open your eyes and do it for real. 
 
Student: 
Do it for real? 
 
Igor: 
That’s it, do it for real. Just keep going as far as you can go. Keep going 
around as far as you can do. Look at that – give him a round of applause. 
Isn’t that something? 
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
That, my friend, is the power of your mind. Just by using your mind a 
different way you’ve already found out about your flexibility. Let me show 
you something you can do now, that will allow you to achieve all your 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
295 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
goals and dreams, all kinds of interesting things. Wouldn’t that be 
something? 
 
 
You know you have a conscious mind. You know you have an 
unconscious mind. What you just did of course was talk to your 
unconscious mind indirectly, through the images inside your brain to tell it 
to become more flexible.  
 
 
To the extent that you can tell your unconscious mind to become more 
flexible in other things, wouldn’t that make it easier to achieve your goals, 
your dreams, and your ambitions? Do you see where I’m going with this 
now folks? 
 
 
Give him a nice round of applause.  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
While we’re describing it – do you want to come up? Let me just say this 
first and then I know where you’re going with this hopefully. 
 
Student: 
Maybe not – I was just going to say thank you for deconstructing that 
because I’ve seen those same kinds of things used to sell water that’s 
infused with this or that and bracelets that have such and such – and 
they’re plastic.  
 
I know they’re doing something like that, and my friends are like, 'Oh my 
gosh, it’s a great product." 
 
And I’m like, "No, it’s in your head." Thank you for that because now I can 
do that to them. That’s all I wanted to say. 
 
Igor: 
I may call on you later, on about the stuff you talked about in terms of the 
bar work, because this fits in perfectly. You’ll get your clients. We’ll talk 
about that in a minute if I may because it actually fits perfectly into what 
we’re doing. 
 
 
 
The concept we’ve got right now is called a magic moment. Remember 
right now we’re talking about. Or rather in this session we want to focus on 
how to create a hypnotic context. A context in which an ordinary 
conversation can become hypnotic. 
 
 
If you’re anything like me or if you're like me, exactly, I know that’s good. 
You probably have had conversations in the past and you’re trying to edge 
something in and it just doesn’t quite fit because the whole mood of the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
296 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
interaction does not allow for that intimacy, that slight change, shifting 
gears and so on. Make sense? 
 
 
We need methods for shifting those gears that will allow us to become 
more hypnotic and as a result start doing conscious and unconscious 
dissociation, 'My Friend John', revivification, or any of these other things 
we want to do. Make sense? 
 
 
Of course, the irresistible induction or the principle behind that, the idea of 
going first, is absolutely crucial. You have to be able to enter the magic of 
what you’re doing, otherwise why would they believe it? It’s not congruent. 
 
 
Magic moments are great because they demark a type of reality. In other 
words, it says normal everyday life does not apply here anymore, at least 
not for awhile. 
 
 
The way magic moments work is essentially by stimulating one of three 
emotions. I call it three A’s. It’s either the, aha, "So now I get it. I realize 
what, kind of like, Nicky, just said. Now I finally understand why this works. 
"Right? It’s like, aha, that’s so cute. That’s so amazing. That’s so nice. 
 
 
Have you ever walked past an artist in the street that’s doing caricatures 
or painting these amazing things and you stop, look and go, "Aha, that’s 
amazing." It’s an emotional response.  
 
 
Of course, the third is one we all know and love, is the ha-ha response 
which is of course when people are laughing. Ever notice, how, when 
people tell a joke the atmosphere just changes everything?  It’s 
like 
a 
demarcation. What went before, now we can wipe the slate clear and start 
again from scratch. Have you ever noticed that? 
 
 
We’re looking for the three core emotions in a magic moment. The way we 
can achieve it is, and again, there are three categories I have. But really, 
the categories aren’t important. It’s just that you do them and that’s 
important. You’ve got a visual, an auditory and a kinesthetic. 
 
 
 
The visual is, basically, when you draw stuff, right? This is kind of a magic 
moment because it starts to reveal in visual form what you’ve been doing. 
It puts it in concrete form. You can then take this away with you and go, 
"This means something. This is now a symbol of something." Does that 
make sense? 
 
 
As long as I infuse this with enough emotion, then it starts becoming 
meaningful. An auditory one might be something as simple as a story. You 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
297 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
can tell an anecdote. We’ll come into story telling more fully later and 
when we do you’ll have lots of opportunity to do this.  
 
 
A story is really one of the most wonderful vehicles for shifting realities, for 
shifting gears from normal hum-drum conversation to an amazing 
conversation, to something that’s really just out of this world. 
 
 
The stories don’t have to be particularly crazy or intense or anything like 
that. They can be, but they don’t have to be. They can be just personal 
stories and things like that too.  
 
 
The third one is what you saw here, you can call it kinesthetic or a 
physical demonstration. You’re, basically, getting people to walk through 
an experience, at the end of which there is an insight. 
 
 
The key thing to magic moments is number one, the performance. If you 
just give it a hum-drum point, turn, point, turn, all right now do it for real, 
thanks. Do you see how if my attitude is deflated the whole thing gets 
deflated? I can cheapen it with my own attitude or I can inspire it with my 
attitude. 
 
 
Secondly, the magic moment has to have a point. It has to have some 
kind of an idea or concept that brings everything that has happened 
together in a meaningful way. 
 
 
If I just left it there and now you’re at point. You’ve stretched a bit further 
and you say, "Wow."  
 
 
And he says, "Wow."  
 
 
"All right, see you tomorrow."  
 
 
I’ve just wasted an opportunity. All that energy has been built up and it 
doesn’t go anywhere, it’s not filtered into anything. 
 
 
It has to have a point. I like the point of how powerful your mind is. The 
point might be if you’re in business or sales, for example, when we’re 
working with an international accountancy firm that specializes in audit’s 
and wants to start getting work from Fortune 500 companies.  
 
The ones listed on the stock exchange, that typically only go for the big 
five international firms like KPMG and so on for safety reasons, they know 
they can tell the shareholders we went for the best. It’s not our fault. 
 
 
It’s very rare that they pick someone, other than, the top five. I think now, 
they’re four because Anderson decided to not work so well anymore. This 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
298 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
is exactly one of the things we taught them to do in order to get the 
business. They end up creating a magic moment and saying. "Look, we 
really believe in the relationship of working with you to get the results." - 
and so on. A magic moment, and then at the end of the conference they’re 
saying, "That’s great. That’s what we want to have. We want to work with 
people like this." 
 
 
It really brought the experience to life for them. Anyone can just say we 
work with people and together in unity and harmony, we’ll master the 
world and all the rest of it – it doesn’t mean so much. But the experience 
does. It has to be focused down on something. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Those are key things. You can use an infinite variety of things for magic 
moments, like magic tricks. You can do what you just saw there. You can 
do psychological things. We have a whole deck of cards with examples for 
these things. I’m sure all of you know some versions of things you can do 
with people in order to arrest their attention and go wow, "This is kind of 
cool. This is unusual and different." Make sense? 
 
 
We’re going to have a chance to practice in this one particular moment 
and use this as an opening door towards conversational induction. Before 
we do it though, do you mind talking about how you get business using 
magic moments? 
 
 
This is not just a little parlor trick to open things up. This is honestly, how I 
first started filling my own business practice as a hypnotherapist, totally by 
accident. Before I tell my story you might as well tell yours because I think 
it’s amazing. 
 
Student: 
I’m down to two bar shifts a week. I work two shifts in the bar, the slowest 
days, Sunday and Monday during the day. By happy hour, I’m out of there. 
By the end of those two shifts my books are full, I’ve got clients for four 
more days, and I do it using magic moments. 
 
 
I of course started with the cards and got a few of them. Then I got 
interested in mentalism. I use another trick, too. I’ll walk up to a table or a 
group of people and while they’re looking at menus, I’ll just tell them what 
they want and they’ll look at me and say how did you do that? It’s the 
embedded command CD. They may not want that, but they’re going to 
have it. 
 
 
If you want to study the embedded commands thing, that’s a good one. 
They say how did you do that? Now I’ve got a conversation and I tell them 
this is a second job for me. They ask what do you do? I get inside your 
head. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
299 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
They’re like. "What?"  
 
 
Wait a minute, then I’ll do a mentalism trick where I’m also doing a 
hypnotic gaze induction on them. They don’t know it, and then they’re like. 
"What are you, a psychic?'  
 
 
I’m like, "No, I’m just a hypnotist." I downplay it.  
 
 
"Do you have a card?"  
 
 
"Sure" – bang.  
 
 
Then I walk away and without fail – Kristin watched me do this like twice in 
20 minutes – they’re up at the bar saying, "When can I set an 
appointment? What can you fix? What can you do?" 
 
Igor: 
Would it be fair to say that when you use magic moments properly, that it’s 
just night and day. It totally transforms the interaction and the results you 
get as well, right? 
 
Student: 
Yes. The best thing about a magic moment is, once you know how to do it 
you’ll go, "Oh really? That’s all it is?" If you do the stage part right, if you 
do the – what’s the word – the setup right, the theater part right, it can be 
the easiest trick in the world and you’re going to get a huge reaction. 
 
 
Most mentalism tricks, when you learn how the trick is actually done, 
you’re like, "Really that’s it?" They’re really simple to learn but if you do it 
right you blow people’s minds and all of the sudden they’re asking for your 
business card. "Can you make me quit smoking?" "Can you make me lose 
weight?" 
 
 
"Well, yes. Yes I can, as a matter of fact.' 
 
Igor: 
Who would like to learn how to do that? Give him a nice round of 
applause. 
 
 
I’ve been teaching magic moments pretty much since we started teaching 
live courses. I really love to hear when people actually use it. A lot of 
people think, "Oh, it’s such a simple thing, it looks charming." – and then 
they forget all about it. 
 
 
When you actually use it you get amazing results. I had the same thing. 
The place I discovered magic moments was, out at a party with friends, 
back in my early days of hypnosis. I was trying to do the networking thing. 
Bugging everyone saying I’m a hypnotist, I’m a hypnotist. And they said, 
"Yes, we know already, whatever." 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
300 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
We were at some kind of bar or club type thing, with loud music, but more 
like a bar. There was a big table of us. Everyone was saying what about 
this – they were all ignoring me. 
 
 
One of my friends then turns around and says, "Oh, I saw this thing in a 
stage show with people whose hands were stuck or arms were stuck. Can 
you do that?" 
 
 
This was in my early days, so I was less confident about the whole 
hypnosis thing. I was kind of like, "Yes, sure, of course, I can. I’m 
Hypnoman." 
 
 
We went to a little corner where the music was playing loudly. I had to 
shout in his ear. I did eye catalepsy – so eyes locked – and then we did 
the arm bar. Of course, with eyes locked, it just looked like I was 
whispering in some guy’s ear. So that was not probably as dramatic, but 
with the arm bar suddenly people noticed. 
 
 
Before I finished the whole arm bar thing, I had, I don’t know, about five or 
ten people hanging around just watching. This is the interesting part – by 
the time I got from the area I was standing in, back to the table, where 
everyone was sitting at, I had a whole queue of people queuing up around 
the table. And half of them weren’t even with us. 
 
 
They were all saying, "Oh, can you cure insomnia?" "Can you deal with 
smoking?" "I’ve got a chocolate fetish and this won’t come off my hips, can 
you help me with that?" – all kinds of stuff. I filled up my book on that one 
night. 
 
 
It is very powerful. Ironically people think, "Oh, it can’t be. It’s just an easy 
gimmick." If you treat it like a gimmick it will be. 
 
 
When I was a kid there was a magician in England called Paul Daniels. Is 
anyone here from the UK? Paul Daniels was a famous TV magician who 
had a show every week for years. It takes a lot of inventiveness to be able 
to do that. 
 
 
Anyway, I loved that show. One Christmas, I might have been 11 or 12, 
and got a Paul Daniels magic set for Christmas. I thought this is fantastic. 
I’m going to be like Paul Daniels. His catch phrase was, "You’ll like this, 
not a lot, but you’ll like this."  
 
 
I practiced my catch phrase. He was going a little bald on top – I didn’t 
quite go as far as that but I was doing my whole Paul Daniels thing. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
301 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Then something happened, I opened the box up and there were these 
little cheap plastic balls and slidy things that made things happen and all 
the rest of it. After about five minutes I’d get bored of it. I wish it had 
written on the box in large letters across the side, magic not included. The 
magic is not in the trick. If you just treat it as a trick, it’s a trick, and really 
after a few like, "Oh, that’s interesting." It just gets tedious. 
 
 
Does anyone here have a friend that’s into magic, like an amateur 
magician, and they just keep doing the same thing over and over to the 
point where it just annoys you? I had a few friends like that. The thing 
they’re missing is the performance element. The magic that comes from 
you. It’s back to the H+ again, isn’t it? 
 
 
I would be doing you a disservice if I didn’t emphasize that, because just 
doing a trick about people pointing around the room isn’t enough. It’s what 
it evokes in people. That creates magic and that shifts peoples’ gears from 
normal conversation to like, eyes open wonder, where you have them. 
 
 
It’s the window of opportunity where you have them. Give them this little 
nudge, and off they go into la-la land. Does that make sense? Who wants 
to have a go of that now?  
 
 
Here’s what I’m going to do. We’re going to start with a magic moment. Do 
you want me to go through what we just did a moment ago, again, just to 
describe it? 
 
 
I’ll describe the magic moment again in a second, let me just give you the 
whole process in a minute.  
 
♦ Find a reason to introduce the magic moment.  
 
Of course, we had a lovely long in-depth conversation before the magic 
moment. Sometimes you can say, "Oh, this reminds me of something. Let 
me show you this." You just bring it in casually in the conversation. If you 
want to pretend you had a conversation first, that’s fine by me. Just bring 
in the magic moment. 
 
      It’s very important at the end of the magic moment when something has 
happened, which is kind of interesting, it’s emotionally stimulating – 
remember the amygdala gets triggered by something novel, something 
unusual, something unexpected – well a magic moment is that. 
 
 
Would it be fair to say you felt your amygdala being triggered? It was 
novel, it was unusual – who came up? 
 
Student: 
Absolutely. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
302 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
You felt like, "Wow, what is that?" Especially when you went to turn 
around normally. Just so you know, when people turn they’ll go to six, 
maybe seven o’clock. That’s about as far as they go. When you went to 
nine, I thought I hope he’s double jointed; otherwise, I’m going to be 
embarrassed. 
 
 
At the end of that, there’s that emotion that’s running around, but it has 
nowhere to go. There’s no purpose or point it can come down on. 
Sometimes people automatically latch onto a point, so they’ll sometimes 
ask. "Oh, wow. Is that how goals work? Is that why when people believe in 
themselves it’ll work?" And all that sort of stuff? 
 
 
It’s relatively rare. You have to give them a meaning. You have to draw it 
all into a point for them. Your point really should be related with whatever 
kind of influence you create with people. In other words, it’s creating a 
frame, or a suggestion of some sort. We’ll talk about frames more 
tomorrow, make sense? 
 
 
 
    2.  You have to make a point.  
 
 
The point I was making here, was, the power of the mind. I just like that 
because it fits my job pretty nicely. It can really be anything. It can be 
about how your corporation is different from other people’s corporations. It 
could be about why it’s important to learn history rather than not. Why it’s 
important to overcome points and stuff, like that. 
 
 
The thing about magic moments though, the magic moments should 
somehow be able to be framed in terms of, or in reference to, whatever 
point you’re trying to make. For example, the pointing game we just 
played, it was trying to convince 100 pupils that history is important to 
learn. How does that fit? How does pointing around fit history? 
 
 
 
I may have to tweak it. For example, imagine there in front of you, is 12 
that’s the 12th century, the 13th century and so on. By the time you get to 
the 20th century or 21st century which is 9 o’clock and then go back past 
and let’s see if we can predict the future. 
 
 
We just talk about how – you can imagine how the whole story gets 
evolved now, right? You go through the centuries all the way up to the 
present day, which is of course the 21st century. That’s 9 o’clock. Then, as 
a lot of people realize the future is always built on the past, so keep going. 
Keep going. See if you can tell the future. 
 
 
When they actually do it and they actually go past the 21st century, past 9 
o’clock, into the future, they say, "Wow, I’ve got to study history." 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
303 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Notice how the association, the link, is not logical. Being able to point has 
nothing to do with predicting the future or even learning history. Because 
your story is smooth and because the experience is emotive, in other 
words, it has emotions attached, and it’s engaging, those three ideas 
somehow get associated. They get collected at the unconscious level and 
they will accept the idea. Does that make sense to you guys? 
 
 
Do you see how magic moments have a lot of scope? It’s just that you 
have to bring it down to a point. And the point has to fit the context you’re 
in, in other words, the message you’re trying to provide. Make sense? 
 
 
At this point you have an opportunity for trance. The first thing I want you 
to do at this point, is, what we call the hypnotic gaze. Do you recall on day 
one, when you put your hands on someone’s shoulder and stared into 
their eyes? You watched for that moment, when their eyes stopped 
shifting, when it settled down and the focus locked in. Did you all notice 
that? 
 
 
As you’re doing your instant inductions now, you should still be looking for 
that. That’s still part of the instant inductions. You’re going to do the same 
thing, only this time it will be conversational. 
 
 
They’ve just had an amazing experience, which means you can arrest 
their attention. Do you remember when Johnny as up here a moment ago 
and he just went way past 9 o’clock? He went an extra couple of inches on 
top of that. He went to ten or eleven, something like that. 
 
 
Do you recall how at the end of it he was like. "Wow. What did we do?" I 
just put one hand on his shoulder – I like touch because it arrests attention 
as well – and I had eye contact with him. I just started speaking. Did you 
all see that? 
 
 
Really, it’s like, shall we say, it’s a more socially acceptable or 
conversational version of look into my eyes and do not look away. I’m not 
actually saying it, but in my attitude it’s still there. Make sense? 
 
 
It’s important that you’re doing this stuff with your inner smile, your H+. 
Why? Because normally when people stare at each other, especially 
males staring at other males – but then again males staring at females 
might be interpreted a different way. Do you see where I’m going with 
this? 
 
 
You have to set the context with your own emotional state as well. At that 
point, you have the perfect context for trance. Do you have attention? Yes. 
Do you have a bypass of the critical factor? The answer is yes. You have 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
304 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
a strong emotional event which is already starting to bypass the critical 
factor. Your arresting their attention with eye contact. Eye contact is, as a 
rule, if it’s prolonged, it makes people uncomfortable and that tends to 
derail the critical factor, so you’re pretty much there. 
 
 
You can slip straight into stimulating the unconscious mind. How did I start 
doing that with Johnny? We did exactly what we’ve been doing all day 
today, wasn’t it? Yes, conscious and unconscious dissociation, pacing, 
leading and, if I should need it, revivification. 
 
 
This time, I’m not going to be down like, "And now Johnny, you can 
remember…" It doesn’t fit the context I’ve created. I can do it more 
conversationally, though. I can still change my tone. But, it will be a subtler 
change because it’ll fit the context more. You all had a demonstration of 
what I meant by that. Do you want another demo so you can see it? 
 
 
Can I have a volunteer please? 
 
 
You keep putting your hand up. All right come on up. Give him a round of 
applause. Come on up. It’s not that I have anything against you, it’s just 
everyone should have an opportunity to come up here. Otherwise, they 
start thinking I just paid him to come on stage. 
 
 
Let’s assume, we’ve just done the magic moment, and he’s going, "Wow, 
that’s amazing." 
 
 
"That’s just the power of your mind. Did you know your mind can do 
amazing things? Just now your body turned further than you thought you 
could, just by how you used your brain to give the right information. 
 
 
"You know you have a conscious mind, right? You also know you have an 
unconscious mind and that’s the part, we’re interested in. Your 
unconscious mind can make amazing things happen, heal cuts and 
wounds, without you having to think about it. It’s made you turn further 
than you even realized. 
 
 
"Of course I know there’s many things you wish to achieve, are there not? 
All you have to do is figure out how to get in touch with that part of your 
mind and almost anything becomes possible. 
 
 
"The interesting thing is, you’ve been doing this all of your life without even 
really realizing it. Do you recall the first time you learned to ride a bike, for 
example? Wasn’t it an interesting moment the day you actually managed 
to stay balanced and just, smooth ride? That feeling of excitement, that 
you actually did this. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
305 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
"I’d like to show you how to do something now. I’d like to show you a way 
you can have that same sense of excitement, again. So you can realize 
that it’s so much easier once you get the knack of it. Would you like to do 
that now?" 
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Do you believe him? Do you see how the whole process is actually very 
smooth? Did you hear the hypnotic language in action? I’ll come to you in 
a minute, if I may.  
 
 
The conscious/unconscious dissociation occurring, the revivification 
occurring – did you all hear that? I did a little bit of pacing, not too much at 
this point, because I was getting a lot of agreement already, so I didn’t 
need that much. 
 
 
Do you see how all the tools you’ve been using so far come together in a 
very nice package and it’s almost invisible? It’s almost just like a friend 
giving someone a pep talk, isn’t it? 
 
Student: 
Yes definitely. 
 
Igor: 
Give him a nice round of applause. Thank you. Do you want to come up? 
 
Student: 
It’s just about the next exercise we’re doing. 
 
Igor: 
Just ask quickly then. 
 
Student: 
For the next exercise I was wondering, is there going to be more talk 
about the actual… 
 
Igor: 
You know what come up. It sounds like this is a longer question. 
 
Student: 
I don’t mean to make it long. I just sometimes use a lot of words. What I 
was saying was there was more talking about the conscious and 
unconscious processes to get the magic moment. 
 
Igor: 
Just now? 
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
No that was after the magic moment. I just skipped the stage, to not have 
to do it again, that’s all. We went straight to this area here. 
 
Student: 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
306 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
34. What I was going to ask was, I know you were using that, at 
that point, but when we’re doing this exercise now, can we use 
either a 'My Friend John' story to create the magic moment? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. 
 
Student: 
Can we do, basically, anything we think will… 
 
Igor: 
No, for the magic moment, just stick to the physical thing we did a moment 
ago and I’ll explain why in a minute. For the actual hypnotic induction, 
which happens here, you can use 'My Friend John'. You can use a 
hypnotic lecture, anything you want, just not in this point here. 
 
 
Although you can use it there, I’d like your mind to be able to separate the 
two for a moment, so that, you know when you’re using what, strategically. 
Does that make sense? You can absolutely use lectures here, no problem 
at all. 
 
 
What I did with him, I missed out this part. We just missed that in the 
demonstration. 
 
Student: 
You missed the magic moment. 
 
Igor: 
I missed it out. I skipped it. I cheated. I went ahead without doing the 
whole thing. I only wanted to show this part, That’s the only part I showed 
because I only needed to show the hypnotic gaze and how you take it 
forward from there because you’d already seen the magic moment itself. 
 
 
What we did with him was not a magic moment. It was just going straight 
into what I call the hypnotic blitz. This bit here was the blitz, because I’m 
overloading his whole mind with positive suggestions. Does that make 
sense? 
 
Student: 
I see.  
 
35. Are we allowed to put the magic moment into the exercise? 
 
Igor: 
You will be doing the magic moment. 
 
Student: 
Okay perfect, sorry. 
 
Igor: 
Next time I’ll do the whole version so you can see the whole thing from 
start to finish. I just didn’t think you’d want to see the same thing, again, 
twice. 
 
Student: 
Okay, I just now realize exactly what you were aiming at. Thank you. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
307 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Thank you very much. 
 
 
We’ll start with a magic moment. You can use the pointing one and a 
couple others. I can show you, if you want. Importantly, you bring it to a 
point. You have to make some meaning out of it. Just when that point 
comes out, you’ll put a hand on their shoulder, maybe even both hands, 
depending, maybe, you just put your heads together, depending on the 
context you’re in. 
 
 
You’ll lock eyes, and then you start your induction. Your induction is all of 
this stuff, any way you want. You can just talk about it directly, as we did 
with the conscious/unconscious dissociation. You can use 'My Friend 
John'. You can give them a hypnotic lecture directly or indirectly, S,o you 
already have four different vehicles in which you can do this, don’t you? 
 
 
 
The key here is you’ve got to keep it inside a context, that, if anyone 
outside the room were to see it, they’d think you’re just having a pep talk 
or just giving someone a good talk. Does that make sense? 
 
 
If you had to say to someone, I just hypnotized that person. They’d say, 
"No, way. That’s not hypnosis. Where’s your pocket watch?" 
 
 
Do you understand the exercise, the four simple steps? Is that easy to do? 
It’s just putting everything you did together up to this point. Let me just 
walk you through very quickly the magic moment I used on the stage here. 
So you have something to begin with. 
 
 
It uses something called the idiodynamic response. All that means is when 
you have an idea and you focus on it with sufficient intensity it will affect 
your body. It will affect your movement and so on. 
 
 
We know this already because if you think about people you like and care 
for, what do you do? If you’re thinking about people or situations that 
make you feel upset – well I already gave it away on that one – people 
you don’t like or stressful situations, then you feel bad. 
 
 
A thought, an idea has changed your body, has changed your feelings and 
emotions. The same goes with this. Have you ever noticed how 
sometimes when dogs are sleeping, they’ll twitch and people will say, "Oh 
look, he’s dreaming?" They’re acting out their dreams to some extent. 
 
 
We’re going to do the same thing with this magic moment. They’re going 
to start off – it’s important, I missed the instruction and you saw what 
happened – that you ask them to plant their feet on the floor and keep 
them stuck there. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
308 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Get them to point out toward 12 o’clock. I just like the clock system 
because it’s very clear which way to go. Start point towards one, two, and 
keep going until you go as far as you can go. It will go something like this. 
Typically, it’ll be somewhere between, just before six. And typically, this 
angle here, is where people end up. If they go further than that, you’re in 
trouble, although it worked out just fine. So, thanks, Johnny for being extra 
flexible. 
 
 
Then you close your eyes and focus on the same thing. The first time, 
mentally speaking, you want to really talk them through it so you’re really 
getting them to get involved in the whole process. 
 
 
Do you remember, was it yesterday, when we did the revivification and 
you started describing a scene they’d never seen before? You’re using the 
same kind of language. Going to 12:00, 1:00, 2:00, 3:00, 4:00, 5:00, 6:00– 
and then all the way beyond that back to 12:00. 
 
 
The second time they go through it, I like to make them go through 12 
twice. And it becomes very unrealistic because no one has that kind of 
double jointed back, but it really emphasizes that idea of stretching. I want 
to over emphasize that so that person really gets the idea that this is going 
way beyond where they’ve been before. 
 
 
I do that several times to condition it in. After a while, I tell them to just 
keep doing that and give me a head nod every time you’ve unwound, so I 
can see that you’ve done a few iterations of it. 
 
 
Eventually, I’ll say, now, just open your eyes and do it again. This time, 
they’ll find themselves going a lot further, right? That’s the point at which 
you need to make your point. If they just go okay, "I’ve gone all the way up 
to here – yep, so?" You’ve lost the whole momentum you’ve been building 
up. 
 
 
Just as they get past and they go through all the way again, and get all the 
way up to there, you go, "Look how much more you achieved." or "Look 
how much further you got. That’s the power of your mind." Do you see 
how you’re cementing in? Make sense? 
 
 
Then hopefully, if you’ve performed the whole thing well, they’ll be a little 
star struck and say, "Wow, that’s amazing." Now you have your window of 
opportunity in order to lock contact with the eyes and begin the whole 
conversational induction. Does that make sense to you guys? 
 
Student: 
In his case, after you gave him the hypnotic blitz and said to him, 
"Wouldn’t you like to learn more about this?"  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
309 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
You mean in the second case, here? I had to figure out a context I might 
want to do a blitz in, so in my mind, I just put myself in a position where I 
wanted to teach someone something. I want to teach them a skill, so I’m 
now getting him to a position where I’m revivifying learning, to make it 
easier. Then, I’m offering the motivation. 
 
 
 
Can I show you how to learn something, so you can feel that feeling again 
and be so excited to succeed? I can teach him a skill with that, as a 
resource. Now he’s going into it, looking forward to being excited. 
 
Student: 
Now he says, "Yes, I’d like to learn that." At that point, you want to induce 
him? 
 
Igor: 
Oh no, I’ve already done the induction. That was the induction. Let me just 
do the whole thing again so you can see it from start to finish. How’s that? 
 
Student: 
I mean the first person that was here. 
 
Igor: 
The first person, Johnny? I can’t even remember what I did in terms of the 
blitz. I only did a very short blitz. The blitz was very short. I just gave 
him…I just did a little conscious/unconscious dissociation with him and left 
it with that. I didn’t actually use it for any purpose. 
 
Student: 
You asked him, "Would you like to learn more?" 
 
Igor: 
Learn more about the power of the mind or something – that might have 
been it. In that case, probably, the context I put myself in, is something 
where I have to motivate him to want more. Maybe coaching or to come to 
a seminar or something like that. 
Student: 
 
36. You don’t need to induce him anymore? 
 
Igor: 
That is the induction already. The conscious/unconscious dissociation is 
the induction, very simple. Magic moment, is the pointing. Hypnotic gaze 
begins the induction. As soon as you lock eyes with someone, as soon as 
you look eye to eye with someone, at this point, the whole process of the 
hypnotic gaze begins. 
 
 
Of course, you’ve been paying careful attention over the last few days, 
have you not? You’ve been taking lots of notes. Another part of you has 
not been taking notes because it’s been busy listening. That part of you 
that was busy listening, is already, right now, recognizing something. 
Something that is not in your notes, something that makes you so much 
better at hypnosis than you realize. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
310 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
To the extent that you stop thinking about everything you’ve written down, 
you begin to remember everything you’ve experienced. Not just today, but 
in a lifetime of learning, a lifetime of having conversations with people, a 
lifetime which makes life easy for you to interact with others. 
 
 
Already you have a sense, you have an instinct about how to do this, to 
talk to people in a special unique way, in a way where their inner mind 
begins to open up and trust the whole process. 
 
 
You can feel good about that trust. You can begin to trust that now, can 
you not? You feel a comfortable sensation, can you not? That’s the 
beginning of your unconscious mind showing you how easy it really is to 
do conversational hypnosis. All you have to do is trust that. You can do 
that, can’t you? 
 
 
Remember. That’s right, just remember. That’s an easy thing to do, isn’t 
it?  
 
 
Does that answer your question? 
 
 
All right, find a partner. Just go through the magic moment, hit the point, 
lock eyes and run through an induction. Once you’re doing the induction, 
you might as well revivify things. If something comes to mind that’s worth 
revivifying - I know, give them a little gift that might make their career as a 
hypnotist a little easier. Who am I to suggest you shouldn’t do that? 
 
 
You may as well enjoy yourself and do whatever comes natural. Is 
everyone cool with that? Off you go. 
 
 
Before we start getting into today’s content, a bunch of you asked more 
about magic moments and so on. Normally I’d show a couple things I like 
to do, but Nicky has actually volunteered to show you some of the things 
he does in his bar, which has been getting him all these clients and filling 
up his hypnotherapy practice. 
 
 
With your guys’ permission, would you like to see some of what has made 
him a wealthy and successful man? Come on up Nicky. 
 
Nicky: 
Nice. Rule number one – never tell the trick. Rule number two – don’t tell 
the trick, I’m going to break rule number one and two, I’m about to tell you 
how to do the tricks. 
 
 
The best way to start, really, is with the mind game magic deck. That’s 
where I started. You can go from there. Right here, Lori. Just stay right 
there. I want you to look right into my right eye. Stare right here at the 
triangle, stare at the circle. Okay, stare at the square back right here. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
311 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Which one do you like? 
 
Lori: 
The square. 
 
Nicky: 
The square? You like the square, really? Where did I put it? 
 
 
Pretty cool, right? What if you’d have said the circle? I would’ve said, 
"Wow. We really have a connection. Look behind my name tag." If you’d 
have said triangle, what would I have said? I would have said, "Wow, look 
underneath your chair – there’s something taped to the bottom of it." 
 
 
Rule number two with good mentalism – when you find out how it’s done, 
it should be a letdown. That means it’s easy. The easier it is the more you 
can pay attention to performance. You notice, I’m saying look into my right 
eye – what am I doing? Hypnotic gaze, right? Do you see how I’m starting 
to build context already? 
 
Lori: 
It’s so easy to do. 
 
Nicky: 
If it’s easy, you can pay attention to performance, which is where it’s at, 
right? You’re a good subject, come up here. Let’s have a round of 
applause for Lori. 
 
 
Let’s do something. Have a seat. Let’s do something weird. Oh, am I not 
talking into this? Is that better? I think I had the same problem when I was 
doing stage hypnosis. 
 
 
How well do you get along with your husband? 
 
Lori: 
Since he’s sitting right there, I’d say pretty good. 
 
Nicky: 
You pretty connected to him? 
 
Lori: 
Yes. 
 
Nicky: 
Really connected to him? 
 
Lori: 
I think so. 
 
Nicky: 
Really? 
 
Lori: 
Yes. 
 
Nicky: 
You’re sure? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
312 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Lori: 
Yes. 
 
Nicky: 
Just hold this in your left hand. Don’t open it, don’t look at it, just hold it 
there. Be very aware that it’s in your hand. See what I’m doing? I’m 
directing attention. 
 
 
Let’s just do this. Some of you might have seen this. There’s a red pen. 
There’s Igor’s little thing. There’s a deck of cards. There’s a ballpoint pen 
and here’s my thumb. 
 
Lori: 
What’s in here? 
 
Nicky: 
I don’t know, it’s not mine. Its scotch– one, two, three, four or five things.  
 
 
Just stare into my right eye. As you stare into my right eye think about that 
piece of paper that’s in your husband’s hand. Make sure you’re aware that 
that’s in your hand, really kind of feel it.  
 
 
Really quick, stare at the red pen. Stare at Igor’s thing. Stare at the mind 
game magic. Stare at the pen. Stare at my phone. Back up here really 
quickly. Point at any three of those items, just point at them, that thing – 
two more, what else? That thing and that thing. 
 
 
Okay, we’re just going to get that out of the way. Pick those two things up. 
Put one in each hand. Hand me one of them. You want to keep the red 
pen, are you sure? 
 
Lori: 
Yes. 
 
Nicky: 
Open up the piece of paper and read it. 
 
Student: 
Red pen. 
 
Nicky: 
I used to screw this thing up because I’d write things like; you will pick the 
red pen. Once again K-I-S-S, keep it simple. It’s got to be easy. If I wrote 
you will pick the red pen, what if she’d handed me the red pen? I wouldn’t 
have been able to say, "Really, you want to give me the red pen?" 
 
 
What if she’d left the red pen? "Really, the red pen is the only thing left?" It 
doesn’t matter where it goes, because what I’m saying, hypnotic language 
folks, kids, the red pen – I can say whatever I want after that. Does that 
make sense? It’s called a force. 
 
 
Once again, it’s very simple. It doesn’t matter where the red pen ends up, 
in my hand, on the table or in her hand. I’m going to say, "The red pen, 
really? The red pen?" People won’t question what they assume. Do you 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
313 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
see how easy that is? The simplicity of it makes it work. The simpler it is, 
the better it is. If it’s simple you can pay attention to performance, does 
that make sense? 
 
 
Really quick, this is where I started. Everybody kept asking me, where’s 
the mentalism thing? This is where I started. There are seven suits to this 
thing. I’m done – you can sit down. Can we give Lori a hand? 
 
Lori: 
Thank you. 
 
Nicky: 
There are seven suits. There’s mind reader, brain games, think yourself 
better, the mind’s eye – those are kind of fun. These are great in a party 
also. My suggestion is pick one of each suit. Memorize it. Practice it. Go to 
a party or go to a bar. 
 
 
Do one at a time. Don’t try to memorize them all at once, one thing at a 
time. There’s self discovery, power habits and unreality testing. They’re all 
a lot of fun. They will make you the life of the party because people will go, 
"Who is that weirdo in the corner?" They won’t be able to help but to come 
talk to you. 
 
 
Another thing you can do is cold read. Anybody want to cold read Igor 
really quick? 
 
 
So Igor, there’s something that everybody notices about you. You don’t 
have to come up, I’m just going to go quick because I’m going to get off 
the stage. 
 
 
The thing that everybody notices about you is your ingenuity, your ability 
to take something complicated and make it simple. You might want to just 
be a little bit careful that you go to the expert in something that’s not your 
field. Don’t try to do your own plumbing or your own car, because you are 
ingenious. 
 
 
Do you see what I just did there? I gave him something. I gave him 
ingenuity, and then I took it away. I’m kind of getting a picture of a s’more. 
I don’t know why – a really gooey s’more. 
 
 
I think I know what it is. You’re kind of like a s’more. You’re kind of 
crunchy on the outside. That’s the way you go most of the time. But inside, 
you’re kind of gooey. There’s somebody special who you’re really gooey 
with and you don’t show it all the time. 
 
 
Somewhere in your life is an octogenarian, someone who’s in their 80’s – 
alive or dead– that meant something to you. They taught you something, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
314 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
something important. I don’t know what that thing was, but you might want 
to revisit that lesson. 
 
 
I don’t know why I keep going back to the camping thing. Now, I’m looking 
at a tent with duct tape on it. I’m seeing your resourcefulness. Okay, my 
only thing is – it’s great that you’re resourceful, but you need to remember 
to also be prepared so you don’t get caught with your shorts down. 
 
 
That was just really quick and simple. All I did was to take the first letter of 
his name Igor, and gave him ingenious. The second letter was G and I 
gave him gooey. The third letter was O, I gave him an octogenarian. The 
fourth letter was R, I gave him resourcefulness. 
 
 
Give it and take it away. All you need is somebody’s name and an 
adjective to go with each letter and you can cold read somebody. I 
suggest – this is just my opinion – you don’t pretend to be a psychic. Don’t 
do it, unless you really are. I have no opinions either way, well I do, but 
don’t pretend to be something you’re not. 
 
 
When people say, "Wow, are you a psychic?"  
 
 
I say, "No, I’m just a hypnotist." Bang, I have a client. Anyway, that’s about 
it. 
 
 
This I showed you. Get started, folks. Everyone who was asking me how 
to get started, this is it. Go to the internet and do a search for mentalism. If 
you want to do some more heavy handed stuff, look up mentalism. 
There’s a book – The 13 Steps to Mentalism. It’s an old, old book. 
 
 
If you watch Darren Brown, if you watch Kris Angel, if you read that book 
you’ll find variations of those tricks. All those things come from that. You 
can look up mentalism. There’s a guy, Mr. X. There’s a lot of marketing 
hype around his product, but Mr. X has got a pretty good product out there 
if you want to learn some mentalism. Did that help? 
 
 
 
 
DVD 12:  Strategic Conversational Hypnosis & 
How to Use the “Dream Machine” for Maximum 
Effect 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
315 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor:  
Who enjoyed the magic moment? Isn’t it a great way of opening the door 
and doing a conversational trance?  
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
We have two interesting ways of creating hypnosis context. Of course, H+ is 
underlying the whole thing. But, the irresistible induction creates that sense 
of flow and harmony of what you're doing. You create a context that people 
naturally fall into.  
You can do the irresistible induction within anything else that you do. You 
just start with yourself first. By describing your own experience, it will help 
you keep track of what it is you're suggesting to others. This is true of 
anything you do, whether it’s story telling or sales approaches or anything 
else. If you go first, it’s easy to remember what to do, because you're doing 
it.  
The magic moments allow you to shift the nature of interaction, so you can 
do your blitz, other techniques and so on. It opens a door for you. It doesn't 
mean you have to do magic moments every time. You may have noticed, 
when Arthur asked his question, there was no need for the magic moment 
because he was already there. I just had to take the opportunity that was 
being presented.  
You’ve got a great foundation. You can do some sophisticated inductions. 
You can take people in and out of trance, conversationally, overtly and 
instantly. You span the whole range of what’s possible with hypnosis. It’s 
time to focus on what we do when you get them there. It’s good to put 
people in trance, but then your hands are stuck, great. Other than a bit of 
showmanship, it doesn't take you very far.  
Direct suggestions can work fine when the context has been created for it. 
But, you need to understand how to create that context within the induction 
itself, so that when you present a suggestion, it takes. If it’s in a 
conversation, so you can set up, so the conversation lets them naturally 
conclude something.  
 
I want to introduce you to a concept I call “Power Loops.” A power loop is 
something people want from a script without a script. What is a script trying 
to do when you read it? It’s trying to move people through a sequence of 
experiences, at the end, of which, you can hopefully predict a reliable result.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
316 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
For example, if someone has a phobia, I lead them through the phobia and 
they have an interaction with it, which is totally abnormal for them. Then 
include some positive emotions at the same time, so when they go back to 
the phobia, they are now feeling these positive emotions. Will it be fair to 
say, that I can reasonably predict that the phobia will be gone?  
That is an example of a power loop. I would like to give you the power loop 
of all power loops. The basic process from which you can create anything 
else.  
It doesn't mean that everything has to go through the same steps, but it’s 
useful when we're talking about the influencing model, the sales model. 
Those who have trained in hypnotherapy with me, will see the same model 
coming out repeatedly.  
It’s robust and works with the mind. Are you interested in that one? If you’ve 
trained with me before, you’ll be familiar with this. It’s the PCAT formula. 
How many know this or have heard of it?  
P starts with the problem or the parameters.  
Here’s the reason we need to start with a problem. Imagine that, a problem 
is, as a raft or a boat in a lake and all the wrong stuff is in it. You need to 
paint this raft a different color so it will be more attractive. If you go out to 
the lake and start splashing paint around, you're adding resources. You're 
creating changes and it’s fantastic. But it doesn't change much, because 
when the raft finally comes around, it’s still the same color and nothing has 
changed.  
This is one of the problems, when people try to create change. They create 
change when they're feeling good or when the problem is absent because 
they're empowered. But, it doesn't attach to anything. When the problem 
comes again, all they’ve done is create a greater disassociation between 
the problem and the solution. They have a great solution as long as the 
problem doesn't show up.  
 
We want to start with a problem so it’s there. You have a grasp on it so you 
can do something with it. You can change that. You don’t want to over 
traumatize people with the problem. You don’t want to beat them over the 
head with it.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
317 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
This can happen in some counseling groups, encounter groups or self-help 
groups where people sit there and talk about their problems. By the way, 
talking about your problems can be a tremendous relief and a great thing up 
to a point. There comes a point where it stops being therapeutic and 
becomes training to maintain it. Does that make sense?  
You have to be careful. You don’t want to take away, for people, the ability 
to talk about something, because that can be therapeutic on its own. But, 
you don’t want to encourage it beyond a certain point because, then, the 
problem becomes larger and larger. They're feeding more energy into it.  
The same is true when you're solving problems. Whether the problem is a 
clause in a contract, or a therapeutic issue, or they don’t want to go to the 
movie theatre with you tomorrow night, because they're too bored or 
whatever it is. You don’t want to over step the problem. You want enough of 
it so they feel it. So, when you start adding solutions, it attaches to the 
problem. But, not so much that the problem looms up inside their mind, 
because then it’s a lot harder to change.  
C is, bypass the critical factor.  
Sometimes if you're doing this within hypnosis, while the critical factor is 
already absent, you consider this as a clearing the slate or clearing the 
mind, so, they're not stuck in the problem.  
You're saying that, we will put this on pause, for a moment. Let’s go 
somewhere fresh and different. That allows a fresh canvas to occur so you 
can bring something in. It’s like emptying your bucket you so you have 
space to put new stuff in. If it’s full of other stuff it’s difficult to add good stuff 
in there. You're not getting rid of the problem, you're just putting it on pause 
for a moment, so you can do something else, so you can come back to it 
later on.  
This is what most people focus on when it comes to the change process. 
Access resources, that’s how most people conceptualize change. 
Motivational speakers say, "You can do it. Yes, go for it." Fantastic stuff as 
long as it attaches to something. Most people start here on the influencing 
process and they usually miss on this point here.  
What is a resource? It can be anything. Who is familiar with the five 
realities? This gets more involved. We think we live in a physical world. This 
is the world of science, action, reaction, cause and effect. Car slams into 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
318 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
wall, wall breaks, car breaks, that sort of stuff. It’s true. There is a strong 
physical component to how we live life.  
It’s not the only thing that drives our life. For example, we probably live more 
in a world of ideas, an intellectual reality, than in, we live in a physical one. 
Why? Some things mean things to us. We’ll try and work things out. We try 
to predict what’s going to happen. It may cause an impact on our physical 
reality. It may change our behavior and so on, but they're still ideas.  
When we talk about things like love and excitement and nation, they're all 
intellectual concepts. We might think they're our physical restraints. For 
example, when moving in and out of a country, you have to show your 
passport. Some people need a Visa, some don’t. 
They seem like physical constraints but they're actually intellectual 
constraints. We’ve constrained the physical space, because some people 
decided this is ours and this is yours and you can’t come into ours unless 
you have a bit of paper that says you can do so. Do you see how that 
works? There are a lot of intellectual things going on that are interfering with 
our physical reality and vice versa.  
The emotional reality is one that drives states, emotions and so on. This 
drives our behavior. Anyone here, ever do something they don’t want to do 
but they can’t help themselves? For example, let’s say you want to go on a 
diet but you find yourself in that fridge eating a chocolate cake anyway. No 
emotions are involved, are they? No. It just seems like a good idea at the 
time, right.  
Our emotional realities drive our behaviors, which in turn changes our 
physical environment. Do you see how that works? Emotions work on a 
different set of logic than the physical reality does. The law of physics does 
not apply to our emotions, do they? No. The same is true of intellectual 
concepts. Logic does not apply to physics unless you're using that as your 
basing.  
Then we have a very interesting one, the symbolic reality. We might not 
think that we're very symbolic as a people, but I would encourage you to 
think again. We're surrounded by symbols. Religion is surrounded by 
symbols. The Christian faith with the cross or the Jewish faith, we have a 
Star of David and other symbols that represent things.  
If a nation is patriotic, for example, in the USA, they're very proud of their 
flag. They fly it everywhere. It means something. If you think about it, it’s just 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
319 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
a piece of cloth, just paint on a piece of cloth. Same as the suit I’m wearing 
essentially.  
No one would think, people would be willing to die to protect a suit. Yet, 
they're willing to die to protect a flag. It’s not the cloth they're protecting. It’s 
what it symbolizes and what it means. The symbolic reality affects your 
emotional, intellectual and physic experience as a result.  
Attention is like, if there is such a thing as pure reality, I suspect attention 
would be it, because it’s not influenced by the other ones. It influences the 
others. Without attention, physical reality doesn't have an impact on you. It 
might indirectly, but it only impacts on those things which you have attention 
for.  
If you had no way of sensing the outside world, unless something made you 
feel uncomfortable, in which case, your attention is on the discomfort. That 
is what you're sensing and that’s what affecting you. Does that make 
sense?  
Same thing with intellect. If you have an idea that there is no attention on, 
whether the attention is conscious or unconscious, of course, that will make 
an impact too, then it has no bearing on you.  
There are millions of ideas out there, that you don’t even know about and 
they don’t impact you. What impacts you are the things that you do know 
about, that you are aware of. It might be a consequence of something else 
that you're not aware of, but it’s attention that decides if something is 
working for you or not.  
Your attention can cycle through any of the other realities. The physical 
reality can only indirectly affect the intellectual. And the intellectual only 
indirectly affects the emotions. Most people don’t reason themselves out of 
emotion, or if you do, it will take a longer time to do so.  
Your attention fits into every single one of those realities. Attention is the 
core thing that we work with as hypnotists because it allows us to construct 
all the other realities and take from one and move into the other and so on.  
 
For example, when we were dealing with pain control, you’ll be moving out 
of the physical reality and working at the symbolic or emotional level. These 
things have a lot to do with pain control.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
320 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
The intellectual level, you only work enough to neutralize this, and prevent 
the pain from maintaining, because this is what maintains the pain. It’s real. 
Your intellect tells you it’s real. Until people give up the idea that the pain is 
real, they can’t have pain control or the numbing of the limb. When they do 
give up the idea, they can have pain control that exceeds even what the 
strongest medication can currently do.  
Does this idea of different realities make sense to you? You can influence 
people on any one of the five levels. Typically, you’ll use attention to 
influence the other four. In terms of the influence game, you can use 
influence in all of these areas. Right now we're going to focus on the 
emotional one, because emotions drive behaviors. Emotions will change the 
way people think so it’s an easy one to change.  
Do you know how long your emotional states last? Between 60 and 90 
seconds. That has to do with the neurochemistry that runs through your 
body. If someone is in an emotional state for longer than 90 seconds they 
are doing something to recreate it or intensify it.  
In other words, imagine a castle where they're pouring boiling oil over 
people. Someone has to fill the pot up again, so you can pour more down 
the wall. Once that pot has been poured, it’s over. It takes an amount of 
time for it to drop and then that’s it.  
Meanwhile someone else is busy filling the pot up again to have another go. 
In that moment, is your moment of opportunity. Emotions can change very 
quickly, as a result, if you catch the right moment. That is when all of these 
traumatic things can happen and so on.  
We're going to focus on the emotional level because it’s the easiest to focus 
on. Tomorrow we’ll talk about some of the intellectual things. Realize that 
you can do this stuff at any of the levels. We're just going to focus on one of 
them to make a point more easily. Get a grasp on the fundamentals of it and 
expand that skill to other areas.  
A is for accessing resources.  
 
For the moment, let’s think of it as evoking a powerful, emotional response 
that will help you to make whatever change it is, whether it’s a behavior, 
idea or whatever. It doesn't have to be. It can be a physical resource, a 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
321 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
symbolic resource or all kinds of things. We’ll make it easy and think of it as 
an emotional or state based resource. 
The final T, depending on which part of the influencing process you're on, is 
called test or transform.  
In a sales cycle, you want to test before you close a sale to avoid 
transforming the whole deal. In therapy you may want to go straight to the 
transformational stage and test whether or not it’s worked. In other areas, 
you may test how people are doing first.  
It’s like hasty construction, first, to see where I’m at. When you have enough 
of the resource, enough momentum going for you, then you’ll apply back the 
problem.  
Essentially all you're doing in transformation is applying this on to this. That 
changes the original condition. The resource gets applied to the problem, 
soothed problem changes. It’s no longer the same.  
Think about it in terms of cleaning your house. If you have a dirty kitchen, 
you don’t start scrubbing the bedroom. That is not where the dirt is. You 
have to go to the kitchen, where the problem is. If you are over loaded by all 
the grime, you have to move things around so you’ve got some space to 
start cleaning.  
Then you get your cleaning products out and apply them. You have to 
transform the kitchen by applying the cleaning products to the dirty surfaces. 
Do you see how the analogy works?  
The bypassing might be moving things around the kitchen so you can get 
access to the dirty area. You’ve got a pile of dirty dishes and you may stack 
them up on one side so you can start cleaning them rather than them being 
everywhere.  
You're organizing your space so that you can efficiently work with it. If every 
time you had a plate clean, and put it to the side. Then put on it, another 
dirty plate, it gets dirty again. That would be an infinite loop.  
 
This prevents the thing from looping so you can organization the space for 
cleaning things as you go along. This analogy will give you a vivid 
representation of the kind of thing we can do.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
322 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Do you understand the idea of the PCAT formula? Maybe looking at it this 
way, will help you to understand how the PCAT formula works.  
You have ambitions, things you want to achieve. For example, who wants to 
be a master hypnotist? Who thinks they’ll achieve it no problem at all? I like 
that. Who is going to apply these skills tonight in the real world with real 
people just because they can?  
I had an interesting dream last night which relates to this. It was a bizarre 
dream. It didn't start pleasant. Do you know when you have a recurring 
dream that comes back over and over; it tends not to be one that’s nice. I 
don’t know why.  
It felt like a recurring dream, but it was not. The theme that kept recurring 
was a similar theme like one that I had in school. Did anyone have those 
dreams where you have to take a test in school and you haven't learned 
anything or studied and you don’t know it?  
It felt like I was in this space with all of these people around and I didn't 
know any of them, I had to do something. The problem was I could not 
remember what it was. I felt this need to do something. I need to do this 
thing now but I don’t know what it is. What if I do the wrong thing? What will 
they think about me? All these thoughts started going through my mind. 
Meanwhile the pressure is building. There is an expectation, something I 
have to do and I don’t know what it is. 
Luckily, the dream continued. One of the figures turned around and it turned 
out to be an old mentor. One of my teachers from school, who had taught 
Latin and Greek. He was there in his full Master’s robes and took me to one 
side. He asked me what was wrong. I told him I can’t remember what I’m 
supposed to do here. I feel like I’m supposed to do something. Like 
something has to happen and I don’t know what it is. I’m afraid I might do it 
wrong.  
He listened patiently. He smiled in that way that I recall when I was at 
school. He was an Irish master, so you know the Irish twinkle? He had a 
little twinkle in his eyes. You couldn't tell if he was being serious, playful or 
both. He told me I didn't need to remember anything. All you have to do is 
trust, because inside you have a feeling that you wish to do something. I 
couldn't help but agree with him.  
He asked me where I thought that feeling comes from. It can only come 
from some part of you that knows what to do. I started thinking about that. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
323 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Intellectually I realized he was right, but I still didn't know what to do. He 
smiled and said, “That’s right. You don’t need to know what to do yet. All 
you have to do is follow that instinct, that feeling, that sense that’s inside. 
Let it guide you toward what needs to be done. Don’t rush it. There is no 
need to be in a hurry to get it done. Let it guide you. 
“When you follow that feeling, what is the first thing that you’d like to do?” 
The answer was simple for me. I’d like to go up to one of these people and 
start talking. There’s something I need to do or find out.  
“Well, let’s go and find out, shall we?”  
"You mean you're coming with me?"  
“Why not, it’s your dream after all. You can bring along anyone you wish.” 
It’s kind of comforting having an important figure from the past come with 
you on an important task.  
We walked up to a large lady who had a big pearl necklace around her 
neck, wearing a blue dress. I don’t know, if the fact that she was wearing a 
blue dress means anything, but it seemed somehow significant. I started 
talking to her. The interesting thing is I really enjoyed the conversation. So 
much, that I forgot to think about what I was saying. It just flowed. It felt 
natural and good.  
Out of the corner of my eye, in the back of my mind, I could sense my old 
tutor smiling and nodding like everything was going just right. It felt good. It 
felt really good. It felt so good in fact, that when I woke up at the end of the 
dream, I just had this little glow left over. Do you know what I mean? When 
you wake up from a good dream, it’s a glow.  
Usually I forget my dreams. It’s true. Sometimes I remember the important 
parts of it, those elements of the dream that are worth remembering just so 
you can walk around with a quiet smile and you know that life is good.  
Sometimes I come back, forgetting the dream so thoroughly. I have no idea 
why I’m smiling, but it feels good anyway. I apologize for digressing a little 
bit, because we're talking about the PCAT formula, weren’t we? It happens 
from time to time. It’s difficult to describe how you might use the PCAT 
formula in action, but, my sense is that you probably have a good instinct 
about it by now.  
You can use any vehicle you want. I like this one. I call it a 'Dream Machine'. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
324 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
I like it because in a dream anything can happen, no matter how bizarre it 
may possibly be. People accept it on face value without questioning in it.  
If you said you had a dream where a rhinoceros was wearing a pink Tutu 
and eating oranges, you wouldn't tell them that no one dreams that. A 
dream allows you to put any reality you want and people won’t question it. 
You can over use this. I had a dream, then another dream, then another. It 
can become over used, but use it at just the right time.  
Who is not fascinated when someone says they had the strangest dream 
last night. Not many people turn around and say “Yes, I had a really dull, 
mundane, boring dream last night. Let me tell you all about it.”  Or, “I had a 
common dream that everyone has and you’ve probably been having every 
day of your life as well. Let me tell you about it.” 
What do people say? I had the oddest dream or the weirdest dream or the 
most bizarre dream. The beauty is you can put anything you want inside of 
that. You have absolute freedom to do an induction.  
In terms of the PCAT loops, did you notice we were going from the problem 
to clearing a state? Finding a resource. Transforming it. And, applying it to 
the problem. The key is, at each stage, you want to watch your subject, or, if 
it’s an audience, you want to make sure that the bulk of the audience is with 
you. You’ll never get everyone in the group, that’s just how it works.  
Make sure they're plugged into something at each level. When you're talking 
about a problem, how can you tell if someone is plugged into the problem?  
Yesterday, when we talked about the signs of stress, people’s emotion 
freezes a little bit, they’ll hold their breath, they’ll pull back a bit, they might 
have nervous mannerisms like nervous movements and so on. You look for 
these things.  
Does the other person feel for you? At that point, even if they're not 
consciously aware of it, some part of them is plugged into the problem 
enough that you can start doing something with it.  
 
Here’s a secret for you and we’ll come on to this, probably, the day after 
tomorrow. The beauty of doing this, in any kind of influence, in terms of 
sales, a business meeting or anything like that is, that you won’t need to 
start the influence process until there is a problem. This means they’ve 
already done the first step for you.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
325 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Is anyone here in sales? Or tried to sell something to someone at one point 
in their life? Have you noticed that occasionally it doesn't quite go the way 
you want it to? And they go, "But, I can’t because..." Traditionally, that’s 
known as an objection. An objection is a problem isn’t it? It’s a problem in 
their mind otherwise they wouldn't raise it. If it’s not a problem to them, they 
could have a question. You answer the question and it’s no big deal.  
If they say they can’t do it because… it’s a great mechanism. The way he 
views it is, when people have an objection, he sees it as them asking for 
more information. It’s just a question and you may as well answer that 
question. Personally, I agree with you.  
The point is they're bringing something up so they're already there. It kicks 
off your influencing cycle. Critical factor bypass, that is straightforward, 
especially in a dream. You can do anything that is bizarre.  
Ultimately, once you elaborate on the problem, you can make bizarre stuff 
happen in the dream. They’ll ask, "What the hell that is all about."  
You can say you don’t know. The next part gets interesting and then you 
access the resources. They're no longer focused on the problem. Does that 
make sense?  
Accessing resources, it’s straightforward enough. Change the way they feel 
and it will change the way they think. Change the way they think and feel 
and you’ll change the way they behavior. It’s not the only way to do it, but 
it’s a very simple way of doing it.  
Finally, you apply that to the original problem or question at hand and 
everything like magic transforms itself. It’s easy. You can do it all within the 
context of a dream you’ve had.  
Who would like to give that a go? Find a different partner than before and 
tell them about a dream you’ve had. If in the course of the dream you 
happen to mention that it starts with a bit of a problem, you don’t even have 
to set the scenario. You can have the problem being a state.  
How many people here usually feel exactly how they want to feel, like totally 
empowered and so on, when something traumatic occurs. In other words, 
they're on a diet and they eat that cheesecake they shouldn't be eating. Or, 
they're in a business meeting and they don’t know what to say next, or 
you're trying to do a hypnotic induction on a complete stranger, out there in 
the real world and for some reason you can’t get yourself to do it?  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
326 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Of course, everyone here feels totally empowered at those moments in 
time, don’t they or is it just me? Problems don’t have to be just situations. It 
could just be an emotion, a feeling. The feeling of being inhibited, being 
afraid despite wanting to do something. Does that make sense?  
The key is you want to see the other person react, to empathize enough that 
they are feeling something too. Now you have something worth changing. 
Then you can clear their mind, access the resources and transform it by 
applying that to the original problem. It gets very straightforward at that 
point.  
Student: 
I just have a basic question, in terms of when you're telling the dream to the 
other person. 
 
37. What is the context you're saying it in?  
 
38. Are you trying to fix something with the other person?  
 
Igor: 
For the moment, we don’t need a context, because this is the training phase 
right now.  
Student: 
 
♦ What would the problem be?  
 
Igor: 
That’s a good question. You don’t have to have the problem in mind. They 
will find one. What you have to do is, make sure they plug into something 
negative and minor. You can give them examples and offers. In the dream, 
different states, there I was afraid and here I was this.  
 
You’ll notice one of them, they’ll respond to more than the others. You can 
say funny enough, that one sucked me in.  
Student: 
 
♦ Are you saying that we just describe our dream in a general 
term to, hopefully, bring up something that we notice through 
their physical reaction. Or, do we actually ask them about a 
problem? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
327 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
For the exercise itself you can do it either way. Whichever you find is easier. 
If you find it easier to say, "Here is something specific to include in this." 
Great. If you want to challenge yourself a bit more, throw out different ideas.  
Dave Dobson used to start his seminars off, just by talking about different 
situations. He had a list of a couple of things that he would cycle through. 
He’d tell a few stories and watch the audience. Wherever people reacted -  
Okay, these people have an issue with this idea, this problem or that 
problem. There are only four problems he focused on, a general fear, rape, 
family/marital problems and something else, I can’t remember.  
Anything that wasn’t in the main category went into the general fear and 
he’d deal with it that way. He’d just observe. He’d tell a story and see which 
one reacts and off he went.  
Student: 
That is like what you were doing. You were telling your dream to the general 
audience. You didn't ask every person what they're problem was, but you 
have an idea what the general theme of people here is, which is fear and 
changing and all of that.  
Igor: 
Right. Everyone took something for themselves and who knows what that 
was. The problem was essentially, inhibition, the desire to do something but 
being inhibited from doing it at some level.  
If you don’t want to do it the hard way, just ask them if there is something 
that will make your life easier in terms of your training here. For example, 
some situation that you're having a problem with. I’m having a problem with 
this or I can’t apply that. The pace is going a bit too fast for me and I’m not 
sure if I can integrate the whole thing or keep up with it. Igor has a motor 
mouth and speaks way too quickly and I’m afraid I’m going to miss 
something.  
 
They can tell you whatever they want. You can say it’s funny you should say 
that, because I had a dream about that just recently. It reminds me of a 
dream I had.  
The simple answer may seem a bit vague and hazy to you and that is kind 
of on purpose, because I don’t want to give you too much structure. The 
point is that you create your own.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
328 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
The first thing you do is go back to this. I know nobody here has ever had a 
problem. I understand that. You have had friends who have had problems in 
the past. I know being the great hypnotist that you are, that you have 
enough empathy to step inside the shoes of a friend and maybe feel what it 
might feel like to have a bit of a problem for a short period of time.  
If you were to describe a dream in terms of how you happen to be feeling, a 
dream that evokes those emotions inside you, it would be the start of the 
whole PCAT loop inside the dream machine. Beyond that, I want you to 
start building your own constructions, just following the simple instructions of 
power loops. Use this, if it helps you to construct something and then see 
where it takes you.  
Easy enough?  
The question is, isn’t it easier to put them in trance and give them a 
suggestion that tonight, they’ll have a dream which will resolve whatever 
problem it is. Sure. That’s an easy way to do it, but it’s not conversational 
hypnosis. Although in conversational hypnosis you could suggest a 
particular dream for them to have to resolve the problem and so on. You 
can do that any time you want.  
The purpose of this is not to resolve the problem. If you think we're doing 
this exercise in order to resolve someone else’s problem, then please 
reconsider. There is another very important reason to do this exercise. If 
you are considering asking me what that question is, I invite you to wait until 
I’m willing to answer it. Is that okay with you guys?  
With that happy thought, please find a partner and spend a six or seven 
minutes telling each other about a dream.  
Did you enjoy it? Comments or questions…? 
 
Student: 
I didn't know how to make the break from the problem, going into the 
emotions and into the resources.  
Igor: 
What did you do?  
Student: 
I described that my attention was brought to something else.  
Igor: 
When you watched them, did you see whatever mannerisms that were 
frozen or pulling back? Did you see those mannerisms easing off?  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
329 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I did not notice too much. I was not focusing enough on that.  
Igor: 
What you did was perfect. The way you can tell if you put enough in it, or to 
add something extra or different, is by watching the person. This is 
interactive. Even though they're not necessarily saying anything, you must 
watch for their reactions. That is the key thing.  
You can make it metaphorical, someone coming in totally different. You can 
be in a dark room and someone throws the curtain up and a breath of fresh 
air comes in and that started you thinking about something else. That is the 
symbolic version of clearing a state.  
It can be confusional. You might say some things that people don’t quite 
follow along. You're in this long corridor and first you turn left and then right. 
You knew how to turn the first left and the second right, but you weren’t sure 
if you should turn left first and then go right after to the second left you’ve 
taken. Do you see what I mean? It was a confusing dream, but the thing I 
did realize was, then you use confusion as a clearing of the slate.  
The process doesn't matter. The key thing is, how you pulled them out of 
that problem enough, that you now can start adding other things instead. 
What you did was perfect.  
Come on up.  
Student: 
The problem I am still trying to figure out is, how do you integrate the whole 
PCAT formula in describing the dream? I was going with the flow of the 
dream and I was trying to be very descriptive about it, but it felt like I was 
describing it and not achieving much. 
I’ll tell you the dream. You wake up and don’t have any clothes on. I’ve had 
those dreams growing up and no one notices until you notice. I tried to think 
of how I’m going to make a theme about this.  
Igor: 
Excellent. It’s a good way to think about it. 
Student:      So then, I needed to embellish the dream a little bit. 
Igor:            Just let me pause you there. What was the problem in the dream?  
Student: 
A feeling of insecurity. Everyone is staring at you.  
Igor: 
Thank you. The problem was insecurity. No one here has ever felt insecure 
before, right? You can talk about the dream. I was there and I wasn’t sure if 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
330 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
something was right or was it something wrong with me. Then I realized I 
didn't have any clothes on. Suddenly everyone was looking at me.  
 
Do you know what I mean? When everyone looks at you and you think, "Oh, 
my god, I don’t know what I’m doing or I must be doing something really 
wrong. I’m standing there completely naked. I felt so exposed." Do you see 
how I’m rifting around the emotion of the problem? It’s the emotion of it at 
this level. Right? What you did was the right thing. You rift around what the 
elements of that dream were. Make sense? 
Student: 
Then I transformed it through me being...You know how the dream can shift 
like a movie? Like, you know the scenes are about to change but you don't 
know how. 
Igor: 
Can I pause you there for a second? What would that be in the PCAT 
formula? What stage is he describing? Isn’t that a perfect transition for 
clearing the slate or bypassing whatever just happened? Do you see how 
the dream naturally lends itself to this?  
Student: 
I ended up being in a field of daisies out in the open and I felt very peaceful, 
relaxed and I was by myself.  
Igor: 
Let me pause you, is he doing a good job? It’s like you’ve blocked yourself 
off, of, just how good, what you did was. All you have to do is accentuate 
the emotional element of that.  
 
In time you’ll be able to accentuate all the different elements of it, in terms of 
the emotional element, as you’ve been describing. You can have some 
intellectual elements, in terms of, and this means, I was a descent person 
and I realize, I can do this and so on.  
Student: 
I did that.  
Igor: 
Perfect. We have an intellectual resource there. Then you have symbolic 
resources. Already the green field, freedom, you can stretch out any way 
you want. No one is there. No one is going to do anything to you or impose 
upon you and so on. Those are symbolic resources as well.  
 
Now you're working on the symbolic, emotional and intellectual levels all at 
the same time. Do you see how easy that becomes?  
Student: 
Exactly. I was in this field and I began to describe how the feeling changed. 
How no one was staring at me anymore and it was about how, when you 
change the scene in your mind, it will change the feelings that follow it. Then 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
331 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the dream came to where it taught me how to realize, that all I have to do to 
change a feeling is to change the images in my mind.  
Igor: 
Where is he right now? At the transformation stage. You can see the natural 
flow of that. You did a great job. It might not have felt as smooth as you’d 
like initially, but that’s why this is called training. It’s the first time you’ve 
done this, so it might not feel as smooth and natural as you’d like. After a 
while it becomes a process.  
 
You’ll probably end up enjoying doing this more than anything else, because 
it is so natural. It gives you so much scope and freedom of what you can do 
with things. Does that help?  
 
Are there any other questions or comments on that or useful stuff? Are you 
beginning to feel like real conversational hypnotists now?  
 
I want to recap. You have five covert inductions. There are more you can 
do, but we focused on these five.  
 
♦ The Blitz,  
♦ The Magic Moment, 
♦ The My Friend John or Rusty M,  
♦ The Hypnotic Lecture– there is a direct and indirect version.  
♦ The Dream Machine, which is kind of like a hypnotic lecture with a 
little bit more scope.  
 
 
You also have five core tools of influence.  
♦ Revivification, which brings experiences to life for people.  
♦ Pacing and Leading, allowing you to nudge people in one direction or 
another.  
♦ The Conscious/Unconscious Disassociation, so you can separate 
experiences out, put them in different places and do things with them.  
♦ You have the Utilization Principle, which is when anything useful 
happens during the process you jump on it, ride it and transform it 
with one of these other things into something you can actually use.  
♦ You have the PCAT formula, which is a simple power loop that you 
can make very sophisticated to very complex or very simple to 
transition people through different mental phases and experiences 
that will end up with a change of some sort.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
332 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We’ll show you how to use this stuff in sales cycle as well as doing other 
things too.   
 
I’d like to put these core tools into creating new things, to invent hypnosis 
methods. You’ll invent them for yourself by the way, so you have the 
freedom for being creative. You can be the creator of new tools, techniques 
and ideas based just on these principles. You’ll be able to adapt everything 
you do to any situation you come across and make it work.  
 
It’s the second type of hypnotic lecture, the indirect lecture so it’s the idea of 
indirection.  
 
The five covert inductions we’ve covered so far are the Blitz, the one which 
we did in the Magic Moment, where you lock eye contact and then you 
launch into a hypnotic rant. Keep going and going. As long as you have the 
context right they're already there.  
 
You saw a great example of that with Arthur, where we just let you jump into 
it, at the end of which he was able to do the whole exercise. The questions 
or concerns had dissipated.  
 
When I worked with Johnny, the first one with a twist, and had him do the 
circling around in his mind, that’s the magic moment. What I did afterward 
was a Blitz. I started talking to him about how his mind is capable of a lot of 
things. He can achieve greatness. All he had to do was focus his mind and 
talk to the unconscious in the way he just did now, that was a Blitz.  
 
The Blitz is essentially a direct suggestion done conversationally. That’s all 
we're doing. You can say to someone in trance, you have a great 
unconscious mind. I want you to feel confident. You're doing great. Or, you 
can take someone in a non-overtly hypnotic context, but you created a 
hypnotic context conversationally.  
 
You can look them in the eye and say you're an amazing person. You have 
ability inside you that you have not yet tapped. To the extent that you find 
your path there, right now, you can feel something happening can you not, 
something pleasant, something interesting. That is the potential that you 
have.  
 
It’s no different than a direct suggestion. Because the context is different, it 
sounds like I’m just giving him a pep talk. I haven’t done any watch 
swinging. I left my top hat at home. My evil monocle is being fixed right now 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
333 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
so I’ve been stripped of my evil, hypnotic powers and yet I can still give a 
pep talk.  
 
Does the hypnotic blitz make sense to you now? Do you understand the five 
core inductions and the five core processes we’ve been covering so far? 
Around all of this, you have your H+.  
 
The irresistible induction, where would that go? Six covert inductions. It can 
go in here as well, because you're talking about a method for yourself to 
guide yourself through a trance process. You can take yourself through a 
PCAT loop, which is exactly what you're doing with your dream and by 
describing it the other person, they come along with you.  
 
The irresistible induction, done the way we did it originally, is more overt. It’s 
very direct. This is what trance feels like and so on. If you put another 
vehicle around it, again, like a hypnotic lecture or 'My Friend John' and so 
on. You can still use this as a principle that lets you fill in the content on 
these quite easily.  
 
Is everyone clear on these things? Hypnotic lectures 1 and 2. This is direct 
and this is indirect. How do we put this all together to create our own stuff? 
Wouldn't that be an interesting question to ask?  
 
I’d like to introduce you to the concept of giving people gifts. Many have 
done so. What is the hypnotic smile, if not a gift? It is an experience they 
can take away with them that will improve that quality of their life somehow. 
If nothing else, as a charming experience, it will stay with them. You’ve been 
doing it for each other, partly because it’s functional, but partly, just because 
it’s a nice thing to do for someone.  
 
That is not the only kind of gift you can give to people. You have heard fairy 
tales, as a kid. That little fairy that saves whoever it was. If you imagine you 
were one of these fairy godmothers who had the gift of the magic wand, at 
the end of the magic wand the person has some traits or ability. Life is 
somehow different.  
 
What kind of things would you want to be able to give people? Think back to 
self-confidence, as an example– confidence, inner peace and calmness. 
How about making good decisions? Is that a nice thing to give someone?  
 
Creative, excitement– how about loving life and being excited? 
Appreciation, for having a good life. Sense of humor. Being decisive. The 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
334 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
release of inhibitions. You can do a bunch of things. Wisdom. The amount 
of gifts you can give people is about as limited as human creativity, isn’t it?  
 
Let’s take wisdom. Making better choices is, perhaps, part of being a wiser 
person. Being a better person is included in the idea of wisdom. How might 
you give someone the gift of wisdom? I’m not suggesting that one induction 
will make them the wisest, but you can increase the potential. How much 
they do with it, access it and so on. How might you increase someone’s 
wisdom? Think of it in terms of a power loop of some sort.  
 
Better concentration. Let me help you with this. Has anyone here ever heard 
a fairy tale, legend or a myth that revolved around the idea of wisdom? Give 
me some examples of fairy tales, legends or myths that revolve around 
wisdom?  
 
Jack and Beanstalk is about developing wisdom. Don’t go climbing strange 
things that go up in the sky. Don’t mess around with GM crops because the 
giant can come and get you.  
 
The Ugly Duckling is more about self-confidence and self-esteem.  
 
Crying Wolf.  
                    King Solomon is a classic story about wisdom.  
 
Yoda, in Star Wars, is a modern legend.  
 
Three Little Pigs, could be.  
 
There is an old story in the Norse legends, the Vikings, of one of the Gods 
called Odin. He was the king of the Gods. He is famous, because he only 
had one eye. The reason is because he wanted to drink from the well of 
wisdom.  
 
That was being held by an entity called Mimir and he wouldn't let anyone 
touch the well of wisdom. It was reputed that inside this well was the answer 
to every question someone could ask. There is a well and anyone who 
drank from it would have the answer to any question they could ask.  
 
The problem is, it was guarded by Mimir. He wouldn't let anyone drink from 
it. Odin didn't like this. Think about it. You were supposed to be the king of 
the gods and you know that there is a well out there somewhere, which if 
only you drink a sip from, you’ll have answers to questions that have been 
bugging you your entire existence. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
335 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Someone out there won’t let you drink from it. It’s kind of frustrating isn’t it? 
Odin, being the persuasive one that he was, asked, "What would it will take 
for me to be able to drink from this well?"  
                      Without pausing, Mimir told him it requires a sacrifice. You must invest 
enough of yourself to be allowed to drink from the well of wisdom. Then 
you’ll have your answer.  
 
Without thinking about it, Odin traded an eye. To him it was a fair trade, 
because he could see more clearly once he had drunk from that well. The 
bargain was struck. The deal was made. Mimir allowed him access. He 
drank from the well.  
 
It’s said that, anytime that Odin was confronted by some problem or 
situation, something tricky, you could see him closing that eye. Somewhere 
inside him an answer came. I don’t know if you realize it, but we all have 
access to something like that. Something inside each one of us, that gives 
us answers. Think about it, you’ve experienced this before.  
 
Who hasn’t been in a situation which was a little dicey or tough? You're up 
against the wall and just at the right moment, without any intellectual over-
thinking, you just knew what to do. You knew the right thing. You had it in 
sight, but it required a sacrifice. You were in a tough situation and then you 
started to listen.  
 
I’d like you to know that if you’ve done it once, you can do it again. Go 
ahead and try for yourself. Ask the question of yourself and then just notice 
how you feel, what shifts occur.  
 
The interesting thing is answers don’t come as direct as people think 
sometimes. If you're willing to invest in yourself enough to really listen, you 
too, could count yourself amongst those people that seem to just see life a 
little differently. Who see life differently enough, for anyone else looking on 
it, would be just as if you’d gone inside and drank from Mimir’s well, too.  
 
Do you know what I mean by that? It’s an interesting idea. Of course, you 
should never use legends when presenting hypnotic lectures, because they 
don’t work.  
 
I’d like you to spend a few minutes, find a partner and give them a gift in 
whatever way strikes you as appropriate. You can use a legend to talk 
about it, a dream or a hypnotic lecture. You can use facts from the real 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
336 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
world that you know about, whether it’s about the dream temples, Bali 
trances, Shamanism, neuroscience, a business secret, it doesn't matter.  
 
The point is, do you see how easy it is to talk to someone and present them 
with a simple gift? Do you have any questions? Let’s go out there and find 
out that you know more about this than you realize. Spend five minutes 
apiece and see where it takes you.  
 
I’d like you to recognize something. I gave you virtually zero guidance on 
that last exercise. I told you to go off and invent a complete hypnotic 
technique all by yourself and use it on someone else and make them feel 
great in doing so.  
 
You all, in three days, have developed enough tools, skills, insights, 
understandings and experience, that you had no trouble making something 
up on the fly, something advanced. How do you feel about that? I think you 
should give yourself a round of applause for that. It’s impressive stuff.  
 
[Applause] 
 
If this was the end of the course, wouldn’t this be worthwhile? You can go 
out and start giving people gifts and being a force for good in the world. 
Wouldn't it be easy to do from this point onward?  
 
I encourage you to go out there and do this with other people. If you're still 
shy about doing it with people outside of this group, then do it with people 
inside this group, but outside of this training. That starts breaking the 
barriers between the inside and the outside.  
 
Today’s homework or exercise is, tonight or tomorrow morning, preferably 
both, find someone, anyone and give them a gift. It’s as simple as that. Find 
someone and give them a gift.  
 
 
If you want to do a little extra, then find someone in this room and give them 
the inner smile as well. Reinforce that, because that one is always worth 
reinforcing. It will make you a way better hypnotist.  
 
If you give another hypnotist a gift, they are duty bound to return the favor. 
You’d better make it good.  
 
Okay, I think that’s a good place to leave the evening. Let the hypno-magic 
flow. Thank you very much.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
337 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
DVD 13:  Frames, Re-Frames & Unstoppable            
Frame Control 
 
Igor: 
Good morning everyone, how are you doing? Any interesting war stories 
to report from last night?  
 
 
Students: 
When I got back to dinner, down in the lobby, I noticed that a few of the 
guys were hypnotizing one person. One person was down in the lobby in a 
leather chair and there were a couple of people around them hypnotizing 
them and then it kind of grew, then there were two, three, four, five, six 
people hypnotizing one person. 
 
Igor: 
Lucky person. 
 
Students: 
When it was my turn to get hypnotized, it was really incredible to have six 
or seven people. It felt like I was being massaged and I on drugs, all kinds 
of amazing things at once. I would suggest we continue that trend. 
 
Igor: 
What we’re going to be focusing on today is this idea of frames and frame 
control. Who has heard of frames and frame control before? Really this is 
a fundamental thing as to how we understand things. Remember we 
talked about the contrast principle the first day? This is really where it 
comes into its own. 
 
 
We cannot understand anything unless it’s in relation to something else. 
Let me give you an example. An old man is sitting in a restaurant eating 
his soup. Something like this is he happy or sad? Is he fortunate or 
unfortunate? We don’t know. It all depends on what just happened, what 
the frame around it is.  
 
 
Some time ago an old man was living in the woods with his son just 
outside a village and one day his son is out in the woodlands. He 
manages to capture a prize stallion that’s been roaming the countryside 
for years. No one has been able to capture it. He captures it and brings it 
home. The villagers are ecstatic. 
 
 
They say, "Oh my God, you are so lucky." He’s got the prize stallion. It’s 
worth a fortune. It’s strong. It’s virile, all those sorts of things. You must be 
very happy. You’re a lucky man. The old man just shrugs his shoulders 
and says, "Maybe."  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
338 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The next day the boy is getting on the horse to try and tame it. In the 
course of the whole breaking of the stallion and so on, the boy falls and 
breaks his leg. The villagers rush over to the old man and says, "You poor 
man. We’re sorry to hear about your son. You’re so unfortunate." The old 
man shrugs his shoulders and says, "Maybe." 
 
 
A few days later Napoleon’s armies are pulling through Europe and they 
need to recruit young men to be able to fight his wars. So, they drag along 
every single young man of fighting age. Of course, the old man’s son has 
a broken leg. He’s useless to them, so they leave him behind in the 
village. 
 
 
This time the villagers all come running up to the old man and say, "You 
are so fortunate that your son broke his leg because now he gets to be 
safe from the wars." Of course, the old man just shrugs his shoulders and 
says, "Maybe." 
 
 
Frames let us know what things mean by giving us a context to refer 
things toward. The interesting thing about frames is we have biases 
around what certain things mean. Let me give you an example of what I 
mean, a lot of you will have heard this before. 
 
 
You’re driving your car. You’re at a traffic light. It’s red. You hear the 
sound of a siren and an ambulance goes speeding past you and goes 
through the red lights and drives on. How do you feel about that 
ambulance? Good thing, bad thing? Were you annoyed by it? It was doing 
its thing, right? 
 
 
Let’s compare that. We have right after the ambulance, in the space it’s 
created through the cars, a Ferrari. It goes driving by and a man is in there 
with his girlfriend, he’s playing the music, and he just goes straight through 
the same traffic light. How do you feel about that car, about that guy? 
 
 
Idiot, annoyed, general sorts of things, right? When you consider it, the 
event is the same. A vehicle is going through the intersection with a red 
light. It’s the same event, the meaning you ascribe to certain things, 
whether it’s an ambulance or a red Ferrari whatever it is, that’s what 
creates the contrast for you. 
 
 
To illustrate this, let’s have exactly the same example but we’ll just change 
the meaning a little bit. As the ambulance goes squealing by, one of the 
back doors swings open. You see a bunch of frat boys who have stolen 
the ambulance for fun. They’re getting drunk and having a party in the 
back. Do you feel the same way about the ambulance now? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
339 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What if I told you that the man driving the Ferrari, actually the woman next 
to him is his wife, she’s fallen down some stairs. He’s trying to get her to 
the hospital in time to save the baby. The music you heard is just an old 
song from childhood to calm her while she’s on her way. Does that change 
your opinion? 
 
 
This is the power of frame control. If you’re not aware of what frames are 
in existence, of what frames you’re presenting and what frames you’re 
walking into in a situation, you have no way of predicting exactly how your 
message will be accepted, will be interpreted, and what meaning it will 
provide. Does that make sense? 
 
 
In other words, if you change the frames you will fundamentally change 
the meaning of something. And there will always be some kind of frame 
present, that’s what people do. We create frames in order to make 
meaning. 
 
 
The two things we want to be looking for are, overt frames. People do this 
all the time, they say this is not a shop, this is a full service establishment. 
You know that kind of stuff? This is not a janitor, this is a hygiene 
engineer. You know what kind of things I’m coming from? 
 
 
These are more overt attempts. If they’re overt, they’re more open for 
critical analysis. Just like you snickered with the hygiene engineer frame – 
it’s true right? But the reason you snickered is, because you analyzed it 
and you re-framed it inside your mind. You’ve put hygiene engineer, of 
course engineer is high status and so on, and you put a janitor which in 
most peoples’ minds will be a lower status thing, you’ve put them together 
and, "Oh, I get it. It’s an attempt to change categories." 
 
 
That’s what’s causing the snicker or the humor. The actual value of the 
individual is irrelevant. The person is still worthwhile, whether, or not 
they’re a janitor, an engineer, or the pope I guess. The point is – yes, I’m 
sorry about the pope comment. 
 
Students: 
He liked the janitor better. Frame control, we’re near the airport. 
 
Igor: 
The point is overt frames can work. They have their place. This is where 
most people try to create the meaning out of something, but really these 
ones, the covert implied, the assumed ones, those are the ones that have 
real power. 
 
 
They have real power for us because we don’t even know they’re 
occurring, we just assume. They have real power in terms of any 
interaction because again, by presenting something in a certain way, so 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
340 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that the critical factor again, the analysis doesn’t focus in on it. It’s just 
assumed. It creates that environment. 
 
 
There’s a variation of this where you get people to choose one of the 
three, circle, square and so on. The frame is set. So, think of a simple 
shape, like a circle or square, but not those two. Well what’s left? A simple 
shape really is in most people’s minds a circle, square or triangle. Those 
are the fundamental shapes we have. You’ve already negated two of 
them, so there’s only left. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
Again, it’s an implication. I’m not saying think of a simple shape – triangle, 
triangle, triangle, think of a triangle now, Do you see how that’s a more 
overt frame and wouldn’t even be vaguely exciting because you can see 
right through what’s going on there? 
 
 
What I’d like you guys to do now is just as a warm up, get into groups of 
five or so and have a little discussion about different contexts you might 
find yourself in as a hypnotist. Choose what kinds of hidden frames, what 
kind of assumed frames are there. 
 
 
Let me give you an example. If you were to enter a hospital in a white lab 
coat, what kind of assumptions would people make? What kind of frame is 
that projecting? 
 
 
A doctor, so what does a doctor mean? You’re going to kick him out 
because he’s going to ask for money? 
 
Students: 
He’s got authority. 
 
Igor: 
Right. What else is there? A sense of belonging, hospital - doctor, they fit 
right? He’s not going to be challenged for why he’s there. What else? 
 
Students: 
Education and knowledge. 
 
Igor: 
So we ascribe a high level of understanding, knowledge and wisdom, if 
you like to that person. What else is there? 
 
Students: 
Healer. 
 
Igor: 
Go ahead? 
 
Students: 
What kind of lab coat is it? 
 
Igor: 
It’s like a lab coat or a doctor’s coat, something like that. It might be an 
orderly, right? That’s the whole point – the assumptions that come 
through. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
341 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Let’s put it this way. If you’re a hypnotist, and you go into a hospital and 
say, "Okay, I’m going to prepare you for surgery so you can do it pain free 
with less anesthetic." What is the likelihood that the patient is going to 
assume you’re a doctor versus if you go into a bar and say I’m going to 
make your arm so numb – don’t do this by the way, probably for legal and 
health reasons – that I could stick this pin through your arm. 
 
 
It can be done. You’re offering the same thing. You’re offering pain control 
and anesthesia, but because you’re in different environments people will 
see you as different. In one you’re a performer, you’re an entertainer 
perhaps or just a weird strange person who comes in to offer to do strange 
things. 
 
 
In the other one, you’re a professional, equated with a doctor. When I 
used to run my clinic in London, because the officers were very smart 
people, assumed I was a doctor all the time. They said doctor, and I said 
I’m not a doctor, but they still assumed it.  
 
 
Even in the back of their mind that bias was still there and that helped me 
mentally. I made a point of reminding them I’m not a doctor, but 
unconsciously they didn’t care, they still ascribed the same meaning to it. 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
I’ve got a couple of environments I’d like you guys to play with. Just put 
yourself in the role as a hypnotist, just to start getting used to these hidden 
implications, these hidden frames of reference that people are working 
with. 
 
 
One of course would be the hospital we just talked about. Another one 
would be a stage hypnosis show, a slightly different environment. Then we 
have the idea of a business meeting. What kind of assumptions are there 
in a business meeting? What about a lab, a science lab during some kind 
of experiment? 
 
 
Those are four relatively common environments people might find 
themselves in. The fifth one will be of particular interest to you, because 
it’s an environment or scenario you’re interested in. In other words you’ve 
come here to learn conversational hypnosis, is that correct? If you haven’t, 
you’re probably in the wrong room, you may want to go next door. 
 
 
You don’t just come here to learn conversational hypnosis because it 
amuses you. It’s probably because you find it’s going to be a useful tool in 
your life, whether it’s as a therapist, a salesperson, a parent, a teacher, a 
manager, a leader, a professional influencer, a coach – do you see what I 
mean? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
342 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
I’d like you to choose the top context that is of importance to you. That 
could be a hypnotherapy room. That could be a sales meeting or that 
could be a coaching process or a consulting process. It really doesn’t 
matter what it is. I’d like you to choose a specific environment and maybe 
think of specific people who are there. 
 
Then with your group again, describe the environment and see if you can 
pick out what are some of the key hidden frames, key implications, hidden 
assumptions that exist there? Does that make sense to you guys? Let’s 
just take about 10 minutes to do that and we’ll come back. Off you go. 
 
 
Welcome back. How was the exercise? Did you enjoy it? Was anything 
surprising in terms of what you found was an assumption. Or, perhaps, did 
anyone here have an assumption that other people did not share about a 
certain environment? Did that happen or did you all have the same 
assumptions about the environments you were talking about, either 
slightly different but more or less the same.  
 
What’s happening here has to do with cultural biases. In every culture 
there will be different assumptions about what certain things mean and 
what happens there. As you move across cultures, of course, a lot of 
these assumptions will fall apart. That’s why things like culture clashes 
and all these things happen. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Remember we keep talking about how you have to set the hypnotic 
context. The hypnotic context is a frame. It’s letting people know on an 
unconscious level what the expectations are. It’s kind of like a stage show. 
What are some of the assumptions of a stage show? 
 
 
Number one, the hypnotist has some special power. Isn’t that an 
assumption? It’s implied. Very rarely do hypnotists, nowadays say it. But 
people go there and think, "I wonder what he’s going to make me do?" If 
they accept the assumption that someone can make you do something, 
well, he can make you do something. Does that make sense? 
 
 
There’s a great example of this in a film that came out recently. Has 
anyone here seen the movie ‘Dinner For Schmucks’? It’s hysterical. 
There’s a classic scene in there that describes exactly what we’re talking 
about. 
 
 
One of the characters believes his work colleague can control his mind. Of 
course the guy is sitting there going, "Perry, tell me…" Of course, Perry is 
saying "No" But he ends up telling him. Why? The pressure is coming 
from inside himself, he’s fighting his own expectations. Does that make 
sense? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
343 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Our job is to understand. What are the expectations that are present, 
when we enter an environment, so we can utilize those that are in our 
favor, and we can neutralize those that are not? Make sense? 
 
 
Here are some of the classic strategies for doing that. First, we have the 
idea of a pre-frame. A pre-frame sets the context up front, so that the 
assumption is already changed before you begin and the difficulties don’t 
begin to run from that point forward. Here’s an example. 
 
 
You’re sitting at a table with friends, discussing a problem with the water 
supply. You’re sitting at the table with enemies, discussing a problem with 
your water supply. How does that change? Do you see where I’m going 
with this? 
 
 
By the way, this is very important because our pre-frames can happen 
unconsciously. In other words, we will project certain qualities into others 
and unconsciously reinforce them. Remember the feedback loop that 
happens unconsciously with a lot of people. 
 
 
An example of this would be, back in the 1970’s – these studies can’t be 
done anymore for ethical reasons – the researchers went into a school or 
a university and they gave a bunch of students a fake aptitude test for 
whatever subject it was. 
 
 
They didn’t score the test properly they just gave them random results. 
They didn’t even give the students the results. They only gave them to 
their teachers and their principals. They said, "These kids are geniuses. 
They’re going to fly, don’t take any stick from them. And these kids are 
really no hopers, do your best but don’t expect too much." 
 
 
The kids never found out their scores. At the end of the year the results 
that came in – not all of them of course – but the results that came in were 
mostly in correlation to the fake aptitude test results. Why? The teachers’ 
expectations set a pre-frame in the classroom. They taught differently. 
They interacted differently. They marked differently. They corrected 
differently. 
 
 
They assumed different things so the behaviors they got back were 
different. Does that make sense? Let me add the idea of re-framing. Re-
framing is what you do when a problem comes your way and you need to 
change it. In other words, suddenly, you realize, there’s a frame here that 
is not really working. Typically, it's when somebody has an objection of 
some sort and you present an alternative point of view, so that it changed 
it. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
344 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
For example, these are not your enemies sitting at the table, these are 
your friends. You all have the same problem right now, with no water. 
You’re all screwed, pretty much. You may as well work together. That’s an 
example of a re-frame Do you see how that works? We’re switching 
enemies to friends because you have a common goal, a common good 
you’re working towards. 
 
 
We’ll talk about each of these in more detail as we go through. 
 
 
Then we have the out-frame. It's a pretty sneaky thing that you’ll see 
happening a fair amount in politics. Believe it or not, but it can happen in 
any other place as well. 
 
 
Basically, an out-frame says, whatever problems you’re bringing to the 
table really aren’t the real problem. There’s a much more important thing 
at hand. You’re trumping it. A classic example, and this has happened 
throughout history, is when the economy fails, start a war. 
 
 
"We’re at war folks, so don’t pay attention to all the mess that’s happening 
at home." "We’re at war, we’ll need your support, you’ll be unpatriotic not 
to support us." and so on and so forth. Can you see the frames that are 
being created at that point? 
 
 
Do you understand the basics of frame control; pre-framing, re-framing 
and out-framing? Those are the three core ideas. 
 
 
Of the three, my preference is the pre-frame. These can be the most 
invisible and the ones that will tend to cause you the least problems over 
time. The problems don’t arise. If you can have a reasonable guess, as to 
what assumptions, expectations, what frames people are walking into, in a 
particular meeting or event with, then you can pre-frame them in such a 
way that those assumptions are no longer there. In other words they adopt 
a new set of assumptions before they even realize it. 
 
 
All the classic problems start to disappear. This is true in sales, in 
teaching, in relationships and everything. Make sense? 
 
Students: 
Are you saying we re-frame the pre-frame? 
 
Igor: 
The question is; do you re-frame the pre-frame? The pre-frame is kind of 
like a re-frame, done before you need it. You’re basically – I know, it gets 
a little mind bending right? 
 
 
Let me give you an illustration. Of course, Nicky and I talked about this 
before.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
345 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You see this magic box? This is the frame of reference people are coming 
in with. Either you can enter the frame of reference, and because there 
are corners here, when you get to the corner, you may have to do 
something to break through – that’s called a re-frame 
 
 
If, however, before any of this happens, you realize that a box exists. So, 
before you even enter, you do something to neutralize that. For example, 
you start here and you make a big circle out of it. These corners have now 
disappeared. When you get to this corner here, there is no resistance. 
There is no push back. There’s no rejection. Why? Because this corner no 
longer exists inside their mind. 
 
 
You have pre-framed. You have created something ahead of time to take 
care of that. Does that make sense? 
 
 
In any situation you’ll find yourself in, and we’ll get into this more as the 
day progresses, you’ll find there’s usually only, four or five major 
assumptions or concerns or needs that people have that you will need to 
address. You don’t have to know everything at once, just the major things. 
 
 
For example, when you’re in a hospital, when there’s a patient in a 
hospital, what kind of things are their major concerns? Life. Am I going to 
be healthy at the end of this? Am I going to survive this? Possibly cost, are 
they going to have to sell their children to be able to afford this? Pain or 
inconvenience things like that, how long, how much effort, that kind of 
stuff. 
 
 
 
Beyond that, there’s not that much else. What’s wrong with me and how 
can I fix it? Those are the main ideas that are driving them. 
 
 
If you’re a doctor and the idea of the patient is, what pill can you give me 
to fix this? And your idea is, the pill isn’t what you need, what you need is 
a particular exercise routine, you might turn around and say you need to 
exercise more or you need to eat less or else your heart will explode. 
Doctors say that kind of stuff, right? 
 
 
The problem is the patients don’t follow the advice. Why? They’re sitting 
there with a set of assumptions already. They’re already thinking, "But 
food is good.", and so on and so forth. He has to be able to build up to the 
advice that you need to stop eating as much or eating different food and 
so on, so they can live longer and healthier. Does that make sense? 
 
 
If he sets that advice up ahead of time, the expectation that people who 
change their lifestyle don’t need surgery, they don’t need these strange 
machines to keep them alive and all the rest of it. Then, this is accepted 
already. That is a pre-frame. They’ve accepted the idea that a lifestyle 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
346 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
change needs to occur long before he even introduces the idea that you 
specifically have to adopt the lifestyle change. 
 
 
The likelihood that they’re actually going to adopt the lifestyle, change 
themselves, exercise and change their diet, are much higher. Does that 
make sense? 
 
 
Do you get the idea of pre-framing versus re-framing and out-framing?  
 
 
There are different methods you can use for each of those stages. I’ll give 
you some of the different categories I like to think about. The first one in 
terms of pre-framing is what I affectionately call the inept pre-frame. Those 
are the ones that people usually try to throw out there. They’re just so 
obvious it’s like, "Come on. Do you really think I’m that stupid?" 
 
 
I’ll give you a classic example of an inept re-frame. It’s the sleazy guy in a 
bar twirling a set of keys saying, "I have a Porsche, baby, outside. Mine, I 
own it – almost."  
 
 
What is the actual pre-frame he’s trying to present there? What are the 
ideas or the understandings he’s trying to convey with that, although in a 
very inept way? 
 
 
Status, right? He’s trying to say, "I am of importance. I have status, 
therefore, you can be attracted to me." Perhaps it’s wealth; I have wealth, I 
can treat you well. Power perhaps, I have power. Powerful car, you can be 
excited, life with me is exciting. 
 
 
This is what he’s trying to convey, but, he’s doing it in such an inept way, 
that it’s actually doing the opposite. Does that make sense? You want to 
be careful about how you set your pre-frames, because if they’re done 
ineptly, you may as well be shooting yourself in the foot. You may as well 
be better off not doing anything at all than presenting an inept frame. 
 
 
The next kind of frame is a pretty direct setting of a re-frame, and that’s 
where the more eloquent speakers or people who in everyday life tend to 
do this. It’s not this, it’s this. It’s a very straight forward. There’s no bones 
about it. Most people think that only some people can be hypnotized. 
They’re usually shocked to hear that pretty much everyone can be 
hypnotized, if they want to, if they can focus properly. 
 
 
My pre-frame there, it’s pretty open, it’s relatively overt, it’s pretty direct. 
You can analyze it and decide whether or not to accept it. But, the logic 
within it seems reasonably persuasive. So, you’re more likely than not to 
accept it, especially if you accept the other pre-frame which is, I am the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
347 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
hypnotist. I know more than you because you’re just a layperson and I’m 
not. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
I’m using an implied pre-frame of authority to impose a direct frame that 
the ability to be hypnotized is very different from what you might actually 
have in your mind. 
 
 
If you accept that, if I actually set that simple pre-frame ahead of time, 
then, we come onto doing some kind of hypnotic thing, and you say, "I 
don’t know if I can be hypnotized." Is that more or less likely to happen, 
when I’ve said the pre-frame, even if it’s direct? It’s less likely to happen, 
isn’t it? 
 
 
If you’ve accepted it, it won’t happen. If you haven’t accepted it, it might 
still happen, but I’ve hedged my bets a little bit better at this point. Make 
sense? 
 
 
Then we have the implied pre-frame. I like this because it’s more subtle. It 
kind of comes in at the sides. As a rule, if people think you’re trying to 
influence them or manipulate them, especially against their own interest, 
clearly the defenses come up. 
 
 
The power of implication is people don’t realize it. They just assume it as 
they go along. Here’s an example; years ago one of my cousins, his 
stepfather is a doctor, he’s in Germany, he’s driving down the road, and 
he gets stopped for something. I think one of his lights was out, I can’t 
remember what it was. 
 
 
Anyway, the policeman had given his stepfather a stern talking to and was 
about to write him a ticket. My cousin, he’s about 12 at the time, starts 
complaining and saying, "Dad, your medical kit is bugging me." 
 
 
You should know that the word for medical kit in German is, Die Koffer von 
einem Arzt, which specifically means ‘the suitcase for a medical doctor’. It, 
basically, tells them this person here is a medical doctor. So, it’s saying 
your medical suitcase is digging at my heels, I don’t like it. 
 
 
The instant the officer heard this, the frame switched. In Germany, doctors 
still have a very high status. His whole manner changed. Suddenly, he 
started being more polite. He told them. "Well, you know, really, I should 
be writing you up. But, I understand. You’re on important business, so, 
please, take care of this as quickly as possible and drive safely. Thank 
you very much. Goodbye." 
 
 
It wasn’t that he said, "Oh officer, I’m a medical doctor. Please treat me 
according to my station." Maybe 100 years ago that might have worked, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
348 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
but in modern society that does not work, because there’s a different set 
of assumptions now around status and so on. Does that make sense? But, 
the implication still worked, right? 
 
Student: 
I shared this with the group, but I’m setting a deliberate pre-frame and I 
didn’t realize it. 
 
Igor: 
Everyone, this is where he lives. 
 
Student: 
This is where I live. Do you see the pre-frame in it? 
 
Igor: 
No, I haven’t really seen it. 
 
Student: 
In the picture, I’m wearing a clerical collar in my driver’s license picture. 
For those in the U.S., there is still a fairly high opinion, at least to a 
degree, of clergy. So, in my driver’s license picture I have my clerical 
collar on, so, when a cop stops me and I hand them my driver’s license, 
they realize I’m a minister. 
 
Igor: 
It already has a bunch of assumptions about honesty, about reliability, 
about safety – right? Do you see what I mean? Do you see the power of 
the implied pre-frame? That is a beautiful pre-frame right there. 
 
 
Do you want to come up? Everyone is in these dark suits, either that or a 
white suit with a stethoscope around the neck. This is my driver’s license. 
 
Student: 
Actually, this is very funny and it involves my driver’s license as well, 
which doesn’t say much of anything. In fact, I’m wearing a t-shirt. 
However, the interesting thing and I discovered this by accident, but I’ve 
been using it and I’ve gotten out of a couple tickets at least so far. Once I 
discovered that it made me really think that. 
 
 
A few people here know, because I took them to the market, I have this 
crappy old van. Like, somebody sold it to me for $1. It’s that crappy. It’s 
rusty and stuff but I like it because I carry stuff in it. 
 
 
Especially if I go to my friends. Obviously, you don’t know the area, but if I 
go to Irvine, which is kind of a higher end area, I won’t get stopped in the 
day but I will get stopped at night. I will consistently get stopped at night. I 
will always get pulled over. 
 
 
The other day I got pulled over on the freeway and I was speeding. He 
told me, "You are speeding." I get stopped and I have crap in the back of 
my van. I don’t really care right now. I get stopped, he looks at my driver’s 
license and he's like, "This is Santa Barbara." "That’s right." 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
349 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I say, "I’m not going to change this because I own that house. I’m just here 
working right now. I’m really kind of tired and that’s why I’m doing this." 
Meanwhile, I’m wearing a nice watch and they run my record. I have no 
record, nothing. They come back, "Alright sir, just slow down next time." 
I’m like, "Alright. Thank you." 
 
Igor: 
The thing that’s happened here is, and this is something we’ll come to this 
afternoon, is remember when we talked a few days ago about triggering 
the amygdala through surprise and the unexpected? What are the 
expectations when they come to the window of a beat up old van, 
especially at nighttime in a nice area? 
 
Students: 
That he’s a robber. 
 
Igor: 
He’s there robbing. He doesn’t belong there or he has some kind of 
criminal intent or something like that. The moment they come up to the 
window, they see someone who is polite, is well dressed and has status 
symbols like a good watch and all that sort of things, who talks about the 
house he owns. What does house ownership imply? Status, wealth, 
security, probably middle- class, there are other liability factors that go 
with that. 
 
 
Notice how these are natural prejudices people have today in our society. 
Just because people are poor, does not make them unreliable, 
untrustworthy or criminals or have criminal intent. Yet, those biases still 
exist to some extent. Does that make sense? 
 
 
The reverse biases exist as well. Just by having that little interaction, he’s 
triggered the amygdala. The old patterns are frozen. The new pattern is 
introduced and he has to try to evaluate that. How do I deal with this new 
pattern? The only way he can do it, at speed, is to go to old prejudices, 
which is middle-class, relatively wealthy, he’s in the safe category, alright 
we’ll let you off this once. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
If he was stopped in a nice car, in a nice area and he came from that area, 
in other words everything fit the picture, do you think it would be more 
likely or less likely that they’d let him off a speeding ticket? Less likely, 
because he already knows how to deal with that situation, he’s already 
prepared for it. Does that make sense? Thank you, that’s a great example. 
 
Student: 
I had an example where in Pennsylvania I went to get my driver’s license 
renewed. 
 
Igor: 
We have all the driving examples here. Can I pause you there a second –
notice what frame are we in right now? What frame have you set by 
bringing out your driver’s license and your driving stories? Getting out of 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
350 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
tickets frame, driving licenses, as an example, so where do our minds go 
automatically? Does that make sense? 
 
 
Do you see how this is happening, invisibly, as we’re operating. It just 
makes sense. It feels natural, but I’d like you to observe it because this is 
exactly how peoples’ minds work. I apologize for doing this. It’s an 
interesting phenomenon worth pointing out. 
 
Student: 
Normally, I sign my name with MD after it. I did that and went to get my 
driver’s license. The person there said, "You can’t do this. You can’t have 
an MD after your name." I said, "Why not?" He said, "We don’t allow any 
clergy or doctors or anything to put that after their name. You just have to 
have your regular name on your driver’s license." 
 
Igor: 
They’re doing that very specifically for the same reason, so you don’t use 
status to do that. Again, do you see how, for every point of influence, 
someone will try to create a safeguard against it? We have to be aware of 
what these things are so we can move through them smoothly.  
 
Students: 
Yes, in terms of wardrobe. We all have implied assumptions that come 
from the way we dress, obviously. Sub-culturally, there are a lot of 
different youth cultures that rock different kinds of outfits. 
 
 
For example, a skateboarder might look different than someone who is 
into Mod or into hip-hop, which is very different. There are assumptions 
that underlie all those things as well. 
 
Igor: 
Each culture is context. Each subculture has their own set of reference 
points. Things that work well with one, don’t work so well with the other. 
For example, I think we mentioned this previously on another day, 
remember the study, we talked about where someone in a suit will have 
the same authority as someone wearing a uniform, who has the same 
authority as a police officer more or less because it triggers the same 
association inside peoples’ minds? 
 
 
If someone in a security uniform – not a police officer – tells random 
people to pick up a piece of litter on the floor and throw it away, it’s not 
their own, it’s just lying there – in fact he’s put it there himself beforehand 
for the purpose of the experiment, a lot of people will go and pick it up. 
 
 
If a person in a suit does the same thing the results are virtually identical. 
Of course, what if he was to walk into a different area with a different 
assumption about authority? For example, maybe a skateboarding 
community – although I’m not saying they all have authority issues – or 
what if he walks into a biker bar or Nicky’s bar, which apparently is a little 
bit more challenging? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
351 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The suit now has a different meaning. The assumptions, the frames have 
changed because the context has changed, which means our study about 
wearing a suit is invalid. Does that make sense? It’s actually going to be 
damaging. 
 
 
I would love to be able to give you – here’s the universal golden rule, just 
do this and you’ll be influential every time, but it doesn’t happen. The one 
golden rule, I would say would be; understand the context you find 
yourself in and the hidden frames that context implies. Does that make 
sense? Is this useful? 
 
 
Students: 
Just a comment in support of what you’re talking about here. I have a 
friend who is a security expert in London and he says you can rob any 
building in London simply by walking into the building wearing a neon high 
vis vest and a hard hat. 
 
Igor: 
Apparently, if you want to have criminal intent, you can walk into any 
building and rob it if you’re wearing a neon vest and a hard hat, like one a 
maintenance worker for the city council would have. 
 
Students: 
The reason for that is every contractor in London wears those high vis 
vests and hard hats. 
 
Igor: 
Right, every contractor in London – I would say probably in the UK – wear 
these high visibility neon vests and the hard hat, it’s kind of like their 
uniform. People expect to see it in those buildings. 
 
Students: 
The most difficult thing in training security guards at the building is, if you 
walk in looking like a contractor, the security guard automatically assumes 
you are a contractor and you’re just there to work on the building. 
 
Igor: 
He’s saying, when his friend trains security guards, one of the hardest 
things is to get through to them that someone who looks like a contractor – 
in other words has the hard hat and the vest – need not necessarily be 
one, because they’re assuming and just waving them through without too 
many checks. 
 
Students: 
The pre-frame in the security guard’s mind is, that that individual is simply 
there to work on the building. 
 
Igor: 
The assumption the security guard has is oh, this person is just here to 
work on the building. He belongs here. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
352 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Students: 
The people that they stop are people who walk into the building wearing a 
suit. They want to know what floor they’re going to, who they’re there to 
see. They see that as the danger. 
 
Igor: 
Of course, they look at the people in suits as the more dangerous people 
because they want to make sure they’re going to the right floor, especially 
in buildings that have segmented corporations inside them. They want to 
make sure they go to the floor they belong to, rather than any old floor. 
 
Students: 
The difficult task in training building security guards is to pre-frame their 
way of thinking. To consider everyone a danger, to stop and question 
everyone. But he said literally, you can walk into any building in London 
and rob it just wearing that vest and hard hat. Once you walk outside, 
there are 100 of guys wearing the same vest and hard hat so you can 
quickly disappear. 
 
Igor: 
Remember, there are legal implications to robbery and theft. However, for 
information purposes only… 
 
 
It just illustrates this whole idea about wearing a vest and jumping into 
people’s assumptions. It just illustrates how people’s assumptions are 
active every day. Honestly, we need those assumptions because we can’t 
think about every single thing fresh, every single time. It frees us up to be 
able to focus our energy and attention on other things. 
 
 
When these assumptions are problematic to us we need to be able to find 
them and change them. If they’re problematic in terms of the context we 
enter, we definitely have to recognize them so we can change them ahead 
of time or during the moment of problems. Make sense? 
 
Students: 
I just want to share a very interesting re-frame experience I had when I 
was a young man. There were four of us, two couples, and we went into a 
bar. There were a few motorcycles outside, choppers and such, we didn’t 
think too much of it.  
 
 
We walked in the door and it was filled with all these rough looking 
characters and we thought maybe we’ve made a mistake here. Then we 
noticed the sign above the bar. It said, "The nicest place with the nicest 
people in town." They were. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. 
 
Students: 
I have something along the same lines. Has anyone seen the movie – you 
can rent it if you go to your video store or Netflix, they can probably find it 
– called 'The Battle in Seattle'? Here’s someone who knows it firsthand, 
then. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
353 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
It’s a fantastic movie. Rent it. It’s all about the big WTO fight in Seattle in 
1999, where the World Trade Organization, an unelected body, was going 
to make all these new rules about trade in the world economy. There were 
a lot of people from environmental groups and from progressive religious 
organizations and labor groups who felt like, well, these rules are going to 
satisfy maybe 1% of the world and screw everybody else. 
 
 
They organized a tremendous march. Unfortunately, there were a few 
hooligans who smashed a few windows and suddenly the news went gaga 
over all these hooligans and vandals. It cast a bad name for all the other 
people who attended who had very good intentions. 
 
 
I had this vision that one day these folks – let me just take a step back and 
look at the picture. You’ve got all these police. They’ve got helmets. 
They’ve got clubs. They’ve got body armor. They may even have gas 
masks and they are out there in force and in big numbers. Then you have 
all these people who are just like everyday folks, unarmed and everything. 
 
 
What if all those folks showed up in three piece suits? I would love to see 
what would happen. Then the enforcers would be acting violently or trying 
to rein in people who look like the people who give them their orders in the 
first place. 
 
Igor: 
What I find interesting about what you’re saying there, political idealism 
aside, is the thing about in terms of what is this is doing here, in terms of 
the frames? He’s mixing two frames that in our minds don’t really come 
together.  
 
 
It’s kind of like saying, what if you had two police forces have a go at each 
other instead? It’s something that’s so weird inside our minds we can’t 
even contemplate it. Although, it’s really no different than war or anything 
else. It is possible at some point, something weird happens and two police 
forces clash this way. 
 
 
The point here is you need to be very aware of what those frames are so 
you can then create the kind of frames that allow a different kind of 
inference to occur. The scenario you just described, again, is a great 
example of a pre-frame. It uses the expectations people already have to 
send a very different message, right? Thank you for that, I appreciate that. 
 
 
Students: 
This thought occurred to me. 
 
♦ Would you say that the use of the 'Yes Set' is a universal pre-
frame? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
354 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
It can be if you do the 'Yes Set' like we have it in the 'Yes Deck', which is 
loaded with frames. If it’s just yeses, I can say, you’re in shoes and jeans 
and playing with your glasses. The 'Yes Set' itself must have a frame built 
into it and if it’s accepted, then you have a form of pre-frame. 
 
 
It’ll probably be more of a direct pre-frame, unless your assumptions are 
very clever in terms of what you’ve pulled into them. But, absolutely, it’s a 
form of pre-frame. 
 
Students: 
When you start working with a group, I’ve noticed, that you’ll ask certain 
questions, which obviously the answer is yes. You’re all here to learn 
conversational hypnosis… 
 
Igor: 
Just to accentuate that, for example, I’m asking you guys, you are here to 
learn some hypnosis, right? Otherwise, go next door, please. You’re here 
for conversational hypnosis in particular, right? You’re here to learn and 
master something new right? 
 
 
What I’ve just done there, is, I’ve got a 'Yes Set'. I’ve, of course, paced 
there, so I’m actually focusing the frame around the idea of hypnosis. So, 
trivial things, I have the ability to dissociate, other ideas that don’t fit into 
this thing. I can cut them off. 
 
 
I’ve also – and this is where it’s a more implied frame – I’ve done a little 
lead. You are here to master something. You never said you were, but I’ve 
assumed that. By the role of the 'Yes Set', it creates a new frame about 
mastery and that allows me to do several things. 
 
 
It allows me to move faster. It allows me to push you more, and it allows 
me to maybe force you back from exercises a bit more. If something is 
going down the wrong track, like right now we’re asking too many 
questions, then I can say, do you want to ask more questions or do you 
want to learn more conversational hypnosis? Which is it? 
 
Students: 
Learn. 
 
Igor: 
All right, let’s do it. 
 
 
Do you see the example of the re-frame that I’ve set up by establishing a 
pre-frame ahead of time? Do you see how that works? I now have a frame 
of reference which is, you’re here to learn conversational hypnosis. You’re 
not here to chat. You’re not here to present your own opinion about the 
world, philosophy of life and so on. You’re here to learn conversational 
hypnosis. That’s what we’re doing. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
355 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
While it’s great to have these discussions, if they go too far, I have an 
ideal setup, pre-frame, which will allow me to cut those things short and 
refocus onto what we’re here for, which after all, really, is what we’re here 
for. 
 
 
That illustrates another point, which is, pre-frames are not necessarily at 
someone else’s detriment. If I allow the conversations to run in any old 
direction constantly, ad infinitum, at the end of the 10 days, how satisfied 
will you feel with what you’ve gotten out of this 10 day course? I would 
have failed on my promises to you because I didn’t allow the group to be 
focused in on what I promised I would be focused on. 
 
It’s not that pre-frames are like a manipulation. I’m going to force you to do 
stuff. It actually, sometimes, allows you to let people get what they want 
when they’re actually fighting themselves without realizing it. Make sense? 
Is everyone good with the idea of pre-frames so far? 
 
There’s a couple of other things I want to say in terms of setting a pre-
frame. We’ll cover this more in the advanced section. It’s that stories are 
one of the best ways of setting pre-frames. You can tell a story about how 
I was at a seminar once and people were asking way too many questions 
so the head of the seminar said shut up, stop it, leave me the hell alone. 
 
I learned a valuable lesson. I would put that kind of story in the inept 
category, and not highly amusing. When we get into storytelling, we’ll 
focus more on how to be a little more suave, a little more smooth, a little 
bit more indirect and elegant about what we’re doing. 
 
The final thing in terms of pre-frames and this is the most important thing 
for you to remember when it comes to frame control, remember frames 
produce a frame of reference with respect to the value of whatever 
message or behavior that’s going on. 
 
I’ll give you an example of what I mean in terms of sales and how to 
change the meaning of something. I think it’s Sonoma that makes a bread 
maker. You know, those little machines you put flour and water and stuff 
like that in. You push a button in the morning and you have a lovely loaf of 
bread. It's not the most inexpensive of machines. Sales are okay. 
 
A few years down the line they introduce a new bread maker. It has extra 
buttons and things that spun and turn. You can put nuts and bolts in it and 
all kinds of stuff. It’s true. It’s apparently better and it’s a lot more 
expensive. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
356 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
This comes out, what do you think the expectations are for the sales team 
in terms of sales of the new machine, given that the older machine was 
doing okay, but it wasn’t doing great, not crazy sales? Any ideas? 
 
They probably think the older machine will die out. No one will want it 
because the new one is on board and it will make similar sales as the new 
one. No, in fact what happened is the new machines sold virtually nil, sold 
a few, but very few, and the sales for the old machine went through the 
roof. 
 
Think about it, you have two machines. They essentially do the same 
thing. They make bread. One costs you $600 and the other costs $100. If 
you have no frame of reference, $100 to get a loaf of bread. What are you 
comparing it to? You’re comparing it to a $2 loaf of bread you get at the 
supermarket. That’s not worth it is it? Now you have a $600 machine that 
does the same thing. Now, it’s a bargain, it’s only $100. Do you see how 
that works? 
 
The contrast frame is very important. You might think that you’re a little 
smarter than that. You wouldn’t be caught up that way. Allow me to offer 
you a scenario and see how this works for you. 
 
Anyone here ever buy pants, like jeans or something like that? How much 
are they, $50-$100? Something like that? You walk into a jeans shop, you 
find your favorite pair of jeans, let’s say they cost $80. You know that 
across town another store sells the same jeans for $60, $50, something 
like that. Where do you buy those jeans? 
 
Students: 
The one across town. 
 
Igor: 
The one across town, would that be fair to say? That seems like a 
sensible choice, you’re saving $30.  
 
 
 
You’re going to buy a flat screen TV that costs $1,000. You know, 
for a fact that across town right next to the jeans store, in fact, is a store 
that sells the exact same TV for $9,900 (Igor got his numbers mixed up.), 
so you save a whole $100.  
 
Where do you buy the TV? The store you’re in because it’s easier. What is 
it that you are referring to? Not the $100 or $30 you’re saving. What you 
are choosing or using as your criteria to buy, you’re contrasting the price 
of one TV against the other, at that point $30 is nothing, $30 compared to 
$1,000 is barely anything, it’s pennies. Thirty dollars compared to $80 is 
huge, that’s almost half the value of it. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
357 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Do you see how contrasting dictates meaning much more than objective 
fact? When you’re setting your frames, it’s very important that you choose 
the right things for people to contrast, your ideas, your product or your 
services and so on, against. Does that make sense? 
 
 
If they make a different comparison, there will be a different conclusion at 
that point. Do you like that Cecil? 
 
 
Let’s have a chat about re-frames   
 
Cecil: 
Yes, I do that, what Igor just mentioned about contrast. There’s a time to 
use a percentage as the contrast mechanism and there’s a time to use a 
dollar amount as a mechanism. It’s very important that you choose the 
right one, otherwise, you get this kind of thing.  
 
Thirty bucks to go across town and pay for parking and gas, and you think 
it’s a bargain. Thirty bucks in a TV store and you won’t even think about it 
because the percentage of difference is so minute, even though the dollar 
amount is the same. 
 
Igor: 
It depends on what is the message you need to get out there? Make 
sense? Re-framing is what you do when either your pre-frame hasn’t 
worked or you’ve forgotten to pre-frame properly. Maybe you missed 
something or maybe you forgot to set it up. Maybe, you were pushed into 
a situation before you could pre-frame it, so now you have to re-frame it 
and so on. 
 
 
The problem with the re-frame is, if it’s presented ineptly again, it actually 
reinforces the original frame. Do you have a question? 
 
Students: 
Perhaps about the pre-frame, wouldn’t it depend on the person you’re 
with? Some people would just be amazed by the suit of the specialist and 
it would be enough. 
 
Igor: 
That’s exactly what we’ve been saying. It depends on the context and the 
context includes the people who are there. If you’re in a crowd of bikers, 
the suit will not be very impressive; in fact it might be the opposite. 
 
 
If you’re in a crowd of bankers or police officers the suit is much more 
impressive. In fact, the absence of a suit is less impressive. The people 
that you’re with and the context that they’re in; the people are part of that 
context. In fact, they are the primary factor in the context, and will be 
absolutely crucial. 
 
Students: 
If someone has a therapist and they go to him, one person might be 
impressed by his cabinet and his things. But I would personally analyze 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
358 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the person more himself. How is he? If I have problems with smoking, if he 
smokes himself or is jumpy… 
 
Igor: 
Exactly, they’re all part of the frame you’re setting up. I absolutely agree 
with you. Remember frame is not just one little thing. Let me reemphasize 
this in case you misunderstood. 
 
 
I’m not saying go out and wear suits more, not in the least. What I’m 
saying is, understand what is the context you are in. What are the 
expectations people have in that context, what do they need to see to 
have trust and comfort? What do they need to not see? Make sense? 
What is it they’re going to come with, what expectations are they going to 
come with that are problematic, that you have to break before you can 
even begin? 
 
 
I’ll give you a quick example of what I mean. In hypnotherapy for example, 
a lot of people come in hoping for a magic pill. They’ve tried everything 
else and it’s failed. Now they want you to control their mind and make 
them do something they can’t do for themselves, or at least they think they 
can’t. 
 
 
That’s not a very useful frame for making change, is it? Now it’s up to you 
to do all the work. The other problem with that frame of course is, the 
expectation doesn’t allow them to actually engage. They just sit there and 
you talk to them, and there’s a great fail rate – like I tried my best. 
 
 
You need to switch that mindset around so they’re now choosing to be 
there. So now engaging, they’re going to work for the outcome. So there’s 
mental activity going on and you can create change. 
 
 
Here’s a great example of how – do you guys understand re-framing since 
we did pre-framing already? 
 
 
The key to re-framing by the way is not to explain things. If someone 
comes in and says, "Alright, I can’t stop smoking I’ve tried everything else. 
You’re a hypnotist, do your hypno-magic and make me stop smoking." 
You can hear the frames, the assumptions in that; can you not? 
 
 
The key to re-framing is not to turn around and say, "Well, I can’t really 
make anyone do anything." What’s he going to think inside his mind? 
You’re useless. What kind of hypnotist are you if you can’t make people 
do stuff? That is a lot of people’s expectations. 
 
 
Just telling them that’s not how hypnosis works, hypnosis is gentle and it’s 
loving and it’s good for relationships – they don’t want to hear that 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
359 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
because it’s not their expectation. You’ve got to change the expectation 
differently. 
 
 
Because there’s a thought loop running around, logic will not do that, or 
will do that very rarely. What you need is to break the thought loop so you 
can replace it with another one. How do we break thought loops? What is 
the primary thing we do? 
 
Students: 
You could use some mind bending language. 
 
Igor: 
He’s talking about mind bending language for example. Yes, what does 
mind bending language do? 
 
 
He’s talking about opening up the transmitter for possibilities. You’re 
close. I’m going to steer out of the idea of mind bending language purely 
because we’re not focusing on that on this seminar, and secondly 
because it just does something. Mind bending language isn’t the important 
part; it’s what it achieves that’s important. 
 
Students: 
Pattern interrupt. 
 
Igor: 
Pattern interrupt yes, but what does a pattern interrupt actually do? 
 
Students: 
Bypass the critical factor. 
 
Igor: 
Bypass the critical factor. How are we doing this? There you go, you’re 
stimulating their amygdala. The amygdala is the part of the brain that’s 
stimulated by novelty, surprise, unexpectedness, and so on. 
 
 
What does the amygdala do? Three things… 
 
♦ Number one, it sharply focuses attention.  
 
Do we want that as hypnotists? Yes.  
 
♦ Number two, it releases a strong emotional response, sometimes 
positive, sometimes negative, depending on what conclusion 
someone is coming to. 
 
 
Do we want a strong emotional response? Yes, that’s called S, stimulating 
the conscious mind.  
 
♦ Number three, it short circuits the neo-cortex to a certain extent.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
360 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
In other words, classic thought loops can no longer run for a period. That’s 
what a pattern interrupt does. That’s what mind bending language does. 
That’s what the critical factor bypass really is. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
You’re cutting the thought loops through from the neo-cortex, which is 
where the thought loops run constantly in the same sort of patterns. For a 
moment, people literally don’t know what to think. That’s the point in which 
a suggestion can be presented. Let me give you an example. 
 
 
Anyone here ever do an instant induction? What happens during instant 
induction? When you do, maybe, a little jerk of the neck, remember the 
gentle jerk, or the hand whatever form you want to use. 
 
 
Would it be fair to say there’s a little bit of surprise going on there, a little 
bit of shock? So it would be fair to surmise that the amygdala has 
somewhere been triggered. What do you do at that point? You present a 
clear, simple, unambiguous suggestion. In the instant induction, of course, 
it’s sleep. In conversation, it’s your re-frame. Does that make sense? 
 
 
We’ll come onto how to do that later on today but I just want to present 
that as a principle later on. Would you like to learn? 
 
Students: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Good. We’ve already talked about out-framing, where you’re changing the 
context. Imagine someone sitting in a room and saying there’s not enough 
food on my plate. That’s a complaint. 
 
 
You want to add frame and say, "Hey, the whole city is starving and 
you’ve got twice as much as anyone else in the city." Do you see how 
that’s an out-frame? You’ve changed the scene and now by reference to a 
bigger scene, the problem isn’t a problem anymore. 
 
 
Here’s another example I like to use sometimes. Imagine you’re watching 
a movie and you see these twigs and logs and stuff like that. And it’s like, 
Christmas music and there's a lovely little fire burning. How do you feel 
about that? Pretty good, right? 
 
 
You see the logs are, actually, branches of a tree. It’s a Christmas tree 
decorated with lots of little lights, and it’s blazing quite happily. All the 
presents underneath are catching fire. How do you feel about this? 
 
 
Do you see how by changing the frame, I’ve changed the meaning? Let’s 
step back. If you step further back, because I don’t want to leave a 
negative image in your mind, and it turns out there this corner, there’s this 
studio, there’s lights and cameras, there’s security personnel with safety 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
361 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
equipment all around – they’re making a movie. How do you feel about it 
now? 
 
 
Do you see just by changing the frame, you change its meaning 
fundamentally? It’s kind of a pre-frame maneuver if you wanted to call it 
that, but it just allows you to change the topic in some respects. 
 
 
This is what happens, classically, when nations go to war to avoid internal 
conflict. Your concerns are petty, look at this, enemies are all around, 
better pull it together or we’re doomed. 
 
 
All the same situations are still occurring but by looking at the bigger 
picture changes people’s attitude. Does that make sense? Have a quick 
question or comment? 
 
Students: 
You used an out-frame at the tail end of the discussion about re-frames. 
 
Igor: 
He’s mentioned that I used an out-frame at the tail end of the discussion 
on re-frames? Care to elaborate? 
 
Students: 
Essentially the discussion of re-frames was drifting off topic and you 
wanted to bring everyone back to topic. 
 
Igor: 
When I talked about people drifting off topic and I wanted to get people 
back to topic. 
 
Students: 
Therefore the out-frame was presented and it was generally accepted by 
everyone. 
 
Igor: 
The out-frame was accepted by everyone, which is stop asking silly 
questions. Classic. Do you see how just talking about it, and of course I 
had to do it with a sense of humor, why?  
 
 
You’re not children. I can’t just say, oh, naughty children talking too much. 
It’s implied more in terms of the story. I’ve changed the frame of reference, 
so, let’s focus on what this whole training is about, not the individual ideas 
or stories that are occurring to you. 
 
 
By the way, I still encourage you guys to ask all the questions. It’s just, 
please don’t be offended if I tell you to shut up. Is that okay? 
 
 
By the way, notice, why did you just laugh? Because your amygdala was 
triggered. Why did it get triggered? It was a surprise. Did you expect me to 
be rude to you, to tell you to shut up at just the point where I was being 
very polite about, and I hope you’ll forgive me, when I tell you to shut the 
hell up? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
362 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Do you see the contrast? Again, the contrast principle is what creates the 
surprise and that’s what triggers the amygdala. Which in turn, allows the 
re-frame to actually set in without being over analyzed, without it bouncing 
into existing thought loops that might say, oh, I don’t think I like being 
treated that way. That’s not a very nice way to talk to people. 
 
 
Do you see where we’re going with this? Does it make sense? Is everyone 
good? Is everyone happy, or should we do the inner smile again? 
 
 
Let’s see how we’re doing on time here. Excellent! What I’d like to do now 
is just give you guys an experience of the mindset that allows you to find 
frames that are worth presenting to people. Does that make sense? 
 
 
 
For the moment you can be very overt about it. We’re not asking for the 
proper re-frame or pre-frame or anything like that. I just want you to get 
into the mindset so you can find frames that are of use to people. 
 
 
To do this is very simple. Who here is familiar with a book, Pollyanna? I 
think it’s an American classic, 1913, what’s her name – Eleanor Potter 
wrote this. A story about a little girl called Pollyanna, an orphan, who goes 
to live with her very strict aunt called Polly – very imaginative there. 
 
 
Essentially, you’ve got a strict aunt and this exuberant little girl who is 
overly optimistic. Because she grew up very poor with her father, he 
invented a game with her called 'The Glad Game'. One Christmas they’re 
going to the mission to get spare things for toys for Christmas, and she’s 
really hoping for a doll. Of course when they look into the barrel the only 
thing that’s left over is a pair of crutches, a great gift for a five year old girl, 
right? 
 
 
To avoid disappointment her father invents a game called 'The Glad 
Game' and they start coming up with reasons why it’s a good thing there’s 
crutches in there for her. One of the things they come up with is, I don’t 
need them and that’s pretty damn good. Do you see where this goes? 
 
 
I’d like you to start playing 'The Glad Game' with each other for a little bit, 
but I’d like you to play it in a special way. I’d like you to find the most 
messed up scenarios you can possibly think of. We’re talking about the 
world is burning, your cat has been nailed to a tree, your whole family has 
been sacrificed on an alter and that’s good because…Do you see where 
we’re going with this? 
 
 
Let me emphasize something here. I would like you to specifically avoid 
anything that is actually happening in your life, for now. I want you to be 
able to find 'The Glad Game' in the most extreme of scenarios. Then, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
363 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
when we rein it back a little bit, it’ll actually be a lot more natural and easy 
for you to do. Make sense? 
 
 
 
Get into groups of five. Maybe go back to the old groups you were in a 
moment ago. Someone throw out a really messed up scenario. Really get 
colorful with this. Then everyone else start finding reasons to be glad for 
that. Off you go. 
 
 
Who here enjoyed 'The Glad Game'? Was it kind of funny? I recommend 
strongly that you keep playing this game. We’re about to go into a break, if 
you want to talk about some crazy scenarios and come up with all sorts of 
crazy ways of looking at it, that would be acceptable. 
 
 
If from time to time, you were to slip in something that might sound like a 
crazy scenario, but it’s actually real…I can’t stop you. I mean, how would I 
know, right? 
 
 
Do you get a good concept of what frames are and how frames work? 
What they do and how you can start beginning to use them? After the 
break we’ll focus a little bit more on how to use them specifically to 
motivate action. To actually get someone to do something, think 
something, feel something. To really motivate action and get people 
excited and enthusiastic about something. 
 
 
Is anyone here in sales, getting people to accept ideas or influence them 
in some way like that? It fits that whole model particularly well.  
 
Thank you very much. 
 
 
 
DVD 14:  Super Persuasion - How to Lock 
People into Your Frame and Make Them Feel 
Good                      at the Same Time 
 
Igor:  
I want to take this idea of frame control and focus it on something that’s 
going to allow you to motivate people. Whether it’s motivating a sale, getting 
people excited about an idea, about doing something, a behavior or even to 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
364 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
accept new ideas that might otherwise be challenging to them, because 
they are motivated to accept them. Does that make sense?   
 
Let me give you an example, of how that works in terms of ideas. When I 
started as a hypnotist, coach and so on, I came from a legal background. I 
worked for one of the top law firms in the UK.  
 
My perception was if you are the best in your field, clients will come 
knocking on your door. Then reality set in when I sat in my office, twiddling 
my thumbs wondering where my clients were. I realized, who knows that I 
exist?  
 
Even though I knew that intellectually, it took me the best part of a year or 
two to accept that I had to do some marketing. I did a little bit here and there 
but I didn't accept the idea until I had issues paying rent. This motivated me 
to find a better way of running my business. It was a business. Running my 
business wasn’t just delivering the service I’d promised. It was getting the 
people to deliver the service to. Does that make sense?  
 
I’m not exactly a slow individual. I’m not mentally too challenged. Yet, it took 
me a year and a half to accept the idea that I have to do marketing. Isn’t that 
weird? The thing that got me over the hump, of course, is I had a reason to 
accept that idea. More importantly, I had to accept marketing that works 
rather than marketing that I thought I should do, which clearly wasn’t 
working very well.  
 
I want to focus this session on ways of getting people to accept ideas, or be 
motivated to accept ideas, to accept behaviors, to engage in behaviors and 
do so enthusiastically. Would that be useful to learn?  
 
This training relates to frames because these are part of the invisible frames 
that will come into any interaction. It’s been called several things by different 
people and people have different categorizations of hierarchies and so on, 
but essentially we're talking about something I like to call 'Values' or things 
that are important to people.  
 
We are not random creatures. We're goal oriented. I suspect that there is no 
one in this room who woke up one morning, got an email saying, fancy 
coming to a seminar and then responded with, why not. Who is it? I don’t 
know, just sign and off you go. You had a reason for being here.  
 
Chances are you had to make sure that what was being offered in the email 
and the sales page matched what you wanted to get. There is a contrast 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
365 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
always occurring. We're always comparing things to our internal goals and 
to the extent they get us closer or make us achieve those internal goals, 
we’ll be motivated.  
 
Something that gets us closer is a little motivational. Something that helps 
us achieve it or makes us think we’ll achieve it is hugely motivational. This is 
where values come in.  
 
One way to look at values is what we hope that goals will give us. When 
someone wants to have a fast car, do they want to have a lump of metal 
that hurdles down the road at high speed? What is it they're really buying?  
 
It might be status. It might be the excitement of driving, a sense of power. It 
might be the freedom. One of the classic rights of passage for teenagers in 
the western world is that they get a driving license. Why? It represents 
freedom to teenagers, especially in North America, where you have lots of 
distance between things.  
 
In Europe you can walk around places. Hop on a bus or something and it’s 
a five minute journey. It’s not possible in most North American cities. Having 
a car is huge freedom. The motivation to getting a license is huge, provided 
they want that freedom of course.  
 
If they're afraid of the outside world or comfortable and want to stay at home 
and never leave, is there any motivation to drive a car or get that license? If 
they have a private chauffeur, mommy and daddy will come and pick them 
up or drop them off any time they want, is there any motivation to get a 
license then?  
 
Do you see how, if we can find people’s true goals, the values behind the 
goals, we know how to motivate them. It becomes a very simple equation. 
All you have to do is make sure that whatever you're offering, the idea, 
service or product gets married up with whatever that feeling is, that value 
or goal. When the two come together, by getting that car they will get the 
freedom, they will get that thrill and status they're looking for.  
 
Values must have a strong emotional component or they are not values. I 
could ask each of you what’s important about life and so on. You might get 
socially polite responses, such as, it’s important to treat people well, this 
and the other.  
 
Somewhere on that list, you might throw something out that is actually 
important to you. Like, they just leave you alone when you ask for it. Do you 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
366 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
see a bit more emotion coming in there? I want to see how we can explore 
people’s values. Find them and find which are worth working with. I’m going 
to give you a caveat before we begin. Human beings are state based. That 
means that when your state changes, your values will change.  
 
Let me give you an example. Do you think it’s acceptable to hit other 
people? Just pummel them in the face? No? Okay. Someone is about to 
harm your children, loved one, someone close to your family. Is that 
acceptable? Yes. By changing the context, we change what is acceptable, 
what is important at that point.  
 
If someone is feeling calm and comfortable, life is going well and they're 
living in a decent part of the world and so on, and you try to sell them an 
alarm system, do they need it? Do they want it? They live in a neighborhood 
where their doors are unlocked. Half the time they're left open. No one 
steals anything. They're neighbors. They feel safe.  
 
This same person goes somewhere else and maybe gets attacked there. 
Now they feel insecure. They feel unsafe. Will they leave their door open? 
No. Are they more likely to buy a burglar alarm? Yes, with a panic button. 
They're still in the same place, same neighborhood, same context. What’s 
changed is them.  
 
Now that they feel insecure. Safety or security goes up in their goal system, 
needs, and value, in their estimation. They’ll start buying things that aren’t 
even necessary, because it’s satisfying an internal need for safety, comfort 
and so on.  
 
This will happen across contexts. It’s important you know this, because you 
might be able to find someone’s values out. But if they switch, go into a 
different emotional state, you’ll have to do the work again, just to find 
something else to come out there too.  
 
Don’t think of these things as absolute. They're close enough to being 
absolute in terms of that context, that setting, that state, but they’ll be 
variations that go with it.  
 
 
How can you find people’s values? It’s very simple. Can I have a volunteer? 
Do you want to come up Ralph? Let’s put you over here so you can use the 
microphone and people can hear you.  
 
Ralph, why is it you came to this course?  
Ralph: 
To learn conversational hypnosis.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
367 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
This is a relatively common response. I know why he’s here. The context 
has defined that. If this was a used car lot and he told me this, I’d be a bit 
perplexed. If it’s a used car lot and he says he’s here to buy a car, it’s like, 
well, of course, it’s a used car lot.  
 
This doesn't give me much information in terms of his values and how to 
motivate Ralph. I need to find out more. We're going to do this initially 
directly and then we’ll see if we can get more indirect about this whole thing.  
 
The simple question we're going to ask to get a set of values out is, what’s 
important to you about, and variations of that. After a while, you may want to 
vary for the sake of not sounding like a broken record.  
 
Let me ask you, what’s important to you about conversational hypnosis? 
Ralph: 
Being able to interact better, being able to do something good for people.   
Igor: 
Okay.   
Ralph: 
Save the world.  
Igor: 
How much emotion was there in Ralph’s responses? By the way Ralph, I 
apologize for talking about you as if you weren’t there. This is a useful way 
of getting through to what we're looking at.  
Ralph: 
No problem.  
Igor: 
Thank you. Was there a huge amount of emotion in what he’s saying here? 
No. Would it be fair to say there was a bit more emotion than when he 
talked about learning conversational hypnosis? Yes.  
 
We're getting a bit closer to his values, but we're not there yet, are we? We 
have to take one of these things here and focus on that a bit more. When 
you talk about interacting with others better, what’s important to you about 
that?  
Ralph: 
For me, getting out of the cave that I live in as my home office, and being 
out among people more.  
Igor: 
If you're out of your cave and amongst people more, what does that do for 
you?  
Ralph: 
It gives me an opportunity to have an effect. 
Igor: 
Do you notice again the emotions are starting to rise again. There is a 
stronger focus on the language. He’s emphasizing a bit more. It’s not a 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
368 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
huge shift, but it’s getting there. You should probably be feeling more 
emotional about the question and not intellectual any more.  
 
There are a couple of things interesting here. First, have an effect, do good, 
save the world, are you beginning to notice a pattern developing here? 
Notice these patterns because these things are important. In a normal 
conversation they’ll throw these out again more randomly. It’s your job to 
spot them as they become more invisible.  
 
The second thing is he wants, to get out of the cave so he can interact with 
more people or something along those lines. Basically, he’s telling me the 
same thing again. He’s giving me the same logical level in terms of 
information. Interact better, get out of my cave and talk to more people. It’s 
on the same wave length, isn’t it?  
 
I’ve got to bump him up a little bit in terms of the idea. Remember with the 
five realities? We want to get to something symbolic, something that 
symbolized the whole of his life, his purpose for being here and so on. It 
could be something like freedom, being a force for good in the world. I’m 
having a suspicion it’s going to go in that direction somewhat, but we’ll see.  
 
If I ask what’s important about getting out of your cave, I’m likely to get 
another version of that again, because he’s already given me one version 
across in the same way. What I do at that point is collect things.  
 
When you're interacting better and you're getting gout of your cave more, 
you're meeting more people, what does that do for you? Do you see how 
that sets a variation of asking, how is that important to you? If I collect them 
altogether, I’m asking him to jump up and summarize. Give me something 
that is present in all those things for him. Does that make sense?  
 
 
That happens to be - to have an effect. What’s important to you about 
having an effect on people?  
Ralph: 
It’s important that it’s a positive effect. 
Igor: 
Clearly you don’t want to go around shooting people.  
Ralph: 
That would only add to the discord.  
Igor: 
Yes. Notice what he just said there. Notice how in casual conversation stuff 
comes out? That would only add to the discord? Who thinks that harmony of 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
369 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
some sort was going to be an element of whatever values we end up with? 
Chances pretty high?  
 
So, what’s wrong with discord?  
Ralph: 
It’s not pleasant.  
Igor: 
What would you rather have? 
Ralph: 
Pleasant environment, pleasant community situation.  
Igor: 
Notice how having a positive effect, doing good and saving the world, 
initially they sound altruistic elements and there is that sense of altruism, but 
notice how we're going somewhere different. Until it has a personal impact 
on him, there has to be some kind of selfish element for everyone, then this 
stuff is just the icing on the cake.  
 
It doesn't devalue the desire to do well and be a good force in the world. In 
my opinion, it enhances it. Here, we're getting a hint. We haven’t got there 
yet, but having a pleasant environment around him is something he enjoys. 
In helping others have a better life and being more harmonious, there’s that 
discord thing again, he’s helping himself to live a more pleasant life. Do you 
see how that’s starting to work out? 
Mickey: 
Would this be a good way to help somebody get rid of or find a dirty goal?  
Igor: 
A dirty goal is when consciously and unconsciously you want different 
things. They conflict. For example, anyone here want some money? Okay, 
just a few.  
 
If your unconscious mind happens to think that people who have money, 
more than a certain amount, more income than $100,000 a year, are 
somehow bad, have tricked others, manipulated them in some way, they are 
somehow unethical and it’s important to be ethical in the world.  
 
What are the chances of you reaching high levels of income? Relatively low. 
If someone says they're going to be wealthy, they're going to be wealthy. 
They're going to start creating an internal conflict. Your unconscious mind is 
saying, no, you're better than that. The harder they try, the bigger the 
conflict. That is called a dirty goal.  
 
You need to release the unconscious drives in order to be able to clean that 
up. Does that make sense?  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
370 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In the process of doing this, you may well come across a dirty goal and 
you’ll come across something to give you leverage to clean it up. So, value 
is all about leverage. Leverage for motivation, leverage for change, for 
whatever.  
 
Let’s explore this a bit.  
Ralph: 
I’d like to give a little insight into save the world motive, which goes back to 
being a selfish component. I would like this world to be more enjoyable, 
more fun and more pleasant for myself and everybody in it.  
 
I think, in order to be more pleasant for me, it needs to be more pleasant for 
others, too. The save the world idea is that, the more each of us, as 
individuals, spreads the good feelings, the better the whole world will be.  
Igor: 
I agree. It’s a great sentiment. It’s important for people and yourself to enjoy 
themselves and to be pleasant to each other.  
Ralph: 
Right. To enjoy life, let go of the stress. You open the newspapers. Who can 
read the newspapers anymore?  
Igor: 
What do you think the driving value is right now? We’ve pretty much found 
it. Enjoy life. Did you see him animate? That was the first time in front of the 
whole group that he started using his expression more openly, putting more 
emotion behind the whole thing.  
 
It’s important to you to enjoy life.  
Ralph: 
Definitely.  
Igor: 
Here is the equation in his mind. When other people are enjoying their life, 
it’s easy for you to enjoy yours.   
Ralph: 
Quite so.  
Igor: 
Again, do you see the enthusiasm with which he’s responding? I have a little 
product that will help people enjoy their lives even more.  
Ralph: 
Can I get that?  
Igor: 
Absolutely, buy all of them and you’ll enjoy yourself way more than by just 
buying one.  
Ralph: 
I already have them.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
371 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Do you see how we’ve navigated through the lower tiers and ultimately 
we're coming down to a single motivating hot button. It’s enjoying life. You 
can create a context in which people are enjoying their lives so that you can 
enjoy your life. Would you like that?  
Ralph: 
Yes, and you know, it’s a lot of fun to light people up. They love it.  
Igor: 
They do and do you enjoy it when other people lighten up?  
Ralph: 
Oh yes.  
Igor: 
Yes. I want to show you something in a minute, how to use values to make 
people really light up so not only are they enjoying themselves, but you can 
have a lot of fun doing it too. Would you like that?  
Ralph: 
Yes.  
Igor: 
Give him a nice round of applause. Do you get an idea of how this hierarchy 
thing works? Notice how it gets a bit messy. There will be a few distractions 
as you go along. Follow the emotion and constantly try to get something 
which is the bigger picture.  
 
What is the bigger picture? It’s interacting with others. It’s a decent chunk. 
What is a bigger picture behind that? What is driving that? It’s getting out of 
your cave, being pleasant with people and so on. What’s the picture behind 
that? It’s to have a pleasant world to live in, to have a positive effect on 
people.  
 
What’s the bigger picture behind that? It’s so that there is enjoyment and fun 
so people can enjoy their life and so I can enjoy my life. Then, all you need 
to do to motivate someone is to go in a different direction. Here is something 
that people who really enjoy life usually like or enjoy, not only because it 
makes their life so much more pleasant, but because it makes it much more 
pleasant for everyone else.  
 
Did you see how we just framed something, in a way, that is uniquely 
presented to them? For example, let’s say we're talking about the 
hypnotherapy training? Hypnotherapy is a way of showing people how to 
enjoy their life more so you can create a more pleasant environment around 
yourself. It’s an enjoyable way of doing it.  
 
Rather than having to take on other people’s bad and negative experiences 
and so on. You're not only showing them how to enjoy their life more, you're 
doing it in a way where you're actually enjoying the interaction better.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
372 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Do you see how I’m hitting all of these things that I'm talking about at that 
point? Do you find that vaguely motivating Ralph? Do you see his reaction? 
He’s lit up and his emotions are up, because we're hitting his emotional hot 
buttons.  
 
This is what his mind is contrasting against when making decisions 
specifically in the field of hypnosis and so on. This is not necessarily his 
biggest life value. I suspect it’s very close to it, but it’s enough for what we're 
doing here. Does that make sense?  
 
Let’s say I was doing some kind of coaching with him, or there was a 
problem in the sales process, all I’d have to do is demonstrate that what 
he’s doing right now or thinking about is in contradiction with his value. Then 
I have leverage.  
 
For example, Ralph came to me and we’ll go back to the money sample. He 
would like to have a bigger income to take care of his family and friends, but 
for some reason, every time he gets close to that magic six figure income, 
something goes wrong and he’s back at square one again. That is a classic 
tell tale sign that unconsciously there is a conflict going on.  
 
As I’m chatting with Ralph, I ask, what’s important about money. It’s so I can 
do this, that and the other. We get this idea that it’s about enjoying life and 
so on. Great! 
 
"How much less do you enjoy life when you don’t have the money to do 
anything that’s of value to you and others?"  
 
 "Well, I’m not." 
 
 "So, to the extent that you can change how you view money, you’ll be able 
to enjoy your life more and help others to enjoy their life, too. Is that what 
you're saying?"  
 
 "Yes."  
 
 "So, it’s not that you want to make more money, it’s just, that making more 
money means that you can enjoy our life more, help others enjoy their life 
more so the whole world becomes more pleasant. Is that what you're telling 
me?"  
 
Do you see how I’ve just reframed his internal conflict using the leverage of 
his value? He can’t fight his own value. It’s so emotional. It’s like having a 
big, red hot button to one of the biggest resources inside of him. The conflict 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
373 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
with the money will evaporate at that point, or is likely to, or it will bring up 
something else for you to handle. Either way, it has to emerge from 
unconsciousness. Does that make sense?  
 
If it does, if he says, only bad people make a lot of money. My grandmother 
always used to tell me this and I can’t shake the idea somehow. Great! You 
still have your leverage. "Do bad people help others enjoy their life more or 
make it more pleasant for them?"  
 
 "No."  
 
 "So you're telling me you want to use your money to help others enjoy 
their life more and have a more pleasant time, right?"  
 
 "Yes."  
 
 "Does that make you a bad person?"  
 
 "No."  
 
 "To the extent you’ll make more money, you’ll be a better person. Is that    
what you're telling me? Is that right? Have I understood you correctly?"  
 
 "I guess so."  
 
Do you see the internal conflict evaporating at that point? The logic is not 
mine. The logic has to be his. These are leverage points to get him there. 
Do you see how this works?  
 
Is that almost a form of a 'Yes Set'? I’ll go a step further. It is a very elegant 
form of a 'Yes Set'. It’s a 'Yes Set' loaded with a frame, like a frame 
controlled 'Yes Set', like the 'Yes Deck' is a frame controlled 'Yes Set'. It’s all 
about how to learn how to create 'Yes Sets', and how to have frames built 
into them to make the interaction easier, only this time, you're using the 
same principle and personalizing it to the individual.  
Student: 
I took a negotiation course and it was massively beneficial to me. The 
technique I learned was simply a thing called opening and confirming 
questions. It’s the same thing as that but was a little different.  
 
People would say things to you and you’d say, oh, and you’d repeat back to 
them. You leave it open, because it then allows that person to expand their 
deeper need.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
374 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
He’s reflecting their own statements back to them with a general open-
endedness so people start adding more to it. For example, we’ve got 
products in the back of the room. You may think it’s too expensive. We're 
now in a negotiation. Borrowing the pattern you’ve told me, so you think it’s 
too expensive?  
 
What do you feel like doing right now? Justify something, add something, 
explain it and give more information. That’s a classic way you can do this 
indirectly. For the moment, I don’t want to confuse the waters too much. I’d 
like to get a very clear sense of getting values, getting it overtly so you can 
get the process inside your mind.  
 
When you want to get more covert, for example, with these questions or 
listening to these stories and so on, it becomes more intuitive. Here is a 
quick exercise I’d like you to do.  
 
I’d like you to get into groups of two. Ask each other why you came to this 
course. You’ll probably end up with an initial reply very close to this: to learn 
conversational hypnosis. I want you to navigate your way through to the true 
value, the big value at the end.  
 
You’ll notice some people have a lot of these and some have a few focused 
ones. We’ll talk more about that after we’ve had some examples.  
 
The way you’ll do it is very simple. What’s important to you about X? If 
they're running a loop, in other words, they're talking about things that are 
similar, collect them together. 
                     When you have X, Y, Z, what do all those things do for you? It forces them 
up to another level. Does that make sense? It makes them go more 
abstract.  Go where the emotion is. If they throw out a casual statement, but 
there is more emotion in it, follow up on that and see how it ties in with the 
other things they were saying.  
 
With Ralph, we got enjoying life and enjoying fun, pleasant things that was a 
side comment he made. Did you notice that? He didn’t answer that as a 
direct answer to my question. There was enough emotion that we decided 
to run with it and that gave us the big value.  
Student: 
Is there a list of what you consider the big values? Where do you stop?  
Igor: 
Yes and no and we’ll come to that later. For now, the place you want to look 
for in terms of stopping this exercise, find something where they really get 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
375 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
animated. They're significantly more animated than when you started. That 
will be enough for now, and then we’ll start refining as we go along.  
 
Spend five minutes apiece and we’ll be back in ten.  
Student: 
Wouldn't you say it’s everyone’s goal to enjoy life?  
Igor: 
No. Honestly. It depends what you mean by enjoying life. For some people, 
it’s just having peacefulness and tranquility. I you want to reframe that as 
meaning to enjoy life, sure. What is it that enjoying life means to them?  
 
You can’t put your label on someone else’s experience. Someone enjoying 
life is about doing the right thing by your family. That’s how they enjoy their 
life. You're right, but I don’t want to get confused with the labels otherwise 
you put your fish in their dreams.  
 
The question is, isn’t the ultimate emotion to enjoy life? Different people will 
have different labels attached. For someone whose association is around 
the area of enjoyment might mean things like fun, bouncing up and down, 
but what they really want out of life is peacefulness and tranquility.  
 
You and I might say that person is enjoying life by being peaceful, but that 
label, that word, enjoying life might mean something different to them than it 
does to you. Their associations are different to it. It’s not the idea, it’s more 
the label. Oh, I just have to find out how someone is enjoying their life more. 
That won’t necessarily be it.  
 
Another thing you have to bear in mind is, because these are context 
dependent, you're looking where the things are inside that context that they 
want. You might miss the idea of a fast car, an elegant car or a racing fire 
red car, because you're too busy looking for something that will already be 
there at some level.  
 
Does anyone know why we're looking for the actual words? It’s their hot 
words. It’s their personal trance words. It has special significance to them 
and points into this huge well of positive emotions for that person. So their 
phrase is going to be very important.  
Student: 
What I noticed when eliciting these values and asking the questions and 
listening to the responses, you can sort of hypnotically guide the person and 
make them go where you want them to go and make them believe that 
some of the ideas are their own. You can slowly meld them into a new way 
of thinking.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
376 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
You guys are way ahead of the game. What you're describing is what I 
would call installing values or massage values. Is anybody here an expert in 
their field, anyone? Do you ever notice that clients will come to you for your 
expertise, but then tell you how to resolve their problem in a way that 
actually won’t resolve their problem? Ever notice that?  
 
As a lawyer we’d get that all the time. People used to come in and say, I 
want to have this special purpose vehicle for launching my whatever and we 
could say great, we’ll do it. Then they get annoyed that we’ve done it, but 
we did what they asked us to.  
 
What they're thinking of is this, will be a tax saving device, for all of these 
different reasons? What they haven’t realized is, those rules do not apply to 
them. So now they’ve created a tax burden when they were looking for a tax 
break. Your job as a lawyer would be to ask them, what are you trying to 
achieve by that? Does that question sound familiar?  
 
Once you know what they're trying to achieve, then you can ask what’s 
important about that? Saving taxes, oh, so what's important is saving taxes. 
Did you realize that this, this and this, means that this will cost you more 
than that? This will actually be more effective for getting your taxes cut? 
This will increase taxes for these reasons. They’ll say, "Wow, no."  
 
Here is a tip for how to create this installation. in other words, to reframe 
people’s values. Essentially, you tell them an insider secret. If you tell 
someone an insider secret, something that will probably not be told by 
others, the trust level for you goes way up. In doing so, the reliability of the 
new value goes up too.  
 
I’ll use the used car example. It’s an easy environment for people to 
navigate through. If someone buys a used car, and let’s assume that a 
classic thing that goes wrong with a used car might be the brakes. I don’t 
know if it’s true or not, but let’s assume that for the purpose of this 
illustration.  
 
Someone says they want to buy a car. What’s important to you? Well, it’s 
got to be cheap, economical, but it’s got to drive. Great! We have some 
things that would fit that bill. One thing you should know and my boss 
doesn't like me to tell you, and you’ll probably never hear this in another 
used car place, but you seem like a decent person and you really should 
know this.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
377 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The biggest problem with a used car is the brakes can fail. Whatever else 
you want to have in a car, we’ll find the right thing for you, but please, make 
sure you have a special warranty for the brakes, because without it, your car 
is useless. If it’s fast but doesn't stop, it’s not the best car, is it? 
 
Do you see how I’ve just installed a new value in him now? If your shop or 
center happens to have guaranteed brakes with extra national certification 
and so on, does that not lift your cars way above the crowd of all the others? 
You just installed a new value. He has accepted it and you happen to be 
able to provide it to. Do you see how that works?  
 
Do you see how this becomes very malleable and useful as well, especially 
when you leverage values on themselves? For example, if he wants to buy 
a car just to be able to get out there and enjoy life, and I need to introduce 
the idea of brake safety as a value, how might I do that? Any ideas? 
Student: 
You want to make sure that you're going to be safe so you can reach the 
people you want to be in touch with, yes, like to leverage values together.  
 
I say, "Listen, how much are you going to enjoy life and how much of a force 
for good will you be in this world when you get somewhere where you can 
start interacting with people, and you start running them over because your 
brakes have failed?"  
 
 Do you see how I’m creating a vivid mental picture where he’s violating his 
highest value, because he hasn’t considered a new value that I need him to 
consider? 
 
It’s like someone saying to me, when I am starting as a hypnotist, why are 
you in this work? So I can have a better lifestyle. So I can do something 
where I feel I’m making a difference in people’s lives and I can control my 
own hours. It’s the reasons I went into hypnotherapy, plus it’s a fascinating 
field.  
 
If someone had said to me, tell me, how much value are you offering to 
people’s lives when no one knows enough about you to come and see you? 
Huh? Think about it. If your marketing sucks, no one actually knows about 
you. They're not going to come and sit in your chair so they can have the 
wonderful effects of hypnotherapy. How do you feel about that? Not 
particularly good.  
 
So, you're telling me that the idea of marketing is important enough to find 
out how to do it properly? So you can do something positive in other 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
378 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
people’s lives, so you can be proud of the work you’ve done at the end of 
the day? Hell, yes. 
 
Do you see how, now, that we started having the higher values, we can use 
them to leverage in new values that they may not have considered, but have 
to, because you know in your field that people will typically ignore them but 
actually, they're more important. Does that make sense?  
 
This is how you overcome the typical objections. Has anyone heard the 
objection, it costs too much? Let’s say someone’s value is their family. I 
want to protect my kids. They need to have a good future.  
 
Let’s say, they say, it costs too much. I understand the safety of brakes and 
so on. I understand it costs too much, but tell me how high a price are you 
willing to put on the safety of your children? You can get a normal car with 
normal standard and they're good.  
 
This car has everything. Side impact, so if that drunk driver comes and hits 
you on the side of the road your children are safe. It has the whole braking 
system so that even in bad weather conditions, if you have to stop on a 
dime, it makes your children safe.  
 
You are leveraging their values to introduce things that they need to be 
considering, because if it’s not part of their mental map, they're missing out. 
You will probably be doing them a disservice by not doing so, because you’ll 
give them what they want, what they’ve asked for, but not what they actually 
need, what they’ll come back to you for, is, as a trusted adviser or source of 
valuable things.  
 
Does that make sense? I’m not suggesting the abuse of this, so that you're 
selling someone something totally ridiculous and unnecessary just because 
you can. Where is the trust going to go when they come back and start 
reasoning through all the gadgets that aren’t necessary to keep my children 
safe? Who needs a flashing light bulb inside the car? How is that going to 
keep them safe?  
 
Especially when other people start talking to them about things, if they 
suddenly realize you sold them something which they do not need, where is 
that trust level going to go? Up or down? It’s going to go way down, way 
below anything you’ve had before.  
 
The rule with trust is this, for most people, it’s relatively easy to get trust. 
Some people had trust issues and we can understand that, but for most 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
379 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
people, it’s relatively easy to get trust. Once you lose trust, it’s very hard to 
get it back. Never violate someone’s trust whether it’s an implied promise, in 
fact, if you think you’ve made an implied promise by accident, make sure 
you clarify that you are or are not making that promise so it’s above board.  
 
Get a commitment up front from them so they know this is what I’m signing 
up for and nothing else. Does that make sense? It keeps you ethical, but 
also keeps your relationship alive.  
 
Most interactions you have with people are about the relationship. If they 
like the one car, they’ll send friends to buy a car. They’ll come back and buy 
a new car. They’ll get upgrades from you. If you have a repair service as 
well, they’ll trust your repair service more because you sold them a good 
car.  
 
Do you see how all of that escalates? If you only think about the one car, 
get this, get this and get this, your ability to influence actually decreases 
significantly.  
 
Has anyone here been in a shop wanting to buy something? You knew 
exactly what you want, a pair of shoes, a dress, a TV set. You knew exactly 
what it was, you went in, wanted to buy it and had a sales person talk to you 
so much about stuff you did not care about, you felt so uncomfortable you 
went next door to buy there instead? Anyone ever done that? It’s a common 
thing, because they had their agenda too strongly inside their mind.  
 
This allows you to put their agenda in. What do they need? What do they 
think they need versus what they actually need? You can put the two 
together and build a proper persuasive piece of communication. Your 
frames flow from this.  
 
 
Here’s the good news. In virtually every field you go into, these values will 
be patent. In other words, the individual expressions may be slightly 
different words, but they're still worth finding them.  
 
The things people are looking for will be four or five types of things. And 
there are four of five types of people in the world that will come back 
repeatedly and ask the same questions, have the same objections, same 
needs or wants, think they want one thing, but need another. Does that 
make sense?  
 
In virtually every field there will be certain kinds of personalities. It won’t be 
more than four or five and they’ll all be in the same group and share similar 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
380 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
things. As soon as you can identify what kind of person it is, your sales 
process becomes that much quicker, because you already understand what 
kind of person they are and so on.  
 
You can guide them through the questioning process more easily to confirm. 
And you already know how to reframe and how to pre-frame things so they 
don’t become a problem. In other words, the problem evaporates before 
they’ve even thought about it.  
 
It requires experience. If it’s the first time you're in that context, you're just 
going to have to make your mistakes and learn as you go along. The longer 
you're in the field, the easier it is to figure out what these things are.  
Student: 
From my experience, if a person has an emotional attachment to whatever, 
they easily depart with the money, because it’s very important.  
Igor: 
Exactly.  
Student: 
 
♦ If you increase the value, will it be easier for them to pay for it, 
they already have the value? 
 
Igor: 
They already have the value, but they haven’t attached to the product yet. If 
you attach the value to the product, does it make it easier for them to buy it? 
Is that what you're asking? 
Student: 
Right. The simple answer is that emotion sells; nothing else. If they feel right 
about that product, they will buy it pretty much no matter what. They’ll make 
sometimes stupid decisions and that is not something you want to 
encourage.  
Igor: 
The reason for having logic and all of these other things around it, is to give 
their minds enough reasons to feel good about that sale, in other words, 
avoiding buyer’s remorse afterward.  
 
First, how many people here have bought something that seemed like a 
good idea at the time, but you’ve never used it. You put it on the back shelf, 
look at it and go, what the hell was that all about? What was I thinking? That 
is called buyer’s remorse. You bought it, because at the time, it felt right. 
Then you got home and that feeling evaporated, because there was no logic 
or reasons in your mind anymore so the feeling disappeared.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
381 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
You also all have something in your house that honestly, has no actual 
practical value in your life whatsoever and you are dead proud of it. You 
love this thing to pieces. It could be your favorite collection of match stick 
men, the flea circus you bought for $9.99 at the local dollar store, or that 
map of Atlantis someone just made up, but looks nice.  
 
These things you do not need. They don’t add a value to your life, but when 
you look at them, you feel good. I’m glad I have this. If anyone took that 
map of Atlantis down off your wall, you’d say. " No. You put that thing back 
there. It’s valuable. One day I’ll go to Atlantis and I’ll find that gold."  
 
The point is the emotion sells. Emotions people need to drive the behavior 
and the sale. You must also have enough logic in there, so afterward, when 
they look at it, they can justify the emotions. It’s the framework they keep in 
their mind that allows the emotions to arise.  
 
Let me give you an example of how frameworks work with emotion. What is 
anger? What causes anger? Anger is caused when a boundary you have 
has been violated. It is designed as an emotion to push people off that 
boundary to reestablish it.  
 
What if you have in your mind the idea that no one is allowed to chew gum? 
It’s a bad thing and people who chew gum have insulted you personally. Is 
that going to make you a very happy, tranquil person, especially in the 
USA? No. Why? Because you're going to have your boundary violated 
constantly.  
 
 
It’s an idea. Think about it. The boundary was set by a framework, an idea. 
People that chew gum are chewing out of respect, because they're not 
going to take their gum out and just spit it at you. That’s kind of nice. That is 
an idea, isn’t it? It’s a reframe. Why? Because now when you see someone 
chewing gum, is your boundary being violated? No.  
 
Was your boundary ever violated? The violation incurred inside your mind 
as a result from an idea interacting with your environment. Does that make 
sense?  
 
This is how the intellectual and symbolic reality can affect your emotional 
reality. When we talk about frames, we're talking about a bunch of 
sophisticated things at the same time. The values have huge emotions 
attached to them. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
382 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The logic that you have in your sales presentation, or whatever other 
persuasive influence you present people, the reframes and pre-frames, etc. 
give them enough logical anchor points so when they reflect back on their 
decision, they realize it was a good one. They continue to feel and maintain 
the good feelings just like your favorite pair of shoes versus that fashion 
mistake.  
 
 
Some people wear real fashion mistakes and love it. They don’t care. I know 
people hate them, but I love these shoes or whatever. It’s because they feel 
good about it and they have enough reasons to carry on feeling good about 
it despite what the world is saying.  
 
 
Versus someone who has the very same pair of shoes and says they don’t 
like them because of what the world is saying. Secretly, they still like them. 
When they bought them in the shop it was great, but the environment 
changed their mind and now they regret it.  
 
Do you see how important values are, because values already pre-exist. 
These emotions are already there, they're looking for this. You may have to 
add values into the hierarchy to help them make better decisions, or it’s 
enough to just attach this to your product or service and then it’s worthwhile 
to them.  
 
Make sure you give them lots of reasons, interesting reframes or pre-frames 
so when they think back on the decision to purchase, to take part in it or 
adopt your idea, they have plenty of reasons for feeling good. Does that 
make sense?  
 
The question is can you reverse it? Can you go from emotions toward 
values? They're the same thing. With Ralph, we had to find the emotion to 
know what the value was. This is just an intellectual construct around a 
feeling.  
 
This frame, and the pre-frame, allows Ralph to feel good. It’s not like it’s one 
or the other. If I find him feeling good and ask what’s that? Oh, I’m enjoying 
life. If I say, do you want to enjoy life and he starts feeling good, it’s a 
chicken and the egg. It’s the same thing.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
383 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Does that make sense? Is this proving useful to you? 
 
 
DVD 15:  The 16 Hot Button “Super Drivers” 
that Force People to Act and How to Push 
Them 
 
Igor: 
Go ahead. 
Student: 
This subject is totally practical and at the same time it feels, maybe from a 
left-brain perspective, it’s a lot to get your arms around. 
Igor: 
Yes and this is where experience is useful. Let me put it this way. Did you 
all enjoy the exercise you just did with people going through the 
hierarchies? 
Student: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
You saw the emotions rising, did you not? 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You can see how you can just, very simply, attach the frame of reference 
they’ve given you, whether its enjoy life or something else. You can play 
'The Glad Game' or the Pollyanna game as cement that links the enjoyment 
of life to whatever problems you have. That’s really what 'The Glad Game' 
does, isn’t it. 
Student: 
That’s what I do for a living as a copywriter. 
Igor: 
Right, exactly. 
Student: 
Even then I feel like I’m still kind of swimming in a great deal of, you know… 
Igor: 
Thank you for that. That’s a great segue.  
How would you like to have a series of frames that are universal? Although, 
not everyone will have all these frames, in other words, these as values. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
384 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Everyone will have at least one or two of these things as very high in their 
value tree? In other words, they will be constant. They may not sound the 
same to people, but it will be the same thing with maybe just a different 
label. Would you like that? 
Student: 
I would love that. What prompted me to come up here is, you said earlier, in 
any field people seek the same needs, wants and objections. Then along 
those lines, there will be, maybe four to five different personality types 
seeking those needs, wants and objections. 
Igor: 
I wouldn’t say necessarily personality types, it’s more certain types of 
needs. If you categorize people according to needs. There are people who 
need this budget versus people who need luxury versus people who need 
that. There will be about four or five people who are interested in your field 
and they’ll have a preference for this, that or the other and there really won’t 
be much outside of that. 
 
Student: 
So ultimately, what I was going to ask is this. 
♦ Is there some kind of, even maybe a diagram or something, that 
kind of collapses all this into some nice little pocket reference? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, would you like to have that? 
Student: 
Absolutely. 
 
Igor: 
If you make your way down back to your chair, I will happily give it to you. 
Would you be interested in that? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
What I’m about to go through now is nothing on my research. This is 
actually from Dr. Steven Rice. He’s a professor of psychology and he went 
round interviewing some 6,000 people to try and figure out is there any kind 
of common theme or thread in what people want and need. It turns out, at 
least according to his research, there is.  
 
I’m going to offer it to you in with a caveat, which is these are broad-brush 
categories. The individual manifestation of each category will be different. In 
other words, two people can be driven by the same drive, the same need, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
385 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
desire, but they can look fundamentally different on the outside. So it’s 
about what’s going on in the inside rather than the outside. Does that make 
sense? 
 
That’s just a question at what level do you switch them. For example, 
enjoying life could come down in a very brutal way. For example, well, I like 
to hunt people with my shotgun as the way to enjoy life. That’s 
fundamentally different behavior to what Ralph was talking about, isn’t it? I 
hope. That’s the caveat. 
 
The caveat is, whilst the drive will be the same, because the frames that fall 
underneath it are different, the behavior may come out differently. The 
conclusions will be different. Does that make sense to you? 
 
I can give you that frame, I can give you the emotion, I can give you the 
drive and then you can massage the frames underneath it, or the values 
that flow from that in a way that will allow you to alter behavior and so on. 
Does that make sense to you? 
 
Here are the 16 drives according to Steven Rice. We’ll talk about each one 
of them in a little bit. The first three I like to call them a trio. They are 
obvious and are to do with our survival mechanisms. You’ll know these 
already, but the manifestations will look different.  
♦ The first one is the desire to eat. 
 
♦ The second one is romance.  
 
♦ The third one is tranquility.  
 
Romance is a euphemism for sex, right? He’s an academic and I guess he 
can’t say the word sex, because it’s a bit too scary. 
 
How do these things come out, for example, the desire or the need for food? 
Do you think that only the people who are overweight have this as a drive in 
their life? No. It can come out, for example, in the health food fad. People 
who only eat good food, healthy food or people who only go to expensive 
restaurants for the cuisine, the enjoyment of the cuisine or it could be just 
volume. So the expression of the desire could be very different amongst 
different people. Does that make sense? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
386 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The same thing, as Rice would call it, romance. The sex drive can come out 
in many different ways. It may be the sleazy guy at the bar that just wants to 
sleep with anyone. It may be the desire to get contact or intimate with a 
specific partner or person. It may be the stalker that is so in love with a 
celebrity that they hang around their house waiting for the one opportunity.  
 
Do you see how these vastly different behaviors are driven by the same 
basic need? If that need is met, the behavior changes somehow. Make 
sense? If you change the unconscious logic, the frames that they’re using to 
express the need it will also change the behavior, right? 
 
Tranquility again, that’s the need to be safe, to be at peace, to be left alone, 
tranquility and so on. I’m going to take a stab at saying that a large portion 
of this is driven by the need for tranquility, for peace, right? Thank you for 
nodding like Ralph, because that confirmed it for me.  
 
How do I know this? Well, there are a couple of clues. One was the idea of 
discord that he just threw out there. Remember? The other one is to do with 
the way he talked about when other people have a pleasant life it makes my 
life more pleasant and so on. All these things indicate tranquility and peace 
of mind as being the core driver, but I still have to frame that in the words of 
enjoying life. 
 
I’m not going to talk to Ralph about enjoying life by jumping out of an 
airplane going, wow, what a rush. It’s not as interesting to him. Whereas, if I 
talk to Ralph about enjoying life in terms of just, you know, the good life, 
where you can just kick back, your friends and neighbors around you and 
it’s just easy. Do you know what I mean?  
 
That’s the kind of life people want, isn’t it? That’s going to be more 
motivating to him, because tranquility or the desire for tranquility, for inner 
peace, is part of what this value of enjoying life is made up of. Does that 
make sense? Everyone clear so far, useful? Shall I continue? 
Students: Yes, please. 
Igor: 
The next three, again they’re in no particular order here - let me just 
emphasize - not everyone is driven by all of these at once. Typically, people 
will have two or three that really drive them in different patterns in different 
situations. But it’s useful to know them so you can start looking out for them 
as part of your investigation. Make sense?  
♦ Fourth is acceptance. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
387 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
♦ Fifth is curiosity. 
 
♦ Sixth is family.  
 
 
The desire for acceptance is really, basically, for approval. We want other 
people’s approval. We want them to agree, to say, well done and so on, 
praise, that kind of stuff. Again, it doesn’t come out as obviously sometimes, 
as you might think.  
 
For example, your hard-nosed scientist that publishes a controversial paper 
may only be interested in approval from a certain select group. He’s willing 
to take the flak of this approval from, say, the masses for that specific kind 
of approval. Make sense?  
 
Or, it might be the opposite. He might be willing to alienate his colleagues 
for mass approval, because the general population is more important to him 
than his specific peers. Do you see how the behavior, again, can look 
differently, but it’s driven by the same basic behavior? Make sense? 
 
Curiosity – that’s the need to learn. Some people are very curious. Some 
people are less curious. Dr. Rice would suggest, for example, that there’s 
no point in trying to motivate kids that are not curious to learn stuff in school. 
I think that’s taking it far too far. I think his conclusion is poor.  
 
Curiosity may be enough to satisfy someone on its own. Do you want to 
know (x) or do you want to know something that other people don’t know? A 
lot of people will go, yes, I do. Some people will go, sure. You may have to 
frame it differently. In other words, you may create curiosity by framing it by, 
would you like to find out how to be more tranquil and peaceful, even if 
things start blowing up all around you? 
 
Do you see how you can still create curiosity? It’s still a driver, even though 
it’s not a driver on its own. Do you see the distinction? One is curiosity on its 
own. That’s enough. I am excited by just the ability to learn something new. 
That in itself is satisfying. The other one is curious to learn for a different 
purpose. He needs another purpose in order to motivate the curiosity to 
want to learn. See how that works? 
 
Then, we have the need for family. The desire to raise children, the whole 
family life, protecting the family and so on. This is something which is a 
huge drive for a lot of people. I mean, you’ve heard people who changed 
their life around for their kids. You know alcoholics who stop drinking 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
388 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
because of their kids. People who pull themselves out of the gutter to give 
their kids a better life.  
 
You see this, a lot in third-world countries, where parents will work 
themselves to the bone, to send their kids to a good school so their kids can 
have a better life than they did. Would you say that these people are driven 
by the desire for family and nurturing their family?  
 
This kind of comes back to the question you had earlier on. They are, in 
some respects, enjoying their life because they’re achieving their drive, but 
at the same time they might be working really tough jobs and suffering 
through that process. But, they can still be happy with that because they’re 
achieving their drive for nurturing the family, building the family and so on.  
So, in some respects, you can say they’re enjoying their life, although it 
won’t necessarily look like it from the outside. Does that make sense? 
♦ Seventh is honor. 
 
♦ Eighth is idealism. 
 
♦ Ninth is independence.  
 
Honor is about, I guess, being true to the ideals of your traditions, your 
values or your group. So honor is always in reference to a certain group. It 
could be a family. It could be your clan. It could be your religion. It could be 
your field of work. Whatever group you identify with, there will be an honor 
with that. 
 
For example, you know that a community of magicians exists, you know, the 
tricks, sleight of hand and so on. It’s a very honor-bound society, in that, if 
magicians steal someone else’s tricks, there are very few law suits. 
Magicians don’t sue each other, but they’ll have lost their respect of their 
peers and that magician gets marginalized in the community. There’s a 
price to pay, of course. So it’s a very honor-bound community. 
 
People don’t steal material or give away material that someone else made 
up. If they do, they’ll have to adapt it and say the original is from so and so. 
Here’s my adaptation of so and so. If you want the original trick, please go 
to so and so for that. They have to acknowledge that way. It’s part of the 
honor code within the magical community.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
389 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Does that make sense? It’s worked great. It’s worked great for the last, I 
don’t know, 200-300 years that they’ve become an official community as 
such. So honor is a very strong driver for people. You just have to figure out 
what community are they being honorable towards. What are the values that 
they are referring to that tells them whether honor is being satisfied or not. 
Make sense? 
 
For example, there are some cults that within the cult, of course, there’s a 
strong honor tradition. You protect your own and so on, but then outside this 
you can lie to them, cheat them, steal from them, you can even use violence 
if it forwards the needs of their community. 
 
You may think, oh, this person is honorable. Well, honor is still a driver for 
that person, but it’s in reference to a different community. Hence, again, it 
can look like they are engaging in dishonorable behavior, but it’s because 
their honor code is not to your community. It’s to someone else’s. Does that 
make sense? Is it useful? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
All right. Idealism – Idealism is interesting. It’s basically the need for social 
justice. It’s kind of like the honor drive, it’s just you’re adopting society as a 
community to which honor must be satisfied. If you see someone else acting 
dishonorably, in other words, presenting an injustice to another member of 
the society, then that person’s drive gets kicked in to fix that. So it’s similar 
to honor, but it’s more at a social level. 
 
Again, it depends on the individual. Some people, it will be their nation is the 
reference point. For some people, humanity is their reference point. For 
some people, actually, it might be the animal kingdom or the planet, the 
plant kingdom to which an injustice has to be redressed. 
 
You can easily think about people in these groups, can you not? Animal 
activists, are they interested in social injustice towards people or animals? I 
don’t mean to say this as a broad-brushed term. I’m not saying that all 
animal activists will harm other people, but some of them are willing to harm 
human codes of justice in order to protect the animals themselves. Do you 
see how that works? 
 
Now, I don’t mean to say, by the way, that’s all activists. Some activists are 
fantastic people who do great jobs and so on. It’s more to illustrate how one 
driver can manifest itself in many different ways. Some ways it may look 
logically inconsistent with what the driver is, but actually when you follow the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
390 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
logic through, it’s actually very consistent. It’s just a question again of the 
frame -- what is their reference point. Make sense? 
♦ Tenth is order. 
 
♦ Eleventh is physical activity.  
 
Their desire for independence is particularly strong in the Western world. 
You go into the Eastern world, Asia, India and so on, individualism is almost 
an offense. It depends on how intense the community is you’re in. 
 
Like a Western audience says, be your own man. Do your own thing. It’s a 
very Western value that we’ve encompassed or accepted, but to a lot of 
more Eastern audiences the idea of individualism is affront to the social unit, 
to your coworkers.  
 
A great story was of a management consultant brought over to Japan to 
help an ailing sales team. They do the analysis and at the end of it they 
present the findings. They say look, we’ve found what’s going on here. You 
have a sales team of about 30 people strong. Now the interesting thing is 
one of these people is selling more than the other 29 put together. So it’s 
clear what we need to do here, isn’t it gentlemen? All the Japanese were 
nodding their heads, yes, yes, yes, yes. We must fire the over performer.  
 
To us it seems funny because we’re individually oriented. We’re success or 
results oriented, but that person was violating the social norm, shall we say. 
He’s making the other members of his team lose face. Do you see how it’s a 
different mindset? It’s not more valuable or less valuable. It’s just what is 
valued in that particular culture by those particular individuals. Does that 
make sense? 
 
So the need for independence can again, manifest in many ways. Some 
people will sit out in the woods because they want to be totally self-
sufficient. For some people it’s enough to get that car so they can have that 
freedom to do things. See how freedom is more about independence than 
about freedom? 
 
Order – Again, this is about things being predictable and organized, 
basically, a trial set against the idea of chaos. So the need for order is really 
the need for predictability, for knowing what’s going to happen next, for 
knowing where things are and so on. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
391 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
An extreme version of this is, of course, the people who have everything all 
straight down their desk. You move their little pencil and they look at it and 
start sweating and they have to move it back. Then you move it over again 
and they're sweating again and move it back.  
 
It’s an extreme version of what I’m talking about, but there are all kinds of 
things. It might be that people who are driven by a high need for order, are 
great in companies, in the logistics division or the admin department. It’s 
what keeps things together, in that sense. So it’s a tremendous and useful 
need to have and a useful drive. 
 
Can you all see, by the way, how in terms of social units or organizational 
units, having a mix of different drives can be very useful? It allows people to 
specialize in things that they are instinctively good at because their minds 
are needed to be satisfied. 
 
Physical activity is really the need for exercise, for physical movement. 
Again, it can manifest in many different ways. It could be because someone 
likes running. It might be a particular sport. It may be that anything will do, 
you know, be it a mountain climb, extreme sports person or something like 
that. It may come out in more gentle things like Tai Chi, Chi Gong or the 
desire to paint, but they need to physically express themselves in some 
way. 
 
Then we have a next set of things that are quite interesting.  
♦ Twelfth is power,  
 
♦ Thirteenth is saving. 
 
♦ Fourteenth is social contact. 
 
♦ Fifteenth is status.  
 
♦ Sixteenth is vengeance.  
 
Student: 
Khan! 
Igor: 
Yes, Star Trek. So, power. What is the drive for power? A lot of people have 
issues with the idea of power, but power can be a very useful thing. In some 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
392 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
instances, power is expressed as power over others. I can express my will 
by making people do things.  
 
That’s the thing that a lot of people take offense to, but in the right context, 
that’s very useful. Churchill saved a nation, as a result, of his need to 
express power. In a different time, not very useful. At that particular time, it’s 
a great drive to have had. Make sense? 
 
Power can also express itself with a self-reflective frame. In other words, it 
might not be power over others, but your power over yourself. That’s the 
people again, the Yoda’s of the world who sit in the mountaintops and 
meditate and want to have their will imposed upon themselves so they have 
the discipline. They have the mental capacity sharp and clear and all these 
sort of things. So again, the drive for power does not necessarily have to be 
power over someone else, it can be over self.  
 
So, power is about expressing your will over something or someone, 
whether it’s self or other. Riders, for example, may well be expressing a 
desire for power, but then again it may also be expressing a desire for 
acceptance by getting in harmony with a horse and so on. It may be a 
desire for tranquility. So do you see how the same behavior can be driven 
by different needs? Does it make sense? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
So, we’re not looking at the level of behavior. We looking at the level that 
drives those behaviors. The good news is, if you fit these things in, you can 
fit any one of these drivers into any kind of behavior. It’s just finding the right 
road map that links the drive to the behavior. 
 
Saving is interesting. This is the need to collect, to not lose things and so 
on. To illustrate this, by the way, this is a nice little bit of research on saving, 
how you express the desire to save will have a significant impact on 
someone.  
 
For example, if I say to you, you can earn $100 by doing something, I don’t 
know, buying a product; it’s motivation for some, not so much for others. If I 
say to you, you can save $100 by purchasing the product; believe it or not, 
more of you will be influenced by it. More of you will be willing to go off and 
buy that.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
393 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I can reframe that one more way, which, if I do it this way will take even 
more of you along with it. In other words, it’s much more persuasive than 
the first two. Would you like to know what that is? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
You’re losing $100 unless you do (x). By far that formulation is the most 
persuasive for people. People hate to lose things. Saving things is an 
example of not losing things.  
 
You’ll see a lot of advertising out there saying, save now and all that sort of 
stuff. The idea being expressed is great, but the mechanics of expressing it 
is a little bit on the weaker side. It will still work, but instead of saying save 
$100 and do this - I mean, how many people have clicked an advert, maybe 
some guru that says you could be losing $100 if you’re doing Y. You go 
really? Oh, my God, I’ll have to check it out.  
Student: 
It’s just a punishment. 
Igor: 
It’s kind of like a punishment thing, right? It’s just that people respond to it 
more fully. Go ahead. 
Student: 
Like the things you get in the mail, where you may have already won? 
Igor: 
He’s saying it’s like the envelopes you get in the mail that say, you may 
already have won. The idea is the same, but it’s going in a different 
direction. You may already have won, is about what you’re gaining. Open 
this to insure you don’t lose out or miss out. It’s going in a different direction 
again. Do you see the difference?  
 
It’s the same idea being expressed, it’s just the formulation of it will be more 
persuasive or not. So you get the idea of the desire to save and collect 
things? 
 
Then social contact, again, I’d say Ralph’s enjoying life is a mixture of 
tranquility and social contact. Can you see how we came to that conclusion 
just from how he was talking about things? This is the need to talk to other 
people, to interact with other people, be with other people and so on. 
 
For some people, by the way, this is the last thing they need. For them 
tranquility and peacefulness is when they’re away from other people and 
their demands and so on. So social contact is not a universal driver, it’s just 
a very common driver for a lot of people. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
394 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The same is true of all these so-called universal drivers. I don’t think there 
will be anyone driven by all of them at the same time. There will be two or 
three of these things that are really dominant in their personality. When you 
find them, you’ll find them being expressed in their values in different ways, 
in a different kind of context. Make sense? 
 
Status is the need to have importance, to have social value and so on. 
Again, a political office is usually driven by a couple of combinations. Status 
is clearly one of them, power is the other one. Depending on the individual 
there might be something else, but those two are, I think, the big drivers in a 
lot political offices. 
 
Finally, we have the idea of vengeance. Now, vengeance actually is not as 
negative as people initially think. Vengeance is really a desire to win, to 
strike back. So what, for example, of the child in school that’s told, you’re no 
good. You’ll never make it and they’ll think, I’ll show you. Or, someone 
who’s been told you’re just a bad person. You just harm people and they 
say, I’ll show you. I can be a force for good in the world. 
 
So vengeance is not necessarily a destructive or harmful drive. It can just be 
expressed as being harmful in some instances, but it can be a strong and 
positive motivator as well. Go ahead. 
Student: 
 
♦ Would it not be that justice is vengeance? 
 
Igor: 
So the question is - would it not be that justice is vengeance. Again, it 
depends on the individual. Do you see how this same behavior can be 
motivated by different things? For some people justice is vengeance. So the 
vengeance is - you’re going to prison, buddy. You’re going to suffer for what 
you did. For other people justice is about social harmony. So you’re going to 
prison to protect the rest of society, because it’s the right thing to do. 
 
So, yes, justice is vengeance, but it depends on your point of view. By the 
way, this is important, because this is one of the fundamental debates that 
has been raging in the legal community for the least, I don’t know, 100 years 
or so. It’s a fundamental debate.  
 
Let’s face it. Those people who are vengeance driven say, no, it’s about 
social control. It’s about payback and people have to feel like justice has 
been done. And, of course, the people driven by social justice say, no, it’s 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
395 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
about building a better society. It’s about rehabilitating the prisoners. It’s 
about being fair and making this world a better place.  
What they’re telling you is not an argument based on logic. Actually, they’re 
expressing a personal drive in a very eloquent way. Do you see how that 
works? 
Student: 
So, all of these things are subject to framing, right? 
Igor: 
All these things are absolutely subject to framing. This is just the pure drive. 
The frame is like the colored lens through which you shine the light and that 
will alter the behavior or the result of it.  
 
So we have the drives. We then have the frames that people perceive those 
drives through and that leaves us with some kind of a value, which then 
engages them in behaviors and certain fall patterns and certain emotions 
resulting from those high-level conditions. Does that make sense to you 
guys? 
Students: That’s perfect. 
Igor: 
Thank you. Do you want to come up? 
Student: 
 
♦ Isn’t this a modern version of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs? 
 
Igor: 
He’s asking if this is a higher version of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. Yes 
and no. The idea would be the same, but the content is fundamentally 
different to Maslow’s hierarchy. If you actually read Maslow himself, he 
himself said, this has never been tested. This is just an idea folks and I’m 
putting it out there. 
 
For some weird and bizarre reason the whole psychological community 
accepted it and adopted it wholesale as the truth. To my knowledge it has 
never been tested. This has actually been tested, which is why I prefer 
presenting this than Maslow. I’m not, by the way, negating Maslow in truth 
value. It’s just that it’s untested and so I can’t put anything behind it, 
whereas these things are tested and you can very easily, of course, find 
reference experiences to back these up as well. 
 
Everyone clear on that. Do you guys want to come up? You can come up 
after him. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
396 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
 
♦ Things like empathy, compassion, love, where do they come? 
 
Igor: 
First, you can have a whole bunch of emotions without having them to be 
driven by something. Secondly, if they are driven by something it depends 
what it is.  
 
For example, some people might have empathy, but it’s driven by the idea 
of vengeance. You might say, for example, you don’t understand other 
people. Watch me. Look. I really get these people. I really feel for them and 
so on. Empathy might be a form of social justice. I really feel for these 
people and I want the world to be a better place and so on.  
 
So these emotions still fit in. They just go hand in hand with these other 
things. They are expressions. Let’s put it this way. They are conclusions that 
people draw as a result of the interplay between a drive and a framework.  
 
Just like anger. Anger is an interplay between a drive, which is the desire to 
maintain a boundary and a framework. People chewing gum are violating 
my self-respect. So when they chew gum it leaks out in the form of an 
emotion – anger. Empathy would be the same thing. Given the right mix of 
frameworks and drives, it manifests in the form of empathy. Of course, 
assuming there’s no biochemical imbalance and so on which has its own 
issues as well. 
 
Remember, all these things are just little pieces of a puzzle and other pieces 
will fit into it as well. Physical reality can interfere with all this stuff. If there is 
a biochemical problem, let’s say, someone got a rod just whacked through 
their brain, and it destroys certain areas of their brain, all this stuff changes 
because the physical reality won’t let them process things the same way 
anymore. Does that make sense? 
 
By the way, there’s lots of research like this. There’s a gentleman back in 
the 19th century who was a perfect case of this. He was working the 
railways. Long story short, he got a big metal pole rammed through his brain 
as an industrial accident.  
 
Miraculously he survived. He went to the hospital. They managed to pull it 
out, patched him up. Physically fine, but it destroyed a certain area of his 
brain. From that day on he was a miserable, sour, nasty person. 
Remember, just before that he was a happy-go-lucky, friendly, everyone 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
397 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
loved him. He, unfortunately, ended his day’s miserable, alone and without 
any friends.  
 
That was the first time that people started looking at the brain in terms of 
areas of the brain being responsible for certain things. He could not control 
his moods any longer. They were always on a negative spin. So his life 
ended up having an unpleasant ending and that had a physical cause to it. 
Do you see where we’re going with this? 
 
What we’re talking about here is, all things being equal, this is one way to 
look at people. But you can look at them physically as well, or emotionally 
as well, or intellectually in terms of the frames that they operate through. 
Does that make sense? 
 
The question is, if there’s a conflict of values, is it a conflict of actual values 
or drives. Really, at this point we’re talking about semantics. What it really 
comes down to is, we have some kind of psychological energy, which needs 
to be expressed in some way.  
 
If you have a conflict between the two, one of them will be the dominant one 
and will alter the other one until there’s harmony again. The unconscious 
mind is very good at creating harmony with two concepts that should not 
match. Hence, the desire for vengeance could be expressed in the form of 
love and empathy. Make sense? 
 
They’ll just harmonize. It’s like, if you imagine two rivers clashing together. 
They’ll end up flowing down one direction. The more dominant river will 
more likely take the direction, or most of it, but the other one will probably be 
shifted across it a little bit as well.  
 
So these things have interplay and it’s very complex. I can give you the 
basic map to look out for and, more importantly, when you’re looking for 
these values in people’s lives, the map I just gave you, the Rice Model, the 
reason I like it is because it allows you then, to have a good instinct about 
where you stop with this. I think it’s answering your question from earlier on. 
 
What are you looking for? When they just give me this verbal stuff around 
interacting better, doing well and so on, what kinds of things are already 
being expressed just by that? That could be a driver.  
 
So this already, on its own, tells me it’s possibly something around social 
contact, acceptance or social justice. I don’t know for a fact yet, but these 
are all things that are coming to mind. As we go down towards this area 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
398 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
more, the pleasantness and so on, well now we’ve got the idea of tranquility 
coming in as well. It clarifies this a little bit more.  
So I’m less inclined to think it’s about social justice and more around 
tranquility and social contact being combined and expressed in this way. Do 
you see how that works? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
I’m sorry, Cassidy had a question first and then we’ll come on to you. 
 
Are there other drives like the drive to build? Let’s put it this way. We can 
cut the pie up in many different ways. Make sense? According to the Rice 
Model, the drive to build is a result of other drives. For example, to save 
things or for social justice or for getting respect or something like that. 
Student: 
 
♦ Is it true? 
 
Igor: 
Well, none of this is necessarily true. I hope you realize this. Nothing that 
we’ve been talking about here is actually true. It’s only true enough to be 
useful. So what I’m presenting to you right now are just ways of looking at 
the world that can make you more influential. Please do not make the 
mistake of thinking this is an absolute fact and this is how people are and 
how the world works.  
 
Even when I talk about the conscious mind and the unconscious mind, 
please realize, that is also a lie. It’s a useful one. It is a useful way of looking 
at people, but it is not the only way of looking at people. 
 
If the only thing you do is look at people as a conscious and unconscious 
being, you’ll miss a whole bunch of other things. For example, the vast 
advances we’re making in neuroscience tells about different areas of the 
brain and what they do, how they work and so on. Does that make sense to 
you guys? 
 
So please don’t do not have the idea that anything I say right now is true. 
It’s only true enough to be useful in terms of how you influence and engage 
other people and so on. Make sense? 
 
So we had a couple more questions up here before we go do lunch. Let’s 
start over here then, and we’ll come back here. Go ahead. Do you want to 
come up here? You guys may as well just line up behind him. That way it 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
399 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
will be easier to get the microphone afterward. There you go, start forming a 
cue. Well, you can see that people are really interested. Come on up. 
Student: 
I don’t think I really have a very well thought out question, but this really 
brought something to my mind. Except for iron things in your head, there are 
clearly people in the world that are really motivated, that I’m kind of 
interested in. I’m not deeply interested, but certain things really intrigue me 
like hoarders, people that collect and save things.  
Igor: 
The desire of saving, exactly. 
Student: 
They have this TV show and they have these crazy people who have 
houses full of nonsense. They have people trying to explain to them 
rationally that this is a bad idea. 
Igor: 
It doesn’t work. 
Student: 
I yell at my TV. 
Igor: 
Because that’s rational, isn’t it? 
Student: 
Well, no, but you know what I’m saying. 
Igor: 
I’m teasing you. 
Student: 
It’s like, my God, the lady has an emotional thing with this. 
Igor: 
Exactly. 
Student: 
But I’m just curious with this. If you explain to someone, okay, look, there 
are these needs.  
♦ Can we shift some of your needs to other needs? 
 
Igor: 
Here’s one way to look at it. I’m not sure, but I can tell you what Professor 
Rice would say. He’d say that you cannot shift someone’s needs. They are, 
in his opinion, biological. I would disagree, but that’s an opinion. I don’t think 
that can be proven, yet, anyway. 
Student: 
I would actually agree with you. 
Igor: 
Right? 
Student: 
Yeah. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
400 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
The point is you don’t necessarily have to shift the need or the drive, all you 
have to do is shift how the drive is understood. How it’s perceived, so that 
you change its behavior afterward. For example, the chewing gum version, 
you don’t change the need to maintain a boundary for personal integrity, all 
you shift is the perception of when a boundary is being attacked and when 
it’s not. 
Student: 
Okay. 
Igor: 
So chewing gum is not an attack on your boundary. It's actually, people 
respecting your boundary. That’s a good thing. So the same behavior, 
instead of triggering anger in one sense, now triggers compassion or 
thankfulness that people are being respectful. 
Student: 
So you’re shifting the meaning of the action. 
Igor: 
Exactly, which goes right back where we started off this morning, which is 
the idea of reframing. 
Student: 
Exactly. 
Igor: 
The point of reframing is that you channel the ultimate frame, the big one, 
the Kahuna that’s just moving all this energy through and saying, okay, let’s 
just change the filter on this one. Let’s change the color of the lens so 
instead of everything looking black it now all looks nice and pink. 
Student: 
Okay. Just quickly, not that it’s an area that I’m particularly interested in 
dealing with specifically, but if I was to deal with hoarder, or you were to 
deal with a hoarder, what would you think would be a best or a better way of 
shifting someone’s perception of that. 
Igor: 
We’ll come on to that when we talk about the whole objection-destroy later. 
The quick version of that is, what we did here a moment ago, which is find 
out the value behind hoarding, which is, basically, then telling you, here are 
the frames that I’m using in relation to my need to save that are being 
expressed by hoarding activity. 
Student: 
And then reframing. 
Igor: 
And then you present another frame where the behavior changes but the 
desire is being expressed the same way. For example, to some extent I am 
a hoarder, but I don’t have physical objects. I hoard nonphysical objects, 
because I travel a lot and there’s no where to put them. Now if someone 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
401 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
gives me a little gimmick like a duck-shaped thing going quack, I’m going 
like, what the hell do I do with this? Thank you very much. 
 
I hoard information, for example. I hoard experiences. So I have just shifted 
my mindset in that sense, so the driver is expressed in a very different way. 
That would be the quick version of it.   
Student: 
I understand. Thank you. 
Igor: 
Do you want to come up? We’re not taking who was up here before. We will 
have a lunch break, we’ll finish this off and then we’ll have a clean start for 
the afternoon. 
Student: 
 
♦ Is this list presented to us in a kind of hierarchy or a level of 
universality? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely not. 
Student: 
If it’s a driver like vengeance, how do you reframe it? 
Igor: 
That’s, basically, what he was talking about as well.  
Student: 
I’m just trying to make sure I understand for my own clarity and hopefully for 
others. If we understand the underlying driver – sex, family, hoarding, 
savings, all of those things – that will better help us to reframe the value to 
change the behavior. 
Igor: 
Yes, exactly right. You will understand, to use the Ralph example, enjoying 
life is more about tranquility and social contact than it is about say physical 
activity, which might be like a thrill and the rush of something and power; the 
expression of will. 
 
For some people the idea of them enjoying life is, I’ve got to jump out of an 
airplane. Why? It’s physical. It’s active. It’s an expression of will. I have to 
master my emotions. I have to master my fear to do it and so the rush 
becomes such a thrill.  
 
Those are fundamentally different ways of being a force for good in the 
world or enjoying life and so on. So this will help me shape my frameworks 
to make them more acceptable when I’m going through the whole 
influencing process. Okay? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
402 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
All right, let me run you quickly through that list again. Rest assured we will 
make you a complete set of notes. I’ll give you my teaching notes before the 
seminar is over. They will be basic notes, but it’s really what I’ve been 
working from and I’ll have all the 16 drivers for you on there as well. I’ll give 
it to you again now so you’ll have it. We have: 
1. Eating, which is the need for food in some way. 
2. Romance, the desire for sex. 
3. Tranquility, the desire for peace and tranquility; the need to be 
safe, essentially. 
4. Acceptance, which is a need for approval. 
5. Curiosity, which is the need to learn or discover something new. 
6. Family, which is the need to raise children. 
7. Honor, which is the need to be loyal to a certain tradition, value, 
group and so on. 
8. Idealism, which about social justice. 
9. Independence, which is the need to express your individuality and 
being self-reliant, in some respects. 
10. Order, which is the need to be organized, stable, to have life be 
predictable in some ways. 
11. Physical activity, that’s the need to exercise or move your body; 
use your body in some way. 
12. Power, which is the need to be able to influence something with 
your will, to express your will, whether it’s on yourself, someone 
else or some objects. 
13. Saving, which is the need to collect. 
14. Social Contact, which is the need for friends and relationships. 
15. Status, which is the need for social standing, social hierarchy and 
being relatively high on the social hierarchy. 
16. Vengeance, which is the desire to strike back or win in a particular 
context. 
 
 
So we’re all good with the idea of values and the drivers that are behind 
them and the frames. How those things kind of work together as the light 
that shines through a frame or spectacle glasses and at the end of it you get 
a very different picture, depending what’s on that frame and how strong your 
light is or what your light source is. Make sense? 
 
That’s kind of how I conceptualize the whole thing. This is a very simple 
model of getting through the values. If you think about those drivers in the 
back of your mind as you talk to people it becomes easier to spot the values 
and which things they’re saying that are worth following. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
403 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Always follow the emotion, because that is where the real juices are. That’s 
how you know it’s a real driver rather than just an intellectual construct or 
something that they say because it will be socially acceptable rather than 
what they truly want or need. Everyone good with that? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
We’ve run a little bit over today, but I thought it was worthwhile spending an 
extra half hour doing this. I hope you’ll agree. Thank you. 
DVD 16:  How to Get Even More Leverage so 
People Feel Compelled to Follow Your 
Suggestions 
 
Igor: 
All right folks, I think it’s time we started getting a little more practical. 
Before the break we had a little play with the idea of values. How they’re 
expressions of frames and how values and frames relate. 
 
 
Here’s the thing, in some respects, we are all playing on a football field 
covered with mist. It’s very difficult to see what’s going on around us. But, 
if, we can create mental categories where all the different yard lines are 
and so on, we can get a sense of where we’re at, whilst we’re navigating 
through conversation. Does that make sense? 
 
 
It doesn’t mean we’re absolutely right and you have to be willing to be 
wrong. In other words, treat these things as experiments, as tests and if 
your influence rises, that’s great, you’re in good shape. If you don’t seem 
to be influencing them consider that you’ve either missed something or 
misread something. That way you become more influential with it. 
 
 
What I want to do right now is to focus on the ideas we started playing 
with this morning and turn the ideas into practical exercises, something 
you can actually use. 
 
 
To do this in a significant and meaningful way, I’d like to take us out of the 
normal context you find yourselves in and put us into a context which 
requires influence, which all of us will be familiar with in one aspect or 
another. It doesn’t matter whether or not you become the greatest 
operator in this context, just to give us a context to work with to get used 
to these things. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
404 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It should be a simple context. One we all understand. One, where we can 
work both sides of the influence equation, of being influenced and 
influencing, so we have instinct about it. Once we can navigate through 
these kinds of ideas and that context, we start applying it to more practical 
context in terms of what you want to have influence in. Does that make 
sense? 
 
The first context I want to play with is the idea of a car showroom. People 
coming in to buy a car. You’re going to sell someone a car, essentially. I’m 
not interested in the sales process. In other words, whether or not you sell 
a car at the end of this and the person drives it – wow whatever car you 
drive I want one too. That is unimportant for what we’re doing. 
 
 
I hope there’s nobody here that actually sells cars for a living. You actually 
sell cars for a living? Well, you might enjoy this in that case. The deal 
though is to get a little bit away from what you do for a living so you can 
experiment with the flow of ideas a bit more. Make sense? 
 
 
What I’d like you to do is get into pairs. One of you is going to be the 
showroom salesperson and the other person is coming in to buy a car. 
We’re going to take this in several steps, so please go both ways and we’ll 
come back, talk a little about it, add the next step and so on. 
 
 
The first step, as in any influential interaction, is you have to establish the 
ground rules. Basically, do you want to have rapport or not? I would 
recommend that you go for the rapport route, but if you want to go for the 
novel version to make them hate you and buy the car anyway. It works 
great with vengeance people maybe, I don’t know. 
 
 
The idea here is you’re really starting to use all the behaviors. Remember, 
the hypnotic rapport, the eyebrow flash, the slight mirroring, the inner 
smile, all those sorts of things. You start at that level. Then you’re going to 
start to elicit these values and the frames that are present. I’d like you to 
elicit these in an indirect way, conversational sort of way. 
 
 
You’re just having a chat. A chat that’s appropriate for that context. Does 
that make sense? 
 
 
The starting point – I’m just going to throw in an idea here, I call this a 
hypnotic reversal, which allows you to switch the assumptions people 
come in with. If you go into a car showroom, especially if it’s a used car 
dealer, what assumptions are you going to be carrying with you? You’re 
here to buy a car, that’s a good assumption to have.  
 
What would not necessarily be useful to you as a salesperson in terms of 
assumptions people come in with? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
405 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Students: 
They’ll think I’m a scam artist. 
 
Igor: 
They’ll think you’re a scam artist. That you might try to sell them 
something – of course, you’re here to buy, but the idea of pressure, 
scamming and so on. We’ve got to neutralize these negative frames in 
some way, make sense? 
 
 
Here’s a little piece of what I call hypnotic reversal that might be useful to 
you. When the person comes in, you can reverse the frame very easily 
saying, "Look, can I help you in terms of what you’re looking for?"  
 
Could you tell me a little about what you’re looking for, because I’d like to 
save you some time? And, if, we don’t have it I’d rather let you know so 
you can go on your way and find someone who has got it, rather than 
waste your time and create frustration and so on. Is that okay with you? 
Cool, let me know what you’re looking for, to see if we’ve got it and if I can 
help you in any way. 
 
 
Notice what we just did at this point. I’ve indirectly acknowledged the fear 
of pressure, the fear of being sold something they don’t want, the fear that 
I’m going to make them buy something that might not be useful to them, 
by doing what; number one, my attitude. It’s not – tell me what you want, 
so if we don’t have it I can send you out.  
 
That’s very different the attitude is much more aggressive. I’m relaxed, I’m 
getting used to my attitude. I’m letting them know up front that if I don’t 
have something that fits their needs, then I’m not going to pressure them 
or sell to them. I’m going to let them get on their way. That should already 
start building me more trust and comfort with a person. Make sense?  
 
 
You can use it as a piece on the side, given the context. It would be 
appropriate, but again, start thinking about what the assumptions are and 
hidden frames in place and how can you start playing with them ahead of 
time. That’s an example of an indirect preframe, is it not? Wouldn’t that be 
fair to say? 
 
 
The next thing you want to do is just right out ask them, what is it you’re 
looking for? They’ll say something like, a car. Of course, I thought you 
came to a car showroom to buy a glass of milk, silly me. The point is that’s 
the opening of the negotiation.  
 
 
When they say I want to have a car – great. Remember, the principle 
utilization, whatever they’re saying is absolutely right. Great, we’ve got 
cars. What kind of car specifically? I’m talking about what size? Is there a 
budget in mind? What kind of things do you want to use the car for? What 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
406 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
does this do? It begins the conversation to allow them to give you context, 
which will allow you to establish the values within it or at least ask about 
the values.  
 
 
I think we’ll do that for the moment. I’d like you to write down the thing that 
you get back in response. You ask them what are you looking for today? 
They’ll say a car. Well, what’s important about a car or what kind of things 
were you looking for in that car? There are different ways of phrasing this. 
 
 
Feel free to play with this. Sometimes they don’t really know what they 
want. They just know they need a new car. If that happens, you’ll still be 
able to get values, because they’ve still been motivated to come to your 
showroom. You still have a set of values, it’s just they’re more 
unconscious.  
 
 
You can ask them, okay, fine, no worries, let me ask you guys – how 
might you start establishing their values and more importantly their drivers 
from a statement when you say, what are you looking for? And they say 
I’m not sure? What kind of things can you ask? 
 
Mickey: 
Do you have family? How many people do you have driving around? 
Igor: 
What is he trying to do right now? He’s establishing a context of use, isn’t 
he? How about going straight forward and saying, where do you plan to 
use it? You might give them hints, is it with your family? Is this for work? Is 
this for business? Is this to relax as a pleasure vehicle? 
 
 
Of course, those of you who are a little sneaky here, I hope its all of you, 
will start to observe their behavior. If you say, is it for your family, is it for 
work, is it just to relax in and cruise around, or is it something else? Any 
ideas which one that might be? I have an instinct that you might be looking 
for something that’s just going to be good to drive, something to cruise 
around in and have fun. Would I be right in that? Yes, I thought so. 
 
 
Do you see how that establishes a lot more trust? How you get a sense of 
wow, this person really knows what they’re talking about.  
 
 
The other thing might be if they say, I don’t know, the context is one thing. 
You might also ask, why have you come here? What made you want to 
come here today? Well, my car broke. Now you’re using the contrast 
frame. What were you using your car for? What did you like about your 
car? What didn’t you like about your car? Values are not all positive. A lot 
of values are away froms, like I want to stay safe. Safe is away from harm. 
Do you see where we’re going with this? 
 
 
Whether they give you a lot of information or they start hedging 
information, you have some conversational avenues you can go into, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
407 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
which will give you more information. Your job is very simple. Your job is 
to find a word or a phrase that is lit up with emotion, like enjoy life. That’s 
their value. 
 
 
Start jotting these down. You have your list of 16 drivers. Start asking 
yourself, what did it seem to me that this person might be driven by, in 
relation to buying a car? That might be expressed in terms of enjoying life. 
That might be expressed in terms of safety, but what is it they’re actually 
being driven by, in terms of what they’re looking for in a vehicle? That will 
be more of their hidden needs at that point. Make sense? 
 
 
Let’s see what you can collate and see if you run into difficulty. If you run 
into difficulty, again, just make a note of it. That’s what we’re here for. This 
is part of the exercise process. Does everyone have a list of those 16 
drivers to navigate through as you’re going through? 
 
 
You’ll be prodding to check which direction their values fit in. Find another 
person and take maybe five minute apiece. We just want to have a rolling 
start to get into this whole thing. Find their values. Find the drivers behind 
it, and do it all very conversationally, just having a chat. Off you go. 
 
 
Welcome back everyone, how was that? Did you enjoy that? Let me ask 
you this; now that you’ve done this exercise, we haven’t finished this 
exercise, we’re just setting something up. How much clearer are you 
about the idea of values and these drivers that line the shadows, the 
hidden values behind it? Is it beginning to get a little bit clearer now?  
 
What kind of things did you notice? What kind of things did you get from 
people in terms of buying a car? What were the values? What were the 
drivers behind those values and how did they mix? How did you get a clue 
about a driver from what we were talking about in terms of what they want 
and what they need and so on? 
 
Student: 
I found it was a nice trick to make a contrast between what they didn’t 
want and what they did want and push. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see the law of contrasts at work here, going from what they don’t 
want, what they do want and that creates a drive in one direction, which 
helps you then attach whatever you want at the end of that, right? 
 
Student: 
I’m already orienting them against and towards something. Then I sell the 
trip not the car. 
 
Igor: 
That’s exactly what we’re coming onto, this is excellent good job. We’ll be 
coming onto that in a little bit. So well done, you’re ahead of the game. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
408 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
He sold the trip not the car. It’s not the car; it’s the experience of having 
the car, the value of having the car rather than the four wheels and a bit of 
metal. 
 
 
What else did you discover? 
 
 
First, as you’re coming up, was it easier than you thought it would be once 
you got into a conversation? The point of all these values and drivers and 
so on is to give your mind reference points for things to look out for. It’s 
kind of like being a captain on a ship in the middle of waves and you’re 
looking out for anchor points, like, oh, there’s a lighthouse, there’s a land 
mass and now you can orient amongst the ocean. If all you’re looking at is 
the choppy waves, it’s like, where the hell am I? I don’t know.  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Student: 
One thing I found interesting was the dichotomy between what my partner 
came in to buy and the kind of car he felt he ought to buy versus what he 
was telling me really lighted up his emotions. 
 
 
Igor: 
This is typical. Remember we talked about before, as a lawyer and a lot of 
consultants have this too, what people ask of you isn’t really what they 
want or need. It’s what they think they need. They’ve already concluded, 
but they’ve not necessarily come to a good conclusion. 
 
 
The same is true in terms of what people come and buy. They’ve 
concluded somehow, with lots of interference – it might be their family tells 
them one thing and someone else tells them another thing and another 
thing is happening here, maybe a TV show that says, oh, maybe that’s the 
kind of thing I want – but they don’t necessarily know themselves exactly 
what it is they want or need. 
 
 
One of our jobs, whether you’re selling officially or you’re selling an idea or 
like a hypnotherapist sells the principle of change, whatever it is, you’re 
selling something and our job is to find out what’s going to fit their life. 
Then they’re making a good decision, they’ll like you a hell of a lot more 
for it, which means, the chances of repeat business or referrals and so on 
are great, and buyer’s remorse goes way down. 
 
 
It’s also actually important though, to make sure that you find out; what is 
it in their original idea, they came with, that was driving them thinking that? 
How did they come to that conclusion? There might be something in there 
that isn’t in the lighting up process but it is of importance. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
409 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Let’s take an example. Someone comes in to buy a nice family car, you 
offer him a Porsche and he says fast – great. But, if you’ve got a family 
and he comes home with a Porsche, "Hi, honey, look what I got! No, it’s 
okay, if we squash the kids together tightly they just fit in the boot and we 
can strap them on the roof, too." 
 
 
There is a check that has to occur to find out how they came to that 
conclusion. There may be another set of values, another set of drivers in 
action that you haven’t hit on. Does that make sense? Do you see where 
we’re going with this? That’s an excellent observation. 
 
 
What other kinds of things did you notice? 
 
Student: 
You are familiar with the Cayenne, right, the sport Porsche SUV? You 
might want to see that. 
 
Igor: 
I prefer the old 911's. Sell me a 911, I’ll say yes. Very small, compact, I 
can put it in my suitcase. 
 
Student: 
He had just bought a car recently. That was a little easier so we went off 
that. But I was still able to elicit all the touch points and all the things that 
were valuable for him in purchasing that. One of which was, that he has 
kind of a contrarian attitude, just something to be distinct. Porsche 
probably wouldn’t have worked, nor Mercedes – too common. 
 
Igor: 
You had to find something that was a little different, whether it’s in the 
color tone or the make. It could be a unique niche brand or something like 
that.  
 
Student: 
Exactly. 
 
Igor: 
Did all of you notice a couple of things? First, there are things people light 
up for and there are phrases that accompany those things. Would that be 
fair to say? Yes, no, maybe so? Would it be fair to say that when you’ve 
talked to them, just conversationally, it’s actually easier to find those things 
because it’ll be flat, flat, flat? When you explore things that light them up, 
have you noticed they light up even more? They get more enthusiastic. 
They offer you more information than they were previously willing to give 
you? 
 
 
This is very important. When you’re in the whole negotiation process and 
stuff like that, sometimes people come in all cagey saying, what do you 
want – I’m not going to tell you, you might sell me something. I wouldn’t 
say this happens in most cases, depends on the industry, the field, and 
the individuals as well. In some cases it’s more prevalent than in others. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
410 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In the car sales business, it’s more likely to happen. But again, it also 
depends on the niche, like high end car sales are more likely to be open, 
because it’s a much different sales process. 
 
 
Within your niche, you will know whether people are going to be more 
distrusting or not. You now need to hit these buttons, if nothing else to get 
more information, so they’re more willing to share that information and 
give that to you. Does that make sense? 
 
 
As they get motivated by their values, as they get excited by it, they’ll want 
to offer you more. It’s just part of how it works. Has anyone here ever 
been excited about something? You’re going on a trip or you just bought 
something new that’s cool or you’ve seen a film that really inspired you. 
Has anyone ever had an experience like that? Just one or two of you. 
 
 
Let me try that again. Those of you who haven’t had this experience – 
seriously, anyone ever had that experience where something very exciting 
happened? How many times, when that’s happened, do you want to go 
out and tell everyone about it? 
 
 
You tell people, oh, this is great film, you’ve got to watch it, it’s amazing. 
Or I’m going on this holiday, it’s the best thing ever, I’m so excited. Why? 
Our emotions or enthusiasm about it makes us want to tell more people 
about it, because then we feel it more. You want to hit those buttons to get 
more information as well.  
 
 
So far, we’ve got a sense of the values and the drivers. Did you notice 
how some people will have several values and it’s difficult to sort out 
which ones are key. Especially if they conflict, like fast car, family and 
other stuff. How many people have had a bunch of things going on and 
you're not sure what to give a priority to?  
 
 
Would you like to know a simple way of organizing that, in a hierarchy, so 
you know what you absolutely have to offer them, without which they 
cannot live, and what they’d like but if you can’t offer it, it won’t be a deal 
breaker? Would you like an easy way of finding that out?  
 
 
You're going to use the contrast principle again. Let’s take two values. 
Let’s say we're going on a job interview and you ask, what’s important 
about your job - its respect, money and interesting work. These are 
common values in finding a job.  
 
 
How do we find out what will motivate that person and what they need? 
Let’s say your job doesn't pay so well, but it’s great in every other respect. 
Or, the job sucks, but it pays very well. How are you going to find out who 
is appropriate for that role?  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
411 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
The simple way is to contrast things. For example, let’s say, you had 
someone who says its money, career prospects, status and interesting 
work. Tell me, if the job we're going to offer you had lots of money, but not 
much of a status, I mean, it seems a bit low end, but you get paid a hell of 
a lot, would that be okay for you?  
 
 
Let me put it another way to you. If we found something else for you, 
where people really respected you, looked up to you and it’s an amazing 
job, but it doesn't pay so well, would that be okay? If they say, yes, it 
would be ideal, which of those two values is more important to that 
person?  
 
 
Status. Does it mean money is unimportant? No, but they will take status 
over money, which means, if you need a leverage point, you leverage on 
the fact that your job has real status even if the money is only going to be 
okay.  
 
 
You can contrast any of the values against each other and find out which 
ones they cannot live without. You can say if I can offer you two things, if I 
can give you status or money, which one would you choose? You can give 
it to them directly or if you had this, but not that, is that okay. Or, if you had 
that, but not this, is that okay. There are different ways of formulating it, 
but you have the principle.  
 
 
There is another thing you need to know, in terms of your fact finding 
mission, and it will give you a lot of information, especially in those 
contexts where people are not willing to give precise details - let’s say you 
were selling to corporations. You can ask them what their budget is. That 
is a classic sales question. We're moving into a little bit more of a sales 
thing, because it’s the easiest lead demonstrated influence process.  
 
 
How many think that the person buying is going to say that it’s this much? 
You’d be right. It doesn't happen. You still need to get all of that 
information to get a sense of what you're playing with. This is where 
metaphors become interesting.  
 
 
I got this from a salesperson friend of mine called Shawn. His question is 
ingenious. He says “Look, give me a ball park figure. Are we talking about 
Fords, Hondas or Mercedes?”  
 
 
Think about the class we're in. A Mercedes is the upper end of the scale. 
He has a bigger budget and quality is already implied in that so you can 
start testing for things like quality versus cost, which are more important. If 
he says Ford or some lower brand, now we have an idea that cost might 
be an issue and they will be happy to trade quality for cost.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
412 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
You also have leverage. When you bring out your package and they think 
it’s very expensive, you can say, that they did say, they wanted a 
Mercedes, right? This is not a Mercedes; it’s the Rolls Royce of the IT 
world. If I misunderstood you and you really wanted a Honda, please let 
me know and we’ll see if we have a different package.  
 
 
Do you notice how I’m now leveraging against his values? No, I want the 
Rolls Royce. If you want the Rolls Royce, you're going to have to pay for a 
Rolls Royce. They don’t come in Christmas crackers. Do you see how that 
works? If a person is reluctant to give you information directly, put them in 
a scenario, a metaphor that will still give you the information in a more 
indirect sort of way. Does that make sense?  
 
 
Let’s go back to the same partners again. Assume the conversation where 
you were at. Have a few chit chats to get back in the conversational frame.  
 
 
I want to start taking all the things you heard them say, all the values, 
especially - you organized the values in a hierarchy and the drivers. But 
use and present the drivers in the language of their values. The drivers of, 
let's say, tranquility and social contact - I'm not going to say, you want 
tranquility and social contact. I'm going to have to frame that in terms of 
pleasantness, enjoying life and so on. A pleasant peacefulness, the 
shared fun of being with people that are pleasant and peaceful, who are 
enjoying themselves.  
 
Do you see how I’ve had to offer the driver in the context of the values that 
were presented? Does that make sense?  
 
 
The example was Ralph. We have someone whose drivers are tranquility 
and social contact. That is our guesstimate at this point. We have a value 
which is enjoying life, having pleasant surroundings, having fun and 
enjoying stuff.  
 
 
In terms of the list, you will offer them the driver, which is social contact 
and tranquility. But you can’t just say we’ll give you some more tranquility 
and social contact as well, because those labels may not mean very much 
to him. We need to frame them in the language or vocabulary that he’s 
giving us.  
 
 
For example, here is something which allows you to hang around with 
pleasant people. Hang around, social contact, pleasant people, the idea of 
tranquility and peace. You can ease back, kick back, enjoy yourself and 
have fun with good people. That is something everyone wants, isn’t it? It’s 
not necessarily something everyone wants, but, of course, it’s something 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
413 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that person wants and that will be good enough for everyone as far as 
he’s concerned.  
 
 
You're, basically, echoing back to them their values and drivers as a 
summary. You want this, this and this. Is that correct? Any ideas why 
you're doing that? There is a Yes Set. You're pacing them. That’s part of 
the Yes Set, absolutely. You can watch for a response for each one to 
make sure that you're still lighting him up. So you're accessing the 
resources, a little revivification.  
 
 
You're reinforcing those things. These are all correct. There is one more 
thing I’m looking for - inducing them in terms of the state, yes, you're 
revivifying the experience.  
 
 
There is a rapport, because this person feels that you know what they 
want. You're looking for values in terms of which ones contradict each 
other? Hopefully, you will have done that before you do this list, but if you 
haven’t found it yet, this might help you spot a conflict if there is one.  
 
 
You lock in the commitment before you make the offer. This is a very 
important principle influence. We’ll talk a bit more about Cialdini. Has 
everyone heard of Robert Cialdini’s The Six Laws of Influence?  
 
 
I’ll give you the six laws a little later so you have them. Essentially, one of 
the principles is called consistency and commitment. When people make a 
commitment in a social context, in other words, to other people, they have 
to conform if they remain consistent to that.  
 
 
 
For example, one of the tests was, if you ask people to put this great big 
sign about slowing down traffic on their front lawn, they’ll say no. It’s ugly 
and it’s on my lawn. But, if one week, someone comes around and asks if 
you are civically minded. "Yes" "Well, do you mind putting this little civic 
sticker on your window?" It’s a tiny thing about a pleasant neighborhood; 
keep your neighborhood clean or something like that.  
 
 
Then, the week after that, someone completely different comes along and 
asks about putting up that great big board about slowing the speed down, 
they’ve already committed to being civically minded in public. Now they 
have to be consistent with that, so they're more likely to let the board be 
put up.  
 
 
This is very important in the whole influencing process. You may have 
noticed that whenever I talk to people in terms of some kind of a change 
process, especially those who have seen me do hypnotherapy, I always 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
414 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
check back with them. Are you telling me it’s this, this and this? Is that 
correct? Yes. So it’s this, this and this. Have I misunderstood you? Yes.  
 
 
I’m locking them into that position. Now I can apply leverage and they 
can’t move. If I ask, "What about that?" "Oh no, what I meant was this." 
"Now you're confusing me. A moment ago you said it was this, this and 
this. Is it or isn’t it?" 
 
 
One of two things will happen. The consistency will either force them to 
stay consistent and that leverage allows you to break through to that point 
of change, or it will force out new info that was unconscious in them 
before, that they weren’t aware of and by exposing the conflict it actually 
exposes the thing you really need to know about. Either way is better as 
far as I’m concerned.  
 
 
Consistency is absolutely crucial. You're looking for A, B, and C, is that 
correct? Have I understood you correctly? If I have a car that does A, B, 
and C and makes you feel like this and looks like that, then you have to 
buy it on the spot, because it’s exactly what you're looking for right? Well, 
yes.  
 
 
What have you noticed? The hesitation. What’s happened? What does 
that tell you about me? There is something missing in terms of what I’ve 
told you, either those values aren’t enough and I haven’t told you about 
something or you have a concern that hasn’t been handled yet, that you 
need to handle before you offer the end of the deal. This is very simple 
when you start paying attention to people.  
 
Student: 
 
♦ Do say we want to elicit their prime values and then anchor 
those values to the product or vehicle?  
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. That will be one of the things we do, amongst other things as 
well. But the core idea, we're going to bring up the emotions of the value 
and attach them to the product or service. So, now, they feel that way 
about the product or service. In other words, that will give them that value. 
Whatever it is they're looking for, they will get it by having this.  
 
 
Those of you who know my background, I went from law to being an 
executive coach. Typically, I would coach people twice my age, because 
they were in their late 40s or early 50s. I was about 27 when I started. 
There was a bit of a contrast there.  
 
 
I remember one of the first people that I coached was someone who was 
doing so well that he almost got fired. The reason was that he was burning 
out his team. In terms of results, fantastic, but his team was being burned 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
415 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
out and he had a huge issue in terms of retention and so on. We worked 
on leadership coaching.  
 
 
One of the things we worked on was for him to find out the values of his 
team members and to the extent that he could, make the job satisfy those 
values in them so they couldn't burn out. Because, now, the harder they 
worked the more they achieved their life purpose. There was no burnout 
rate. The retention rate was sky high. People started volunteering to come 
back to the same department.  
 
 
By the way, they were working just as hard as they were before, but rather 
than being driven by someone else’s value, which is what happens when 
people say our mission is to achieve superiority by complex suppositions 
of interesting managerial double talk that no one really understands. You 
are now plugging into an individual and what they need and want out of 
life and that becomes super motivating.  
 
 
Do you see how that works? Do you see how this is a useful model for 
pretty much any context? Any comments or questions on what we’ve done 
so far?  
 
 
In a moment you're going to go back to the same partner. Have a little chit 
chat. You're going to offer them a summary of what they told you, in their 
terms or words.  
 
 
You're going to say, so what you want is to really interact with others so 
you can get out of your cage and have as pleasant a life where people are 
enjoying themselves, having fun and enjoying life - where they're enjoying 
life and you're enjoying life? Is that what you're telling me? Is that what 
you want? You're going to weave in your drivers as well, so it fits that kind 
of language.  
 
 
Once they’ve committed to that, you may even throw it in a few more just 
to make sure they’ve committed to those principles. I’d like to create a 
future memory.  
 
 
Do you remember the revivification exercise where you painted a picture 
for them on the mountain, a beach or somewhere they haven’t been yet? 
I’d like you to conversationally paint a picture for them, of a time in the 
future, where they have two things, your service, product or idea that you 
are hoping they will accept and the other is all of those values and drivers 
woven together.  
 
 
I can see you driving this car down the highway. It’s exactly what Shawn 
was talking about. The freedom, you’d be the envy of everyone. What 
drivers am I using right now? Vengeance to some extent, status, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
416 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
independence, possibly power. You're painting a mental picture for them 
using their values, their drivers as benefits, as a reason for them being in 
there. The car becomes a vehicle for experiencing their values.  
 
 
That’s all you have to do. It’s very simple. Summarize their values so they 
accept, this is what I want. Then paint them a picture where they have 
those values through the vehicle, of in this case, a car, but it can be 
anything, an idea, a service or product and so on.  
 
 
When is it time to make those tradeoffs, do you want this over that? By the 
time you come to that future memory, you describe that picture, it should 
all be totally clear. When it gets to summary, you want to be totally clear 
on exactly what it is.  
 
 
Let’s go back to the employment example. The trade off was they’ll trade 
off money for status. They want status more than money. They're okay 
with having a lower income if they have a high status. You might say to 
them, "Let me get this straight, you want to have independence, status 
and people looking up to you. You would quite like the cash, but you’d 
rather have people respect and admire you. Is that correct?" 
 
 
If I had a sense that there might be a problem with this, I would commit to 
the following. So, what you're telling me is, you would rather have the 
status than the cash. You’d be okay with a lower income, provided the 
status was high enough. Is that right?   
 
 
Do you see how I’ve increased the clarity and the separation and got them 
to commit to that? I want that before I do my summary so when I do, it’s a 
sense of saying, okay, so you want to have independence, status. You’d 
like to have the cash, but honestly, it’s not that important to you.  
 
 
Then I’ll paint the picture. You know, "I can see you a couple of months 
from now being the mayor of this town. The money might not be great, but 
the way that people look at you, that’s worth every moment of your time. 
You get to be your own boss, do what you want, and honestly, people will 
invite you to functions, because you're the mayor. You deserve to be 
treated with respect, don’t you?"  
 
 
Do you see how I’ve built into the future memory the idea that cash is 
unimportant to them now? I’ve gone from, you want the cash, but you’d 
rather have status, the cash is less important but status is very important. 
So status is everything and cash really is not important.  
 
 
I’ve installed a different set of values at that point, by removing the thing 
we can’t offer, which is the cash, but offering them what we can offer and 
what they do want, which is the status. Is this useful? This is a very 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
417 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
different way of looking at the frame control and reframing than traditional, 
well, look at it this way. There is a lot more power in what we're doing this 
way.  
 
Student: 
I almost hear you giving a false dichotomy between one and the other.  
 
♦ Are we looking at a broader, because it’s not going to be just 
one or the other? 
 
Igor: 
If there are several things going, you're going to create a hierarchy. The 
dichotomy comes from what you can and can’t deliver. If you can’t deliver 
a high income and status, but you can deliver on job satisfaction, 
interesting job and social contact, then you need to create a dichotomy 
between social contact and interesting job versus cash and status.  
 
Student: 
We are trying to drive to a dichotomy, one over the other… 
 
Igor: 
Only if it’s necessary. If there is no conflict and you can offer them 
everything they’ve asked for, then there is no need. You can give them 
everything they’ve asked for. The only reason for doing this is, if you can’t 
deliver on some of the things they think they want.  
 
 
For some people, the idea of cash and status will be more important than 
the interesting work and social contact. Which means, they're not the right 
people to be working for you, same with the car. If your cars are all 
Ferrari’s and they're looking for a safe family vehicle, they are not your 
idea client.  
 
 
Your best bet is to say to them, here is an address of someone who does 
exactly what you're looking for. They’ll take care of you. Tell them I sent 
you. I would be wasting your time trying to sell you one of these cars, 
because it doesn't do what you need or want it to do.  
 
 
Who is more likely to refer people to you to buy a car, especially if it’s a 
Ferrari? The guy that bought a Ferrari and is asking what the hell he 
bought this thing for? Or, the guy that didn't buy the Ferrari from you, but 
went down the road to your recommendation and is perfectly happy with 
the station wagon? Now when his wealthy friends say they should get a 
car, he’ll tell them to talk to this guy here. He’ll give you the coolest sports 
car ever.  
 
 
Who is going to do that for you?  
 
Student: 
That and the other dealership too when they say the Ferrari guy sent me 
down here.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
418 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
You’ll have a deal with the other dealership. If you're sending people to 
someone else’s business, they’ll have to send people to you if they don’t 
have the right thing. Now we have one of the other Cialdini laws and it’s 
called reciprocity. I do you a favor you’ll do me a favor. I did you a favor 
not selling you the car you don’t want and by telling you where you can get 
it. I did them a favor by sending them a client.  
 
 
What are they going to do? They're going to send me a client back if they 
can’t service that person. What is that person going to do? They're going 
to send referrals to me. Do you see how this becomes a win-win all 
around when you look beyond the initial transaction?  
 
 
Let’s spend another 10 minutes doing this. Get into the same group. If you 
need to restart the values, that’s fine. If you want to do a bit of fine tuning 
in terms of contrasting the different values to find out which ones you can 
drop, that’s fine.  
 
 
You're aiming to get to a very clear acknowledgment of the values in a 
row. That is, what you want in a car. Is that right? You want a clear 
committed yes. If there is any hesitation, pauses, tension, lack of 
movement suddenly, is there a shift that does not describe somebody 
who’s getting enthusiastic and animated by something, then you need to 
go back and find out what that is.  
 
 
Assuming everything is good, once acknowledged, and they’ve accepted 
the summary you’ve given them with all of the emotions and they’ve lifted 
up appropriately, you will create a future memory where they have all of 
this linked to the car and you can leave it at that. We’ll talk more tomorrow 
about creating the final closing process.  
 
 
Off you go.  
 
 
Is this useful? Who can see themselves using this stuff at home to make 
their life easier, more fun and enjoyable?  
 
Student: 
It’s not just, more fun to be able to present, interact or connect, that way 
it’s a lot more fun for them too. They're engaged, they're understood. They 
get to buy from somebody that likes them.  
 
Igor: 
Right. How many times have you bought stuff from your friends, not 
because they're trying to sell you something, but they got something cool, 
look how amazing it is and you ask where can I get one of those? They 
sold you based on their enthusiasm, which is much more fun.  
 
 
Remember the irresistible induction? They’ve just done the irresistible 
induction equivalent of a sales process. They’ve given you their values, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
419 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
how they feel about it, so much so you’ve adopted their values and just 
went ahead and bought it.  
 
Student: 
I want to point out something that helped me in this exercise. At one point 
I started to veer off and go more into features versus benefits.  
 
Igor: 
Features is, basically, saying the car has wheels, a tiny stick and a shiny 
belt buckle on the front. That’s what it has, but it doesn't mean much, 
whereas benefits are things it can do for you. The shiny belt buckle is 
going to save your life. The nice little twiddly bit means you can turn the 
radio on without thinking too much about it. It makes your life easier.  
 
Student: 
Even though the features did have to do with his values, I wasn’t putting it 
so much in a benefit term. It still felt like I was doing an intellectual list.  
 
Igor: 
Right. This is a key thing. This is not about the intellect. What sells? What 
persuades? Emotions. That is a key thing. This is why we're looking for 
emotional language. Values are based on goals, on what they're going to 
get.  
 
 
We don’t want a box full of stuff. We want to know what the box full of stuff 
will do for us. It’s an excellent point to make. Thank you.  
 
Student: 
Even though this was an exercise, it was amazing to have somebody 
listen to what I wanted and to understand what I wanted and needed and 
looked to provide that. Here is somebody who really wants to help me. My 
partner turned around afterward and we talked about that. He said if he 
could only find a real estate agent that would do that.  
 
Igor: 
Any real estate agents here? He’s looking for you. Let me ask you a 
question. Those who have been the subject, the person doing the buying, 
would you agree with the observation there? That it’s pleasant to be finally 
understood by someone? They get it? It’s nice, isn’t it?  
 
 
Let me ask you a question. Who is in a relationship? Do I need to say 
anything else? Can you see a sort of benefit emerging from this? That is, 
maybe, a little unexpected but it could transform your life in a significant 
and very pleasant way?  
 
Student: 
My enlightenment was, while conducting the exercise with my partner, 
darn it, I could apply this to myself, which I will be doing this evening. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. This is how you can sort your own priorities out and your own 
motivations. Does anyone here suffer from procrastination? What if you 
could guide yourself through a list distinguishing between what this thing is 
going to do for you in the end.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
420 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
If you find enough juice or value in the exercise, you’ll end up doing it. If 
there isn’t any value, you may as well realize that it’s something you're 
never going to do.  So why torture yourself about it?  
 
Student: 
I encountered the classic conundrum when doing sales where I met all of 
his values and I seemed to have everything he wanted for the vehicle. He 
agreed with all of that, and I tested all of that again to make sure he was 
100%. I asked if he was ready to make a commitment to buy the car and 
he said, well, I want to look around. You're the first place I came to.   
 
Igor: 
You missed one thing.  
 
Student: 
I said the classic thing you hear in sales which is the pressure. We say 
this is our most popular model. It’s going to be the last one we're going to 
have on the lot.  
 
Igor: 
First, do you remember before the exercise, I said I don’t care whether 
they buy or not. That is not the purpose of the exercise. Seeing how it 
came up, we may as well deal with it. The rejection had nothing to do with 
the stuff you talked about.  
 
 
One of the ways you can test before you get to that point, by the way, is 
you can do an X, Y and Z - is that right? Of course, you did it. One thing I 
like to do at that point is repeat it again, but add another criteria. So you 
want X, Y, and Z and if you had X. Y and Z that means you will be so 
happy you’ll be getting it right now? Isn’t that right?  
 
 
One of two things will happen. They’ll say yes. It’s exactly what I want. I 
found what I want and it’s got X. Y and Z. I’m going to buy it right away. 
Or, they’ll go no.  
 
Student: 
That's the most likely response.  
 
Igor: 
I wouldn’t say it was the most likely. It depends on the individual and the 
context. Let’s always figure out the context. In your field it may be a very 
likely response. You talked about having certain types of problems coming 
up repeatedly, so you may well be right about that.  
 
Student: 
I’m very suspicious when I go to dealerships.  
 
Igor: 
The way to neutralize it up front, say, if you find something that had X. Y, 
and Z, that’s what you're going to buy. There is no going any further at that 
point, is that right, as long as it has X, Y and Z, you go and look for it. If 
they hesitate, ask what the hesitation is about. They may say something 
about not looking around and making sure they get the right deal. Oh. So 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
421 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
it’s important to you to get a good deal, is that right? How is that important 
to you? 
 
 
Well, I don’t want to waste money. I don’t want to feel like I’ve been had. I 
understand. You want to make sure that you're not taken advantage of, is 
that right? 
 
Student: 
I want to look around and see if there are any lower prices.  
 
Igor: 
Right. You want to see if there are any lower prices. Was price part of X, Y 
and Z? No. You're telling me if you have X, Y and Z and it has the right 
price for you, that's what you're looking for? Is that right?    
 
 
You can handle it in a couple of different ways. One is a guarantee. How 
about this, if we find you something with X, Y and Z at the right price range 
for you and you get it right now and sometime in the next week or two, I 
mean how long will you be looking for these things? The next couple 
weeks? Yes. If in the next couple of weeks, you find something at a better 
price somewhere else, come back and we’ll refund you the difference, 
how is that?  
 
Student: 
It sounds excellent. 
 
Igor: 
Then you don’t miss anything. You can even have the ease, let’s say 
peace and tranquility is part of this thing, you can know and have that 
peace of mind, you don’t have to have the hassle of searching around the 
place. You can just look on the Internet or drive around and if you glimpse 
something, you know you can take advantage of the offer.  
 
 
All we ask is that if you find something, you show us some proof of the 
price and I’ll refund you. No worries.  
 
 
Most people will not follow up on that, because they’ll feel good now that 
they’ve done it. By the way, if they do, you have to be good to your 
guarantee. You’ve made a promise so follow up on it. Personally, I have 
no issues making that. 
 
Student: 
If they haven’t seen other deals, 90% will go out to check anyway. Having 
a guarantee inoculates them.  The question is, they’ll look around, but the 
same car at probably the same price, maybe a little more expensively, 
because it’s not worth the $100 to go back.  
 
 
It comes down to the price and the values again, not price as a value. It’s 
getting a good deal that’s a value. If you can make sure they feel they're 
getting a good deal right, they’ll buy right now. What is it that makes you 
want to look somewhere else?  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
422 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
I want to make sure there is nothing cheaper somewhere else. Oh, so it’s 
about not spending more on this car than you have to, is that right? 
Correct. Excellent, so if you had a guarantee that this is the absolute 
lowest price anywhere for the next two or three weeks, however long you’ll 
be looking and then you’d get it right now, would you?  
 
 
The only reason for going somewhere else might be price. It might be 
something else. It’s part of their values. If you take care of that value, 
they’ll buy right now. It’s what we did with Eric. We’ve taken care of the 
problem. The value is, can I get this cheaper somewhere else.  
 
 
Great, if you find it cheaper someone else, we’ll refund you the difference 
so you’ve not lost anything. That was the guarantee we just talked about.  
 
 
The point is you need that commitment. If you have X, Y and Z is that 
everything you need to have to get this right now? If we don’t have it by 
the way, I’ll happily send you away. But if we do have something that has 
X. Y and Z, is that all you need? No. What else is there?  
 
 
I want to check around for price. Great! What will that do for you? It 
ensures I have the lowest price. Fine. If I can ensure, in a way that will 
satisfy you, that this is the lowest price, will you be happy with that? Yes. 
Of course, I still have to make sure that you're totally comfortable that 
there is no way you can get it cheaper than this somewhere else. 
 
 
Let’s not get stuck on the whole thing too much. The point is, if you have 
the value, the value is price and the guarantee will take care of it. If the 
price is not that important, you can lift and elevate other values. Say, you 
have things here you can’t find anywhere else. The more unique your 
business is, by the way, the easier it is to do that.  
 
Student: 
I’m a big fan of Robert Cialdini’s work as well. The marriage of his work 
with conversational hypnosis, if you keep it within his research, the six 
automatic responses from the old part of the brain, to me that is called 
bypassing the critical factor.  
 
As long as you look for- social proof, reciprocity, authority, commitment 
and consistency, etc. 
 
Igor: 
Let’s do these quickly- reciprocity, commitment, social proof, liking, 
authority, scarcity.  
 
Student: 
The liking and the authority is covered with the H+. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
423 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
This is how you present yourself in terms of your non verbal movement 
and mannerisms. Are you more the Alpha male? Liking, we’ve taken care 
of with the H+ and the hypnosis rapport. Social proof, you can take of with 
things like demonstrations.  
 
 
Even in a therapy session, why would Erickson get someone’s arm to 
levitate in the air? It’s proof. What if someone has this amazing thing and 
says you’ve got to go see this doctor. It’s proof again. It’s built into the 
whole model.  
 
 
What are we doing right now? We're talking about an ethical model of 
influencing. Where you will send people away if you cannot give them 
what they want or need. Over time, your reputation, your social proof 
becomes stronger for you.  
 
 
Commitment, did anyone hear any elements of commitment in what we 
just did? Yes. You're looking for X, Y and Z. That’s everything, yes? 
Absolutely! So if you saw X, Y and Z on the street right now, you’d buy it 
on the spot, is that right? I don’t know. What’s missing? I have to shop 
around. What would that do for you? Well, it will make me feel like I 
haven’t been taken advantage of.  
 
 
Great! If you had X. Y and Z and you're not being taken advantage and 
you absolutely know it, you would get that, on the street, on the spot, is 
that right? Yes. Check. Now all you have to do is fulfill your promises.  
 
 
These two here haven’t been built into the model so much, although 
they're useful. Reciprocity, basically, I do something for you and you do 
something for me. It’s the essence of how societies work as well. That is 
part of what we do in terms of sales by sending people away or taking the 
time out to actually understand them.  
 
 
Who here felt good when someone sold to your values, listened to your 
values and what you want and tried to fit it in? And was respectful enough 
of you to fit what you want and how you feel rather than giving you 
whatever it is they can knock off and quickly sell out?  
 
 
There is a kind of reciprocity in there, because they're now in it for you. Let 
me give you an example. You know when restaurants bring a check and 
bring a little mint or candy along side with it. Do you know why? It’s 
reciprocity. If they give you a candy, we're more likely to see them better 
and that’s proven.  
 
 
Imagine a restaurant in four sections. In section one, when the check 
comes nothing. You just get the check and that’s it. On table 2, you’ll get 
the check and a candy as well. On table 3 you get the check and get two 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
424 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
candies. On table 4 you get the check and a candy, only this time the 
waiter starts to leave. Just as he’s leaving, it’s like he mentally shrugs 
himself, smiles at you, acts like he’s thinking what the hell, winks, puts 
another candy down and walks off.  
 
 
Which table do you think got the fewest tips?  
 
♦ Table 1, absolutely. Of the rest of the tables, which was the next to 
lowest?  
♦ Table 2. Next.  
♦ Table 3. Actually tables 2 and 3 were virtually identical. Table 3 was 
barely more than table 2.  
♦ Table 4 had a massive change in terms of uplifting the average tip 
to tables 1 and 2.  
 
Why? The reciprocity was more personal. It wasn’t an automatic thing.  
 
 
It’s now about you as an individual. When you're spending time getting 
through to people’s values this way, listening and matching what you can 
offer to what they actually want and need, is that personal? Yes. Do you 
think you’ve switched that on?  
 
 
Scarcity is another one. We can talk about that more as we go along. 
Essentially, people like most the things they can’t get a hold of. As soon 
as you hear you can’t get it, you’ll want it more. As soon as you're denied, 
it becomes more valuable.  
 
 
You can see that most of these principles have already been built in to 
what you're doing. It’s just that I’d rather do it invisibly so it’s just a natural 
part of what you do than talk about this too intellectually, because then 
you start thinking about it more than doing it. Does that help you?  
 
Student: 
Yes. The big aha for me, is that with the drivers, which are these universal 
things people desire, you marry with these components here whether their 
responses are automatic for the first time. I think I understand what 
conversational hypnosis is, in terms of keeping it in the automatic area of 
the brain and not through the neo-cortex part of the brain.  
 
 
It’s not about relaxation. It’s about keeping the critical thinking part out of 
it, by keeping it in the area of the brain it actually loves. It doesn't want to 
think. Just give me the stuff that’s easy for me to process and I’ll do it all 
day long.  
 
Igor: 
We’ll throw a couple more models that will make that easier for you as we 
go through. Thank you.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
425 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I’m glad Alex brought this up. At the moment, where it came down to price, 
the person doesn't want to spend any more than they absolutely have to. 
Meanwhile, we went through the trouble, eliciting their values. We said if it 
was X. Y and Z, you can do this.  
 
 
Then it surfaces that it’s X, Y, Z and a prime. A prime in this case is price. 
What we were trying to do or did for a while is bypass the critical factor 
with X, Y and Z. However, if price now comes up to the foreground, the 
critical factor is essentially re-engaged, isn’t it?  
 
Igor: 
It may be, unless you utilize it. What happens when you're doing an 
induction and someone suddenly opens their eyes? Do you say, oh, I 
messed up I’m sorry, let’s start again. Or, do you say, that's right and with 
your eyes open you can go into an even deeper trance can you not?  
 
 
If they say, "Isn’t there something else going on?" "Well, what’s that?" 
"Well, I wanted to look at other places?" "What is that?" "It’s price." "That’s 
right. Because price really is important to you isn’t it? It’s important to me 
that we found that. I want to make sure we checked, because it usually is 
important to people and I’d feel terrible if you ended up getting this car and 
we didn't take care of everything you wanted. Thank you for bringing that 
up." 
 
Student: 
I was thinking of price as a proxy for risk in general.  
 
Igor: 
Exactly. When they say price, it’s often not about price, it’s about 
something else. In this case it could be about risk, being taken advantage 
of, status, self-esteem, trust and these things. Oftentimes, things that 
come disguised as price and they even think it’s price, because 
remember, we're rationalizing how we feel, but it has nothing to do with 
price.  
 
 
Has anyone here ever overpaid for something that you know you can get 
cheaper somewhere else, but you're quite happy you paid extra, because 
there was something else you liked, more reliability, you trusted the 
person more, they were nicer, they look after you if something goes 
wrong? Price is not really the bottom line that people make out that it is.  
 
 
You say, but it’s not true. There are so many things when you're buying a 
car. Who here would buy a cheap car at $500 less or one you know will 
not blow up on you on the freeway? Which one would rather pay $500 
extra and not get blown up on the freeway?    
 
 
Price is not the objection here. It’s something else. By the way, I’m not 
trying to change your mind on this. You're welcome to believe what you 
want. It’s just that in my experience, you can get through the whole price 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
426 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
objection relatively easily most of the time. The thing is, if you believe 
price will be an objection, it’s called a Pygmalion Effect.  
 
 
Remember the kids whose teachers believed they were going to do well or 
do poorly? Guess what those teachers got? I invite you to consider a 
world in which price is not the most important thing. It is sometimes and 
you will find it by testing for value, but it will not always be the case.  
 
 
I offer to you the possibility that it’s usually not the case as long as it’s 
within a range. In other words, if you're buying a Ford, as long as it’s in the 
$10,000 range, then you're okay. If the car you're offering them is $20,000 
- $40,000, you might be outside of the price range, which is a very 
different kettle of fish.  
 
 
If we're talking about $100 saved here or $200 there; there will be other 
things more important that they're willing to pay the extra $200 for, to have 
those. You don’t have to believe me. I’m only offering you my experience. 
You have to go out and test it. The mindset that you carry into it will 
absolutely make a difference.  
 
Student: 
I was thinking, okay, if price is a proxy for risk, can be addressed in terms 
of value. The example you said was, would you pay $500 more for a 
vehicle that won’t blow up on the highway. I was thinking it could get to the 
point where you have to get into the weeds about the guy across town that 
has a guarantee or warranty that is a year and a half. We’ll give you an 
extra six months for the same outlay. It comes down to these kinds of 
things.  
 
Igor: 
It can, but sometimes it’s not even about that. Values are big things. It 
could be that sometimes they just like you.  
 
Student: 
There is a different meaning to the word value there. The value is how 
much are you getting for your money.  
 
Igor: 
Yes, but that’s one possible thing of what they want. Let’s say that one of 
their drivers is tranquility. We can do this easily, you’ll be chilled out and 
there is no hassle on paperwork. If there is a problem, bring it back, 
especially in six months. We’ll fix it. It’s going to be easy.  
 
 
Or, it’s up to you. You can spend the next two weeks fighting through the 
weeds. Going to every single place to see if you can save yourself a 
couple extra bucks. Then you still don’t know how well you can trust the 
person you're meeting, because you’ll have to go through the whole 
rigmarole again. What if you make a mistake and misjudge a person’s 
character? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
427 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I like how you're handling this, because it’s still keeping the critical factor 
bypassed.  
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. You do not want to get into horse trading, which becomes an 
analytical process. You want to keep them happy, but you don’t want to 
start horse trading or saying this versus that and making him think about 
these things critically.  
 
 
You want to give them their values, fulfill on your promises, give them 
enough reason so they can feel good about it afterward. So they can 
justify it to themselves. It’s an ethical thing. They can walk home thinking, I 
have this thing and I’m happy about it. I knew the risk I was getting into. 
 
 
By the way, you can tell people what’s wrong with your product and still 
sell it. They will respect you more for saying this model of car, over 80 
miles an hour becomes a gas guzzling freak. It will eat up more fuel than 
you can probably put into it. As long as you don’t go over 80 miles an 
hour, you’ll be fine.  
 
 
That honesty will get you more trust. You know the old saying, if you can’t 
justify it then feature it. If there is a problem that you can’t hide or get rid 
of, feature it and people will go, "Wow, at least I trust this person." Now 
they know what they're getting into.  
 
 
It’s not just a question of pulling the wool over someone’s eyes. I want to 
make sure that you don’t believe or get the impression that this is how to 
hoodwink people. It’s not. The critical factor bypassed is to ease the 
decision making process, not to switch off their mind to make a bad 
decision. Does that make sense?  
 
Student:  
The people, who buy cheaper used cars, are not the richest people and 
for them the price is really important. You don’t have high margins. At the 
moment, when you're convincing someone, you may have the best car, 
but the dealer down the road can sell the same car for $500 cheaper - 
because it has two painted doors or whatever - and you will not explain it 
to him at this moment. He will not understand it, especially if he doesn't 
notice it.  
 
 
You will have the cheesy car salesmen sell a car, preferably to him and 
the person will never come back to either of you, but you lose in that case. 
It is often, just the price.  
 
Igor: 
You have more experience in that. I work with people in the printing 
industry for example, and there, it’s just about the price. It’s paper. How 
much can paper be, but it’s never just about the price. Why? Because the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
428 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
people who come in will think it’s about the price, because that’s inside 
their mind.  
 
 
Remember we talked about what hidden frames there are when they 
come in? They will come in with a hidden frame, perhaps. It’s going to be 
$500 or whatever it is and the extra $10, I’ll go down the road for the $10. 
It’s your job to change their values as you go through that process. 
 
 
Do you remember we talked about that? Changing values? Oh, you know 
you say it’s about a fast car and so on, but did you consider the safety 
element that has to come in with a fast car, because of this, that and the 
other?  
 
 
If you haven’t done that part of your job, you haven’t reeducated them 
outside of the whole price thing. Let’s face it, even for a cheap car, they're 
going to have a budget. Even if its $500 and I can’t spend over $500. They 
can still spend $500. The thing that’s missing is, if all you do is take them 
at face value, they will run the program inside their mind.  
 
 
The purpose of what we did this afternoon is to find out what that program 
is, and if it needs tweaking, it will be tweaked or changed. Let me ask you 
this, do you believe that you're selling decent cars? Do you believe that 
your cars are better than the cars on the road even though it might be 
$100 more?  
 
 
They are more or less equal. So why should someone come to you and 
not someone else? If you don’t have an answer for that, then it’s no 
wonder you can’t sell it. If you, in your mind are absolutely identical to the 
person down the road and the person down the road from there, you have 
nothing to distinguish yourself.  
 
 
Then I would invite you to find out something about what you have to offer 
that is of value to people. It can be anything. It can be in how you treat the 
people. How you help them through the process of buying it, with the 
government registrations, making it easier for them. It could be in the way 
you help them deal with problem after it’s happened. You have special 
deals or whatever it is to make it easy for them afterward. It can be, 
because you can throw in extra things that other people can’t. 
 
 
Anything in any industry can be changed. However, if your mind is stuck in 
thinking, I’m the same as everyone else then you can sell nothing. All you 
can do is hope for the best. That someone lands in your place and that's it. 
Your job, specifically as a sales person, is to find value and offer it in any 
way you can.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
429 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
The minute your brain starts thinking about how you can add more value 
to this, you start rising above the pack and your success rates go through 
the roof. Why? Because no one else is doing that.  
 
 
I’ll give you a personal example. Remember, I told you I used to be an 
executive coach. I started when I was 27. My first client was 49, I’m half 
their age, what do I have to offer? Other coaches have more business 
experience, more actual experience, people with better credentials, in 
terms of PhDs, psychological degrees and so on. Why the hell would they 
come to me? Any ideas? What if I’m good? They don’t know that yet. I can 
say I’m good. So what? He’s got a PhD. That makes him better.  
 
 
The difference is, it’s in the ability for me to transfer to their mind that I 
have something of value to offer them than can’t get anywhere else. That's 
where the scarcity comes in. I can offer something that they cannot get 
anywhere else.  
 
 
Whatever preconceptions they had inside their mind, I can bring them out 
and change them. The very things I have are the very things they need. 
And, of course, I get the results. I have to fulfill my promises. It would be 
no good if I persuade them to take a risk on me and I’m so pathetic at the 
end of this thing that they have no change and they wasted all of their 
cash.  
 
 
Hopefully, you're beginning to get this whole feeling for this right now that 
there is no industry, there is nothing where there are other human beings 
present, where you cannot distinguish yourself from other people in a way 
that makes you and what you have to offer more valuable. It is a mindset.  
 
 
If your mindset is that I’m the same as everyone else, I offer to you the 
possibility that you have the wrong mindset. And that a different mindset 
will make you wealthier and more successful than ever before.  
 
 
By the way, if you don’t want to experiment with it, you're welcome not to. 
It’s your life. You’ve come here for me to show you what it is that I do and 
what I believe. Take what you want. Take what’s useful and the rest, feel 
free to ignore it. Is that useful to you guys?  
 
Student: 
Everything you’ve been saying can be summarized in three words in the 
marketing world which is unique selling proposition. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly.  
 
Student: 
If you're having trouble figuring out what makes you different from the guy 
down the street, there are books on USP, but if you want to take a 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
430 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
shortcut, think of what people don’t like about the guy down the street. If 
you can say I’m not that, that’s the fastest way to get a USP.   
 
Igor: 
Right. Amen to that. It’s all about value. It’s what they value and what they 
should be valuing and that creates more influence than is possible to even 
appreciate without actually having experienced it.  
 
Student: 
I like that. On the other end of the car spectrum, I bought an SL550.  
 
Igor: 
A Mercedes. 
 
Student: 
Right. The car had an advertised price. I went down to Santa Monica, 
looked at the car and did a test drive. I come back in with the salesman. I 
said the price is a bit beyond me. I don’t want to pay that. I gave him an 
offer for what I wanted to pay.  
 
 
He says, "I don’t think so. Let me go to my sales manager." He came back 
and gave me their counter offer. I didn't quite like that. Then I showed 
them my bank statement previously. I said I can’t do this deal. I got up and 
started heading for the door. The sales manager ran out of the office and 
stopped me. He took me back to the desk, started throwing in all of this 
other stuff. I’ll give you the pre-owned Mercedes certification. 
 
 
This was my first Mercedes and I asked, what is that? He says it adds an 
extra year to your warranty. I did a quick mental mind check and said 
okay. He said he’d give it to me, for free because you have to buy it 
otherwise. He gave me a few other things. I said fine.  
 
 
What I wanted to address, for this example is, as far as risk, its way down 
on the list as far as I’m concerned. I wanted to make sure I didn't get 
screwed over on the deal.  
 
Igor: 
Right. That goes back to the values. Remember, the values will be 
different with every person. In each industry the values will be relatively 
similar. I agree with you. Probably in the lower budgets in the car industry, 
price will be of a significant importance. It doesn't mean you're stuck with 
that though.  
 
 
The whole point is that you can reframe things. They reframed you. You 
paid more for the car than you offered them right, but you got other 
things?  
 
Student: 
When I added all the other stuff they added, the low jack, tinted windows, I 
paid more than what they were asking, but I paid less than the unit price of 
the car.   
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
431 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Right, but do you see the justification process going on here? I don’t mean 
this as a bad thing. It sounds like you got a pretty good deal. The point is 
he has enough stuff to rationalize paying more. More money came out of 
his pocket than he had originally intended, but he’s got reasons to justify 
doing so.  
 
 
He loves it, he’s happy with the deal, you got more value out it and that’s 
the whole point. You have more value and therefore, you're happy. You’ve 
had your values satisfied in terms of, you haven’t been screwed over. You 
got a good deal. You got good stuff out of it. This is from a bunch of sales 
people that were not doing what you were doing. They were not getting 
inside his mind the way you will get inside his mind.  
 
 
They were horse trading, which is more of an analytical process, which 
honestly, kind of cheapens the whole interaction in my opinion. He still 
feels good, because they did enough right to make him feel good. You 
now have the capacity to do way more than that.  
 
 
Hopefully, you're feeling good about your skills right now, because they 
are a very impressive skill set, so impressive I think you deserve a break.  
 
 
 
DVD 17:  How to “Reboot” any Stubborn Mind 
with the Objection Destroyer Method 
 
Igor: 
Hopefully, we’re now moving down this whole idea of frame control in a very 
systematic way to get solid skill sets that you can apply in real-life 
scenarios. Would that be fair to say?  
 
You can see yourself using this stuff alone as we’ve been going through so 
far and we’re applying some pretty, shall we say, abstract ideas hopefully in 
a very practical sort of way. 
 
I’d like to go one stage further now and come up with something which I like 
to call the Objection Destroyer. What is an objection, anyone? 
Tim: 
A resistance. 
Igor: 
Go on. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
432 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
A valid concern that they have. 
Igor: 
It’s a valid that someone has. I think that’s the best way of phrasing it. 
You’re in this to influence someone else to change the way they think, feel 
and behave. That’s pretty much it, isn’t it? 
 
Now, if they have no concerns do you need any of this stuff to do it? You 
say look, here’s something. It’s better than that? All right, I’ll take it. It’s 
really that simple, isn’t it?  
 
Just to use the tried and tested car and salesman thing, because we’ve 
been playing with that for a while, if there is no problem you say here’s the 
car. Do you want it? Yes. Great, off you go, done. There’s no need for 
anything else. 
 
Of course, life usually isn’t that simple. Why? Because they have valid 
concerns, they have needs and things that have to be satisfied before they 
know it’s the right decision, before they can go ahead with it. Does that 
make sense? Those are objections, essentially.  
 
Now, a lot of these things you can address very easily, very directly, but 
some of them are about thought loops running their mind. For example, 
when I was coaching my average client was twice my age. There is a 
thought loop, a preconception, a frame that I have to neutralize before I can 
begin. Any ideas what that might be? 
Student: 
Age before beauty? 
Igor: 
Age is an experience. What can you do that I can’t do? I am older, wiser 
and more experienced than you, essentially? You can see how that’d be 
pretty obvious, right? So I have to somehow get through that point and I 
can’t just say to them oh, my youth is an advantage. I know more than it 
looks like I know and I can get results honest, governor.  
Now, would you like to sign up on the dotted line for a coaching contact 
please? Is that particularly persuasive? But the logic of it is true, isn’t it? I’m 
using my age as an advantage. I have ideas or if I’ve been exposed to 
concepts that other people are unaware of and I can get results that other 
people cannot. Yet just saying it like that, listening out loud won’t cut it. 
Why? 
Student: 
It’s not related to their values. 
Igor: 
An idea that it’s not related to their values.   

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
433 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
Emotions? 
Igor: 
It doesn’t address the emotions. Absolutely. What else?   
Student: 
It hasn’t aligned with their objections. 
Igor: 
It hasn’t aligned with their objections. You’re really close to what I mean. 
Essentially their objection, their valid concern and it’s a valid concern, is a 
thought loop running through inside their mind. I must stop that thought loop 
somehow. Just telling them stop the thought loop is not going to cut it. 
 
Now there are many ways to cut that thought loop out. You can give 
massive amounts of evidence. That’s the whole social proof thing, right? 
Here is a testimonial. Each one erodes the thought loop a little bit until 
there’s no juice left inside of it. That’s one way to do it, but it’s long and slow 
and I don’t have the patience. 
 
Another way to do this is to use basically the way the brain works and here’s 
the beauty of it. The very act of me breaking through one of these thought 
loops proves to them that I’m exactly the right person to do the coaching in 
the first place, because I’ve already done what I said I can do. Doesn’t that 
make sense? Do you see how that works? 
 
Believe me, I’m about to show you something which may seem relatively 
small and actually we’ve already done the essence of it already without 
realizing it yet. It may seem relatively small, but the impact it can have is 
huge. 
 
We’re talking about hard-bitten executives. Does anyone here work with 
executives like board of director level? These people are pretty hard-bitten. 
Wouldn’t it be fair to say that it’s hard to get through?  
 
Once you’re on their inside, in other words, once they trust you it’s actually 
really easy to work with them, but getting there is a real struggle. You have 
to work quite hard to get through. You just take an average half an hour to 
do that using what I’m about to show you. Would you like to see how that 
works? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
You already know the secret to some extent. We have an autopilot 
response. It’s automatic. It’s looping. It’s the expectation they’ve come with, 
the framework, the hidden framework that is there, but no one really talks 
about. Does that make sense? It’s what we talked about all morning really. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
434 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I know it’s there, because partly I feel it too. It’s like what have I got to offer 
or partly because people ask me or partly because I may have already 
failed with previous incarnations of this, depending on what my level of 
experience is. Does that make sense? 
 
As it happens I was lucky. I had worked with that level of individual before 
as a lawyer, so I already understood the mindset to a greater extent. That 
was just fortunate for me; otherwise, it would have been a much harder way 
of figuring this out. So that’s the first thing. 
 
I know there are expectations and I can pretty much guess what they will 
be. There’s a thought loop and I have to interrupt that thought loop 
somehow. I want to present a reframe. In other words, this is good 
because… I want to play the Glad Game with them in some respects, right?  
 
I mean the Glad Game is easy to play, isn’t it? The essence of the Glad 
Game, though, is not the reframe portion. The essence of the Glad Game is 
having someone accept the reframe portion.  
 
So what do we already know? What mechanisms do we have that will allow 
us to stop thought loops, to stop automatic ideas from circulating round and 
round? The amygdala, right, that’s what it does.  
 
Anyone here ever been in love? Anyone or is it just me? When that 
happens, how straight do you think? Your powers of critical analysis, how 
sharp and crystal clear are they? How logical is your behavior?  
 
Has anyone here ever been scared or is it just me? When you’ve been 
afraid, how easy is it to make sense? When someone tries to calm you 
down with logic, you can recognize the logic of it, but you still don’t care. 
Isn’t that right? 
 
Have you ever been so stressed, tense or afraid of something? Not like a 
physical fear of like an exam coming up or something like that, but you try to 
read something like a text, perhaps you’re doing a revision at school and 
you just can’t make sense of it. You read the same paragraph five times and 
you know it should make sense, but somehow you don’t know what the 
words mean. Anyone ever have that experience? 
 
What’s going on here is the amygdala is short circuiting your neo-cortex. 
Your neo-cortex is where language occurs or the greater portion of it. It’s 
where the logic occurs. It’s where your ability to read and comprehend 
occurs and it’s one of the first things that shutdown when the lower more 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
435 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
primitive parts of your brain like the mammalian brain -- the reptilian brain -- 
start to take over. The amygdala is at the lowest part of the brain – the 
reptilian brain – and it can switch off your neo-cortex like that. 
 
Now what I’m proposing is not that we swatch people off and turn them into 
lizards so they can start licking walls and sunbathing, right? It would be 
amusing for a short period of time, but your career prospects aren’t really 
that good at that point. However, you can stimulate the amygdala to a 
certain extent to cut through the thought loops and then present an idea. 
Here’s how this works and there is actually research that backs this up. 
 
Imagine you’re in a supermarket and you’re selling little cheese and wine 
niblets like any other cheese and wine niblets anywhere in the country. 
Supermarkets do it everywhere, right? People come up, they’ll taste the little 
cheese niblet. At the end of it they’ll say well if you want some they cost 
$10. Now the people will take the cheese and buy it or they won’t. It’s a very 
simple test. It’s very black and white, isn’t it? 
 
So in the first trial people will taste the niblets, this little gift, this little sort of 
reciprocity of course and you say oh, this is a great cheese it’s only $10. Of 
course, their contrasting it to other cheeses, the $5 cheese, the $2 cheese. 
They’ve got nothing else to contrast it against.  
 
Ten dollars? Well, my autopilot says I don’t buy $10 cheeses or maybe they 
do buy $10 cheeses so you have your baseline response. Some buy it and 
some don’t. Where’s the reframe in that by the way? Only $10, right? It’s a 
great cheese, only $10.  
 
So now another group comes along, another day happens. People test the 
cheese and then say, how much is it? They say oh, it’s 1, 000 cents. That’s 
only $10 to you and me. Do you think the sales went up or down on that 
second occasion? The sales went up. Why? Consider it, one thousand 
cents. Do you think about $10 in the units of cents? You get the principle 
here, right? 
 
What’s happened is it’s an unusual number for the mind to manage when it 
comes to cents. That is enough of a surprise to trigger the amygdala mildly. 
You see, you don’t want to trigger it intensely like with a shock induction, 
because then everything is deleted for a while and you have to work much 
harder to get the message across; plus, it’s more obvious and the whole 
point of Conversation Hypnosis is to not be obvious. Does that make 
sense? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
436 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
If you’re too obvious you can actually trigger the opposite effect. If people 
think they are being influenced you can create resistance to the fact that 
they feel like they’re being influenced. Do you see how that works?  
 
This is why you walk out of a store where the salesperson tries too hard, 
because you feel like they’re trying to influence you, which of course they 
are, every salesperson has to, but you don’t like it. You respond against it 
and that’s why you leave or why you shoo them away. Make sense? So the 
secret is you trigger it mildly and then offer your reframe. Let me give you 
another example. 
 
A university campus people are selling these little cupcakes. You know the 
little cupcakes, the little cakes in a cup? What do you sell? We sell 
cupcakes, only $1 a piece or whatever, right? A certain amount of people 
buy cupcakes. They’re tasty. They’re nice.  
 
Next day or next campus, you come along and there’s a big sign up. Half 
cakes only $1 each. What’s a half cake, any ideas? 
Student: 
Half a cupcake. 
Igor: 
It’s actually a cupcake. It’s exactly the same product. Let me reemphasize 
this. It’s exactly the same product, but it’s given an unusual title. It stops the 
thought loops for a moment, half cakes, what’s that? It allows a fresh 
evaluation of what this is. In other words, the autopilot response to 
cupcakes – no thanks or yes please – has been shutdown. Now you have a 
chance to influence, but it’s only a small thing. Let me explain what I mean 
by the small surprise or novelty. 
 
In another little bit of research, people go round from door to door collecting 
money for a local charity, a nice thing, unless, of course, the charity is the 
let’s shoot dogs charity, in which case if you like dogs it’s not such a nice 
thing. In this case it was a nice charity. 
 
So they knock on the door and ask, would you like to donate some money 
for charity, $10 is the usual amount? They got some. They didn’t get some. 
It’s all good.  
 
The next time they went round and said we’re from such and such a charity. 
We do such and such a thing, exactly the same initial process. Would you 
like to donate money sum to this charity? You just switched the words 
around, right? The donations went up. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
437 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Then they went round again to see hey, can we accentuate this effect, all 
right. Would you like a money sum donate to this charity? Way down in 
response to almost nothing. Why? The final version was so awkward it 
almost sounded like a clear attempt at influencing. It was like what the hell 
are these guys doing? That’s kind of weird. Are they trying to play with my 
mind? Are you amusing my mind? All of a sudden you close the door and 
go leave me alone. 
 
So the key to triggering the amygdala is it has to be a small novelty if you’re 
going to break through a thought loop. Now there are times for large 
novelties, big surprises, big shocks like an instant induction, but those are in 
context where people will accept it. In other words, you’ve already worked to 
create a context where a bigger surprise is appropriate. 
 
For example, once I got into the coaching work I had a much more leeway 
to do more outrageous things to shock the pants off them, not literally, and 
get a better reaction as a result, but I don’t have that leeway when I first 
meet them. Do you see how that works? I need mild surprise. I need 
something mildly unexpected. Is this making sense to you so far? 
 
There are many ways to achieve this. One of my friends is a charisma 
coach in London. He takes people out in the streets of London or 
sometimes they fly him out to exotic places to work with them there. He just 
shows them how to have more fun in life, meet people, hang out and get 
free pizzas, all kinds of stuff like that.  
 
He’s just a fun, social guy and one of his favorite games is he’ll come up to 
random people, maybe it’s in a shop, and he sees a shirt he likes. He’ll call 
over the sales assistant and says um, please don’t think I’m racist. I’m not 
being racist, but how much does this shirt cost? It’s a complete non sequitur 
and of course it’s a surprise.  
 
Some people look at him and go ha? The surprise is too much for them. 
You’ve probably fried a few circuits there. Most of them just look and 
suddenly they start laughing. You’ve just reset the interaction. So rather 
than just being from clunky store clerk mode they’ve gone into social normal 
human being modes and the interaction becomes much more genuine and 
much richer and more fun for everyone. Do you see how that works? 
 
Again, it’s context dependent. You don’t walk into a hundred million dollar 
company and say hey, don’t think that I think that you’re ugly, but would you 
like to sign this contract? It would not necessarily work in that context so 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
438 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
well. These things are context dependent, right? The principle though is the 
same. Do you get this?  
 
Would you like to know how I use to do this with my clients? The answer is 
very simple. It’s a magic moment. It’s actually on the Magic Moments 
Master Class. Remember the magic moments? What does it do? It triggers 
the amygdala, doesn’t it? It triggers it. It hones it down to a point. The point 
is my reframe. The point is I can work with the mind. I know things about the 
mind that most people don’t, even the PhD’s, but I can’t say it. I have to let 
them conclude it. Does that make sense to you guys? 
 
So the magic moment I used to use was a mind read. It was easy for me 
because I knew the industry and I knew the executives. I knew that there 
were certain patterns – remember those five clients -- they would fall into. 
So at the meeting I’d list their values: what’s important to them, why is it 
you’ve become a coach now, what’s this, that and the other.  
 
So the values were already making them feel very in there and one of two 
things would happen, either they gave me their values and I’d feel this is 
good and I’d just run with it. Great, job done; sometimes it was kind of 50-
50. You have people turning round and they wouldn’t want to answer the 
value questions. They’d be more cautious. It would be too personal for that 
point. Does that kind of make sense? 
 
So I’d say look, let’s do this another way, let me just take a guess and see if 
I understand your position correctly and just please correct me if I misread 
the situation. You’re an executive, you’ve got a team and you’re probably 
finding these problems.  
 
You’ve probably tried these things and they’ve failed and you’ve now got 
this situation and these kinds of situations here and, honestly, you probably 
don’t know what to do about it. You feel like no one has prepared you for it 
and you’re probably right, because it’s not in any MBA program. It’s not any 
management school thing. It’s something that’s outside of that. 
 
The irony is you probably know someone who could probably deal with that 
situation better, but you don’t even know how to ask them for help. Would 
that be fair to say? They’re sitting there going how do you know me? 
 
Would it be fair to say that the amygdala has been stimulated to some 
degree? At that point my reframe is very simple. My job is to help your mind 
to figure out the answers so you can do these things. You see, there are 
things that you cannot learn from books, MBA programs or any other thing, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
439 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
but the irony is you have the answer inside; otherwise, you would not be 
able to recognize those problems yourself.  
 
My job is to help you find those answers so you can bring the same genius 
that made you reach the top of the organization and apply it those situations 
so you can solve those problems just as efficiently. That’s really all I do. 
 
I think only one person I can recall currently, who signed up for a coaching 
contract with me, once I sat down with them over the course of an hour and 
had like a pre interview. Sometimes it’s between half an hour to an hour 
depending on the individual. Once I actually sat down face to face with 
someone, I believe there is only one person I can currently remember -- I 
could be wrong, it’s been a while now -- that did not sign up for a coaching 
contract there and then. 
 
There were a few others who didn’t sign up, but their values were in the 
wrong place in terms of they didn’t care about a coaching thing. It was just 
recommended to them by someone else who thought to ask. They really 
didn’t care, so we just cut the meeting short and left it at that. So that’s just 
to give you the parameters I was working in. 
 
So this is kind of powerful stuff, right? Who here would like to learn how to 
do that any time, any place, any where? Would that be of interest to you or 
should we just skip it and just have an early dinner? 
Students: Let’s do it. 
Igor: 
All right. So the first thing I want to do with you is I’d like to give you a very 
simple system to create little moments that trigger the amygdala. You know 
the money sum example, things like that that you can do. You already have 
one whole class of things that will do that. Do you know what those are? 
Students: Magic moments. 
Igor: 
Exactly. I’m going to assume that you can work your magic moments into 
different settings, whether they’re corporate settings, educational settings or 
therapeutic settings. Really there is enough in those things that you can 
adjust them and find ones that are relevant for different settings. We’re not 
going to necessarily cover that as a unit, just because you already have that 
as a resource. 
 
There’s another thing that you can do, which is more down the money sum 
kind of route. That’s where you use what I call Mind Bending Language. 
We’re not going to give you the whole Mind Bending Language Course, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
440 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
because that’s a four-day course. Whilst this is a long course going from 10 
days suddenly to two weeks, it just adds more and more and before you 
know it you’re here for the entire year going when can I go home and 
actually use this stuff. So I’ll just give you the quick nutshell guide to mind 
bending language. 
 
Essentially what you’re going to do is you’re going to use adjectives and 
adverbs to change the way people perceive what is normally being said. 
‘Would you like to donate some money’ is understood as a phrase. It’s a 
common phrase. It’s easy to understand, isn’t it?  
 
‘Would you like to donate money sum’, there’s something not quite right with 
it. You can’t quite put your finger on it at first. It calls more attention to it, 
because the amygdala, of course, is triggered by its novelty. Do you see 
how that works? 
 
We can create the same novelty with any other kind of linguistic construct if 
we change the way the words are phrased or introduced so they’re not done 
in an ordinary fashion. Here is simple vocabulary that you can start 
practicing that will do that. 
 
These are some of what I would call Mind Bending Power Words. 
Remember the power words from the first day? This is the mind bending 
language equivalent of power words and they do for mind bending language 
what power words do for regular hypnosis. 
 
These are just some simple phrases. On their own they don’t really seem 
that unusual, do they? 
 Other than 
 More than 
 Aside from 
 Only 
 All 
 
 
They’re pretty standard, normal everyday words, aren’t they? It’s how you 
use them to modify a normal sentence or a normal idea that makes a 
difference. Other than all the things you think you know about running a 
business, what’s more than you’ve done already that will make you more 
successful, any idea? 
 
Do you notice how your mind is already spinning a little bit into like, what? I 
didn’t even consider that. That, my friends, is the amygdala being triggered. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
441 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Aside from all the things you’ve already tried, what are only all those things 
that you’ve yet to do that you can’t even consider property, which when you 
do will help you solve that problem easily. 
 
Whose mind is starting to spin a little bit already? Think about it. No, we’re 
not going to make it that much worse. We’re going to keep it at a simple 
level. Just think about this. We’re using normal phrases. These are natural 
ways of using language and they’re not presented in a weird, convoluted 
like ‘donation money sum make’.  
 
That’s just like either I have an incomplete grasp of the English language or 
I’m trying to do something and I’m very inept about it. The ideas I presented 
to you are absolutely logical and when you hear them you think yeah, 
they’re supposed to make sense, but it takes a little bit of time for your brain 
to catch up.  
 
This is important. When you use mind bending language, the more of these 
phrases you put in to put more spin on the more time you have to allow 
them to recover so that they can mentally process what you say next.  If you 
have too much of this that mental process could create a mental gap where 
the information doesn’t stick to anything, because they just haven’t a chance 
to process it. Does that make sense? So this is a balancing act and we’ll get 
to play with it a little bit.  
 
You have a question. Do you want to come up for it or is it just a quick one? 
Student: 
Sure. I guess it was along the lines of what you just said like overriding the 
brain, for example. So let’s say I was to say the money sum thing to 
someone when I’m collecting charity.  
♦ What if someone, especially someone more linguistically 
forward or something like that, were to challenge the grammar 
or the language that you’re using? 
 
Igor: 
Right. In that sense if it’s the money sum example, of course most people 
don’t do that, but if you ask somebody, for example a school teacher, it 
might trigger their critical factor because they’re used to looking out for 
these things to correct them, right? 
Student: 
Yes. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
442 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
In which case that particular maneuver hasn’t worked. Now, when we come 
on to mind bending language, the beauty of this is the phrases or the 
statements you make will be grammatically 100% correct. 
Student: 
Oh, they will be. 
Igor: 
Did I say anything which was grammatically incorrect just now? 
Student: 
I guess not. 
Igor: 
Aside from everything I said, what are all the things I haven’t said yet that 
are only making sense when you consider them? 
Student: 
Yeah, I guess you have a point.  
♦ Most people won’t question them, right? 
 
Igor: 
Well there’s no reason to. If anything I’ll sit there and go what did he say? 
You have to match it to the personality. Someone who is mentally more 
alert, you can put a few more spins in. People who are like just don’t make 
me think, man, then you put next to nothing in, because it’s more than 
enough already. Does that make sense? 
Student: 
Okay. 
Igor: 
See, you have to judge the context very clearly. Plus, if you overplay your 
hand a little bit, what I said a moment ago, you must give them processing 
time. They’re going like… If I see someone doing something like what 
the…? I say look, let me make this easy. I hope you make better choices. 
Do you hear the reframe? 
 
But, of course, now the reframe has somewhere to go, doesn’t it? Are there 
any thought loops fighting my reframe? No. I don’t have to stop the train 
anymore. It’s already stopped dead in its track. I can change the 
passengers out and say off you go and start the loop running again. Does 
that make more sense? 
Student: 
Yes. Thank you for clarifying. 
Igor: 
You’re very welcome. Do you want to come up? Is this useful? Do you like 
this? The Objection Destroyer.   
Student: 
 
♦ Can you do that in the context of writings too? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
443 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
In writing, absolutely. It’s just in writing you don’t have the luxury of 
feedback so you cannot as easily amend mistakes if you’ve gone too far. So 
in writing I would suggest that you tone these things down significantly so 
you’re erring on the side of caution other then that, of course you can. Make 
sense everyone? 
Student: 
I, fortunately, have the DVD set and was with you in New York when we had 
two days of NPL. 
Igor: 
Pretty trippy, hey? 
Student: 
Very trippy. I’ve used it. I’m still learning it, but I’ve used it in therapy and the 
worst thing I’ve gotten is, I don’t understand. And my response is that’s 
right. I have to say my experience has been phenomenal using the mind 
bending language.  
Igor: 
Thank you. I appreciate you saying that. Yeah, give him a round of applause 
for doing good work. 
 
Bear in mind this is the real executive summary or the short version of mind 
bending language, but already you can see, just with these little power 
words, these power phrases or mind bending phrases, that you can start 
creating these little spins inside people. Wouldn’t that be fair to say? Let’s 
go through the whole process very quickly that we do in that case.  
 
So we’re having a conversation and in the context of the conversation a 
problem comes up. Would that be fair to say? So you’re going to now 
acknowledge the problem and you’re going to add some kind of mind 
bending language or a magic moment, because a magic moment can be 
used in exactly this same way.  
 
A lot of times it will come up in this sense. A lot of times when people ask a 
question you can say let me show you something. You do something and 
they go oh, I get it now. You’ve said the exact same things afterwards. In 
other words, after this process here, you’ve offered the reframe or the 
explanation and suddenly it makes more sense. 
 
Remember, magic moments can be anything from a little anecdote to a little 
story through to drawing a little picture or doing a more elaborate thing like a 
magic trick or something like that. Does that make sense? This is an 
Objection Destroyer. It’s very simple and it’s very easy to do. Does anyone 
recognize a pattern here by the way? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
444 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
This is really the reframe. The “t” stands for test. You actually might as well 
throw it in there. The test is check with them that they’ve understood: 
 Do you see what I mean by that?  
 Does that make sense to you?  
 Is that the kind of thing you’re looking for?  
 What do you think about that? 
 
 
This is kind of your test here. We’re checking did the reframe settle in the 
place you needed it to. Does that make sense? 
 
So that’s that PCAT Formula in action. It also, by the way, happens to be 
the ABS Formula. You acknowledge it. The problem and the 
acknowledgment get their attention. This is the bypassing of the critical 
factor and the reframe and checking. That’s when you stimulate the 
unconscious mind to make sure it’s all worked. Whether you want to think of 
it as ABS or in the terms of PCAT it really is the same process. Does that 
make sense? 
 
I’d like to spend a little time now to really make something of this. Each one 
of you has a particular area in which you wish to be more influential. Is that 
not so? I mean one which is more important than anything else. I know we 
want to use this in general life and so on, but there’s one area that if you’re 
influence increases even by a small amount, it will make your life easier, 
better, you’ll be a lot happier and it will be worthwhile you having come to 
this whole course. Would that be fair to say? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
I’d like you to think about that particular area and aside from all the things 
you’ve already done with it, I would like you to consider it in only one way at 
this time and that is consider yourself to be some kind of a coach or 
consultant in that process. 
 
If it’s sales, you’re a consultant to help them make a good decision when 
they’re buying. If it’s therapy, you’re coaching them through a process of 
change. If it’s some kind of consulting process like they need to change 
managerial structures, then you’re coaching them through that process of 
change and consulting with them to help them get the right decisions again 
at that point.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
445 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Do you see where I’m going with this? If you’re teaching, you’re really 
coaching them on their understanding so they can go step by step through 
to the understanding of whatever the topic at hand is. I’d like for you to think 
of your particular field in those terms, if you could, just for a moment and an 
interaction that would typify what that context is like. A one-to-one 
interaction would be ideal right now and we’re going to play this in an 
interesting way.  
 
I’d like you to get with a partner. I would like for you to coach your partner in 
terms of what that field is or what the industry is. Your partner then is going 
to play the role of the coach, consultant or whatever that we just talked 
about. You will be your own client or worst client. It wouldn’t necessarily the 
worst. We’ll just have someone who’s just a little bit tricky. Your job, as the 
client, is to role play someone that you’ve already met; someone who 
typifies the people’s reaction in that area. 
 
For example, if I am a hypnotherapist, okay, I want to think about smoking 
clients. Great, my interaction is going to be a smoking client coming in 
saying, make me stop smoking, which is not very useful for me as a 
hypnotherapist. Now I’m actually going to play me, the person saying make 
me stop smoking, and the coach – the hypnotist – is going to go through the 
entire influence model we’ve built up so far, which means: 
 He’ll develop hypnotic rapport, 
 He’ll get your values, and 
 Read into them whatever the drivers might have been. 
 
 
If there’s a conflict: 
 He’ll test for conflict, 
 Clash, or 
 Something missing along the way. 
 
 
Of course, something will arise. There’ll be some kind of objection. So as 
soon as an objection occurs you’re into the Objection Destroyer. This, the 
objection they give you, is the starting point that sets out the Objection 
Destroyer. They’ll acknowledge it. They’ll go oh, I understand.  
 
So this is a problem or something that you need to have addressed, is that 
correct? Yes. So aside from all the things that you think this thing will do for 
you, inside of this context have you considered that it could be all these 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
446 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
other things? For example, using the car thing again, the safety of the 
brakes and whatever it is.  
 
In other words, you’re going to start by acknowledging it then you’re going to 
move into either a magic moment or a mind bending moment using the mind 
bending language or a magic moment you already know.  
 
Then you’ll offer your reframe, your Glad Game version of it which lets them 
see the world differently, either to see that the objection really is not that 
important or to train them so there’s something of more importance that they 
haven’t considered yet. 
 
You sort of add value into the whole mix that diminishes that or to resolve 
the objection so they realize that hang on a second, I thought this was a 
problem, but actually I misunderstood, the situation is actually very different. 
Does that make sense to you? Then they just check in with you. So then the 
hypnotist will check in and of course you’ll be reading their reaction more 
than what their response is. Make sense? That’s all.  
 
I don’t even care if you follow through with this all the way to the summary 
or you can do the summary and the future memory. I don’t care if you get all 
the way through to that. I’m happy if you just get to this point here. Make 
sense? 
 
Now you’re going to be the client, of course, because you’re going to role 
play the scenario that you know best. If you’re a hypnotherapist, you’ll know 
hypnotherapy clients pretty well. If you’re a corporate consultant, well you’ll 
know corporate executives pretty well. If you’re a car salesman, you’ll know 
car buyers pretty well. If you’re a nurse, you’ll know patients pretty well. Do 
you see where I’m going with this? 
 
What I want you to do as they’re taking you through this process is I want 
you to notice how you feel. If they make a mistake, please don’t tell them 
about it. It doesn’t really matter. The point is I want you to spot and think to 
yourself, if this was going for real I would want him to go in this direction 
now rather than that. Does that make sense? You’re going to contrast their 
behavior.  
 
If they’re doing a great job go great, that’s what I needed and make a note 
of what it is or a mental note of what it is they’re doing right. If they make a 
mistake, contrast against it and go to yourself, great. I’ll make sure not to do 
that when I am in front of my own clients or go to this direction because I 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
447 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
feel intuitive that’s where I want to go or I need someone to go for me. Does 
that kind of make sense to you guys? 
 
This is why you’ll be playing the client in that role interaction first. We 
probably won’t have time today, but if you want to do this on your own time 
or if we have some time we’ll do this tomorrow, you can be the person 
coaching someone through the buying process, the learning process and 
through the change process, but you need your instincts in place first and 
the best way to get instincts is to be the client. Does that make sense? 
Student: 
 
♦ So, if we role the client who is going to be the coach? 
 
Igor: 
You’ll switch roles. 
Student: 
Oh. 
Igor: 
Right. So you’ll have two people, one will be the coach first and the client 
only that coach will not choose the field. The client will choose the field. I am 
a business executive and you need to treat me in this way. Then the coach 
will go okay, I don’t know much about executives, but I’ll give it a good shot. 
 
It will be 15 minutes apiece. Once you’ve done your piece you’ll switch 
roles. Now he’s a coach and he’s a client. The client might say okay, in my 
example I’m a hypnotherapist and you have to motivate me for change. So 
he goes okay, I don’t know much about hypnotherapy, but I’ll do my best. 
Does that make sense? 
Student: 
I’m just having a hard time wrapping my mind around what that looks like. 
Igor: 
Do you want to have a quick role play of it, a really brief one? Do you want 
me to role play the role of a client or the role of a coach? 
Students: Both. 
Igor: 
Of course. All right, can I have a volunteer to just do it quickly? Can I borrow 
you then? Come on up. We’ll do this very quickly. I’ll do a two minute 
version of it otherwise we’ll go forever. 
 
I’m going to play the client first. I’m going to choose something which is of 
importance to me, which would be hypnotherapy. I like teaching people 
hypnotherapy and doing zone. So I’m going to tell my coach, okay Eric, I 
don’t know what your profession normally is, but this is going to be therapy. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
448 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
I’m going to be a smoking client and your job is to make me want to quit 
smoking and realize that I’m going to have to do all the inner work myself. 
It’s not going to be all up to you. 
Eric: 
In that case can we switch chairs? 
Igor: 
Are you going to be the coach? 
Eric: 
Well, the guidelines are there. 
Igor: 
Oh, you want to see the guidelines. Sure. 
Eric: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
Do you want to turn that on and sake sure you get it close to your mouth so 
people can see you. Now we’re putting Eric on the spot a little bit here, so I’ll 
play both the client and I’ll coach him to coach me as a client as well so you 
get a sense of it. Are you good? 
Eric: 
I think so. 
Igor: 
Okay. Actually the first thing you’ll be looking at is hypnotic rapport.  
Eric: 
Sure. It’s all good. 
Igor: 
Okay, so we’ve got a little rapport. There you go, done. Thank you. 
Eric: 
Check. 
Igor: 
Values and drivers. What happened was I did a little eyebrow flash, just in 
case you were missing it. I’m hamming it up a little bit. 
Eric: 
Your issue is what? 
Igor: 
I want to stop smoking. Make me stop smoking. 
Eric: 
Okay. So you want to stop smoking. I’d like to know why? What is it about 
stopping smoking that’s really important to you? 
Igor: 
Great. You see how he’s straight into the values?  
 
Well, I don’t know. It’s just that it’s healthier for me and it costs too much 
money. 
Eric: 
It’s healthy for you and it costs too much money.  
Igor: 
Does he have my values yet? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
449 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Students: No. 
Igor: 
Not yet, but he’s getting close. 
Eric: 
So it costs too much money, it’s unhealthy, why now? 
Igor: 
Okay, let me just pause you there for a second and just give some coaching 
there. You can go for why now, which is excellent. That’s a possibility or you 
can just bounce up on what I’ve just said. So when you’re not spending 
money and you’re healthy what does that do for you? That’s the easiest way 
of climbing the ladder. 
Eric: 
Okay. 
Igor: 
Why now will give you more information and you’ll get there eventually. It’ 
going to take a little longer that’s all. So we’ll just keep the simple version. 
We may as well just bounce me up. 
Eric: 
Okay. So if you could walk out of here knowing that you’ve stopped and that 
you won’t start again what would that mean to you? What would that be 
like? 
Igor: 
Great. That’s a great.  
 
Well, I’d be just so much freer and I’d feel really proud of myself for having 
done it. 
 
Do you now have something worth playing with? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Right. What is your mind read of the possible drivers, power possibly, 
independence possibly, acceptance possibly; although that’s more about 
other people. Do you see where we’re going with this?  
Student: 
Tranquility. 
Igor: 
Tranquility, a piece of mind thing possibly. These are all things you can test 
out in the process. We definitely have a set of values, which is feel proud of 
myself. That’s definitely a value there and something for you to utilize. Do 
you see how that works?  
 
So far we’re at this level here. We’re going to assume we’ve done a good 
job of that now. Is that okay with you? 
Eric: 
Okay, sure. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
450 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
So let’s see if we can get some objections round. You can do two things. 
One is you can pull objections out on purpose like what prevents you or why 
haven’t you stopped already or why have you come to me? That will bring 
objections round.  
 
Or, you can go straight to the testing area, which will bring it out. Like, so if 
you have a method that will make you feel respect of yourself and you can 
finish it and stop it and so on, would you sign up on the dotted line? Sure I 
would. Does that make sense? So choose whichever you want to do, it 
doesn’t matter. 
Eric: 
If you found that you could feel great pride knowing that you can walk away 
from this habit and feel healthier and save all that money you’d sign on the 
dotted line, wouldn’t you? 
Igor: 
Ah, yeah. 
Eric: 
I take it that you’re almost sure of that. 
Igor: 
Great. So carry on with that thought. 
Eric: 
What else do you think you need to do that now? 
Igor: 
Exactly. Very simply he’s like what is it you’re missing? It seems like 
something is missing there or, have I misunderstood this?  
 
Well, I’ve tried in the past and I’ve failed. I just want you to do it. You’re a 
hypnotist, just put me to sleep and make me do it. 
 
Now you have an objection, don’t you? Isn’t that an objection?  
Eric: 
An objection to? 
Igor: 
It’s a problem. My problem is I don’t have faith in myself because I’ve failed 
in the past. The second problem is I want you to do it and I don’t expect to 
do it myself. It is a particular one for therapy in the sense that I have to take 
responsibility for the change or I can’t do it. Make sense?  
 
So now you’re on that side of the ball there. Let’s just work with the first one, 
which is the idea that I fear that I’ll fail again. Is that problem? 
Students: Yes. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
451 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
What’s the first step on that? You acknowledge the problem. So go ahead 
and acknowledge it. 
Eric: 
Is it so that you feel that you’ve failed in the past and this is something that 
you’d like to make a change about? 
Igor: 
Right. So, essentially, all you’re doing is you’re going to echo back his 
concern. So you’ve tried to quit in the past and you failed. You’re not sure 
you can do it. You’d rather have someone else do it for you. Is that what 
you’re saying? Do you see where I’m going with this?  
 
He’s reflecting exactly my concern at that point, acknowledging it and that 
makes me feel okay, someone understands me now. Now I’ve got 
something that I can start reframing and so on. Does that make sense? Is 
everyone still with us, even around the corner there somewhere? Does that 
make sense? 
Eric: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
So if he throws that at me, I’m going to like it and go yes, that’s exactly it. So 
my loop is basically I can’t do it, you make me do it. I can’t do it, you make 
me do. I can’t do it, you make me do.  
That’s my thought loop, basically. You must interrupt that somehow, 
whether it’s a magic moment like the Pointing Game would fit perfectly here 
or it could be some mind bending language, which would be some of these 
things here, followed by a reframe – change comes from within.  
 
This is something happened in New York when we were doing the New 
York Seminar. Actually, I live in Thailand a lot of times and I actually saw a 
couple of Thai priests. They’re all Buddhists in Thailand of course and they 
were doing the whole New York thing.  
 
They go up to one of the hotdog vendors and say make me one with 
everything. They get their hotdogs and they give him the $10. Then their 
waiting and waiting and the hotdog vendor is just ignoring them. They turn 
around and say excuse me, where’s my change. The hotdog vendor says 
the change comes from within. Did we have a magic moment folks? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Is it appropriate given the problem I’ve just described? 
Students: Yes. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
452 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Right. Do you see where we’re going with this? I want you to understand 
there’s lots of variety. Whether you want to do mind bending language or a 
magic moment and so on, you have lots of choice it’s just you have to fit it 
into the social context of the interaction. Is it making sense so far? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
At the end of that really that joke was both a magic moment and the reframe 
was in there already, wasn’t it? The change comes from within. Then he 
might make it a little joke and say, but seriously, you realize that the change 
comes from within. All we were doing is making sure that that change gets 
accessed easily. 
 
In the past you tried to make the change from without and that’s why you 
were without results. Now we’ll go inside and help you to get to that place 
where you can make the change and it will be easy. Would you like to do 
that? 
Eric: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
Yes. Does he now have me? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Has he broken my thought loop? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
His job is now very easy or relatively speaking very easy, because most of 
the problems that would otherwise have to be dealt with in therapy have 
been taken care of before we started. Do you see how that works? 
 
This works the same whether it’s a corporate meeting, a coaching session, 
or you’re teaching someone something, mentoring them, selling them 
something or you’re getting your friends to come to the cinema. The same 
process fits everywhere. Is this helping? Was this a useful demonstration for 
you, yes? 
Students: Yes.  
Igor: 
Thank you. Give Eric a great big hand for doing such a good job. Thank 
you, Eric. I don’t know, Eric, I presume you’re not a hypnotherapist. Is that 
correct? 
Eric: 
I’m in training. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
453 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
You’re in training, excellent. Please notice that your partner may well not 
know anything about your industry, which means they’ll probably make 
blunders, right? If you wish to whisper in his ear and say take it this route 
just to help you get more of the kind of picture that would normally develop, 
by all means do so, but the purpose we use to observe oh, I know what you 
could do at this point.  
This is what I would do. It’s a lot easier to see it from the inside than from 
the out. Does that make sense to you guys? Everyone clear on the 
exercise?  
 
Honestly, going back to this thing here, if you just get to the Objection 
Destroyer and you do one round, you clean up one objection and you don’t 
even finish the whole transaction that’s fine. That’s all I care about, because 
you started at the right place: 
 
You’ve gone through a systematic place of looking for the values and the 
drivers. You’ve tested for a conflict or an objection and when you’ve 
received one you’ve managed to resolve it. At that point it’s just a question 
of can you do that same process enough times to take care of everything, 
really. Does that make sense to you guys? 
 
So I’m going to give you guys 15 minutes apiece. That’s half an hour in 
total. Please keep track of your own time so that I don’t have come in 
halfway through and disturb people when they’re doing things. So in half an 
hour we’ll be back here and we’ll finish up for the day. Has this been useful 
so far?  
 
So, please, keep that motivation going and really engage yourself in the 
process. Be a good client and spot the places in which the other person 
could really have made a difference for you, because that’s what you will 
need to do with your clients, subjects, students, etc. Make sense? All right 
guys, off you go. 
  
This room is starting to look like some works been done in it. Do you feel 
like you’ve been doing some work? 
Students: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
Good. How do you feel about the exercise you just did? Did you enjoy it? 
Was it interesting? 
Students: Yes. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
454 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Eric: 
It really crystallized. 
Igor: 
You really crystallized. Wasn’t it interesting being your own subject, your 
own client and experiencing the influencing process the way they will be 
experiencing it. Isn’t that a really useful way of doing things? 
Students: Very much so. 
Igor: 
Do you want to come up? 
Eric: 
No. 
Igor: 
No. Is it a quick one? 
Eric: 
I can’t stand right now. 
Igor: 
You can’t stand right now. 
Eric: 
That was the single best exercise I’ve been through and I’ve been training 
for 16 years. 
Igor: 
So he says in 16 years of hypnotic training that’s the single best exercise 
he’s ever been through. Please say that on the testimonials when it comes 
time. That will really be worthwhile, right? So go ahead. 
Eric: 
Okay.  
Igor: 
Stand to the side a little bit. That way the camera will be able to catch a 
shadow and your beard will be full-faced. 
Eric: 
I really enjoyed this exercise and I believe that I understand more than I 
actually think I do. 
Igor: 
Always good. 
Eric: 
So what I was doing is we were identifying the problem and then I was using 
some mind bending language to try to weed out exactly how I can illicit 
some values and to get her in that trance state. Once I would start to use 
the mind bending language, I would go into some ‘yes’ sets to try to direct 
her, because the problem is people will get stuck in the loop if you just keep 
asking questions. They’ll just keep saying well I’m not sure. I don’t know. I 
think so, yeah.  
 
Correct me if I’m wrong, my question basically is this. The point is to kind of 
guide them to a solution-oriented thing where they don’t really have any 
other choice except to say yes, I want to feel better about that. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
455 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Right. In terms of them not having the choice, it’s the question of resolving 
the conflict they’ve created by being like I don’t know. There’s this problem, 
but I can’t really tell. The bit where I wouldn’t say you don’t give them any 
choice is what conclusion they land to.  
 
You can offer them reframes, but that’s really more a test to see how well it 
suits that person and if they come back with another objection great, 
because they’re telling you more about how they need to resolve whatever 
concern they have. That’s the main thing. 
 
Now, the simple way of doing that is very simple. If you want to have a 
simple, quick formula it’s: 
 They have a problem.  
 You acknowledge the problem the way they present it to you.  
 You create a little mind bending moment, whether it’s a little bit of 
language or a magic moment; something so they no longer think in 
the same loops like they used to. 
 That you’ve already spotted that loop happening.  
 Immediately afterwards in that processing space, if it’s a crazy 
processing you need to let them come down a little bit. 
 Before the intellect kicks in again in normal mode you present to 
them the reframe. It’s a very simple reframe. What happens is 
they’ll latch onto it as a new thought or idea, because it’s easier 
than trying to figure out what’s going on. 
 
 
Now rest assured, if it’s not appropriate to them they’ll latch onto it, but then 
another objection will arise because it hasn’t quite satisfied the concern that 
they had. Especially if you know the industry you’ll know the concerns, 
which means you’ll know how to resolve those concerns ahead of time, 
that’s part of your job about knowing your field, you can offer them valuable 
reframes. That takes care of these things automatically, at which point 
they’ll go oh yeah. Yeah, fine. I get it. Then it’s done. 
Eric: 
The problem was, wanting to change, but not being able to stick to a 
program. 
Igor: 
Right. 
Eric: 
So I said well what about change that might happen to you that would 
happen before you’re able to change. She kind of just said ha? Then I said 
that’s right. What about change would make you feel really good? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
456 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. Do you see the beauty of what he just did? That is exactly what 
we’ve been talking about. There’s a mind bending moment which actually 
has logic within it, if they got to think it through, then the reframe is very 
simple. We’re going to find a way that you can change so you can feel good. 
It’s like yes. That’s what I want. 
Eric: 
Right. 
Igor: 
Shall we begin? Beautiful. Give him a round of applause because that was a 
beautiful way of doing it. 
Eric: 
I just have one more real quick. So then at that point is when you kind of 
start to use more language patterns to structure a more concrete change as 
opposed to just leaving it at that. Then I went into a future memory and 
created… 
Igor: 
Exactly, because now you’ve just gone back to this bit here where you 
summarize their values, including whatever they just said, which is like the 
idea of feeling good about change. Then you go the future memory of how 
good they’ll feel once they have change and so on.  
 
If it’s a change work process then you just go straight into induction. If fact, 
the future memory will be the beginning of the change work. You’re already 
into it. You’re now rolling up your sleeves and doing the work. You’re done. 
Eric: 
Exactly. 
Igor: 
Excellent; beautiful. 
Eric: 
Thank you. 
Igor: 
Thank you. Give him a round of applause before the next one comes up. 
Student: 
I’d just like to ask, Igor. So you have the problem and you’ve acknowledged 
that already, so you have the choice to use mind bending language or a 
magic moment. 
Igor: 
Absolutely. 
Student: 
My understanding of a magic moment is you can give maybe an analogy, a 
fact, a testimonial as you said. I don’t have any background on mind 
bending language, actually.  
♦ Can you give a clear example?  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
457 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
You said there’s a shock moment there when you give the other than. 
Igor: 
The simplest way of doing it is do you remember what Eric just said a 
moment ago? That was a mind bending moment. Did you follow all the stuff 
he was saying about changing before you’re ready to and considering things 
after that’s done so by the time you realize what’s going on it’s just about 
changing and feeling good, isn’t it. 
Student: 
All right. Okay. I got it. 
Igor: 
Do you understand? 
Student: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
Thank you. By the way, please give him a round of applause. Thank you. 
The reaction you just saw is what happens when you offer someone the 
objection. It’s exactly that yeah, but, yeah, but, yeah, but…all right. Thank 
you.   
 
How many of you guys have done something similar to this outside of the 
context of this training? Have you guys used it in this way before, anyone? 
Would it be fair to say that that’s actually a pretty standard response?  
 
Whether it’s a magic moment or mind bending language it doesn’t matter so 
much, the point is you’ve shocked their brain a little bit through novelty 
surprise. It goes out of gear for a second. You present a simple reframe for 
them to latch onto and then suddenly oh, all right. This is the new reality I 
guess, fine. 
 
It has to be a simple reframe. You can’t have a complex system of levels 
and gears and anarchy and hierarchy and so on, because then that just 
creates another level of confusion and that’s not what you want. It’s got to 
be a very simple, precise, clear message that they just get. Does that make 
sense? 
Students: Yes. 
Student: 
Hi. My partner, Mark and I, both wanted to go through the avenue of getting 
a client for therapy. The problem we’re addressing, and I’m sure you can 
apply this to different avenues of business whatever field you’re in is this. 
♦ What if they’re having a problem with not seeing themselves 
having any value that’s worth changing or the thing that they 
want is…? 
Igor: 
I’m not worth changing and so on, right? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
458 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
Yes. That or it’s just not worth it. 
Igor: 
Fair enough. 
Student: 
Like they’re feeling numb, almost even suicidal. 
Igor: 
Sure. The first question is, what kind of clients are you seeing? If they’re 
already calling you, well there’s already a motivator there and that’s what 
you end up using. If it’s a question of going to someone who doesn’t really 
consider change and you want to motivate them to want to change that’s a 
much bigger deal, because now you have to tread careful territory about 
how much you impose and so on.  
 
In that case, the first thing you want to look for is can you find anything of 
value in their life. Be a lever. You need leverage; otherwise, they’re nothing. 
The leverage might be they might be very down on themselves, but it’s all 
about others.  
Student: 
Okay. 
Igor: 
So to the extent you can be more of a force for good in life, doesn’t it make 
sense to change yourself too? 
How else are you going to help others? So that’s the leverage. Do you see 
how I’ve contrasted a conflict, which is I’m not worth changing, but I want to 
help others live in a better world. Well how can you help others until you 
have the capacity to help yourself enough that you can do something 
worthwhile for others too? 
Student: 
Just another question. 
Igor: 
Let’s pause there because the question you’ve asked is actually a lot bigger 
than you may have initially indicated, that’s just a starting point, right? 
Student: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
The next thing is, especially when we come to the story telling thing, I would 
do a lot of storytelling to give their unconscious mind directions to head in. 
This will be a longer process; I did not expect that to be a one-shot deal. 
I do not expect something as extreme as what you’ve talked about to be a 
one-shot deal. You’re especially talking about doing an intervention. Has 
anyone here seen an alcoholic’s intervention or something like that? 
Student: 
Yes. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
459 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
They’re intense scenarios and they’re pretty 50-50. Some people will go and 
some people will go the other way. So we want to stack the deck in our 
favor before we start apply the strong arm, because we want to make sure 
we’ve primed them to go the direction of health, change, becoming a better 
person and someone they can be happy with in themselves. Does that 
make sense? 
Student: 
Yes. We were thinking story telling or Dream Machine would probably be 
one way to covertly start going in that direction. 
Igor: 
Absolutely. 
Student: 
So I was wondering, going down that road do you have any maybe more 
specific tips to help the person subconsciously realize that they are excited 
about something, maybe through the story telling and the Dream Machine 
and then connect it to the value of the therapy or whatever the item that you 
want to give them? 
Igor: 
The answer is very simply yes. If they have a value for something, that is it. 
As long as they value something there will be some high enough level 
behind that that is valuable. Whether it’s they have a little pet mouse and 
they love that mouse, there is a strong emotion there. You can use that as 
leverage, right? 
Student: 
Okay. 
Igor: 
If they can care for that mouse then they have the capacity of caring and 
how much more can they do for that mouse if they can care for themselves 
in the same way. 
Student: 
Right, so just building off of something, the nugget that you’ve found. 
Igor: 
You build, exactly. The point is you want to get a little foot in the door and 
then slowly eek it open a little bit further, a little bit further, a little bit further. 
That’s really where things like the Distraction Method and Master Class 
comes in, the stories and so on. You build a little bit at a time. I’m serious, 
because this is a big topic, right? 
Student: 
It is, yes. 
Igor: 
It’s not something you can expect to solve in the first hit. If you do you’ve got 
lucky and well done. If you can do it consistently please tell me how, 
because I’d really be interested in finding out. As far as I’m concerned this is 
not a one-shot deal. You just position the idea of change and that just slowly 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
460 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
evolves as they can accept it more and more because they’re lower than 
low at that point, right? 
Student: 
Right. 
Igor: 
If it’s a normal, everyday individual the process is much faster, because 
they’re already actually in a pretty good place. We’re talking about building 
someone up to be in an okay place, if you see what I mean. 
Student: 
Yes. Thank you very much. 
Igor: 
You’re welcome. Are there any other comments or questions? Let’s have 
one last one then we can finish up for the day. 
Student: 
You know I was working with Australian Alex in the corner over there and 
what’s funny is the importance of hypnotic rapport and just that intensity. We 
wound up going beyond the exercise and just starting to talk about our lives. 
We wound up actually getting into some really cool places. We did some 
good stuff, yeah? 
Alex: 
Definitely. 
Igor: 
Like it. 
Student: 
Yeah, kick ass. That’s all I have to say. 
Igor: 
So this stuff kind of works, right? It opens people up. You notice that? It 
would be fair to say that you’re opening people up in a way that normal 
conversations usually do not. Would that be fair to say? 
Alex: 
Absolutely. 
Igor: 
That’s kind of what we’re aiming for, right? That’s exactly what we’re aiming 
for. So what I want to leave you with today is just kind of shorthand of how 
far you’ve come. I mean do you realize you’ve only been here four days. 
Does it feel like four days? 
Students: No. 
Igor: 
It feels more like four months, doesn’t it? Get on with it. Give me a point.  
 
This is a diagram to illustrate how far we have come so far. You should 
recognize all the features of it. We’ve got the language stuff here, including 
the power words, the trance themes, the reference similes and the language 
softeners and all that sort of stuff. We’ve got our performance elements here 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
461 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
in red, which is the hypnotic rapport, the inner smile, the H-Plus, the tonality 
and the rhythms.  
 
All these things are actually are actually occurring relatively spontaneously 
by now, aren’t they? Think about it. How hard did they seem just two days 
ago and how much of a no-brainer are they now. 
 
We’ve got our core inductions, the Utilization Principle, the revivifying 
inductions, the pacing and leading construction and the conscious and 
unconscious association. These are our core processes, our bricks to build 
our hypnotic house.  
 
We’ve got the PCAT Formula encapsulating all of this stuff inside of frames 
to give a process that people can go through for change and we’ve used 
that essentially to create two vehicles, two, for want of a better word, 
techniques that have lots of different varieties or variations that you can 
apply in different places. 
 
The first I the Dream Machine, so the Dream Machine has the same 
construction, frames and so on within the context of a conversational trance. 
The second is this Objection and Destroyer Right Now, which means you’ve 
reached the objection.  
Then using the same principles, the same PCAT Formula and so on, you’re 
applying the leverage from the frames, in this case the value, in order to 
destroy the objection so you can handle the concern that they have so that it 
gets neutralized and so on. Does that make sense? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Now the reason we’re doing this is because really, consciously, this is all we 
have to think about. Oh, time for Dream Machine. There’s always an 
objection there. I’ll handle that. You don’t need to think about all the things 
inside, because it’s already there.  
 
It’s kind of like a car. Do you think about all the gears, the wheels and the 
mechanics inside that? No. Someone’s built the car for you. You’ve already 
built your own car. You’ve built your own machine, your own devices. You 
spend time tinkering and playing with these concepts so that your 
unconscious mind can use your instincts naturally and apply this stuff when 
you need to. 
 
When you consider even this last exercise and how well it went, you realize 
you were doing so much more than asking a few simple questions, were 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
462 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you not? Where did all that come from? Did you have to keep track of all the 
principles, authority and scarcity, reciprocity, feedback loops, utilizing things, 
that’s right, revivifying experiences? No. Those things were just there for 
you, were they not? 
 
Because they were there for you now when you least expected them to you 
didn’t have to think, all you needed was a genuine desire to use a simple 
technique. In this case it was the Objection Destroyer, but it could equally 
have been the Dream Machine. 
 
And, perhaps, tonight as you dream you’ll have a machine that helps you 
sort through your own experiences and memories and apply the very 
process of influence that you’ve just been using with others on yourself so 
that as you dream you dream a new you into existence.  
 
 
It’s easy to do, just close your eyes and go to sleep at night and dreams will 
come. You can’t help it. Now you might not remember them all, but dreams 
will come. And if only one of those dreams is a dream of power, a dream of 
change, a dream of healing, you can sort through your memories and 
experiences in a way that is appropriate for you, safe for you.  
 
For your own values become the frameworks that allows you to clean up 
your own personal history, where your own experiences become the 
teachers and the guides that allow you to reach greater heights comfortably, 
easily, naturally. And if you dreamed it just once you can do it again on 
another night and another night and one more and again and again in a 
different night so that days and nights blend into weeks and months.  
 
And as the years roll by and the seasons change inside good things 
happen. Things clearing up, feelings, becoming calmer and more 
resourceful, more energized. Your own unconscious can, you know, make 
changes positively and easily in a way that is suitable for you as an 
individual and you don’t even need to know what is being resolved in order 
to enjoy the fruits of your labors, the results of just being the better you. 
 
I don’t know about you, but I think that’s a pretty good deal, don’t you? Good 
to hear that. For your unconscious mind is there for you. It can make 
changes, heal the past and prepare you for a spectacular future. I find that 
quite an encouraging thought, so I thought I might as well share it. 
 
I’ll see all of you tomorrow at 9:00 a.m. sharp. Please be here at 8:30 
outside. You can chat to your colleagues, chat to your friends and if at some 
point today you wish to do a little inner smile with someone, maybe 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
463 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
tomorrow morning, who am I to stop you? After all, I’m only a hypnotist and 
you guys know more than I do by now, don’t you? 
 
Thank you very much and goodnight. 
 
 
DVD 18:  Simple Hypnotic Persuasion Tactics 
You Can Easily Slip into Any Conversation 
 
Igor: 
So are your brains feeling nice and fresh after some evening of relaxation? 
No, we’re still all over the place. Today will be a little easier day. We’re 
going to start bringing concepts together. I’m going to throw a whole bunch 
of little techniques at you today. 
 
In terms of the bulk of the method of what we want to do you have the core 
skills already. What I’m going to focus on today is showing you different 
ways that you can take the principles that we’ve already heard about – the 
Hypnotic Principles, the Influencing Principles – finding different ways that 
we can put them together into persuasion Power Loops.  
 
Do you know what I mean by Power Loops? Power Loops is a system I 
have for hypnosis where we create little experiences so that at the end of 
the set of experiences people are changed or have some of that kind of 
effect. You have, for example, someone who wants to feel confident. You 
don’t just say be confident, be confident, yeah, because that doesn’t 
necessarily work or people don’t necessarily know how to get there straight 
away.  
 
You may, for example, get them to recall doing really well, drawing a lesson 
from that then going to the future and having that lesson become even more 
so, so they can anticipate even better things in the future and coming back 
to the present with that sense of anticipation in the future now they can feel 
confident.  
 
Do you see how we’re moving through a range of experiences -- the past, 
the lesson, the future, the future successes, back to the present, expecting 
the future -- and so on? Do you see how each one of those is a little set in 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
464 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the process at the end of which someone will become more confident? It’s 
not the only way to create confidence of course.  
 
So we have the concept of Power Loops in hypnosis, what I’d like to focus 
on today is some examples of Power Loops; processes you can take people 
through invisibly in a conversation that are persuasive. You can think of 
them as little tactics or strategies you can just throw out there.  
 
They going to be like the colorings, the things you put around your core 
influencing processes to help enhance them, make them more useful and 
so on. Sometimes you’ll throw one of these out just because it’s easy and 
that’s all you need to do. You know the old saying; you don’t need a 
hammer to crack an egg shell. 
 
The same is true in hypnosis. You don’t have to go through this whole huge 
thing of values and secret hidden drivers and then discovering what their 
real passion is and then putting a future in and adding this on top and then 
going underneath. You can do those things, but honestly, if you just want 
someone to give you a piece of chewing gum it’s a little bit too much effort 
to go through. Does that make sense? 
 
We’re going to focus on things they can do on their own or they can add into 
your general influencing process to enhance it or to maybe fix something 
that might be going a little astray in the middle of the whole process so you 
have a little more option. Do you see what I mean by this? 
 
Remember, the two core influencing processes that we have so far are the 
Dream Machine, which you have variations of with the blitz, the hypnotic 
lecture and all those things, but they are essentially more overt hypnotic 
processes. These require more of a monologue. In other words, you’ll 
create the context in which you can talk and keep on talking and we’ll show 
you how to do that later on today. 
 
Then we have the Objection Destroyer, which is, essentially, when someone 
has a concern, some kind of push back or they’re not quite there yet, there’s 
a hesitation for some reason, it’s a way of handling that very quickly and 
elegantly. Make sense? Then you have some steps for something else, but 
we haven’t covered that yet. So we’ll just talk about that later, if that’s okay 
with you. 
 
Right now what I want to do is I’d like to start getting you having some 
practical experiences of just little bits of influence you do every day. Now, a 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
465 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
lot of the things I’ll talk about you will already be familiar with in one way or 
another, because chances are you will have done it.  
 
However, the way I’d like you to address it at this point is for you to do it on 
purpose. In other words, you’ll know the impact that you’re having so that 
whenever you need it you’ll realize oh, I can get my little toolkit out and go 
ah, which manner fits, this one here. Let’s put that one to the mechanism 
that we need to change. Make sense? 
 
These are going to be very quick exercises like one minute pieces, because 
I’ve got lots of little things to do. So I’d like to ask you guys, if I may, to keep 
your attention again on the sound in the room so that I can pull you back, 
add another exercise, then you go off, come back, another exercise and so 
on.  
 
You are welcome to stack the exercises so you can do several things at the 
same time, but the key thing to focus on is whatever the new thing is that we 
happen to be focusing on. Does that make sense? All clear all right. 
 
Also, all of you please consider the area which you want to influence people 
in. If it’s business of course it’s the business meeting. If it’s sales it will be 
the sales meeting. If it’s therapy it might be the things you do in the middle 
of therapy or it might be something you do in the beginning to prepare 
people to want to change. It’s up to you. Make sense? Think about your 
context. 
 
As we do the mingling exercise again you’re going to have literally about 30 
seconds or a minute to engage the particular process we’re going to be 
talking about and I’d like you to pretend that you’re in your particular arena. 
Just tell the person hey, you’re a businessperson, just go along with it. Then 
they’ll say okay, now you’re a client in a hypnotherapy practice and play that 
role as well. It’s more about you getting a sense of how do I frame this; how 
do I present this in the environment that I want to use it in.  
 
The first step is everyone please stand up. Remember to keep your things 
nice and safe. If you have any liquids, please make sure they’re at the 
edges or underneath the chairs. This will be very active so we don’t anyone 
bouncing in and when we pause if you want to come in close that’s fine, but 
please leave this corridor here so we can get a straight line for the camera. 
1. The first thing I want to do is start off with what you know already, 
which is the Hypnotic Rapport.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
466 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
I’d like you walking around the room and just give your little flashes to 
people, but here’s the key thing. I would like for you to follow through on the 
flashes. So it’s not just like… Where’s my nice smile? Where is the sort of 
mirroring effect afterwards?  
 
Remember, the purpose of the flash is not that it creates instant rapport. 
The purpose of the flash is that it begins that rapport mechanism going. So 
when you do your little eyebrow flash then someone else will do something, 
nod something or smile. They’ll do some kind of behavior which you need to 
reflect back to maintain that contact going. You don’t want to be doing like… 
That kind of destroys the whole context you starting creating. Does that 
make sense to you guys? 
 
All right, let’s start with that. Off you go. 
 
[Exercise] 
 
All right guys. That’s easy, right? So the first thing I want you to do now is as 
soon as you meet the next person you’ll do the eyebrow flash, the mirroring 
and all that sort of stuff. So the first thing I want you to do in terms of 
influencing someone is go through a routine of asking for a very small favor 
or an act of compliance and I want you to acknowledge the favor when it’s 
been done. In other words, thank them for doing it or give them a little 
compliment on how well they’ve done it and then ask for a larger favor 
straight afterwards.  
 
It’s something that seems a little counterintuitive for people. It’s like I’ve just 
asked a favor I can’t ask it again. Actually the best time to ask for another 
favor is when they’ve agreed to do one or they’ve just finished doing one. 
Does that make sense? 
 
So it’s up to you. You can upscale it. You say can I have a favor? They’re 
just about to go off onto it and then say oh, could you just add this onto it as 
well? Or, they’ll do the favor and you say thank you. That was really well 
done. I really appreciate this, by the way… Then you add a bigger favor. 
Does that make sense?  
 
Off you go. Go ahead. 
 
Student: 
A favor they can actually do in this room, right? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
467 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
You want them to be able to act it out in this room, yes. In public would be 
good. We are in public, so please remember that. Yes, absolutely.  
 
All right, off you go. 
 
[Exercise] 
 
Good, I like this.  
2. The next one is very similar it’s called the Salami Tactic. 
 
This is predicated on the old thing that if you want the whole salami you 
can’t ask for the whole thing. No, it’s mine. You can ask for one slice and 
then come back and ask for another slice and then for another slice and 
eventually the whole thing is yours.  
 
There is one problem with the Salami Tactic, however. If all you do is keep 
asking and you never give it breaks the reciprocity cycle and you start losing 
the emotional investment from other people. Does that kind of make sense 
to you guys?  
 
So one of the keys to the Salami Tactic is not to constantly keep asking, it’s 
to keep asking them periodically. So you ask for a little bit more and a little 
bit more, but periodically give something in return, something of genuine 
value. Now in this room you’re not going to start exchanging cash, favors or 
something like that because it’s a quick exercise.  
 
The way you can give something of value back here is in terms of 
acknowledgement, compliments, praise; in other words, a positive emotional 
vibe that you present to people. Does that make sense?  
 
Out in the real world, of course, you’ll be able to do other things like doing 
little favors for people or doing little tasks or chores for people and so on. It’s 
kind of a give and take thing. Meanwhile, of course, you’re systematically 
building up towards the bigger favor or the bigger thing that you wanted to.  
 
The way to think about this is there is a big behavior or a bigger thing that 
you wish to have done or created. Break it down into steps. What’s the 
smallest step you can ask someone that leads in that direction and then 
what’s the next smallest step and the next one and the next one. Each one 
of those is a slice of the salami. Make sense? Easy to do? 
 
Off you go. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
468 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
[Exercise] 
 
Was that fun? Remember, it’s very important if you’re going to use the 
Salami Tactic you cannot violate the Reciprocity Rule; otherwise, you start 
alienating the relationship over time. People will think they’re being abused 
and actually they will be. You’re abusing the relationship by asking for more 
without ever giving anything in return. Does that make sense to you guys? 
3. For the next exercise I will need you to present some level of 
resistance back.  
 
In other words, you’ll ask for something like a small favor or something, 
perhaps to initiate one of the other tactics, but they’re going to resist and go 
no, I don’t want to do that or they’re going to be hesitant in terms of how 
they do that. 
 
At that point I just want you to give them a simple simile or an analogy to 
motivate them. The easiest way of getting some resistance is to say why 
should I do that? You say well it’s like…and then you just give them any 
random analogy or simile that fits the context. 
 
So, for example, a simple favor might be can you get me a glass of water. 
Why should I do that? Well, it’s kind of like when a patient is lying in a 
hospital and they can’t get out of bed. Someone has to help them. Please, 
be a nurse for me.  
 
The point is the analogy is not that important. There will be more analogies 
and similes, that will fit the context more easily, but you’re asking for exactly 
the same favor again, only this time you’re using a symbolic representation, 
a symbolic reality rather than a direct intellectual request. Does that make 
sense? Do you want another example? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
All right, give me a context of a kind of favor that you might ask someone. 
Student: 
Someone is coming up with stupid excuses not to do whatever it is you 
would like them to do. 
Igor: 
What specifically? So someone is coming up with stupid excuses. 
Student: 
Specifically, well I don’t know that I could do that because… 
Student: 
It’s Wednesday. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
469 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Because it’s Wednesday, okay. Right, and what is it you asked them to do? 
Student: 
Give you your wallet. 
Igor: 
Give them your wallet or give you back or own wallet? 
Student: 
Give them your wallet or give you back your wallet. 
Student: 
 
♦ How about email? 
 
Igor: 
Okay email. Let’s give them something really simple. Someone is going to 
send you an email and they give you some silly excuse like oh, I can’t do 
that. I don’t have time where it’s Wednesday or something like that. So you 
say look, all I’m asking for is an email.  
 
It’s kind of like if you think of someone who’s been in prison all their life and 
no one is actually writing to them. I just want a little message of hope, just to 
know someone is out there listening. Do you see what’s going on here? 
You’re building the emotions into the actual symbolic version, the simile or 
analogy. Just ask yourself this in terms of creating the simile. We’ll work 
more on similes and stories a little later on. 
 
The thing to ask yourself is the emotional space, how do you feel when 
they’re refusing your request. Make sense? It’s like I need help and you’re 
not giving it to me and what is that like. It’s like a little bear cub trying to get 
some food and mother is going no. Do you want to be like that? No, I’m so 
sorry.   
 
Or, it’s like someone who’s been hungry all day and they’ve been looking 
forward to a great meal and now they’ve found the frig is empty. Well at 
least we can go out or do something with it. Do you see where we’re going 
with this? 
 
You want to create something in your mind that follows the emotions. The 
emotions are the key to get an unconscious response for yourself. So if you 
put yourself into space of what it’s like for the request to be fulfilled or what 
you feel like when the request has been denied and then you put another 
scenario in that kind of expresses the same emotion you’re pretty much 
there. Does that make sense? Everyone clear on that? One more question, 
go ahead. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
470 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I just have a question. So is it just simply a matter of thanking the person, 
showing appreciation, because sometimes it seems a little weak? 
Igor: 
It can be. In here it will be and sometimes just giving positive attention is a 
good payback as it is. In here that’s pretty much all we’ve got to go for, 
because it’s only a two-minute exercise. In real life it means a lot more 
things.  
Sometimes just giving thanks constantly isn’t enough, because you will go 
well he’s just thanking me, but it just sounds a bit rough, he doesn’t really 
mean it anymore. He’s not demonstrating the genuine value that’s being 
exchanged in some other ways.  
Student: 
Okay. 
Igor: 
Make sense? 
Student: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
So for here and in a lot of situations a heartfelt thank you, a positive emotion 
that’s transferred is enough of a gift in return, but you’ve got to put it in the 
social context so don’t think that just saying thank you is enough. Thanks... 
You’ll need more. 
 
In here it’s enough to give you the foundation, so that later on, when you 
start using it in real life you’ll realize oh yeah, I’ve got to do stuff back. I’ve 
been asking for quite a lot now and unless I do something in return, 
something maybe unasked for or something that’s of genuine value for the 
other person then they’ll start feeling all abused and so on. 
4. All right, let’s go back to the analogies and similes.  
 
Give that a go and whatever comes out of your mouth is fine, by the way. If 
it’s a really bad analogy or a bad simile it doesn’t matter right now. It’s just to 
force your brain into starting to think about this so when we get onto it it will 
be easier to do. 
 
Off you go. 
 
[Exercise] 
 
All right guys, did you enjoy that? 
Students: Yes. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
471 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Don’t worry; we’ll talk more about analogies, metaphors and all these things 
in much more detail so you can develop that skill more fully. This is kind of 
warm up phase.  
 
So the next thing is I’m going to actually give you two little influence tricks at 
the same time, partly because one of them you can’t really do so well on the 
fly. You need the context to do it properly, it will make more sense; but you 
can use both and if the situation arises, you can just throw the second one 
in there as well. 
 
The first one I call the Value Challenge. If you know someone’s value in 
terms of why they’re here and what it’s doing for them, for example the 
enjoying life and so on, you can simply challenge them if they resist 
something or if you’re having problems getting through or getting some kind 
of an agreement. 
 
You can challenge them on their value. You can challenge them on their 
reason for being there. Does that make sense? So, for example, at the 
customer service desk you can always ask them look, what is your job 
function. Why do you answer calls?  
 
It’s to help people. So your job is to help customers, is that right? Yes. So 
I’m asking for your help right now. How helpful are you being? Think about 
it. I’ve asked for this, this and this and you can’t do anything. All I’m asking 
for is for your help and that’s what you do, isn’t it?  
 
Do you see what you’re doing here? You’re challenging them on the very 
value they presented to you, but it’s important that you get the value first 
and you lock it in before you challenge them on it. Does that make sense to 
you guys? 
 
It’s not something you can necessarily practice in this kind of live 
environment here because you’d have to set up the whole value exchange 
and so on. If you want to and you can think of something, a context that fits, 
very quickly say it then. You’re this and this. Ask a good question like I did 
with the customer service thing and then challenge them on the value and 
they’ll be like uncomfortable. 
 
Two very important things in that… 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
472 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
→ First, when someone is being uncomfortable the most common 
response that people have is to want to take the pressure off them 
and say look, don’t worry its okay.  
 
Don’t do that. The pressure is the very thing that creates change; that 
creates some kind of extra thing. The best thing to happen at that point is to 
be silent. Now, if they’re silent for too long, in other words, it starts turning a 
little bit more gloomy shall we say, you can kind of feel the atmosphere 
changing a little bit, then you have to step in and give them an out and the 
out of course is to assist you in some way.  
 
In the customer service example it might be, for example, to put you through 
to their boss or someone who can actually deal with the situation. You might 
start throwing out some suggestions of look, isn’t there somebody? You can 
go along these lines or along these lines or along these lines, because I 
know you want to help me. I can tell you want to help me. Of course they do 
now, because they feel that pressure and they don’t know how to release it. 
Does that make sense? 
 
You want that pressure to build up, because often they’ll just present a 
solution if you’re silent. If you’re not silent it can help them take the pressure 
off, because now they’ve got something to fight against. If you have 
pressure and you’re saying well you can do this, you can do this, you do 
this, now they feel pressure on the inside and pressure on the outside.  
 
They know how to deal with pressure on the outside, it’s by saying no. By 
saying no, of course, they’re relieving their own internal pressure too, 
because they’re dealing with both pressures at the same time. Does that 
kind of make sense? 
 
So, if you’re doing a Value Challenge remain silent. Let the pressure build 
until either they respond with a solution or an offer of some sort and then 
you can work with that or if it starts turning a bit sour, because they’ve been 
feeling that pressure too long. 
It’s a feeling thing you’ll get, it’s a fine tuning thing you’ll get, then you 
present them with options or general possibilities so they can start selecting 
or getting more creative about how they can help you, assist you or do 
whatever it is you’ve ask of them.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
473 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So is the first one clear, the Value Challenge? Do you like it, by the way? It’s 
good.  
→ The second is to work with purpose.  
 
It’s similar to the idea of value. You’re basically going to ask people what is 
their intention. What’s their purpose for whatever behavior it is or the 
resistance is. Let me give me some classic examples. 
 
In a hypnotherapy office why are people there? Well, they’re there to 
change; so that you can start finding other ways that they can do that. Now 
all behaviors are driven by a purpose. They’re trying to achieve something, 
right? 
 
Let’s say someone is being really nasty or being unpleasant in a meeting 
with you. You can call them out in public, although that’s a little bit harsher 
or you can call them out in private and say listen, I notice you keep doing 
this in the meetings. Can I just ask what’s it all about? What are you trying 
to achieve? What are you trying to get?  
 
I think it’s important that people hear the other side too. Great, so to the 
extent that we make sure people hear both sides can we get on with the 
meeting in a smoother manner? Sure.  
 
Now you can start negotiating about other ways of doing that. For example, 
you could have a meeting where you say okay, here are all the options. 
Now we’ll turn to Harry for the opposite view. Thank you very much for the 
opposite view Harry. Let’s carry on.  
 
Now it’s contained within an agreement frame rather than just constantly 
chipping away at whatever it is you’re suggesting. Does that make? So 
when you get resistance as you go round now and you can actually practice 
this, ask for a favor then you get resistance, ask for the purpose. What’s that 
about? It’s only a simple favor so clearly there’s something else that’s going 
on. What is that?  
 
He goes oh I feel like I’ve been doing too much or, I don’t know it seemed 
like a lot of effort. Oh, I get it. So if we can make it easier for you it’d be a 
no-brainer to do the favor, right? Sure. 
 
In that case, you can explore. Do you realize when I asked for a glass of 
water I just mean from that tank right over there whilst I’m fixing this. I don’t 
mean for you to go out to the store, down the street, get in your car, drive, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
474 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
get me a big bottle of water, polish it up, freeze it and put ice cubes in. We 
don’t need any of that. Just grab me a glass of water over there whilst I 
finish this so I can focus on what I’m doing here.  
 
Do you see how you’ve just taken care of the intention straight away? Does 
that make sense? Everyone clear on the Value Challenge and getting the 
purpose so you can create a new behavior out of the end of that or a new 
conclusion from that? 
 
All right, give that a go. 
 
[Exercise] 
 
Was that interesting? Now, what is the general principle that’s beginning to 
emerge from all these little tactics that we’ve been playing with, anyone care 
to guess? 
Student: 
Emotions are involved. 
Igor: 
Emotions are involved, absolutely. Go ahead. 
Student: 
It’s like an agreement. 
Igor: 
So we have an agreement set going on, absolutely. What else? 
Student: 
Compliance. 
Igor: 
Compliance, the best part of the agreement set, absolutely. 
Student: 
You got people’s attention in putting pressure on. 
Igor: 
That’s the magic word. We’ve got people’s attention and you’re getting 
pressure. Now, we mentioned this a moment ago and I want to emphasize 
this right now. There are two kinds of pressures that you can use in the 
whole influence cycle. One is external pressure. One is internal pressure.  
 
The problem with external pressure is people know how to deal with it. They 
know how to fight back, how to avoid it, how to escape it and so on. Now 
sometimes it works great. It’s the absolutely right thing to do. Just put a little 
pressure on them and it’s done, but if people are good at escaping external 
pressure, if you tried using pressure and it’s not working, then you internal 
pressure. 
 
The beauty about internal pressure is that it’s self-generated. What happens 
with internal pressure is the pressure builds and builds? When they do the 
favor or the activity you’ve asked for the pressure releases and they will feel 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
475 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
good. If the pressure is external, once you leave the pressure is gone and 
they can forget about it or they engage in the activity but afterwards they still 
feel used and abused somehow, because they were forced into doing it, 
right? 
 
If I put a gun to your head and said, get me a glass of water or I will shoot. 
Well you probably wouldn’t take me seriously, but if you did you wouldn’t 
exactly be particularly happy about doing the favor for me, would you?  
 
The thing about internal pressure is once someone releases the internal 
pressure by, for example, doing a favor for me, getting me a glass of water 
or whatever it is, they’ll actually feel pleased for having done so because it’s 
internally generated. Does that make sense? 
 
Hence, when you give them a compliment or a little thank you note at the 
end of it, it augments that being pleased and makes it more likely that they’ll 
respond favorable to you in the future as well, so you’re building a healthy 
relationship rather than destroying one.  
 
Go ahead. There’s a question here. The question is if someone says no, 
how do you reframe that without asking why and so on? Really, that’s what 
we’re doing right now. The bigger issue is how and when are they saying 
no? No on its own does not exist. It exists in relation to a context, a person, 
the behaviors that preceded it, a certain kind of request that you’ve asked of 
them. There’s a whole bunch of things going on at the same time, right?  
 
So one of the things you can do is what we’ve already talked about. You 
can leverage on their value. Well, you know when you say no, I thought you 
were the kind of person that did “X”. It’s their value. I thought you were the 
kind of person that enjoyed life. I’m just talking about going out and having 
fun. Isn’t that enjoying life? Do you see how they get it? 
 
Bit by bit we’re going to add extra things. Another thing you can do, which 
we’ll be coming onto right now, if someone says no sometimes it can be 
because there’s no accountability. There’s no consequence. So if you can 
make someone accountable the chances are they’ll take the request more 
seriously. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Now, if you’re working with an organization like at the customer service desk 
or so on, you may need to do kind of a double whammy. Find out if they will 
take responsibility, which a lot of people aren’t willing to do, or get someone 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
476 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
that has responsibility. In other words, pass the buck, but you want to make 
sure that they pass the buck to someone where the buck actually stops so 
they don’t just keep sending you around in a circle.  
 
If you end up back with the same person then you basically have to lock 
them in and say look, you’ve already passed the buck once. You can’t do 
that. Either you send me to someone who’s actually authorized to do this or 
well you’re going to be responsible for this, essentially is the message 
you’re giving out. Does that make sense to you guys? 
 
So especially when you’re working with big organizations, Kevin Hogan has 
a nicer way of phrasing this, which I kind of like, which is asking something 
along the lines of do you have the authority to do “X”? It’s kind of a 
challenge to their self-importance. If they say no, well then the implication is 
that someone out there does have it. So I go great, well who does? Please 
go and get them.  
 
Now they are personally responsible for bringing to you the very person that 
can fix your problem, so they’ll start searching for someone better rather 
than someone just to pass the buck to, right? 
 
If they say yes, what have the just agreed to? Well, they can decide on your 
issue. They can’t say anymore oh, I’m sorry, company policy says no. I 
thought you had the authority? So, if you don’t have the authority, who has 
the authority to make an exception here? Something like that. Do you see 
where we’re going with this? Everyone clear on that? 
 
Do you want to play with that one and we’ll a few more? All right guys. Just 
spend a minute or so finding someone, get some resistance and then ask 
them do you have the authority to do this? Let me just check before we go 
any further. Do you have the authority to get this result? No, I don’t. Oh, 
great. Could you please put me in touch with somebody who can or could 
you bring the manager so I can speak to someone who can? 
 
If they yes, you go great, what I need is this. They’ve already accepted the 
role that they’re the kind of person that can make an exception and so on. 
Do you see where we’re going with this? There’s a kind of a strange little 
consistency and commitment thing going on. They’ve already told you that 
they can make the exception, which makes it more likely that they will. Do 
you see how that works?  
 
Go ahead, quick question. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
477 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
He’s asking would it turbo-charge it more to ask do you have the experience 
and authority? Sure it might be, I don’t know it depends on the context 
perhaps.  
Student: 
I’ve heard you use that phrase, I just forget. There’s another word in 
addition to authority, I just can’t remember what it is. 
Igor: 
I don’t know. I can’t help you with that, but play with it. I mean it’s the 
principle that’s most important than anything else. Incidentally, if they accept 
the authority to be able to help you, even if they don’t necessarily want to 
help you, there’s a nice little bit of research that talks about people who put 
little stickers in their houses like civically-minded messages.  
 
If you come back the next week and say would you put this great big 
cardboard poster on your front lawn to stop people speeding they’re more 
likely to say yes, because mentally they’ve already entered the role of a 
civically-minded individual. Does that make sense? It’s a percentage you’re 
playing here of course, but you’re increasing your percentage constantly 
and that’s what we’re looking for.  
 
Easy? Off you go. 
 
[Exercise] 
 
Did you enjoy that? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
I want to give you one quick caveat in terms of using the authority the way 
it’s been phrased like that. It’s also culture dependent, in other words, if you 
go to somewhere like Asia. In Asia there’s a lot of face value to be taken 
care of. People don’t want to be embarrassed in public. 
 
If you ask someone in Asia do you have the authority to do this, you might 
be challenging their self-worth, if you like, in public. That’s a very bad thing 
to do. The whole system might shut down then in order to protect that 
individual. Does that make sense? So you want to be careful about the 
context you’re using this in so that the phrasing doesn’t accidentally trigger 
a cultural backlash in that sense.     
 
The next two are interesting as well.  
♦ Can you in that context turn them around so that you need to 
save face and recruit them to help you save face? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
478 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
You can do that, but again you have to do it eloquently so that they want to, 
because if there’s a risk to them they won’t do it. They’ll say oh, so sorry. 
They don’t want to take the risk of losing face along the way. 
 
The next one is kind of interesting. There are actually two bits to it, if you 
like, that are related. It’s to do with reasonableness. Now, remember, 
reasoning or logic won’t necessarily by convincing; however, it can be used 
to create pressure, the internal pressure we talked about, right? 
 
So if you’ve gone through a process of, shall we say, denials and you tried it 
this way and you tried it that way and you tried it the other way, you can 
then kind of list out a set of steps. You can say look, I’ve been the one that’s 
been reasonable here. I’ve been doing this and this and this, your turn, 
essentially is what you’re saying. You can say it sometimes directly and 
sometimes implied. Look, I’ve been doing all these things. I’m trying really 
hard. What else could I possibly do?  
 
The second part we just heard there is we start turning the frames around. 
What would you do in my shoes? So once you’ve shown yourself 
established as being reasonable and their response is being very unhelpful 
and hinting, of course, that they’re unreasonable, you can then switch the 
frame of reference around and say what would you do in my shoes or how 
would you feel in my shoes. 
 
A lot of time it switches people around and they’ll go actually, there’s not 
much I can say to that. It’s like I feel pretty bad. Well good, because that’s 
exactly how I feel right now. There’s a very simple way you can deal with 
this. Now, I don’t know if you’re the one who has the authority to change 
this, but… Do you see how you start stacking these things together?  
 
Let’s spend a minute or so walking around getting some resistance. When 
you get resistance be reasonable about it. Be polite and say okay, how 
about trying it this way? How about trying it that way? Trying it this way? Get 
resistance a few times then pause, back off and say look, all I need is this.  
 
It’s not an unreasonable request to make. I’ve asked you this way. I’ve tried 
it this way. I’ve tried this way. I’ve made everything I can think of to make 
your life easier, what else is there to do? I mean think about it. How would 
you feel is you were in my shoes and you got the same responses? What 
else could I possibly do? Tell me. 
 
Can you feel how the pressure now starts building inside again? You 
reversed the whole pressure thing. Rather than being able to do a whole 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
479 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
broken record they now have to take responsibility for the result, which is 
kind of what you want. Do you get that?  
 
All right off you go. 
 
[Exercise] 
 
Are you enjoying yourself so far? Is everyone enjoying themselves? I’d like 
to put everything we just did this morning into context so you can see how 
these things add up on each other. 
 
About a month or so ago I was on a set of flights. I was going to Thailand 
this time. You may as well sit down. We’re going to add some more things 
after this. Are we all ready? Then let us begin. 
 
Once upon a time there was a weary traveler flying through business class. 
The problem was that he wasn’t allowed to check in on time. Why? Because 
he arrived at the airport far too early. He was being reasonable. He said no 
problem. Instead of waiting in the lovely, delightful, relaxing business 
lounge, I will wait in the restaurant upstairs to make your life easier. Off he 
goes. 
 
Several hours later he comes back and wants to check in. This time they 
can’t check him in. Why? Well, because the business credit card on which 
he was checked wasn’t there. In other words, he had to wait for his business 
partner to turn up. 
 
Basically, Cliff had the business credit card and they refused to check 
people in without the credit card on which the whole thing was booked, 
which is really ironic given that I have a passport, which is probably a bit 
more of a serious document reflecting who I am. 
 
That’s where the whole saga starts beginning. They can’t check me in, 
because I don’t have the credit card, the passport is not enough and so on. 
So I have the check-in girl in front of me. I pretty much realized it’s not up to 
her whether or not she can check me in. 
 
I asked her look, is there anything you can do? Can you check me in 
manual because the system won’t let you? Well, I don’t know. I’m not sure 
I’m allowed to do that. So I know there is a possibility, it’s just that she 
hasn’t got the authority. Do you hear that? 
 
I said okay, I understand. Don’t worry. So who can help me? One of the 
customer managers, he’ll be down in 10 minutes. No worries, I’ll just wait 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
480 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
here. So I’m being very reasonable, very calm, building my ammunition. 
Eventually the customer service manager comes down. I talk to him and he 
goes oh, I can’t help you I’m afraid.  
 
So he sends me off to the customer service desk. You can see the chain 
beginning to happen, right? I speak to an older gentleman there who is 
probably in charge, but refuses to acknowledge it. So I’m going this is 
interesting. Fine, he can’t do it. He send me right back to the customer 
service manager again. So I’m now a full buck in return, right? 
 
So I come back to him and he says oh, you have to go to so and so. I said 
well, he just sent me back to you. I guess you’re in charge, right? What have 
I just done? 
Students: Gave him the authority. 
Igor: 
Gave him the authority. I labeled it, right? At this point, he’s a little 
overloaded. He feels the pressure and, honestly, he’s not the best customer 
service representative. He doesn’t really know how to deal with people. 
What does he do? He shuts down and walks off, right? Shocking. My 
ammunition is building. 
 
So I’m thinking this is interesting. At this point, of course, I’m not the 
happiest of campers. So I grab him again. This time I am now going to force 
responsibility. I said okay, I’d like to have a copy of complaint procedure. 
How do I spell your name again? It forces responsibility, doesn’t it? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
So, of course, he has to comply. I get all the details. So there’s already 
some pressure building in the system, right? So I’m hanging around again 
and eventually I get to speak to another customer services rep at the main 
desk. He’s present, but he’s not there. I explain the whole thing again and 
say look, is there anyone else that can help you that has the authority to do 
this? Essentially, their problem is the person without the card can’t check in.  
I think this is about whether or not the person has paid for it, which is weird 
because it’s their bank and they should know, right? So they have bad 
systems in place. So I’m being very reasonable saying look, I came here 
like five hours ago. I waited for three hours to be able to check in and that’s 
fine. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
481 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
There’s no problem, because they couldn’t take my bag. Instead of being in 
the nice, comfortable business lounge that I did pay for I had to sit upstairs 
in the little dingy restaurant and that’s not a big deal.  
 
Then I had to wait for the manager and the manager sent me here and they 
sent me back and this, that and the other. What would you do if you were in 
my shoes? She’s kind of like… The pressure is building. She didn’t know 
how to respond. I don’t think she had the authority to actually do anything 
there. She doesn’t know how to respond.  
 
She says I’m sorry. I can’t do anything with this. I can’t check you in 
because the system requires the credit card. So you’re going back to the 
excuse, which is of course the credit card. I said look, what’s the issue 
here? Is that you need to know who I am or is it that you’re not sure the 
whole things been paid for?  
 
If you need to know who I am it’s very simple. Here’s my passport. That’s 
pretty much if the U.S. Government will let me into the country with this 
thing, I think they have a slightly higher security protocol than you do, right? 
This is me.  
 
Secondly, I’ve flown with you lots of times before, look at your records. 
Here’s my frequent flyer card and so on. You can check me out. You know 
that it’s me. I think their first excuse was we’ve got to make sure that this is 
the actual traveler that’s bought the ticket. I said look, you can check me 
out. You have all the things there.  
 
Am I being reasonable?  
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Who’s now being unreasonable? 
Students: They are. 
Igor: 
Right. How? I’ve broken their frame. They said we need to identify the 
passenger. Well, here’s my identity. Here’s another identity. Here’s another 
identity. Check your system, you have even more identity. Then of course 
the real objection comes out, the one they can’t tell the public, which is they 
have to be sure that I’ve paid for the flight, which basically means that they 
have bad credit control systems because they should know as soon as 
they’ve taken the payment, right? 
Students: Yes. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
482 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Anyway, that’s neither here nor there. So the thing about the issue of the 
payment comes up and I said oh, is that all. Well here’s my credit card. Feel 
free to take the details and if my business partner doesn’t turn up with the 
credit card just bill that. 
 
So they said oh, I don’t know. What we have to do is we’ll have to charge 
the card for the full amount and then refund it afterwards. I said fine, no 
worries, but – this is important, of course – will you refund it to me as soon 
as my partner gets here? She says oh, no, no. You’ll have to come back on 
your return flight, which of course is next year. 
 
At this point, the next tactic starts coming in, it’s called anger. Notice, 
though, it’s not just random anger. It’s not just frothing at the mouth. This is 
kind of a justified anger. So I said look, I’ve been here, you’ve messed me 
about. You’ve sent me around this place and I’ve been nothing but 
reasonable.  
 
I showed you my ID. I’m even willing to pay for the flight again. All you have 
to do is promise me you’ll refund on the spot. I mean hotels can do it. 
Anyone can do it. It’s just reversing the transaction like that. You can’t have 
my money for a whole year. That’s just outrageous.  
 
Now, of course, the pressure is really built. She doesn’t know what to do 
with it. What does she do? She disappears into the back room. I wait 
patiently. Out comes the original gentleman I spoke to. He is the manager, 
shielded by all these little soldiers and staff who are supposed to take the 
flack and die for him. Now they can’t take anymore so it’s up to him, but of 
course the pressure is already built.  
 
My ammunitions dump is ready to fire, because they’ve given me lots and 
lots of things to present. So I run through the whole spiel again and now I’m 
being very, very reasonable again. I’m very calm. At the end of which I let a 
little bit of anger, a little bit of frustration creep in and say look, you can tell 
why I’m kind of frustrated about this, right?  
 
Now tell me, I’ve bought a business class ticket, what’s the point of buying a 
business class ticket if I’m going to be treated poorly? Isn’t the whole point 
that I have a smooth, elegant flight so that I don’t have to get stressed about 
the whole thing? You see where I’m coming from, don’t you? How would 
you feel if you were in my shoes? The pressure is building, pressure is 
building. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
483 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
What can I do to get into the lounge now? All I want to do is be able to relax 
in the lounge, get some work done and when my business partner comes it 
will be fine. Oh, we have to wait for him to turn up. He’s not turning up until 
the last minute. I can’t wait out here all this time. Think about it. So the 
pressure is building some more.  
 
Then I run through the whole thing again. Look, here are my identity cards. 
Here’s my thing. Look in the system. He starts typing out the numbers and 
sees that I’ve taken other flights before. I’ve offered to give you my credit 
card so you can take payment. You must return the payment as soon as 
you get what you want, which is you see the credit card on which it’s been 
taken. You cannot keep my money for a year. It’s only reasonable, right?  
 
Pressure is building. Pressure is building. What can you do? It’s building 
again. No, I can’t do it. So what do I do? The next tactic is you just cycle. 
Look, I’ve been here for five hours. I’ve talked to so and so. Then I spoke to 
so and so. Then this happened. Then that happened. I’ve given you my ID. 
I’ve given you my visa card. I’ve given you this. What else could I do? Think 
about it. If you were in my shoes, what would you do? What else is there?  
 
Eventually he’s cracking and I’m wondering will he run away as well? Then 
he does something very interesting. He looks up and says do you promise 
that your business partner will turn with the credit card? Now he doesn’t 
need a promise. If I promised him beforehand would it have made any 
affect? 
Students: No. 
Igor: 
He needs the promise to justify to himself why is he going to break the 
system or ignore the normal rules. Make sense? As soon as I heard that…of 
course I do. You know what? If he doesn’t show up you know exactly where 
I am. Here’s my credit card. You’ll be able to take the payment no problem 
at all. I’ve just given him an extra justification for allowing me to check in- 
tap, tap, tap, tap- here you go sir, this if for your bags. Have a nice flight. 
 
 
Now notice it took a fair amount of effort to get to that point, right? To be 
honest with you, at this point I was in kind of an interesting place because I 
thought either I spend the next three hours arguing with these people and 
that’d be kind of enjoyable or I get on the flight, either way I kind of win.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
484 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The point is, though, can you see how there’s a system and, by the way, do 
not normally break the protocol. They normally cannot break protocol. I 
know this because it’s happened to me before and it’s pretty much 
systematic. Only this time I had time to spare, so I thought I might as well go 
for it, right? 
 
The key thing here is how do you build the internal pressure? What does the 
pressure do to the critical factor in particular? 
Student: 
It obliterates it. 
Igor: 
Exactly. Eventually the critical factor is moved to one side, the amygdala is 
getting enough stimulation that they can’t think through their old thought 
loops. All their excuses have been destroyed, because I’ve countered every 
single one. They have nothing left.  
                    One of the most powerful words in the English language and if translated in 
a lot of other languages, too, is the word “because”. If you cannot rationalize 
something it’s very difficult to maintain the behavior. He could no longer 
rationalize the protocol. That’s why eventually he had to go through with it, 
but notice how there’s a lot of pressure that has to be built up to get into that 
point. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DVD 19:  Persuasion Principles & Foundation 
Strategies to Weave into Your Master Plan             
for Hypnotic Influence 
 
Igor: 
What I’d like to do now is run you through a whole bunch of extra strategies 
that can fit in different context. We’re going to just lay them out in a list form. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
485 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
I hate giving lists, because I want people to actually get a chance to 
experience them as well.  
 
So, we’ll just go through a whole bunch of these at first then we’ll go back to 
the exercise process with the understanding that you can have your little list 
and you can see in the interaction I have right now what will fit. Does that 
make sense? 
 
It might be stuff you’ve already done, it might be some of the new stuff that 
we’re doing, but you now have some choice in terms of what’s the most 
natural entry point in terms of what we’re doing. Make sense? 
 
Some of this stuff has to do with framing and frame control as well. The first 
one, again depending on the context, is very good for when you’re the 
purchaser is basically knowing your bottom line.  
 
One of the reasons people get sort of strong armed into making poor 
decisions is they don’t know when it’s time to get out. It’s called the Sunk 
Cost Phenomenon in business. If you imagine a business that’s starting to 
fail so the business owners throw more money at it. They say I’ll make it any 
minute now, so they throw more money after it and more money after it.  
Eventually, they’ve invested so much money they think I may as well throw 
more in because I’m already sunk in. Gamblers do this a lot. You know they 
lose one round then they say okay, I’ll make it up on the next round. I’ll 
make it up on the next round. Eventually they’ve lost so much money it’s 
like, you know what, I’m in so much debt anyway I may as well go to the 
loan shark, just go crazy and this will be the one. So they start taking crazy 
risks because they’ve invested too much in it. 
Student: 
 
♦ What’s that called? 
 
Igor: 
The Sunk Cost Phenomenon. You’re sinking your cost into a sinking 
business or in a gambling thing. One of your greatest protections from that 
is to know what your cutoff rate is. In other words, I will go in for this. If I do 
not get this that’s it, I’m willing to walk away.  
 
If you want to practice this, the best place is like in the third-world countries 
where people still barter and haggle over goods, because the easiest way to 
go sell is to be interested. They give you a price and you go oh, well, and 
walk away. They go no, no, no, make me an offer. Then it comes a lot 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
486 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
easier because they know you’re serious about walking away. What you 
can’t do is pretend to walk away. Any ideas why? 
Students: Mixed responses. 
Igor: 
Right, for two reasons.  
1. Number one, if you’re not congruent with it, it doesn’t trigger anything 
off in them. They’re going ah, a city bugger. He’ll be back.  
 
2. Number two, if you are back who has the stronger position?  
 
Students: They do. 
Igor: 
This is something where you know absolutely I’m going to walk away and at 
that point it creates a lot of, again, pressure to the person, depending on 
how much they want to have that sale. Does that make sense? It’s kind of 
like what happened to Gregory who bought the car. 
Gregory: Yes. 
Igor: 
That’s kind of what happened to you. 
Gregory: I was going forget it. I’m done with this place. 
Igor: 
Absolutely. He was done. He was literally finished. You can see the emotion 
when he’s talking about it. It was clear and they saw we’ve got a big fat 
paycheck walking out the door. Well, we can do something. We can throw in 
extra pieces and whatever and it works out for both parties that way. Make 
sense? 
 
That’s just kind of a general strategy to have in the back of the mind. Again, 
you’re using this now primarily to build pressure on the other people, but of 
course it can be used as a defense mechanism too. 
 
In terms of the offers you’re making, you know the Scarcity Principle. Think 
about ways of making it scarce. In other words, it could be limited in time, 
there could be limit in quantity, it could be limits in access or it could be 
limited by price. In other words, they can only have this price for a certain 
time or it’s so expensive that only a few people can have it. 
 
Someone the other day mentioned to me that a friend of theirs used to sell 
to the Amish community and if you give them two virtually identical 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
487 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
machines and one is like a $100 and the other one is $500, they’ll buy the 
$500 machine because they think price is quality. Actually, it can bear out. 
 
There was an interesting thing like that that happened as well I think in the 
UK. A guy makes a new perfume. He used to work for one of the big 
perfume manufacturers and decided to do it on his own. His strategy is I’m 
going to beat them on price. So they go into the supermarkets and his 
perfume is half the price or a fraction of the price of everyone else’s, but no 
one buys it. 
 
They’re about to take everything off the shelves, because a supermarket’s 
shelf value is prime real estate. So he says no, no, just give me one more 
week. He takes all the items off, repackages them and gives it a new name. 
The scent is the same; the only thing he does different is he triples the price 
or something like that so it’s on the same league as the other ones. The 
sales go through the roof. 
 
So price and the whole scarcity thing evolves value, which means that you 
want to be very careful with that really dirty four-letter word beginning with 
“f” – free. Free tends to devalue things.  
 
Now free has other advantages, it can create attraction and people can get 
a taste of something, but they will de-value whatever it is they got for free. It 
will suddenly not be worth very much anymore. By extension you risk having 
your own ideas or things not being worth very much anymore.  
 
So sometimes, even if it’s not a money tree value in terms of what you’re 
doing, you may want to put a price or a worth on what you’re offering in 
terms of effort, commitment, what it takes to get the secret and so on. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Here’s another way of using social proof as a way of kind of formatting 
people’s minds. It works best when it’s mentioned casually rather than too 
obviously because again, if it’s too obvious it gets analysed, but if you 
mention at how other people respond. 
 
Like someone in the class went into the car showroom and they notice he’s 
looking at a car. They go oh, yeah, I see you’re looking at this car. A lot of 
people have bought this car. They love it. We can’t keep it on the lot. They 
just keep driving out. So what does that imply? There is a sense of scarcity, 
a sense of social proof. In other words, other people are doing it. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
488 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
A great example of this was one of these infomercials late at night. They 
used to say something like call now. Our operators are standing by. Call 
volume was okay. Then they changed the saying. Call now and if you don’t 
get through please call back, because an operator will take your call as 
soon as they’re available.  
Student: 
Scarcity. 
Igor: 
There’s scarcity and social proof, isn’t it? In one what’s the mental picture? 
There are all these people with phones twiddling their thumbs while 
tumbleweed starts floating down the benches. In the other you’ve got people 
crazily picking up phones going oh, my God, I better call before they’re all 
gone. Or, everyone is doing it, I better be one of those people too. 
 
I mean who’s seen those adverts, nine out of 10 cat owners prefer this and 
all that sort of stuff? They’re all social proofing. They’re all saying this is 
normal. This is customary.  
 
This is important. This is to do with the mental picture that you’re painting for 
people and you have to be very careful what that mental picture is, because 
that will be the social proof element that people will follow along with. Here 
are some examples. 
 
If you present an advert, your message can be in spoken form too, which is 
in the negative, for example, there’s an ad in one of the national parks in the 
U.S. saying please don’t steal parts of the Petrified Forest, giving you 
reasons and so on, when they presented those plaques in the Petrified 
Forest theft actually went up. 
 
Think about it. What’s the mental representation? What is the picture put 
inside someone’s mind? It’s people taking stuff. Oh that’s a good idea. All 
right then. It gets worse. 
 
I’m not sure if it was a power company or a water company, but anyway 
they decided to reward people who were consuming energy efficiently 
versus over consuming energy. So to the people who were over consuming 
they’d say you know you’re over consuming. You should consider maybe 
cutting down for the environment and so on. 
 
The irony is the people who were consuming economically they’d send them 
a little thank you note saying you’re in the most thrifty category. Well done. 
Congratulations. You’re saving the planet. You’re using a lot less energy 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
489 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
than anyone else. Guess what happened? Their energy consumption went 
up. 
 
Think about the mental image that they put inside their minds. Other people 
are using more than you. That’s essentially the message that they’re saying, 
isn’t it? Other people are taking stuff. They’re getting an advantage. All right, 
I’ll take some too. Everyone else is doing it, I’ll do it too. Do you see how 
that works? 
 
So you want to be careful with social proof. You want to make sure that the 
mental picture you paint inside of people’s minds is that the behavior you 
want is something that most people are adopting. Does that make sense to 
you guys? 
Student: 
It’s really true. As a minister and I’ve had other ministers come to me, 
they’re preaching on the Ten Commandments. Thou shalt not steal Thou 
shalt not commit adultery. What happens is within their congregation those 
behaviors actually increase and come out. It’s really bizarre, but it’s the 
truth.  
Igor: 
To some respect the rule is very simple to follow; when you present a 
message, present the message in terms of behavior. You want to paint a 
word picture of how you want people to respond not how they should not 
respond.  
 
If you say don’t steal from the Petrified Forest what are you really saying? 
What is the image? Take stuff and walk away, right? If you say thank you for 
conserving the Petrified Forest, thanks to people like you the forest can 
remain in pristine condition for eternity, do you see what happens? Go 
ahead. 
Student: 
I just thought of this funny thought, because of the Petrified Forest example 
and taking things. Apparently in the Volcanic Park in Hawaii, maybe it’s true, 
but maybe it’s just a rumor they use, because they tell you if you take the 
rocks then something terrible happens to you eventually and people send 
the rocks back continuously. The rangers tell you this and I assume it 
probably stops people from taking the rocks. 
Igor: 
I pretty much would agree with that. I mean there may well actually be a 
local legend about that, but I can also see people taking it back. Think about 
it. You just taking a little bit of rock and you’ll have an accident for whatever 
reason. You’re like maybe it’s the rock. Quick, send it back, back to Hawaii, 
because people have the association inside their mind, right? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
490 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
This brings up a real important point. I’m a military guy. I’ve been a 
squadron commander and work a lot with kids 12 to 18 and other people. 
How many times do we always say now don’t forget… Okay.  
 
So what I’m constantly saying is put your commands in positive vocabulary, 
because we don’t hear the word “not”. We have to think of that item first 
before we can negate it. So I’m always saying okay, what do you really want 
them to do? Remember. So remember to pack your lunch. Remember to do 
this and that rather than to forget things. It’s a pet peeve, positive 
vocabulary. 
Igor: 
Right. Do you want to come up here as well? Whilst he’s coming up, the rule 
actually goes a little bit further than that. Well, actually, I’ll add something in 
a moment. Let Jeff do his little thing. 
Jeff: 
I was just going to add a point, which is on these topics of social proof and 
scarcity. A friend of mine who’s a therapist has an online profile and every 
time you send him an email you get a response that says I get a lot of 
emails every day, but I do get to my emails and every email is very 
important to me. It creates this frame of not only scarcity and social proof, 
but when you get that response back you place a value on it which is higher 
as well. 
Igor: 
Exactly. In fact, this is one of things we talk about when we train 
hypnotherapists in terms of filling their practice. It’s something I used to do 
as well. When people ask for an appointment it’s like all right, come in a little 
bit later in the day, because that day is already starting to fill up pretty 
quickly. It’s just one of these things to create the perception of scarcity, the 
perception of desire and then people start coming in as well.  
 
Think of it in terms of our seminars here. We sell out our seminars. It 
happens, by the way. It happens easier each time or more quickly each 
time, because people know that once the seminar is sold out that’s it. You’re 
not coming to the seminar.  
 
We’re not going to put an extra chair in the back. We can’t, partly because 
of space reasons, but what’s the expectation? They’re busy. They’re 
popular. You better book it as soon as you get it, which means the next time 
the seminar is presented people will sign up more quickly. 
Jeff: 
There’s an added benefit, which is when I send emails out to people that are 
discretionary I won’t include him on that. So he gets less junk mail as well. It 
keeps his inbox being very efficient. It’s pretty neat. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
491 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Perfect. The general principle here and the way I like to think of it is just 
paint the picture in the mind that you want them to act out. Whether it’s a 
feeling, a behavior or a thought, you’ve got to paint that picture in their mind. 
 
Let me ask you this. Let’s say you’re using fear as a motivator. That’s not 
necessarily the most ethical one, depending on how you use it, but 
sometimes it’s actually very useful. Some people need to be pushed away 
from something, right? 
 
There’s actually a little research here. You’re a student and you get a flyer 
about tetanus vaccination and all the evils of tetanus and how terrible it is. 
On the back of it there’s a little coupon so you can go to your local medical 
office and get yourself a vaccination, but all the flyer is talking about is the 
evils of tetanus, how bad the disease is, how dangerous it is and so on. 
What do you think the response is? 
Student: 
Low? 
Igor: 
It’s pretty low. The problem with fear is people shut down. They’ll start 
having defense mechanisms. Oh, that won’t happen to me. That can’t be it 
and so on. The only time it’s useful to use a negative propellant, whether it’s 
fear, anger or something like that is if you build into it specific steps to get 
out of it. In other words, they’re left in a place where the fear is no longer 
necessary. The anger is no longer necessary and so on. 
 
So, for example, the one where the response rates went through the roof is 
the same flyer with the same message about how bad tetanus is, but at the 
end there was a section that talked about the steps you can take to prevent 
it. Step one, call this number. Make an appointment. Have a vaccination. At 
the end of the vaccination you’ll be safe, basically. 
 
Now it’s nothing that people couldn’t conclude for themselves, is it? It’s 
talking about the evils of vaccination and at their back end there’s a little 
number to vaccine control center or something like that. So they could have 
worked that out for themselves very easily, but by giving specific steps it 
allows the fear to channel through into actual action. The same is true of 
any internal pressure.  
 
Do you recall the airline example I just gave you? Remember, I’m building 
the pressure. If I just leave the pressure there sometimes a resolution will 
pop out, but if it doesn’t I have to give them specific steps of how to resolve 
the pressure. They pretty much realized after an hour or so of bouncing 
around there’s only one way to get rid of me, right? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
492 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I wasn’t being obnoxious so that they would ignore me on principle. I was 
being very reasonable so they can’t just ignore me. They can’t justify saying 
oh, that was a bad person. We’ll get security on him. That’s one of the 
airlines favorites currently. Oh, I’m sorry sir. You’re violating airline security. 
You can’t come on the airplane. I’m angry? All right. Thank you for making 
me this way.  
 
It’s a very standard approach, by the way, right now; hence, you’re being 
very reasonable though. There’s no justification for that. They can’t bring 
their one ace in the hole out. The pressure is still building. They know I’m 
not going to go away, so either their going to have to spend the next three 
hours dealing with the pressure which they don’t want or they let me 
through. 
 
I’ve given very specific clear steps. All I want is for you to go into the 
system, manually check me in, give me a luggage tag for my suitcase so 
that the lady at the counter can take it and then I can go through and we’re 
all happy. It’s a very clear set of steps, isn’t it? Do you see how that works? 
 
Again, notice how there is a representation inside their mind. There’s a 
mental picture I’ve drawn which is very precise. I may even have had 
somebody to look, all you have to do is get on your machine, manually 
check me in, print me a boarding pass, give me a tag for my luggage, then I 
can give the suitcase to the lady over there, I’ll walk through and we’ll all be 
happy.  
 
Notice how I’m acting out their behaviors for them as well. So, I’m really 
building up a representation inside them of what they need to do to resolve 
the pressure. Go ahead. 
Student: 
 
♦ Were you wearing a suit? 
 
Igor: 
I was actually, yes. Is this useful stuff?   
Student: 
 
♦ How do you feel that would have unfolded if you were not 
wearing a suit? 
 
Igor: 
How would I feel it would have unfolded if I was not wearing a suit? Well, it’s 
hard to say. If I was not wearing a suit, I was doing this anyway, I would 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
493 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
have to with my mannerisms still portray that I belong in that section. I think 
it would have probably gone in a similar way, but it would have been a little 
bit harder at first to be taken seriously. Luckily, I wear suits a lot so I didn’t 
have to think about that.   
Student: 
 
♦ Could you have gotten there any faster? 
 
Igor: 
Possibly, if I had found the person with the authority quicker. My mistake 
was I had an inkling that the person I was sent to originally could help me, 
but there was a bit of an obscurity around who could actually do the work 
and no one was really talking that much.  
 
I guess if I was doing this whole thing again, I would initially create more 
leverage to get the person who can actually do this and then once I had that 
then I might get a quicker response, but I don’t know. Honestly, who knows, 
right. 
 
Let’s go over here first then we’ll come on. 
Student: 
I had a similar problem. 
Igor: 
Is it a longer one? 
Student: 
No. 
Igor: 
It’s good exercise for all of us. 
Student: 
I had a similar problem. I live in Marina Del Rey and I work from home. I 
went to the counter at a gourmet hamburger place there. A lot of high-end 
people go in there. This is an area with movie studios and so forth who go 
there. I come in there. I dress casual. I won’t go near a suit anymore. I have 
my jeans and a nice colored shirt on. I have my keys on my ring.  
 
I go in there, sit down, place my order and I’m waiting for it. They have two 
TVs in there, one is on the sports channel and one is on CNN. I’m watching 
CNN and I’m really into what the guy is saying. I can’t hear anything, but I’m 
just reading the closed captioning.  
 
All of a sudden this girl comes over and she has this shirt that says the 
counter. This guy comes over and I’m thinking he’s a patron. I could catch 
him out of the corner of my eye and he starts moving stuff on my table. He’s 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
494 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
encroached onto my territory. Hello! I got pissed, okay? I just said excuse 
me what are you doing this is my table.  
 
Then he comes out, straightens himself up, stands up really tall, because he 
was bent over before and said I work here. I said well, I’m a customer here. 
I’ll bottom line it for you. I said look, I don’t know who you are. I’m thinking 
that you’re going to move tables together, because the tables were really 
small tables. You’re moving salt shakers and other stuff on my table and 
you didn’t say excuse me? The first thing is you didn’t identify yourself. So 
I’m thinking it’s a customer. 
Igor: 
Do you notice the reasonableness? He’s building up the whole sense like 
I’m being reasonable. I’m being reasonable. I’m being reasonable. You’re 
not. Do you see the pressure building there? Carry on. 
Student: 
So every time he would pass by he would give me a look. Later on he 
comes over to me. Sir, is there anything I can help you with? Do you need 
anything else? By this time I have my order, I’m working on eating my 
burger and sweet potato fries. He’s being really nice. But, when I left, 
because there are a lot of big windows, I took the way so he could see me 
drive by in my SL and I had my top down.  
Igor: 
Right. 
Student: 
So the next time I go in there… 
Igor: 
You reframed the whole situation. 
Student: 
He’s like the manager there, the day manager, next time he’ll remember me 
and attach me to the car. 
Igor: 
Right and give you extra service. 
Student: 
It shouldn’t be a big deal, you should treat everybody the same. He should 
identify himself if he’s going to come up and start shuffling tables and stuff. 
Igor: 
Remember we talked about this the very first day? Status makes a 
difference, right? 
Student: 
Yeah. 
Igor: 
All these symbols of authority they make a difference. They shouldn’t, I 
agree. But they do, it’s the world we live in and if you’re going to stack the 
deck in your favor then use these things. If you don’t want to stack the deck 
in your favor you can do it, absolutely, you just know that you have to do 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
495 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
other things to make up for potential losses in people’s perceptions, shall we 
say. Make sense? 
 
One last one and we’ll just carry on then. 
Student: 
This is a comment not a question. That’s for you, actually. 
Igor: 
All right. 
Student: 
I just want to share. You triggered something for me about, were you 
wearing a suit; that question. I saw a study and it’s all about frames and 
frame control and how automatic our responses are. It’s insidious. You think 
you’re thinking clearly, rationally or unbiased, but we are so biased it’s 
incredible.  
 
In Toronto, my home town, there was a study where they took a gentleman, 
very good looking, very fit, in an athletic outfit where they were able to see 
his physique. The trick was he forgot his glasses. He tried to get a phone 
number from his cell phone. He couldn’t see the number and he was to ask 
women if they would help him. 
 
When he was wearing his athletic outfit the compliance was about 90%. 
Nine out of the 10 said yes, sure, I’ll help you find your number. They then 
put a fat suit on him like one of those Samaria things with a constructions 
worker’s outfit and the compliance dropped down to three out of ten, three 
percent. The content was identical, but the context and frame was different. 
 
Then they kept the fat suit on and put him in an Armani suit with a gold 
watch and the compliance jumped up to 80%. That was a shocker for me, 
but the frame control and just how if you’re not getting the result you really 
do have to check in. What are the loops and the programs running? They’re 
insidious. It can be devastating at times. 
Igor: 
Really, the best place to find where these frames or these hidden frames 
occur is inside your own mind, right? When you see a certain type of 
individual without even knowing them, say a construction worker is a little 
over weight. Ask yourself, if he came up and talked to me right now, how 
would I feel about that or if he asked me for a favor versus that person in the 
suit over there or the police office or someone else?  
 
You can kind of test your own biases that way as well and hopefully 
overcome some, but, by the way, some of these biases are also useful. 
Some of these biases can save your life. So I wouldn’t necessarily say you 
challenge everything. You just go with where you go and then if it becomes 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
496 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
a problem you get to challenge yourself to I guess, become a better and so 
on. Make sense? All right, let’s get back to the list.  
 
Is this useful, by the way, guys? The thing about these things is they’re little 
mini strategies you can just weave into other things that you’re doing so 
they’re easy to get through. 
 
So we talked about the whole idea of reinforcing the positive messages. 
Another corollary of this idea of the mental picture you’re putting in people’s 
minds is how many choices do you give people? If you give people a vast 
amount of choices what’s the mental image? Is there a specific behavior 
they need to engage in? 
Student: 
No. 
Igor: 
Right. If you give them one choice or a small selection of choices it’s a lot 
easier for them to understand. Oh, I get it. This is where I need to go. It 
choices become easier, depending on the individual. Some people like more 
choices, some fewer, but as a rule the fewer the choices the easier it is to 
create persuasion.  
Student: 
 
♦ Can you give an example? 
 
Igor: 
Sure. You can do this if you go online, for example. Go online for like a 
product search. You’ll see some Websites that have millions of products 
and you’re just going through them going which one do I go for? Some 
Websites will have one or maybe two versions of what it is you’re looking 
for. They’ll have a nice clear representation. It’s like oh, that’s exactly what I 
want. Click, bye.  
 
Otherwise what do you normally do? This one has like 50 different versions. 
I’ll click on this and I’ll click on this one and I’ll click on this. Oh, my God, 
there are so many things. I don’t know what to do. You know what, I’ll think 
about this tomorrow. Has anyone done that before? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Did that help you? This is not just an online thing. This works in terms of 
interaction as well. You know, what would you like to do? Would you like to 
eat here? Would you like to eat there? Would you like this? Would you like 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
497 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
to see this movie or see that movie? We can go to the theatre or we can do 
this. Do you see how giving too many choices is like it gets overwhelming. 
 
So the simple answer is to give a simple choice like would you rather have 
this or that. Remember the contrast? We work great on contrasts. Would 
you like to go to an Italian restaurant or a steak place? Would you like to go 
to the movies or the theatre? Would you like to watch this movie or that 
movie? 
 
Those are very simple choices, which also set you up of course for a double 
bind very naturally. See how that works? That’s, incidentally, one of the 
reasons why double binds work so well, because to break the double bind 
requires more mental effort than is often worth investing at that point in time. 
 
All right, let’s cover the other principle now, the idea of contrast. We’ve 
already talked about frames are the reference points against which people 
will contrast things, right? Fair enough? So what are you contrasting a 
product to when it’s free? You’re contrasting it to things that are free. What 
things are normally free? 
Student: 
Cheap stuff. 
Igor: 
Cheap stuff, worthless stuff. 
Student: 
Low quality. 
Igor: 
Right. You can go rummage in the bins and get stuff for free all you want. 
But, seriously, that’s the category you just opened up, isn’t it? 
Student: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
I’ve seen some people do this. I’m not sure if there’s any research on this, 
but I’ve seen people put a dollar value on something and they say for you 
zero dollars. So it’s not free, it just cost you zero dollars. Let’s say the real 
price is $100, we’ll discount $100, price to you zero dollars. 
 
You’ll see this a lot, for example, on things like Amazon and stuff like that. 
When there’s shipping it comes free. It’s not free shipping. You’ve paid for 
the shipping, but they’ve given it back to you. Isn’t that nice of them? 
Student: 
It’s rebated. 
Igor: 
It’s rebated, exactly, but now the shipping is worth something, isn’t it? You 
don’t expect the shipping. It’s like well of course it’s free shipping. It’s free. 
You’ve paid for the shipping. It’s just they were so nice to you, because you 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
498 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
did a good order, you’re a good customer, they’ve rewarded you for being a 
good customer by paying you back. Do you see how that works? 
Student: 
For $25 you get the super saver. 
Igor: 
Right, but then when you actually get the receipt it does not say free. 
Student: 
Right. 
Igor: 
It says you’ve paid for it and then we’ve paid you back. It’s a specific point 
that’s being made. They may have done it out of accounting purposes, but 
actually, psychologically speaking, it’s very sound.  
 
What else can you contrast things against? If you’ve got a product or 
service that is difficult to contrast, you’ve got to find something else to 
contrast with it so, for example, the paper industry; the printing industry. 
Well, one printer prints, the other printer prints. They’ve got the same kind of 
paper, the same kind of card. They print. You’ve got to find something else 
to contrast it against.  
 
It might be something symbolic. For example, you do it faster, you did it 
better or that the service is somehow better. It’s a question of what you 
contrast. Now this is where it starts getting to a very interesting territory.  
 
For example, if I showed you, maybe online somewhere, a perfume that 
costs $1,000, who here would be interested in buying it? A thousand dollars, 
who’d actually pay for that, anyone?    
 
What if I could show you a place where for the next couple of weeks only 
you can buy exactly the same perfume, same make, same model, 
everything, for $10? Who’d get that one? But you don’t even know what it is. 
You don’t even know if it smells any good or what it looks like, right? Why 
has that perfume become more valuable?  
 
Who here is in the habit of buying a $10 perfume box by the way, anyone? 
On the streets there’s a little…Yeah, good. Armani $10, you know this $10, 
Polo $10, right? 
Student: 
Igor? 
Igor: 
Yes. 
Student: 
In downtown LA they have the garment district. They have the merchants 
and they’re carrying name-brand colognes. They all have like a sampler 
bottles, smaller bottles for $10. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
499 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
They sell little sampler bottles for $10, right. 
Student: 
So they sell the top fragrances for $10 along with the bigger bottles. 
Igor: 
They’ll sell sampler bottles for $10 along with the bigger bottles too. 
Student: 
So you know what you’re buying when you go in, because I’ve bought 
those. I’ve bought the $10, but I know I’m buying quality because they also 
have the regular size. 
Igor: 
So he’s buying the $10 little bottles, because he’s comparing it to the $100 
big bottle. Do you see the contrast that’s going on here? A normal sized 
bottle of perfume if it’s $10, the contrast is what are other things that are 
$10? What are other perfumes that cost $10? Well it’s very low quality or at 
least that’s our perception.  
 
We don’t even know. We haven’t tried it yet, but it’s a nice eristic, which 
more often than not might be true. As a rule things that are cheaper tend to 
be low quality, as a rule. It’s not always the case.  
I’ve paid a lot of 
money for shirts and suits that are made really poorly and very little money 
for things that are of amazing quality.  
 
Do you want to come, if it’s a little longer thing? 
 
So the key we want to be thinking about here always is what are you 
comparing and contrasting to. Do not let the customer or the person you’re 
influencing create the contrast themselves. Give them the contrast that they 
should be referring against. Go ahead. 
Student: 
When I lived in Thailand you’d go into the tailor and you’re buying top-
quality cloth for your suits. The price compared to the currency exchange 
rate between the U.S. dollar and the Thai baht. Then you come back home 
and people are like where’d you get that suit? Now I mean you’re talking 
about a $500 suit and you paid almost next to nothing compared to the Thai 
currency. 
Igor: 
Yeah. I’ve bought better suits in Thailand than I’ve paid, I don’t know, $800-
$900 for in the UK Absolutely, right? 
Student: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
So, again, does it devalue it? No. So, again, it’s a question of the contrast 
that you’re creating. Is it starting to make sense a little bit now? Let me give 
you another example of how contrast can work. Are there any real estate 
agents here? This may be of use to you guys.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
500 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
I’m going to be moving to the Bahamas for a while, for three months or so, 
and I’ve been looking for a place to stay. The first place I’m looking for is 
maybe some hotels that have long-stay arrangements and the price 
category is pretty high. We’re talking about $6,000 to $8,000.  
 
So I’m going like that’s a lot for a month, right? Then I say okay, I’ll look at 
more of a budget accommodation and suddenly I’m finding these really flea-
bitten hotels for like $2,000. It’s like I don’t know.  
 
So what are my expectations right now? It has set a contrast, hasn’t it? In 
other places I wouldn’t even consider anything like that, I’m thinking like 
wow, maybe I have to bump up what I’m expected to pay.  
 
Finally, I find an apartment in a complex. It’s gorgeous. It cost just a little bit 
more than the flea-bitten motel. I’m thinking like wow, that’s a bargain. It still 
costs around $2,500-$3,000, but now it’s a bargain because I’m referring it 
or comparing it to other things. Make sense? 
 
One of the classic contrasts that people make in terms of like the real estate 
thing might be, you take them to a really expensive house that no one will 
ever buy and it looks okay. Then you take them somewhere which is worse. 
Then you take them to the place they really want and it’s like I love it. I have 
to have it.  
 
Do you notice the internal pressure again being built up by contrast? Always 
consider what is it you’re contrasting to what, right?  
 
When you buy one of my courses what is it you’re buying? Is it the course? 
No, because that’s just a number and then you’re comparing that number to 
someone else’s courses number. What you’re comparing it against is the, I 
don’t know, over $100,000 that I spent in learning how to do this stuff. Who 
here wants to spend $100,000 on becoming really good at hypnosis, 
anyone? 
 
You’d pay $100,000? All right. Guys, we’ll have a chat afterwards about the 
lovely mentoring program, the extended version. But, seriously, if you can 
get access to similar knowledge in a shorter timeframe isn’t it worth paying 
$1,000 for or $2,000, depending on the amount of content? So again, we’ve 
got to present the contrast, otherwise what are we justifying? 
 
Another way of doing a contrast is the results. How many of you, for 
example, have been on a diet plan of some sort like Jenny Craig, Weight 
Watchers or something like that? You pay tons of cash to eat these special 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
501 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
foods and so on and the minute you stop you go right back to where you 
were again, right? 
 
Now, if I was a hypnotherapist I could say right. You can do one method, the 
Jenny Craig method, which is not just the price you pay to join the program 
which is a couple of hundred dollars, but then you have so many food things 
which on average a week is this much, per month is this much. So over the 
next six months you’ll probably be paying, I don’t know, $2,000-$3,000. 
 
Or, you go into our weight control program for $1,500. It’s over a six-month 
period. You have so many sessions and we’re going to build your self-
esteem. We’re going to do your history. We’re going to do this. You’re going 
to feel fresh and new and you can eat whatever you want. You’re body will 
naturally go ideal. 
 
Suddenly, $1,500 is not so much for a hypnotherapist is it? But if I started 
off by saying, if someone says so how much is your weight loss session 
cost, $1,500, ha. Do you see what we’re doing here? That’s one of the 
reasons why, as a rule, when it comes to things like price you never 
represent the price on something until after you’ve established the value 
and the contrast points.  
 
Student: 
It wouldn’t work on me if the hypnotherapist himself was really overweight.  
Igor: 
So he’s saying it would work on him unless, of course, the hypnotherapist 
was overweight, in which case it wouldn’t. Then it goes back to what we 
talked about before, right? What are the hidden assumptions people come 
in with and we have to know it. 
 
I know hypnotherapists that have been chain smokers and do stop smoking 
sessions and I’ve asked them the exact same questions. How can you be 
congruent with that? They go oh, well, you know it’s a personal choice thing, 
yada- yada. He did okay. He’s done quite a few stop smoking sessions and 
I’m sure he lost quite a few as well, because of the incongruity that was 
there. Does that make sense? 
 
So the rule of thumb is the more congruent you can you can be the better 
and I agree with you for that. Remember, being incongruous doesn’t mean 
that you’re doomed. It’s just that you’ve taken one of your advantages away. 
Just like not being in a suit doesn’t doom me in terms of getting what I need 
at the airport, it just diminishes my odds somewhat, so I’ve got to make it up 
in some other way. Does that make sense? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
502 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
Igor? 
Igor: 
Yes, sir. 
Student: 
Can I share just one quick thing? 
Igor: 
Sure.   
Student: 
It’s funny, one day I was at my dad’s shop. My dad has a car stereo shop 
and people come buy and he fixes things. He was there and this guy shows 
up in his brown truck. My dad tells me oh, could you help me? Could you go 
fix this thing? I’m a software engineer. I used to do that a long time ago, I 
don’t do that anymore. I’m like okay, fine. 
 
So, meanwhile, I start talking… 
Igor: 
Of course, he’s very enthused by the whole thing as you can clearly see. 
Student: 
Yeah, this is not really what I want to do. It’s like this young guy, so I start 
talking to him. Meanwhile, I’m setting the frame. I’m like okay, before I start 
on your car I want you to understand this is going to cost you something. 
We’re going to charge you this much an hour and I don’t really know what 
it’s going to take yada, yada, yada. 
 
Meanwhile, I’m thinking I don’t really know what I’m going to do on his car. 
I’m thinking I’m going to have to walk out there and try to figure this out. My 
dad has these expectations. 
Igor: 
Right. 
Student: 
I’m like okay, fine. So I go out there and meanwhile this other guy who 
works for my dad runs up there and he’s huffy. He gets under the car and 
he does whatever he does and he fixes the problem. It takes like no time at 
all. 
He gets up and he huffs and puffs and he leaves. He mostly did that 
because my dad was moseying over. My dad was going to do something 
and so they kind of wander off. They figure that’s the end of it.  
 
The guy is standing there and I said well, we fixed your problem really quick. 
Normally, we would have charged you like $85 an hour or something, but I 
will cut it down to like half an hour and, you know, just roll it down to like 
$40. Is that okay? He went oh yeah, that’s great. Thanks. 
Igor: 
He thinks it’s a great favor, right? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
503 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I go inside and I take the credit machine, swipe the card. They never quite 
figured it out. They were like miffed. I’m thinking yeah, I made money yet 
you did the work. 
Igor: 
Right.  
Student: 
It’s because I set the frame. 
Igor: 
Absolutely and the expectations. This is a very clear thing, right? So it’s 
really important. Remember, we talked about framing a lot yesterday? 
We’ve got to set the expectations. We’ve got to set where the value is. Who 
established the value, him or the person that fixed the car? You did, which is 
why he’s the one that gets paid.  
 
The person that fixed the car just did the work and that’s the key thing. Now 
doing the work of course is valuable, but then what’s the person who came 
into the garage going to think. Well, I guess the guy is just working there so 
I’m going to pay the guy who’s running the place, which of course is you 
because you’re the one that the same up very reasonably and so on.  
 
Do you see how these things work? Is this kind of useful? I don’t want you 
to think of it in terms of sales context; although, we’re going to be focusing 
on sales as a key influencing cycle today.  
 
It works the same way with ideas or getting your teenagers to do their 
homework, getting the little kids to go to bed, teaching something new or 
motivating someone to get up and sort their life out.  
 
The same principles constantly apply, which is what are they contrasting 
against. What is the framework that is the reference experience? What are 
the mental pictures they have inside their mind and what are they telling 
them in terms of what they should be doing. Where are the drives? Where is 
the pressure, that’s building up inside to drive their behavior and is there 
something in place for them to go towards? 
 
You know the saying someone is all dressed up and has no where to go? 
That’s the classic example. A lot of people I’ve seen are great influencers. 
They build the motivation and then go… Then people are all excited and 
they’ll go… You have to channel all that energy down somewhere. 
 
Magic Moments, what do you do with it? You’re building a lot of energy with 
it, emotional energy. If you do not channel it somewhere it dissipates. It 
disappears.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
504 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Has anyone ever done a little magic trick or a card trick or even a Magic 
Moment and then just left it like that? People will go all right… Wouldn’t that 
be fair to say that’s pretty much what happens? It’s your job to harness that 
mental energy and focus it on something and actually then it increases. 
When it’s focused it’s kind of like a flowering happens and people go wow, 
that’s really extra amazing, because now they have something inside their 
mind to cycle that into.  
 
Remember, emotions last 90 seconds maximum. So now they have 
something to cycle those emotions, to build it even further. It becomes a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. It becomes self-maintaining. 
Student: 
I’m a businessperson and so as you were talking about the concept of 
contrast and free, I think of industries like the music business and the 
newspaper industry where there’s a constant tussle to figure out how do you 
continue to charge people for something that they can now get for free. 
Igor: 
Right. 
Student: 
So there’s the proposition of how do you establish a value proposition and, 
to some extent, the music business is defaulted to trying to enforce this 
legal or moral obligation. 
Igor: 
Which can’t last forever, because basically you’re punishing your clients, 
right? 
Student: 
And it doesn’t work, yeah. 
Igor: 
Exactly. I mean if all you’re doing is punishing your clients well, it’s not 
great. I’m not saying that you can’t stop people stealing stuff and whatever, I 
understand that, but if everything is going down one road… 
 
A classic one is the music industry. Back in the beginning of the 20th century 
the original model for making money was people got up on stage, performed 
and you had some guy with a big cudgel standing outside the door and 
saying pay money if you want to hear. If you don’t then go away or you’ll get 
little Mr. Wood on your head and you won’t be very happy about the whole 
thing. 
 
Yes, it hurts, right?  
 
Then radio comes along and people are listening to music on the radio for 
free essentially. That starts destroying the whole live music venue thing and 
people are going oh, that will never take off, because they’ve got to come to 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
505 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the venue and so on, but then of course you have the performance rights 
societies, record sales are making it back and so. So you hear something 
on the radio, you want to buy the record so that you can listen to it at home 
and a new model emerged.  
 
Now, of course, they’re in the same tension area again. They’ve got to 
figure out a new model and it might be something like being part of a fan 
club, for example. That’s a great way of establishing value, isn’t it? Your 
favorite artist, the music is free, but you get to be part of this whole 
organization, this whole movement and that’s where the money is or 
something else. I don’t know. I’m not suggesting necessarily the result.  
 
The point is where is your thinking going? You’ve got to put your thinking in 
terms of what’s the contrast, where is the value and what are the behaviors 
that people are constantly have to reinforce inside their minds, right? 
Student: 
Yeah like bonus features on a DVD for instance.  
♦ Can we create value by adding something? 
 
Igor: 
For example. That’s exactly the right thing, right? 
Student: 
Yeah. 
Igor: 
You see any conundrum I think can be resolved as long as human beings 
are involved within it. It’s just a question of can you use the principles well 
enough so you don’t have to get stuck in the old. If the old model is not 
working, you’ve got to change it.  
If your sales process is okay, then there’s something there that you need to 
change and fix and the principle will show you how to evolve that. Hopefully, 
what we’re talking about now is just the same principles in action; contrast, 
the clear mental image, the different motivators like reciprocity, social proof 
and so on.  
We’re just finding different ways of tweaking it so it looks different, but it’s 
actually the same thing in action, isn’t it? The main reason for this is not just 
so much to have a huge lecturer like oh, here are 101 little bitty things you 
can do. It’s more so you start thinking about how can I structure my 
communication, how can I frame it so that it’s more persuasive.  
 
So we have some powerful tools for framing things, right? We’ve got the 
idea of values and using that as a leverage point. We’ve got the idea of 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
506 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
contrast so people understand the value of what you’ve got in a different 
way. We’ve got the idea of social proof, which is a kind of contrast, isn’t it?  
 
We’ve got the idea of reciprocity, which builds the desire to return. We’ve 
got the idea of the…what are the other influence ones. I’ve forgotten them 
now. Anyway, they’ll come back to me. 
 
The point is, you start focusing on these and saying how can I apply this 
and what is a principle that’s working here. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DVD 20:  How to Covertly Hijack Other 
People’s Conversations and Take them in the 
Direction        You Want Them to Go 
 
Igor: 
What we’ve been focusing on today in some respects is, shall we say, how 
to control conversation and how to direct it in a purposeful way. Think about 
it. We start off with things you can do inside of a conversation to build the 
pressure up so that the result you’re looking for will come out of it.  
 
We’ve just looked at a few ways and we’ll look at more later on, on how we 
can deflect the pressure. If someone is trying to control a conversation by 
imposing it on us the pressures respond to them and hence sucking us into 
their frame, their reality, their conversation rather than ours. Does that make 
sense? 
 
So there are many ways that we can do that in terms of breaking it down. 
We’ll look at it a little bit more as we go along. So at this point, let me ask 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
507 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you this first of all. How does it feel as the influencer to have someone 
interrupt you this way? Is it pleasant? Interesting? Different?  
We’ll start with Mickey.   
Mickey: 
I was going to say it reminds me of a sales book I once read The Power of a 
Positive No. It’s empowering when you get that no, because you don’t have 
to waste your time. You can move on to the next person. You don’t stand 
there and try and push through, you just move on. 
Igor: 
So the influencer is actually kind of useful, because as soon as you get the 
no, you just get okay, great. I haven’t wasted my time for an hour on 
someone that’s essentially not interested. I can move on, right? It’s 
excellent. 
 
I agree with you, by the way. You may as well get your biggest things out of 
the way earlier on so you actually spend your time on the people that are 
worth spending the time on. You only have so much time in the day, why 
waste it on someone that you could probably beat over the head and maybe 
give them a noogie just to get them to sign on the dotted line.  
 
Aside from the unethical business maneuvers that you have there, it’s not 
necessarily a healthy thing. If anyone offers you one, don’t take it. 
 
There are lots and lots of people that are perfect match for you, why waste 
your time on the others? You’re better off actually spending time finding 
people that might be interested than spending an hour on person that is 
more or less not. Do you see how that works? Go ahead. 
Student: 
And every time you say no you fall into a deeper and deeper hypnotic sleep. 
Every time you say no, deeper and deeper… 
Igor: 
It would definitely be interesting. I think he got me on that one. Do you want 
to come up as well? That’s pretty good. But isn’t that the Utilization Principle 
nicely and classically presented there? 
Student: 
I think that would solve the problem, which I have the question on. 
Igor: 
Okay. 
Student: 
It seems very difficult sometimes to break through the obstinacy that people 
set up.  
♦ In this exercise is that kind of the point?  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
508 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
I mean, at some point, no matter how much hypnosis you do if someone is 
totally just going to put up a wall you can’t really get past that. 
Igor: 
That’s the power of the positive no. The purpose here, aside from learning 
how to safeguard your own self in terms of not being put in a position where 
you’re being manipulated in a way that’s not useful for you, there are a 
couple of things here. 
 
First, you do not have to influence everyone you meet and you should not 
be in the mindset that you have to get everyone you meet. That is only 
going to lead you down that model, that road where you try too hard and all 
those things that have been working for you all week long go out the 
window.  
 
So you may as well start learning to differentiate between people who are 
just clearly not interested. Maybe you’ll get them some other time when 
they’re more open to the whole influence process.  
 
There are people who might be interested who just need a little bit of 
tweaking and let’s see where that goes. Maybe after a little bit of tweaking 
they fall into one way or the other and that’s fine or people who are 
interested it’s just they’re getting in their own way because of fears about 
making a bad decision, fears about if this is the right thing for them, not 
knowing what they really want.  
 
I mean these are the kind of people you really want, because there you’re 
really consulting them through an influence process where it’s like great, 
you’re looking for this sort of thing. It fits your life, it’s just you don’t 
necessarily know how to make that choice or make that move as easily and 
quickly as possible. Then you’re away. So being able to accept and know 
and go great, saved me a lot of time, is a very good thing to have. 
Student: 
For example, when we were in Seattle at the training last year. A buddy of 
mine lives there, so he was in the training. So, I and one other person were 
in his car in the parking garage where he had parked in the hotel. He lost 
the ticket to get out so they were going to charge him a lot more than it 
would have been if he had the ticket. We were trying to think well how can 
we get out of this so we don’t have to pay $30?  
 
Now the point I’m mentioning this is we were still kind of learning how to do 
this and we’ve seen some Darren Brown stuff so we kind of threw the whole 
shotgun effect at the parking attendant. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
509 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
He’s still there like this… 
Student: 
He pulled out some ticket that had nothing to do with the parking garage. It 
was from the hotel and he said well this is the one you’re looking for. He 
ended up saying well I’m a little confused. I don’t know what’s going on and 
we just kept bombarding him with different things. Then he ended up letting 
us go without paying anything. 
♦ The reason I mention that is how can we use a situation like that 
where you have the PCAT formula where it’s very step-by-step?  
 
♦ How do I approach a situation where if I want to get reservations 
at a restaurant and they say it’s full? 
 
Igor: 
The first thing you have to realize is you have to weigh the cost and the 
benefits. In terms of a $30 parking ticket, I wouldn’t spend the next three 
hours to build the pressure and put all the things in the right place so that 
you can avoid the payment. Or, you pay the $30, go home and make $1,000 
by ringing up a few clients and booking them in. 
 
That’s a decision point you have to make. It’s kind of like do you save $10 
on your TV set by buying it here or by going across town and buying it there. 
So there’s an equation there as well. 
 
Secondly, you’ve got to think really importantly about the ethics. For 
example, in this case it’s funny. You did a lot of distraction and confusion, 
which is fantastic, but you were justified. It wasn’t like you were trying to skip 
out without paying the ticket. It’s just that the ticket wasn’t there. It wasn’t 
like you were trying to pull a fast one. It’s just you’re getting something that 
would be a fair thing to do anyway.  
 
The key thing here is this. The method you kind of mentioned there tends 
towards, as you can see, could be used in an unethical way. Someone just 
signed on a contract or something, for example, that they’re really not 
interested in and so on.  
 
In the parking garage it’s a one-shot transaction anyway. No big deal. No 
skin off his nose. No skin off your nose. There are no consequences, but 
you want to be very, very careful about where you use these things when 
there is a consequence. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
510 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In the UK double-glazing salesmen have a worse reputation than used car 
salesmen have in the US, for example. Double-glazing for windows is like 
when you have two panels of windows to keep the sound out and the heat 
in. 
 
One of the reasons for it is in the ‘80’s they used all kinds of confusion 
tactics, strong-arm tactics, really bad shall we say processes to get people 
to buy these windows at inflated prices. Then, of course, they provided a 
shoddy product because it’s just basically a cash cow for them.  
 
The problem then is that the whole industry has distrust written all over it, so 
the ethical performers in that industry are screwed even nowadays. It’s left 
in the cultural psyche of the English people right now.  
 
Secondly, it’s a one-shot transaction. Once you get beyond that there is 
nothing left and that’s a consequence that you want to be very, very careful 
about. That’s just kind of the framework to put it within that. 
 
As for how to apply it in specific circumstances, what we’ve been showing 
you. I gave you the example of the airplane. You can use it for a simple way 
to get an upgrade, if it’s possible. Usually it’s the simplest things that will 
work. It’s ask for a simple favor, as it’s being performed tag something else 
on and wrap it up with some kind of justification that makes it easy and so 
on. 
Student: 
 
♦ Would the PCAT Formula be something you could apply to 
those situations? 
 
Igor: 
Of course, it is and that’s kind of what we talked with the Objection 
Destroyer and what we’re coming onto later on. The only reason for having 
these little piecemeal things today is sometimes it’s just too much effort to 
go through the whole process, you know the problem and creating some 
confusion or distracting the mind, then finding the resources and 
transforming it. Those are a lot of the processes that are involved.  
 
It’s great to have the sledgehammer, it’s great to have the shotgun, as you 
say, but you don’t want to be shooting everyone with a shotgun because 
sometimes just a water pistol is enough. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
511 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Student: 
I mean, I understood everything and now a lot is starting to come together 
and I’m getting confused about when I go on a situation what do I really do 
first. I’ve heard everything you’ve been saying it’s just not absorbing in. 
Igor: 
Don’t worry about that for the moment. As long you can understand the 
things as separate entities we’ll start bringing it together later on today, 
okay? 
Student: 
All right. 
Igor: 
Does that help? We’ll come back to this idea of how to break the influence 
cycle of you again later on. This is more an introduction to get your mind 
rolling in this way, partly because we want to figure out how we can direct 
the conversation. We need to be in control in order to do the conversation 
hypnosis, right? 
 
We all know, again, the stereotypical salesperson that goes yada, yada, 
cha, cha, cha, cha, cha, cha, chewing your ear off. Question…ah…maybe? 
Ah, cha, cha, cha, cha, cha. Well yeah, I guess cha, cha, cha, right? You’re 
not in charge of that interaction or that conversation.  
 
How are you going to introduce yourself in a way that you can maintain the 
contact so you can actually introduce your Dream Machine so that when the 
objections arise you have the space to destroy the objections and so on, 
wouldn’t that be interesting? 
 
Believe it or not, you have the essence of it in terms of what we just did. 
How did the transaction change when instead of being shall we say socially 
compliant so they are running the frame, they’re asking the questions, 
they’re asking for the favors and so on? You changed the frame yourself. In 
other words, you had the broken record or you set your own conditions like 
a pre-frame before you engage and so on.  
 
How did the interaction feel different or change compared to how you did it 
earlier on, any answers? Was it different? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Speaking to you as the subject, the person being influenced at this point, 
would you say you felt more empowered or less empowered the second 
time? 
Student: 
More empowered. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
512 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
More empowered. Would that be fair to say? Would it be fair to say then that 
once you introduced your own defense mechanism, whether it’s like saying 
not interested, not interested, not interested or presented your pre-frame 
sure, on the condition that…and so on, that something changed in your part 
as well as the influencer?  
 
Did you notice that for a moment they went…? Even though they know it’s 
coming, there was a moment where they had to reevaluate what’s going on. 
You’ve broken their script so to speak. Did everyone notice that? 
 
If you really want to notice this, this works great and is a lot of fun. Those 
annoying phone calls you get at night sometimes become a lot fun. The 
telesales people that call you up, I like to think of them as practice fodder. 
They’re going to annoy you one way or the other, so if you haven’t got time, 
fine, just hang up, it’s all good. 
 
I just remember one guy and I decided to try all kinds of these things out. I 
annoyed him so much he ended up doing crank calls for the next hour. He’d 
call, do some heavy breathing. I knew exactly who it was, because the 
timing wasn’t actually that distanced. So, rather than engaging; back to the 
whole idea of the broken record. Hello, wait, wait, wait I get it. I didn’t say 
anything. Click. Hello, wait, wait, wait. Click.  
 
 
I figured eventually he’s going to get bored and he did, but the point is you 
need to know a little bit of these things because if you go a little bit too far 
someone’s ego might get involved too. 
 
On that note aside, telesales people are great people to start playing with 
because they have a sales script. Often, if it’s a good sales script, you’ll 
recognize a lot of the patterns we’ve talked about already. More importantly, 
their mindset is fixed. Because they are stuck on a script, they cannot 
interact properly.  
 
The good ones will dissect the scripts and know how to feed it back and 
feed back into it smoothly and conversationally, but most people don’t stick 
around long enough to get good. All they can do is read and when you ask a 
question and say oh, hold on a second. A few minutes ago you said this. 
Could you remind me about that again?  
 
They’ll go ahh. Well, no. Actually sir, what I wanted to say was this. No, no, 
but you told me about this. That’s very interesting, tell me more about that. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
513 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
They’ll go ahh. But, sir, they’re really… They’ll try to get back onto their 
broken record constantly. See how often you can interrupt them until they 
give up. They will give up, by the way, eventually. They’ll go have a nice day 
sir. Click. 
 
The reason for this is because in order to direct the conversation, you need 
to be able to direct it. In order to direct it when you’re not in charge of it, you 
have to be able to interrupt it. Does that make sense? 
 
A moment ago you practiced interrupting a conversation, didn’t you? It was 
a more hard line to interrupt because we’re basically showing you how to 
not be caught in a social contract, but what if you are in that social contract, 
it’s appropriate to be in that, whether it’s a business meeting or you’re 
talking to your kids and so on.  
You don’t want to break the social contract at that point, but you still need to 
be in charge of the interaction, what do you do then? Isn’t that an interesting 
question to ask? 
 
This is where interruptions become important, but doing them elegantly is 
also important because when you interrupt you run the risk of being rude. 
When I say being rude I don’t mean just violating the social contract. You 
could harm someone’s self-esteem and then their self-defense mechanisms 
flair and that’s where the problems occur. The problem is not the 
interruption. The problem is if someone’s ego is bruised as a result of the 
interruption. Does that make sense?  
 
You’ve been interrupted a thousand times and haven’t cared. Some people 
are more robust than others so they can be interrupted more robustly than 
others and they won’t care. So the skill then is how do we start interrupting 
people and make it smooth and make it elegant so that people will just let 
you do it. It’s just a natural part of the conversation and then they realize 
that they’ve handed over the reins. Wouldn’t that be interesting? 
 
The first thing we want to do is we need to figure out how a conversation 
flows. Here are the three tonalities. Are you guys familiar with the idea of the 
three tonalities?  
Students: No. 
Igor: 
I’ll show you right now. This is true of the English language and most of the 
Western languages. This is not true of, for example, Asian languages which 
are tonal.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
514 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
In most Western languages we have essentially three tones.  
A questioning tone, which tends to go upwards and when someone talks 
upward with a questioning tone what does it do when someone has an 
upward tone at the end of each sentence? 
Student: 
It creates an expectation of response. 
Igor: 
It creates an expectation of response, does it not? It does two things 
actually, especially if it’s coupled with something nonverbal like a raised 
eyebrow. Do you see what I’m saying? Do you see how that puts the 
pressure on you now to respond? 
 
The other thing it can do is it could also make you sound as though you’re 
unsure of yourself. Or we could do this, or we could do that. It’s up to you 
really. Do you see how that works? 
 
So questions can put things into question or it can also signal to others that 
you are not sure about something or it can signal to others that you’re 
handing the responsibility over for the conversation.   
 
There are a couple of cultures, for example, New Zealand has a tendency to 
have an upward inflection at the end of their sentences. They’ll still have the 
three core tonalities, it’s just the statement charge, which is the second one, 
will tend to have a slight upward inflection. So the questioning tonality will be 
more emphasized in New Zealand. It’s just these little cultural things you 
have to get used to.  
 
A statement is usually a flat tonality. In other words, it begins and ends and 
all the way through, stays in the same place. Make sense? It’s just imparting 
information. Think of it this way. Think about reading a shopping list. I’m 
buying apples. I’m buying pears. I’m getting shoes. I’m buying a dishcloth. 
It’s not I’m buying apples I’m buying pears? Dishcloth. Are you crazy? Do 
you understand the statement tonality? 
 
The final one is called command tonality. It’s the tonality we reserve 
exclusively for giving instructions, orders or commands. Would you all stand 
up for me now please? Would you all stand up for me please? Do you see 
the difference? 
 
So, if I’m standing up here saying everyone please stand up? Please, stand 
up? Do you see how my questioning tonality fundamentally changes what 
I’m expecting? If on the other hand I’m saying everyone please stand up 
now. You feel that sort of oh, it’s time for me to do something. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
515 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So we want to be aware of these basic tonalities and then there are things 
we do in our interactions which do the same things. If I make a command or 
present a command who’s running the conversation, who’s in charge of the 
flow of it?  
Students: You are. 
Igor: 
I am, right, the person making the commands. If I present a statement, who 
is in charge of the interaction?  
Students: You both are. 
Igor: 
I’m still in charge whilst I am talking; however, if I present a command I can 
stop talking and I’m still in charge. If I present a statement I can stop talking 
and the other person is free to pick it up. Does that make sense? Do you 
see how that flows?  
 
If I ask a question, who is in charge of that interaction? The other person. 
You just handed the ball over to them and said you now take over for a 
while. Now, of course, in polite conversation we do this, don’t we? We 
involve people by saying I’ve played with the shinny ball long enough, you 
take it for a while. If they’re a polite conversational partner they’ll hand it 
back to you after a while, but if they’re impolite they will hold onto it and if 
they hold onto it, who’s in charge of the conversation? 
Students: They are. 
Igor: 
They are, right? So the rule of thumb you want to be following is if you’re 
just having a normal conversation, have the conversation. Hand it over. Ask 
questions. Go backwards and forward. It’s all well and good. However, if 
you that you’re about to start some kind of influence cycle, you want to be 
starting to get wary of the questions that you ask.  
Now, you can still ask questions, it’s just the nature of the questions need to 
change so that you’re not handing the responsibility over to the other 
person. You’ve all had experience of a conversation, haven’t you? Yet, 
you’ve been in charge of that conversation. Did I ask a question? Who 
answered it? 
Students: You did. 
Igor: 
I did. Who has ever been to the cinema? I love going to watch the movies. 
So, notice, I’ve asked the question, but am I expecting you to fill in yes, yes, 
yes, I’ve seen the film and I liked it. No, it’s very clear that when asked the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
516 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
question I’m going to fill-in the blanks myself. It’s called a rhetorical 
question, right? 
 
So if you’re going to start the influencing cycle and you’re asking someone a 
question, fill it in for them or if you’re not sure what the answer will be, give 
them options to select from which clearly still shows that you’re running the 
interaction at that point. Do you have a question? 
Student: 
Yes.  
♦ Would you ask a question with a downward tonality? 
 
Igor: 
Would I really ask a question with a downward tonality?  
Student: 
 
♦ How does that influence someone? 
 
Igor: 
How is that influencing you now? So yes, I would. But it would be relatively 
rare. I’d be more doing something else like embedded suggestions or 
something like that, okay? You have a question? 
Student: 
Yes, I do actually. What it seems to me, correct me if I’m wrong, when you 
ask a rhetorical question you’re asking a question, but it’s more in a 
statement frame. 
Igor: 
So the question here is if you ask a rhetorical question it seems more like 
you’re making a statement. You’re phrasing it like a statement, although 
you’re asking a question. 
Student: 
That sends a meta message to the other person. 
Igor: 
Which sends meta message or what I would call a sub communication to 
the other person. 
Student: 
Right and that kind of gives the clue to that person that it is a rhetorical 
question, at least that’s what I think. Also, the other thing I noticed earlier is 
talking back. Like when you have a child and the parents say don’t talk back 
to me, it’s because they issued a command. Instead of the child doing what 
they should have done they decided to continue with the statement. They 
didn’t get the meta message clue. 
Igor: 
Right. The second part of the thing is like sometimes, for example, an adult 
tells a child to do something and the child starts talking back. It’s almost like 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
517 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the child has missed that meta communication or the sub communication 
that says this is an instruction, carry it out and they’ve just carried right on 
the conversation frame. In other words, they’re trying to break that 
framework. Make sense? 
 
I agree with you. It’s either because they haven’t learned the tonality thing 
yet, because it is a learned response -- other cultures don’t have it – or they 
are trying to control the interaction again.  
 
Anyone here have children? It would be a big mistake would it not to believe 
that children are not very good at controlling interactions? You would be a 
parent at great risk to make that assumption.  
 
Do you want to come up, because these are good questions?  
Student: 
That was a command, right? 
Igor: 
Remember, I phrased it as a question, but it was an instruction, wasn’t it? 
Do you want to come up, because these are good questions? 
Student: 
 
♦ When you’re asking the rhetorical command if it’s a yes answer, 
is that also building the agreement frame? 
 
Igor: 
If you ask a rhetorical question yes, absolutely. So if you ask a rhetorical 
question and you’re expecting a yes, you’re basically sending out yes 
messages. You’re still looking for a nonverbal acceptance, except that, of 
course, you’re now running the interaction more. 
 
Something else I want to point out before the question comes. Just take 
your idea of the rhetorical question, you can still ask questions with 
questioning tonality provided that you run on again and change the tonality 
afterwards. 
 
A great example is what just happened here. Would you like to come up? 
That gives them a choice, doesn’t it? Because your question is great, it 
leaves no room for doubt that instruction has been given, hasn’t it?  
 
So, even though it sounds like a polite request, which by the way it is, I’m 
still following through with command tonality which then gives, as you would 
call it, a meta message saying an instruction has been given, please carry it 
out. When your mind is searching for the instruction, where is it going to go? 
It has to go to where the question was, because that’s the only instruction 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
518 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
which had a behavioral component. See how that works? Is this a good 
pace we’re working in at the moment? 
Student: 
You just answered my question. I was curious about doing that.  
♦ Are we really doing conditional statements?  
 
You know if you would do this, then whatever. 
Igor: 
You can do conditional statements, but it doesn’t have to be conditional 
statements? Would you give me a glass of water? It’s time to get to work. 
It’s not really a conditional statement. There’s no condition. I’m just making 
sure that my tonality is making it very obvious what’s just happened. Does 
that make sense? 
 
There is also something that happens when you present two ideas at the 
same time. The first one doesn’t get analyzed as much. It will tend to be 
accepted more directly.  
 
Do you want to come up for this? These are things you’re doing with your 
tonality, so in the written word and so on it’s not going to be quite as easy to 
follow through on that. 
Student: 
I’m trying to find ways to take notes and remember this easier. You’ve got 
the situation where you gave an instruction, that had the rising inflection and 
that all seems as normal. Then you follow with another portion of the 
verbiage that is what I call a justification.  
 
At this moment, you said can you get me a drink of water. Can you get me a 
drink of water? It’s time to get to work.  
♦ Is that also what they call a complex equivalence, because really 
those two things have nothing to do with each other? 
 
Igor: 
They have nothing to do with that. It will end up being either interpreted as a 
complex equivalent or a cause-affect. This means that or this because that. 
That will how it will be interpreted, but again, we’re not making a big deal out 
of it so it won’t as analyzed. The point they’ll be getting is like behavior is 
expected and then we’ll be getting to work as well. It doesn’t get analyzed 
that much. 
Student: 
Okay. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
519 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
Does that make sense? 
Student: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
The easiest way to get used to this, by the way, is just to do it. So what I’d 
like you guys to do is again just spend two minutes walking around and I 
want you to talk to each other. Ask the other person for a behavioral 
response of some sort with a questioning tonality and then just follow it up 
with an instruction tonality but a neutral statement. 
 
For example, it’s time to get to work. The walls are gray. The light is dark. 
The room is big. These are just neutral statements and then the behavioral 
response like can you life you hand up? This room is big. They don’t have to 
be related.  
 
Of course, in normal conversations there has to be some semblance of 
relate in terms of topic. For example, get a drink of water. It’s time to work. If 
we’re going to work together, the context allows for it, right? So, for the 
moment, we’re not going to take the context into account, but of course in 
normal conversations you always take the context into account. Does that 
make sense to you guys? 
 
Do you want to come up first and then yourself? Okay, quick one. 
Student: 
 
♦ Isn’t that just piggybacking suggestions? 
 
Igor: 
That’s exactly what it is. Now you’re using the Piggyback Principle to add 
your tonalities as well, so the question then becomes an instruction and you 
don’t lose control of the conversation. You’re not handing the ball over 
conversationally to someone else. 
Student: 
 
♦ It’s command tone or a statement, the second part? 
 
Igor: 
A command tone. It’s a command toned down. All right guys. Let’s spend a 
minute doing that just to get the feel for it and then we’ll come back. Off you 
go. 
 
[Exercise] 
Igor: 
Would it be fair to say that was relatively easy to do? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
520 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Students: Yeah. 
Igor: 
Right. It was quick. It was easy. It’s a no-brainer. It takes longer to talk about 
it than to actually do it. Did you feel the impact? You feel how you weren’t 
losing control of the conversation and vice versa. You weren’t being offered 
the control of the conversation. 
 
So what I want to do now is to start going through a couple of simple, but 
relatively sophisticated ways of interrupting a conversation that will allow 
you to take control of it and then start doing these things. 
 
If you’re aware of these things then you just continue talking. In other words, 
you start the talking and you carry on talking, you carry on talking. You ask 
a question, but then you answer it yourself. So you carry on talking. In other 
words, the continuity means you’re in charge for that conversation.  
 
If you have enough authority within that group, then your authority, the 
power you have in terms of your body language and so on, means that you 
can be silent…and people won’t interrupt…because they’re waiting for you 
to continue… 
 
Did you just see what happened there? That’s exactly what the whole 
Authority Principle is about, isn’t it? We had an interruption. By the way, 
thank you for doing that, because that was actually very useful.  
 
The whole point of the authority principle is like if someone interrupts you 
and you go ah! Who’s in control now? 
Student: 
They are. 
Igor: 
Right? Because I have reacted to it versus he said something. Now I could 
either override it like I haven’t heard it or I call it give them the look. Did you 
also notice the response I got, which was a classic appeasement gesture 
which is no, no, no, it’s okay.   
 
What is that doing? In terms of the social context, it’s re-establishing the 
relative relationships, which tell you again what’s going on. Is it a challenge 
happening or not? Do you see how that works? It’s just a natural response.  
 
However, if you’re not the authority figure then you can’t assume those 
pauses as much. You will do it in time. Initially you may have to run a little 
bit and then you can slow down a little bit and then you can take your time 
and then, of course, you’re letting people realize that although you’re taking 
your time it really isn’t their turn to talk yet. Do you see how that works? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
521 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Now we want to start interrupting their conversation so you can start that 
pattern moving. Does that make sense? 
 
The first method is very simple. It’s virtually invisible and it fits very neatly 
into the conversation. I call it the Agreement Extension. So you’re going to 
agree with whatever they said and then run on that theme further until you 
can start taking any direction you want. Does that make sense? 
 
So if someone is talking about sailboats and how wonderful it sounds then 
say you know you’re so right. You want to agree with enthusiasm. You’re so 
right! A sailboat is the most amazing thing. It’s line of racing. You see, now 
you can go in any other direction, but I’ve agreed enthusiastically. 
 
 
It’s kind of like the Yes, and Principle. You using whatever they’ve talked 
about and you’re going to build on top of that until you’re in charge of the 
conversation enough that you can start introducing any topic that you want. 
Does that make sense? 
 
Can I give you another one and then you can just practice in alternation. Is 
that okay? 
Students: Sure. 
Igor: 
The second one is very similar. It’s called the Agreement Reversal. It’s the 
Yes, but Principle. So you start agreeing. For example, they’ll talk about 
sailboats and say, yeah, sailboats are awesome, but do you know what’s 
really cool? Cooking, food, you’ve gone somewhere completely different, 
haven’t you. 
 
At this point, you may have a slight power struggle in terms of, you know, 
like but really man, we’re talking about sailing. If you do it with enough 
authority, with enough enthusiasm and the right mannerisms people will just 
go ah, ah, all right. You’ll see them kind of deflating into the new 
conversational thread.  
 
If they do start challenging, you’ll do what you kind of just saw happening 
here. You might give them a look or, really, as long as you keep talking and 
there’s a little more energy in what you’re saying then what someone else 
is, people go where the energy is in a conversation. 
 
If I interrupt like this and I say yes, but cooking so much better and the 
cheese on a sandwich is really good. There’s no energy in my interaction, is 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
522 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
there? Whereas, if I put more energy into it and said yes and do you know 
what’s even better than that? It’s cooking. I love to cook. Who doesn’t? I 
mean let’s face it. You’re creating something. You’re like a God in the 
kitchen! 
 
Notice how I’ve put more energy in it, more enthusiasm. It’s a lot harder. On 
which one would you rather interrupt me on, by the way? The first one, 
right? On which one would you find it easier to sensor me for trying to take 
over your conversation? 
Student: 
The first. 
Igor: 
The first one, right? So energy and enthusiasm kind of protect you. They 
keep you going. Does that make sense? So it’s called the Agreement 
Extension. You build on what they’ve said until you have enough control 
over the conversation that you can change the topic or you have the 
Agreement Reversal which has a little bit of a kind of mind bending moment.  
People will go where the hell do you go with that? It requires a little bit more 
energy to pull off, but it’s very eloquent when you do and it’s very easy to 
get into conversation. Are you cool with those two? 
Students: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
Quick question over here. 
Student: 
Just a quick add on to the Agreement Reversal. Some speakers say, if it’s 
possible, to avoid the but, because the but could create a defensiveness, 
but to say I agree with you and from this other point of view. 
Igor: 
Sure. So, when I say yes but, I don’t want to suggest that you have to use 
the yes but, as their words. It’s the principle there, right? So you can use 
yes, and something else. Here’s a classic way of creating the Yes, but 
Principle totally invisibly. Would you like that? 
 
Someone talks about whatever it is, let’s say sailboats again and you go do 
you know what? That’s just like cooking. It’s a classic Agreement Reversal, 
isn’t it? Just like…it’s agreeing, agreeing…cooking. What the hell?  
 
But as long as you carry on at that point, they’re going to give you a few 
moments to make your case. Like cooking, I don’t know. It has sails and 
wind going through it, who knows? But of course you’re not going to do that. 
Their mind is going to search for, what’s the relevance here? What’s the 
relevance? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
523 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Now if you want to be really sneaky, we may as well throw something out if 
you want to be really sneaky at this point. If you want to be really sneaky, 
change topic about three times. By the time you’ve changed to a third topic 
they won’t know how to get back to the original conversation. 
Student: 
You’ll forget what it was? 
Igor: 
Most people will forget what it was. Let’s put it this way. Have you ever been 
at the edge of a conversation and people are talking about stuff? Then they 
talk about something that you know about like a movie you’ve been to or 
something like that. You want to say your peace and you’re just waiting for 
the time to say it and the conversation moves.  
 
It moves on somewhere else and moves on somewhere else and then 
suddenly it’s your turn to talk and you’ll go ah, I’ve got nothing to say. 
Because my mind is still on the thing I wanted to say but the topic is totally 
different now. I know it’s going to sound awkward if I bring it back up again.  
 
Have you had that experience? Well that’s what you’re creating by changing 
topics relatively quickly early on in a conversation. Make sense? I think 
that’s enough for the moment.  
 
Just go out and have a conversation with people. Walk around; just two-
minute conversations. The initial person starts the conversation as having 
chat and whatever. Your job is to agree and extend, agree and reverse and, 
if you want, then you can just throw a couple of different changes of topics 
in there as well to cement in the fact that you’re now running the 
conversation. Easy. Okay, spend about three or four minutes doing that. Off 
you go. 
 
[Exercise] 
Igor: 
Did you enjoy that? 
Students: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
Isn’t it easier to take charge of a conversation then we originally thought, 
right? Would you like to have a way of actually increasing the effectiveness 
and the power of that? Would that be useful? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Only two of you want to do that? I can do that at lunchtime if you want. 
Would it be useful to have some methods to make that increasingly effective 
and powerful, yes? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
524 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
Can I borrow you as a volunteer seeing you’re up here already? So we have 
the idea of the Agreement Reversal or the Agreement Extension. So he’s 
chatting way and my job is to jump in and go oh, that’s right, absolutely and 
so on, right? What if you started using your body language to help with it?  
 
At the low level we have signals that it’s my turn to talk. Those signals are 
things like if you just start talking about your topic, it doesn’t really matter. 
People don’t need to hear you. 
Student: 
You know I really like going for walks. It’s so nice out there in the breeze. 
Igor:  
What am I doing? Hands opening, eyes opening, I’m leaning forward. These 
are all preparatory movements that are basically showing I’d like to add 
something to that. Does that make sense? 
 
In many conversations that would be enough. He’s talking about something 
and he’ll go…and he’ll probably pause and look and then it’s my turn to talk, 
right? It’s just a little nonverbal signal. It’s my turn. 
 
The problem is if someone is in their gear just running and running and 
they’re enjoying it, they like the sound of their own voice and oh, man, I’m 
the marathon man, I can keep going forever, this turns into…then it’s 
like…all right, keep talking. I’ll just wait here.   
 
You can start this one. If this is enough that’s fine, but you need to be able 
to increase the intensity of the non-verbal’s to make it more likely that you’ll 
get the desired response. So from the classic it’s my turn to talk, you can 
then start going to the more authority body language, which is open things 
up, you might even pull back a little bit.  
 
So you notice now I’m kind of like pulling a little away from his conversations 
like I’m creating physical gestures of authority, the pointing finger or, more 
extreme, I might have open palms like stop, right?  
 
I might have something which softens it in terms of my language. It might 
sound something like whoa, you know you said something interesting a 
moment ago. Notice the hand again. Physical touch gets attention. 
 
If he’s so stuck in his own stuff in terms of what he’s talking about and so 
on, he might literally delete the fact that I’m there. He might negatively 
hallucinate me. It happens more commonly than you think. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
525 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
So, if I’m going like…and then the train went faster and the wheels went 
round and round…hello? A touch, can often their attention and what a touch 
allows you to do, nonverbally… This is quite invasive, isn’t it? 
Student: 
Stop! 
Igor: 
It allows you to do that in a socially-acceptable way, because he’s talking, 
he’s talking. Just talk about anything. 
Student: 
The movie was really cool last night.   
Igor: 
You know what’s really interesting is…? So you can give him the same non-
verbal gesture, but on the way it’s just to touch shoulders like a friendly tap 
or a chat. So it doesn’t get registered consciously like he’s told me to stop. 
That’s rude, right? 
 
It’s just like, you know, it’s really interesting you should talk about the train’s 
wheels, because it reminds me of…cooking. Do you see where this goes? 
So, as a rule, you may want to start off with the low version of the body 
language which is just opening up, hands open, eyes open, mouth might be 
open like you’re about to say something.  
 
We’ll do this instinctively anyway, by the way. When we want to say 
something, we’ll lean in a little bit. If he ignores you, you want to pull back a 
little bit in kind of a power gesture.  
 
If he still ignores that then you might just come up with a physical touch and, 
personally, I’d like to have a little stop sign and go you know, that’s really 
interesting you should say that, because…and you just keep running with 
that. Make sense? 
Student: 
Yeah. 
Igor: 
Do you like that?  
Student: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
Yes, no, maybe so? 
Students: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
Do you want to practice that or do you want to have another little extra thing 
you can do and you can just mix them up? 
Students: Extra. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
526 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Igor: 
All right. The next thing you can do as well, which will soften… 
 
You may as well stay here. 
 
Student: 
Stay, okay. 
Igor: 
Thank you. Stay! You may not leave this stage! Did I say you could go? 
Why are you going? 
 
So the next thing you can do and this is especially if you want to do 
something more dramatic. Let’s say even this didn’t work out. The subtle 
gesture didn’t work out. If you want to do something more dramatic, you 
may have to take this thing out a little bit more with what you’re saying. 
 
So you can always ask for permission to interrupt, whilst at the same time 
non-verbally being very direct about things. So he carries on talking it’s like, 
I was going to go and talk and he carries on talking any way. Let me 
interrupt you for a moment. Do you see how that’s much more direct, much 
more in his face?  
 
I now have much more control of the physical space and everything else, 
but I’m asking for permission to interrupt, which takes away this thing of kind 
of arresting control away from him.   
Student: 
So you said you were asking for permission to interrupt and the phrase you 
used was ‘let me interrupt.’ 
Igor: 
Yeah. Or, can I interrupt you for a moment or let me interrupt. 
Student: 
Okay. I took it literally. ‘Let’ is a very mind command. 
Igor: 
It might be. If someone says let me and he says oh, would you allow me to 
interrupt for a moment. The language is not so important. The point is that 
you’re asking for some kind of permission for interruption and it will fit.  
 
Can I interrupt? Yeah. Can I just interrupt you for a moment? Or, I like what 
you’re saying, can I just interrupt something? You have a really good point? 
When you think about this, the wheels of the train going round and round, 
it’s kind of like cooking, isn’t it? 
 
You notice how my gestures have become more dramatic to take more 
control of this. I’m being more invasive to prevent him from re-interrupting 
here. Make sense?  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
527 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Meanwhile, of course, my job is now to talk with a little bit more animation, a 
little bit more volume and a little bit more energy and to keep talking long 
enough for him to settle down in the new interaction which is I’m doing all 
the talking. Now he’ll try and interrupt me and my job is to do what he did to 
me earlier on and that is carry on, but now that I’ve got this hand here he 
can’t do it back. 
 
Put your hand up here for a second and do some gestures with the hand 
there. It’s very awkward for me to go….jujitsu, now it’s my turn! If that 
happens, your conversation has a bigger issue than who’s actually doing 
the talking. Does that make sense? Do you like that? Is that useful? 
Students: Yes. 
Igor: 
We may as well throw the last one in there as well, just because we may as 
well deal with them all at the same time. The last one really is to ask a 
question of the person. You can do it in conjunction with all the body 
language stuff we talked about or you can just ask on its own. 
 
The point of the question is it’s filtered. It’s kind of like a yes, and or a yes, 
but, because it accentuates whatever message he was developing, but then 
of course it gives you the control again, unless you let him answer the 
question fully. 
 
So the kinds of questions I’m talking about are known traditionally as Closed 
Questions, yes or no questions. For example, did you just say that was 
Mary, as in Mary from Newport? It’s interesting, because Mary told me 
something really interesting important about cooking. But do you see how 
I’ve now hijacked the question? It’s a closed question. He’s going, oh, he’s 
interested in my thing. Yes, it is. That’s so cool, because Mary…Now I’m 
going back to my Agreement Reversals or my Agreement Extension, right? 
Do you see how that works? 
 
You need, really, a closed question because you have an open question. It’s 
like did you enjoy that? Oh, it was wonderful, the wheels of the bus went 
round and round and they kept going around, right? You don’t want to give 
them too much to go on. A simple closed question, yes, no, what did you 
say your name was again? Mary. Oh, wow. Now you’ve got the interaction 
going again. Does that make sense? Do you like this? 
 
So they’re very simple mechanisms and you can escalate them. In other 
words, you can just join the conversation. You can have some simple body 
language. You can extend the body language. You can be quite invasive; 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
528 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
although, you can still be respectful of the person and you can add a few 
extra things in there to make it very simple to do. Do you like that? Is that 
useful? 
 
What I want you to do is, spend three or four minutes having the battle of 
conversation. What’s going to happen is this. You’re going to get thinking.  
 
[Applause] 
 
What’s going to happen is this. You’re going to start a conversation, right, 
and they’re going to give you a couple of minutes to just keep throwing. 
They go aha, hum, just like normal conversational stuff. Then it’s your turn 
to take over and when it is, you’ll try any of the ones – Agreement Reversal, 
Agreement Extension, the body language, the escalation, the question, the 
asking for permission and all that sort of stuff. 
 
As you battle your way through, you’ll have control of the conversation. 
You’ll rest it back. You’ll change topics three or four times and then you’re in 
your groove. Yes, the wheels of the bus are going round and round. After a 
while they go hang on a second. What just happened there?  
 
So they’re going to go is that Mary you’re talking about? No, because Mary 
is talking about cooking! You go back to your cooking thread and they’ll 
listen intently and go yeah, yeah, what the hell just happened? A scheme 
will develop in the back of your mind. That scheme will include something 
like really? Do you see where we’re going with this? 
 
Have fun with this. I think the easiest way of doing this is to spend about five 
minutes doing it now.  So everyone, when we start again just do your own 
thing. We’ll leave you to your own devices.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
529 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
DVD 21:  Getting Agreements, Getting Favors 
& Getting Sales – How to “Close” Absolutely 
Anybody 
 
Igor: 
What I want to do now is have a little bit of fun. So far we’ve focused a lot on 
what we can do to influence others. Now we’re going to go to war. What 
we’re going to do is you’re going to carry on with these influencing tactics 
we’ve talked about. There are many more, but hopefully, you just got the 
ball rolling inside your minds.  
 
 
Meanwhile, I’m going to present to you a few ways of breaking people’s 
influences so that you don’t feel imposed upon. Remember the emotional 
energy we talked about? It will capture just as much as anyone else. How 
can you defend yourself from an unethical influence, wouldn’t that be 
something?  
 
 
The way we’ll play with this is very simple. We’ll do the whole thing again, 
one of you will be the influencer and you’ll use all these things to try to get 
the emotional energy built up and start focusing down one channel or 
another. The other one will cut it flat and you’ll switch roles so it’s just as 
fair. Then you’ll move onto someone else and find a creative variety of ways 
of trying to influence and of cutting short so they don’t influence you when 
you do not desire to be influence. Does that make sense to you guys? 
Would that be useful? 
 
 
The first few I have here are actually very simple and kind of fun. The first 
one is present your pre-frame before they start the influence cycle. What do 
I mean by this? Well, there are many contexts, in which you pretty much 
know that an influence cycle is going to occur. You walk into a shop and you 
know someone is going to try to assist you. If you call someone up to inquire 
for information, it’s reasonably sure, it’s reasonably likely that they’re going 
to involve you in some kind of sales cycle. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
530 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
One of my favorite examples is do you know what a chugger is? It’s an 
English expression, neologism, which stands for charity mugger. They are 
the people who stand on the streets with their clipboards of those poor 
people who have been decapitated, their feet have gone gangrenous and 
life is terrible and look, we’re here to save them. Yay! Only a really person 
wouldn’t help to save these people. Are you a bad person or are you the 
kind of good person that will give us $10 a month? Do you see where this is 
going?  
 
 
I have no problem with charities. I think charities do a wonderful job. I do 
have a problem with the way they recruit for payments like that because it’s 
an unethical influence. It’s actually guilt-tripping people into handing over 
money, and I don’t think that’s very ethical. In my opinion, it’s one step down 
from begging.  
 
 
So, two things I like to do. One actually I picked up from a friend of mine 
called Anthony Jacquin. He likes to do instant inductions on charity 
muggers. I kind of like that. The last time he did that it was fantastic 
because he does an instant induction and then tells them, whenever you 
see me walk by you won’t recognize me. You’ll forget about this interaction, 
but when I wave my hand like this, whatever I say, you’ll repeat and it will 
become your reality. 
 
 
So he goes off, picks up some friends and they’re walking and sure enough, 
there’s the charity mugger going, gentlemen this is this, whatever it is. He 
waves his hand and says we do not qualify for your survey. He looks up and 
goes you don’t qualify for my survey. He says we should leave now. You 
should leave now. He walks off. His two friends are standing there going, 
what the f---? 
 
 
If that doesn’t give you a reason to learn walk-up street hypnosis, I don’t 
think anything will. Amusement sidebars aside, if I’m in kind of a hurry and I 
don’t want to mess around with it, but I want to give these people my time, 
I’ll say sure, I’ll have a few moments with you. I’m giving them a favor so I 
can then call on a favor, right? Just one thing please, if you could. I just 
want you to promise me one thing. Sure, what is it? At the end of whatever 
you tell me, you’re not going to ask me for any money.  
 
 
Some people will try to rally back and say that’s kind of the whole point of 
this thing here. I say oh, I thought you believed in what you were doing. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
531 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Aren’t you just here to inform me about some situation whereas that could 
be helped? Well, that’s fine in you believe in that, then I’ll happily listen as 
long as you promise not to ask me for money at the end. Do you see how 
that works? 
 
 
Oh, only one person this has ever happened to me with. They had gone 
through the whole spiel and at the end he falls into his whole close and asks 
for money and so on. Then I turned around and said, well, what happened 
to your promise? We’re going to have to ask for it. No you don’t you 
promised you wouldn’t, I don’t think I trust you anymore.  
 
 
Do you see how setting a preframe resolves all that emotional angst they try 
to put on top of you because now, essentially, what you’ve done is it’s not 
me it’s you, which by the way is the next tactic. 
 
 
It’s crazily called out-framing. You’re switching the roles of responsibility. 
You’re no longer the one that needs to start responding. They have to be 
the one that starts to respond because remember, most influence cycles, 
especially the more unethical ones like con artists or even people who kind 
of strong-arm you into a sales cycle of some sort, requires your response. 
 
It’s all built around building pressure inside of you for you to be forced to 
respond in some way or another. Recall that our sales cycle is not about 
forcing, it’s about building more positive emotional things so they make 
good decisions. They may look related, but we’re also willing to let people 
walk away. I assume you realize that, right? 
 
 
So if someone is using more strong-arm tactics trying to enforce things and 
so on, one of the simplest ways of turning this around is to make it about 
them. One of the ways you can do this is kind of evil, but why not? I call this 
the paranoia defense.  
 
 
Why are you saying that? Why are you doing that? Are you trying to 
influence me? Are you trying to sell me something? Are you trying to 
influence me? I have a feeling that you don’t have my best interest at heart. 
No-no, I do because of this. You see, if you didn’t have my interests at 
heart, that’s exactly what you’d say. 
 
 
Do you see where we’re going with this? It’s not me, it’s you. I am a 
reasonable person, but you are trying to take advantage of me. No I’m not 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
532 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
I’m just trying to show you. You see, you’re doing it again. Denial is proof 
that you’re trying to influence me. You can have a lot of fun with this.  
 
 
The next thing is a more invisible kind of principle and this is never agree to 
something as a specific thing. Only ever present your agreement in principle 
and leave enough room to wriggle out. Ideally, don’t even agree to anything 
at all, only position. Are you the kind of person that thinks that this is a good 
idea? Usually I am. Do you think it’s good to do this? Well, it’s often the 
case, yes. Or, if I’m already sensing where it’s going, well, often that’s the 
case, but not always.  
 
 
Do you see what we’re doing with this? You’re not giving a black and white 
response, which means they can’t use consistency or commitment against 
you. You’re presenting yourself. Then they say is it yes or no, because you 
want to have a clear answer? Well no, life is much more complex then that. 
Does that kind of make sense? 
 
 
The last one is actually very useful. It’s called the broken record. It’s 
especially useful for you girls if you’re getting pestered by the wrong kind of 
attention. The broken record, basically, the premise behind it is you’re not 
adding any justification and you’re not varying.  
 
 
Whenever someone varies their response it allows a foothold for something 
to change. Oh well, you said this. Well, I’ll fit myself into that. If the response 
is always no thank you, no thank you, no thank you, no thank you, it’s a 
broken record. It’s like a wall that cannot be gotten through. Make sense? 
They can try the kind of thing like oh, you’re not being social. The answer is 
no thank you. Well, that’s not how you treat normal people. No thank you.  
 
 
Everything else is an attempt to engage you in a social interaction to be able 
to leverage off social principles. The broken record says I’m not going to 
socially interact with you; hence, there is no leverage. Does that make 
sense? This is very important especially if someone’s pestering you over 
something, because interacting with them adds nothing to the interaction.  
 
 
Has anyone here ever stood and argued with a wall for an hour or so? A 
real wall? No? Why? Because there’s no feedback. Has anyone here had 
an argument with someone else for an hour or two, just an argument? Why? 
Because there’s feedback. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
533 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Remember the feedback principle from day one? The broken record cuts 
the feedback loop so there is nothing to escalate, nothing to build. Initially 
there might be an escalation, like people might be a little bit more like hey, 
why are you saying no thank you all the time? Of course, that is an attempt 
to get you to engage and create feedback. The response to that, of course, 
is again no thank you. Does that make sense?  
 
 
Students: I was just going to say I’ve used that before. Of course, I didn’t know what I 
was doing. It was extremely effective because they can’t – I mean after a 
point they run out of things to say and they realize that’s all she can say is 
no thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Right and they might even try. Is that all you can say, no thank you? No 
thank you. You do not vary one iota. If you say yes, you’ve just engaged in a 
social contact and you cannot do that. Does that make sense? Is that fun? 
Interesting stuff?  
 
 
What we’ll do very quickly is spend about five minutes practicing the closed 
doors. We will do more of this later on, especially when it comes to the 
whole closing cycle. I just want you to get used to this. I think there are five 
or so things we talked about here, very simple and easy to do… 
 
– Get them inside your mind,  
– Get a feeling for how to do them  
– Later on we’ll get to closes, which is how people get to the point 
where you’ve transformed them  
– The influence cycle,  
– The actual behavior, like signing on a contract or changing a belief  
– How we can expand those same ideas in those contexts so we can 
go despite the pressure that’s been built up.  
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Spend five minutes now. The exercise is very simply you’re all going to go 
around and with any interaction, one of you will be the hypnotist first and 
then you’ll have a switch over in a second. The hypnotist is going to start by 
trying to influence the other person with any of the things we’ve talked 
about, the little mini cycles, like a small request or a larger one and so on.  
 
 
Your job is very simply to pick one of the four or five breaks, the defense 
mechanisms against influence that we just talked about and present it.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
534 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Then the influencer is going to try at least twice to break through, and you 
will present at him more. You can do the same one or you can cycle to 
another one. It’s up to you. The only caveat is, if you decide to use the 
broken record, do not cycle from that, that has to stay the same constantly 
or it will not work. Have fun. 
 
 
Did you enjoy yourselves? Was that interesting? Remember, we’re just 
warming up on this. We’ll come back to this later on. I just wanted to get that 
sort of in there so that you don’t just have the one side of the influence 
cycle. You realize there’s an interplay going on here as well.   
 
 
Let’s the session formally, how are you doing? Are you guys having fun? 
Who here had interesting conversations over lunch, anyone? Did you notice 
there’s a power play going on, like when it switches one way and you go oh 
I’m going to get you back, and it switches the other way, and I’m going to 
get you back, and it switches the other way and so on? Do you notice that 
whole backwards and forwards flow?  
 
 
It’s important to appreciate that flow because it will tell you where you are in 
the influencing process. Are you leading the way or are you being lead?  
 
 
I can’t remember what the film is. It’s one of these poker playing films where 
one of the lines in it is, at every poker table there is a – I can’t remember 
what the term is, like a stooge or there’s someone who’s being taken by the 
rest of the table. If you look around the room and you can’t figure out who 
the idiot is that’s being taken by the table, it’s you. 
 
 
In some respects, influence works the same way. Someone is always 
influencing someone else, and that doesn’t mean it’s a bad thing. It’s just an 
effect. If you’re wondering whose doing the influencing, then chances are 
it’s not you. One of the reasons for the exercise we did early on is to get you 
used to that interplay and what happens when someone takes you too far 
out of your influence zone and how you can start pulling it back. 
 
 
What I’d like to do now is, take that process a little bit further and play a 
couple games. These games will be interesting. Do not take them to heart in 
terms of like oh, what if this actually happens to me in real life? I will show 
you a way of making sure these things that we’re about to talk about do not 
happen to you in real life, but they’re interesting to experience anyway so in 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
535 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
case it does happen, it should be a warning sign to you that you’ve missed a 
step somewhere along the way.  
 
 
Plus, it’s also a good way of defending yourself from, shall we say, more 
unethical forms of influence. Does that make sense?  
 
 
Essentially, I call this the closing game. What we’re going to do is we’re 
going to put everything we’ve done together so far into a process where 
you’ll swap roles, of course. You’ll be closing someone on some pretend 
product. You can invent something – a widget, a car or a magic sponge. I 
don’t care.  
 
 
I’m going to give you specific closes, which are particularly common and 
quite useful, which will have principles built into them, like the scarcity 
principle and so on. What your partner is then going to do is they’re going to 
break your frame. In other words, he’s going to destroy your close. Make 
sense? 
 
 
The reason this won’t happen to you necessarily in your real life is because 
we’ll show you how to go through it so that it’s unlikely to happen, but it’s 
also a useful skill to have when someone’s giving you a sales spiel and you 
think all right, I’m feeling myself put in a corner here. It’s a great way for 
getting out of the corner. It’s kind of like a continuation of what we did early 
on today. Who wants to play that game?  
 
 
 
Everyone stand up please. What we’re going to do is very simply you’re 
going to walk around the room, make contact with someone, you have a 
little chat for like 10 seconds or so, and assume that this is the end of some 
kind of sales process. At the end of the sales process, you’re simply going 
to close them, and I’ll show you the different kinds of closes that I’d like you 
to practice. As soon as you’ve done the closing, you’ll go how about it? The 
other person is going to break that close in a specific way again.   
 
 
The first one is probably the most unethical ones I’ve come across and one 
of the reasons I hate the chuggers we spoke about before, not the 
individuals, just the way that they ask for money. It’s the shame or the guilt 
close. In this one, your job is to make the other person feel guilty about 
saying no or shame or embarrass them if they did try to say no.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
536 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Classic ones are, for example, oh you’re wearing last year’s fashions oh, 
this is all new now. So you embarrass them like, oh my God, maybe I better 
buy. That feels so wrong. Or maybe you can’t afford this. Do you see how 
this is all about shaming or guilt-tripping people into saying yes?  
 
 
You’ll like the defense. By the way, these defenses are not matched, they’re 
not paired in terms of… this is not the only thing you can do at this point. 
You can use this defense anyway they’re nice matched at this point. The 
defense for this that I’d like you to use is to flip the script on them. You’re 
going to our frame them essentially and you’re going to blame them for 
something.  
 
 
You might even get a little bit angry. Oh, you can’t afford this. Then you 
might turn around and say its people like you that make all the girls anorexic 
and give them complexes, how dare you promote such behavior. Do you 
see how I’ve kind of broken the frame? You’re going to blame them for 
something, and right now I don’t care what it is. Just find something to 
blame. It’s kind of like the glad game with a really evil twist.   
 
Student: 
 
♦ Would you characterize it as chunking up?  
 
Igor: 
That’s one way you can do it and if you want to go random, that’s the most 
fun one because they go, where the hell did that come from? The key here 
is to notice what happens in the interaction when blame gets introduced.  
 
 
Please listen now because I’m going to be rolling through these relatively 
quickly. If I pause you, just stay where you are and turn your attention 
quickly so we can add the next one, and we’ll go from there.  
 
 
Off you go.  
 
 
All right, was that fun and interesting? Are you going both ways? Make sure 
you do go both ways. All right, so we’re going to go onto the next close and 
defense. This one’s called like the quality close or the arts and crafts close. 
The idea is, basically, you’re going to show the quality of your product. Get 
people involved, enthusiastic and accepting how wonderful this is and how 
high quality it is so by implication they’re accepting the idea that this is a 
desirable thing to have that is better than anything else.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
537 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
They can’t say oh I don’t really want it. But I thought you liked it, look how 
wonderful this feels and so on. They’re trying to get you involved in the 
experience of it in the sales process.  
 
 
Again, you can break it from many different ways, but the one I think is 
going to be fun is you’re going to prevent them from sealing the deal. In 
other words, before they get a chance to say, you can buy it now, it’s just 
fantastic quality and for you it’s only $10. Yay! Before they get to that point 
where they make or break the sale, your job is to interrupt, pull the 
conversation back and just keep talking no matter what.  
 
 
 
Change the topic and as they try to bring it back so they can kind of get 
back on topic and get the close, you go oh yeah, that reminds me and then 
you go to another topic. Of course, after a few minutes just throw your 
hands up in the air and say great and then just switch roles, because 
otherwise you can go on forever with this one.  
 
 
This one is great, especially when you have people in a store showing you 
how amazing the dress is and so on, like do you want this, because you’re 
just being social. You’re just chatting and they never quite get the point of 
urging you and then suddenly they do this stuff, like how about you just think 
about it. I’ll come back later. Then they’ll leave you alone, which is kind of 
nice.  
 
 
Off you go. 
 
 
All right, for the next one, this one is again fun. The initial version of it seems 
a little direct and not quite as devious as our usually defense mechanisms, 
but we’ll make it more devious, rest assured.  
 
 
So the first one is you know that assumptive close, when people say oh, 
do you want the red one or the green one? Or, as soon as you’ve signed the 
paperwork, this car could all be yours. Or, this will be all yours you’ll take it 
home, you’ll be proud and all that sort of stuff. Again, these defenses, let me 
just emphasize, they’re not one for one. You can use these defenses 
anywhere and vice versa they’re just fun pairings for the purpose of the 
exercise. 
 
 
The defense I’d like you to use is denial. Of course, initially the denial will be 
very simple. I didn’t say I wanted it. Then I want the salesperson to come 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
538 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
back with some point of fact that the other person’s already agreed to. For 
example, but I thought you said you like Volvos and it’s fast and this is what 
it is. At that point, you’re going to have a lot of fun.  
 
 
You’re going to deny that you ever agreed that you wanted something, 
some quality that’s in it. You may have actually have said it, but just lose 
your memory about it. I never said I wanted a Volvo. You said you wanted a 
Volvo. I never said I wanted a Volvo. Yes you did. No I didn’t. Yes you did. 
Are you telling me you know better than I do what is this? Are you trying to 
manipulate me? Do you see where this is going? It confuses the hell out of 
the salespeople because they, basically, have to start from scratch, only this 
time you know exactly what they’re up to. Do you understand the denial and 
how sneaky it can get? 
 
 
Also, it just absolves you of responsibility. You just keep getting put backed 
into the corner and backed into a corner. They say well, you said you want 
this. No I didn’t. Yes you did, I just heard you. No, I didn’t say that. You 
misheard me. What do you mean? What did you say? I don’t know. What 
part are you talking about? You know what let’s start all over again. Sure, 
why not? Do you see where we’re going with this?  
 
 
A quick couple questions…   
 
Student: 
 
♦ Can we do it in Monte Python accents? 
 
Igor: 
It works better in Monte Python accents, for sure.  
 
Student: 
I have two questions.  
 
 
The first is one thing I noticed is that when like let’s say someone breaks 
your frame, they take over and they start talking about something, what I 
found is another way you can take it back is if you start talking about what 
they’re talking about, you roll with it and it allows you to get it back. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. 
 
Students: That’s interesting. The other question I had is everything we’re learning right 
now is more about how to just get out of the situation completely. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
539 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
♦ Are we going to go into something more where we can actually 
use the situation to where we can, as opposed to just breaking 
the relationship, use it more to kind of get what we want?  
 
 
Like with a car dealer, we don’t always necessarily want to walk out of there. 
Will we go back into the objection destroyer or something like that? 
 
Igor: 
We’ll put the whole thing into a system first, in terms of influence that you 
can ethically influence people very well. Remember, what we’re doing right 
now just to kind of give you like a framework to get these fields in, we’re 
creating black and white reference points so you can get the extent as you 
can do. 
 
 
You can also just do small versions of this. For example, denial, you know 
the assumptive close as soon as we’ve done the paperwork we’re ready to 
go. Well, I never said I wanted to do it. What’s missing? I thought you were 
going to give me a bonus. I never said anything about a bonus. I’m sure you 
did. I’m sure I remember your saying something about a bonus. I never said 
anything about a bonus. Well, could you throw one in anyway?  
 
 
Do you see how it works? In order to get to that, we need to get a contrast 
and that’s what we’re doing right now.   
 
Student: 
Perfect sense now. 
 
Igor: 
Any other questions or shall we just go into the next one? All right, what was 
the next one again the assumption and denial.  
 
 
Off you go. 
 
 
Okay, so are you enjoying that? It’s kind of fun? What I’d like you to notice 
please is the nature of the interaction and how it changes. How do you feel 
as the influencer, the salesperson in this case, when everything’s going 
swimmingly, you’re about to close and suddenly, something happens like, 
what the hell is this? How do you feel about that? Confused, frustrated and 
so on.  
 
 
Would it be fair to say that internal pressure’s building up? That’s where you 
start using, to answer your question, in order to start presenting your 
frameworks and so on. We’re giving you lots of different defenses to build 
up pressure– notice how each time you have a different defense, whether 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
540 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
it’s blame or it’s denial or something else– it actually opens up a different set 
of responses or a different set of possibilities.  
 
 
If you deny that you said something, well, once you get past the little tassel 
thing, they’ll try to reiterate what it was so you can re-open negotiations at 
that level. When you create blame, they’ll either apologize or be confused, 
at which point, of course, you can introduce new things. For example, do 
you know what would make me happy is if you give me this, this, this and 
this that’s the very least thing you could do.  
 
 
Then the blame turns into a bargaining, shall we say, because they need to 
modify that. Do you see how this is working? So please pay attention as the 
influencer or the salesperson here, how it feels when different types of 
defenses are presented to the close because those will open up different 
types of bargaining positions afterwards, which is kind of where you were 
coming from before. 
 
Student: 
It seems like the denial frame only works if you’re deeper into an interaction, 
because you have to have some kind of a context. 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. Right now we’re just role playing something. Imagine you spent 
like an hour in the car showroom, and he’s showing you all kinds of stuff and 
he says well, let’s just do the paperwork over here and you can drive off with 
the car. I didn’t say I wanted this car. Well, we just spent the time looking at 
it. No we didn’t.  
 
 
 
What do you think we’ve been doing for the last hour? You’ve been showing 
me cars, but that’s not what I want. What I want to see is this, that and the 
other. Then that’s where your bonuses come in and so on. Do you see how 
that works? 
 
 
Because you’ve thrown him for a loop, notice the surprise that suddenly 
comes. That’s your opportunity to reframe the situation again in your favor 
because you’ve just triggered the amygdala at the point where they think it’s 
all secure, it’s all ready to go. I think it’s particularly useful when they’re 
employing an unethical sales close because it’s like, all right, if you want to 
take the gloves off, off they come. Does that help?  
 
 
Are there any other questions? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
541 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Let’s try another kind of pairing. The calendar close is a classic variation of 
the assumption. The calendar close is basically, well, is Tuesday or 
Wednesday better for you? You could, of course, go down the denial route. 
We’ve done that already, so let’s just play with something different.  
 
 
This is the confusion defense. Say I feel really confused and go like, what? 
I’m not sure what are you talking about? Well, do you want to come in 
Wednesday or Thursday? Notice how they’re now feeling a little bit more 
insecure like, are you coming to hypnotherapy? I’m sorry I’m not quite sure 
what it is that you want to sign me up for. What is this all about again?  
 
 
Remember, you called me for hypnotherapy. You wanted to come in for a 
car, remember. We showed you these cars. Oh, yeah but you forgot – and 
now you can start reopening negotiations again. Do you see where we’re 
going with this? Act confused and see where it takes you. Is that easy?  
 
 
Off you go.  
 
 
Are you beginning to notice how different ways of presenting a push-back at 
the end of the close will actually open different possibilities to you, and really 
the easiest way of finding out what all the possibilities are is to be the 
salesperson and have someone push back on you and go oh, what’s this? 
Because then you’re actually experiencing it and that’s really how other 
people will experience it too. Make sense?  
 
 
Are you ready for another close?  
 
 
This is the flattery close. Basically, you’re going to flatter them into 
submission by saying oh, you’re such a smart person this is a great thing. 
All the smartest people get this yada, yada, yada, 9 out of 10 Mensa 
graduates prefer this. 
 
 
Your response to that is, keeping with that flattery approach, let’s ask for 
more data and more data and more information and some more, and some 
more. Are you done yet? No, some more. Is that everything you need? A 
little bit more and some more and some more. Do you see where we’re 
going with this?  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
542 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
It’s a variation of the broken record, exactly but, of course, it’s getting more 
and more information out and one of the reasons for this being useful is 
because the more information that’s present, the more you’ll have things 
that you can use for leverage. Something will slip out or might offer you 
more in frustration or say well, what about this? 
 
 
It’s a way of collecting data so you have something for more leverage later 
on. Does that make sense? Do you have a question or comment on that?  
 
Student: 
 
♦ Are you asking us to provide more information about whatever it 
is I’m trying to sell or is the person asking to have their ego 
stroked more? 
 
Igor: 
Well actually, I never thought of the second version, but that’s a good one 
too I like that.  
 
Student: 
You’re busy telling them how smart they are or whatever, so that’s… 
 
Igor: 
Right, the proper version of the defense is to ask for more information on 
the product, get more details and more details and more details, although I 
never really considered saying well, if you just flatter me enough I might get 
this. You’re not doing a good job right now. No, I’ve heard that one before, a 
little more originality, please.  
 
 
That’s another version of close that we’ll come onto, which is the calling on 
it. One of the simplest ways of breaking a close, when someone’s trying to 
leverage you into position, is to describe to them what it is they’re doing. Oh, 
you’re doing this, this and this.  
 
 
Let’s say someone’s doing the objection destroyer on you and you have a 
genuine objection and for some reason they’ve used it in a way that doesn’t 
quite work, it hasn’t resolved. You go oh, I get it. Do you know Igor, you 
realize that you messed up on the H+ part, but other than that it was pretty 
good. 
 
 
Did you see how that works? It’s kind of fun. I kind of like doing that again 
with people who are standing on the streets asking for things and so on. 
With one guy I ended up saying look, you’re doing this all wrong. What you 
need to do is ask them this. You’re standing wrong. Look, this is how to do 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
543 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
it. They’re like can I learn this from you? Do you want to stay here and help 
me out? No, that’s okay, thank you.  
 
 
For the moment, let’s just stick with asking for more data. You want to have 
more facts. The more facts you have, the more you have at your disposal to 
point out a contradiction and say well, hang on a second, you said it does all 
these things, but now you’re saying this. How does that work? So it allows 
you to find more information for bargaining, plus it delays the pressure for 
the close. Make sense? 
 
 
Off you go. 
 
 
All right, are you ready for the next one? For the close, we’re going to use 
scarcity or whatever you want maybe exclusivity, like this is only available 
at certain times. Or, it might be scarcity in the sense of oh, this is our last 
model, our last example and we already promised it to someone else. No, 
no, I want this and so on. 
 
 
You have the classic ones. In Thailand, of course, they have these 
wonderfully really, I can’t believe this actually works in closes where you’re 
brought to one of these jewelry stores, which are normally just for trade, but 
today and today only how lucky are you that they have this sale to normal 
tourists as well. One day of the year. I must be the luckiest person because 
I keep bumping into this one day of the year sales. I must be really lucky. 
 
 
Of course, you realize that there’s a scarcity being created here that’s trying 
to drive you into buying because you’re not having that much time to make a 
decision and so on. 
 
 
The simplest defense for that, you can use any of the ones we’ve used so 
far, a useful defense to have in general is doubt. Just doubt them. 
Remember the glad game where you find reasons for why things are going 
well or why life is good and so on? You’re going to now play the doubt 
game. You find reasons to doubt.  
 
 
Oh, I’m sure I’ll find it somewhere else. Or I’m sure I’ve seen exactly the 
same thing in another place. Oh no, this is exclusive to our thing. Really, I’m 
sure I’ve seen it somewhere else, maybe it was something similar. Yeah, it 
might have been cheaper as well I don’t know.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
544 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Do you see where I’m going with this? You’re beginning to doubt the 
exclusivity or the scarcity of it, which instantly negates their bargaining 
position. Everyone clear on that?  
 
 
Off you go.  
 
 
Ready for another one? All right, we’ve got two more for you. These again 
are fun ones.  
 
 
The first one is the ownership close or the future memory.  
 
 
Essentially, you’re going to describe to them what it’s going to be like to 
actually own it. You’re going to assume that they already own this product 
and just enthused about how great life is.  
 
 
For example, this is really the car for you. When you take this home, your 
family is going to love this. Your neighbors are going to come around and 
ask you, where did you get this? Just make sure you mention my name 
because we’ve got other things for other people as well. You’re building up 
the whole future memory for them, right? 
 
 
The defense I would like you to use is a beautiful one, and particularly 
frustrating in this case, it’s called splitting hairs. Oh, I’m not married. I don’t 
have kids. Okay well, when you take it home your neighbors… Oh no, I’m 
not going to take it home. I’m going to drive it straight to the office. Well, 
your colleagues will probably really appreciate it? Oh, they don’t know much 
about cars.  
 
 
Do you see where we’re going with this? You’re splitting hairs, its tiny little 
things o like, when you sign this contract… Oh, I’m not sure I can sign it. 
Can I just email you something? You’re, basically, splitting hairs about little 
things that are unimportant, but that just prolongs the whole interaction until 
something gives again. You’re just building pressure with it.  
 
 
Off you go. 
 
 
Is this useful stuff so far? Yes? Okay, let’s have one last one so you can get 
used to this whole process. Before I give the last one, again, are you 
noticing again differences in terms of how you feel when someone’s pushing 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
545 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
back on your close? Are you noticing how it puts you in different positions, 
which open up different possibilities to the other person? Good.  
 
 
What I’d like to do now, the last close is the classic close. Everyone’s heard 
of the yes set close. You want this, you want this, you want this and you 
want this. Let’s check it off the list. Look, I’ve got this. This car’s got wheels. 
This car’s got brakes. This car’s got a wind screen. My God, it’s a real car. 
This is kind of a fun close.  
 
 
Basically, the defense to this is giving yourself permission to be totally and 
utterly illogical. The way you can do it in this one is very simple you’re just 
going to agree with everything, except the close. So you like the car? Yes. 
The color’s great? Yes. The price is great? Yes. Are there exceptions? No. 
Are you ready to buy the car? No. What? But you like the car, right? Yes. 
You like the color, right? Yes. The price is right, isn’t it? Yes. You want it 
now, do you yes? Well, are you ready to buy the car now? No. Why not? 
What’s missing? I don’t know. 
 
Student: 
But you said you wanted all these things why not? 
 
Igor: 
I do want all those things. Did you hear the question over there? What else 
do you want? Do you see what it naturally starts bringing up? So you’re not 
going to ask for anything. They’re going to offer. Yes, yes, yes, or no. Huh? 
It’s a lot of fun. Just spend a few minutes doing that.  
 
 
Off you go.  
 
 
Very quickly let’s go over the list again. Remember, the defenses are not 
linked to any particular close. I just matched them together in an amusing 
manner. Let’s put it that way. Any one will kind of work with anything else. 
 
 
I’ll just give you all the closes first and then all the defenses second. 
 
1. 
Shame or the guilt close. 
 
2. 
The quality close. (You look at the quality, the craftsmanship and 
that sort of stuff.) 
 
3. 
The assumptive close. (You assume the close in some way.) 
 
Students: These are actually defensive closes, right? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
546 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Igor: 
Say again? No, no, no. These are all the closes and then we’ll show you the 
defenses about how to break them all open again. So when someone’s 
trying to railroad you into a close to make a decision now, you get to open it 
up again, have a new bargaining position and get more. 
 
4. 
The calendar close, which is very similar. (It’s a very common one 
so you may as well get used that one too. Would you like to do it on 
Wednesday or Thursday? I’ve got an appointment on the 15th and 
the 17th. Is morning or afternoon better for you?) 
 
5. 
The flattery close, which is usually linked with things like how 
intelligent you are or what a smart buyer or fashionable or whatever 
relates to the product in some ways. (It’s essentially flattery.) 
 
 
 
6. 
The ownership close, which essentially is a future memory. (You 
assume that they own the item or the service already. They’ve 
already bought it, it’s already theirs and you just go straight into the 
benefits and how much they’ll enjoy it.) 
 
7. 
The yes set. 
 
 
Again, these are not all of the things that are possible. I’m just trying to get 
you guys to have a sense of how rich a variety of responses you can have. 
It just gives you much more choice, doesn’t it? 
 
 
So the first one is: 
 
1. 
Blame them for something. 
 
 
It has a real way of just redirection the whole energy of the interaction. A lot 
of people end up getting into the appeasement mode, and the way to 
appease you is, of course, to make up for it in some way, which is, of 
course, when you get extra bits and pieces. 
 
2. 
Keep talking and change the topic. 
 
So the idea of keeping talking is you quite let them finish the whole close. 
It’s amusing and sometimes in frustration, they’ll offer something more or 
they’ll want to show you something more. It just changes the dynamic a little 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
547 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
bit, plus it gives you more opportunities for laying foundations, like pre-
frames and so on as they’re talking innocently, it seems. 
 
3. 
Denial. 
 
That’s a funny one. Just deny that you agreed to something or said 
something or locked yourself into a position. Say no, I didn’t. I heard you say 
it. I’m not sure what you heard, but I didn’t say it. It’s a little sketchy on the 
ethics, but again, it comes back to, in my opinion, it gives you as good as it 
gets. If they’re really trying to railroad you, then you may as well railroad 
right back. Of course, this is not something you do at McDonald’s. Here’s 
your Big Mac, sir. I didn’t order that. You choose your venues for these 
things. 
 
4. 
Act confused. 
 
 
Acting confused is great because it gets them to elaborate and introduce 
information. It gives you an opportunity to really remember that you didn’t do 
something. 
 
 
Even when I’ m not doing mind-bending language, it’s still bending your 
mind!  
 
 
So he’s asking if the confusion can be mixed with denial. I think they’re very 
good partners, absolutely. So you confuse them at first, and they turn 
around and to the offer again. Some part of it you don’t really like so you go, 
I didn’t say that. Yes you did. No I didn’t. I’m sure I didn’t say that. Let’s just 
start from the beginning again, just talk me through this once more.  
 
 
That gives you an opportunity – now you know what the whole thing is to 
object at some point or not accept something or ask for something more and 
so on. Now they’ve already placed all their cards on the table. You already 
know what pretty much the whole deal is.   
 
5. 
Doubting. 
 
 
Doubting them in terms of, when they say oh, we’ll do this, we’ll do that. 
Well, what if you don’t deliver? What if it’s not there on time? What if this is 
the only the left, and you go, oh I don’t know if it’s the last one. I’m sure I 
saw something down the road somewhere. I’m sure I can get this on the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
548 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Internet or something very much like that. So doubt opens the bargaining 
table again. 
 
6. 
Keep asking for more data, more facts and more information. 
 
Data is very useful because it allows you to then find a frame of reference in 
what they’ve said that allows you to leverage something else. Oh, well, you 
know you said this and this, and it’s this. Really I wanted this. Or I thought 
you meant that, but really it’s something different. That’s not really what I 
was looking for. Do you see how that works? 
 
7. 
Splitting hairs. 
 
Again, it’s a way of prolonging the information until something can happen. 
Also, it’s particularly useful if you’re in a position where you feel you’re being 
socially railroaded into something, but you don’t want to have a hard close, 
just say simply no, I’m not interested. Splitting hairs is a great way of making 
it impossible for the person to close.  
 
What about this? What about that? It’s not this. The yellow’s not quite right. 
Have you got a different yellow? No we don’t. Well, I’d like this in yellow 
anyway. It’s a way of delaying their ability to actually close you. If you’re in a 
situation where you can’t just say, no I don’t want it, flat out.  
 
 
For example, can you get the milk out of the fridge? Well, what kind of milk 
were you thinking of? I don’t know. Which frig and how long do I have to do 
this? Oh, I don’t know if I can do it instantly, but maybe a little bit later on I 
can do it. So you’re splitting hairs in terms of the delivering of some sort. 
 
8. 
The irrational defense. 
 
Who says you need to be rational? So yes, yes, yes or no. Huh? That goes 
kind of into the whole idea of the broken record, which is the idea of just 
closing off. You just create a closed loop and nothing comes in at that point. 
It’s very difficult to influence someone who has created a closed loop 
essentially, who is no interacting with you anymore, who is rejecting all 
information that’s coming from you whether it’s good or bad or indifferent.  
 
Everyone clear on those?   
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
549 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
Students:  
♦ Irrational or rational? 
 
Igor: 
Irrational. So they’re saying you want this? Yes. You want that? Yes. You 
want this? Yes. It has this? Yes. It has all these little features that you want? 
Yes. So are you ready to buy it? No. Huh? Why?  
 
 
It doesn’t have to be just the yes set. We’re just using the yes set in that 
sense, but it can also be totally irrational like, are you ready to buy this car? 
No. Why? The wheels aren’t shiny enough. Do you see what I mean? 
You’re throwing irrationality into the mix, which is very confusing like oh, 
that’s not very sensible, sir. Well, I want it anyway. If I can’t have shiny 
wheels, then I’m sorry. I think I’m not interested. How are you going to make 
up for the lack of shiny wheels to me? Do you see where we’re going with 
this stuff? 
 
 
Student: 
This defense is so effective that when I was doing the exercise, I couldn’t 
win any of them. 
 
Igor: 
That’s the whole point. 
 
Student: 
 
♦ How do we win? 
 
Igor: 
That’s a good question. When we are faced with these things, how do we 
win anyway? Would you like to know how to do that? Are you sure about 
this?  
 
Students: Yes.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
550 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
DVD 22:  The I.G.O.R. Method – How to 
Destroy Resistance to Your Influence for 
Guaranteed Results 
 
Igor: 
So, we spent a lot of time doing some interesting things today, haven’t we? 
All right, if there was going to be one theme that would be a guiding thing 
throughout the whole of today, what do you think that would be? If there was 
one theme that was kind of behind most of the stuff that you did, any 
guesses on what that might be?  
 
Students: Reframing and reversals?  
 
Igor: 
That’s close.  
 
Students: Conversation awareness?  
 
Igor: 
That’s absolutely important, but it’s not quite what we’re looking for.  
 
Students: Feeling the emotions?  
 
Igor: 
Again, it’s getting very close to what we’re talking about, but it’s not quite 
there yet. Flexibility is part of this whole thing. Yes! What did he say? You 
missed it you should have sat down earlier. He said resistance. 
 
 
Think about it. All we’ve been doing today is we’ve been playing with 
different types of things that are traditionally known as resistance, have we 
not? One of the reasons I do this is because most people who think about 
the influencing process, think about motivation. How can I motivate 
someone? If only I motivate someone enough, then there’s no resistance. 
Isn’t that the logical thing most of us think about?  
 
 
Actually, as it turns out that’s not quite the case. We have two separate 
systems in our brain that actually get triggered at the same time whenever 
some kind of influencing process goes on.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
551 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
i. One is all about approach and opportunity.  
 
ii. Second is all about avoidance or it’s about inhibition.   
 
 
The approach frame is– let’s look at the right one. Here you go. It’s the part 
of the brain called the basal ganglia and the drug of choice is dopamine. 
This is what gets people motivated. It makes them approach things, makes 
them interested and curious, and it’s a wonderful part of the brain to have, 
isn’t it? The problem is if all you have is approach – oh, look at those shiny 
teeth on that saber-toothed tiger – you can get into all kinds of trouble.  
 
 
To balance this system, we have the hippocampus and our good friend the 
amygdala. Remember the amygdala, what does it do? It inhibits things. It 
breaks the process of the circling thoughts in the neocortex and so on, 
right? I believe I’m correct when I say that serotonin is the drug of choice of 
the inhibitory system.  
 
 
So as influences, I’d like you not to focus just on how we motivate people to 
do things, but I’d like you to think of it as a sliding scale. How do we 
decrease resistance as we increase motivation? It’s not either/or. The 
Cialdini Principles, for example, are primarily about motivation, aren’t they–
authority, social proof and so on. 
 
 
There is another researcher called Dr. Knowles, who looks at the other side 
of the equation. What happens when people are resistant, and how can you 
break that resistance down? Wouldn’t that be something worth looking at 
and building into our model of influence? So I have to say I like that Dr. 
Knowles presented as he’s got and then we’ll see if we can use our tools to 
solve these problems. He’s got three kinds or three main reasons for 
inhibition for resistance. 
 
 
The first he calls the reactant, which is a reaction to the influence process 
itself. You’re trying to influence me, and I don’t like it. Who here likes being 
told what to do? Who here likes it when someone sneakily makes them do 
stuff that they didn’t choose to do? Anyone enjoy that?  
 
 
A classic example of this is a lot of the subliminal studies with images. 
Images actually will work much better than sounds. If you flash an image of 
a certain kind of water, for example, and at the end they have the boss 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
552 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
playing video games, at the end they can choose from a whole bunch of 
different waters as a drink to take and then go home.  
 
 
Some people have the visual acuity to perceive, shall we say, consciously 
even a tiny flash at a hundredths of a second. The people that did not 
perceive the flash of a particular water bottle – I don’t know what it was– I 
think it was the water from the Coca Cola Company they would 
automatically take the water bottle, more or less. 
 
 
However, the people who perceived the water, to a person, excluded that 
from their choices. That is a classic reactant and you feel the same way, 
don’t you, when you feel like someone’s trying to manipulate you, trying to 
do something to you, what do we do? We shut down. We go no, I don’t like 
this. We fight back.  
 
 
So the first hurdle we’ve got to do is be aware of and think about what’s 
going on is what happens when people think they’re being influenced and 
it’s to their detriment, so we’ve got to take care of that. 
 
 
The next one is the idea of skepticism. It’s just plain old doubt and finally, is 
the idea of inertia. We tend to like to preserve things the way they are, and it 
takes effort to change or add things. So sometimes people are ready for 
everything, it’s just like, I just can’t get the drive going to get this done and 
those are three main causes of resistance.  
 
 
Think back to the previous exercise that we just did, where people were just 
putting a stop to things and so on, those are all examples of one of those 
three things in action, wasn’t it? Some skepticism – was that like maybe the 
doubt thing? Inertia – yes, yes, yes, yes, no. Why not? I don’t know. It’s too 
much effort. 
 
 
What we want to do is make sure that in the process, when we’re listing the 
values and getting the drivers and so on, these are all motivators. We also 
want to make sure that we’re testing for the resistance, for inhibitors, so we 
can take care of them as part of the natural cycle. That would make sense, 
wouldn’t it? So should we have a look at some ideas of how we might do 
that? 
 
 
Let’s just run through some of things in terms of the principles. Let’s look at 
the idea of reaction, the idea of people not wanting to be influenced. What’s 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
553 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the primary reason why people don’t like being influenced? Fear absolutely, 
afraid they’re going to lose something. It’s the fear that something to their 
detriment is going to occur.  
 
 
So our solution somehow has to take care of that fear process, doesn’t it? 
Now one of the simplest methods of taking care of fear and the whole trust 
concern really is rapport. Do you have a relatively powerful method for 
building rapport now? Something that’s a little bit unusual compared to what 
most people normally talk about?  
 
 
Do you now realise why we spent so much time in the last five days 
practicing the inner smile and everything that’s built up on top of it? Because 
a lot of the problems that you guys are talking about – like oh, what about 
this? I don’t like this – they’re taken care of with rapport. I mean real rapport, 
not like yeah, he’s okay. We’re talking like, this is an amazing person.  
 
 
Do you remember how you felt yesterday when you went through the first 
half of the influence process? In other words, the proper value, elicitation, 
they’re really listening to you and you had a little bit of an objection, but they 
busted through those in a way that was very respectful of you. How did you 
guys feel? Did you like it?    
 
 
That’s a very different type of influencing process then when someone just 
goes yeah, that’s very nice. Yeah, I like holidays too. Yeah, it’s cool. That’s 
a much lighter level of rapport. We’re talking about the more the depth the 
rapport, the more trust. That’s why friends can sell each other things very 
easily; because they don’t try they just demonstrate the value of it.  
 
 
I found this cool thing, it’s amazing, do you want to try it? Sure. Oh, wow, it’s 
amazing. Where do I get it? Oh, it’s in the store over there. Because they’re 
not selling it, unless they’re into the whole multi-level marketing which is a 
different story, of course, and your friends become like sales monsters. Not 
all the time, of course. 
 
 
We trust our friends. That trust, that rapport and respect is already there. If 
you can establish that right up front, it takes care of a lot of the reactant 
issues.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
554 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The next thing is something that is perplexing to me why a lot of people 
don’t notice this – is what happens – let me try it this way. Could I borrow 
you for a second? Just come up here. I just want to show you something.  
 
 
What if I was going to try to take more restraint – resist. What do people 
normally do? One, come on. Do you see the reaction there? That’s typical 
isn’t it? The harder I pull, the harder he’ll pull back. Yet strangely enough, 
when we get into this whole tussle thing, we start wanting to pull harder.  
 
 
When we’re doing these little practice closes with the resistance, how many 
of you felt like, if only I pull hard enough, I’m going to get this bastard to 
come with me? With emotion rising up, it’s that conflict interaction. 
 
 
All that’s going to do, of course, is build or increase resistance. So as a rule, 
if you get a little resistance here, just back off and let it go, say that’s all 
right. Now he’s back in his space. He’s maintaining his integrity and so on, 
but any time you should want to come, it is kind of fun. I’ll show you 
something. Come over here a second- wash, rinse, repeat. 
 
 
You want to back off, let him have his thing. It’s like okay, I’m safe. This is 
good. Then you might just increase some motivation, decrease some of the 
inhibitions. I’ll show you something else if you like that actually quite 
straightforward and people love this stuff. Do you know how much they love 
it? Let me show you. Come over here. 
 
 
So he’s saying that he feels like it’s more his choice as well and that’s the 
whole point, isn’t it. Aren’t reactions about choice, about not feeling like 
you’re being influenced and so on?  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
 
Wash, rinse and repeat instead of just pulling harder, it’s not about pulling 
harder. The one thing I will say in terms of caveat, there are occasions when 
people are just, its not reactant that’s the problem. It’s like they’re not 
resisting because they’re not sure about the influence process and so on 
sometimes it’s just inertia. It’s like well, I don’t know. It’s effort, there’s a 
different quality to that.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
555 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Isn’t there so if its inertia, the putting more pressure on can actually work 
and we’ll come onto that in a moment. Just want to make sure you 
understand that it’s not a black and white sort of rule.  
 
 
Hypnotic reversals are great. It’s kind of little bit like what we’re doing here. 
It’s, when we start reversing the scene of them. Here’s a classic example. 
Those of you, who’ve got the 'How To Make A Lot Of Money', please don’t 
answer this because it’s already revealed there. How would the rest of you 
deal with a situation where say a smoker comes in and you say are you 
ready to smoke? They go yeah, well, my family wants me to stop.  
 
 
How will you deal with that? Would you say well, hypnosis can do great 
things, and it’s very important, let’s find some way for you to stop smoking 
and so on. Would you do that? How many people would do that? No? How 
about say, well, it seems like you don’t really know why you’re here. So I’m 
not going to waste your time, and honestly I’d rather see other clients 
instead. So why don’t you go home and really think about it and then come 
back when you decide that you really want to make this change.  
 
 
Any of you actually tried that approach when it comes to especially smoking 
sessions and so on? What are your percentages in terms of people who 
stay despite your kicking them out? For me, it was around about 70% of the 
people stayed. Would that be fair to say that it’s 70%, maybe a little bit 
more?   
 
 
Set up correctly, most people stay, and they don’t just stay. They stay! 
They’re now in the program. You’ve reversed the whole script on them. 
Does that make sense? So you can take the resistance and flip it right back 
round on them. Sometimes acknowledgment is enough. Have you ever 
been to maybe like a family function and nobody speaks about Uncle Harry? 
It’s like a big elephant stuck in the middle of the room, and everyone’s trying 
very hard not even to bump into the elephant.   
 
 
 
Has anyone here ever tried – of course, done tactfully – acknowledged the 
fact that it’s there? Sometimes just acknowledging it – and actually the 
research shows this – when someone is feeling resistance, just 
acknowledging it – look, you might not like this, I understand. Sometimes if 
you can anticipate the resistance you say, you might not like this, but here’s 
the product, and then actually have the reactions the opposite way.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
556 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
The problem with that, by the way, is that you want to make sure that you 
know the person ahead of time because if you say, you might not like this to 
someone who has no reactants, and then they probably won’t like it 
because you just suggested it. The research backs it up. People who are 
introduced with this might not like it, and if they were normally just easily 
persuaded, you’ve diminished their response rate. You increase the 
responses of the reactives, but you decrease the responses for everyone 
else.  
 
 
So as a rule, I’d say reserve that for when there’s a problem. Just say look, I 
understand. You don’t want to be doing this. You feel rushed and the rest of 
it. I get it. Here’s the crazy part. You don’t have to do anything else. Just 
acknowledging it is enough. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Let’s have a look at some other little choice tidbits here. Another thing you 
can do is to start depersonalizing things. Part of reactants is all about what 
kind of framework happens when people get reactive or resist? It’s kind of 
like a “its them v us” thing, isn’t it? Oh, you’re not one of us. You’re not in my 
best interest.   
 
 
So the two things you can do is one is to do joining. It’s about us. So rather 
than blaming and saying, you need to stand up here, well let’s stand up here 
together. That’s joining and becoming joining forces, rather than opposing 
forces. The other version is the same idea essentially. It’s to depersonalize 
it.  
 
 
Most people find that standing up here is actually quite comfortable and it’s 
easy to do. So I’m not really asking you to do anything other than what I’d 
ask anyone else to do. It’s not about you. I ask everyone this.  
 
 
Who here gets offended when you’re in a doctor’s office, and he touches 
you in more intimate areas? If it’s part of the examination well, it’s not 
personal. It’s not about you it’s just how the work gets done, right. But if it 
ever was personal about you, even in that environment and you got a sense 
that it was personal, wouldn’t that be a completely different story? Same 
activity, if you think about it. So depersonalizing something can be a very 
powerful way of diminishing resistance.   
 
 
Stories are something we’ll come onto more as we get into the advanced 
part. It’s an excellent way of getting through most kinds of resistance, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
557 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
whether its inertia or reactants or even skepticism, but we’ll talk more about 
those as we get into that fully. 
 
 
You can minimize the request as well. You can diminish the importance of it, 
right? The study for this, by the way, was would you like to make a donation. 
People think oh, I don’t know. Anything will do, just pennies will be fine. 
Every little bit helps. On average, people would donate just as much, in 
other words, the people would otherwise not donate, are donating just as 
much as everyone else does. They’re just being given the freedom to 
respond only a little bit, in other words, you’re diminishing the request. It’s 
enough freedom to feel, I’m not being taken advantage of here. 
 
 
By the way, do you notice how a lot of these things you can just weave into 
your normal presentation, normal interaction? These are not little power 
moves and so on, they’re subtle, invisible things you can weave into how 
you present everything else, when you talk about values and all the rest of 
it, right? 
 
 
This is quite a sneaky one now. I came across his originally with Grinder 
and Bandler. Knowles actually did some research on this as well. The story 
that Grinder tells is kind of funny. They had some clients come in for a 
period and decided to go with hysterical clients just because. So they come 
in all hysterical. Hold on a second, we haven’t started yet. Just give me five 
minutes to get ready. They go okay, sure. They pulled themselves right 
back together again. 
 
 
If you haven’t started yet or if you’re already finished those are the times 
when people are most open to influence because nothing is going on. So 
before we begin, let’s just get some ground rules out of the way so we can 
get the interaction done properly. You can do most of your influence cycle in 
that segment. Let me get this out of the way. Let’s talk about you or about 
what you want to do and all the rest of it. Do you see how that works?  
 
 
Whew, we got the hard part done. Well, at least that’s over now. So now 
that we’re done, let’s have a little chat about life in general or something. Do 
you see how, again, you’re diminishing the importance of what’s going on, 
and that’s the point where the defenses come down the most? Again, do not 
abuse this because if you abuse this once, once trust goes, it’s very difficult 
to get it back.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
558 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Another one – and this is a classic one from the whole Ericksonian school – 
is redirecting resistance. Bandler did it to the point where if someone is 
sitting in the wrong chair, you just move them across the chair in a way that 
it stays in that place. I like to move people to physical locations. Sometimes 
I move them across rooms. A lot of people find that getting someone into a 
different office for the actual signing of something will diminish the 
resistance in a way.  
 
 
Right along with that could be to redirect the resistance in a way of giving 
them something to fight and win over. You can introduce ideas that they’ll 
object to, and you’ll fight back a little bit and they’ll object even more 
vehemently, and then you say, all right, you’re right, you can have it. Of 
course, now they feel like they’ve won, they’ve got their trophy, and to you 
really it’s a no brainer, but it feeds their need to win. It feeds their need to 
have pushed back on something. Make sense? 
 
 
The next one is a classic routine – the good cop, bad cop. Someone puts 
pressure on you and then the other person becomes your saving or shining 
white knight. Suddenly it builds more rapport potential and so on. People 
can be a little bit clued into that one, but it can still work in situations where 
that would not be expected, in terms of like a sales thing where someone 
says, oh, I can’t do this. This can’t be done. We don’t have these things in 
stock.  
 
 
Then the next sales person comes in and says, look, why don’t you go and 
deal with this over here. I’m sorry about that, he’s new here. He’s right that 
we’re low on stock and so on, but I’ll tell you what. I’ll do my best to find 
what it is. What was it you were looking for? Do you see the whole switching 
thing? You create pressure and then you release the pressure and, of 
course, that accelerates the bonding process.  
 
 
Finally, the idea of removing the strings, if people feel that there are strings 
attached, just to give you the quick study on that one. If you’re in a hotel and 
they say, please reuse your hotel towels and so on. On one card it would 
say if you reuse your towel, if you don’t get us to wash it again, we will make 
a donation on your behalf to such and such a charity. That’s a nice thing, 
right? 
 
 
Another version said we have made a donation for such and such a charity 
on your behalf already. So whether or not you use the towel is irrelevant. It’s 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
559 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
already been made. More people at that point decided to actually go ahead 
and reuse their towels. So by taking the pressure off and by taking off the 
strings, so to speak, it gives them freedom to respond socially, and that’s, of 
course, what we want to be doing. 
 
 
Finally, in terms of reactants, sometimes it’s enough to get a little bit of 
momentum going and then redirect it in any direction. Oh, that’s more 
important really for the inertia. Do you get the idea of how to deal with 
people who feel like they’re being manipulated? They’re resisting the 
process of influence, so you stop that process of influence. You make it 
more transparent and invisible you back off and let them have time to find 
their own way.  
 
 
Let’s talk about skepticism. What’s the purpose of skepticism? It, basically, 
is doubt, isn’t it? That’s the basic thing there. I’m not sure if this is correct. 
One of the simplest ways of taking care of skepticism is a guarantee. The 
question is; is skepticism related to the critical factor? It can well be. So 
people who have got an overdeveloped critical factor in terms of they 
analyse everything, they’ll tend to be more skeptical.  
 
True skeptics, in my opinion though, are open to experiences rather than 
rejecting them all. It’s just that they won’t accept the conclusions. So they’ll 
accept the experience but not the conclusion. What a lot of people call 
skeptics, of course, won’t even accept the experience in the first place.  
 
 
For example, if you went to a true scientist who’s supposed to be a skeptic 
and say, I can read minds. If he laughs in your face that is just someone 
who is closed off. They’re actually close-minded. If he says all right, prove it, 
show me. Then he’s open to the experience although he’s pauses his 
conclusion about it. He doubts the conclusion, although he’s happy to have 
the experience of what that might be. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
A guarantee is one good way of taking care of skeptics because essentially 
it’s about avoiding risk. A large part of doubt is about avoiding risk. The 
reactant is a fear of being manipulated. Skepticism is the fear of making the 
wrong choice essentially.  
 
 
Another thing that works fantastically well with skeptics – it will take a little 
bit more time and it depends on what kind of situation you’re in, but this is 
where hypnotic gifts, for example, are wonderful. If you can teach someone 
how to make a better decision, how to sort the genuine offers from the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
560 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
snake oil salesman, the irony is there will be no difference in how much or 
little they get influenced by a snake oil salesman. However, their rate of 
response, the way they get influenced by the genuine article – goes up.                           
 
 
So the way they did this was, basically, by teaching a bunch of students 
how to recognize websites and analyze them critically in terms of what’s a 
genuine offer in terms of if a sports star is talking about toothpaste, well, 
that’s not a genuine testimonial, shall we say, because what does he know 
about toothpaste? He’s just another human being. If it’s a doctor talking 
about it, that’s much more genuine. That has more weight in terms of the 
argument. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
So they had them being able to analyze websites to figure out which ones 
were just blowing smoke and air and which ones actually had genuine offers 
on them, and they found that with the smoke and air ones, the influence rate 
stayed pretty much level, but the genuine ones, they ended up buying way 
more on those.  
 
 
Why? Because think about what’s happened. They’re now confident in their 
decision-making abilities, so they’re more willing to make a decision. 
Skepticism is often a defense against making a bad decision. Do you see 
how that works? 
 
 
Another couple things like contrasts. Skeptics are contrasting against 
something. Can you change the contrast? Can you figure out what the 
contrast is they’re having and give them a different contrast? Change their 
frame.  
 
 
For example, you could get one of the DVD sets – let’s say the Advanced 
Covert Hypnosis. You can get the DVD set I’m selling for – I don’t know 
what the price is, so let’s make it up. Let’s just say its $500. You can get the 
cards on their own for $300, or you can get the cards and the DVD set for 
$500. Which one would you like? Do you see how we’re changing your 
contrast points and making something more appealing as a result? 
 
 
We’ve played already with contrast, so I won’t mention too much about it, 
but it’s one other way you can play with skeptics by changing the reference 
experience that they’re using.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
561 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Next we have the objection destroyer. That’s a classic way because the 
critical factor is a part of the whole skepticism thing. So when you trigger the 
amygdala, short circuit their thinking and present a clear reframe for them to 
latch onto, it can sometimes really easily short circuit the whole process. 
 
 
Finally, future memories are great for skeptics. I’m not sure if we talked 
about this, but do you understand the difference between how people 
process information in the present versus the future? Do you know what the 
fundamental difference is, other than it’s not now? Cost-benefit. 
 
 
In the present, people focus more on risk, what it costs them and what the 
risk is. So if you are giving them, for example, a bet to make. I think this is 
how they tested this. You can make a bet, and here are the odds and how 
often you win and so on. They’ll bet on the deal that gets them smaller wins 
but the odds are stacked in their favor. 
 
 
If you offer them the same selection of bets but say it won’t happen until the 
future – next week it will happen – people will usually or typically go for the 
future benefit. In other words, they’ll bet more on a higher risk thing because 
when we contemplate the future, we’re contemplating benefits.  
 
 
One way to get people out of skepticism is to give them a future memory. 
Focus on the benefits by going into the future, and the risk element 
disappears, or it diminishes at least. Do you see how that works? Is 
everyone clear on the idea of skepticism and how to play with that? 
 
 
Finally, we’ve got the idea of inertia. Inertia is it has a lot of possibilities. One 
is again a fear-based thing. I’m going to try to stay steady because I know 
what’s here. So in that case, simply building someone’s self-esteem usually 
can build a lot of momentum.  
 
Other reasons are just because they’re kind of stuck in a loop. So again the 
idea of teaching them to make better decisions works just as well here. You 
can kind of give them the poisoned well. You can make it more difficult to 
stay in inertia than to get momentum. So if it’s more painful – let’s put it this 
way just to give you a random example.  
 
 
Let’s say someone wants to get motivated to go to the gym, but they’re 
sitting there and they’re watching TV, and it’s all kind of nice. It’s easy to do 
inertia now, isn’t it? What if the other people in the house – let’s say he has 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
562 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
roommates – what if they’re now having this huge argument and the vibes in 
the air are just bad juju? You say I’m trying to watch TV.  
 
 
What’s the likelihood they’ll go well, the TV’s not working. I need to get out 
of here. Now he’s got momentum, hasn’t he? Where is that momentum 
going to go towards? Well, it’s probably going to go towards what’s already 
there at some level, which is well, I thought about going to the gym, and the 
gym is better than this. So you’re poisoning their ability to maintain inertia at 
that point.  
 
 
This is, for example, where the negative emotions become very useful – 
anger, fear and all that sort of stuff – but let me give you a great big caution 
on those. If you over-stimulate them or you only use these things, then it will 
very often blow up in your face. Remember, when you’re using their 
emotions as stimulants, you must give them a very clear exit strategy or way 
out.  
 
 
In this case, he’s uncomfortable because people are arguing around him. 
The way out is to go to the gym and clear the air. Now he doesn’t have to 
deal with it and now it’s all clear and its fine, same thing with fear. The 
tetanus injections, remember? If you get the vaccine, the fear gets removed 
versus there’s no clear steps, in which case, they’ll just go into denial.  
 
 
Do you see the difference? So it’s very important you give them an exit 
strategy so they don’t get stuck there.  
 
 
I think one of the most elegant propellants for people in inertia is you begin 
with a negative propellant – like fear or anger or something like that – but 
you end it with a positive – something that draws them towards it. So I 
create a smooth chain through the whole process, and if nothing else, they 
don’t get stuck in the negative state.   
 
 
By the way, we’ll have a chance to practice this stuff, especially when we 
get into the more advanced things. These little things you can build into your 
stories and all kinds of stuff. Objection destroy, of course, fits in there as 
well. 
 
 
The last thing that works really well with people with inertia is binds and 
double binds. Remember, inertia is about making less choice, less activity. 
One of the things that make a bind work is its more effort to figure out what 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
563 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
the other things in the bind are – in other words, what’s not included in the 
bind – than just to go along with it. So you’re actually using the pattern of 
inertia on itself where you’re using a bind. Do you see how that works?  
 
 
Do you want an example of a bind or an example of how it might work? 
Well, let me put it this way. If I give you a selection of choices and there are 
too many of them, you have to analyze it all. I think the study was in terms 
of giving people insurance policies or retirement plans, and you had lots of 
choices of about how much percent you should pay in and who pays in 
extra stuff, and there were all these numbers. People were paralyzed, right? 
 
 
Then they said okay, here are your choices. You put in a small amount or a 
large amount. The small amount ends up this way; the large amount ends 
up that way. Very clear choices. A lot more people invested in those plans 
than in the complex choices where you can do this, you can do that, or you 
add this, this, and so on. But consider this. When you had all the extra 
choices so you can create a bespoke plan, fewer people purchased 
anything.  
 
 
When you had just the two choices – invest a small amount, invest a large 
amount – more people purchased one. I can’t remember which of the two 
was more attractive. I can’t recall that, but more people actually invested in 
that insurance plan or that retirement plan. Does that make sense? It’s 
clearly a bind, isn’t it? Do you want to invest a small amount or a large 
amount? Good?  
 
 
So a double bind is when you give people two choices that seem different 
but actually are the same. As I said, you can use binds or double binds. So I 
just get you an example of a bind. Is it this one or that one? You could also 
think of it as a double bind because you haven’t given them much choice, 
it’s just invest small or large, right? Which color do you want? Do you want t 
have it red or green?  
 
 
That’s another bind, double bind. The whole area gets a little bit fudged, so I 
wouldn’t worry too much about that whole thing. The idea is you want to 
make the choices themselves simple, and things outside the choices 
complex.  
 
 
Can you come over here? It’s probably easier to capture the whole thing. 
Otherwise, I’ll have to chat later with you.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
564 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Student: 
All I was going to say was one year when I first started working for corporate 
America and invested in a retirement plan, it was PIP or something like that 
– Personal Investment Plan – but you had three choices low, medium and 
high-risk. It didn’t get any more complicated than that. So a lot of people 
pretty much – I think 85-90% of the company – invested in some fashion.  
 
 
Then later they decided in their infinite wisdom that they would extend that 
so you could buy company stock and you could invest in this other thing. 
They gave you like five or six choices and the number dropped.  
 
Igor: 
This is a classic example of what we’re talking about. Too much choice 
creates inertia.  
 
Student: 
I actually wanted to give a very inspirational example to me of the last three 
things you were talking about, the future memory, the double bind and the 
risk thing. 
 
 
One time I was working with a counselor. They drew out a chart of the bad 
behavior and the good behavior, short-term, long-term, and they showed 
under the long-term all the risks down of what you were doing and you 
wrote all the benefits down of what you were doing.  
 
 
Then after you wrote and saw like physically the risks and the benefits, 
which kind of gave you the motivation and where to go from, they took you 
through a future memory, through the benefit chart. Like imagine all those 
happening right in front of you, close your eyes. Then they ended it with a 
double bind of you can either choose now or later. If you look at the short-
term versus the long-term, what do you think you’d like to do? 
 
Igor: 
Now let me just pause you there and show you that this is a great example 
of the kind of question you’re asking for. Do you notice how much more 
complex it is to go beyond choose now or later? What? What am I 
choosing? Is it like the bad, the good or what? Especially on the back of a 
future memory where they’ve had pleasant experiences, now really where’s 
all the energy going towards?  
 
 
It’s, basically, you’ve got to choose now or you’ve got to choose later? 
You’re going to choose a little change or a big change? Those are easy 
choices to make. To break out of the frame requires mental effort, and it’s a 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
565 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
lot easier to just go along with it. Of course, once you’ve started on that path 
that can get accentuated. It’s the salami tactic in reverse at that point. Do 
you understand? Thank you. 
 
Student: 
I thought it was great because it was triple-layered, and it’s good for any 
therapist in the room because I know it worked wonders with me. 
 
Igor: 
Beautiful. That’s an excellent demonstration of it. Did that help you?  
 
 
[Applause] 
Student: 
There’s a certain burger chain that has a double bind and they leave out 
one choice. 
 
Igor: 
Oh really? 
 
Student: 
So you have the burger and you have the meal. The meal is small and it’s 
the lower price and so when you ask for it, they say do you want that in 
medium or large? They don’t give you the choice of the small. That 
increased their sales by not giving you the choice of the small one. I think 
it’s kind of unethical, but they seem to do it quite well. 
 
Igor: 
Right and it goes right back to that same thing again. You’re there, you 
order, and it’s like, yeah, it seems like a good idea. Even if you have a small 
appetite, you’ll go for a lower version. I’m sure people will break through and 
say no, I just want a small meal, I just want the burger. 
 
 
Do you see how these things are abounding in all our everyday lives? So it’s 
not a question of – the key here is the delivery, which is just natural. Do you 
want the medium meal or the large one? Will he get it? Will he get it? Then 
you’re putting them on notice that something weird is going on, and that’s a 
very different kettle of fish.  
 
 
Did you get the idea of the principle of what we’ve just been talking about? 
That’s really all I care about. We’ll have lots of opportunities to put it into 
practice. I want you guys to just think about the terms of motivating people.  
 
 
We want to put everything we can into one basket so that as we’re 
negotiating through our conversations, we’re looking out for is this a certain 
kind of resistance so we could build something in here? Is this enough in 
terms of the leverage we’re going to get, the motivation we’re going to get 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
566 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
out of the values? Is that enough for the motivation? What else can we build 
in here? Does that make sense? 
 
 
Now we’re going to do a quick exercise that is going to give us everything 
and put it into one simple kind of cover-all technique for almost any 
circumstance, and you can scale it up or down, depending on how you need 
it. Would that be kind of interesting? Yes? Everything put together in a very 
simple formula for you guys to follow. 
 
1. The first step as always is HR, H+ and hypnotic rapport.  
 
 
You want to get into a decent interaction based on trust and comfort where 
you are making promises that you’re constantly keeping, you’re not breaking 
your own promises and so on.  
 
 
2. Step two you want to make sure you’re in control of the conversation.  
 
 
A lot of times I find that people when they go through the rapport phase, 
they lose control of the conversation. They let other people get so animated 
and excited that they don’t want to interfere with the process, and they’re 
afraid of interrupting to re-direct the conversation.  
 
 
I know some therapists who will spend two hours taking a personal history, 
not because they want it, just because they’re afraid of interrupting the client 
because they might miss something important, or we might mess up the 
client relationship and so on.  
 
 
Don’t be afraid of controlling interaction. As long as your H+, your HR is in 
good shape, the interaction will be accepted. I mean you’ve accepted all the 
interruptions early on with good grace, didn’t you? So long as it’s done 
respectfully, then you can intrude even someone who’s in completely one 
train of thought, although bear in mind with some people you’ll need to 
repeat your interruption several times. This can happen throughout the 
phase.  
 
 
For example, we need to be asking questions as part of the process. So if 
you lose control of the interaction during the question because you need 
information, once you have the information you can interrupt and then 
redirect it again somewhere else. Do you see how that works? So we need 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
567 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
to have these control mechanisms so that you really have the direction of 
the conversation. 
 
3. Step three is all about questions and fact-finding.  
 
 
The kind of questions you’ll be looking for – of course, you’ll let them tell you 
what it is that they think they want or need, but you’re listening for, you’re 
looking for information about what they really want or need. One of the 
things that’s going to give you a clue to that is going to be their values and 
drivers. What is it that’s going to help them achieve at the end of the whole 
day.  
 
 
Another thing you can look out for that is related to values and drivers is 
purpose. What do you want to use your brand new car for? What is it you 
need over time and plan to do? What is your purpose for looking for this 
item right now or asking for it? 
 
 
The next thing you want to do is flush out resistance. This can be in the form 
of hidden fears, objections. Remember we talked yesterday at some length 
about the idea of what if money becomes an issue? Money is rarely an 
issue. Money will be an issue within a price range. Within that range, it’s 
rarely an issue unless you haven’t flushed out all the other resistances. 
Then, it becomes the focal point of the issue and they’ll actually believe it 
because, basically, what’s happening is they feel like something’s not quite 
right. So the price then becomes the, oh it must be the price or maybe I 
won’t get the right price, but you have to flush out the resistances to figure 
out what it is. 
 
 
In that process, of course, you now have some tools to diminish resistance, 
don’t you? So your value and your purpose allow you to raise the levels of 
motivation. Flushing out the resistances allows you to diminish resistance or 
if you need to, which is kind of the next stage, or if you need to start the 
objection destroyer to reframe those objections using what we did 
yesterday. So now you have some places to go. 
 
 
Now at this point here, things start getting a little less linear. I’m going to put 
this down as a linear process, but you’ll probably find a resistance, you’ll run 
through a little objection destroyer, you’ll come back on the loop and you’ll 
carry on another thread, and you’ll do little mini loops and start all the stuff 
that you’re doing. Does that make sense? I’ll just give you the whole thing 
as a linear process so that you have a nice overview. 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
568 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
Actually, you know what? Why don’t we do this? Why don’t we just start this 
as an exercise? Go up to this point here, and then we’re going to add a 
couple of things that are going to make this more interesting, and then we’ll 
just wrap it all up as a whole exercise. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Find a partner and remember yesterday you were being the subject for your 
own field? Today, I’d like you to be the actual hypnotist, the influencer in 
your own field. If you’re a hypnotist, then be a hypnotist. If you’re a stock 
broker, be a stock broker. If you’re a teacher, be a teacher. Tell your client 
how you expect them to respond to some degree. If their reaction is 
unrealistic, just tell them that normally they’d respond like this, give me that, 
and you have that interaction. 
 
 
What I am looking for is very simple. You’re going to build that strong 
hypnotic rapport, which takes care of a lot of the resistances up front. Can 
you control the conversation when it starts going a little bit one way or 
another? You can let it wander for a little bit, but then can you reign in back 
in and focus it on the questions you need to ask, which are essentially what 
do they really need? What do they really want? Not what they say they 
want, which is also related to what are their values? What’s driving this 
whole thing? What is their purpose? What are they trying to use this stuff 
for? 
 
 
Finally, you’re going to see if you can flush out resistances as you go along. 
Resistance to the process, resistance to answering the question, 
skepticism, inertia, are they a little slow in answering, all these things you 
want to flush out. You do not have to do anything with them yet. Just know 
that they exist or maybe take a note of them. We’ll come back, we’ll add 
something more and then we’ll go from there. Does that make sense, is 
everything good?  
 
 
Let’s take about seven minutes apiece and then we’ll come back. Stay with 
the same partner for the whole exercise, and when you come back just 
remember who your partner is and we’ll add some more. Off you go.  
 
 
Welcome back. Did you enjoy that? Was that useful? Was that easy to do? 
So by this point, it should be relatively easy to do and so on. Remember, at 
any of these points you can launch into little mini hypnotic things, a dream 
machine or anything like that. The main thing is this is your fact-finding 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
569 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
machine here, what gives you the information that lets you know what kind 
of territory you have to navigate.  
 
 
Some of these things you’ll do kind of informally, you’re just having a chat 
and so on. Some of these things you’ll do more formally, depending on the 
context and what it requires. 
 
 
The next thing you have is the idea of the objection destroyer. I hesitate to 
put it in as a step because really it filters in. It’s kind of like a light bulb that 
flashes on and off as things arise. Does that make sense? So if something 
is there and you can’t quite reframe it, just throw in an objection destroyer, 
have the whole cycle, acknowledge the problem, a little bit of a magic 
moment or something like that and out it comes. He goes oh wow, that’s 
amazing.  
 
 
When we come onto the more advanced things, we’ll show you how to 
create more similes, analogies and all these things that can be used as 
impromptu magic moments too.  
 
 
Then when you start focusing on something that is very interesting, which is 
we’re going to add problems into the mix. That sounds a little weird to do 
that. Essentially what we’re doing here is, well, we’re doing two things. The 
first thing we’re doing is we’re educating our clients by adding problems. 
We’re making sure that they have understood all the ramifications, all the 
consequences of what they think they want.  
 
 
For example, let’s say someone wants to have a safe family car and is 
looking for a Porsche, like a 911. You say well, have you thought this 
through properly? How big are your children? Will they fit in the back? Are 
you going strap them to the hood? How do you plan to do this? It’s an 
extreme example, but a lot of times they haven’t necessarily checked all the 
options that are available, especially think about it this way.  
 
You’re an expert in your field. I’m just thinking about in terms of the mind as 
well, not in terms of the sales process. Sometimes just in terms of the 
conversation, you may know more about something than they do. 
Sometimes it’s as simple as have you considered this? What about that? 
 
 
Essentially what you’re doing here is you’re going to start expanding their 
options and their values. You’re going to add more. Now what this also does 
is it adds a massive amount of trust because how often does someone 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
570 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
who’s trying to influence you give away a secret that actually you may not 
have considered all the problems?  
 
 
Normally, don’t they try to sweep the problems under the carpet to get you 
to say yes or buy as quickly as possible? So it creates more acceptance, it 
creates more honesty, more trust and meanwhile, of course, you’re 
potentially flushing out if there’s anything left.  
 
 
If you start mentioning problems and, of course, problems that you know 
how to handle as well– you’ll show them how to deal with them – they might 
start coming back saying, what about this and what about that? So now their 
hidden concerns are more likely to come out as well. See how that works? 
Of course, you’re going constantly through the reframing process and the 
objection destroyer if you need it as an extra thing. You’re adding in all your 
persuasion mechanisms.  
 
 
If resistance goes up, then you can figure out if its skepticism, in which case 
you might throw some guarantee type things in or other work. If they feel 
more like they’re being pressured, you back off and then you let them come 
back on their own time. 
 
 
A classic example of that is if they say I want to think about it, say that’s 
fine. Take some time to think about it. Shall I get you a coffee whilst you’re 
thinking? Do you notice how you’re giving them time, but at the same time 
you’re still containing the space to some extent? Do you see how these 
things are working? 
 
 
Very importantly throughout this whole sequence now, you’re introducing 
your yes sets. You’re constantly checking that you have them on board, and 
you’re checking especially their nonverbal responses. So we’re doing this 
and that and the other. Yes, happy. What does that tell you? You missed 
something? This is where you have to explore. This is where that anything 
left has been left over.  
 
 
Now this looks like a little complex process so far, but really a lot of these 
steps might be just a one-liner, if that. We’re just putting it out here for 
thoroughness. This is a scalable process, you can do this whole thing in two 
minutes as you chat with someone or you can do it over the course of two 
months as you go through a whole sales process. You’re constantly testing 
to make sure they’re still on board with something.  

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
571 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
If incidentally you have to break the influence cycle and come back maybe a 
day or two later, you summarize – and again, you go straight back to your 
yes set to make sure that all the conditions are still the same because some 
of their values may have changed. They may have learned something new 
and the conditions may have changed. Make no assumptions at that point, 
right? 
 
 
Once you’ve gone through this whole process, you’ve added extra problems 
and, of course, you’ve resolved them again, you want to start attaching their 
values to whatever it is that you’re offering – an idea, a project, a product, a 
service, it really doesn’t matter. You somehow have to get them to get a 
sense that what you’re offering, the world or the hypnotic reality that you’re 
offering is one in which their values are going to be increased.  
 
 
In that case, of course, life will be more enjoyable and his ability to help 
others make a more enjoyable life for themselves is going to increase as 
well and so on. Do you see how that works?  
 
 
A simple way of doing that and one that I would encourage you to do 
anyway even if you’re doing this with some other means, whether it’s 
hypnotic language or reframing or frame control or pre-frames, is to also 
include a future memory. Now we’re doing this for several reasons. 
 
 
One is because of the cost-benefit thing we know about futures. The other is 
because they’re now already developing a sense of ownership over the 
whole thing. They have an experience of it. The third is, of course, the 
experiential thing. Experience is what persuades. Remember the emotions? 
They have to have the emotion of what it’s like to have their value satisfied 
by having this new idea or belief, by having this new product or service and 
so on.  
 
 
The future memory is a simple, elegant way of doing that. You’ve got to give 
them experiences. Then you do another set of yes sets for testing, of 
course. You can still do the indirect yes sets or the future memory to see if 
they’re along with you and so on, but then at the end here you’re going to 
summarize the whole thing. So you came here looking for this, this and this 
and really it’s because it’s going to give you this, this and this.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
572 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
We have something here, which is this and this. That’s a very formal way of 
doing it. You can also do it informally in terms of it’s an idea.  
 
 
 
Look, you used to believe that Santa Claus existed. Yet you’re also the kind 
of person that really wants to know the truth about things. I admire you for 
being able to take it like such a big adult, you 35-year-old person. The idea 
that Santa Claus may just have been an invention is an admirable trait, that 
you can really focus on the truth and accept it. See how we’re going for the 
yes sets here, and we’re checking through? 
 
 
The point of the yes set is it’s kind of – some people call it a trial close. 
You’re constantly checking if there’s anything missing. Is there anything I’m 
missing? Is anything else missing? So we have this, we have this, we have 
this, we have this. Then, depending on the context, you’ll have a kind of 
open-ended yes set. Is that what you’re looking for? Is anything missing? 
Does that seem right to you? Does that feel natural now? It depends on the 
context.  
 
 
Ideas will seem right or feel natural. Products will be what they’re looking for 
or what they’ve been hoping to get or get their hands on or something like 
that. So you can flip this around a little bit.  
 
 
Finally, in terms of closing, I really don’t care what kind of closing method 
you use. Very often they’ll close themselves. They’ll go yes, and they’re 
pretty much done. The key thing I usually look for right at the end is the next 
small step. I want a physical or symbolic activity to show that they’re in this 
new reality now.  
 
 
For example, smokers usually bring their last pack of cigarettes with them, 
and at the end of the session they throw them in the bin. It’s a symbolic act 
that cements in everything else. In coaching, it used to be the handshake 
and a firm date. Now, the firm date might not have necessarily been when 
we do our first coaching session. It might be so I will call your secretary 
tomorrow to put a date in your diary and we’ll go from there. Is that right? 
Yes. It’s a simple step, but it’s gone to that next level of commitment. It 
might be a signature.  
 
 
There’s an old saying, signatures make long memories. The purpose in my 
opinion of a contract is not to prevent litigation. If you don’t trust someone, 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
573 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
you don’t start a contract without somebody you don’t trust because you 
know you can force them and win in court. It’s expensive, guys. It takes 
forever and it’s a hassle. It’s a pain.  
 
 
As an ex-lawyer, I’m not giving you legal advice. I’m not allowed to 
anymore, but if I were to give legal advice I would say the purpose of a 
contract is not, win in court if you need to. It’s to make sure that everyone is 
very clear about what they’re getting into. If you’re not sure about getting 
into something with that person, well, a contract is not going to fix that. It’s 
just going to make sure that your litigation becomes more interesting. It’s 
just a personal opinion. You’re welcome to take it or not.  
 
 
So a signature might be that symbolic act. It might be handing over the 
keys. It might be taking a formal payment or whatever. The point is it doesn’t 
have to be a large act. It’s got to be something that cements them in that 
social commitment of this is my new role. This is how I am now. Does that 
make sense to you guys? 
 
 
Are there any questions on the process?  
 
 
I think the best thing to do now is for you guys to practice that. So take it 
from where you left it and jump straight back in. Assume you’ve just flushed 
out their problem, their resistances; you’ve got their purpose, their values; 
you’ve got a good sense of where they’re going with it; and then just run all 
the way through to the end in a full complete cycle using the objection 
destroyer whenever it’s appropriate.  
 
 
Seven minutes apiece is enough? Off you go.  
 
 
That was interesting. Was that fun? Who enjoyed that? Who realises that 
this whole thing can be scaled up and down. In other words, you can have 
like a two-minute conversation, you can have a 20-hour conversation, 
depending what depth you go into and so on. It’s just that now you’re 
looking out for key features that you’ll either enhance or skip over. Does that 
make sense?  
 
 
Sometimes you can rush the process because it’s not that big a deal. Other 
times you have to go more step-wise and really build up your foundations so 
that you have a solid outcome. Other than that though, it’s a solid process. I 
think it pretty much encompasses everything we’ve done so far, does it not? 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
574 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
So who feels good about this? Good. I think you really deserve to. You 
really should. 
 
 
I’ll try to clear something up in terms of a lot of people asked me about this 
yesterday. Remember we had the three diagrams? We had the dream 
machine, which looks something like this. Then we had the objection 
destroyer, which looks something like that. Do you remember these? Then 
we had the big influence cycle, which had all the things built into it together, 
right? A few of you have been asking, what does this whole thing mean? 
 
 
Well, we didn’t really give a label, so I thought we might come up with 
something interesting. It’s about influence, of course. I always liked the idea 
of guaranteeing some things, so there are influence guarantees, but then 
I’m practical minded so I thought maybe we should say what it is, which is 
all about only getting results. So I thought maybe we’d call it the influence 
guaranteed – only results method.   
 
 
If there was only a way to really remember this easily, as a way to just wrap 
our minds around it so that it would be easy to recall. I don’t know because 
it’s a bit of a mouthful isn’t it?  
 
Student: 
Just a touch.  
 
Igor: 
Yes, so I’m sure you will come up with a method to remember this easily like 
a little mnemonic device, you know like an acronym but, of course, EEYS 
won’t really work so I don’t know. I’ll leave it in your hands. Is that okay? 
 
 
Do you all get the idea of how this one works? So when you look up at 
words that have gone on board here. You look at the four main diagrams. 
Those are essentially the four big pieces that you’ve been learning over the 
last eight days or so. Does that make sense? 
 
 
If you just remember those four diagrams, you should be able to remember 
everything you’ve done so far because it’s built into them. So make sure you 
take a little note of them. Take them home and tattoo them on your forearm, 
your toes or your eyelids. Oh yeah, I remember now, wherever you want. Is 
that helpful? 
 
 
As you know, we’re going to have a break tomorrow to let a couple of things 
happen. One of them, of course, is your minds, your brains will require a 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
575 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
little bit of detoxing after five days of intensive effort. I have learned in the 
past by trying to run courses over an extended period, that around day five, 
it all starts going a little bit hot and hairy up in there.  
 
 
Day six a good day for you guys to just decompress a little bit. Have a late 
night tonight if you want. Have a late morning tomorrow if you want. I will, 
however, ask you not to waste the time you have tomorrow. You can 
absolutely decompress, chill out, hang out with people and go to the beach 
and all that sorts of stuff.  
 
 
However, whilst you’re there, this is a conversational hypnosis course after 
all, isn’t it? So whilst you’re there, you may as well start applying some of 
these skills, sometimes invisibly, sometimes more visibly in different areas 
to get used to doing it not in here. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So here are some of the things I would recommend. These are 
recommendations, folks. You can take them or leave them as you wish, but 
they will definitely help you to do certain things.  
 
 
First and foremost, really, this is the most fun thing. I’d like you to go around 
and flash some people. I, of course, don’t mean for you to take your clothes 
off in any way or leave without any clothes on. Just in case you mistook my 
meaning there. We’re talking about the whole hypnotic rapport thing. 
Remember, it’s three phases. The inner smile is what drives it. You have to 
have that feeling inside of you.  
 
 
If you find it difficult finding that feeling, do you know what you do? You talk 
to one of these other hypnotists in the room. I’m sure they’ll be happy to sort 
you out.  
 
 
So find that feeling, intensify it and then just flash a couple of strangers, and 
importantly keep observing them. So whatever they do next, you mirror in a 
friendly disposition. If they happen to come over, don’t go oh Jesus, they’re 
coming over. What do I do now? What do I do now? Think quick! Well, why 
not, right? 
 
 
So at that point, if you want to get into a conversation go, do I know you? I 
don’t know. Do I know you? Have we met before? I don’t know it feels kind 
of weird, doesn’t it? Yeah, it does. So that’s probably the way the 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
576 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
conversation will end up going. What do you do? I’m a hypnotist, which 
could be another way it could go.  
 
 
At some point, I would like you to do an instant induction somewhere in 
public. It’s fine doing it in here. We’re all amongst friends now, right? But 
doing it in public, well, if people can watch and observe that’s going to add a 
little bit more of an edge to it. Now to make it easy on you, I’m not going to 
ask you to do street hypnosis and do with a stranger and so on. If you want 
to, if you feel up for it, it’s kind of fun to do, then do it. It’s going to be a lot of 
fun. 
 
 
However, if you’re not quite there yet, then just find someone else in the 
room and say do you if we do that tomorrow and j do it with each other. 
There’s a couple thing’s I want to point out as you do that and I’m going to 
encourage you not to do it outside of the hotel even, because you’re now 
very familiar with the hotel it’s home territory.  
 
 
I’d like you to go out of home territory, maybe on the beach, there’s a shuttle 
that goes to the beach or the airport that would be kind of interesting but it 
doesn’t matter where it is but if you feel up to it, do it with a stranger if they 
offer. If not, do it with someone from this room, but out there somewhere 
else where other people can observe.  
 
 
Typically, something will happen whilst you’re doing this in public, 
something like this. If the induction is happening over here, people won’t just 
come up and stare this way. They’ll feel afraid. They’ll watch from a 
distance, right? Do you know what you do as soon as you spot someone 
watching from a distance? Any ideas? That’s right, you flash them. Then 
you can wave them over and just say, look, watch this and if they want to 
have a go afterwards well, who are you to deny them the wonders of 
hypnosis.  
 
 
In correlation to that, I’d also like you to do a magic moment at some point in 
public, one magic moment. It can be in correlation with the instant induction. 
So you could use it as part of a setup for the instant induction. It’s a nice 
way of doing it, or it can be separate and different scenarios, or just in 
normal conversation because it just happens to fit. That’s fine. Is that all 
cool so far? 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
577 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Then next one can also be combined if you wish. The next one is, again, 
very, very simple to do. I like to do this primarily with someone who’s not in 
this room, although if you feel like warm-up with someone here, you can do 
that too, which is you can just have a chat with someone. Can anyone have 
a chat with someone? Is that possible to chat to people? It can be people 
who have been with you in terms of like, if your family has come over here, 
it can be strangers or people you just meet hanging around and so on.  
 
 
My preference is not someone in this room, but if that’s the way you need to 
warm up, that’s fine. The key distinction I want to make in terms of this chat 
is somewhere in the middle of this chat, I’d like you to shift your inner state 
as though you were doing the, that’s right exercise. Now you don’t even 
have to change your voice all that much. Just change your feelings, and 
make sure that the way that you speak does not change the way that you 
feel. They’re in sync, and that’s it. That’s easy to do, is it not?  
 
 
Now should the little devil on your shoulder be whispering in your ear saying 
go on, do it, do it, the it that it’s referring to is, of course, the dream machine, 
isn’t it? Now far be it for me to suggest that you use the dream machine in 
normal conversation with an unsuspecting member of the public and give 
them a hypnotic gift, and even if I were to have the audacity to suggest that 
to you, then it would only be a suggestion, wouldn’t it? I’m only a hypnotist. 
 
 
So you get the idea of how you can fill up your day tomorrow, these are 
easy things you can do as you’re going about your day, as you’re chilling 
out and relaxing by the pool, going to the seaside, hanging out in a 
restaurant or something like that. If you want to hang out in little groups for 
moral support, that’s fine too.  
 
 
The one thing to not do is go out in the streets and go okay, ooh, okay, uh, 
want to do hypnosis? That’s probably, not the most convenient way to do 
this. You can if you want to. If it amuses you, by all means do it that way, 
but there are much more relaxing and easy ways of doing it. I recommend 
you start there at least. Does that make sense for tomorrow? 
 
 
One thought or an idea that can still kind of arises – I mean would it be fair 
to say we’ve covered a lot of territory just in these five days? Would that be 
fair to say? And would I be close to having an approximation when I take a 
wild guess that your minds are feeling a little bit full right now? Would that 
be close to a wild guess? Just a little bit? Perhaps – I mean I could be 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
578 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
stretching things a little bit, but perhaps some of you are kind of wondering; 
how do I keep track of all this stuff I’ve learned? Maybe it’s just me, I don’t 
know. 
 
 
One of our students who couldn’t be here, unfortunately – he lives in L.A. 
and his name is Dan. Pasadena is part of L.A., isn’t it? He’s in Pasadena, 
and he’s been through a lot of the home-study courses and the master 
classes and so on. He asked a question that I suspect is kind of somewhere 
in your minds as well.  
 
 
How do I put it all together? How do I use all this stuff? I mean think about 
it? It’s not a small amount of stuff and even keeping track of it alone is kind 
of a bit of a headache, right? So how do you keep track of all this stuff? How 
do you make sure you use it and implement it so you become a persuasive 
individual and so on? 
 
 
I told him something very simple. Of course, you realize that you need to 
trust your unconscious, right? You need to let it do the work because that’s 
where it’s going to happen. Of course, he’s in a rush. I just want to get it all 
now, now, now. It’s going to happen. 
 
 
So the first thing is just slow down. What’s the rush? Think about it. What is 
the rush? If you want your unconscious mind to integrate all this stuff and 
start using it, you just have to give it an opportunity for it to happen, to allow 
it to happen, not to force it through. So I made a simple recommendation to 
him, which is why don’t you just change your day around just a little bit, 
nothing huge or dramatic?  
 
 
Just change something in your day so it’s different. If it’s different, you don’t 
have any thought loops and patterns running around with it. If it’s different 
and you don’t have those patterns running around, you could fill it up with 
something else. 
 
 
Now, your unconscious mind is pretty creative about filling stuff up, so it 
might fill it up with something that is a little bit more hypnotic, a little bit more 
of the things you’ve been learning, and if it happens to come out then enjoy 
it. Just don’t be in a rush to get there. 
 
 
So he took my advice at face value, and the next day he decides to walk to 
work, which is interesting because that’s not quite what I meant, but fair 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
579 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
enough. He’s in Pasadena and L.A. is kind of really stretched out and so on. 
So he gets up an hour earlier because it’s a bit of a walk, and actually he 
enjoys it. He’s a little overweight so it’s actually good for him to get 
movement and motion and so on, and he’s walking out – and I don’t know 
Pasadena that well.  
 
 
He’s walking down the street and it’s just a little bit after dawn, so it’s before 
most people are up. The sun is shining a little bit; it’s just come up on the 
edges. It’s actually not that much of a bright morning because it’s L.A. and 
it’s all kind of smoggy, but we like to believe it was a bright, fresh morning, 
right? 
 
 
He’s walking down the street and something happens. It’s kind of like a 
weird spider sense tingling thing. Something just doesn’t seem right to him, 
although he feels great and fresh and so on. He eventually figured out what 
it is. It’s kind of this rumbling noise in the distance. Sure enough, over time it 
gets louder as he’s walking. He starts to recognize what this is. This is the 
sound of engines, motor bikes.  
 
 
He starts to think, well, who the hell is going to be on a motor bike at this 
time of morning, and by the sound of it, a lot of them? So he starts getting a 
little bit nervous. I don’t know if you know that L.A. has all kinds of biker 
gangs in the peripheries. So he starts getting a little bit nervous and starts 
looking around to see where he could take a little detour for a bit, but there’s 
no way.  
 
 
There are these huge blocks and it takes a while to get to the end of the 
block. Before he can get to the end of the block, just take a detour and let 
things pass by. This wave of biker’s catches up to him and now it gets a little 
bit serious. 
 
 
They see a man on his own, in the morning and they’re going to have some 
fun so they stop their bikes, surround him and he’s terrified. What the hell do 
these people want with me? So they have all these leering faces, and then 
the worst thing you can possibly imagine starts happening. They grab him, 
they stick a bag over his head, they get those plastic cuffs and tie his arms 
behind his back, his legs as well, throw him on one of the vehicles and off 
they drive.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
580 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Right now he is very nervous. He’s not, the happiest of chaps right now. 
They’re driving and driving and driving, and he’s nervous and his breathing 
shifts as it would normally do and he’s thinking, what the hell do they want 
with me? Now I don’t know if you know this, but when you get kind of 
nervous about things, it requires a lot of energy, doesn’t it? I hope this never 
happens to you and that you never have a chance to experience the truth of 
what I’m about to say, but he discovered that if you’re nervous for long 
enough – because time kind of distorted for him – but there came a point 
where he got so tired, he either fell asleep or he passed out. He doesn’t 
know which. 
 
 
 
He wakes up with no sense of time. It’s all gone. All he knows is its hot. He’s 
lying on the ground and he’s very hot. He’s sweating and the first thing he 
does is his survival instincts kick in and he starts really listening. He wants 
to get a sense of where are they? Maybe he can get a hint at what they 
want because up to this point, nobody said anything to him. They’ve poked 
him and jibed him a bit, but they haven’t actually said anything. 
 
 
He wakes up and he’s listening, but he doesn’t hear much. So he starts 
shifting around and the strangest thing happens. His hands – the cuffs have 
been tightened, they’re still and he can still feel the marks, but they’ve been 
cut. All right. All you do when you’re not sure of the environment, he makes 
his next move very carefully, very slowly. Hands come out and he just tips 
the edge of the bag over his head, puts his hands back in case someone 
glances over and just looks around from underneath. 
 
 
He can’t see anyone. In fact, the weirdest thing is he’s outside. He takes a 
few moments – actually, a long moment because he’s still not too sure 
what’s going on. He builds up the courage eventually, he’s still pretty 
shaken, but then he kind of peeks under the bag and takes a 360 and looks 
around. He can’t see anyone anywhere. There are just tracks of wheels that 
were around him, but essentially he’s lying in the middle of the desert.  
 
 
He takes off the bag. Same thing with his feet – the cuffs are still on, but 
they’ve been sawed through so he can just snap them open. At first he just 
takes stock of himself. There’s initially a wave a relief. They’ve gone, right? 
Then of course, a wave a panic – they might be back. There’s relief, and 
then he starts trying to talk to himself – oh no, it will be fine, it’s good, it’s all 
good. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
581 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Eventually, he goes backwards and forwards on this whole thing, and he 
realises he’s just really, really, hot. He’s sweating and the sun is hot, and he 
starts to get concerned. He’s looking around for landmarks, but he doesn’t 
recognize anything. There are no roads, and he’s in the middle of the 
desert. There are no street signs, no roads, no signs of habitation, just him 
and dirt, a few cacti and the sky – lots of sun. 
 
 
So, he thinks, the first to do is just move. Leave here and if nothing else, 
because if they come back he doesn’t want to have anything to do with 
them. So he starts walking. He doesn’t know which way, he just starts 
walking. He’s a little bit dazed still. Then suddenly, he starts getting a little 
bit concerned.  
 
 
The fear starts rising, and he starts wrestling with his own mortality at this 
point. He’s thinking, maybe I won’t make it, maybe I won’t get out because 
I’m walking and walking and I don’t see anything, I don’t recognize anything. 
He’s actually very afraid and all these thoughts about the end start coming 
to him. 
 
 
Here’s the strangest thing. The thing that dominates his mind as he’s 
walking through this desert and he’s starting to kind of come to grips with 
the possibility that maybe he might not make it, the thing that dominates his 
mind the most is I don’t want to die in the sun. It’s hot, it’s uncomfortable. 
Please God, at least let me just find some shade, somewhere that I can just 
crawl under a rock or something. Let me die with a little bit of dignity if it’s 
going to happen. 
 
 
He walks a little bit more and it seems that someone is listening. He notices 
a cactus with all kinds of weird bushes and things, and I’m not sure if he 
was a bush or a cactus, but it had these big spongy leaf things. It was like a 
cactus bush. I have no idea what it was. Anyway, he spots one of these 
things, and it’s got these huge fleshy leaves coming across, and he notices 
that there’s this little crawl space underneath and the leaves are crawling 
over the top of each other, so there’s a little bit of shade but not much. 
 
 
So of course, he just crawls under there and it’s cooler now. There’s a little 
bit of a breeze that comes through, like a little tunnel, like a wind tunnel and 
it cools him down a bit and he feels more comfortable. He closes his eyes, 
and maybe he falls asleep I guess. The day has pretty worn him out.  
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
582 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
When he opens his eyes again, it’s a strange scene. A hawk has landed out 
in front and it’s just watching him, staring. It’s a little unnerving at first. The 
hawk says what are you doing? I’m hiding from the sun. Why? Well, 
because I don’t want to die in the sun. What makes you think you’re going to 
die in the sun? I’m in the desert, I’m lost, I can’t find any landmarks, I don’t 
know how to get out and it’s hot. I’ve probably lost half my moisture all 
ready. It’s only a matter of time before I die of thirst. I don’t know how to 
survive this place. Follow a coyote. 
 
 
Sure enough, he looks over and there’s a little coyote there and it’s kind of 
wiggling its way through the underbrush. He crawls out and starts jogging 
after him. Through the journey, he stops at certain places, bushes and 
shows him how to dig for certain roots that have moisture, which you can 
split open cacti and basically eat the flesh or drink the juice inside.  
 
 
It’s kind of like a little feast for the man right now. He’s going from place to 
place, and he’s feeding himself and drinking all the juices. He’s satisfying 
his thirst and eventually he’s sitting there and he has a root in his hand and 
he’s got this fleshy weird thing in his other hand. He’s sitting there and he’s 
drunk his fill, and he feels good again, for a moment at least. 
 
 
He sits down and when the coyote sees this, he turns and he leaves. The 
moment lasts for a while. He’s sitting there, not wanting much, he’s drunk 
and at that point, drinking was pretty much a major deal. But then the 
thoughts start again. I may be able to drink, but I’m still hungry. I don’t know 
how to feed myself here. Eventually I’ll die. This is water. This is not going to 
keep me alive for very long. If anything, it’s worse now because it takes like 
a month to starve to death. It only takes a few days without water, especially 
in the sun, right?  
 
 
So he starts getting afraid again. He gets up and he starts running the way 
he came until he finds his little bushy cactus thing, and he crawls 
underneath and shuts his eyes. At least he’s going to die in the shade. What 
are you doing? He opens one eye and there’s the hawk. I’m hiding from the 
sun. Why? Well, because I don’t want to die in the sun. What makes you 
think you’re going to die? Well, I’m in the desert and I don’t know where to 
get food. I’m going to starve to death here. I don’t know where to go. Follow 
a rattlesnake. 
 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
583 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
 
Sure enough there’s a little snake making its way through the desert. The 
man crawls out and follows the snake just as before, and it stops at different 
places. It shows him roots he can get. It shows him bugs that are actually 
edible and nutrition. They taste kind of nuts and peanuts. So he’s going 
around collecting little berries that are hidden by bushes. He collects these 
roots and the insects that are surprisingly interesting in taste. He’s eating as 
he’s going along. Kind of I guess how a man did it thousands of years ago.  
 
 
Eventually he’s got his pile, he’s got his pockets stuffed, he’s got a pile in his 
hand and he’s been eating. He sits down and munches some more, and 
eventually he just takes a big heavy sigh. He breathes out and he’s 
satisfied. He feels good. The rattlesnake is watching him and when he sees 
this, he turns around and leaves. 
 
 
The man feels good for a while and then the thoughts come. Sure he knows 
how to eat. Sure he knows what to drink. He doesn’t know where he is. He’s 
still going to die. The sun is going to get him or some animal is going to get 
him, some creature. It’s the desert. It’s a hostile environment. He’s going to 
die here, and if he’s going to die, he’s God damn well going to die in the 
shade. 
 
 
 
So he races back through the desert, back to where he started from. Only 
this time when he reaches there, the bush has been destroyed. There are 
just shreds of leaves everywhere. In this middle of this whole mess stands 
the hawk looking at the man. What have you done? Why have you 
destroyed the one little comfort I had, the one piece of shade? Now I’m 
going to have to die in the sun. 
 
 
What makes you think you’re going to die in the sun? Well, this is the 
desert. It’s hot and it’s got all kinds of creatures and so on, and then he kind 
of runs out of words. The hawk says look. The man turns to one side and he 
sees that the whole day has already passed and the sun is starting to set. 
It’s quite a sight. The colors are changing – the gold, the oranges, deeper 
purple is starting to develop. There’s a ridge, maybe hills or small mountains 
in the distance, and the sun has just been tucked away, and it looks like 
they’re shining like they’re alive.  
 
 
On one side the moon has already started to rise. He begins to hear the 
sounds of the air just drifting through. The little sounds that insects make at 
nighttime as they come out. He breathes and it actually feels good. The 

CHM Transcript Manual – Part 1 
 
584 Conversational Hypnosis Mastery       ©Street Hypnosis   All Rights Reserved 
 
hawk sees this and says why don’t you go home? How do I know which way 
is home? It’s that way. Walk for about an hour and there will be a road. 
Follow the road, and it will take you to a town and you can call someone 
from there. It’s easy.  
 
 
The man thinks about it and looks up. His senses are starting to come alive. 
He can smell the dust in the desert and its not, an unpleasant smell, a sort 
of earthy smell. The sounds are beginning to pick up, and now the darkness 
is starting more, the stars are starting to come out and he’s looking at them. 
The hawk says, go home. You can go home now.  
 
 
The man looks over at him. He looks back at the skyline and just directs his 
attention to the sun. It’s almost gone. There’s just a tiny strip of light and the 
stars are coming out. My God, he’s never seen such stars. They’re bright, 
beautiful and there’s a peacefulness. The sounds are intense in their 
rhythm. 
 
 
Go home now. It’s that way. The man looks up and says no. I think I’ll stay 
here for a while. After all, what’s the rush? 
 
 

