Whitehat Copycat
Copycat Site BluePrint
Tim Bekker introducing Copycat Sites...
        
4

Index
Index
 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
............................................................................................................................................
 
 2  
Introduction
 
                                                                                                                                  
 
 
.................................................................................................................................
 
 3  
Creating Your Copycat Sites
 
                                                                                                        
 
 
.......................................................................................................
 
 5  
Working with Kompozer to create your copycat sites
 
                                                             
 
 
............................................................
 
 9  
Some more Kompozer basics
 
                                                                                                     
 
 
....................................................................................................
 
 20
  
For the lazy (or smart) marketers
 
                                                                                               
 
 
..............................................................................................
 
 25
  

Introduction
In the Copycat Site Blueprint I will tell you exactly how to prepare your 
copycat sites from the premade templates. Just follow up my exact steps 
and you should be fine. I will also give some explanation about the free 
program you can use if you don’t have a program like dreamweaver 
running yet.
IMPORTANT: There is a distinction between your copycat sites and the 
actual page where you offer the download (matching to the copycat site).
The copycat sites are fully targeted to get your traffic redirected to your 
download page where you offer the download and the ad for the program 
you promote.
Don’t mix these two parts up. The download pages are covered in the 
Download Page Blueprint.
You could however upload the download pages to the same domain.
Example
http://www.yourdomain.com/copycatsitename/download.html
You can also choose to have your copycat sites on one domain and your 
download pages on another. Up to you! 
Example
http://www.yourdomaincopycatsites.com/copycatsitename
http://www.yourdomaindownloadpages.com/copycatsitename 

A small sketch of the linking pattern would look like:

Creating Your Copycat Sites
Don’t worry. This is going to be as easy as working with a text editor like 
Word.
You don’t need any programming knowledge or experience with HTML 
whatsoever. I will show you exactly how easy it is to work with ready 
made templates even if you have zero experience.
Thank god there are so many good programs on the market that we can 
use to edit an existing template literally within minutes.
I really like to work with Adobe Dreamweaver. It’s a really cool program 
that shows 2 screens when you are editing you templates ->
The source and a preview of the actual page.
See the image below for a screenshot of the program 

Unfortunately Dreamweaver is not a free program. It’s actually quite 
expensive. 
Lucky enough, for us, there was some producer friendly enough to offer 
a similar program to the market called “kompozer” which is free. Even 
better it’s an amazing program, that works very handy and that does the 
job perfectly fine.
The program can be downloaded here:
http://www.WhitehatCopycat.com/kompozer.html 
It works exactly the same as Dreamweaver, but it displays the pages 
differently. Where Dreamweaver shows 2 screens on one page, 
kompozer shows only one screen per page and you have to switch 
between the source screen and the preview screen with tabs (just like 
your browser has). 
We don’t have to be on the source page very often, so it doesn’t matter 
actually. The program works great!

The image below shows screenshot of the preview page 

When you switch tab you can switch to the source page. See the image 
below 
The tabs to switch pages can be found at the bottom left. 

Working with Kompozer to create your copycat sites
Working with kompozer is actually just like working with a text editor. 
The first step is opening the file you are going to work with. 
Click on “file” in the menu bar of kompozer (left top)
Click on “open file” in the menu
Go to the folder where you saved the template files and open the index 
file.
(the index file is just the file that appears on your homepage.  When you 
type a domain name in the address field of your browser like 
http://www.WhitehatCopycat.com it always displays the index file or the 
main file called index.html (index.php). 
You could check this by typing http://www.
 
 WhitehatCopycat.com
 
  in the 
address field. It will send you to the same page as 
www.WhitehatCopycat.com , right?
Ok, open your index file ->

 
Your template index.html file opens in your screen. If you now click on 
the tabs at the bottom that I showed you earlier you can switch between 
the source and the normal page.
Also open the other pages from the template folder
•
customer-support.html
•
faq.html
•
link-page.html
•
privacy-policy-terms-of-service.html

You should have all 5 pages of the template open now. I will tell you 
which parts to change. 
BTW the first copycat site you create will take the most time. Since you 
only have to rewrite the faq, customer support and some other parts 
once. You can simply copy/paste that in your other copycat sites!
index.html

1. Replace the text with the right program name and link the 3 words 
to the right download page
2. Replace the text with the right program name
3. Replace the text with the right program description. This really 
takes a few seconds. Go to download.com, softpedia or any other 
download site and copy the program description text from that site. 
They have usually good descriptions!
CRUCIAL
Now paste the program description in your own template and start 
turning around sentences. Mix some words around. YOU CAN”T 
use the exact same text. Don’t be lazy . You will get penalized if 
you just copy/paste and your copycat sites will never see daylight.
So just mix it up a little. You don’t have rewrite it totally. Just a little 
mixing.
4. Delete this picture. Open paint or another drawing program and 
open this image from your template folder (img1.jpg)
Delete the logo and add the correct program logo.

Logo’s can be easily found by using Google and then the image 
engines. Just go to Google, enter for instance Winrar logo and hit 
search. Now select on top “images’ and you will find what you need!
5. Replace the text with the right program name and make sure the 3 
words stay linked to index.html
6. Replace the text with the right program name and make sure the 3 
words stay linked to index.html
7. Replace the text with the right program name and make sure the 3 
words stay linked to link-page.html
8. Delete this picture. Open paint or another drawing program and 
open this image from your template folder (logo.gif)
Delete the program name word and write the correct program 
name.
9. Replace the text with the right program name and make sure the 
line is matching.
Example: you wouldn’t write: the Webs Best Media Player if you 
create a copycat site for Internet Explorer  the Webs Best 
Browser.
10.
Link “join now”to your download page!

11.
Of course you are allowed to change all parts below “why we are 
the number #1” and “testimonials” section as you wish.
customer-support.html
1. Delete this picture. Open paint or another drawing program and 
open this image from your template folder (logo.gif)
Delete the program name word and write the correct program 
name.

2. Replace the text with the right program name and link the 3 
words to the right download page
3. Replace the text with the right program name and make sure the 
line is matching.
Example: you wouldn’t write: the Webs Best Media Player if you 
create a copycat site for Internet Explorer  the Webs Best 
Browser.
4. Rewrite the support page a little and add an email if you want to 
answer questions of your traffic
5. Replace the text with the right program name and make sure the 
3 words stay linked to index.html
6. Link “join now”to your download page!
faq.html
Exactly the same changes as for the customer support page. Only 
now rewrite the faq’s a little.
privacy-policy-terms-of-service.html
Exactly the same changes as for the customer support page. Only 
now rewrite the privacy policy a little.

link-page.html
The content of this page will be fully covered in the traffic blueprint. 
Please read that blueprint first and you know what to put there!
Ok ready for the last changes? 
One thing that needs a little more explanation is the meta tags. It sounds 
pretty scary, but it’s just the part in the code that includes the summary of 
your website. The part that tells the search engines what your website is 
about. 
Once again you don’t have to code one single line yourself. All you have 
to is switch from the normal tab to the source tab.
On top of the source page you will find this section for instance:
  
<title>Download Avast Antivirus FREE - Best Antivirus against
Intruders like Virus, Spyware, Adware</title>
  
  <meta name="Keywords" content="download avast antivirus free, ad 
aware, antivirus, spyware, adware, worms, software, windows registry, 
malware, protect" />
  
<meta name="Description" content="Avast Antivirus FREE Download - 
Antivirus software protect against intruders with firewall like virus, 
spyware, adware, malware, worms and other attacks. Clean windows 
registry" />
It exists of 3 parts:

The Title
The Description 
The Keywords
The content you put between the <title> tags will display in the browser 
when visitors surf your site:
It should include a brief summary about the topic of your site.
Don’t include more than 10-12 words. And use your primary words from 
the product you are offering in the beginning.

Basically all you do is deleting the link between the title tags 
<title></title> and replacing it with your own title. 
<title>Download Avast Antivirus FREE - Best Antivirus against
Intruders Like Virus, Spyware, Adware</title>

<title> Download Mp3Rocket FREE - Best Program For Music, Videos 
And Games</title>
A few tips:
Don’t use more than 10-12  words
Use Capital Letters For Every New Word
Important words in the beginning
Don’t use words 2 times in the title
Do exactly the same for the description and the keywords tags Delete 
the content between content=” and “ /> and replace it with your own 
content.
<meta name="Keywords" content="download avast antivirus free, ad 
aware, antivirus, spyware, adware, worms, software, windows registry, 
malware, protect" />

<meta name="Keywords" content=" download mp3 rocket free, music, 
videos, games, songs " />

Piece of cake! Absolutely no coding, just Replacing!
Few Tips for the description part:
•
It can be the same as the title but you may add some more words. 
You may use your important words here 2. Like once in the 
beginning and once at the end.
•
Also use many Capital letters
Few Tips for the keyword part:
•
Don’t use words twice
•
Don’t add 100’s of keywords. No more than 10-12 keywords!
These metatags have to be replaced on all pages!
Once you are done replacing the page content and the meta tags save 
your files and your new copycat site is ready to go.
That’s all. Follow these steps and you create yourself killer copycat 
sites!

Some more Kompozer basics
You can replace pictures by just clicking on it.
Click on a picture, hit delete, go to your main menu on top and click 
insert. Select “Image”. Go to the folder where you have saved the image 
you want to insert and click “OK”.
Click on the picture 

Hit delete 
Insert your new image 

By the way when you are inserting a new image Kompozer asks to add 
an alternative text. It’s not really important for you to know why at this 
moment.  Just add a description of the image in 1 to 3 words. That’s all!
This works exactly like most of the text editors like Word. I don’t think I 
have to tell you how to change text. Just click on the parts you want to 
change: testimonials, header text, content text. 
Delete it and replace it with your own text. It’s that simple! 
For linking your text or pictures to your download page links (that’s the 
purpose right) just select the picture or text you want to link. Hit the right 
mouse button, and choose create link. 
Add your download page link in the field (be sure to start with http://) and 
click “ok”. That’s all.
Right mouse button 

Click “create link” and add the link in the field 
Remarks
In the template I already linked to your faq.html and 
customersupport.html from your index.html file 
Instead of typing your download page links in the field when you choose 
“create link” just type the name of the page you want to link to within your 
site. (without http:// this time)


For the lazy (or smart) marketers
Want us to pick and create the copycat sites for you? We have up to 250 
copycat sites ready for you to use. 
All you have to do is change the text on the index page and link to 
the right download pages. This will save you tons of time.
You can choose from the following packages:
25 ready made copycat sites
$175
You pay $7 per copycat site
50 ready made copycat sites
$300
You pay $6 per copycat site
100 ready made copycat sites
$500
You pay $5 per copycat site
250 ready made copycat sites
$1000
You pay $4 per copycat site
If you would like to order premade copycat sites go to:
http://www.whitehatcopycat.com/order-copycat-sites.php 

