www.ebook3000.com

www.ebook3000.com

CORE CONCEPTS OF
Accounting
Information
Systems
Eleventh Edition
Nancy A. Bagranoff, DBA
Professor
Dean, College of Business and Public Administration
Old Dominion University
Mark G. Simkin, Ph.D.
Professor
Department of Accounting and Information Systems
University of Nevada
Carolyn Strand Norman, Ph.D., CPA
Associate Professor
Department of Accounting
Virginia Commonwealth University
JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC
www.ebook3000.com

For Larry (Nancy Bagranoff)
In memory of my father, Edward R. Simkin
(Mark G. Simkin)
Thank you to my students—especially the Spring 2009
class who helped select our cover design
(Carolyn Strand Norman)
VP and Publisher
George Hoffman
Associate Publisher
Christopher DeJohn
Editorial Assistant
Kara Taylor
Project Editor
Ed Brislin
Media Editor
Greg Chaput
Executive Media Editor
Allison Morris
Senior Marketing Manager
Julia Flohr
Marketing Assistant
Laura Finley
Photo Editor
Hilary Newman
Designer
RDC Publishing Group Sdn Bhd
Production Manager
Janis Soo
Senior Production Editor
Joyce Poh
Cover Credit: © Carol & Mike Werner/Visuals Unlimited
This book was set by Laserwords Private Limited, and printed and bound by R.R. Donnelley. The cover was
printed by R.R. Donnelley.
This book is printed on acid free paper.
Copyright © 2010, 2008, 2005, 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976
United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923, website www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed
to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774,
(201)748-6011, fax (201)748-6008, website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
To order books or for customer service please, call 1-800-CALL WILEY (225-5945).
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bagranoff, Nancy A.
Core concept of accounting information systems / Nancy A. Bagranoff,
Mark G. Simkin, Carolyn Strand Norman.—11th ed.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-50702-5 (pbk.)
1. Accounting–Data processing. 2. Information storage and retrieval systems–Accounting. I. Simkin, Mark G.
II. Norman, Carolyn Strand. III. Title.
HF5679.M62 2010
657.0285–dc22
2009026526
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
www.ebook3000.com

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Nancy A. Bagranoff received her A.A. degree from Briarcliff College, B.S. degree from
the Ohio State University, and M.S. degree in accounting from Syracuse University. Her
DBA degree was conferred by The George Washington University in 1986 (accounting
major and information systems minor). From 1973 to 1976, she was employed by General
Electric in Syracuse, New York, where she completed the company’s Financial Management
Training Program. Dr. Bagranoff passed the CPA examination in the District of Columbia
in 1982. She spent fall 1995 as Faculty in Residence at Arthur Andersen where she worked
for the Business Systems Consulting and Computer Risk Management groups. Professor
Bagranoff has published several articles in such journals as Journal of Information
Systems, Journal of Accounting Literature, Computers and Accounting, The Journal of
Accounting Education, Behavioral Research in Accounting, Journal of Accountancy, and
The Journal of Accounting and EDP. Dr. Bagranoff is also co-author of Core Concepts of
Consulting for Accountants and Core Concepts of IT Auditing. She is currently Professor
of Accounting and the Dean of the College of Business and Public Administration at Old
Dominion University. She was formerly President of the Information Systems section and
Vice President—Education, of the American Accounting Association. She is currently the
President of the American Accounting Association.
Mark G. Simkin received his A.B. degree from Brandeis University and his MBA and Ph.D.
degrees from the Graduate School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley.
Before assuming his present position of professor in the Department of Accounting and
Information Systems, University of Nevada, Professor Simkin taught in the Department of
Decision Sciences at the University of Hawaii. He has also taught at California State Uni-
versity, Hayward, and the Japan America Institute of Decision Sciences, Honolulu; worked
as a research analyst at the Institute of Business and Economic Research at the University
of California, Berkeley; programmed computers at IBM’s Industrial Development—Finance
Headquarters in White Plains, New York; and acted as a computer consultant to business
companies in California, Hawaii, and Nevada. Dr. Simkin is the author of more than 100
articles that have been published in such journals as Decision Sciences, JASA, The Journal
of Accountancy, Communications of the ACM, Interfaces, The Review of Business and
Economic Research, Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education, Information
Systems Control Journal, and the Journal of Bank Research.
Carolyn Strand Norman received her B.S. and M.S.I.A. degrees from Purdue University
and her Ph.D. from Texas A&M University. Dr. Norman is a Certiﬁed Public Accountant,
licensed in Virginia. She is a retired Lieutenant Colonel who was a management analyst with
the United States Air Force. At the Pentagon, she developed compensation and entitlements
legislation, working frequently with House and Senate staffers. Prior to assuming her current
position, Dr. Norman taught at Seattle Paciﬁc University where she co-authored the book,
XBRL Essentials with Charles Hoffman, and was selected as Scholar of the Year for the
School of Business and Economics. Dr. Norman has published more than 40 articles in such
journals as Behavioral Research in Accounting, Journal of Accounting and Public Policy,
Journal of Information Systems, Advances in Accounting Behavioral Research, Issues in
Accounting Education, Journal of Accounting Education, and Research in Government
and Nonproﬁt Accounting.
iii
www.ebook3000.com

www.ebook3000.com

PREFACE
Information technologies impact every aspect of accounting, including ﬁnancial reporting,
managerial accounting, auditing, and tax. The nature of the work done by accountants
continues to evolve as these technologies advance. For example, less than 30 years
ago, accountants could have spent much of their day footing ledgers and making hand
calculations. Today, of course, accountants use the many helpful functions in spreadsheet
software, and update or change calculations instantly, instead of the days it would have
taken with paper and pencil. Internet technologies continue to change the way accountants
do things. And because most accounting systems are now computerized, accountants must
understand software and system processes to effect and evaluate systems of internal
control. Business and auditing failures continue to force the profession to emphasize
internal controls and to rethink the state of assurance services. As a result, the subject of
accounting information systems (AIS) will continue to be an important part of the new
vision of the accounting profession.
The purpose of this book is to help students understand basic AIS concepts. Exactly
what comprises these AIS concepts is subject to some interpretation, and is certainly
changing over time, but most accounting professionals believe that it is the knowledge
that accountants will need for understanding and using information technologies and for
knowing how an AIS gathers and transforms data into useful decision-making information.
In this edition of our textbook, we include the core concepts of accounting information
systems indicated by chapter in the table below. The book is ﬂexible enough that instructors
may choose to cover the chapters in any order.
ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS
COURSE CONTENT AREA COVERAGE
Content Area
7,8,9
AIS Applications
7,8,9
Auditing
14
Database Concepts
4,5,6
Internal Control
10,11,12
Management of Information Systems
1,2,13
Management Use of Information
1,3,7,8,9,15
Systems Development Work
13
Technology of Information Systems
2, All
Use of Systems Technology
All
About This Book
Despite the commonality of subjects in the AAA study, the content of AIS courses continues
to vary widely from school to school. Some schools, for example, use their AIS courses
to teach accounting students how to use computers. In other colleges and universities,
the course focuses on business processes and data modeling. Other courses emphasize
transaction processing and accounting as a communication system, and have little to do
with the technical aspects of how underlying accounting data are processed or stored.
Given the variety of objectives for an AIS course and the different ways that instructors
teach it, we developed a textbook that attempts to cover only the core concepts of AIS. In
writing the text, we assumed that students have completed basic courses in ﬁnancial and
managerial accounting and have a basic knowledge of computer hardware and software
v
www.ebook3000.com

vi
Preface
concepts. The text is designed for a one-semester course in AIS and may be used at the
community college, baccalaureate, or graduate level.
Our hope is that individual instructors will use this book as a foundation for an AIS
course, building around it to meet their individual course objectives. Thus, we fully expect
that many instructors will supplement this textbook with other books, cases, software, or
readings. The arrangement of the chapters permits ﬂexibility in the instructor’s subject
matter coverage. Certain chapters may be omitted if students have covered speciﬁc topics
in prior courses.
Part One introduces students to the subject of AIS. In the ﬁrst chapter, we lay the
basic foundation for the remainder of the text and set the stage for students to think about
the high degree of technology that is common to the accounting profession. This chapter
also includes a section on careers in AIS so that students can understand the career paths
that combine accounting with the study of information systems. Students taking the AIS
course may or may not have had an earlier course in information technology. Chapter
2 allows those who did not have such a course to learn about the latest technologies
and emphasizes their use in accounting. For students who have had earlier courses in
computers and/or information systems, this chapter serves as a review. Chapter 3 is about
systems documentation, a matter of critical importance to the success of an AIS and also to
the understanding of an accounting information system. This chapter describes the various
tools that accountants can use to document an AIS for their own and others’ understanding
of information ﬂows.
Part Two discusses databases and data modeling. Chapter 4 begins our coverage by
discussing database concepts in general, describes the steps required to create database
tables and records, and emphasizes such database concerns as security, privacy, and
concurrency. This chapter also responds to increasing instructor interest in teaching the
REA approach to data modeling. Chapter 5 continues these discussions, focusing on such
topics as normalization, and using Microsoft Access to illustrate uses of data deﬁnition
languages and data manipulation languages. Chapter 6 continues the discussion of how to
use Microsoft Access to develop database forms and reports. This chapter is more ‘‘how
to’’ than the other chapters in the book and it allows the instructor to guide students
with hands-on experience in using software to implement the database concepts they have
learned.
Business processes and software solutions for improving those processes are gaining
in importance in today’s businesses. Chapters 7 and 8 discuss several core business
processes and highlight a number of Business Process Management (BPM) solutions that
are currently available in the marketplace. Instructors who focus on transaction cycles in
their AIS courses may choose to use supplemental pedagogical tools, such as software and
practice sets, to cover this material in more depth. In Chapter 9 we discuss accounting and
enterprise software, also providing advice in AIS selection.
Part Four is an overview of the value of internal controls and the consequences when
controls are not developed (or are weak). Chapter 10 focuses on computer crime, ethics,
and privacy to help students understand the need for internal controls. The next two
chapters introduce the students to internal controls that are necessary at each level of the
organization. Although the subject of internal control appears repeatedly throughout the
book, we examine this subject in depth in Chapters 11 and 12.
The last section of the book examines special topics in AIS. Recognizing that some
students in current AIS courses may have taken a prior course in management information
systems (MIS) and thus are already familiar with systems development topics, the emphasis
in Chapter 13 is on the accountant’s role in designing, developing, implementing, and
maintaining a system. Information technology auditing is an increasingly important ﬁeld
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
vii
and represents a great career opportunity for students who understand both accounting
and IT. Chapter 14 extends our coverage of internal controls to the general subject of
auditing in an IT environment. Finally, although we have integrated Internet technology
throughout this book, its inﬂuence on accounting information systems is so great that we
devoted a special chapter to it. Chapter 15 provides a basic overview of Internet concepts,
discusses ﬁnancial reporting on the Internet, including an expanded section on XBRL,
explores the accounting components of ecommerce, and covers the issues of privacy and
security.
Special Features
This edition of our book uses a large number of special features to enhance the coverage
of chapter material as well as to help students understand chapter concepts. Thus,
each chapter begins with an outline and a list of learning objectives that emphasize the
important subject matter of the chapter. This edition of the book also includes more real
world cases-in-point, which are woven into the text material and illustrate a particular
concept or procedure. Each chapter also includes a more-detailed real-world case or
concept in an end-of-chapter AlS-at-Work feature.
Each chapter ends with a summary and a list of key terms, and also includes
multiple-choice questions for self-review with answers, and three types of end-of-chapter
exercises to help students understand the material: discussion questions, problems, and
cases. This wide variety of questions, Test Yourself multiple choice questions and answers,
problems, and cases enables students to examine many different aspects of each chapter’s
subject matter and also enables instructors to vary the exercises they use each semester.
The end-of-chapter materials also include a list of references and recommended readings
that allow interested students to explore the chapter material in greater depth. In addition,
instructors may wish to assign one or a number of articles listed in each chapter reference
section to supplement chapter discussions. These articles are also an important resource
for instructors to encourage students to begin reading professional journals. We include
articles from Strategic Finance, The Journal of Accountancy, and The Internal Auditor,
which represents the journals of three important accounting professional organizations.
There are two major supplements to this textbook. One is an instructor’s manual
containing suggested answers to the end-of-chapter discussion questions, problems, and
cases. There is also a test bank of true-false and multiple-choice questions.
What’s New in the Eleventh Edition
This edition of our book includes a number of changes from prior editions. These include:
• Additional Test Yourself multiple choice questions at the end of each chapter to help
students assess their understanding of the chapter material.
• Expanded coverage of topics that are increasingly impacting AIS, including a new
discussion of suspicious activity reporting, updated narrative on business continuity
planning and disaster recovery, new accounting frauds, the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002,
an introduction of COBIT version 4.1, synergies that are available to organizations (i.e.,
ERPs, SOX, COBIT, and BPM), emphasis on risk and governance, lean production and
lean accounting, and XBRL.
• An expanded section in Chapter 1 on career paths for those majoring in AIS.
www.ebook3000.com

viii
Preface
• Increased usage of bullets and tables to review or explain material in an efﬁcient format
that appeals to students. For example, all of the chapter summaries are now in bullet
format.
• Many new Case-in-Points that identify examples of the discussion in the textbook. These
examples illustrate the topic to give students a better grasp of the material.
• Color! This edition uses color to offset cases and to make the book more interesting to
read.
• Chapter reorganization, with database chapters moved closer to the front, as requested
by our adopters. Instructors still have the ﬂexibility to integrate the database concepts
and database development anywhere in their course.
• An updated glossary of AIS terms at the end of the book.
• One chapter on developing and implementing AISs, with a focus on the role of
accountants in these studies. Because many students cover these concepts in other MIS
and computer courses, this allows the instructor to assign the chapter as a review, rather
than as a major segment of the course.
• New AIS at Work features at the end of many chapters to help students better understand
the impact of systems in a wide variety of contexts.
• A number of new cases at the end of chapters so that instructors have more choices of
comprehensive assignments for students.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank the many people who helped us during the writing, editing, and produc-
tion of our textbook. Our families and friends are ﬁrst on our list of acknowledgments. We
are grateful to them for their patience and understanding as we were writing this book.
Next, we thank those instructors who read earlier drafts of this edition of our textbook
and provided many useful suggestions for improving the ﬁnal product. In addition, we
are indebted to the many adopters of our book who frequently provide us with feedback.
We sincerely appreciate Paula Funkhouser who revised chapters 4, 5, and 6 on this edi-
tion as well as helped us with our supplementary materials on this and several previous
editions. We also thank our development editor, Chris DeJohn, and our production editor,
Joyce Poh, for their contributions to this edition of our book. Finally, we thank all of our
many students who have given us feedback when we’ve used the book. We do listen!
Nancy A. Bagranoff
Mark G. Simkin
Carolyn Strand Norman
February 2009
www.ebook3000.com

CONTENTS
PART ONE
AN INTRODUCTION TO ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS/
1
CHAPTER 1
Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant/
3
Introduction/
4
What are Accounting Information Systems?/
4
What’s New in Accounting Information Systems?/
9
Accounting and IT/
14
Careers in Accounting Information Systems/
21
CHAPTER 2
Information Technology and AISs/
35
Introduction/
36
The Importance of Information Technology to Accountants/
36
Input, Processing, and Output Devices/
38
Secondary Storage Devices/
48
Data Communications and Networks/
52
Computer Software/
60
CHAPTER 3
Documenting Accounting Information Systems/
73
Introduction/
74
Why Documentation is Important/
74
Document and System Flowcharts/
77
Process Maps and Data Flow Diagrams/
85
Other Documentation Tools/
93
End-User Computing and Documentation/
98
PART TWO
DATABASES/
113
CHAPTER 4
Data Modeling/
115
Introduction/
116
An Overview of Databases/
116
Steps in Creating a Database Using REA/
123
Creating Database Tables and Records/
132
CHAPTER 5
Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases/
153
Introduction/
154
Normalization/
154
Validating the Data in Databases/
158
Extracting Data From Databases: Data Manipulation Languages (DMLs)/
162
Object-Oriented Databases, Multimedia Databases, and Data Warehouses/
171
CHAPTER 6
Database Forms and Reports/
187
Introduction/
188
Forms/
188
Reports/
196
PART THREE
USING ACCOUNTING INFORMATION/
215
CHAPTER 7
Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I/
217
Introduction/
218
Business Process Fundamentals/
218
Collecting and Reporting Accounting Information/
221
The Sales Process/
225
The Purchasing Process/
230
Current Trends in Business Processes/
237
CHAPTER 8
Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II/
249
Introduction/
250
The Resource Management Process/
250
The Production Process/
256
ix

x
Contents
The Financing Process/
262
Business Processes in Special Industries/
265
Business Process Reengineering/
271
CHAPTER 9
Accounting and Enterprise Software/
281
Introduction/
282
Integrated Accounting Software Programs/
282
Enterprise-Wide Information Systems/
287
Selecting a Software Package/
298
PART FOUR
CONTROLS, SECURITY, PRIVACY, AND ETHICS FOR ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
SYSTEMS/
311
CHAPTER 10
Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy/
313
Introduction/
314
Computer Crime, Abuse, and Fraud/
314
Three Examples of Computer Crime/
321
Mitigating Computer Crime and Fraud/
326
Ethical Issues, Privacy, and Identity Theft/
333
CHAPTER 11
Introduction to Internal Control Systems/
347
Introduction/
348
Internal Control Systems/
348
Types of Controls/
356
Control Activities/
358
Evaluating Controls/
365
CHAPTER 12
Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems/
377
Introduction/
378
General Controls for Organizations/
378
General Controls for Information Technology/
390
Application Controls for Transaction Processing/
395
PART FIVE
SPECIAL TOPICS IN ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS/
413
CHAPTER 13
Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems/
415
Introduction/
416
Systems Development Life Cycle/
416
Systems Planning/
418
Systems Analysis/
420
Systems Design/
425
Implementation, Follow-Up, and Maintenance/
433
CHAPTER 14
Information Technology Auditing/
449
Introduction/
450
The Audit Function/
450
The Information Technology Auditor’s Toolkit/
457
Auditing Computerized Accounting Information Systems/
460
Information Technology Auditing Today/
467
CHAPTER 15
Accounting on the Internet/
481
Introduction/
482
The Internet and World Wide Web/
482
XBRL: Financial Reporting on the Internet/
486
Electronic Commerce/
489
Privacy and Security on the Internet/
494
Privacy Statement/
506
Disclosure of Business Practices, Shipping, and Billing/
506
Glossary/
511
Index/
523

PART ONE
AN INTRODUCTION TO ACCOUNTING
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 1
Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
CHAPTER 2
Information Technology and AISs
CHAPTER 3
Documenting Accounting Information Systems
Part One of this book introduces the subject of accounting information systems (AISs).
It deﬁnes accounting’s principal goal, which is to communicate relevant information to
individuals and organizations, and describes the strong inﬂuence of information technology
on this communication process. Chapter 1 deﬁnes accounting information systems and
then discusses some current events that impact accountants and the profession. This
chapter also examines the impact of information technology on ﬁnancial accounting,
managerial accounting, auditing, and taxation. Finally, Chapter 1 describes a number of
career opportunities in AISs.
Chapter 2 provides an overview of information technology that is relevant to accounting
professionals. It begins by identifying six reasons that make information technology so
important to accountants, and then discusses the current AICPA survey on the Top
10 Information Systems Technologies. Of course, the focus of this chapter is on modern
technology and its impact on AISs. Hardware technology, including computer input devices,
central processing units, secondary storage devices, and output devices, is discussed in
detail. Because communication links are so important to AISs, this chapter discusses
various communication and network arrangements, including client/server computer and
wireless technology. The chapter concludes with descriptions of various types of computer
software.
The term ‘‘documentation’’ refers to the paper documents that describe how an accounting
information system functions as well as the representative computer inputs, outputs,
record formats, and ﬁles that store this information. Documenting an AIS is critical. It
helps managers, systems analysts, and users understand the basic processes and functions
of the system. Also, designers use documentation to create new systems, and auditors use
documentation of a system to evaluate the AIS of a client. Chapter 3 describes various tools
and techniques for documenting AISs, including document and system ﬂowcharts, data
ﬂow diagrams, and computer-assisted software engineering (CASE) tools.
1


Chapter 1
Accounting Information Systems
and the Accountant
INTRODUCTION
WHAT ARE ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
SYSTEMS?
Accounting Information Systems—A Deﬁnition
Accounting Information Systems and Their Role in
Organizations
WHAT’S NEW IN ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
SYSTEMS?
Suspicious Activity Reporting
Countering Terrorism
Corporate Scandals and Accounting
The Sarbanes-Oxley and Patriot Acts
ACCOUNTING AND IT
Financial Accounting
Managerial Accounting
Auditing
Taxation
CAREERS IN ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
SYSTEMS
Traditional Accounting
Systems Consulting
Information Technology Auditing and Security
AIS AT WORK—CONSULTING WORK FOR CPAs
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
The Annual Report
Universal Concrete Products
Ross, Sells, and Young, LLP
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Be able to distinguish between such terms
as ‘‘systems,’’ ‘‘information systems,’’ ‘‘informa-
tion technology,’’ and ‘‘accounting information
systems.’’
2. Learn how information technology (IT) inﬂu-
ences accounting systems.
3. Be familiar with suspicious activity reporting.
4. Understand how ﬁnancial reporting is changing
with advances in IT, such as XBRL.
5. Appreciate how IT allows management accoun-
tants to use business intelligence to create
dashboards and scorecards.
6. Know why auditors provide a variety of assur-
ance services.
7. Be more aware of what is new in the area of
accounting information systems.
8. Be familiar with career opportunities that com-
bine accounting and IT knowledge and skills.
3

4
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
‘‘The accounting industry has always been paper-driven. Now, it is becoming technology
driven.’’
Maureen Link, ‘‘3G Technology Will Change the Way You Work’’
Pennsylvania CPA Journal (Spring 2003), p. 19.
INTRODUCTION
The study of accounting information systems (AISs) is, in large part, the study
of the application of information technology (IT) to accounting systems. This chapter
describes the ways that information technology affects ﬁnancial accounting, managerial
accounting, auditing, and taxation. We begin by answering the question ‘‘what are
accounting information systems’’ and then look at some new developments in the ﬁeld.
Following this, we will examine some traditional roles of AISs in commerce.
Why should you study accounting information systems? There are many reasons, which
we will review brieﬂy in this chapter, but one of the most important is because of the special
career opportunities that will enable you to combine your study of accounting subjects with
your interest in computer systems. In today’s job market, accounting employers expect
new hires to be computer literate. In addition, a large number of specialized employment
opportunities are available to those students who possess a deeper understanding of
computer subjects and can bring advanced computer skills to accounting jobs. The last
part of this chapter describes a number of special career opportunities for those with an
interest in AISs.
WHAT ARE ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS?
What do the following have in common: (1) a shoebox ﬁlled with a lawyer’s expense
receipts, (2) the monthly payroll spreadsheet in the computer of an auto-repair shop,
(3) the Peachtree accounting system for a small chain of dry-cleaning stores, and (4) the
ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system of a large manufacturer? The answer is that
they are all examples of accounting information systems. How can such a wide range of
accounting applications each qualify as an accounting information system? The answer
is that this is the essence of what AISs are—collections of raw and stored data (that
together typically serve as inputs), processing methods (usually called ‘‘procedures’’), and
information (outputs) that serve useful accounting purposes. Do such systems have to be
computerized? The ﬁrst example—the shoebox—suggests that they do not. Can they be
complicated? The last example—an ERP system—illustrates one that is.
Accounting Information Systems—A Deﬁnition
Figure 1-1 suggests that accounting information systems (AISs) stand at the crossroads of
two disciplines: ‘‘accounting’’ and ‘‘information systems.’’ Thus, the study of AISs is often
viewed as the study of computerized accounting systems. But because we cannot deﬁne

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
5
Information
Systems
Accounting
Accounting
Information
Systems
FIGURE 1-1
Accounting information systems exists at the intersection of two important disci-
plines: (1) accounting and (2) information systems.
an AIS by its size; it is better to deﬁne it by what it does. This latter approach leads us to
the following deﬁnition that we will use as a model in this book:
Deﬁnition: An accounting information system is a collection of data and pro-
cessing procedures that creates needed information for its users.
Let us examine in greater detail what this deﬁnition really means. For our discussion,
we’ll examine each of the words in the term ‘‘accounting information systems’’ separately.
Accounting.
You probably have a pretty good understanding of accounting subjects
because you have already taken one or more courses in the area. Thus, you know that
the accounting ﬁeld includes ﬁnancial accounting, managerial accounting, and taxation.
Accounting information systems are used in all these areas—for example, to perform tasks
in such areas as payroll, accounts receivable, accounts payable, inventory, and budgeting.
In addition, AISs help accountants maintain general ledger information, create spreadsheets
for strategic planning, and distribute ﬁnancial reports. Indeed, it is difﬁcult to think of
an accounting task that is not integrated, in some way, with an accounting information
system.
The challenge for accountants is to determine how best to provide the information
required to support business and government processes. For example, in making a decision
to buy ofﬁce equipment, an ofﬁce manager may require information about the sources
of such equipment, the costs of alternate choices, and the purchasing terms for each
choice. Where can the manager obtain this information? That’s the job of the accounting
information system.
AISs don’t just support accounting and ﬁnance business processes. They often cre-
ate information that is useful to non-accountants—for example, individuals working in
marketing, production, or human relations. Figure 1-2 provides some examples. For this
information to be effective, the individuals working in these subsystems must help the
developers of an AIS identify what information they need for their planning, decision
making, and control functions. These examples illustrate why an AIS course is useful not
only for accounting majors, but also for many non-accounting majors.
Information (versus Data).
Although the terms data and information are often
used interchangeably, it is useful to distinguish between them. Data (the plural of datum)
are raw facts about events that have little organization or meaning—for example, a set
of raw scores on a class examination. To be useful or meaningful, most data must be
processed into useful information—for example, by sorting, manipulating, aggregating, or

6
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Finance—cash forecasts and actual payment and receipt information
Marketing—sales, summary analyses, cost information, and sales forecasts
Human Resources—payroll analyses (including employee beneﬁt information) and projections of future
personnel costs
Production—inventory summaries and product cost analyses.
FIGURE 1-2
Examples of useful information that an AIS can generate for selected
non-accounting functions of a business.
classifying them. An example might be by taking the raw scores of a class examination and
computing the class average.
Do raw data have to be processed in order to be meaningful? The answer is ‘‘not at
all.’’ Imagine, for example, that you take a test in a class. Which is more important to
you—the average score for the class as a whole (a processed value) or your score (a raw
data value)? Similarly, suppose you own shares of stock in a particular company. Which of
these values would be least important to you: (1) the average price of a stock that was
traded during a given day (a processed value), (2) the price you paid for the shares of stock
(an unprocessed value), or (3) the last price trade of the day (another unprocessed value)?
Raw data are also important because they mark the starting point of an audit trail—
i.e., the path that data follow as they ﬂow through an AIS. In a payroll system, for example,
an employee’s time card for a given pay period indicates how many hours he worked, and
therefore (when combined with his hourly pay rate), his gross pay. An auditor can verify
the information on a paycheck by following the audit trail backwards—for example, to
make sure that the ﬁnal value reﬂects the correct payment for the number of hours worked.
Case-in-Point 1.1
At one American university, an employee in the payroll department was
able to steal thousands of dollars by manipulating the payroll records of student workers.
When students quit their jobs, she would delay inputting their termination dates in her
computer, continue to submit time cards in their behalf, and cash the subsequent payroll
checks generated by the system. She was caught when one student complained that his W-2
tax form showed he had earned more money than he had in fact been paid. Auditors then
examined his payroll records and were able to uncover the fraud.1
Despite the potential usefulness of some unprocessed data, most end users need
ﬁnancial totals, summary statistics, or exception values—i.e., processed data—for
decision-making purposes. Figure 1-3 illustrates a model for this—a three stage process
in which (1) raw and/or stored data serve as the primary inputs, (2) processing tasks
process the data, and (3) meaningful information is the primary output. Modern AISs, of
Inputs
Outputs
Processes
Data/Information from
Internal/External
Sources
Information for
Internal/External
Decision-Makers
Sort, Organize,
Calculate
FIGURE 1-3
An information system’s components. Data or information is input, processed, and
output as information for planning, decision-making, and control purposes.
1Source: from the authors.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
7
course, harness information technology to perform the necessary tasks in each step of
the process. For example, a catalog retailer might use some web pages on the Internet to
gather customer purchase data, then use central ﬁle servers and disk storage to process
and store the purchase transactions, and ﬁnally employ other web pages and printed
outputs to conﬁrm and distribute information about the order to appropriate parties.
Although computers are wonderfully efﬁcient and useful tools, they also create prob-
lems. One is their ability to output vast amounts of information quickly. Too much
information, and especially too much trivial information, can overwhelm its users, pos-
sibly causing relevant information to be lost or overlooked. This situation is known as
information overload. It is up to the accounting profession to determine the nature and
timing of the outputs created and distributed by an AIS to its end users.
Another problem with computerized data processing is that computers do not automat-
ically catch the simple input errors that humans make. For example, if you were performing
payroll processing, you would probably know that a value of ‘‘-40’’ hours for the number
of hours worked was probably a mistake—the value should be ‘‘40.’’ A computer can be
programmed to look for (and reject) bad input, but it is difﬁcult to anticipate all possible
problems.
Yet a third problem created by computers is that they make audit trails more difﬁcult
to follow. This is because the path that data follow through computerized systems is
electronic, not recorded on paper. However, a well-designed AIS can still document its
audit trail with listings of transactions and account balances both before and after the
transactions update the accounts. A major focus of this book is on developing effective
internal control systems for companies, of which audit trails are important elements.
Chapters 11, 12, and 14 discuss these topics in detail.
In addition to collecting and distributing large amounts of data and information,
modern AISs must also organize and store data for future uses. In a payroll application,
for example, the system must maintain running totals for the earnings, tax withholdings,
and retirement contributions of each employee in order to prepare end-of-year tax forms.
These data-organization and storage tasks are major challenges, and one of the reasons why
this book contains three chapters on the subject (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6).
Besides deciding what data to store, businesses must also worry about how best to
integrate the stored data for end users. An older approach to this problem was to maintain
independently the data for each of its traditional organization functions—e.g. ﬁnance,
marketing, human resources, and production. A problem with this approach is that even
if all the applications are maintained internally by the same IT department, there will be
separate data-gathering and reporting responsibilities within each subsystem, and each
application will store its data independently of the others. This often leads to a duplication
of data-collecting and processing efforts, as well as conﬂicting data values when speciﬁc
information (e.g., a customer’s address) is changed in one application but not another.
Organizations today recognize the need to integrate the data associated with their
functions into large, seamless data warehouses. This integration allows internal managers
and possibly external parties to obtain the information needed for planning, decision
making, and control, whether or not that information is for marketing, accounting, or some
other functional area in the organization. To accomplish this task, many companies are now
using large (and expensive) enterprise resource planning (ERP) software packages to
integrate their information subsystems into one application. An example of such a software
product is SAP R/3, which combines accounting, manufacturing, and human resource
subsystems into an enterprise-wide information system—i.e., a system that focuses on
the business processes of the organization as a whole. (We discuss these systems in
Chapter 9.)

8
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Case-in-Point 1.2
Accountants and other managers are using predictive analytics, a
technique that takes advantage of data stored in data warehouses, to create systems that
allow them to use their data to improve performance. FedEx uses these tools to determine
how customers will react to proposed price changes or changes in service. The police force
in Richmond, Virginia uses predictive analysis tools and a database of police calls and crime
incident data to predict where and when crimes are most likely. Their system even includes
information about weather and local events.2
Systems.
Within the accounting profession, the term ‘‘systems’’ usually refers to ‘‘com-
puter systems.’’ As you probably know, IT advances are changing the way we do just about
everything. Just a few years ago, the authors never imagined that people could someday
purchase a book from a ‘‘virtual bookstore’’ on the Internet using a wireless laptop, while
sipping on a latte in a Starbucks! The explosion in electronic connectivity and commerce
are just some of the many ways that IT inﬂuences how people now access information or
how ﬁrms conduct business. In fact, as suggested by the quote at the beginning of this
chapter, IT is a vital part of what accountants must now know to be employable.
Returning to our deﬁnition, you probably noticed that we did not use the term
‘‘computer,’’ although we did use the term ‘‘processing procedures.’’ You already know
the reason for this—not all AISs are computerized, or even need to be. But most of the
ones in businesses today are automated ones and thus the term ‘‘processing procedures’’
could be replaced by the term ‘‘computerized processing’’ for most modern AISs.
In summary, it is convenient to conceptualize an accounting information system as a
set of components that collect accounting data, store it for future uses, and process it for
end users. This abstract model of data inputs, storage, processing, and outputs applies to
almost all the traditional accounting cycles with which you are familiar—e.g., the payroll,
revenue, and expenditure cycles—and is thus a useful way of conceptualizing an AIS. Again,
we stress that many of the ‘‘end users’’ of the information of an AIS are not accountants,
but include customers, investors, suppliers, ﬁnancial analysts, and government agencies.
Accounting Information Systems and Their Role in Organizations
Information technology (IT) refers to the hardware, software, and related system compo-
nents that organizations use to create computerized information systems. IT has been a
major force in our current society and now inﬂuences our lives in many personal ways—for
example, when we use digital cameras to take pictures, access the Internet to make a
purchase or learn about something, or make phone calls to friends and family. It is perhaps
less clear that computer technology has also had profound inﬂuences on commerce. In
this information age, for example, fewer workers actually make products, and more of
them produce, analyze, manipulate, and distribute information about business activities.
These individuals are often called knowledge workers. Companies ﬁnd that their success
or failure is often dependent on the uses or misuses of the information that knowledge
workers manage.
Case-in-Point 1.3
The
United
States
has
lost
over
3
million
jobs
to
overseas
competition—many of them in the manufacturing sector. Yet, Air Products and Chemicals (a
supplier of industrial gases to the steel industry) has not only managed to survive, but to
2Source: Rick Whiting, ‘‘Predict the Future—Or Try, Anyway,’’ InformationWeek, May 29, 2006, Issue 1091,
pp. 38–43.
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
9
thrive, in the face of this trend. Over the last 30 years, in fact, sales have increased tenfold
(from $600 million to $6 billion) and the company’s work force has more than doubled (to
18,500 employees). What’s its secret? The answer was to follow steel production to offshore
manufacturing sites, and to become a local supplier in each of the developing countries in
which the new business developed. Says John Jones, its CEO: ‘‘The competitive weapon is
speed, moving knowledge around the world as rapidly as possible.’’ Jones’ attitude reﬂects
the modern thinking of others: a knowledgeable worker is often a company’s most valuable
asset.3
The information age has important implications for accounting because that is what
accountants are—knowledge workers. In fact, accountants have always been in the
‘‘information business’’ because their role has been, in part, to communicate accurate
and relevant ﬁnancial information to parties interested in how their organizations are
performing. The information age also includes the increasing importance and growth of
e-business, conducting business over the Internet or dedicated proprietary networks, and
e-commerce, a subset of e-business, which refers mostly to buying and selling transactions.
In many ways, accounting is itself an information system—i.e., a communicative
process that collects, stores, processes, and distributes information to those who need
it. For instance, corporate accountants develop ﬁnancial statements for external parties
and such other reports as accounts receivable aging analyses for internal managers. But
users of accounting information sometimes criticize AISs for only capturing and reporting
ﬁnancial transactions. They claim that ﬁnancial statements often ignore some of the most
important activities that inﬂuence business entities. For example, the ﬁnancial reports of
a professional basketball team would not include information about hiring a new star
because this would not result in journal entries in the franchise’s double-entry accounting
system.
Today, however, AISs are concerned with non-ﬁnancial as well as ﬁnancial data and
information. Thus, our deﬁnition of an AIS as an enterprise-wide system views accounting as
an organization’s primary producer and distributor of many different types of information.
The deﬁnition also considers the AIS as process focused. This matches the contemporary
perspective that accounting systems are not only ﬁnancial systems.
WHAT’S NEW IN ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS?
The last few years have witnessed some of the most startling changes in the uses and
applications of accounting information systems, causing us to reassess our understanding
and uses of accounting data. Below are a few examples.
Suspicious Activity Reporting
A number of suspicious activity reporting (SAR) laws now require accountants to
report questionable ﬁnancial transactions to the U.S. Treasury Department. Examples
of such transactions are ones suggestive of money laundering, bribes, or wire transfers
to terrorist organizations. Federal statutes that mandate SARs include sections of the
Annunzio-Wylie Anti-Money Laundering Act (1992), amendments to the Bank Secrecy Act
3Source: Jyoti Thottam, ‘‘Inside Business: What Can America Make’’ Time Magazine (January 12, 2004), pp. 77 ff.

10
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
of 1996, and several sections of the Patriot Act (2001). Institutions affected by these laws
include (1) banks, (2) money service businesses such as currency traders, (3) broker dealers,
(4) casinos and card clubs, (5) commodity traders, (6) insurance companies, and (7) mutual
funds. Over the years, such ﬁlings have enabled the federal government to investigate a
wide number of criminal activities, gather evidence, and in some cases, repatriate funds
sent overseas. Testimony to the importance of suspicious activity reporting is the growth
of SAR ﬁlings—from about 62,000 reports in 1996 to over 1.6 million of them in 2008.
Case-in-Point 1.4
In 2005, a cooperating witness indicated that a pharmaceutical network
was selling controlled drugs through afﬁliated websites to customers without authorized
prescriptions. To evade U.S. laws, the owners located their headquarters in Central America
and their web servers in the Middle East. A federal investigation and a SAR ﬁled by a ﬁnancial
institution involved in the matter documented almost $5 million in suspicious wire transfers.
The result: indictments against 18 individuals and the repatriation of over $9 million from
overseas accounts as part of the forfeiture proceedings.4
Suspicious activity reporting impacts AISs in several ways. Because so much of the
information within AISs is ﬁnancial, these systems are often used to launder money or
conduct criminal activities. A corollary to this fact is that AISs document ﬁnancial activities
in the course of daily transaction processing, and therefore become important sources of
SAR evidence and subsequent legal action. Finally, SAR can act as a deterrent to criminal or
terrorist activities—and therefore an important control for AISs.
Figure 1-4 contains a classiﬁcation of SAR reports for ten years of ﬁlings from banks
and other depository institutions—one of the most important sources of these ﬁlings. In
this ﬁgure, note the importance of money laundering and check frauds.
Countering Terrorism
On September 11, 2001, terrorist agents commandeered four separate commercial U.S.
jetliners, crashing two of them into the twin towers of the Word Trade Center in New York
City and a third into a side of the Pentagon building in Washington, DC. Over 3,000 lives
were lost in this one event, and the economic, social, and political impacts of these events
are still being felt today. You have probably seen many of their effects ﬁrst hand, including
the creation of a new Presidential cabinet position entitled ‘‘Homeland Security,’’ increased
security at major airports, and stricter controls over immigration and visitor passages into
the United States (and many other countries as well).
Case-in-Point 1.5
Operation Safe Commerce (OSC) is an initiative by the federal govern-
ment to thwart terrorists wishing to use innocent commercial cargo to transport weapons
or dangerous chemicals through West Coast ports. The major thrust of OSC is to enhance
security along the entire supply chain of a ship’s cargo. Besides using ‘‘smart seals’’ to guard
against tampering with shipping containers while in transit, OSC also focuses on standardizing
computerized documentation such as bills of lading that will help government ofﬁcials identify
pallets from ‘‘countries of interest.’’5
Although countering terrorism might seem like a governmental matter having little
to do with accounting, just the opposite is true. One example of the use of accounting
4Source: FinCen website at www.ﬁncen.gov/law enforcement/ss/html/Issue14-story5.html.
5Source: Lara L. Sowinski, ‘‘Port Security Is a Sink or Swim Proposition’’ World Trade (January 2004), pp. 20–24.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
11
Rank
Suspicious Activity Type
Filings (Overall)
Percentage (Overall)
1
BSA/Structuring/Money Laundering
1,503,003
48.28%
2
Check Fraud
333,862
10.72%
3
Other
270,152
8.68%
4
Counterfeit Check
155,141
4.98%
5
Credit Card Fraud
154,506
4.96%
6
Mortgage Loan Fraud
113,071
3.63%
7
Check Kiting
101,107
3.25%
8
Identity Theft
69,325
2.23%
9
False Statement
67,902
2.18%
10
Defalcation/Embezzlement
63,392
2.04%
11
Unknown/Blank
63,069
2.03%
12
Consumer Loan Fraud
53,588
1.72%
13
Misuse of Position or Self Dealing
30,899
0.99%
14
Wire Transfer Fraud
29,574
0.95%
15
Mysterious Disappearance
26,465
0.85%
16
Debit Card Fraud
17,480
0.56%
17
Commercial Loan Fraud
16,524
0.53%
18
Counterfeit Instrument (Other)
13,542
0.43%
19
Computer Intrusions
12,307
0.40%
20
Counterfeit Credit/Debit Card
12,177
0.39%
21
Terrorist Financing
3,178
0.10%
22
Bribery/Gratuity
2,932
0.09%
Total:
3,113,196
100.00%
FIGURE 1-4
A classiﬁcation of suspicious activity report ﬁlings using Form TD F 90-22.47 from
depository institutions, April 1, 1996–December 31, 2006. Source: Website of the U.S. Treasury
Department (2008).
information systems for this purpose is using banking systems to trace the ﬂow of funds
across international borders. Other examples include: (1) identifying and denying ﬁnancial
aid to terrorist groups and their sympathizers, (2) tracing arms and chemical orders to their
ﬁnal destinations, thereby identifying the ultimate—perhaps unauthorized—purchasers,
(3) using spreadsheets to help plan for catastrophic events, (4) using security measures
to control cyber terrorism, and (5) installing new internal controls to help detect money
laundering and illegal fund transfers.
Corporate Scandals and Accounting
Although corporate frauds and scandals are hardly new, the latest set of them has set
records for their magnitude and scope. Figure 1-5 provides a list of some examples. Sadly,
this list is neither complete nor particularly current, as new discoveries involving the
misrepresentation of assets and incomes continue to surface.
Of particular note on this list are the Enron scandal and the case against Bernard
Madoff. The Enron scandal is important because of the amount of money and jobs that
were lost, and also because so much of it appears to be directly related to the adroit
manipulation of accounting records. Although the details of these manipulations are
complex, the results were to understate the liabilities of the company as well as to inﬂate
its earnings and net worth. The opinion of most experts today is that the mechanics of these

12
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Company
Date fraud
became public
Industry
Event
Names of Primary Executives
Adelphia
2002
Cable television
provider
Adelphia, led by the controlling Rigas family, used off–balance sheet
ﬁnancing to hide $2.3 billion in debt from the eyes of shareholders
and creditors. The company also fraudulently increased earnings
by exaggerating cable subscriptions. The SEC charged Adelphia
and various members of the Rigas family with violating federal
antifraud regulations.
John Rigas—Company founder,
former chairman and CEO
Timothy, Michael and James
Rigas—Sons of John Rigas,
Members of the Board and also held
executive positions with Adelphia
Arthur Andersen
2001
Accounting ﬁrm
As Enron’s auditor, Andersen aided and abetted Enron’s use of
off–balance sheet ﬁnancing arrangements. When it became clear
that Andersen would be investigated by the SEC, employees
shredded evidence of Andersen’s involvement. Andersen, once a
huge accounting ﬁrm, was ordered to cease operations by a Texas
court in June 2002.
David Duncan—Senior audit partner
for Enron
Bernard Madoff
2008
Investments
In late 2008, Madoff confesses to running an elaborate Ponzi scheme
involving between $50 and $65 billion.
Bernard Madoff and perhaps
members of his family
Enron
2001
Energy trader
Enron, once a star performer in the ‘‘new economy,’’ used
off–balance sheet ﬁnancing to hide large amounts of debt from
investors and creditors. The company’s implosion resulted in many
lost jobs and evaporation of workers’ and investors’ pensions.
Enron’s downfall spurred demand for accounting reform.
Andrew Fastow—Former CFO
Kenneth Lay—Former Chairman of
the Board
Jeff Skilling—Former CEO
Arthur Andersen—Enron’s auditor
Global Crossing
2002
Telecom networks
In 2002, the company ﬁled for bankruptcy. Following this ﬁling,
allegations were directed toward the company that executives
artiﬁcially increased revenues, shredded accounting documents,
and took part in insider trading. To date, no charges have been
ﬁled against Global Crossing or its employees.
Gary Winnick—Former Chairman of
the Board
Arthur Andersen—WorldCom’s
auditor
HealthSouth
2003
Health care service
provider
The company defrauded investors by artiﬁcially increasing earnings
and assets to the tune of $1.4 billion over a 5-year period.
Numerous company insiders were charged with selling stock while
they knew that the company’s stock value was artiﬁcially high.
Richard Scrushy—Chairman of the
Board
ImClone
2001
Biopharmaceutical
company
CEO Waksal learned privately that ImClone’s main product, a cancer
drug, would soon be rejected by the FDA. Before this information
became public, he sold most of his shares and convinced family
members to sell their shares of ImClone. Martha Stewart learned of
these sales from her broker and subsequently sold her shares in
the company prior to the FDA’s ofﬁcial announcement. All were
charged with insider trading.
Samuel Waksal—CEO
Aliza Waksal—CEO’s daughter and
major shareholder
Martha Stewart—Television celebrity
as well as founder and CEO of
Martha Stewart Living, Inc.
Merrill Lynch
2002
Investment brokerage
Analysts at the ﬁrm recommended the stock of Merrill Lynch clients
to individual investors that the analysts disparaged privately. The
ﬁrm was also implicated for producing biased, rather than
objective, research reports on companies.
David Komansky—CEO
Stanley O’Neal—President
Henry Blodget—Former analyst
New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE)
2003
Stock exchange
Following frequent calls for corporate reform in the post-Enron era, it
came to light that Grasso, CEO of the NYSE, was being
compensated very handsomely for his work at the exchange. Once
news of his $180 million retirement package became public
knowledge, Grasso was forced to resign from his post.
Dick Grasso—Former CEO
Parmalat
2003
Dairy foods producer
Considered by some to be the ‘‘Enron of Europe,’’ the Italian
company Parmalat used massive ﬁnancial fraud to hide its true
ﬁnancial position. Executives inﬂated assets by around $13 billion,
and CEO Tanzi redirected $640 million of company funds for
private use in Tanzi’s other businesses.
Calisto Tanzi—Founder and former
CEO
Fausto Tonna—Former CFO
Tyco
2002
Diversiﬁed
manufacturing
Tyco executives used funds from company loan programs for
inappropriate personal use. These loans were not disclosed to
shareholders. Also, executives misused company funds as
evidenced by the scandalous birthday party former CEO Kozlowski
threw for his wife in the amount of $2 million.
Dennis Kozlowski—Former CEO and
Chairman of the Board
Mark Swartz—Former CEO
Mark Belnick—Former Chief Legal
Ofﬁcer
WorldCom
2003
Telecommunications
On the heels of Enron’s downfall, it came to light that the company
had systematically overstated its revenues by $9 billion to meet
Wall Street earnings expectations. Investors lost huge amounts of
capital and thousands of workers were laid off.
Bernard Ebbers—Former CEO
Scott Sullivan—Former CFO
David Myers—Former Controller
FIGURE 1-5
Examples of recent accounting frauds and problems.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
13
adjustments might not have been illegal, but the intent to defraud was clear and therefore
criminal.
Accounting rules allow for some ﬂexibility in ﬁnancial reporting. Unfortunately, some
ﬁnancial ofﬁcers have exploited this ﬂexibility to enhance earnings reports or present
rosier forecasts than reality might dictate—i.e., have ‘‘cooked the books.’’ Examples
are Scott Sullivan, former Chief Financial Ofﬁcer at WorldCom, Inc., Mark H. Swartz,
former Chief Financial Ofﬁcer at Tyco International, Inc., and Andrew Fastow, Enron’s
former Chief Financial Ofﬁcer. Just as some accountants have been guilty of criminal
and unethical behavior, there are also others who have emerged from the scandals as
heroes. These include Sherron Watkins, who tried to tell Ken Lay that the numbers at
Enron just didn’t add up, and Cynthia Cooper, an internal auditor at WorldCom, who
blew the whistle on the falsiﬁed accounting transactions ordered by her boss, Scott
Sullivan.
As the credit crunch worked its way through the economy in 2008, a number of
ﬁnancial institutions either collapsed or narrowly avoided doing so, and accounting was in
the news once again. Some questioned whether there was enough regulation and others
whether perhaps there was too much. There was controversy about fair value accounting
rules and some questioned the strength of Securities and Exchange Commission oversight,
particularly as one of the biggest ﬁnancial frauds of all time came to light. This was the
Ponzi scheme constructed by Bernard Madoff, a well-known investment fund manager.
Ponzi schemes are named for Charles Ponzi, a scam artist who created a pyramid fraud in
which the perpetrator uses new investment funds to pay returns to current investors. The
fraud relies on new money continuously entering the system so that investors believe their
money is actually earning returns. The problem is that when the new money stops ﬂowing,
the pyramid collapses.
Bernard Madoff appears to have taken this common fraud technique to a new high,
creating a house of cards in excess of $50 billion. The SEC was tipped to the questionability
of Madoff’s investments many times over a period of years, but never investigated enough
to discover the fraud. You would expect that investment funds of the size managed by
Madoff would be overseen by an army of highly-trained and experienced accountants and
auditors. Rather, Madoff employed a little known three-person ﬁrm, Friehling & Horowitz.
At the time of this writing, the American Institute of Certiﬁed Public Accountants, among
other organizations, was investigating the auditor.
The Sarbanes-Oxley and Patriot Acts
In response to the corporate frauds discussed above, the U.S. Congress passed the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Highly publicized and hurriedly passed, the SOX act has
many requirements that affect accounting information systems. One section, for example,
forbids corporations from making personal loans to executives—a requirement that outlaws
the former practice of transferring funds to ofﬁcers who never pay back the money. Another
section requires the chief executive ofﬁcers (CEOs) of companies to personally vouch for
the accuracy and completeness of its ﬁnancial statements. Yet a third section requires
public companies to hire independent, new auditors to review their internal controls and
determine their compliance with other ﬁnancial regulations.
Perhaps the most important part of SOX to accountants is Section 404, which
requires managers to implement and assess internal controls and auditors to evaluate
those assessments. This portion of the bill has created the most work for accountants and
information systems auditors. We discuss the details of this act in several chapters of this
book.

14
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Case-in-Point 1.6
In order to make sure they are fully compliant with the requirements
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, many companies are acquiring specialized software packages that
collect ﬁnancial information and help auditors verify that they are fully compliant with the
data-gathering and retention requirements of the law. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act has thus been
a boon to the developers of such software—i.e., Interwoven, PeopleSoft, and Oracle. The
estimated market for such products: between $1 and $4 billion.6
The U.S. Patriot Act— an acronym for ‘‘Providing Appropriate Tools Required to
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism’’—was signed into law shortly after the terrorist attacks
of September 11, 2001. Although those sections of the law permitting search, wire-tapping,
and seizure actions without legal warrants have attracted the most attention, a number
of less-publicized articles directly affect accounting systems. Section 352 of the Act, for
example, requires auditors to verify that their organizations have adequate risk assessment
and prevention systems. Other sections of the law require ﬁnancial institutions to have
an anti-money laundering ofﬁcer, professional training for employees, and independent
audits of ﬁnancial programs. Of special interest: the requirement that banks monitor their
accounts in foreign institutions for possible fraudulent uses, and perform due diligence in
high-risk (but unnamed) countries known for corruption, money laundering, or terrorist
activities. The Act also includes penalties for those organizations that do not comply with
these requirements.
ACCOUNTING AND IT
Information technology strongly inﬂuences the way most accountants work. Instantaneous
access to the Internet via mobile communication devices such as cell phones, for example,
enables managerial accountants to complete important work tasks while traveling in the
ﬁeld, auditors to communicate with each other from remote job sites (but auditing the
same client), staff accountants to text message one another from alternate locations, and
tax experts to download information on tax rulings that are even more current than their
latest CDs.
Figure 1-6 provides an overview of the major areas within the general ﬁeld of
accounting. This section of the chapter considers the impact of IT on each of them.
Financial Accounting
(principally provides
information to external
parties or users)
Managerial Accounting
(principally provides
information to internal
parties or users)
Auditing
Budgeting
Systems
Study
Cost
Accounting
Taxation
FIGURE 1-6
An overview of systems. The ﬁnancial and managerial accounting components are
not mutually exclusive: information from the ﬁnancial accounting component is used within the
managerial accounting component, and vice versa.
6Source: Jim Kerstetter, ‘‘Sarbanes-Oxley Sparks a Software Boom’’ Business Week (January 12, 2004), p. 94.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
15
Financial Accounting
The major objective of ﬁnancial accounting information systems is to provide relevant
information to individuals and groups outside an organization’s boundaries—e.g., investors,
federal and state tax agencies, and creditors. Accountants achieve these informational
objectives by preparing such ﬁnancial statements as income statements, balance sheets,
and cash ﬂow statements. Of course, many managers within a company can also use
ﬁnancial reports for planning, decision-making, and control activities. For example, a
manager in charge of a particular division could use such proﬁtability information to make
decisions about future investments or to control expenses.
Figure 1-7 is an example of a ﬁnancial accounting audit trail. This trail traces an
organization’s ﬁnancial accounting cycle, which begins with transaction data (e.g.,
captured at the point of sale) and ends with its periodic ﬁnancial statements. Accounting
clerks, store cashiers, or even the customers themselves input relevant data into the system,
which stores these data for later use. In ﬁnancial AISs, the processing function also includes
posting these entries to general and subsidiary ledger accounts and preparing a trial balance
from the general ledger account balances.
Non-Financial Data.
The basic inputs to, and outputs from, traditional ﬁnancial
accounting systems are usually expressed in monetary units. This can be a problem if the AIS
ignores non-monetary information that is also important to users. For example, an investor
might like to know what the prospects are for the future sales of a company, but many
ﬁnancial AISs do not record such information as unfulﬁlled customer sales because such
sales are not recognizable ﬁnancial events—even though they are important ones. This is
the basic premise behind REA accounting—the idea of also storing important non-ﬁnancial
information about resources, events, and agents in databases precisely because they are
relevant to the decision-making processes of their users. We discuss the REA framework in
greater detail in Chapter 4.
Case-in-Point 1.7
A friend of one of the authors of this book recently received a call from
the local hospital’s accounting ofﬁce, urgently requesting to speak to his wife. The clerk was
very insistent because the wife had thousands of dollars in unpaid bills and the hospital was
anxious to settle the account. It took the friend several minutes to get a word in. Finally, he
Source
documents
(sales invoices,
payroll time
cards, etc.)
Input
Transaction
Processing
Output
Financial
statements
and other
external reports
Journals
Ledgers
Trial balance
Files of source
documents
FIGURE 1-7
A ﬁnancial accounting audit trail.

16
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
was able to reveal the one piece of information lacking in the hospital’s ﬁnancial computer
records: his wife had died at the hospital.7
Several professional associations now formally recognize that non-ﬁnancial perfor-
mance measures enhance the value of purely-ﬁnancial information. For example, in 1994
a special committee of the American Institute of Certiﬁed Public Accountants (AICPA)
recommended several ways that businesses could improve the information they were
providing to external parties, including management-analysis data, forward-looking infor-
mation such as opportunities and risks, information about management and shareholders,
and background information about the reporting entity. Similarly, in 2002, the American
Accounting Association (AAA) Financial Accounting Standards Committee recommended
that the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB) encourage companies to voluntarily disclose more non-ﬁnancial
performance measures.
Real-Time Reporting.
Another impact of IT on ﬁnancial accounting concerns the
timing of inputs, processing, and outputs. Financial statements are periodic and most
large companies traditionally issue them quarterly, with a comprehensive report pro-
duced annually. With advances in IT that allow transactions to be captured immediately,
accountants and even the AIS itself can produce ﬁnancial statements almost in real-time.
Of course, some of the adjustments that accountants must make to the records are not
done minute-by-minute, but a business can certainly track sales and many of its expenses
continuously. This is especially useful to retailing executives.
Interactive Data and XBRL.
A problem that accountants, investors, auditors, and
other ﬁnancial managers have often faced is that data used in one application are not
easily transferable to another. This means that accountants may spend hours preparing
spreadsheets and reports that require them to enter the same data in different formats over
and over. Interactive data are data that can be reused and carried seamlessly among a
variety of applications or reports. Consider for example a data item such as total assets.
This number might need to be formatted and even calculated several different ways
for reports, such as ﬁlings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), banks,
performance reports, and so on. With interactive data, the data are captured once and
applied everywhere needed.
Interactive data require a language for standardization that ‘‘tags’’ the data at its
most basic level. (For total assets, this would be at the detail level for each asset.)
Extensible business reporting language (XBRL) is emerging as the language of choice
for this purpose. At present, the SEC has a voluntary ﬁling program whereby public
companies may ﬁle their ﬁnancial reports in XBRL format. Many companies, software
programs, and industries are beginning to incorporate XBRL for creating, transforming, and
communicating ﬁnancial information. The case-in-point below provides an example of its
beneﬁts. We discuss XBRL in some detail in Chapter 15 and you can learn about its status
at www.xbrl.org.
Case-in-Point 1.8
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) insures bank
deposits over a speciﬁc amount. FDIC wanted to create an Internet-based Central Data
Repository that stored all the call (quarterly) data they received from more than 7,000 banks.
They convinced their software vendors to incorporate XBRL language to standardize the data.
7Source: from the authors.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
17
The tagged data the FDIC received from the banks now has improved accuracy and can be
published and made available to users much more quickly than before.
Managerial Accounting
The principal objective of managerial accounting is to provide relevant information to
organizational managers—i.e., users who are internal to a company or government agency.
Figure 1-8 summarizes some of the most important features of this accounting area. As
suggested by Figure 1-8, cost accounting and budgeting are two typical parts of a company’s
managerial accounting system. Let us examine each of them in turn.
Cost Accounting.
Due to globalization, decentralization, deregulation, and other fac-
tors, companies are facing increased competition. The result is that companies must be
more efﬁcient and better control costs. The cost accounting part of managerial accounting
speciﬁcally assists management in measuring and controlling the costs associated with an
organization’s various acquisition, processing, distribution, and selling activities. In the
broadest sense, these tasks focus on the value added by an organization to its goods or
services, and this concept remains constant whether the organization is a manufacturer, a
bank, a hospital, or a police department.
Activity-Based Costing.
One example of an AIS in the area of cost accounting is an
activity-based costing (ABC) system. Traditionally, cost accountants assigned overhead
(i.e., indirect production costs) on the basis of direct labor hours because the number of
labor hours was usually directly related to the volume of production. The problem with
this traditional system is that, over time, increasing automation has caused manufacturers
to use less and less direct labor. Thus, managers became frustrated using this one method
of assigning overhead costs when a clear relationship between labor and these overhead
expenses no longer seemed to exist. Instead, managers in a variety of manufacturing and
service industries now identify speciﬁc activities involved in a manufacturing or service
task, and then assign overhead costs based on the resources directly consumed by each
activity.
Although activity-based costing techniques have been available for over 20 years, they
are more common now that computerized systems track costs. Moreover, these systems
can move an organization in new strategic directions, allowing corporate executives to
• Managerial accounting focuses on providing accounting information for internal parties, such as
management, rather than for external investors and creditors.
• Managerial accounting information is mostly forward-looking.
• Managerial accounting information is not regulated by generally accepted accounting principles, nor is
it mandatory to prepare it.
• Managerial accounting reports include both non-monetary and ﬁnancial data.
• Managerial accounting is inﬂuenced by many business and non-business disciplines, such as
economics, behavioral science, and quantitative methods.
• Managerial accounting information is ﬂexible and frequently involves non-routine reporting.
FIGURE 1-8
A summary of features characterizing managerial accounting.

18
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
examine fundamental business processes and enabling them to reengineer the way they do
business. ABC systems can also play an essential strategic role in building and maintaining
a successful e-commerce business because they can answer questions about production
costs and help managers allocate resources more effectively.
Case-in-Point 1.9
Art.com, with its collection of prints, posters, and photographs, com-
bined with its custom framing service, offers consumers unlimited opportunities to ﬁnd ‘‘just
the right piece of artwork.’’ It’s a dot-com success story. When the start-up company turned
to professionals to help it build a long-term successful business, the consultants used ABC to
identify 12 key activities. By focusing on the most costly activities, company executives ﬁnd
that they can do a better job of managing resources.8
Corporate
Performance
Measurement
and
Business
Intelligence.
Another
example of an AIS used in the area of cost accounting is in corporate performance
measurement (CPM). In a responsibility accounting system, for example, managers
trace unfavorable performance to the department or individuals that caused the
inefﬁciencies. Under a responsibility accounting system, each subsystem within an
organization is only accountable for those items over which it has control. Thus, when
a particular cost expenditure exceeds its standard cost, managers can take immediate
corrective action.
In addition to the traditional ﬁnancial measures, cost accountants also collect a variety
of non-ﬁnancial performance measures to evaluate such things as customer satisfaction,
product quality, business innovation, and branding effectiveness. The balanced scorecard
measures business performance in four categories: (1) ﬁnancial performance, (2) customer
knowledge, (3) internal business processes, and (4) learning and growth. A company may
choose to rank these categories to align with their strategic value. For example, a company
may stress ‘‘customer knowledge’’ because customer satisfaction is important to its market
position and planned sales growth.
Balanced scorecards and corporate performance measurement aren’t new ideas.
But with the Internet, integrated systems, and other advanced technologies, balanced
scorecards and other approaches to CPM are becoming increasingly valuable business
intelligence tools. Businesses use key performance indicators (KPIs) to measure and
evaluate activities in each quadrant of the balanced scorecard. For example, a ﬁnancial KPI
might be return on investment. In the customer area, a company might track the number
of new customers per month.
Also new is the use of dashboards (Figure 1-9) to monitor key performance metrics.
Dashboards usually appear in color, so that red, for example, might indicate a failure to
meet the goal. Another indicator might be up and down arrows to show how a key activity
performs for a certain time period. Dashboards are especially useful to managers who
appreciate the presentation of important performance data in easy-to-understand graphic
formats.
Case-in-Point 1.10
Health care entities, such as St. Luke’s Episcopal Health System,
are using scorecards and dashboards to monitor ﬁnancial and operational performance.
By using a balanced scorecard, and channeling data through a single portal, St. Luke’s
managers can look at KPIs such as supply expenses and patient waiting times on several
visual dashboards. Hospitals and other health care organizations are monitoring metrics such
8Source: T. Zeller, D. Kublank, and P. Makris, ‘‘Art.com Uses ABC to Succeed’’ Strategic Finance (March 2001),
pp. 24–31.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
19
FIGURE 1-9
An example of an executive dashboard courtesy of Salesforce.com Corporation.
as numbers of surgical cases, inpatient and outpatient revenues, departmental margins, and
bed occupancy rates with dashboards that managers can regularly access through Internet
browsers.9
Budgeting.
A budget is a ﬁnancial projection for the future and is thus a valuable
managerial planning aid. Managerial accountants develop both short- and long-range
budget projections. Short-range budget projections disclose detailed ﬁnancial plans for a
12-month period, whereas long-range budgets are less-detailed ﬁnancial projections for ﬁve
or more years into the future.
A good budgetary system is also a useful managerial control mechanism. Because
budgets attempt to predict future ﬁnancial expectations, a company’s managers can
compare the causes of signiﬁcant variations between actual and budgeted results during
the budget period. Through timely performance reports that compare actual operating
results with prescribed norms, mangers are able to identify and investigate signiﬁcant
negative variations. Similarly, favorable budget variations enable managers to reward
outstanding performance or make investment decisions on speciﬁc activities that promise
to beneﬁt future operating performance.
9Source: Jamie Wyatt, ‘‘Scorecards, Dashboards, and KPIs Keys to Integrated Performance Measurement,’’
Healthcare Financial Management. Westchester: February 2004, Vol. 58, Iss.2, p. 76–80.

20
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Auditing
The traditional role of auditing has been to evaluate the accuracy and completeness of a
corporation’s ﬁnancial statements. In recent years, however, the individuals working in
CPA ﬁrms would probably argue that they are actually in the assurance business—i.e., the
business of providing third-party testimony that a client complies with a given statue, law,
or similar requirement. Historically, the growth of such assurance services can be traced
to a conference of the American Institute of Certiﬁed Public Accountants in 1993, which
created a Special Committee on Assurance Services to identify and formalize some other
areas (besides ﬁnancial audits) in which accountants could provide assurance services.
Figure 1-10 describes the ﬁrst six areas identiﬁed by the committee.
Today, there are several new areas in which auditors now perform assurance work,
many involving accounting information systems. One example is to vouch for a client’s
compliance with the new HIPAA laws—e.g., the privacy requirements of the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. Another example is CPA Trust Services, a
set of professional service areas built around a set of common principles and criteria related
to the risks and opportunities presented by IT environments. Trust services include online
privacy evaluations, security audits, testing the integrity of information processing systems,
assessing availability of IT services, and systems conﬁdentiality testing.
Despite the rise in ancillary assurance services, auditors mainly focus on traditional
ﬁnancial-auditing tasks. As noted earlier, computerized AISs have made these tasks more
challenging. For example, automated data processing also creates a need for auditors
to evaluate the risks associated with such automation. Chapter 14 discusses the audit
of computerized accounting information systems and the ways in which auditors use
information technology to perform their jobs.
In addition to the auditing and assurance businesses mentioned above, many CPA ﬁrms
also perform management consulting tasks—e.g., helping clients acquire, install, and use
new information systems. The AIS at Work feature at the end of this chapter describes one
Risk Assessment
Provide assurance that an organization’s set of business risks is comprehensive and manageable.
Business Performance Measurement
Provide assurance that an organization’s performance measures beyond the traditional measures in
ﬁnancial statements are relevant and reasonable for helping the organization to achieve its goals and
objectives.
Information Systems Reliability
Provide assurance that an organization’s information system has been designed to provide reliable
information for decision making.
Electronic Commerce
Provide assurance that organizations doing business on the Internet can be trusted to provide the goods
and services they promise, and that there is a measure of security provided to customers.
Health Care Performance Measurement
Provide assurance to health care recipients about the effectiveness of health care offered by a variety of
health care providers.
Eldercare Plus
Provide assurance that various caregivers offering services to the elderly are offering appropriate and
high-quality services.
FIGURE 1-10
Assurance services identiﬁed by the American Institute of Certiﬁed Public
Accountants Special Committee on Assurance Services.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
21
such consulting area. However, the corporate accounting scandals mentioned earlier have
led members of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. Congress to question
whether a CPA ﬁrm can conduct an independent audit of the same systems it recently
assisted a client in installing and using—a concern intensiﬁed when audit staff at Arthur
Andersen LLP apparently deliberately destroyed auditing papers for the Enron corporation
that many believe would have documented such doubts. Thus, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002 expressly forbids such potential conﬂicts of interest by disallowing CPA ﬁrms from
simultaneously acting as a ‘‘management consultant’’ and the ‘‘independent auditor’’ for
the same ﬁrm.
Despite this requirement, however, there are still many areas in which CPA ﬁrms
provide consulting services to clients. Examples include business valuations, litigation
support, systems implementation, personal ﬁnancial planning, estate planning, strategic
planning, health care planning, making ﬁnancing arrangements, and performing forensic
(fraud) investigations.
Taxation
Although some individuals still complete their income tax returns manually, many now
use computer programs such as TurboTax for this task. Like spreadsheets, tax preparation
software is an example of an AIS that enables its users to create and store copies of trial tax
returns, examine the consequences of alternate tax strategies, print speciﬁc portions of a
return, and even transmit complete copies of a state or federal tax return to the appropriate
government agency.
Information technology can also help tax professionals research challenging tax
questions—for example, by providing access to electronic tax libraries on CDs or online that
cost less and that can provide more up-to-date tax information than traditional paper-based
libraries. Thus, a tax professional may subscribe to an online tax service by paying a fee for
the right to access databases of tax information stored at centralized computer locations.
Online services or CD-ROMs can provide tax researchers with databases of federal and
state tax laws, tax court rulings, court decisions, and technical advice.
CAREERS IN ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Our introductory remarks to this chapter suggest a variety of reasons why you should
study accounting information systems. Of them, perhaps the most interesting to new
students in AIS courses is the employment opportunities available within the discipline.
Career opportunities abound for those with a solid foundation in AIS, including traditional
accounting vocations in ﬁnancial and managerial accounting, as well as careers in consulting
and information systems auditing and security.
Traditional Accounting
Certainly a number of traditional accounting jobs are also available to those who choose to
major in accounting information systems. After all, what accounting system is not also an
accounting information system? Also, because technology now plays such a strong role in
accounting, AIS majors enjoy the advantage of understanding both traditional accounting

22
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
concepts and information systems concepts. Recognizing the importance to accountants of
knowledge about information systems, the AICPA recently developed a new designation:
Certiﬁed Information Technology Professional (CITP), which accountants can earn
with business experience and by passing an examination.
Systems Consulting
A consultant is an outside expert who helps an organization solve problems or provides
technical expertise on an issue. Systems consultants provide help with issues concerning
information systems—for example, by helping an organization design a new information
system, select computer hardware or software, or reengineering business processes (so
that they operate more effectively).
One of the most important assets a consultant brings to his or her job is an objective
view of the client organization and its processes and goals. AIS students who are skilled in
both accounting and information systems make particularly competent systems consultants
because they understand how data ﬂow through accounting systems as well as how business
processes function. Systems consultants can help a variety of organizations, including
professional service organizations, private corporations, and government agencies. This
broad work experience, combined with technical knowledge about hardware and software,
can be a valuable asset to CPA clients. Because it is likely that a newly-designed system
will include accounting-related information, a consultant who understands accounting
is particularly helpful. Many systems consultants work for large professional service
organizations, such as Accenture or Cap Gemini Ernst & Young. Others may work for
specialized organizations that focus on the custom design of accounting information
systems.
Consulting careers for students of accounting information systems also include jobs as
value-added resellers (VARs). Software vendors license VARs to sell a particular line of
software products and provide consulting services to companies, such as help with their
software installation, training, and customization. A VAR may set up a small one-person
consulting business or may work with other VARs and consultants to provide alternative
software solutions to clients.
Case-in-Point 1.11
Martin and Associates is a regional consulting ﬁrm in the Midwest,
started by Kevin Martin in 1983. Kevin, a CPA, left a job with a large accounting ﬁrm to
open an accounting business that would help companies implement AISs. Today the company
describes itself as a ‘‘ﬁrm dedicated to delivering accounting, ERP, and CRM solutions to our
clients and alliances.’’ The staff at Martin and Associates are professionals with CPA and IT
experience—many have dual degrees or double majors.10
Information Technology Auditing and Security
Information technology (IT) auditors concern themselves with analyzing the risks associated
with computerized information systems. These individuals often work closely with ﬁnancial
auditors to assess the risks associated with automated AISs—a position in high demand
because so many systems are now computerized. Information systems auditors also help
ﬁnancial auditors decide how much time to devote to auditing each segment of a company’s
10See www.martinandassociates.com.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
23
business. This assessment may lead to the conclusion that the controls within some portions
of a client’s information systems are reliable and that less time need be spent on it—or
the opposite.
IT auditors are involved in a number of activities apart from assessing risk for ﬁnancial
audit purposes. Many of these auditors work for professional service organizations, such as
Ernst & Young, PricewaterhouseCoopers, or KPMG. (See Figure 1-11 for a partial listing of
the types of services offered by Ernst & Young.)
IT auditors might be CPAs or be licensed as Certiﬁed Information Systems Audi-
tors (CISAs)—a certiﬁcation given to professional information systems auditors by the
Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA). To become a CISA,
you must take an examination and obtain specialized work experience. Many CISAs have
accounting and information systems backgrounds, although formal accounting education
is not required for certiﬁcation. IT auditors are in more demand than ever today, in
part because of the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation, speciﬁcally Section 404, which requires
documenting and evaluating IT controls.
Case-in-Point 1.12
While
efﬁciencies
in
compliance
with
requirements
of
the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 will help in the future, the numbers of hours necessary to
document and evaluate internal controls, including IT controls, means more work for those
with IT audit skills. According to 2004 and 2005 surveys by the Controllers’ Leadership
Roundtable research, audit fee increases for the Big Four, in complying with Section 404,
ranged from 78% for Deloitte and Touche to 134% for PricewaterhouseCoopers. Complying
with SOX costs the average large company $7.8 million and 70,000 hours of employee time11
Sometimes the best way to assess the risks associated with a computerized system
is to try to penetrate the system, which is referred to as penetration testing. These
tests are usually conducted within a system’s security audit, in which the organization
attempts to determine the level of vulnerability of their information systems and the impact
such weaknesses might have on the viability of the organization. If any security issues are
discovered, the organization will typically work swiftly to correct the problems or at least
mitigate the impact they might have on the company.
Assurance Services:
• Financial statement attestation
• Internal control reporting
• Assess procedures and controls concerning privacy and conﬁdentiality, performance Measurement,
systems reliability, outsourced process controls, information security
Business Risk Services
Fraud Investigation and Dispute Services
Technology and Security Risk Services
Specialty Advisory Services
FIGURE 1-11
A sample of the many types of services offered by Ernst and Young LLP, one of
the largest international professional service organizations.
11Source: John Goff, ‘‘Fractured Fraternity,’’ CFO Magazine, September 01, 2005, pp. 1, and Sarah Lacey, ‘‘The
Sarbantes-Oxley Software Race’’ Business Week Online (7/12/2005), no page number.

24
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
AIS AT WORK
Consulting Work for CPAs
Businesses and government entities have always been concerned about disaster recovery
or continuity planning. However, the events of September 11, 2001, and Hurricane Katrina
made everyone even more aware of the necessity of preparing for disaster. Auditors
can help. Continuity planning is an internal control devised to ensure that operations,
including IT functions, can continue in the event of a natural or man-made disaster,
including terrorism and acts of nature. IT—especially Internet technologies—is vulnerable
to man-made attacks, such as viruses and worms. An online retailer, for example, can not
afford to compromise system availability. The absence of a continuity plan is a reportable
condition under Statement on Auditing Standards No. 60, Communication of Internal
Control Related Matters Noted in an Audit.
A CPA can help a business to draw up a business continuity plan. As noted in a recent
article in New Accountant, some Fortune 500 companies will pay $40,000 or more for
such a disaster recovery planning engagement.12 These plans include sections on backup
and recovery procedures for all IT, offsite locations for data storage, and information
about hot (fully equipped for immediate use) or cold (leased facilities that do not include
hardware and software) sites available for use should current physical facilities become
inaccessible or damaged. The plans also include contact information for the management
recovery team. Copies of the plan, of course, must be stored off-site themselves. Ideally,
each member of the management recovery team has at least one copy at their home or in
another easily-accessible location off-site.
A disaster recovery plan is of no use if it is not tested regularly. Such testing is vital
to learn where there may be weaknesses. As an example, during an early Internet worm
crisis, many managers found that they were actually storing information regarding who to
contact in a systems emergency on their own computers! Naturally, when the computers
went down, so did this vital information. Full-blown testing of a disaster recovery plan is
expensive and time consuming. Sometimes it is difﬁcult for managers to understand the
importance of it because they can’t see a direct link to enhancing their income. The auditor
may need to make the case. Unfortunately, there are many, many examples available to use
for this purpose.
SUMMARY
• Computerized information systems collect, process, store, transform, and distribute ﬁnancial and
non-ﬁnancial information for planning, decision-making, and control purposes.
• Data are raw facts; information refers to data that are meaningful and useful.
• By law, the accountants in many speciﬁc ﬁnancial institutions must now ﬁle suspicious activity
reports that document potential instances of fraud, money laundering, or money transfers to
terrorist organizations.
• Accounting information systems can help to thwart terrorism.
• Some of the recent corporate scandals involved manipulation of accounting data, which has led to
the passage of legislation to protect investors.
12Reed, Randy M., ‘‘Enhancing Consulting Revenues with Disaster Recovery Planning,’’ New Accountant, 2006,
p. 13.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
25
• The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 is a sweeping piece of ﬁnancial legislation with implications for
auditors as it requires management to develop and assess internal control systems.
• The U.S. Patriot Act contains a number of provisions that directly affect AISs, including sections
that focus on money laundering, auditing, and conducting business with correspondent banks
abroad.
• Information technology affects virtually every aspect of accounting, including ﬁnancial and
managerial accounting, auditing, and taxation.
• Financial accounting information is becoming increasingly relevant and important as advances in
IT allow for creation of new reporting systems.
• Managerial accounting is impacted by IT, speciﬁcally with development of activity-based costing
systems and corporate performance measures (CPM) based on the balanced scorecard.
• Auditors perform many types of assurance services, in addition to ﬁnancial statement attestation.
• The availability of tax software and extensive tax databases inﬂuences both tax preparation and
tax planning.
• There are many reasons to study accounting information systems, and one of the most important is
the availability of many exciting career opportunities. These include traditional accounting careers
as well as jobs in consulting and information systems auditing and security.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
accounting cycle
accounting information system (AIS)
activity-based costing systems
audit trail
balanced scorecard
business entity
business intelligence
Certiﬁed Information Systems Auditors (CISAs)
Certiﬁed Information Technology Professionals
(CITP)
computer-based information systems
cost accounting
CPA Trust Services
dashboards
data
e-business
e-commerce
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system
extensible business reporting language (XBRL)
ﬁnancial accounting information system
information
information age
information overload
Information Systems Audit and Control
Association (ISACA)
information technology (IT)
information technology (IT) auditors
interactive data
key performance indicators (KPIs)
knowledge workers
managerial accounting
performance measurement
predictive analytics
REA accounting
responsibility accounting system
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
systems consultant
suspicious activity reporting (SAR)
value-added resellers (VARs)
TEST YOURSELF
Q1-1. Which of the following is NOT true about accounting information systems (AISs)?
a. All AISs are computerized
b. AIS may report both ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial information

26
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
c. AIS, in addition to collecting and distributing large amounts of data and information, also
organize and store data for future uses
d. A student who has an interest in both accounting and IT will ﬁnd many job opportunities
that combine these knowledge and skills areas
Q1-2. Which of the following is likely to be information rather than data?
a. Sales price
b. Customer number
c. Net proﬁt
d. Employee name
Q1-3. With respect to computerized AIS, computers:
a. Turn data into information in all cases
b. Make audit trails easier to follow
c. Cannot catch mistakes as well as humans
d. Do not generally process information more quickly than humans
Q1-4. A dashboard is:
a. A computer screen used by data entry clerks for input tasks
b. A physical device dedicated to AIS processing tasks
c. A summary screen typically used by managers
d. A type of blackboard used by managers to present useful information to others
Q1-5. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002:
a. Enables U.S. ofﬁcers to wire tap corporate phones if required
b. Has lead to a decrease in the amount of work done by auditors and accountants
c. Forbids corporations from making personal loans to executives
d. Requires the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of a public company to take responsibility for the
reliability of its ﬁnancial statements
Q1-6. The acronym SAR stands for:
a. Simple accounting receipts
b. Suspicious accounting revenue
c. Suspicious activity reporting
d. Standard accounts receivable
Q1-7. Which of the following is NOT true regarding assurance services?
a. Auditors of public companies are no longer allowed to provide assurance services to any
public company as a result of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
b. Assurance services include online privacy evaluations
c. Activity-based costing is not a type of assurance service
d. Only CPAs can provide assurance services to clients
Q1-8. Assigning overhead costs based on the resources, rather than only direct labor, used in
manufacturing is an example of:
a. Activity-based costing (ABC)
b. Budgeting
c. Cost-plus accounting
d. Financial, rather than managerial, accounting

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
27
Q1-9. Which of these acronyms represents a law involving health assurance and privacy?
a. ABC
b. HIPAA
c. CPA
d. SOX
e. XBRL
Q1-10. Which of these acronyms stands for a computer language used for reporting business
activities?
a. ABC
b. HIPAA
c. CPA
d. SOX
e. XBRL
Q1-11. Which of these acronyms is a certiﬁcation for information professionals?
a. ABC
b. HIPAA
c. CBA
d. CITP
e. XBRL
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1-1. Take a survey of the students in your class to ﬁnd out what jobs their parents hold. How many
are employed in manufacturing? How many are employed in service industries? How many
could be classiﬁed as knowledge workers?
1-2. Hiring an employee and taking a sales order are business activities but are not accounting
transactions requiring journal entries. Make a list of some other business activities that would
not be captured as journal entries in traditional AIS. Do you think managers or investors would
be interested in knowing about these activities? Why or why not?
1-3. Advances in IT are likely to have a continuing impact on ﬁnancial accounting. What are some
changes you think will occur in the way ﬁnancial information is gathered, processed, and
communicated as a result of increasingly sophisticated information technology?
1-4. XBRL is emerging as the language that will be used to create interactive data that ﬁnancial
managers can use in communication. How do you think the use of interactive data might
enhance the value of a company’s ﬁnancial statements?
1-5. Discuss suspicious activity reporting. For example, do you think that such reporting should be
a legal requirement, or should it be just an ethical matter? Do you think that the majority of
SAR activity is illegal or are they mostly false alarms?
1-6. Managerial accounting is impacted by IT in many ways, including enhancing corporate
performance measurement (CPM). How do you think a university might be able to use a
scorecard or dashboard approach to operate more effectively?
1-7. Look again at the list of assurance services shown in Figure 1-10. Can you think of other
assurance services that CPAs could offer that would take advantage of their AIS expertise?
1-8. Interview a sample of auditors from professional service ﬁrms in your area. Ask them whether
or not they plan to offer any of the assurance services suggested by the AICPA. Also, ﬁnd out
if they offer services other than ﬁnancial auditing and taxation. Discuss your ﬁndings in class.
1-9. This chapter described several career opportunities available to students who combine a study
of accounting with course work in accounting information systems, information systems,
and/or computer science. Can you think of other jobs where these skill sets would be
desirable?
1-10. This chapter stressed the importance of information technology for understanding how
accounting information systems operate. But is this the only skill valued by employers? How
important do you think ‘‘analytical thinking skills’’ or ‘‘writing skills’’ are? Discuss.

28
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
PROBLEMS
1-11. What words were used to form each of the following acronyms? (Hint: each of them can be
found in the chapter.)
a.
AAA
i.
CPM
q.
PATRIOT Act
b.
ABC
j.
ERP
r.
REA
c.
AICPA
k.
FASB
s.
SAR
d.
AIS
l.
HIPAA
t.
SEC
e.
CFO
m.
ISACA
u.
SOX
f.
CISA
n.
IT
v.
VAR
g.
CITP
o.
KPI
w.
XBRL
h.
CPA
p.
OSC
1-12. The accounting profession publishes many journals such as the Journal of Accountancy,
Internal Auditor, Strategic Finance, and Management Accounting. Choose three or four
issues of each of these journals and count the number of articles that are related to information
technology. In addition, make a list of the speciﬁc technology discussed in each article (where
possible). When you are ﬁnished, decide whether you believe information technology is
inﬂuencing the ﬁeld of accounting.
1-13. Nehru Gupta is the controller at the Acme Shoe Company, a large manufacturing company
located in Franklin, Pennsylvania. Acme has many divisions, and the performance of each
division has typically been evaluated using a return on investment (ROI) formula. The return
on investment is calculated by dividing proﬁt by the book value of total assets.
In a meeting yesterday with Bob Burn, the company president, Nehru warned that this return
on investment measure might not be accurately reﬂecting how well the divisions are doing.
Nehru is concerned that by using proﬁts and the book value of assets, division managers might
be engaging in some short-term ﬁnagling to show the highest possible return. Bob concurred
and asked what other numbers they could use to evaluate division performance.
Nehru said, ‘‘I’m not sure, Bob. Net income isn’t a good number for evaluation purposes.
Because we allocate a lot of overhead costs to the divisions on what some managers consider
an arbitrary basis, net income won’t work as a performance measure in place of return on
investment.’’
Bob told Nehru to give some thought to this problem and report back to him.
Requirements
1. Explain what managers can do in the short run to maximize return on investment as
calculated at Acme. What other accounting measures could Acme use to evaluate the
performance of its divisional managers?
2. Describe other instances in which accounting numbers might lead to dysfunctional behavior
in an organization.
3. Search the Internet and ﬁnd at least one company that offers an information system (or
software) that might help Nehru evaluate his company’s performance.
1-14. In a recent article in the New York Times, Jeff Zucker—CEO of NBC-Universal—described the
digital age as one ‘‘trading analog dollars for digital pennies.’’13 Discuss this comment from the
viewpoint of each of the following:
a. A music company executive
13Tim Arango, ‘‘Digital Sales Exceed CDs at Atlantic’’ New York Times (November 26, 2008), p. B7.

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
29
b. A consumer
c. A TV executive
1-15. What’s new in the ﬁeld of accounting information systems today? Select one new trend that was
not mentioned in the chapter, but that you feel is important. Write a short report describing
your ﬁndings. Be sure to provide reasons why you feel that your choice of topics is important,
and therefore of interest to others in your class.
1-16. The participants of such recreational activities as hang gliding, soaring, hiking, rock collecting,
or skydiving often create local ‘‘birds-of-a-feather’’ (afﬁnity) organizations. Two examples are
the Chicago sky divers (www.chicagoskydivers.com) or the soaring club of western Canada
(www.canadianrockiessoaring.com). Many of these clubs collect dues from members to pay
for club activities as well as the printing and mailing costs of monthly newsletters. Some
of them maintain only minimal accounting information on manual pages or, at best, in
spreadsheets.
a. What ﬁnancial information are such clubs likely to collect and maintain?
b. Assuming that the club keeps manual accounting records, would you consider such systems
‘‘accounting information systems?’’ Why or why not?
c. Assume that the club treasurer of one such organization is in charge of all ﬁnancial matters,
including collecting and depositing member dues, paying vendor invoices, and preparing
yearly reports. Do you think that assigning only one person to this job is a good idea? Why
or why not?
d. What beneﬁts would you guess might come from computerizing some or all of the club’s
ﬁnancial information, even if there are less than 100 members? For example, do you think
that such computerization is likely to be cost effective?
1-17. Many companies now provide a wealth of information about themselves on their websites.
But how much of this information is useful for investment purposes? To help you answer this
question, imagine that you have $10,000, which you must invest in the common stock of a
publicly-held company.
a. Select a company as speciﬁed by your instructor and access its online ﬁnancial reports.
Is the information contained in the reports complete? If not, why not? Is the information
contained in these reports sufﬁcient for you to decide whether or not to invest in the
company? If not, why not?
b. Now select an online brokerage website such as E∗Trade and look up the information of
that same company. Does the information provided by the brokerage ﬁrm differ from that
of the company itself? If so, how? Again, answer the question: Is the information contained
in these reports sufﬁciently detailed and complete for you to decide whether to invest in it?
If not, why not?
c. Access the website of an investment rating service such as Value Line. How does the
information on this third site differ from that of the other two? Again, answer the question:
‘‘Is the information contained on the site sufﬁciently detailed and complete for you to
decide whether invest in the stock? If not, why not?’’
d. What do these comparisons tell you about the difference between ‘‘data’’ and ‘‘informa-
tion?’’
1-18. The website of FinCen—the Financial Center Crimes Enforcement Center Network (a depart-
ment of the U.S. Treasury)—can be found at www.ﬁncen.gov. On the left side of its home
page, you will ﬁnd links to information for various types of companies including banks, casinos,
money service businesses, insurance companies, security and futures traders, and dealers in
precious metals and jewelry—i.e., the companies mandated by various federal laws to ﬁle
suspicious activity reports (SARs). Select three of these types of companies, and for each type,
use the information provided on these secondary pages to list at least two types of ﬁnancial
transactions or activities that should be considered ‘‘suspicious.’’

30
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
CASE ANALYSES
1-19. The Annual Report (Communicating Accounting Information)
The annual report is considered by some to be the single most important printed document
that companies produce. In recent years, annual reports have become large documents.
They now include such sections as letters to the stockholders, descriptions of the busi-
ness, operating highlights, ﬁnancial review, management discussion and analysis, segment
reporting, and inﬂation data as well as the basic ﬁnancial statements. The expansion has
been due in part to a general increase in the degree of sophistication and complexity in
accounting standards and disclosure requirements for ﬁnancial reporting.
The expansion also reﬂects the change in the composition and level of sophistication
of users. Current users include not only stockholders, but ﬁnancial and securities analysts,
potential investors, lending institutions, stockbrokers, customers, employees, and (whether
the reporting company likes it or not) competitors. Thus, a report that was originally
designed as a device for communicating basic ﬁnancial information now attempts to meet
the diverse needs of an expanding audience.
Users hold conﬂicting views on the value of annual reports. Some argue that annual
reports fail to provide enough information, whereas others believe that disclosures in
annual reports have expanded to the point where they create information overload. The
futures of most companies depend on acceptance by the investing public and by their
customers; therefore, companies should take this opportunity to communicate well-deﬁned
corporate strategies.
Requirements
1. The goal of preparing an annual report is to communicate information from a company
to its targeted users. (a) Identify and discuss the basic factors of communication that must
be considered in the presentation of this information. (b) Discuss the communication
problems a company faces in preparing the annual report that result from the diversity
its users.
2. Select two types of information found in an annual report, other than the ﬁnancial
statements and accompanying footnotes, and describe how they are useful to the users
of annual reports.
3. Discuss at least two advantages and two disadvantages of stating well-deﬁned corporate
strategies in the annual report.
4. Evaluate the effectiveness of annual reports in fulﬁlling the information needs of the
following current and potential users: (a) shareholders, (b) creditors, (c) employees, (d)
customers, and (e) ﬁnancial analysts.
5. Annual reports are public and accessible to anyone, including competitors. Discuss how
this affects decisions about what information should be provided in annual reports.
1-20. Universal Concrete Products (Information for Performance Evaluation)
Jack Merritt is the controller for Universal Concrete Products (UCP), a manufacturing
company with headquarters in Columbus, Ohio. UCP has seven concrete product plants
located throughout the Midwest region of the United States. The company has recently

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
31
switched to a decentralized organizational structure. In the past, the company did not try
to measure proﬁtability at each plant. Rather, all revenues and expenses were consolidated
to produce just one income statement.
Under the new organizational structure, each concrete manufacturing plant is headed
by a general manager, who has responsibility for operating the plant like a separate
company. Jack has asked one of his accountants, Scott McDermott, to organize a small
group to be in charge of performance analysis. This group is to prepare monthly reports
on performance for each of the seven plants. These reports consist of budgeted and
actual income statements. Written explanations and appraisals are to accompany variances.
Each member of Scott’s group has been assigned to one speciﬁc plant and is encouraged
to interact with management and staff in that plant in order to become familiar with
operations.
After a few months, the controller began receiving complaints from the general managers
at several of the plants. Common to many of these complaints is the observation that
Scott’s staff members are interfering with operations and, in general, are ‘‘getting in
the way.’’ In addition, the managers worry that someone is constantly ‘‘looking over
their shoulders’’ to see if they are operating in line with budget. Two plant managers
have pointed out that the work the performance analysis staff is trying to do should
be done by them (i.e., explain the variances). As Andrew Boord, one of the most vocal
plant managers, stated, ‘‘How can these accountants explain the variances when they
don’t know anything about the industry? They don’t know what’s happening with our
suppliers or our labor unions, and they haven’t got a clue about our relationships with our
customers.’’
The president of Universal Concrete Products, Hector Eschenbrenner, has also com-
plained about the new system for performance evaluation reporting. He claims that he is
unable to wade through the seven detailed income statements, variances, and narrative
explanations of all variances each month. As he put it, ‘‘I don’t have time for this and I
think much of the information I am receiving is irrelevant!’’
Requirements
1. Do you think it is a good idea to have a special staff in charge of performance evaluation
and analysis?
2. In a decentralized organization such as this one, what would seem to be the best
approach to performance evaluation?
3. What information would you include in a performance evaluation report for Mr.
Eschenbrenner?
1-21. Ross, Sells, and Young, LLP (Information Technology and Auditing)
Carrie Ross is the Managing Partner of Ross, Sells, and Young, LLP, a mid-sized CPA ﬁrm. She
has just ﬁnished reviewing the ﬁrm’s detailed income statement for the previous quarter.
The statement showed that auditing revenues were about 4% below last year’s value and
tax revenues were about the same. Carrie also noted that the income from ﬁnancial auditing
was 10% less than that of the same quarter for the previous year. She is dismayed, but not
surprised, by the ﬁgures. During the past few years, competition for new audit clients has
been intense and Ross, Sells, and Young has cut its hourly billing rates. The client base
of the organization consists mostly of small- and medium-sized retailers and wholesalers
besides several midsize property management companies.

32
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Carrie and the other partners have been discussing ways to expand the revenue base of
the organization. Knowing that information technology is a tool that the ﬁrm can use to
develop new lines of business, Ross, Sells, and Young hired several college graduates during
the past few years with dual majors in accounting and information systems or computer
science. Given the recent ﬁnancial results, Carrie thinks now is the time to begin offering
other professional services.
Requirements
1. Would it make the most sense for Carrie to consider developing new clients or to
consider offering different types of services to existing clients?
2. Carrie knows that the AICPA has developed a list of various types of assurance services
that auditing ﬁrms might consider offering. Describe three of these assurance services
that might be a good ﬁt for this organization. (Hint: Visit the AICPA’s web page or a
website of a large accounting ﬁrm for a listing of assurance services.)
3. How can Ross, Sells, and Young capitalize on its new hires’ combined strengths in
accounting and information systems/computer science?
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Beaumier, Carol M., ‘‘Anti-Money-Laundering Compliance: Elements of a Successful Program’’ Bank
Accounting & Finance Vol. 21, No. 2 (February 2008), pp. 39–42.
Boehmer, Jay. ‘‘Cos Face Sarbanes-Oxley Law’’ Business Travel News Vol. 21, No. 1 (January 19,
2004), pp. 1–2.
Cheney, Glenn. ‘‘Are Auditors Patriot Act Ready?’’ Accounting Today Vol. 21, No. 22 (December 17,
2007), p. 14.
Coustan, Harvey, Linda M. Leinicke, W. Max Rexroad, & Joyce A. Ostrosky, ‘‘Sarbanes-Oxley: What it
Means to the Marketplace’’ Journal of Accountancy (February 2004), pp. 43–47.
Hannon, Neal J., ‘‘The Lead Singer Gets a Chorus,’’ Strategic Finance, Vol. 87, Iss. 11 (May 2006),
pp. 59–60.
Hemphill, Thomas A. ‘‘Corporate Responsibility and the War on Terrorism’’ Business Horizons Vol.
46, No. 3 (May/June 2003), pp. 13–17.
Holbrook, Kevin. ‘‘Adding Value with Analytics,’’ Strategic Finance (November 2004), p. 40–43.
Kaplan, Robert S., & David P. Norton, ‘‘Transforming the Balanced Scorecard from Performance
Measurement to Strategic Management: Part II,’’ Accounting Horizons (June 2001), pp.
147–160.
Kerstetter, Jim. ‘‘Sarbanes-Oxley Sparks a Software Boom,’’ Business Week (January 12, 2004),
p. 94.
Johnston, Randolph P., ‘‘A Tour of Tomorrow’s Technology,’’ Journal of Accountancy, Vol.200,
No. 4 (October 2005), pp. 95–96.
Malykhina, Elena. ‘‘XBRL: More than a Must-Do,’’ InformationWeek, Iss. 1091 (May 29, 2006),
pp. 57–59.
Rainer, R. Kelly Jr., Efraim Turban, & Richard E. Potter. Introduction to Information Systems.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (2007).

CHAPTER 1 / Accounting Information Systems and the Accountant
33
Reynolds, Bob. ‘‘How the Terrorists Helped the Taxman’’ Accountancy Vol. 131, No. 1316 (April
2003), pp. 44–46.
Richards, Dave. ‘‘Envisioning Our Future,’’ Internal Auditor (August 2001), pp. 60–67.
Thottam, Jyoti. ‘‘Inside Business: What Can America Make’’ Time Magazine (January 12, 2004),
pp. 77 ff.
Tie, Robert. ‘‘XBRL: It’s Unstoppable,’’ Journal of Accountancy (August 2005), Vol. 200, Iss. 2,
pp. 32–35.
Vardi, Nathan. ‘‘Auditing Arafat’’ Forbes Magazine, Vol. 171, No. 6 (March 17, 2003) pp. 49–51.
Willis, Mike. ‘‘XBRL and Data Standardization: Transforming the Way CPAs Work,’’ Journal of
Accountancy, Vol. 199, Iss. 3 (March 2005), pp. 80–81.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. a
2. c
3. c
4. c
5. c
6. c
7. d
8. a
9. b
10. e
11. d


Chapter 2
Information Technology and AISs
INTRODUCTION
THE IMPORTANCE OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY TO ACCOUNTANTS
Six Reasons
The Top Ten Information Technologies
INPUT, PROCESSING, AND OUTPUT DEVICES
Input Devices
Central Processing Units
Output Devices
SECONDARY STORAGE DEVICES
Magnetic (Hard) Disks
CD-ROMs and DVDs
Flash Memory
Image Processing and Record Management Systems
DATA COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKS
Communication Channels and Protocols
Local and Wide Area Networks
Client/Server Computing
Wireless Data Communications
Cloud Computing
COMPUTER SOFTWARE
Operating Systems
Application Software
Programming Languages
AIS AT WORK—DELIVERING PACKAGES IS
HIGH-TECH AT UPS
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Savage Motors
Backwater University
Bennet National Bank
Prado Roberts Manufacturing
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Be able to describe why information technology
is important to accounting information systems,
and why accountants should know about this
technology.
2. Understand why computer processor speeds
are not particularly important to most account-
ing information systems.
3. Be familiar with source documents and why
they are important to AISs.
4. Know some common AIS uses for POS input,
MICR media, and OCR.
5. Be able to explain in general terms the value of
secondary storage devices to AISs.
6. Understand why data communications are
important to AISs.
7. Be able to describe some advantages of client/
server computing.
8. Be able to explain the advantages and disadvan-
tages of cloud computing.
35

36
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Business does not operate independently of technology. It never did . . . Business analysis
cannot operate without considering the impact of technology. It never could . . .
Robert Scott, ‘‘Knowing the Tech Talk’’ Accounting Technology Vol. 20, No. 3
(April 2004), p. 4.
INTRODUCTION
In automated accounting systems, information technology (IT) serves as a platform
upon which other system components rely. The purpose of this chapter is to discuss IT
subjects in detail, especially as they relate to AISs. Because most students in AIS courses
have already taken a survey computer class, the discussions here are brief. This chapter
may nonetheless be useful as a review of computer hardware and software concepts, or as
a study of how IT helps organizations accomplish strategic accounting goals.
It is helpful to view an accounting information system as a set of ﬁve interacting
components: (1) hardware, (2) software, (3) data, (4) people, and (5) procedures. Computer
hardware is probably the most tangible element in this set, but ‘‘hardware’’ is only one piece
of the pie—and not necessarily the most important piece. For example, most organizations
spend more money on people (in wages and salaries) than they do on computer hardware
and software combined. Similarly, computer hardware must work together with the other
system components to accomplish data processing tasks. Without computer software, for
example, the hardware would stand idle. Without data to process, both the hardware and
the software would be useless. Without procedures, accounting data could not be gathered
accurately or distributed properly. And ﬁnally, without people, it is doubtful that the rest
of the system could operate for long or be of much use.
What all this means is that ‘‘information technology’’ is a fuzzy term that includes
more than computer hardware. In this chapter, we concentrate on computer hardware (in
the next three sections of the chapter) and software (in the ﬁnal section). But you should
remember that these items must interact with all the other system components to create
successful AISs.
Case-in-Point 2.1
CPA Crossings is a small consulting company in Rochester, Minnesota,
that provides IT services to both CPA ﬁrms and the organizations they serve. In helping
companies install document management systems, general partner John Higgins notes that
such matters as (1) deﬁning work ﬂow policies and procedures, and (2) understanding the
difference between document management systems and electronic documents themselves are
the keys to successful implementations—not ‘‘technology.’’1
THE IMPORTANCE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
TO ACCOUNTANTS
Although it may be tempting to dismiss ‘‘information technology’’ as more important to
computer people than accountants, this would be a mistake. In fact, most of the references
at the end of this chapter make clear that ‘‘IT’’ and ‘‘accounting systems’’ are intimately
related. Here are six reasons why IT is important to accountants.
1Source: John H. Higgins, ‘‘Street Talk: Reader Views’’ Accounting Technology Vol. 22, No. 3 (April 2006), p. 7.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
37
Six Reasons
One reason for IT’s importance is because information technology must be compatible with,
and support, the other components of an AIS. For example, to automate the accounting
system of a dry-cleaning business, the owners will have to consider what tasks they’ll want
their system to accomplish, identify what software package or packages can perform these
tasks, and perhaps evaluate several different computer hardware conﬁgurations that might
support these packages. These concerns are the subject of ‘‘systems analysis’’—the topic
covered in Chapter 13.
A second reason why information technology is important is because accounting
professionals often help clients make hardware and software purchases. For example, large
expenditures on computer systems must be cost-justiﬁed—a task usually performed with
accounting expertise and assistance. For this reason, many consulting ﬁrms now specialize
in, or have departments for, management advisory services to perform these consulting
tasks. Understanding IT is critical to these efforts.
A third reason why information technology is important to accountants is because
auditors must evaluate computerized systems. Today, it is no longer possible for auditors
to treat a computer as a ‘‘black box’’ and audit around it. Rather, auditors now commonly
audit through or with a computer. This means that auditors must understand automation
and automated controls, and also be able to identify a computerized system’s strengths and
weaknesses. We discuss these matters in Chapter 14.
A fourth reason why IT is important to accountants is because they are often asked to
evaluate the efﬁciency (for example, costliness and timeliness) and effectiveness (usually
strategic value) of an existing system. This is a daunting task, requiring a familiarity with
the strengths and weaknesses of the current system, as well as an understanding of what
alternate technologies might work better.
A ﬁfth reason why information technology is important to accountants is because IT
profoundly affects the way they now work, and how they will work in the future. This
includes new ways of gathering and recording information, new types of systems that
accountants will use (both to perform personal tasks and to communicate their work
to others), new types of hardware, software, and computer networks upon which these
systems will run, and even new ways to audit these systems.
Case-in-Point 2.2
Target is a retailer with 1,591 stores in the United States (in 2008)
and over $65 billion in retail sales. Many of its suppliers claim that the chain’s sophisticated
technology is ‘‘the best in the business,’’ enabling managers to make fast, accurate decisions on
its many merchandising operations. Attention to detail is also important, including color-coding
department areas within the store and automating operations at checkout stands. Says Target
president Kenneth Woodrow, ‘‘If people have to wait in line, it means we don’t respect their
time.’’2
A ﬁnal reason why information technology is important to accountants is because
understanding how IT affects accounting systems is vital to passing most accounting
certiﬁcation examinations. For example, sections of both the CPA and CMA examinations
contain questions about information technology.
2Source: Jim Frederick, ‘‘Target Adheres to Core Strategy in Midst of Tough Economy’’ Drug Store News Vol. 30,
No. 5 (April 21, 2008), p. 130.

38
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
The Top Ten Information Technologies
Annually, the AICPA conducts a voluntary annual survey of its members to identify the
‘‘top 10 information system technologies’’ affecting the study and practice of accounting.
Figure 2-1 provides the set for 2008. For the ﬁfth year in a row, ‘‘information security’’ tops
the list, although the general topic of ‘‘security’’ involves almost all the other items in the
list as well.
Because of their importance, we discuss many of the items in Figure 2-1 in various
chapters of the text itself. For example, Chapters 10, 11, 12, and 15 discuss the topic of
‘‘information security’’ (item 1 on the list). Similarly, we discuss ‘‘assurance and compliance
standards’’ in Chapter 14, ‘‘identity and access management’’ in Chapter 12, ‘‘mobile and
remote computing’’ here, and ‘‘disaster recovery’’ in Chapter 12.
INPUT, PROCESSING, AND OUTPUT DEVICES
Figure 2-2 suggests that the hardware of a computer system includes the computer
itself—for example, a microcomputer—as well as the keyboards, printers, hard disks, and
similar devices that help the computer perform input and output tasks. These devices are
commonly called peripheral equipment because they typically surround the computer
and help it process data.
One way to classify peripheral equipment is by the tasks they perform. Thus, input
equipment (such as computer mice and keyboards) enable users to enter data into a
computer system, output equipment (such as monitors and printers) enable users to see
processed results, secondary storage devices (such as hard disks) enable users to store data
for future reference, and communications equipment (such as internal networking cards)
enable users to transmit data over data networks. Like any other system, these distinct
pieces of computer equipment must work together to accomplish data processing tasks.
Most accounting transactions are processed in a three-phase operation called the
input-processing-output cycle. For convenience, we shall look at technologies that
assist AISs in each of these areas in this order.
Input Devices
The starting point of the input-processing-output cycle—especially when processing
accounting data—is input. Thus, even where the amount of data is small, most AISs require
input methods and procedures that ensure complete, accurate, authentic, timely, and
cost-effective ways of gathering and inputting accounting data. Usually, there are several
ways of capturing accounting data, so system designers must pick those input procedures
and devices that best meet these system objectives.
Source Documents and Data Transcription.
The starting point for collecting
accounting data in most AISs is a source document. Manual examples include time cards,
packing slips, survey forms, employee application forms, patient intake forms, purchase
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
39
Rank
Item
Explanation
1
Information Security
The ability to protect the components of an AIS
from such threats as viruses, password intru-
sions, and physical harm.
2
Identity and Access Management
The hardware, software, and procedural tools that
enable organizations to identify and authen-
ticate individuals uniquely. Examples include
passwords, digital certiﬁcates, and biometrics.
3
Conforming to Assurance and
Compliance Standards
Software tools that enable organizations to create,
document, monitor, assess, test, and report on
their compliance with speciﬁed controls. This
encompasses risk management, risk assess-
ment, and continuous auditing.
4
Privacy Management
Protecting the rights and meeting the responsibili-
ties of collecting, storing, using, and disclosing
personal information—especially information in
digital formats.
5
Disaster Planning and Recovery
The ability to continue business operations in the
event that a disaster (such as an earthquake)
occurs.
6
IT Governance
Relationships and processes that help organiza-
tions achieve strategic goals while balancing
risks and returns in IT operations.
7
Securing and Controlling
Information Distribution
Protecting and securing the transmission and dis-
tribution of digital data—for example, using
encryption systems.
8
Digital Identity and Authentication
Technologies
Methods that verify users are who they say they
are, and also non-repudiation techniques.
9
Wireless Technology
The ability to transmit voice and data via airwaves,
thus avoiding the need for physical connectivity.
10
Mobile and Remote Computing
Hardware, software, and procedures that enable
users to connect securely to computer systems
remotely, using such technologies as wireless
PDAs, Bluetooth, WiFi, and WiMax.
11
Electronic Archiving and Data
Retention
Technologies that enable organizations to archive
and retrieve digital information efﬁciently and
securely—for example, using Direct Attached
Storage
(DAS),
Network
Attached
Storage
(NAS), and Storage Area Networks (SANs),
or optical devices such as DVDs, CDs, and
Blu-Ray. This includes policies for both the
backup and destruction of archived data.
12
Document, Content, and
Knowledge Management
Methodologies for capturing, storing, indexing,
retrieving,
searching,
and managing
digital
information, including database information and
video ﬁles. The term ‘‘knowledge manage-
ment’’ means organizing this information so
that employees can use it intelligently.
FIGURE 2-1
The AICPA’s Top 10 Information Technologies for 2008. Source: www.AICPA.org

40
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
USB
Drive
Hard Disk
Drive
CD-Rom
Drive
CRT
Monitor
Printer
Output
Equipment
Audio
Speaker
Automated
Teller Machine
(ATM)
POS Terminal
Communications Equipment
Modem
Mouse
MICR Reader
Keyboard
Input
Equipment
Secondary Storage Equipment
DVD
Drive
Touch
Screen
Scanner
Large
Display
Screen
Central
Processing
Unit (CPU)
FIGURE 2-2
A central processing unit and examples of peripheral equipment.
invoices, sales invoices, cash disbursement vouchers, and travel reimbursement forms.
Computerized examples include airline reservation screens, bank deposit screens, and
web-based customer-order forms.
Source documents are important to AISs because (1) they are human readable, and
(2) they can be completed by the user. Source documents also important because they
provide evidence of a transaction’s authenticity (e.g., a signed cash disbursement voucher
authorizes a cash disbursement), are the starting point of an audit trail, and (in emergencies)
can serve as backup in the event that the computer ﬁles created from them are damaged
or destroyed.
The greatest disadvantage of manually-prepared source documents is that they are
not machine-readable. Thus, in order to process source-document data electronically, the
data must ﬁrst be transcribed into machine-readable media. This data transcription is
mostly an inefﬁcient, labor-intensive, time-consuming, costly, and non-productive process
that has the potential to bottleneck data at the transcription site, embed errors in the
transcribed data, and provide opportunities for fraud, embezzlement, or sabotage. Is it any
wonder, then, that most AISs capture data that are already in machine-readable formats?
The paragraphs that follow describe some devices that overcome these problems.
POS Devices.
Because most of the information required by retailers can be captured
at the point at which a sale is made, retail businesses now commonly use automated
point-of-sale (POS) devices to gather and record pertinent data electronically at that
time. One example is the ‘‘smart cash registers’’ that are connected to offsite computers.
Another example is the bar code readers that interpret the universal product code (UPC)
commonly printed on supermarket and variety store items (Figure 2-3). Non-UPC bar codes
are used extensively in transportation and inventory applications to track shipments (e.g.,
Federal Express), by warehouse employees to log received merchandise, by universities

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
41
D
47400 26426
Manufacturer
Code
Product
Code
FIGURE 2-3
An example of the universal product code (UPC), which is often preprinted on
the labels of retail products for merchandise identiﬁcation and computerized checkout.
to identify equipment, by the U.S. Post Ofﬁce to route mail, and by publishers to identify
books using ISBN numbers (see the bar code on the back of this book for an example).
POS systems allow retailers to centralize price information in online computers, avoid
the task of afﬁxing price stickers to individual items on retail store shelves, and update
prices easily when required. With such systems, for example, the sales data obtained at the
checkout-station of a convenience store can be transmitted directly to a computer where
they can be veriﬁed for accuracy, reasonableness, and completeness, and also stored for
later uses—for example, preparing sales reports. Figure 2-4 lists other advantages of POS
data collection systems, which are actually growing in use despite the maturity of the
technology.
Case-in-Point 2.3
Independent dealers operate the 1,370 Mac’s Convenience Stores in
Canada, but the company provides the accounting and systems support. Saddled with extra
steps required to consolidate information using its old system and a need for tighter inventory
control, corporate managers decided to install a new Catapult POS system. The new system
fully integrates debit/credit card purchases, uses touch screen technology that is ‘‘10 times
faster’’ than the old system, and enables store owners to identify supplier problems more
quickly.3
1. Clerical errors, such as a salesperson’s incorrect reading of a price tag, are detectable, and even
potentially correctable, automatically.
2. Such standard procedures as the computation of a sales tax, the multiplication of prices times quantities
sold, or the calculation of a discount can be performed using the register-terminal as a calculator.
3. Processing errors caused by illegible sales slips can be reduced.
4. Credit checks and answers to questions about customers’ account balances are routinely handled by
using the cash register as an inquiry terminal.
5. The inventory-disbursements data required for inventory control are collected as a natural part of the
sales transaction.
6. A breakdown listing by the computer of sales by type of inventory item, dollar volume, sales clerk, or store
location is possible because the data required for such reports are collected automatically with the sales
transaction and may be stored for such use.
7. Sales and inventory personnel levels can be reduced because the manual data processing functions
required of such personnel have largely been eliminated.
FIGURE 2-4
Advantages of POS systems.
3Source: Tammy Mastroberte, ‘‘A Perfect Connection’’ Convenience Store News Vol. 39, No 13 (October 12,
2003), pp. 216–218.

42
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Non-numeric symbols
A M O U N T  S Y M B O L
ON US SYMBOL
TRANSIT NUMBER SYMBOL
DASH SYMBOL
FIGURE 2-5
The MICR symbols of the American Banking Association (ABA).
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition.
The banking industry pioneered the devel-
opment of magnetically-encoded paper, commonly called magnetic ink character
recognition (MICR). You are probably familiar with MICR characters—the odd-looking
numbers printed on the bottom of your checks (Figure 2-5). This type font has been
standardized for the entire country by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
Thus, a check you write anywhere in the United States or Canada is machine-readable by
any bank.
One advantage of MICR coding is that it is both machine readable and human readable.
Another advantage is that MICR coding is quite ﬂexible: documents of varying sizes,
thicknesses, or widths may be used. The chief disadvantage of MICR is that the magnetic
strength (called the ‘‘magnetic ﬂux’’) of the characters diminishes over time. This makes
MICR documents unreliable when they must be input repeatedly.
Optical Character Recognition.
Optical character recognition (OCR) uses opti-
cal, rather than magnetic, readers to interpret the data found on source documents.
Typical OCR devices use light-sensing mechanisms and laser technology to perform the
character-recognition function required to interpret recorded data. Mark-sense media
(such as the type used in computerized exams) use simple rectangles or ovals as ‘‘char-
acters’’ that you blacken with a pencil. More sophisticated versions of OCR can read
complete character sets of numbers and letters (Figure 2-6), and are therefore more versatile
as input.
Accounting uses of OCR include the billing statements of public utility companies,
credit card issuers, and insurance companies, mortgage payment coupons, telephone bills,
subscription renewal forms, and airline tickets. Most of these forms are turnaround
documents—i. e., documents that are initially prepared by a company, then sent to
individuals, and ﬁnally returned to the organization for further data processing. Like MICR
encoding, the chief advantage of OCR is a source document that is both human-readable
and machine-readable.
Plastic Cards with Magnetic Strips.
Many plastic cards have a magnetic strip
attached to one side of them that can store permanent information and therefore pro-
vide input data when required. Typically, the ‘‘mag strip’’ stores information about the
user—for example, a checking account number, credit-card number, room number, or
security-clearance code. In the United States, the magnetic strip on these cards has been
divided into distinct physical areas and, by agreement, each major industry using these

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
43
FIGURE 2-6
This versatile optical character reader from Scan Corporation can read OCR char-
acters, barcodes, and magnetic stripes.
cards has its own assigned space. Thus, the International Airline Transport Association
(IATA), the American Banking Association (ABA), and the savings and loan industry each
encode information pertinent to their individual needs on such plastic cards without fear
that, by accident, these cards will be misused in another application.
AISs use mag-strip cards to capture data at the time these cards are used. For example,
credit cards can include passwords that ATM machines can examine every time someone
uses the card. This also facilitates data gathering because reliable electronic equipment
reads the strip, thus eliminating human error.
Case-in-Point 2.4
In the United States, many gambling casinos issue mag-strip ‘‘club
cards’’ to their customers, who use them as internal credit cards for playing slot machines,
poker machines, and so forth. These cards free customers from the task of cashing checks
or getting change. But these same cards also enable casinos to gather data on player
activities—information that managers can subsequently use to make better decisions about
extending credit limits or providing complimentary meals and hotel rooms.4
Microcomputer Input Devices.
Many specialized devices now help users input
data to their microcomputers. Keyboards are perhaps the most common input device.
Computer mice, touch pads, joy sticks and similar devices enable users to control a
screen cursor, create graphic images, reposition screen objects, or select items from
display menus. Touch screens enable users to make menu choices simply by touching a
display screen with a ﬁnger or stick. Web cams provide live video input to a computer.
Computer pens or styluses permit users to enter data on video screens and are espe-
cially popular with PDA (personal data assistant) devices such as Blackberries. These
PDAs enable their users to make phone calls as well as maintain such personal data as
address books, appointment calendars, and check registers. Most models also incorporate
4Source: From the authors.

44
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
wireless technology that provide access to the Internet—a practical feature for email
users.
Digital Cameras.
Although many people only use digital cameras in recreational
settings, accountants also use them for documenting (1) inventories of large assets such
as trucks, cranes, and buildings, (2) damage to vehicles or ofﬁces due to accidents,
vandalism, or natural disasters for insurance purposes, and (3) new or existing employees
for identiﬁcation and security purposes. As suggested by the following case-in-point, the
beneﬁts of digital photographs—i.e., the ability to store, display, reproduce, and transmit
them electronically—must be weighed against their potential social costs.
Case-in-Point 2.5
Red-light cameras automate the process of ticketing motorists who
drive through red trafﬁc lights (Figure 2-7). Such cameras enable municipalities to enforce
driving laws at important trafﬁc intersections and often substantially increase revenues
from trafﬁc violations. Proponents of red-light cameras argue that red-light cameras reduce
accidents and that the funds they generate can be used to pay for other important police work.
Critics counter that the cameras are only revenue generators and that they pose an important
threat to an individual’s right to privacy.5
FIGURE 2-7
An example of a red-light camera (Source: istockphoto).
5Source: no author, ‘‘California City to Transform Red Light Cameras into Spy Cameras’’ The Newspaper.com:
A Journal of the Politics of Driving, accessed at www.thenewspaper.com/news/18/1886.asp, November 23,
2008.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
45
(a) fingerprint scanner
(b) iris scanner
FIGURE 2-8
(a) An inexpensive USB ﬁngerprint scanner, courtesy of BioEnable, and (b) an
inexpensive iris scanner, courtesy of LG Electronics.
Biometric Scanners.
Many accounting applications must verify that a user has legiti-
mate access to a system—for example, can view corporate personnel ﬁles. Authentication
systems based on what you know require you to input codes, account numbers, pass-
words, or similar values. These are low-security systems because users can easily forget,
lose, or guess such information, making such systems vulnerable to attack and misuse.
Systems based on what you have require physical keys, magnetic cards, or similar phys-
ical media—but suffer many of the same problems as password-based authenticating
systems.
Biometric scanners authenticate users based on who they are. Behavioral systems
recognize signatures, voices, or keystroke dynamics. Physiological systems recognize
ﬁngerprints, irises, retinas, faces, and even ears. Most of these devices connect directly to
computer USB ports or are integrated in computer keyboards, mice, or web cams. The
two most reliable biometric systems use ﬁngerprint or iris scanners to authenticate users
(Figure 2-8). Fingerprints are unique, and experts have yet to discover two people with the
same minute details since 1892 when records were kept. Iris scans record vein patterns
in the colored portion of the eye, and are even more accurate than ﬁngerprints because
of the wider variability in vein patterns and the fact that even the right and left eye of the
same person are not identical.
Biometric authentication begins with enrollment—the process of creating digital
templates for legitimate users. Template ﬁles are small, requiring about 256 bytes for a
ﬁngerprint and 512 bytes for an iris scan. To authenticate a user, the scanner takes a new
sample from the individual and compares it to known templates. Unlike passwords, the
new samples will not perfectly match the template. The hamming distance measures how
close the two match.
Case-in-Point 2.6
One interesting use of biometric scanning was recently mandated by
the Maritime Transportation Security Act. Workers, such as longshoremen and truck drivers
who need access to secure U.S. ports or marine vessels, must now apply for a Transportation
Worker Identiﬁcation Credential (TWIC) card. Over 1.1 million port workers already have
such smart cards, each of which includes a picture, a magnetic stripe, and a bar code. The
information in the card includes the cardholder’s ﬁngerprints to establish a secure biometric
connection between the cardholder and the card.6
6Source: www.tsa.gov/what we do/layers/twic.

46
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Central Processing Units
Once data have been captured (and perhaps transcribed into machine-readable formats),
they usually must be processed to be valuable to decision-makers. These processing tasks
are performed by the central processing unit (CPU) of a computer system (Figure 2-9).
In the computer industry, the terms computer and CPU are often used interchangeably.
The processing power of CPUs starts with the most limited microcomputers (aka
‘‘personal computers’’ or ‘‘PCs’’) and increases in such capabilities as speed, multi-user
support, and peripheral equipment with minicomputers, mainframe computers, and
supercomputers. A growing segment of the microcomputer market is the portable
systems—i.e., laptop computers, netbook computers, and the even more-compact per-
sonal digital assistants (PDAs) and cell phones. The accounting systems of the smallest
businesses—for example, that of a bicycle-repair shop—can often be implemented entirely
on a desktop microcomputer. In contrast, the inventory control systems of the nation’s
largest vendors—for example, Wal-Mart—require multi-user systems that may employ
several centralized mainframes working in tandem.
One of the biggest challenges facing businesses today is identifying the right combi-
nation of computing technologies—i.e., computers of various sizes, networks, and related
software—that best meet their IT needs. Dollar for dollar, organizations usually get the most
processing power and the cheapest software with microcomputers, which helps explain
why modern organizations buy so many of them. Reasons to retain older mainframe
systems include (1) the need to support multi-user processing capabilities that work best
on such systems, (2) the advantages of centralized processing—for example, simpliﬁed
control over hardware, software, and user accesses to databases, and (3) the huge costs
that organizations typically incur when replacing these legacy systems.
Random Access Memory (RAM)
 
(contains the computer's operating system
instructions, application program instructions,
and user data)
Cache
 
(high-speed buffer
memory)
Primary Memory
Microprocessor
Flow of data and instructions
Flow of data and instructions
Arithmetic-Logic Unit (ALU)
  
(performs arithmetic and logic
functions)
Control Unit
  
(interprets program instructions
and supervises the activities
of primary memory and the ALU)
FIGURE 2-9
A schematic of a central processing unit. In some computers, the ‘‘Level 2’’
(high-speed buffer) cache is part of the microprocessor unit.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
47
Primary Memory.
Figure 2-9 indicates that the two main components of a CPU are
its primary memory and its microprocessor, with cache, or buffer, memory serving as
the interface between these components. The purpose of primary memory is to store
data and program instructions temporarily for immediate processing and execution. In
microcomputers, this primary or random access memory (RAM) consists of individual
bytes, each capable of storing a single character of data—e.g., a letter or punctuation mark.
RAM capacities are typically measured in gigabytes (billions of bytes). Most accounting
software requires minimum amounts of primary memory to operate properly, so ‘‘RAM
size’’ is often a key concern when matching computer hardware to software requirements
for smaller AIS applications.
Microprocessors.
Computers cannot manipulate data or execute instructions directly
in primary memory. Rather, these tasks are performed by the CPU’s microprocessor.
Examples include Intel Corporation’s Atom or Core 2 Quad chips. The arithmetic-logic unit
(ALU) portion of these microprocessor chips performs arithmetic tasks (such as addition
and multiplication), as well as logic tasks (such as comparisons). In contrast, the control
unit of the processor supervises the actual data processing—for example, transferring data
from primary memory to the ALU, performing the required task (e.g., adding two numbers
together), and transferring the answer back to primary memory.
Computers, Processor Speeds, and AISs.
The most important thing to know
about processor speeds is that they are rarely important in accounting applications. This is
because the input-processing-output cycle characteristic of most accounting tasks requires
input and output operations as well as processing procedures in order to perform speciﬁc
tasks. An example is a payroll application, which must input, process, and output the data
from each time card. The speeds of the input/output (I/O) operations involved in this
application are orders of magnitude slower than the internal speeds of the processor, thus
explaining why most computers are I/O bound, not process bound. What this means to
accounting applications is that designers must typically look elsewhere for ways to speed
computer throughput—i.e., the time it takes to process business transactions such as
payroll time cards—for example, by employing faster data transmissions.
Output Devices
Accounting data are meaningless if they cannot be output in forms that are useful and
convenient to end users. Printed, hard-copy output is one possibility, but video or
soft-copy output on monitor screens, audio output, and ﬁle output to secondary storage
devices such as hard disks are other possibilities that we explore here. Outputs are
especially important to AISs because the information in these outputs is usually the basis
of managerial decision making, and therefore the goal of the entire system.
Printers.
The hope for a paperless ofﬁce has yet to be realized and most AISs still
produce many types of printed outputs—for example, transaction summaries, ﬁnancial
statements, exception reports, spreadsheet-based budget reports, word processing docu-
ments, and graphs. Many printers now also perform the functions of fax machines, copiers,
and scanners, enabling these devices to serve as input devices, transmission devices, and
standalone copying devices.
Printers fall into three general categories: (1) dot-matrix, (2) ink-jet, and (3) laser.
Dot-matrix printers are impact printers that employ tiny wires in a print head to strike

48
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
an inked ribbon and create tiny dots on a print page. These printers are popular with
small-business users because they are inexpensive and can print multipart (‘‘carbon’’)
paper—an important feature commonly used in commercial cash registers to print multiple
copies of credit-card receipts.
Ink-jet printers create characters by distributing tiny bubbles or dots of ink onto print
pages. The print resolutions of these printers (commonly measured in dots per inch or dpi)
tend to be higher than dot-matrix printers, while printing speeds (commonly measured in
pages per minute or ppm) tend to be lower than laser printers. But most ink-jet printers
can print in colors—a capability lacking in many dot-matrix and laser printers—enabling
them to print graphics and colored pictures as well as text documents.
Laser printers create printed output in much the same way as duplicating machines.
The costs of laser printers are higher than dot-matrix or ink-jet printers, but print quality is
usually superior and output speeds are much faster. Laser printers are often the printer of
choice for commercial users because of this speed advantage. Many laser printers can now
also print in color.
Video Output.
Because hard-copy outputs clutter ofﬁces with paper and take time to
print, many AISs use fast, soft-copy video screen displays instead. Computer monitors are
perhaps the most common type of video output, but the airport display screens showing
arrivals and departures, stadium scoreboards, highway billboards, and the signage of many
private stores are also forms of computerized video outputs.
The monitors of most laptop and desktop computers use ﬂat-panel, liquid crystal
display (LCD) screens to create video outputs the same way that televisions do. The
picture elements (pixels) in both types of screens are tiny, discrete dots arranged in a
matrix. SVGA (for super video graphics adapter) refers to a pixel matrix of about 1200 by
800 pixels (the exact dimensions are not standardized and vary with the manufacturer).
Multimedia.
Multimedia combines video, text, graphics, animation, and sound to
produce multidimensional output. By deﬁnition, multimedia presentations also require
advanced processor chips, sound cards, and fast video cards to work properly. One
accounting use of multimedia is storing the pictures of employees in personnel ﬁles.
Another is recording verbal interviews with audit clients. A third is preparing instructional
disks for tax accountants. Accounting uses of multimedia are likely to grow as the cost of
producing multimedia applications becomes cheaper and new applications are found for
this stimulating form of output. Multimedia applications are now also becoming common
on the Internet.
SECONDARY STORAGE DEVICES
Primary memory is volatile memory, meaning memory that loses its contents when
electrical power is lost. In contrast, AISs must store data on permanent media that maintain
their accuracy and integrity, yet permit these systems to access and modify information
quickly and easily. This is the purpose of secondary storage (also called mass storage or
auxiliary storage). Like primary memory, the basic unit otf secondary storage is a byte, and
secondary storage capacities are measured in kilobytes (1,024 bytes), megabytes (1,024
kilobytes), gigabytes (1,024 megabytes), or terabytes (1,024 gigabytes).
In this section, we examine several types of secondary storage: magnetic (hard) disks,
CD-ROMs, DVD disks, and USB ﬂash disks. Common to all these media is the concept of

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
49
Social
Security
Number
Street
Address
alphabetic data field
City,
State
Zip
Code
Pay
Code
Hourly
Rate
Withholding
Amounts
Other
Information
Name
numeric data field
9
20
50
50
5
1
4
30
101
one computer record
FIGURE 2-10
The format for the computer record of an employee on a payroll ﬁle.
a computer record. Like manual systems, computerized AISs must maintain information
about payroll activities, warehouse inventories, and accounts receivable data in permanent
ﬁles. In each such ﬁle, a computer record is a collection of information about one ﬁle
entity—for example, one employee on a payroll ﬁle (Figure 2-10).
Magnetic (Hard) Disks
A magnetic (hard) disk (Figure 2-11) consists of one or more spinning platters, each
surface of which has an iron oxide coating that can be magnetized to record information.
The smallest hard disks use only a single, double-sided platter, whereas larger-capacity hard
disks use multiple platters. The disk system can access (or write) records from any portion
of the platter by moving its read/write heads in toward the center of the disk platters, or
outward to their outer edges. To avoid contamination from dust or smoke particles, most
hard disks are permanently sealed in their boxes.
To further guard against disk failures as well as increase storage capacities, manufactur-
ers now also offer redundant arrays of inexpensive disks (RAIDs)— see Figure 2-12. In
effect, these are stacks of hard disks, each similar to the disk system shown in Figure 2-11.
Disk platters
Read/write head
Surface of platter
stores data
FIGURE 2-11
A schematic of a multiplatter hard disk. The read/write head assembly moves the
read/write heads inward (toward the central spindle) or outward as needed, allowing the system
to access the data on any portion of any platter.

50
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
FIGURE 2-12
A redundant array of inexpensive disks (RAID).
Source: OrbitMicro at www.orbitmicro.com
RAIDs are also commonly used for archiving functions—and therefore critical to AISs in
the event of an unforeseen disaster.
One advantage of magnetic disk media is their large storage capacities—now commonly
measured in gigabytes for microcomputers and terabytes for commercial AISs. Another
advantage is their fast data transfer rates, which now can exceed 100 million characters
per second. Finally, perhaps their most important advantage is their ability to directly
access any speciﬁc record without sequential searching—a capability made possible by the
fact that disk data are assigned individual addresses (like postal addresses). This accessing
capability is useful for such online applications as airline reservations or bank account
inquiries, when users require immediate access to speciﬁc records, and explains why
magnetic disks are also called direct access storage devices (DASDs).
CD-ROMs and DVDs
Two types of secondary storage devices currently popular with microcomputer users are
CD-ROMS and DVDs. Both media store data digitally and are read optically.
CD-ROMs.
The term CD-ROM is an acronym for ‘‘compact disk-read only memory.’’
The name is appropriate because CD-ROMs are the same size and appearance as audio CDs.
CD-ROMs contain microscopic pits that are etched along a spiraling track in their substrate
surfaces. Laser beams interpret the presence or absence of a pit as the ‘‘one’’ or ‘‘zero’’ of
binary codes.
CD-ROMs come in three types. The oldest, prerecorded versions are similar to those
on which music or software is distributed. Newer, ‘‘CD-r’’ media are blank CD-ROMs that
can be recorded (only once) with inexpensive CD encoding devices. These are worm
(write-once, read-many) media. Finally, the newest ‘‘CD-rw’’ media are rewritable,
allowing AISs to use them as low-capacity hard disks.
One advantage of CD-ROMs is the fact that they are a removable medium with storage
capacities in excess of 650 megabytes per disk—the equivalent of 300,000 pages of text!
This makes CD-ROMs ideal for storing large amounts of accounting data or reference
materials. Because CD-ROMs are read with laser beams, data transfer rates are also very fast,
and wear and tear is minimal, even with continuous usage. Finally, the worm characteristic

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
51
of CD-ROMs and CD-r’s make them useful for archiving ﬁles securely (i.e., storing ﬁles on
a medium that cannot be changed). But CD-ROMs suffer from at least one drawback—the
fact that that worm media cannot be updated (because new information cannot be written
on them once they have been encoded).
DVDs.
A digital video disk or DVD closely resembles a CD-ROM in that it too is a 5-inch
plastic disk that uses a laser to encode microscopic pits in its substrate surface. But the pits
on a DVD are much smaller and encoded much closer together than those on a CD-ROM.
Also, a DVD can have as many as two layers on each of its two sides (compared to the
single-layered, single-sided CD-ROM). The end result is a medium that can hold as much
as 17 gigabytes of data—over 25 times the capacity of a standard CD-ROM disk. The two
greatest advantages of DVDs are therefore (1) a huge storage capacity that enables users to
archive large amounts of data, and (2) a single, light-weight, reliable, easily-transportable
medium. Newer DVDs are writeable and even re-writeable.
Flash Memory
Flash memory is solid state memory that comes in various forms. Examples include the
ﬂash drives that use the USB ports of microcomputers (Figure 2-13), the PCMCIA memory
cards used with laptops, the memory sticks used in digital cameras, and the memory cards
used with video games. The term ‘‘solid state’’ means that there are no moving parts (unlike
the hard disk in Figure 2-11)—everything is electronic rather than mechanical.
USB drives can store gigabytes of data in an erasable format. Because data transfer rates
are high and the devices themselves compact, they are particularly useful to accountants
for creating backups of important ﬁles and transporting them offsite. Costs are low—under
$20 for smaller-capacity USB drives.
Image Processing and Record Management Systems
The life cycle of business documents begins with their creation, continues with their
storage and use, and ends with their destruction. Two important tools that can help
managers with such tasks are image-processing systems and record management systems.
FIGURE 2-13
This Flash memory from San Disk plugs into a standard USB microcomputer
connector. It can write data at 13 mb per second, read data at 15 mb per second, and store up to
4 gigabytes of data.

52
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Image Processing.
Image processing allows users to store graphic images in digital
formats on secondary storage media (e.g., the images now taken by digital cameras).
Thus, image processing systems are able to capture almost any type of document electron-
ically, including photographs, ﬂowcharts, drawings, and pages containing hand-written
signatures. Commercial users of image processing include: (1) insurance companies that
use image processing to store claims forms and accident reports, (2) banks that use
image processing to store check images, (3) hospitals that use image processing to
store medical-diagnostic scans, and (4) the Internal Revenue Service, which uses image
processing to capture and store tax return data.
Case-in-Point 2.7
Lloyd’s of London is the world’s largest insurer. It processes over
90,000 new claims annually and handles over 1.5 million paper documents each year. To
speed claims processing as well as reduce the costs associated with all this paper handling,
the company is developing an £11m system to store new claims information digitally as well
as process the transactions associated with them. Estimated annual savings: £50 million.7
Image processing offers several advantages. One is the fast speeds at which images can
be captured—a beneﬁt of special importance to high-volume users such as banks. Another
advantage is the reduced amount of physical storage space required (compared to paper
storage). A third advantage is the convenience of storing images in computer records,
which can then be sorted, classiﬁed, retrieved, or otherwise manipulated as needs require.
A ﬁnal advantage is the ability to store images in central ﬁles, thus making copies available
to many users at once, even at the same time. (This last advantage is an important beneﬁt
to business and medical ofﬁces, where personnel no longer have to ask ‘‘who’s got the
ﬁle?’’ This is the topic of the AIS at Work at the end of Chapter 8.)
Record Management Systems.
Simple record management systems enable busi-
nesses to systematically capture and store documents. Newer electronic document and
record management systems (EDRMs) extend such capabilities by helping organi-
zations manage the workﬂow of electronic documents during document development,
provide collaborative tools that enable several users to work on the same document, and
allow organizations to create and store multiple versions of documents.
It is easy to understand why business and government organizations use EDRM tools.
For legal reasons, for example, businesses may need to retain both current and old policy
manuals, contracts, or employment records. Similarly, it is convenient to automate the
termination of documents when contracts expire, employees quit, or new policies replace
them.
DATA COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKS
Data communications refers to transmitting data to and from different locations. Many
accounting applications use data communications in normal business operations. For
example, banking systems enable individual ofﬁces to transmit deposit and withdrawal
information to centralized computer locations, airline reservation systems enable travel
agents to book ﬂights from remote locations, and stock brokerage systems enable brokers
7Source: Nick Huber, ‘‘Lloyd’s Moves to End Paper-Based Transactions’’ Computer Weekly (February 17, 2004),
p. 5.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
53
to transmit buy and sell orders for their customers. Accountants must understand data
communication concepts because so many AISs use them and also because so many
clients acquire AISs that depend upon them. In addition, auditors must sometimes audit
the capabilities of a network—for example, evaluate its ability to transmit information
accurately and to safeguard the integrity of the data during such transmissions.
Communication Channels and Protocols
A communication channel is the physical path that data take in data transmissions.
Examples include: (1) the twisted-pair wires of telephone lines, (2) coaxial cables, (3)
optical ﬁbers, (4) microwaves, and (5) radio (satellite) waves. Local area networking
applications (discussed shortly) typically use the ﬁrst three of these, while Internet
applications often use all ﬁve of them.
To transmit data over these communications channels, the digital pulses of the sending
computer must be translated into the sound patterns, light pulses, or radio waves of the
communications channel. Over voice-grade telephone lines, this translation is performed
by a modem (an acronym for ‘‘modulator-demodulator’’). The transmission rates are
commonly measured in bits per second (bps).
ISDN (integrated services digital network) is an international data communications
standard that transmits data, voice message, or images at a standard rate of 128k bps over
the Internet. A similar data transmission service is a digital subscriber line (DSL),
which supports data communications rates up to 9 megabits per second. Finally, large
data communications installations using ﬁber optic cables and similar wide-band channels
can currently transmit data up to 266 million bps. Future optic ﬁber transmission rates
will transmit data at speeds up to 2.2 billion bps—speeds high enough to transmit
motion-picture images in real time.
In all data communications applications, the sending and receiving stations must use a
compatible transmission format. A data communications protocol refers to the settings
that provide this format. Two common protocols are TCP (transmission control protocol),
which networks commonly use for emails, and HTTP (hypertext transmission protocol),
which networks commonly use for web pages.
Local and Wide Area Networks
One important use of data communications is in local area networks (LANs). Figure 2-14
shows that a LAN consists of microcomputers, printers, terminals, and similar devices that
are connected together for communications purposes. Most LANs use ﬁle servers to store
centralized software and data ﬁles, and also to coordinate data transmissions among the
other LAN devices and users. Most local area networks occupy a single building, although
LANs covering several buildings are also common. In the past, installers hard-wired LAN
devices together. Today, many LANs are wireless—a convenience to users, who no longer
need to worry about where to place computer equipment in their ofﬁces, but an added
security hazard to network administrators.
LANs provide several users access to common hardware, software, and computer ﬁles,
as well as to each other. Some advantages of LANs are:
1. Facilitating communications: The number one reason why businesses install LANs
today is to support email and/or provide access to the Internet.

54
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Internet
with web
services
Personal
computer
Personal
computer
Personal
computer
Personal
computer
Printer 
Online
storage
File
server
FIGURE 2-14
A local area network with representative devices.
2. Sharing computer equipment: For example, a LAN can provide users access to the
same printers or Internet servers.
3. Sharing computer ﬁles: LANs enable several users to input or output data to or from
the same accounting ﬁles.
4. Saving software costs: It is often cheaper to buy a single software package for a local
area network than to buy individual packages for each of several workstations.
5. Enabling unlike computer equipment to communicate with one another: Not
all computers use the same operating system or application software. LANs enable
different computers using different software to communicate with one another.
Wide area networks (WANs) are computer networks spanning regional, national,
or even global areas. For example, a WAN enables a national manufacturing company to
connect several manufacturing, distribution, and regional centers to national headquarters,
and therefore to each other, for communications purposes (see Figure 2-15). WANs typically
Manufacturing plant
Transmission station
Local office and ground-based
transmission line
M
Satellite
Headquarters
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
FIGURE 2-15
A wide area network that a large organization might use to connect regional
users and computers.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
55
use a multitude of communications channels for this purpose, including leased phone lines,
microwave transmitters, and perhaps even satellite transmissions. Rather than developing
and maintaining their own WANs, many organizations employ public carriers, the Internet,
or third-party network vendors to transmit data electronically.
Case-in-Point 2.8
IGT is the world’s largest slot machine manufacturer, but nearly
half its proﬁts derive from another product—its Megabucks ® system. Megabucks is, in
effect, a WAN of progressive slot machines that are located on the ﬂoors of participat-
ing casinos in the state of Nevada. The company links the machines together over private
communications lines, enabling the company to both monitor its slot machines and display
the growing jackpots in real time as customers play. (You can view the current jackpot:
www.igtonline.com/megajackpots/nevada/systems/ﬂash9 99. html). To date, Megabucks has
created more than 1,000 millionaires and paid more than $3.8 billion in major jackpots. On
March 21, 2003, it set a new jackpot record: $39 million. Only one lucky player has ever won
the Megabucks jackpot twice—once for $4.6 million in 1989 and again for $21.1 million in
2005 (when he was 92).8
AISs use WANs to gather ﬁnancial data from remote sites, distribute accounting
information to and from headquarters, and support email communications among users.
WANs are therefore typically complex, multifaceted systems that serve many users for many
purposes. For example, the wide area networks of large Internet service providers (ISPs)
such as America Online allow subscribers to access centralized databases through local
phone lines. Similarly, regional supermarket chains use WANs to gather inventory data,
cash receipts data, and sales information from the many stores in their chains. WANs can
also be dedicated to speciﬁc tasks. For example, most bank ATM machines are connected
to WANs for the purpose of centralizing account information.
Many WANs are organized in a hierarchy, in which the individual microcomputers of a
speciﬁc branch ofﬁce are connected to a ﬁle server on a local area network, the ﬁle servers
of several LANs are connected to a regional computer, and several regional computers are
connected to a corporate mainframe. This hierarchical approach allows a large company
to gather, store, and distribute ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial information at the appropriate
geographic level of the company.
Client/Server Computing
Client/server computing is an alternate technology to mainframe and/or hierarchical
networks. Depending on the type of client/server system, the data processing can be per-
formed by any computer on the network. The software application, such as a spreadsheet
program, resides on the client computer—typically, a microcomputer. The database and
related software are stored on networked ﬁle servers. Although mainframe systems nor-
mally centralize everything (including the control of the system), client/server applications
distribute data and software among the server and client computers of the system. As
a result, client/server computing is a way to achieve the overall objective of an enter-
prise network. In so doing, more computing power resides in user desktops, yet all
organizational computers are linked together.
8Source: The IGT website at www.igt.com/Content (2006).

56
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Client
Presentation component
Local Server 
Application component
(depending upon the system,
also performs some of the
logic and database services)
Centralized System
Data-management
component
Mainframe
computer or
large server
File
server
FIGURE 2-16
Components of a client/server system.
Components of Client/Server Systems.
Figure 2-16 shows that a client/server
system may be viewed as a set of three interacting components: (1) a presentation
component, (2) an application-logic component, and (3) a data-management component.
The presentation component of a client/server system is the user’s view of the system—i.e.,
what the user sees onscreen. This view may resemble the familiar screens of the user’s
home computer, or may differ considerably from them. Simple client/server systems that
focus on this presentation task are called distributed presentation systems. Most Internet
applications illustrate this category.
The application-logic component of a client/server system refers to the processing
logic of a speciﬁc application—for example, the logic involved in preparing payroll checks.
Thus, client/server computing differs from simple ‘‘host/terminal computing’’ in the user’s
new ability to (1) query or manipulate the warehoused data on the server, (2) ask what-if
questions of the server’s data, (3) process a transaction that may affect data stored on
both client and server computers, or (4) alter data stored elsewhere on the network. Some
systems enable users to write their own data queries (that ask for speciﬁc information from
the server database), and also to store such queries on local ﬁles for later uses.
The processing tasks involved in each application are typically shared unequally
between the client computer and the server, with the division of labor depending upon
the particular application. For example, in a payroll application, the client’s contribution
may be limited to validating the data entered into the system, while in a word-processing
application the client computer might perform nearly all the processing tasks required.
Finally, the data-management component of a client/server system refers to its
databases and data-storage systems. Some applications rely on a centralized mainframe for
this task. More typically, however, multiple copies of the databases reside on large, regional
ﬁle servers, thereby speeding user access to the data they contain. These systems are also
the most complex, and therefore pose the greatest challenges to accountants for control
and audit tasks.
Advantages and Disadvantages.
The advantages of client/server computing include
the ﬂexibility of distributing hardware, software, data, and processing capabilities through-
out a computer network. A further advantage can be reduced telecommunications costs—an
advantage that enabled Avis Rent-a-Car to save a half-minute on each of its 23 million annual
customer calls, and therefore $1 million. A third advantage is the ability to install thin-client
systems, which use inexpensive or diskless microcomputers, instead of more expensive
models, to save money on system acquisition and maintenance costs. The managers of

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
57
Mr. Gatti’s, a Texas chain of 300 pizza restaurants, for example, estimate that it will save
about 45% on its maintenance costs using such a system.
One disadvantage of a large client/server system is that it must maintain multiple copies
of the same databases, which it then stores on its various regional servers. This makes
backup and recovery procedures more difﬁcult because multiple copies of the same ﬁle (or
several parts of a single ﬁle) now exist on several different computers. This multiple-copy
problem also causes difﬁculties in data synchronization (i.e., the need to update all copies
of the same ﬁle when a change is made to any one of them).
Changing from one version of an application program to another is also more difﬁcult
in client/server systems because the system usually requires consistency in these programs
across all servers. User access and security are also more difﬁcult because access privileges
may vary widely among employees or applications. Finally, the need for user training is
often greater in client/server systems because employees must not only know how to use
the data and application programs required by the jobs, but also understand the system
software that enables them to access these databases and programs from local workstations.
Wireless Data Communications
A recent survey by Intuit revealed that over 70% of the small businesses in the U.S. have
mobile employees, and by all accounts that number is growing. The term wireless com-
munications, also called Wi-Fi (for ‘‘wireless ﬁdelity’’), means transmitting voice-grade
signals or digital data over wireless communication channels. Wi-Fi creates a wireless
Ethernet network using access hubs and receiver cards in PCs, cell phones, and PDAs,
thereby turning cell phones and similar wireless devices into cordless, multi-function ‘‘web
appliances.’’
Wireless devices have become important tools for business professionals, helping
accountants in particular stay in touch with fellow employees, clients, and corporate
networks. Early, emailing uses of wireless communications have now been joined by
such job-dependent ﬁnancial functions as recording sales orders, entering time and billing
information, and—as suggested by the following case-in-point—even preparing the payroll.
Case-in-Point 2.9
It wasn’t until the middle of his son’s little league game that Eddie
Elizando realized he hadn’t prepared the payroll for the employees at his small CPA company.
Mr. Elizando was nowhere near his corporate ofﬁce, but this wasn’t a problem. Using his
new iPhone, Mr. Elizando called his payroll service, entered data by clicking through the
appropriate payroll program, and accomplished the task remotely between innings of the
game. An added bonus: one of Mr. Elizando’s employees was his wife, who still wanted to be
paid!9
The two key dimensions of Wi-Fi applications are ‘‘connectivity’’ and ‘‘mobility.’’ The
connectivity advantage means the ability to connect to the Internet, LAN, or WAN without
physical wires or cables. To accomplish this, Wi-Fi devices use wireless application
protocol (WAP), a set of communications standards and wireless markup language (a
subset of XML optimized for the small display screens typical of wireless, Internet-enabled
appliances). Two important types of wireless communications are RFID applications and
NFC communications.
9Source: Alexandra Defelice, ‘‘Working in a Wireless World’’ Accounting Technology Vol. 23, No. 10 (November
2007), pp. 30–34.

58
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Source
Reader
Receiver
Electronic tag
FIGURE 2-17
Reading an RFID at a toll both.
RFID.
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) enables businesses to identify pallets
and even individual items without unpacking them from shipping crates. Passive RFID
tags have no power source (and therefore cannot wear out), but can nonetheless ‘‘answer’’
inquiries from energized sources. Active RFID tags are actually chips with antennas, have
their own power source, enjoy ranges of more than 100 meters, and are generally more
reliable than passive tags.
Perhaps the most noticeable use of RFID tags is as user identiﬁers in transportation
systems (Figure 2-17). For example, the subway systems of New York City, Moscow,
and Hong Kong use them, as do some of the toll roads and parking lots in the states of
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Georgia, Florida, and Illinois. Similar
systems may be found in Paris, the Philippines, Israel, Australia, Chile, and Portugal. To
toll-road travelers, RFID systems represent a convenient way of paying user fees and
reducing wait times in tollbooth lines. To their operators, these systems are a convenient
way of gathering accounting data and updating customer accounts.
Case-in-Point 2.10
Recent RFID applications include employee ID badges, library books,
credit cards, and even tire-tread sensors. Similarly, many retailers now require their suppliers
to include tags that identify merchandise. Wal-Mart, Target, and Albertsons are three of a
growing list of large retailers that now require their largest suppliers to include RFID tags in
the cases and pallets sent to their various distribution centers. The tags are superior to bar
codes, which require a line of sight for reading, must appear on the outside of cartons, and
can be lost or defaced.10
NFC.
Near ﬁeld communication (NFC) enables mobile devices such as cell phones,
PDAs, and laptop computers to communicate with similar devices containing NFC chips
(Figure 2-18). With NFC devices, for example, you can make travel reservations on your
PC, download airline tickets to your mobile phone or PDA, and check in at a departure
gate kiosk with a swipe of your mobile device—all with no paper or printing.
In effect, NFCs represents RFID communications for the masses. But the operating
range of NFC devices is limited to 20 cm or about 8 inches—a limitation that helps avoid
unintentional uses. The transit systems in China, Singapore, and Japan now use NFC
10Doug Desjardins, ‘‘Implementation Easier as No. 2’’ DSN Retailing Today Vol. 44, No. 7 (March 11, 2005), p. 34.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
59
FIGURE 2-18
Near ﬁeld communication devices.
systems, as do Visa International’s credit card system and chip-enabled posters of the
Atlanta Hawk’s basketball team.
NFC technology is a joint product development of Sony, Philips, and Nokia. Three
possible communication modes are (1) active (bidirectional), (2) passive (one way), and
(3) transponder (battery-less and therefore only powered by an external communication
source). Current NFC standardized communication speeds are between 106k and 424k
bps—considerably less than the 1–7 mbps speeds of Bluetooth or Wi-Fi data transmissions.
But passive NFC chips cost as little as 20 cents and are currently considerably cheaper than
these alternate communications devices.
Cloud Computing
The term cloud computing refers to a range of computing services on the Internet—for
example, access to computer software programs, backup and recovery ﬁle services, and
even web-page development and hosting. The term gets its name from the common use of
a cloud symbol to represent the Internet itself—refer back to Figure 2-14. Most commercial
applications of cloud computing are types of outsourcing—i.e., situations in which one
company hires another to perform a vital service. An accounting application is the use of
tax preparation software, which the customer accesses over the Internet from the vendor
for a fee. Many cloud service vendors have familiar names, including Amazon, Google,
Yahoo, IBM, Intel, Sun Microsystems, and Microsoft. The ﬁrst cloud computing conference
took place in May 2008, and attracted over 1,000 attendees.
Cloud computing offers several advantages. One is that it gives even the smallest
customer access to supercomputing capabilities. Another is that it enables organizations
of any size to avoid investing in the technology required to perform the outsourced tasks
in-house. A third is that customers only pay for services actually used. A fourth is the
ability to avoid preparing for peak loading—e.g., times when transaction volumes are
high. Finally, when companies purchase archiving services, backup ﬁles can be created
automatically and by deﬁnition, are stored offsite for security. This last advantage might
also be of particular interest to students, who can subscribe to one of several services at
nominal costs, or even for free—see Figure 2-19.
Cloud computing also has several drawbacks. One is that cloud subscription fees
can be high and may not always be cost effective. Another is that many cloud services
require customers to trust their service providers with sensitive data and to stay operational
at all times—uncomfortable risks to some. Finally, backup service providers typically
require large bandwidths, and the timing of automatic backups is not always convenient to
individual subscribers.

60
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
FIGURE 2-19
Mozy is a cloud service provider of backups for both individual and corporate
users. This conﬁgurations screen allows a user to schedule backups.
COMPUTER SOFTWARE
As noted in the introduction to this chapter, it is impossible to discuss information
technology without also recognizing the importance of computer software. Computer
hardware serves as a base, or platform, upon which two types of computer software
typically reside: (1) operating systems, and (2) application software. This chapter concludes
by brieﬂy discussing each of these types of software.
It is difﬁcult to overstate the importance of software to AISs. Both in industry and
in private homes, computer software performs such tasks as computing spreadsheets,
paying corporate bills, routing parcels on conveyor belts, answering telephones, and
reserving airline seats. Automated AISs depend on software to function properly. But
this dependency also presents important challenges to accountants. For example, every
system that inﬂuences cash accounts or affects other corporate resources must also contain
automated controls to ensure the reliability, completeness, and authenticity of computer
inputs, processing, and outputs. Similarly, all AIS software must initially be designed,
acquired, and installed by someone. These facts help explain why accountants are often
such an integral part of the teams that shop for, test, and audit such systems.
Operating Systems
An operating system (OS) is a set of software programs that helps a computer, ﬁle
server, or network run itself and also the application programs designed for it. Examples
of operating systems for microcomputers include MacOS, Windows Vista, and Linux.
Operating systems for larger computers include UNIX, Windows.Net server, and OS2.
Some of these operating systems are designed as single-user operating systems (e.g.,
Windows XP), while others are designed as multi-user operating systems for LANs (e.g.,
Windows NT Server and Novell Netware). Operating systems for very small systems such
as PDAs and cell phones include Windows Mobile, Blackberry, Bluetooth, Palm OS, and
Symbian OS. Most of these operating systems combine many convenient software tools

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
61
in one package and use graphical user interfaces (GUIs) with menus, icons, and other
graphics elements (instead of instruction commands) to identify system components and
launch processing programs.
On computers of any size, the operating system is typically the ﬁrst piece of software
loaded (booted) into primary memory when the computer powers up. System tasks
for single-user OS’s include testing critical components on boot-up, allocating primary
memory among competing applications (i.e., managing the multitasking demands of several
Windows sessions), managing system ﬁles (such as directory ﬁles), maintaining system
security, and (in larger computers) gathering system performance statistics. The system
tasks for multi-user OS’s are even more complicated than for single-user systems because
more users are involved and more coordination of system resources is required. These
multi-user OS’s maintain job queues of programs awaiting execution, create and check
password ﬁles, allocate primary memory to several online users, apportion computer time in
time-sharing (multiprocessing) environments, and accumulate charges for resource usage.
Application (end-user) programs are designed to work with (‘‘run under’’) a particular
operating system. An operating system helps run application programs by coordinating
those programs’ input and output tasks, by managing the pieces of a large application
program that is too large to ﬁt entirely in RAM, and by monitoring their execution.
The utility programs that come with operating systems help users perform such tasks
as copying ﬁles, converting ﬁles from one format to another, compressing ﬁles, performing
system diagnostics, and building disk directories. Another task is to manage virtual
storage— i.e., disk memory that a computer system uses to augment its limited primary
memory. Finally, today’s operating systems also run antivirus software. As explained
more fully in Chapter 12, a virus is a destructive program that, when active, damages or
destroys computer ﬁles or programs. Today’s operating systems include antivirus software
routines that guard against the virus programs a user might accidentally introduce into his
or her computer system from external sources. However, because new viruses continue to
appear, users should update this software at least monthly.
Application Software
The term application software refers to computer programs that help end users such
as accountants perform the tasks speciﬁc to their jobs or relevant to their personal needs.
One category of application software is the personal productivity software familiar to
most accountants—i.e., word processing software (for creating documents and reports),
spreadsheet software (for creating worksheets of rows and columns and also for graphing
the data), database software (for creating ﬁles and databases of personal information), and
personal ﬁnance software (for paying bills, creating personal budgets, and maintaining
investment portfolio data).
Another category of application software is the personal productivity software designed
for commercial uses. Examples include project management software (for coordinating
and tracking the events, resources, and costs of large projects such as construction projects
or ofﬁce moves), computer-aided design (CAD) software (for designing consumer prod-
ucts, fashion clothing, automobiles, or machinery), and presentation graphics software
(for creating slides and other presentations).
A third category of application software is the accounting software that performs
such familiar tasks as preparing payrolls, maintaining accounts receivable ﬁles, executing
accounts payable tasks, controlling inventory, and producing ﬁnancial statements. Often,
developers integrate these tasks in complete accounting packages. Because of the particular
relevance of such software to AISs, Chapter 9 discusses such packages in greater detail.

62
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Yet a fourth type of application software is communications software that allows
separate computers to transmit data to one another. Microcomputer examples include com-
munications packages (for simple data transmissions between computers), web browsers
(for accessing and displaying graphics information on the Internet), backend software
(that enables web servers to communicate with large, commercial databases of customer
and product information), and email software (for creating, transmitting, displaying, and
deleting email messages).
Finally, a ﬁfth type of application software is the relatively-new enterprise resource
planning (ERP) software that enables businesses and government agencies to transmit
and manipulate ﬁnancial data on an organization-wide basis. An example is SAP. These
systems are particularly important to electronic commerce (e-commerce) applications—for
example, because a simple sale over the Internet simultaneously affects accounts receivable,
inventory, and marketing subsystems.
Programming Languages
To develop application software, developers must write detailed instructions in pro-
gramming languages that computers can understand and execute. FORTRAN, COBOL,
and RPG are examples of older programming languages that developers used to create
minicomputer and mainframe AISs (i.e., the older but still-viable legacy systems). Newer
computer languages include C++ (favored for its ability to manipulate data at the bit level),
Visual Basic (favored for creating Windows-like user interfaces), HTML (an editing language
favored for creating web pages), and Java (favored for its ability to run on many different
types of computers).
Most of the newer programming languages are object-oriented, meaning that they
encourage programmers to develop code in reusable modules called objects, which are
easier to develop, debug, and modify. Both Visual Basic and C++ are event-driven
programming languages— i.e., programming languages where code responds to events
such as a user clicking on a menu item with a mouse.
Figure 2-20 illustrates how developers create application programs using these pro-
gramming languages. The process begins when computer programmers write instructions
in a source programming language such as Visual Basic. In a second step, the developers use
another program called a compiler to translate this source code into the machine language
(object code) that a computer understands. This translation process is called a compilation.
The output from the compilation is the object code that a computer can then load and exe-
cute in a third step. When end users buy application software packages, they buy compiled
programs in machine language that are ready to execute on their speciﬁc computers.
Step 1: Computer
programmers create a
program written in a high-
level programming
language such as Java.
Source Code
Step 2: Another computer
program called a compiler
treats the source code as
input. It translates the
source code into object
code (machine language)
that a computer can
understand.
Compilation
Step 3: The object code
is ready for execution.
This object code is the
product that end users
buy when purchasing
application programs “off
the shelf.”
Object Code
FIGURE 2-20
How computer programmers create application software.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
63
AIS AT WORK
Delivering Packages is High-Tech at UPS
Most people recognize UPS as the company that picks up or delivers packages with
brown delivery trucks—not exactly a high-tech business. But UPS has gone high-tech.
The company’s annual spending on IT is now about $1 billion—one of the largest in the
world—and the company’s IT division alone employs 4,700 employees, maintains 8,700
web servers and 15 large mainframe computers, and helps the company deliver about 15
million packages each day to customers around the world.
Why does a company in a ‘‘low-tech business’’ spend all that money on IT resources?
One of its newest initiatives is its automated delivery system. That system starts with a
‘‘smart label’’ that customers can create for themselves on UPS’s website for each of their
packages. Even before a driver picks up the package, the company forwards a copy of the
label to the distribution center closest to the ﬁnal delivery point, where special software
begins building a delivery schedule for each of 66,000 UPS drivers. When the package
ﬁnally arrives at the center, the system creates a separate label with delivery instructions
that also indicate where to place the package in the truck and when to drop it off. (Express
deliveries go in the front, afternoon deliveries go in the back.) The system also creates a
customized route for each driver each day.
The gains from all this automation are also impressive. In one month, for example,
the new routing system reduced almost 2 million miles in delivery and pickup travel, and
enabled drivers to make an additional seven to nine pickups or drop-offs per day. The
new system also interfaces with a global positioning system (GPS), enabling managers to
precisely locate the position of any truck and, perhaps estimate more precisely pickup
times for customers waiting with packages.
UPS executives note that the most important problem they’ve had with their new
systems has been a lack of familiarity with the new software and an unanticipated need for
more employee training. This reminds us that, like any large information system, ‘‘people’’
play an important role in high-tech applications.
Source: Corey Dade ‘‘Moving Ahead: How UPS Went from Low-Tech to an IT Power’’ Wall
Street Journal (July 24, 2006), pp. R4, R7.
SUMMARY
• It is useful to view an AIS as a collection of hardware, software, data, people, and procedures that
must all work together to accomplish processing tasks.
• Information technology will become even more important to accountants as AISs continue to
incorporate technological advances in their designs, and also as this technology becomes more
important to their daily professional and personal tasks.
• To achieve their objectives, computerized AISs must input, process, store, and output information,
and often, utilize data communications.
• The starting point for most AIS data processing is either an electronic or a manual source
document. Electronic source documents eliminate many errors that are introduced by human
input. POS devices, MIRC readers, OCR readers, and magnetic strip readers enable AISs to capture
data that are already in machine-readable formats.
• Biometric scanners help AISs limit access to legitimate users. Two of the most reliable types of
scanners read ﬁngerprints or irises.

64
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
• The central processing unit (CPU) of a computer system performs the data-manipulating tasks
required of the system. In order of increasing power, these units are micro- or personal computers,
minicomputers, mainframe computers, and supercomputers. All CPUs have primary memories and
microprocessors. However, most AISs are I/O bound, not process bound.
• Two major output devices are printers and video monitors. Three important types of printers
are dot matrix printers, ink-jet printers, and laser printers. Businesses usually prefer laser printers
because they are the fastest and have the highest print resolutions.
• Secondary storage devices enable AISs to store and archive data on permanent media. Magnetic
disks, CD-ROMs, DVDs, and ﬂash memories are the most common secondary storage devices.
• Image processing allows users to capture and store visual graphs, charts, and pictures in digital
formats on such media.
• Data communications enable AISs to transmit data over local and wide area networks. Many AISs
now use LANs or WANs for email, sharing computer resources, saving software costs, gathering
input data, or distributing outputs. Wi-Fi technology such as RFID and NFC applications signiﬁcantly
increases our ability to access information accurately as well as communicate efﬁciently with others.
• Cloud computing refers to the use of service providers over the Internet.Applications include access
to computer software programs, backup and recovery ﬁle services, and web-page development
and hosting.
• The software of an AIS performs the speciﬁc data processing tasks required. Operating systems
enable computers to run themselves, and also to execute the application programs designed for
them.
• Application software enables end users to perform work-related tasks. Categories of such software
include personal productivity software, integrated accounting packages, and communication
packages. Programming languages enable IT professionals to translate processing logic into
instructions that computers can execute.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
antivirus software
application software
audio input
bar code reader
CD-ROM
central processing unit (CPU)
client/server computing
cloud computing
compiler
computer record
computer software
data communications
data communications protocol
data transcription
digital subscriber line (DSL)
dot-matrix printer
electronic data interchange (EDI)
enterprise network
enterprise resource planning (ERP)
software
event-driven programming language
extranet
ﬁle server
graphical user interface (GUI)
hard-copy output
I/O-bound computer
image processing
information technology (IT)
ink-jet printer
input-processing-output cycle
ISDN line
laser printer
legacy system
local area network (LAN)
magnetic (hard) disk
magnetic ink character recognition (MICR)
mainframe computer
mark-sense media
microprocessor
minicomputer
modem (modulator/demodulator)
multimedia

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
65
near ﬁeld communications (NFC)
object-oriented programming language
operating system
optical character recognition (OCR)
peripheral equipment
personal data assistant (PDA) devices
personal productivity software
picture elements (pixels)
point-of-sale (POS) device
primary memory
programming language
radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID)
redundant array of independent disks (RAIDs)
secondary storage
soft-copy output
source document
supercomputer
turnaround document
utility program
virtual storage
virus
voice recognition system
volatile memory
wireless application protocol (WAP)
wide-area network (WAN)
wireless communications
Wi-Fi (wireless ﬁdelity)
worm (write-once, read many)
TEST YOURSELF
Q2-1. All of the following are reasons why IT is important to accountants except:
a. Accountants often help clients make IT decisions
b. Auditors must evaluate computerized systems
c. IT questions often appear on professional certiﬁcation examinations
d. The costs of IT are skyrocketing
Q2-2. Data transcription is best described as:
a. An efﬁcient process
b. Always necessary in AISs
c. Labor-intensive and time-consuming
d. An important way to limit fraud and embezzlement
Q2-3. The acronyms POS, MIC, and OCR are most closely associated with:
a. Input devices
b. Processing devices
c. Output devices
d. Communication devices
Q2-4. Purchasing backup services from an Internet vendor is an example of:
a. OCR
b. Modem services
c. Virtual storage
d. Cloud computing
Q2-5. The term ‘‘enrollment’’ is most closely associated with:
a. PDAs
b. Biometric scanners
c. Printers
d. Modems
Q2-6. The RAM of a computer is associated with:
a. Primary memory

66
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
b. Secondary storage
c. Arithmetic-logic unit
d. Modem
Q2-7. The term ‘‘I/O bound’’ means that:
a. Computers must input and output data when executing accounting applications
b. AISs are headed for the land of I/O
c. Computers can ‘‘think’’ faster than they can read or write
d. Computers are obligated to make inferences and oversights
Q2-8. Video output can also be called:
a. Hard-copy output
b. Soft-copy output
c. Image output
d. Pixilated output
Q2-9. Which of these devices is capable of storing the most data?
a. CD-ROM disk
b. DVD disk
c. USB (ﬂash memory) drive
d. Magnetic (hard) disk
Q2-10. All of these are components, or layers, of a client/server computing system except:
a. Presentation layer
b. Application/logic layer
c. Client layer
d. Data management layer
Q2-11. All of these are terms associated with programming languages except:
a. Object-oriented
b. Event-driven
c. Compiler
d. Server
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
2-1. Why is it important to view an AIS as a combination of hardware, software, people, data, and
procedures?
2-2. Why is information technology important to accountants?
2-3. Why do most AISs try to avoid data transcription?
2-4. Name several types of computer input devices, and explain in general terms how each one
functions.
2-5. How do you feel about red light cameras? Should cities be allowed to use them? Why or why
not?
2-6. Identify the three sections of a CPU, and describe the functions of each component. How are
microprocessor speeds measured? Why are such speeds rarely important to AISs?
2-7. Identify several types of printers. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each type?
2-8. What is the function of secondary storage? Describe three types of secondary storage media,
and describe the advantages and disadvantages of each type.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
67
2-9. What is image processing? How is image processing used in AISs?
2-10. What are data communication protocols? Why are they important?
2-11. What are local area networks? What advantages do LANs offer accounting applications?
2-12. What is client/server computing? How does it differ from host/mainframe computing? What
are some of the advantages and disadvantages of client/server systems?
2-13. What are the names of some current cloud computing vendors other than those discussed in
the text? Do you think that all ﬁrms should use cloud vendors, or are there some reasons why
they should be avoided?
2-14. What are windowing operating systems, multitasking operating systems, and graphical user
interfaces? Why are they useful to AISs?
2-15. Name some general classes of application software. What tasks do each of the software classes
perform?
2-16. What are computer programming languages? Name some speciﬁc languages and describe
brieﬂy an advantage of each.
PROBLEMS
2-17. Are the following input equipment, output equipment, CPU components, secondary storage
devices, or data-communications related?
(a) CRT screen, (b) ALU, (c) CD-ROM, (d) keyboard, (e) modem, (f) dot-matrix printer,
(g) audio speaker, (h) POS device, (i) MICR reader, (j) laser printer, (k) magnetic tape, (l) ﬂash
memory, (m) OCR reader, (n) magnetic (hard) disk, (o) ATM, (p) primary memory, (q) ALU.
2-18. All of the following are acronyms discussed in this chapter. What words were used to form
each one and what does each term mean?
(a) POS, (b) CPU, (c) OCR, (d) MICR, (e) ATM, (f) RAM, (g) ALU, (h) MIPS, (i) OS, (j) MHz,
(k) pixel, (l) RGB, (m) CD-ROM, (n) worm, (o) modem, (p) LAN, (q) WAN, (r) ERP, (s) WAP,
(t) Wi-Fi, (u) ppm, (v) dpi, (w) NFC, (x) RFID.
2-19. Which of the following holds the most data?
(a) One DVD disk (b) One hard disk (capacity: 160 gigabytes), or (c) Ten CD-ROMs
2-20. Brian Fry Products manufactures a variety of machine tools and parts used primarily in industrial
tasks. To control production, the company requires the information listed below. Design an
efﬁcient record format for Brian Fry Products. (Hint: see Figure 2-10.)
a. Order number (4 digits)
b. Part number to be manufactured (5 digits)
c. Part description (10 characters)
d. Manufacturing department (3 digits)
e. Number of pieces started (always less than 10,000)
f. Number of pieces ﬁnished
g. Machine number (2 digits)
h. Date work started
i. Hour work started (use 24-hour system)
j. Date work completed
k. Hour work completed
l. Work standard per hour (3 digits)
m. Worker number (5 digits)
n. Foreman number (5 digits)

68
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
2-21. Go to the AICPA website at www.aicpa.org. What are the top ten information technologies
for the current year? How do these items compare with the list in Figure 2-1? Is it common for
new items to appear, or do you think this list is ‘‘stable’’ from year to year?
2-22. Your state has recently decided to install an RFID system for its toll roads. The current plan is
to sell non-refundable transponders for $20 and allow users to deposit up to $1,000 in their
accounts. To assist the IT personnel, the system’s planners want to develop a list of possible
accounting transactions and system responses. Using your skills from earlier accounting classes,
what debit and credit entries would you make for each of the following activities? (Feel free to
develop your own accounts for this problem.)
a. A user buys a new transponder for $20.
b. A user adds $100 to his account.
c. A user discovers that a data entry clerk charges his credit card $1,000 instead of $100 when
adding $100 to his account.
d. An individual leaves the state, turns in his transponder, and wants a cash refund for the
$25.75 remaining in his account.
e. A good Samaritan turns in a transponder that he ﬁnds on the side of the road. There is a $10
reward for this act, taken from the owner’s account.
2-23. Select a type of computer hardware that interests you and write a one-page report on three
possible choices of it. Examples include monitors, USB drives, external hard drives, or even
new laptops. Your report should include a table similar to the one shown here that includes:
(1) embedded pictures of your choices, (2) major speciﬁcations (e.g., storage capacities, pixel
sizes, data transfer rates, etc.), (3) the suggested retail price of each item, (4) the likely ‘‘street
price’’ of the item, and (5) the name of the vendor that sells the item at the street price.
The major deliverable is a one-page report that includes (1) the table identiﬁed above, (2)
an explanation of why you chose to examine the hardware you did, and (3) an indication of
which particular item you would buy of your three choices.
spec
spec
spec 
spec
spec
spec 
Cruzer USB
Sushi USB
Squid USB
CASE ANALYSES
2-24. Savage Motors (Software Training)
Savage Motors sells and leases commercial automobiles, vans, and trucks to customers in
southern California. Most of the company’s administrative staff works in the main ofﬁce.
The company has been in business for 35 years, but only in the last 10 years has the
company begun to recognize the beneﬁts of computer training for its employees.
The company president, Arline Savage, is thinking about hiring a training company
to give onsite classes. To pursue this option, the company would set up a temporary
‘‘computer laboratory’’ in one of the meeting rooms, and the trainers would spend all day
teaching one or more particular types of software. You have been hired as a consultant to
recommend what type of training would best meet the ﬁrm’s needs.
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
69
You begin your task by surveying the three primary corporate departments: sales,
operations, and accounting. You ﬁnd that most employees use their personal computers
for only ﬁve types of software: (1) word processing, (2) spreadsheets, (3) database, (4)
presentations, and (5) accounting. The accompanying table shows your estimates of the
total number of hours per week used by each department on each type of software.
Hours per week
Department
(number of
employees)
Word Processing
Spreadsheet
Database
Presentation
Accounting
Sales (112)
1,150
750
900
500
700
Operations (82)
320
2,450
650
100
500
Accounting (55)
750
3,600
820
250
2,500
Requirements
1. Create a spreadsheet illustrating each department’s average use of each application per
employee, rounding all averages to one decimal point. For example, the average hours
of word processing for the Sales department is 1,150/112 = 10.3 hours.
2. Suppose there were only enough training funds for each department to train employees
on only one type of application. What training would you recommend for each
department?
3. What is the average number of hours of use of each application for all the employees
in the company? What training would you recommend if funds were limited to only
training one type of application for the entire company?
4. Using spreadsheet tools, create graphs that illustrate your ﬁndings in parts 1 and 2.
Do you think that your graphs or your numbers better ‘‘tell your story?’’
5. What alternatives are there to onsite training? Suggest at least two alternatives and
discuss which of your three possibilities you prefer.
2-25. Backwater University (Automating a Data Gathering Task)
Backwater University is a small technical college that is located miles from the nearest
town. As a result, most of the students who attend classes there also live in the resident
dormitories and purchase one of three types of meal plans. The ‘‘Full Plan’’ entitles a
student to eat three meals a day, seven days a week, at any one of the campus’s three
dining facilities. The ‘‘Weekday Plan’’ is the same as the Full Plan, but entitles students to
eat meals only on weekdays—not weekends. Finally, the ‘‘50-Meal’’ plan entitles students
to eat any 50 meals during a given month. Of course, students and visitors can always
purchase any given meal for cash.
Because the school administration is anxious to attract and retain students, it allows them
to change their meal plans from month to month. This, in fact, is common, as students
pick plans that best serve their needs each month. But this ﬂexibility has also created a
nightmare at lunch times, when large numbers of students attempt to eat at the dining
facilities simultaneously.
In response to repeated student complaints about the long lines that form at lunchtime,
Barbara Wright, the Dean of Students, decides to look into the matter and see for herself
what is going on. At lunch the next day, she observes that each cashier at the entrance to

70
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
the dining facilities requires each student to present an ID card, veriﬁes that the picture
on the card matches the student presenting it, and then consults a long, hard-copy list of
students to determine whether the student is eligible for the current meal. A cashier later
informs Barbara that these tasks are regrettable, but also mentions that they have become
necessary because many students attempt to eat meals that their plans do not allow.
The cashier also mentions that, at present, the current system provides no way of keeping
a student from eating two of the same meals at two different dining facilities. Although
Barbara thinks that this idea is far-fetched, the cashier says that this problem is surprisingly
common. Some students do it just as a prank or on a dare, but other students do it to
smuggle out food for their friends.
Barbara Wright realizes that one solution to the long-lines problem is to simply hire
more cashiers. She also recognizes that a computerized system might be an even more
cost-effective solution. In particular, she realizes that if the current cashiers had some way
of identifying each student quickly, the computer system could immediately identify a
given student as eligible, or ineligible, for any given meal.
Requirements
1. Suggest two or more ‘‘technology solutions’’ for this problem.
2. What hardware would be required for each solution you named in part 1?
3. What software would be required for each solution you named in part 1? What would
this software do?
4. How would you go about showing that your solutions would be more cost effective
than simply hiring more cashiers? (You do not have to perform any calculations to
answer this question, merely outline your method.)
2-26. Bennet National Bank (Centralized versus Decentralized Data
Processing)
Bennet National Bank’s credit-card department issues a special credit card that permits
credit-card holders to withdraw funds from the bank’s automated teller machines (ATMs) at
any time of the day or night. These machines are actually smart terminals connected to the
bank’s central computer. To use them, a bank customer inserts the magnetically-encoded
card in the automated teller’s slot and types in a unique password on the teller keyboard. If
the password matches the authorized code, the customer goes on to indicate, for example,
(1) whether a withdrawal from a savings account or a withdrawal from a checking
account is desired and (2) the amount of the withdrawal (in multiples of $10). The teller
terminal communicates this information to the bank’s central computer and then gives the
customer the desired cash. In addition, the automated terminal prints out a hard copy of
the transaction for the customer.
To guard against irregularities in the automated cash transaction described, the credit-card
department has imposed the following restrictions on the use of the credit cards when
customers make cash withdrawals at ATMs.
1. The correct password must be keyed into the teller keyboard before the cash withdrawal
is processed.
2. The credit card must be one issued by Bennet National Bank. For this purpose, a special
bank code has been encoded as part of the magnetic strip information.

CHAPTER 2 / Information Technology and AISs
71
3. The credit card must be current. If the expiration date on the card has already passed
at the time the card is used, the card is rejected.
4. The credit card must not be a stolen one. The bank keeps a computerized list of these
stolen cards and requires that this list be checked electronically before the withdrawal
transaction can proceed.
5. For the purposes of making withdrawals, each credit card can only be used twice on
any given day. This restriction is intended to hold no matter what branch bank(s) are
visited by the customers.
6. The amount of the withdrawal must not exceed the customer’s account balance.
Requirements
1. What information must be encoded on the magnetic-card strip on each Bennet National
Bank credit card to permit the computerized testing of these policy restrictions?
2. What tests of these restrictions could be performed at the teller window by a smart
terminal and what tests would have to be performed by the bank’s central processing
unit and other equipment?
2-27. Prado Roberts Manufacturing (What Type of Computer System to
Implement?)
Prado Roberts Manufacturing is a medium-sized company with regional ofﬁces in several
western states and manufacturing facilities in both California and Nevada. The company
performs most of its important data processing tasks, such as payroll, accounting, marketing,
and inventory control, on a mainframe computer at corporate headquarters. However,
almost all the managers at this company also have microcomputers, which they use for such
personal productivity tasks as word processing, analyzing budgets (using spreadsheets),
and managing the data in small databases.
The IT manager, Tonya Fisher, realizes that there are both advantages and disadvantages
of using different types of systems to meet the processing needs of her company. Although
she acknowledges that many companies are racing ahead to install microcomputers and
client/server systems, she also knows that the corporate mainframe system has provided
her company with some advantages that smaller systems cannot match. Tonya knows
that American companies annually purchase over $5 billion in used computers, primarily
mainframes.
Requirements
1. Identify several advantages and disadvantages of operating a mainframe computer system
that is likely to be present at Prado Roberts Manufacturing. Are these advantages and
disadvantages likely to parallel those at other manufacturing companies?
2. Identify at least two factors or actions that companies experience or do to prolong the
lives of their legacy systems. Are these factors or actions likely to apply to Prado Roberts
Manufacturing?

72
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
3. Identify several advantages and disadvantages of microcomputer/client server systems.
Would these advantages apply to Prado Roberts Manufacturing?
(CMA Adapted)
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Amoruso, Anthony J., Richard C. Brooks, & Richard A. Riley, Jr. ‘‘Biometrics and Internal Control:
An Emerging Opportunity’’ Journal of Government and Financial Management Vol. 54,
No. 2 (Summer 2005), pp. 40–44.
Arunachalam, Vairam. ‘‘Electronic Data Interchange: An Evaluation of Alternative Organiza-
tional Forms’’ Accounting, Organizations and Society Vol. 29, No. 3/4 (April/May 2004),
pp. 227–241.
Boomer, L. Gary. ‘‘Why so Many Technology Projects Fail’’ Accounting Today Vol. 20, No. 12 (July
10, 2006), pp. 24–29.
Burnett, Royce D., Bobbie W. Daniels, Alan Freidel, & Mark Friedman. ‘‘WiFi: Boon or Boondogle’’
Journal of Corporate Accounting and Finance Vol. 19, No. 5 (July/August, 2008), pp. 3–8.
Chandra, Akhilesh & Thomas G. Calderon. ‘‘Challenges and Constraints to the Diffusion of Biometrics
in Information Systems’’ Communications of the ACM Vol. 48, No. 12 (December 2005),
pp. 101–106.
Garen, Ken. ‘‘Driving the Firm of the Future’’ Accounting Today Vol. 20, No. 11 (June 19, 2006),
p. 17.
Huber, Nick. ‘‘Lloyd’s Moves to End Paper-Based Transactions’’ Computer Weekly (February 17,
2004), p. 5.
Kay, Russel. ‘‘Quick Study: Cloud Computing’’ Computerworld (May 8, 2008), pp. 1–2.
Lok, Corie. ‘‘One Person, One Phone’’ (March 2004), www.technologyreview.com/articles.
Martin, Richard & J. Nicholas Hoover. ‘‘Guide to Cloud Computing’’ Information Week Vol. 1193
(June 21, 2008), pp. 9.
McCausland, Richard. ‘‘The Power of POSitive Thinking’’ Accounting Technology Vol. 20, No. 6 (July
2004), pp. 36–41.
McClure, David. ‘‘What to Look for in Point of Sale’’ Practical Accountant Vol. 38, No. 11 (November
2005), p. 10.
Scott, Robert. ‘‘Knowing the Tech Talk’’ Accounting Technology Vol. 20, No. 3 (April 2004), p. 4.
Scott, Robert. ‘‘Universal Computing’’ Accounting Technology Vol. 20, No. 1 (January/February
2004), p. 6.
Simone, Dan. ‘‘Make WLANs More Secure’’ Communications News Vol. 43, No. 2 (February 2006),
pp. 36–38.
Spinelli, Lisa. ‘‘POS Systems Create Point of Relief for CPAs, Clients’’ Accounting Today Vol. 19,
No. 9 (May 16, 2005), pp. 24–26.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. d
2. c
3. a
4. d
5. b
6. a
7. c
8. b
9. d
10. c
11. d

Chapter 3
Documenting Accounting
Information Systems
INTRODUCTION
WHY DOCUMENTATION IS IMPORTANT
DOCUMENT AND SYSTEM FLOWCHARTS
Document Flowcharts
Guidelines for Drawing Document Flowcharts
System Flowcharts
Guidelines for Drawing System Flowcharts
PROCESS MAPS AND DATA FLOW DIAGRAMS
Process Maps
Guidelines for Drawing Process Maps
Data Flow Diagrams
Guidelines for Drawing Data Flow Diagrams
OTHER DOCUMENTATION TOOLS
Program Flowcharts
Decision Tables
Software Tools for Graphical Documentation and SOX
Compliance
END-USER COMPUTING AND
DOCUMENTATION
The Importance of End-User Documentation
Policies for End-User Computing and Documentation
AIS AT WORK—FLOWCHARTS HELP RECOVER
EMBEZZLED ASSETS
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
The Berridge Company
FreezeTime, Inc.
The Dinteman Company
Lois Hale and Associates
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Understand why documenting an AIS is impor-
tant.
2. Be able to draw simple document ﬂowcharts
and explain how they describe the ﬂow of data
in AISs.
3. Be able to draw simple document ﬂowcharts,
system ﬂowcharts, process maps, and data ﬂow
diagrams.
4. Know how program ﬂowcharts and decision
tables help document AISs.
5. Be able to explain the importance of end-user
documentation.
6. Be aware of software available for document-
ing AISs and helping companies comply with
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
73

74
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
‘‘Although documentation of [business] processes needs to be detailed, it also must be
clear and easy to follow . . . .If people cannot easily explain it, or someone can’t pick up
the documentation and understand it, you have not successfully completed the task.’’
Regina Baraban, ‘‘Look Out for SOX’’ Meetingsnet.com
Vol. 24, No. 2, (February 2005), pp. 23–24.
INTRODUCTION
Documentation explains how AISs operate and is therefore a vital part of any accounting
system. For example, documentation describes the tasks for recording accounting data, the
procedures that users must perform to operate computer applications, the processing steps
that AISs follow, and the logical and physical ﬂows of accounting data through the system.
This chapter explains in greater detail why accountants need to understand documentation
and describes some tools for diagramming complex systems.
Accountants can use many different types of logic charts to trace the ﬂow of accounting
data through an AIS. For example, document ﬂowcharts describe the physical ﬂow of order
forms, requisition slips, and similar hard-copy documents through an AIS. These ﬂowcharts
pictorially represent data paths in compact formats and therefore save pages of narrative
description. System ﬂowcharts are similar to document ﬂowcharts, except that system
ﬂowcharts usually focus on the electronic ﬂows of data in computerized AISs. Other
examples of documentation aids include process maps, data ﬂow diagrams, program
ﬂowcharts, and decision tables. This chapter describes all of these documentation aids, as
well as some computerized tools for creating them.
Today, many end users develop computer applications for themselves. This end-user
programming is very helpful to managers, who consequently do not require IT professionals
to develop simple word processing, spreadsheet, or database applications. But end-user
programming can also be a problem because many employees do not know how to
document their work properly or simply don’t do so. The ﬁnal section of this chapter
examines the topic of end-user programming and documentation in greater detail.
WHY DOCUMENTATION IS IMPORTANT
Accountants do not need to understand exactly how computers process the data of a partic-
ular accounting application, but it is important for them to understand the documentation
that describes how this processing takes place. In fact a recent survey of practitioners
found that system documentation has become increasingly important as organizations seek
to better understand their own business processes and also comply with legislation that
requires this understanding, such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.1 Documentation includes
all the ﬂowcharts, narratives, and other written communications that describe the inputs,
1Bradford, Marianne, Sandra B. Richtermeyer, and Douglas F. Roberts, ‘‘System Diagramming Techniques: An
Analysis of Methods Used in Accounting Education and Practice,’’ Journal of Information Systems Vol. 21, Iss. 1
(Spring 2007), p. 173.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
75
processing, and outputs of an AIS. Documentation also describes the logical ﬂow of data
within a computer system and the procedures that employees must follow to accomplish
application tasks. Here are nine reasons why documentation is important to AISs.
1. Depicting how the system works.
Simply observing large AISs in action is an
impractical way to learn about them, even if they are completely manual. In computerized
systems, this task is impossible because the processing is electronic and therefore invisible.
On the other hand, studying written descriptions of the inputs, processing steps, and
outputs of the system make the job easier, and a few graphs or diagrams of these processing
functions makes things easier still. This is one purpose of documentation—to help explain
how an AIS operates. Documentation helps employees understand how a system works,
assists accountants in designing controls for it, and gives managers conﬁdence that it will
meet their information needs.
The Internet contains many examples of ﬂowcharts or logic diagrams that help
individuals understand unfamiliar tasks or processes. For example, some universities use
them to show students what classes to take and when they should take them to complete
their majors in a timely manner. The University of Washington has ﬂowcharts that show how
to obtain grants and other types of funding. The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
uses elaborate diagrams to depict what happens when a faculty member’s employment
terminates. Figure 3-1 is a logic diagram from the University of Arizona website that shows
employees how to ﬁle a claim for reimbursement. If the employee would like additional
information for any step in the process, a click of the mouse on the appropriate ﬂowchart
symbol reveals additional information.
2. Training users.
Documentation also includes the user guides, manuals, and similar
operating instructions that help people learn how an AIS operates. Employees usually
do not like to read the user manuals that typically accompany application software, but
these instructional materials are invaluable reference aids when they are needed. Whether
distributed manually in hard-copy format or electronically in the familiar Help ﬁles or
‘‘get-started tours’’ of microcomputer applications, these documentation aids help train
users to operate AIS hardware and software, solve operational problems, and perform their
jobs better.
Employee
Reimbursement
Explore Other
Reimbursement
Possibilities.
Prepare Check Request
Forward to Accounts Payable.
The reimbursement will be
added to the employee's net
pay.
Allowable?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Business
Entertainment?
Local
Account?
NOTE: Employee reimbursement must be
signed by the employee and the
employee's supervisor, except at the
dean and vice president level and above.
FIGURE 3-1
Example of a ﬂowchart used at the University of Arizona to help employees ﬁle a reim-
bursement claim. For additional information, individuals simply click on the appropriate symbol.

76
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
3. Designing new systems.
Documentation helps system designers develop new
systems in much the same way that blueprints help architects design buildings. For
example, professional IT personnel commonly hold structured walkthroughs in which they
review system documentation to ensure the integrity and completeness of their designs,
and to identify design ﬂaws. Well-written documentation, along with other systems-design
methodologies, often plays a key role in reducing systems failures and decreasing the time
spent correcting ‘‘emergency errors’’ in computer systems. Conversely, poorly-designed
systems usually lead to critical mistakes and expensive write-offs.
4. Controlling system development and maintenance costs.
Personal com-
puter applications typically employ prewritten, off-the-shelf software that is relatively
reliable and inexpensive. In contrast, custom-developed business systems often cost mil-
lions of dollars and can be less reliable. Good documentation helps system designers
develop object-oriented software, that is, programs that contain modular, reusable code.
This object-orientation helps programmers avoid writing duplicate programs and facilitates
changes when programs must be modiﬁed later. If you have ever replaced a specialized
part in your car, you have some idea of how frustrating, time-consuming, and expensive
‘‘non-standardization’’ can be, and therefore how useful object-oriented programming
might be to business organizations.
5. Standardizing communications with others.
The usefulness of narrative
descriptions can vary signiﬁcantly, and a reader can interpret such descriptions differ-
ently from what the writer intended. Documentation aids such as system ﬂowcharts or data
ﬂow diagrams are standard industry tools, and they are more likely to be interpreted the
same way by all parties viewing them. Thus, documentation tools are important because
they help describe an existing or proposed system in a ‘‘common language’’ and help users
communicate with one another about these systems.
Case-in-Point 3.1
The fourth largest public healthcare system in the United States,
Carolinas HealthCare System (CHS), uses business process management software from
Staffware to automate and streamline its revenue cycle processes and improve customer
service for their patients and doctors. As a result of using this software, CHS can now service
patient accounts much faster and has increased the speed and accuracy of their billing ofﬁce
operations.2
6. Auditing AISs.
Documentation helps depict audit trails. When investigating an AIS,
for example, the auditors typically focus on internal controls. In such circumstances,
documentation helps auditors determine the strengths and weaknesses of a system’s
controls, and therefore the scope and complexity of the audit. Similarly, the auditors will
want to trace sample outputs to the original transactions that created them (e.g., tracing
inventory assets back to original purchases). System documentation helps auditors perform
these tasks.
7. Documenting business processes.
Accounting systems automatically create a
record of some organization’s processes because they capture ﬁnancial data as they occur.
A study of these processes can lead to better systems. Thus, in mapping these processes,
documentation can help managers better understand the ways in which their businesses
2‘‘Carolinas HealthCare System Uses Staffware Software to Streamline Business Processes,’’ Business Wire February
23, 2004, p. 53.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
77
operate, what controls are involved or missing from critical organizational activities, and
how to improve core business processes.
8. Complying with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002 (SOX) requires publicly-traded companies to identify the major sources of
business risks, document their internal control procedures, and hire external auditors
to evaluate the validity and effectiveness of such procedures. Documentation is therefore
crucial for analyzing the risks of errors, frauds, omissions, and similar mistakes in important
business processes, as well as helping auditors evaluate the controls used to mitigate such
risks—i.e., some of the major tasks required by SOX.
Almost everyone acknowledges that the costs of complying with SOX are enormous,
and many also believe that SOX gave documentation ‘‘a new life.’’ To save money, many
companies now use software packages to help them automate SOX documentation tasks.
We describe some examples of such software in a later section of this chapter.
Case-in-Point 3.2
FirstEnergy Corporation in Akron, Ohio, generates and distributes
electrical energy to customers in a 36,100-square-mile area of Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New
Jersey. Certus Governance Suite, a software package, helps company managers comply with
many SOX documentation requirements, better understand the company’s internal controls,
and saves ‘‘looking at hundreds of spreadsheets.’’3
9. Establishing accountability.
Manual signatures on business and government
documents allow employees and government agents to execute their responsibilities,
create audit trails, and establish accountability for their actions. An example is a signed
checklist that outlines the month-end journal entries an accountant must perform. Such
checklists verify that the accountant performed these tasks, that a reviewer approved
them, and that both individuals are accountable for the accuracy of the work. Similar
comments apply to the checklists for preparing ﬁnancial statements, tax returns, auditing
papers, budgets, and similar accounting documents. Including such checklists with the
statements themselves both documents the work that the employees performed as well as
the procedures and controls involved in the work.
Case-in-Point 3.3
In a parallel universe, the master accountant for the great warlord took
on an apprentice. One day, the apprentice approached his mentor and asked ‘‘Master, is it
always necessary to document accounting systems?’’
The master accountant answered ‘‘No. Such documentation is only needed by those who
cannot feel the complete tao and beauty of such systems.’’
The apprentice replied ‘‘Who can feel such beauty?’’
The master accountant responded ‘‘I do not know anyone with such abilities.’’
DOCUMENT AND SYSTEM FLOWCHARTS
Despite the many reasons why documentation is important, most organizations ﬁnd that
they document less than they should. One explanation for this deﬁciency is that orga-
nizations often create or implement large AISs under tight deadlines. In such cases,
the urgency to develop ‘‘a system that works’’ overrides the need for ‘‘a system that
3Thomas Hoffman, ‘‘Calibrating Toward Compliance’’ Computerworld Vol. 40, No. 6 (February 6, 2006),
pp. 21–24.

78
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
is well-documented.’’ Another reason is that most IT professionals much prefer cre-
ating systems to documenting them. Thus, many developers actively resist it, arguing
that they will ‘‘get around to it later’’ or that documenting is a job for non-existent
assistants.
The record suggests that insufﬁcient or deﬁcient documentation costs organizations
time and money and that good documentation is as important as the good software
it describes. What tools are available to document AISs? Two examples are document
ﬂowcharts and system ﬂowcharts.
Document Flowcharts
A
document
ﬂowchart
traces
the
physical
ﬂow
of
documents
through
an
organization—i.e., from the departments, groups, or individuals who ﬁrst create them to
their ﬁnal dispositions. Figure 3-2 illustrates common document ﬂowcharting symbols,
and the examples below illustrate how to use them to create simple document
ﬂowcharts.
Constructing a document ﬂowchart begins by identifying the different departments or
groups that handle the documents of a particular system. The ﬂowcharter then uses the
symbols in Figure 3-2 to illustrate the document ﬂows. Let us ﬁrst examine two simple
cases and then discuss some general ﬂowcharting guidelines.
1
2 3
Document
Multiple copies of
a specific document
Keying operation
Manual operation
On-page connector
between two points
on a flowchart
Off-page connector
between two points
on a flowchart
Electronic data
communication
Annotation symbol
for comments or
further descriptions
Adding machine tape
total utilized for
batch control
Flow of physical
goods (inventory, etc.)
Journal or ledger
Envelope for mailing
or distributing bills,
checks, etc.
Information flow
(without document
flow)
Document flow
Permanent file of
manual documents
(letter inside symbol
indicates file
sequence order)
A = alphabetically
N = numerically
D = chronologically
        (year, month, day)
A
FIGURE 3-2
Common document ﬂowcharting symbols.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
79
Example 1.
Your boss asks you to document the paperwork involved in acquiring ofﬁce
supplies from your company’s Central Supplies Department. Your administrative assistant
explains the process as follows:
Reordering supplies requires a requisition request. When I need more stationery,
for example, I ﬁll out two copies of a goods requisition form (GRF). I send the ﬁrst
copy to central supplies and ﬁle the second copy here in the ofﬁce.
There are two departments involved in this example—your department (which we
shall call the Requesting Department) and the Central Supplies Department. Thus, you
should begin by naming these departments in headings on your document ﬂowchart
(Figure 3-3). Next, you draw two copies of the GRF under the heading for the Requesting
Department because this is the department that creates this form. You number these copies
1 and 2 to indicate two copies.
Finally, you indicate where each document goes: copy 1 to the Central Supplies
Department and copy 2 to a ﬁle in the Requesting Department. A document’s ﬁrst
appearance should be in the department that creates it. A solid line or the on-page
connectors shown here indicates its physical transmittal from one place to another. You
should then redraw the transmitted document to indicate its arrival at the department that
receives it. Figure 3-3 illustrates the completed ﬂowchart for this narrative.
Example 2.
Let us now consider a slightly more complex example—the task of hiring
a new employee at your company. The process begins when a department develops a
vacancy. The Human Resources (HR) director explains the process as follows:
The department that develops a vacancy must ﬁrst complete a job vacancy form,
which it forwards to my department. We then advertise for the position and, with
the help of the requesting department, interview applicants. When the vacancy is
ﬁlled, the HR Department prepares a position hiring form (PHF) in triplicate. We
ﬁle the ﬁrst copy in a manual ﬁle, which is organized by employee Social Security
Requesting Department
Goods
Requisition
Form
(GRF)
1
A
File
Central Supplies Department
Goods
Requisition
Form
(GRF)
1
2
A
FIGURE 3-3
A simple document ﬂowchart.

80
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
number. We staple the third copy to the job vacancy form and return it to the
Requesting Department, where clerks ﬁle it alphabetically by employee last name.
The HR Department forwards the second copy of the PHF to the Payroll
Department. The Payroll Department uses the form as an authorization document
to create a payroll record for the new employee. Thus, the information on the form
is keyed directly into the company’s computer system using an online terminal
located in the payroll ofﬁce. This copy of the PHF is then ﬁled numerically for
reference and also as evidence that the form has been processed.
Figure 3-4 is a document ﬂowchart for this example. To draw it, your ﬁrst step is the
same as before—to identify the participants. In this case there are three of them: (1) the
department with the job vacancy (i.e., the Requesting Department in Figure 3-4), (2) the
Human Resources Department, and (3) the Payroll Department. You identify each of these
departments in separate columns at the top of the document ﬂowchart.
Your next step is to identify the documents involved. There are two major ones:
(1) the Job Vacancy form, which we presume is prepared as a single copy, and (2) the
Position Hiring form, which we are told is prepared in triplicate. In practice, multiple-copy
forms are usually color-coded. However, in document ﬂowcharts, usually these are simply
numbered and a separate page is attached to explain the color-number equivalencies.
Your third step is to indicate where the documents are created, processed, and
used. This is probably the most difﬁcult task, and a document ﬂowchart designer
must often use considerable ingenuity to represent data ﬂows and processing activities
Requesting Department
Human Resources
Payroll Department
B
A
C
B
2
Position
Hiring form
2
Position
Hiring
form
key data using
online terminal
N
N
Job
Vacancy
form
Job Vacancy
form
Job Vacancy
form
prepare
Position
Hiring
form
3
3
2
1
Position
Hiring
form
Position
Hiring form
filed by
employee
Social
Security
number
A
filed
alphabetically
by employee
last name
A
C
FIGURE 3-4
A document ﬂowchart illustrating the ﬂow of documents involved in the hiring of
a new employee.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
81
accurately. Figure 3-4 illustrates these ﬂows for the hiring procedures just described.
Where there are a large number of document transmittals, you can use on-page connectors
(circles) to connect document ﬂows from one place on a page to another and avoid
complicated ﬂow lines. Thus, Figure 3-4 uses several on-page connectors (with letters A,
B, and C) to avoid cluttering the drawing and shows the completed document ﬂowchart.
You should use a unique identiﬁer in each connector (such as a letter) for identiﬁcation
purposes. You can also use off-page connectors (to connect data ﬂows to other pages) if
necessary.
Guidelines for Drawing Document Flowcharts
Document ﬂowcharts concentrate on the physical ﬂow of reports and similar documents.
When constructing them, some analysts also include any movement of physical goods
in their document ﬂowcharts—e.g., moving inventory from a receiving department to
an inventory storeroom. (Document ﬂowcharts typically use hand-truck symbols for this
task.) Some document ﬂowcharts also illustrate information ﬂows that do not involve
documents (for example, a sales clerk telephoning to check a customer’s account balance
before approving a credit sale). Thus, the term ‘‘document’’ broadly includes all types of
organizational communications and data ﬂows.
Unlike other types of symbols—for example, the system and program ﬂowcharting
symbols discussed later in this chapter—document ﬂowcharting symbols are not standard-
ized. But even though creating document ﬂowcharts is more an art than a science, you can
use the following guidelines to make these ﬂowcharts clearer.
1. Identify all the departments that create or receive the documents involved in the
system. Use vertical lines to create ‘‘swim lanes’’ to separate each department from
the others.
2. Carefully classify the documents and activities of each department, and draw them
under their corresponding department headings.
3. Identify each copy of an accounting document with a number. If multiple-copy
documents are color-coded, use a table to identify the number-color associations.
4. Account for the distribution of each copy of a document. In general, it is better to
over-document a complicated process than to under-document it.
5. Use on-page and off-page connectors to avoid diagrams with lines that cross one
another.
6. Each pair of connectors (a ‘‘from’’ and a ‘‘to’’ connector in each pair) should use the
same letter or number.
7. Use annotations if necessary to explain activities or symbols that may be unclear. These
are little notes to the reader that help clarify your documentation.
8. If the sequence of records in a ﬁle is important, include the letter ‘‘A’’ for alphabetical,
‘‘N’’ for numeric, or ‘‘C’’ for chronological in the ﬁle symbol. As indicated in guideline
7, you can also include a note in the ﬂowchart to make things clearer.
9. Most employees reference forms with acronyms (e.g., GRF or PHF in the preceding
examples). To avoid confusion, use full names (possibly with acronyms in parentheses)
or create a table of equivalents to ensure accuracy in identifying such forms.
10. Consider using automated ﬂowcharting tools. See the section of this chapter on CASE
tools.

82
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Case-in-Point 3.4
Accountants disagree about the usefulness of document ﬂowcharts rel-
ative to other documenting tools, but one manuscript reviewer of this book wrote: ‘‘Flowcharting
is one of the most essential skills, in my opinion, for a student to learn in a systems course.
During my tenure at a CPA ﬁrm, I had the opportunity to document several accounting infor-
mation systems, and document ﬂowcharting was the key skill. When word got around the ofﬁce
that I was a good ﬂowcharter, I got placed on more important clients, furthering my career.’’
System Flowcharts
Whereas document ﬂowcharts focus on tangible documents, system ﬂowcharts concen-
trate on the computerized data ﬂows of AISs. Thus, a system ﬂowchart typically depicts the
electronic ﬂow of data and processing steps in an AIS. Figure 3-5 illustrates some common
Terminator (start or stop)
Decision point
Yes
No
Start
Processing function
Computer
running payroll
program
Hard-copy document (e.g., a report, payroll check,
customer letter, etc.)
Online storage, especially disk storage
Screen display (output only)
Communications link (e.g., a satellite connection)
Annotation symbol (contains notes and
explanations)
Manual keying operation using an online terminal
or microcomputer (typically assumes the presence
of a dedicated display screen)
Payroll
processing
report
or
Input or output, using any type of medium or data
Input time
card data
for an
employee
Payroll
master file
Payroll
master
file
Hours
>=40?
Airport
departures
screen
Transcribe time
card data
Time card must
be signed by
supervisor
FIGURE 3-5
Some common system and programming ﬂowcharting symbols.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
83
system ﬂowcharting symbols. Most of these symbols are industry conventions that have
been standardized by the National Bureau of Standards (Standard × 3.5), although addi-
tional symbols are now necessary to represent newer data transmission technologies—for
example, wireless data ﬂows.
Some system ﬂowcharts are general in nature and merely provide an overview of the
system. These are high-level system ﬂowcharts. Figure 3-6 is an example. The inputs and
outputs of the system are speciﬁed by the general input and output symbol, a parallelogram.
In more detailed system ﬂowcharts, the speciﬁc form of these inputs and outputs would
be indicated—for example, by magnetic disk symbols.
Figure 3-6 refers to only one process—preparing a payroll. A more detailed system
ﬂowchart would describe all the processes performed by the payroll program and the
speciﬁc inputs and outputs of each process. At the lowest, most-detailed level of such doc-
umentation are program ﬂowcharts that describe the processing logic of each application
program. We will examine program ﬂowcharts later in this chapter.
Like document ﬂowcharts, the process of drawing system ﬂowcharts is probably best
understood by studying an illustration. Figure 3-7 is a system ﬂowchart for the following
example.
The Sarah Stanton Company is a magazine distributor that maintains a ﬁle of mag-
azine subscribers for creating monthly mailing labels. Magazine subscribers mail
change-of-address forms or new-subscription forms directly to the company, where
input personnel key the information into the system through online terminals. The
computer system temporarily stores this information as a ﬁle of address-change
or new-subscription requests. Clerical staff keys these data into computer ﬁles
continuously, so we may characterize it as ‘‘daily processing.’’
Once a week, the system uses the information in the daily processing ﬁle to
update the subscriber master ﬁle. At this time, new subscriber names and addresses
are added to the ﬁle, and the addresses of existing subscribers who have moved are
changed. The system also prepares a Master File Maintenance Processing Report to
indicate what additions and modiﬁcations were made to the ﬁle. Once a month, the
company prepares postal labels for the magazine’s mailing. The subscriber master
ﬁle serves as the chief input for this computer program. The two major outputs are
the labels themselves and a Mailing Labels Processing Report that documents this
run and indicates any problems.
Paychecks and
Reports
Computer Using
Payroll
Program
Time Cards and
Payroll Changes
Payroll
Master File
FIGURE 3-6
A high-level system ﬂowchart for payroll processing.

84
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
New Subscriber
Forms
Subscriber
Address Change
Request Forms
Online
Terminal
Computer, using
"Subscriber File
Maintenance"
Program
(Daily Processing)
Change
Request
Records
Subscriber
Master
File
Computer, using
"Master File
Maintenance"
Program
(Weekly Processing)
Master File
Maintenance
Processing
Report
Mailing Labels
Processing
Report
Subscriber
Mailing
Labels
Computer, using
"Prepare Mailing
Labels" Program
(Monthly Processing)
FIGURE 3-7
A system ﬂowchart illustrating the computer steps involved in maintaining a
subscriber master ﬁle and creating monthly mailing labels.
The system ﬂowchart in Figure 3-7 documents the ﬂow of data through the company’s
computerized system. Thus, it identiﬁes sources of data, the places where data are
temporarily stored, and the outputs on which processed data appear. In Figure 3-7, for
example, the system ﬂowchart begins with the subscriber request forms and documents
the ﬂow of data on these forms through the keying phase, master-ﬁle-maintenance phase,
and ﬁnally, the monthly mailing phase.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
85
Indirectly, system ﬂowcharts also indicate processing cycles (daily, weekly, or
monthly), hardware needs (e.g., disk drives and printers), areas of weak or missing
application controls, and potential bottlenecks in processing (e.g., manual data entry).
In Figure 3-7, we can also identify the major ﬁles of the system (a temporary log ﬁle of
change-request records and a subscriber master ﬁle) and the major reports of the system.
Finally, note that each processing phase of a system ﬂowchart usually involves preparing
one or more control reports. These reports provide processing-control information (e.g.,
counts of transactions processed) for control purposes and exceptions information (e.g.,
the identity of unprocessed transactions) that helps employees correct the errors detected
by the system.
Guidelines for Drawing System Flowcharts
System ﬂowcharts depict an electronic job stream of data through the various processing
phases of an AIS, and therefore also illustrate audit trails. Each time the records of a ﬁle
are sorted or updated, for example, a system ﬂowchart should show this in a separate
processing step. Generally speaking, this is the way processing proceeds in almost all AISs,
one step at a time, and is therefore the way system ﬂowcharts must portray processing
phases. In recognizing the usefulness of system ﬂowcharts, both the American Institute of
Certiﬁed Public Accountants (AICPA) and the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA)
consistently include test questions in their professional examinations, which require a
working knowledge of system ﬂowcharts.
Although no strict rules govern exactly how to construct a system ﬂowchart, the
following list provides some guidelines.
1. System ﬂowcharts should read from top to bottom and from left to right. In drawing or
reading such ﬂowcharts, you should begin in the upper-left corner.
2. Because system ﬂowcharting symbols are standardized, you should use these symbols
when drawing your ﬂowcharts—do not make up your own.
3. A processing symbol should always be found between an input symbol and an output
symbol. This is called the sandwich rule.
4. Use on-page and off-page connectors to avoid crossed lines and cluttered ﬂowcharts.
5. Sketch a ﬂowchart before designing the ﬁnal draft. Graphical documentation software
tools (discussed shortly) make this job easier.
6. Add descriptions and comments in ﬂowcharts to clarify processing elements. You can
place these inside the processing symbols themselves, include them in annotation
symbols attached to process or ﬁle symbols, or add them as separate notes on your
system’s documentation.
PROCESS MAPS AND DATA FLOW DIAGRAMS
Like system and document ﬂowcharts, process maps and data ﬂow diagrams (DFDs)
document the ﬂow of data through an AIS. We examine both types of diagrams in this
section of the chapter.

86
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Process Maps
A business process is a natural group of business activities that create value for an
organization. Process maps document business processes in easy-to-follow diagrams. Did
you understand the logic diagram in Figure 3-1 at the beginning of the chapter? It’s an
example of a process map. Studies suggest that process maps are among the easiest to
draw and are also among the easiest for novices to follow.
In businesses, a major process is usually the sales or order fulﬁllment process. A
process map for this process (Figure 3-8) shows such activities as customers placing
orders, warehouse personnel picking goods, and clerks shipping goods. Managers can
create similar maps that show just about any other process—for example, depict how an
organization processes time cards for a payroll application, how a business responds to
customer returns, or how a manager deals with defective merchandise.
Case-in-Point 3.5
Increased competition and tighter proﬁt margins have forced companies
to look for places where they might be able to save money. One large accounting ﬁrm has
used process mapping software to assist clients in evaluating and redesigning their business
processes. For example, the ﬁrm’s business reengineering practice helped a ﬁnancial services
company cut its costs and become more efﬁcient. The company was able to cut in half the time
it took to approve a loan—and it needed 40% fewer staff to do it.
Internal and external auditors can use process maps to help them learn how a
department or division operates, assist them in documenting what they have learned, and
help them identify internal control weaknesses or problems in existing operations. An
additional beneﬁt is to use such maps as training aids. Consultants frequently use process
maps to help them study business processes and redesign them for greater productivity.
Accountants and managers can also use this tool to help them describe current processes
to others.
Like most other types of documentation, you can draw process maps in multi-level
versions called hierarchical process maps that show successively ﬁner levels of detail. Such
maps are especially popular on the web because viewers can click on individual symbols to
Order
Goods
CUSTOMER
SALES DEPT.
SHIPPING
CREDIT &
BILLING
Submit
Order
Check
Credit
Credit
OK?
On
Hand?
Check
Inventory
Pick and
Ship Goods
Prepare
Payment
Send
Invoice
yes
yes
FIGURE 3-8
A process map for the order fulﬁllment process (created with Microsoft Word).

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
87
SHIPPING
CREDIT &
BILLING
Submit
Order
Customer
approved
for credit?
Customer
account
current?
New order
falls within
credit limit?
Approve
for
shipping
Reject
order
no
yes
Credit
OK?
SALES
DEPARTMENT
FIGURE 3-9
A second-level process map for the credit approval process of Figure 3-8.
see more information for any given process or decision. Figure 3-9, for example, illustrates
a secondary-level process map for checking credit that might link to the ‘‘Check Credit’’
box in Figure 3-8.
Guidelines for Drawing Process Maps
Process maps vary considerably and the symbols found in web versions are remarkably
inconsistent. Nonetheless, it is possible to use the symbols that you already know from
drawing ﬂowcharts to create process maps, including: a rectangle (to represent a process),
a diamond (to represent decisions), an oval (to depict the starting and ending points for
a process), an off-page connector, and a document symbol. Creating a good process map
requires a blend of art, science, and craftsmanship, all of which mostly comes with practice.
Here are some guidelines to use when drawing process maps.4
1. Identify and deﬁne the process of interest. The goal is to stay focused on the scope of
the process you are trying to map.
2. Understand the purpose for the process map. Is it to identify bottlenecks? To discover
redundancies?
3. Meet with employees to get their ideas, suggestions, and comments. Don’t hesitate to
ask challenging or probing questions.
4. Remember that processes have inputs, outputs, and enablers. An input could be an
invoice; an output could be a payment check for a supplier, and an enabler helps a
process achieve results. In AISs, information technology is itself a common enabler.
5. Show key decision points. A process map will not be an effective analytical tool without
decision points (the intellectual or mental steps in a process).
6. Pay attention to the level of detail you capture. Did you capture enough detail to truly
represent the process and explain it to others?
7. Avoid mapping the ‘‘should-be’’ or ‘‘could-be’’. Map what is.
8. Practice, practice, practice.
4Joe Paradiso, ‘‘The Essential Process: The Quick and Painless Path to Successful Process Mapping,’’ Industrial
Engineer, (April 2003), Vol. 35, p. 46–49.

88
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Data Flow Diagrams
Data Flow Diagrams (DFDs) are used primarily in the systems development process—for
example, as a tool for analyzing an existing system or as a planning aid for creating a new
system. Because documented data ﬂows are important for understanding an AIS, many of
the remaining chapters of this book use DFDs to illustrate the ﬂow of data in the AISs under
discussion.
Data Flow Diagram Symbols.
Figure 3-10 illustrates the four basic symbols used in
DFDs. A rectangle or square represents an external data source or data destination—for
example, a customer. To show this, a DFD would include the word ‘‘customer’’ inside a
data source or destination symbol. In Figure 3-10, the term ‘‘external entity’’ means ‘‘an
entity outside the system under study,’’ not necessarily an entity that is external to the
company. Thus, for example, a ‘‘customer’’ might be another division of the same company
under study.
Data ﬂow lines are lines with arrows that indicate the direction of data ﬂow. Thus,
data ﬂow lines indicate the paths that data follow into, out of, or through the system under
study. For this reason, every data source symbol will have one or more data ﬂow lines
leading away from it, and every data destination symbol will have one or more data ﬂow
lines leading into it. For clarity, you should label each data ﬂow line to indicate exactly
what data are ﬂowing along it.
A circle or ‘‘bubble’’ in a DFD indicates a system entity or process that changes or
transforms data. (Some authors prefer to use squares with rounded corners for this symbol.)
In physical DFDs (discussed shortly), the label inside a bubble typically contains the title
of the person performing a task—for example, ‘‘cashier.’’ In logical DFDs (also discussed
shortly), the label inside the bubble describes a transformation process—for example,
‘‘process cash receipts.’’
Finally, DFDs use a set of parallel lines or an open rectangle to represent a store or
repository of data. This is usually a ﬁle of some sort. If data are permanently stored, a data
store symbol is mandatory. If data are collected over time and stored in some temporary
Data store (file)
or
Internal entity (physical DFDs) or
transformation process (logical DFDs)
Data flow
External entity (data source or data destination)
FIGURE 3-10
Symbols for data ﬂow diagrams.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
89
place, you are not required to use a ﬁle symbol for this (although experts recommend
including one for clarity).
Context Diagrams.
As with system ﬂowcharts and process maps, we typically draw
DFDs in levels that show increasing amounts of detail. Designers ﬁrst prepare a high-level
DFD called a context diagram to provide an overview of a system. Figure 3-11 is an
example of a context diagram for the payroll processing of Figure 3-6.
The DFD in Figure 3-11 shows the inputs and outputs of the application (payroll
processing) as well as the data sources and destinations external to the application. Thus,
this context diagram uses rectangles to identify ‘‘Timekeeping’’ and ‘‘Human Resources’’
as external entities, despite the fact that these departments are internal to the company.
This is because these entities are external to the payroll processing system under study.
The data ﬂow lines connecting these entities to and from the system (e.g., time card data)
are called system interfaces.
Physical Data Flow Diagrams.
A context diagram shows very little detail. For
this reason, system designers usually elaborate on the elements in context DFDs by
decomposing them into successively more detailed levels. These subsequent DFDs show
more particulars, such as the detailed processes of the application, and the inputs and
outputs associated with each processing step.
The ﬁrst level of detail is commonly called a physical data ﬂow diagram. Figure 3-12
is an example for our payroll illustration. A physical DFD closely resembles the document
ﬂowcharts discussed earlier in this chapter; that is, it focuses on physical entities such
as the employees involved in the system under study, as well as the tangible documents,
reports, and similar hard-copy inputs and outputs that ﬂow through the system. Thus,
for example, the bubbles in the physical DFD of Figure 3-12 identify the data-entry clerk
who enters payroll information into the computer, the payroll cashier who distributes
paychecks to employees, and the tax accountant who sends tax information to the Internal
Revenue Service of the federal government.
Figure 3-12 illustrates several important characteristics of physical DFDs. First, we
observe that each bubble contains a number as well as a title. Including a number in each
bubble makes it easier to reference it later. This also assists designers in the decomposition
tasks discussed shortly. Second, we notice that a physical DFD includes the same inputs
and outputs as its predecessor context diagram in Figure 3-11—i.e., the context DFD and
the physical DFD are balanced. This balancing is important because unbalanced DFDs are
Timekeeping
Human
Resources
Government
Agencies
Management
Employees
Payroll Change
Data
Time Card Data
Paychecks
Tax Information
Payroll Summaries
Payroll
Processing
System
FIGURE 3-11
A context diagram for a payroll processing system.

90
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Timekeeping
Employee
Management
Government
Agencies
Human
Resources
Payroll Change
Data
Payroll
Data
Paycheck
Payroll Summary
Information
Payroll tax
Information
Payroll tax
Information
Time Card Data
1.0
Data
Entry Clerk
2.0
Payroll
Cashier
3.0
Tax
Accountant
Weekly payroll
data and changes
Payroll master
file
FIGURE 3-12
A physical data ﬂow diagram.
inconsistent and therefore probably contain errors. Third, we ﬁnd that all the bubbles in
the physical DFD contain the names of system entities (i.e., the titles of employees). These
titles should correspond to the titles in an ofﬁcial organization chart.
Finally, we see that a physical DFD lists the job title of only one typical employee
in an entity symbol, despite the fact that several employees may perform the same
task—for example, several data-entry clerks or payroll cashiers. This last characteristic
also applies when several employees perform the same task at different locations—for
example, a company has several payroll cashiers who distribute paychecks at each of its
manufacturing facilities. This keeps the DFD simple, more readable, and therefore more
easily understood.
Logical Data Flow Diagrams.
A physical DFD illustrates which internal and external
entities participate in a given system but does not give the reader a good idea of what
these participants do. For this task, we need one or more logical data ﬂow diagrams
that address this requirement.
Figure 3-13 is a logical DFD for the payroll illustration in Figure 3-12. In Figure 3-13,
note that each bubble no longer contains the name of a system entity, but instead contains
a verb that indicates a task the system performs. For example, instead of a single bubble
with the title ‘‘data-entry clerk,’’ as in Figure 3-12, the logical DFD in Figure 3-13 shows two
bubbles with the titles ‘‘process employee hours worked’’ and ‘‘process payroll change
data’’ because these are separate data processing tasks such clerks perform.
From the standpoint of good system design and control, describing system processes is
important because how a system performs its tasks is often more important than what tasks
it performs. For example, all payroll systems prepare paychecks, but not all payroll systems
do this exactly the same way. The differences may require different hardware, software,

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
91
Payroll
Master File
Time card
data
Payroll
change data
Status and
rate data
Employee
hours data
Tax
information
Paycheck
Processed payroll
information
Paycheck data
Payroll
summaries
Payroll
information
1.0
Process
employees
hours
worked
3.0
Process
paycheck
4.0
Process
payroll
reports
2.0
Process
payroll
change
data
Employee
Government
Management
Timekeeping
Human
Resources
FIGURE 3-13
A logical data ﬂow diagram for a payroll processing system.
procedures, or controls. Logical DFDs help designers decide what system resources to
acquire, what activities employees must perform to run these systems, and how to protect
and control these systems after they are installed.
Figure 3-13 is a level 0 data ﬂow diagram because it shows only in broad terms
what tasks a system performs. Most systems are more complex than this and therefore
require more detail to describe them completely. The task of creating such detail is called
decomposition, which becomes necessary because DFD designers try to limit each level
diagram to between ﬁve and seven processing symbols (bubbles).
Figure 3-14 shows an example of a level 1 data ﬂow diagram— an ‘‘explosion’’
of symbol 3.0 (in Figure 3-13) with caption ‘‘process paycheck.’’ Here, we see that
‘‘processing paychecks’’ entails computing gross pay, determining payroll deductions,
and calculating net pay. If necessary, you can also show ancillary computer ﬁles at
this level.
To fully document the system, you would continue to perform these decomposition
tasks in still further DFDs. For example, you might decompose the procedure ‘‘compute
payroll deductions’’ in bubble 3.2 of Figure 3-13 into several additional processes in
lower-level DFDs—for example, separate DFDs for ‘‘compute medical deductions,’’ ‘‘com-
pute savings plan deductions,’’ ‘‘compute tax deductions,’’ and so forth. In this way, a set
of DFDs become linked together in a hierarchy.

92
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Payroll
Master File
Paycheck data
Processed
payroll
information
Summary
paycheck
data
Paycheck data with gross pay
and deductions
Paycheck data with gross pay
Paycheck
3.1
Compute
gross pay
3.2
Compute
payroll
deductions
3.3
Compute
net pay
3.4
Prepare
paycheck
Employee
FIGURE 3-14
An exploded view of the ‘‘process paycheck’’ bubble of Figure 2-11.
Guidelines for Drawing Data Flow Diagrams
Data ﬂow diagrams use fewer symbols than system ﬂowcharts, and to some people
are therefore easier to prepare and understand. Many companies use both types of
documentation, with the choice often hinging on the preference of the designer. But like
creating other types of system documentation, creating DFDs is as much art as science.
The following rules can help you design them better, make them clearer, and assist you in
avoiding simple errors.
1. Avoid detail in high-level DFDs (i.e., in levels 0 and 1). Where appropriate, combine
activities that are performed at the same place, at the same time, or that are logically
related.
2. As a general rule, each logical DFD should contain between ﬁve and seven processing
bubbles. This guideline helps keep things simple, and again helps you avoid showing
too much detail in high-level DFDs.
3. Different data ﬂows should have different names. This avoids confusion about what data
are ﬂowing where.
4. Unless they are outside the system or used for archiving, all data stores should have data
ﬂows both into them and out of them. Thus, an internal ﬁle symbol that lacks both of
these data ﬂow lines is usually in error.
5. Even if a ﬁle is temporary, it is usually desirable to include it in a DFD.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
93
6. Classify most of the ﬁnal recipients of system information as external entities.
7. Classify all personnel or departments that process the data of the current system as
internal entities.
8. Display only normal processing routines in high-level DFDs. Avoid showing error
routines or similar exception tasks in them.
9. Where several system entities perform the same task, show only one to represent them
all. This rule also applies when system personnel perform the same task at different
locations of the organization—for example, at different plants.
OTHER DOCUMENTATION TOOLS
There are many other tools for documenting AISs besides document ﬂowcharts, system
ﬂowcharts, process maps, and data ﬂow diagrams. Two of them are (1) program ﬂowcharts,
and (2) decision tables. Because these tools are used mostly by consultants and IT
professionals rather than accountants, we will describe them only brieﬂy. Accountants
should have some familiarity with these tools, however, because they may see them—for
example, when reviewing the design for a revised accounting system.
Program Flowcharts
Because large computer programs today involve millions of instructions, they require careful
planning and the coordinated work of hundreds of systems analysts and programmers.
Typically, organizations use structured programming techniques to create these large
programs in a hierarchical fashion—that is, from the top down. This means that the
developers design the main routines ﬁrst and then design subroutines for subsidiary
processing as major processing tasks become clear.
To help them plan the logic for each processing routine, IT professionals often create
one or more program ﬂowcharts (Figure 3-15). Program ﬂowcharts outline the processing
logic for each part of a computer program and indicate the order in which processing
steps take place. After designing such program ﬂowcharts, the developer typically presents
them to colleagues in a structured walkthrough or formal review of the logic. This
process helps the reviewers assess the soundness of the logic, detect and correct design
ﬂaws, and make improvements. Upon approval, the program ﬂowchart then becomes a
‘‘blueprint’’ for writing the instructions of the computer program itself, and of course
serves to document the program as well.
Program ﬂowcharts use many of the same symbols as system ﬂowcharts (refer back
to Figure 3-5). A few specialized symbols for program ﬂowcharts are the diamond symbol
(which indicates a decision point in the processing logic) and the oval symbol (which
indicates a starting or stopping point).
Like system ﬂowcharts and data ﬂow diagrams, program ﬂowcharts can be designed at
different levels of detail. The highest-level program ﬂowchart is sometimes called a macro
program ﬂowchart and provides an overview of the data processing logic. A lower-level
program ﬂowchart would indicate the detailed programming logic necessary to carry out a
processing task. Figure 3-15 is a detailed (lower-level) program ﬂowchart for a sales report
application.

94
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Initialize
control total
to zero
Read a
record
Print an
output line
Print final
output line with
control total
Compute sales
amount =
price × quantity
Add sales
amount to
control total
Last
account?
Yes
No
Stop
Start
FIGURE 3-15
A program ﬂowchart for a sales application.
Decision Tables
When a computer program involves a large number of conditions and subsequent courses of
action, its program ﬂowchart tends to be large and complex. A decision table (Figure 3-16)
is a table of conditions and processing tasks that indicates what action to take for each
possibility. Sometimes, decision tables are used as an alternative to program ﬂowcharts.
More commonly, they are used in addition to these ﬂowcharts. To illustrate decision tables,
consider the following scenario:
A credit union pays interest to its depositors at the rate of 5% per year. Accounts
of less than $5 are not paid interest. Accounts of $1,000 or more that have been
with the credit union for more than one year get paid the normal 5 percent, plus a
bonus of. 5 percent.
Figure 3-16 illustrates a decision table to help the credit union decide how much
interest to pay each account. Note that the decision table consists of four parts: (1)
the condition stub outlines the potential conditions of the application, (2) the action stub
outlines the available actions that can be taken, (3) the condition entries depict the possible
combinations of conditions likely to occur, and (4) the action entries outline the action to
be taken for each combination of conditions.
The rules at the top of the decision table set forth the combination of conditions that
may occur, and the action entries show what to do for each of them. For the illustration at
hand, three conditions affect the data processing of each account: (1) an account balance
less than $5, (2) an account balance less than $1,000, and (3) an account one year old or
less. As deﬁned, each of these conditions can now be answered ‘‘yes’’ or ‘‘no.’’ Figure 3-15

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
95
Condition
stub
Conditions
Account balance less than $5
Account balance less than $1,000
Account 1 year old or less
Actions
Pay no interest
Pay 5 percent interest
Pay 5.5 percent interest
Y
*
*
X
1
N
*
Y
X
3
Rules
N
Y
*
 
X
2
N
N
N
 
 
X
4
Action
stub
Condition
entries
Action
entries
FIGURE 3-16
This is a decision table to help a credit union decide how much interest to pay
each account. An asterisk (∗) means that the condition does not affect the course of action.
is a decision table for the illustration at hand, in which Y stands for ‘‘yes’’ and N stands for
‘‘no.’’ The combination of Ys and Ns in each column of the table illustrates each possible
condition the system might encounter. Using Xs, the decision table also shows what course
of action should be taken for each condition (i.e., how much interest should be paid to
each account).
The major advantage of decision tables is that they summarize the processing tasks for
a large number of conditions in a compact, easily understood format. This increases system
understanding, resulting in fewer omissions of important processing possibilities. Decision
tables also serve as useful documentation aids when new data processing conditions arise
or when changes in organizational policy result in new actions for existing conditions. This
advantage is particularly important to AISs because of organizational concern for accuracy
and completeness in processing ﬁnancial data.
One drawback of decision tables is that they do not show the order in which a program
tests data conditions or takes processing actions, as do program ﬂowcharts. This is a major
deﬁciency because the order in which accounting data are tested or processed is often
as important as the tests or processing themselves. A second drawback is that decision
tables require an understanding of documentation techniques beyond ﬂowcharting. Finally,
decision tables require extra work to prepare, and this work may not be cost effective if
program ﬂowcharts must be prepared anyway.
Software Tools for Graphical Documentation and SOX Compliance
Accountants, consultants, and system developers can use a variety of software tools to
create graphical documentation of existing or proposed AISs. The simplest tools include
presentation software, such as Microsoft PowerPoint, as well as word processing and
spreadsheet software such as Microsoft Word and Excel. The advantages of using such
tools closely parallel those of using word processing software instead of typewriters (e.g.,
easily revised documents, advanced formatting capabilities and coloring options, and a
variety of reproduction capabilities). For example, the authors used Microsoft Word to
create the process maps in Figures 3-8 and 3-9.
Microsoft Word, Excel, and PowerPoint.
Using the ‘‘AutoShapes’’ option in the
Drawing Toolbar of Microsoft Word, Excel or PowerPoint, you can reproduce most of
the graphics symbols and logic diagrams in this chapter. (The connectors in Excel are
different from, as well as better than, simple lines because they adjust automatically when
you reposition symbols in your charts.) Two additional advantages of using Excel to create

96
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
graphical documentation are the ability to create large drawings (that exceed the margins
of word-processing documents) and the option to embed computed values in ﬂowcharting
symbols. Problem 3–21 at the end of the chapter describes how to use Excel to create
such graphical documentation.
CASE Tools.
The capabilities of specialized graphical documentation software exceed
those of word-processing or spreadsheet packages. These CASE tools (an acronym for
computer-assisted software engineering) automate such documentation tasks as drawing
or modifying ﬂowcharts, drawing graphics and screen designs, developing reports, and
even generating code from documentation. Thus, CASE tools are to ﬂowcharts what word
processors are to text documents. Figure 3-17 is an example of a CASE package in use,
drawing a data ﬂow diagram.
Most CASE products run on personal computers. Examples include iGrafx (Micrografx,
Inc.), allCLEAR (SPSS, Inc.), SmartDraw (SmartDraw Software, Inc.), and Visio (Microsoft
Corp.). These products are especially popular with auditors and consultants, who use them
to document AISs using the techniques discussed above, as well as to analyze the results.
Graphical documentation software enables its users to create a wide array of outputs,
including data ﬂow diagrams, entity-relationship diagrams (described in Chapter 7), system
ﬂowcharts, program ﬂowcharts, process maps, and even computer network designs.
More complex CASE products enable their users to do even more. Examples include
Application Factory (Cortex Corporation), Excelerator II (Intersolv), and Pacbase (CGI
Systems, Inc.). These CASE tools enable system designers to create process models,
data-entry screens, report formats, menu screens, structure charts, and customized user
interfaces. Most CASE packages also include modules for creating data dictionaries and word
SED
G
ORDER
ENT
MARKETING
R
I
Toolbox 
A
BC
A
BC
0.0 OIS SYSTEM DIAGRAM
File
Options
Help
Level: 1 Select command:
PROCESS
ORDER
ORDER/
INVENTORY
DETAIL
1.0
MAINTAIN
INVENTORY
3.0
FULFILL
2.0
RECEIVE
5.0-P
ORDER/INVENTORY
DATA
ACT
ACCOUNTING
ORD
ORDER
ENTRY
DEPARTMENT
REC
RECEIVING
REQUEST FOR
CREDIT APPROVAL
APPROVED
CUSTOMER
ORDER ENTRY SIGNALS
CUSTOMER DETAIL
....
....
....
OPEN
ORDER
INVENTORY
DETAIL
RELEASED
MAIL
ORDER
INVENTORY
DETAIL
CATALOGUE
CHANGE
GOODS
RECEIVED
DETAIL
Map 
FIGURE 3-17
This CASE tool is a software program called Excelerator™, which is used here to
create a data ﬂow diagram. The toolbox on the left contains symbols that the user can select for
his or her diagram.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
97
processors for creating written documentation. Top-end packages include project man-
agement modules, and also support client/server applications, encourage object-oriented
programming, and provide visual tools for workﬂow analyses and process redesigns.
Front-end CASE tools focus on the early (‘‘front end’’) tasks of systems design—for
example, requirements-design activities. Backend CASE tools automate the detailed design
tasks required in the later stages of a project—for example, developing detailed program
ﬂowcharts. Integrated CASE (I-CASE) packages enable users to perform both types of tasks
and perhaps even generate computer code directly from logic diagrams. As a result, these
tools help support rapid application development (RAD) and help organizations save
money.
Graphical documentation software tools enable their users to generate documentation
quickly and consistently, as well as to automate modiﬁcations to this documentation later
as changes are required. They include templates and models that allow users to document
almost any business and system environment. But these packages only create what they
are told to create. Like word processors, they lack imagination and creativity, and they also
require training to use them efﬁciently.
SOX Compliance.
Many businesses now use specialized software packages to automate
the tasks required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Just as word processing
software makes document revisions easier, these ‘‘compliance software packages’’ enable
businesses to reduce the time and costs required to satisfy SOX requirements. BlindView
(Symatec Corporation), for example, monitors servers to determine which applications each
employee can access, identiﬁes ﬁnancial information stored on these servers, determines
whether adequate segregation of duties are in place, and even restricts employee access
to selected information as dictated by SOX. Similarly, Movaris Certainty (Movaris, Inc.) is
another software tool that companies can use for compliance purposes:
Case-in-Point 3.6
The Chicago Mercantile Exchange creates markets in which customers
buy and sell futures contracts for such products as corn, wheat, soybeans, and pork
bellies—and uses Movaris Certainty 8.0 to help it meet SOX requirements. The software
enables the exchange to centralize all its compliance documentation in one Oracle database,
document, report, and review its internal controls, and analyze workﬂow capabilities.5
Some software focuses on risk identiﬁcation and management. Certus Governance
Suite (Certus Software, Inc.) is one example. This suite includes SOX compliance and
risk software that enables organizations to identify the risks tied to various accounting
applications, and to map these risks back to the controls that govern them. The software
also enables businesses to identify which divisions and controls involve multiple ﬁnancial
systems or operations, and to consolidate such reviews in a single application.
OpenPages FCM (OpenPages, Inc.) and BizRights (Approva Corp.) provide somewhat
similar capabilities. OpenPages FCM includes a compliance database, workﬂow manage-
ment tools, and provides a software dashboard that enables executives to verify that
speciﬁc managerial controls are now in place as well as to identify control deﬁciencies that
might affect ﬁnancial reports. BizRights software enables users to focus on separation of
duties in an ERP environment. Using a rule book, the software determines whether such
separations are appropriate, and therefore enables companies to reduce their reliance on
external auditors for such work.
5Hoffman, Thomas, ‘‘Calibrating Toward Compliance’’ Computerworld Vol. 40, No. 6 (February 6, 2006),
pp. 21–24.

98
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
END-USER COMPUTING AND DOCUMENTATION
End-user computing refers to the ability of non-IT employees to create computer
applications of their own. Today, we take much of this ‘‘computing’’ for granted—for
example, when employees manipulate data with word processing, spreadsheet, database
management systems, or tax packages—because all of these programs were developed
expressly so that end users can develop applications for themselves.
The Importance of End-User Documentation
End-user applications often require substantial resources or perform mission-critical func-
tions for busy organizations. Thus, end users should document their applications for many
of the same reasons that professionals must document their applications. One rationale
for this is that end users require complete, easy-to-follow training manuals, tutorials, and
reference guides to help them use computer software and perform application tasks. New
software always seems to place us at the ‘‘low end of the learning curve’’ (i.e., in unfamiliar
territory), thus making documentation important for learning how to accomplish things or
undo mistakes.
Documentation is also important when end users develop their own applications (for
example, spreadsheet models or database applications). This self-development places the
responsibility for documenting these applications on the same employees who created
them. Unfortunately, this documentation task is often overlooked or is performed so poorly
that it might as well be overlooked. Such oversight can be costly. For example, time is
wasted when other employees must alter the system but lack the basic documentation to
accomplish this task. Thus, even if the developer is the only one in the ofﬁce who uses a
particular application, managers should insist that he or she document it—for example, in
case of sickness or dismissal.
The speciﬁc items that should be used to document any particular end-user application
will, of course, vary with the application. For example, businesses often ﬁnd it convenient
to use systematic ﬁle names to identify word processing documents and to embed these
ﬁle names within the reports to help others ﬁnd them later. Figure 3-18 provides some
ideas for documenting spreadsheet applications.
1. Name of the developer.
2. Name of the ﬁle where the application is stored.
3. Name of the directories and subdirectories where the application is stored.
4. Date the application was ﬁrst developed.
5. Date the application was last modiﬁed, and the name of the person who modiﬁed it.
6. Date the application was last run.
7. Name and phone number of person to call in case of problems.
8. Sources of external data used by the system.
9. Important assumptions made in the application.
10. Important parameters that must be modiﬁed in order to change assumptions or answer ‘‘what-if’’
questions.
11. Range names used in the application and their locations in the spreadsheet.
FIGURE 3-18
Examples of information to include when documenting spreadsheets.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
99
Policies for End-User Computing and Documentation
Besides ﬁnding that some applications are poorly documented, organizations sometimes
also discover that the end-user applications of one department duplicate those of another.
Then, too, a lack of corporate-wide documentation standards can penalize both the
developer and the organization in the long run. Finally, many ﬁrms ﬁnd that end-user
applications are not well tested and that internal controls are either weak or non-existent.
To avoid such problems, businesses should establish and follow the guidelines outlined
here to control end-user applications development:
1. Formally evaluate large projects. Employees should be allowed to create a large
application only after it has withstood the scrutiny of a formal review of its costs and
beneﬁts. When projects are large, higher-level management should be involved in the
go-ahead decision.
2. Adopt formal end-user development policies. Employees usually do not develop poor
applications because they wish to do so, but because no organizational policies exist
that restrict them from doing so. Policy guidelines should include procedures for testing
software, examining internal controls, and periodically auditing systems.
3. Formalize documentation standards. At this point in the chapter, the importance of
formal documentation should be self-evident. What may be less obvious is the need to
create procedures for ensuring that these documentation standards are met.
4. Limit the number of employees authorized to create end-user applications. This
restricts applications development to those employees in whom management has
conﬁdence, or perhaps who have taken formal development classes.
5. Audit new and existing systems. The more critical an end-user system is to the
functioning of a department or division, the more important it is for organizations
to require formal audits of such systems for compliance with the guidelines outlined
previously.
Case-in-Point 3.7
In a parallel universe, the apprentice had yet one more question for
the master accountant. ‘‘Master,’’ he said, ‘‘I now understand why documenting end-user
applications is so important. Is it not correct, therefore, that all companies require such
documentation?’’
The master accountant shifted his weight and cleared his throat. ‘‘The lesson is over for today,’’
he said.
AIS AT WORK
Flowcharts Help Recover Embezzled Assets
In August 2001, a forensic team of two CPAs and an IT professional were hired by a law
ﬁrm to help investigate the suspected siphoning of large sums of money from government
ofﬁces of a Persian Gulf sovereignty. The team only had about seven weeks to collect as
much relevant information as possible, analyze this information, and then make it easy to
understand (in the event that the case went to court).
The assets were allegedly hidden in investment banks and brokerage ﬁrms in a
number of European countries. Therefore, the biggest challenges were to determine what
information should be collected and then what information was still available—the concern

100
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
was that this embezzlement had been going on for more than a decade. The search for
transactions and data required extensive information technology and data-mining skills,
because the money trail was hidden in databases at ﬁnancial institutions. The team quickly
realized the value of understanding databases, particularly Microsoft Access database
software.
But tracing the cash ﬂows became a difﬁcult task because the number of transactions
was large and the ﬂow of monies both inside and outside the country was complicated.
The forensic team quickly decided that the most efﬁcient and effective method for keeping
track of these cash ﬂows (and how they ﬁt into the whole picture) was to use ﬂow charts
and decision tables. Understanding how the money was moving inside and outside the
organization provided the basis for the team to identify the transactions where assets were
misappropriated. As a result, the team could also identify existing controls that could be
thwarted, and suggest how the investigation should proceed. In the end, the team found
hundreds of suspect transactions that led to an out-of-court settlement.
Source: Marc Siegel, ‘‘Recovery of Embezzled Assets Half a World Away,’’ Journal of
Accountancy, (August 2001), Vol. 192, No. 2, p. 45–49.
SUMMARY
• Nine reasons to document an AIS are: (1) to explain how the system works, (2) to train others, (3)
to help developers design new systems, (4) to control system development and maintenance costs,
(5) to standardize communications among system designers, (6) to provide information to auditors,
(7) to document a business’s processes, (8) to help a company comply with the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002, and (9) to establish employee accountability for speciﬁc tasks or procedures.
• A document ﬂowchart describes the physical ﬂow of documents through an AlS—for example,
by providing an overview of where documents are created, sent, reviewed, and stored, and what
activities they trigger.
• A system ﬂowchart describes the electronic ﬂow of data through an AIS, indicates what processing
steps and ﬁles are used and when, and provides an overview of the entire system.
• Process maps also describe the ﬂow of information through an organization, use only a few
symbols, and (to many) are among the easiest to draw and understand.
• Data ﬂow diagrams provide both a physical and a logical view of a system, but concentrate more
on the ﬂow and transformation of data than on the physical devices or timing of inputs, processing,
or outputs.
• Two additional documentation tools are program ﬂowcharts and decision tables. Accountants do
not need to be programmers to evaluate or design an accounting information system, but they
should understand in general terms how these tools work.
• A variety of software tools exist for documenting AISs. These include standard personal productivity
tools such as word processing and spreadsheet software, specialized CASE tools, and software
packages designed to help companies comply with SOX.
• End-user computing is important because many employees do it and also because such appli-
cations often contribute signiﬁcantly to the efﬁciency of speciﬁc departments or divisions. But
many employees do not document their applications very well, and this often costs time and
money.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
101
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
CASE (computer-assisted software engineering)
tools
context diagram
data ﬂow diagrams (DFDs)
decision table
decomposition
document ﬂowchart
documentation
end-user computing
graphical documentation software
job stream
level 0 data ﬂow diagram
level 1 data ﬂow diagram
logical data ﬂow diagram
macro program ﬂowchart
object-oriented software
physical data ﬂow diagram
process map
program ﬂowcharts
rapid application development (RAD)
sandwich rule (system ﬂowcharts)
signed checklists
structured programming
structured walkthrough
system ﬂowchart
TEST YOURSELF
The ﬁrst three questions refer to this diagram:
A
office supplies
requisition form
Q3-1. The diagram here is most likely a:
a. Document ﬂowchart
b. System ﬂowchart
c. Data ﬂow diagram
d. Program ﬂowchart
Q3-2. In the diagram here, the symbol with the letter A represents:
a. An on-page connector
b. An off-page connector
c. A ﬁle
d. An answering machine
Q3-3. In this diagram, the arrow represents:
a. A wireless transmission
b. A telephone call
c. An information ﬂow
d. A management order to a subordinate
Q3-4. Document ﬂowcharts would not be able to represent:
a. The ﬂow of information when ordering ofﬁce supplies
b. The ﬂow of information when hiring new employees
c. The ﬂow of information when creating orders for new magazine subscriptions
d. The logic in performing payroll processing

102
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Q3-5. Which of the following is not true about system ﬂowcharts?
a. They can depict the ﬂow of information in computerized AISs
b. They use standardized symbols
c. They cannot show how documents ﬂow in an AIS
d. They often document an audit trail
Q3-6. Which of the following is not true about process maps?
a. They depict the ﬂow of information in computerized AISs
b. They use standardized symbols
c. Government agencies as well as businesses often use them
d. Web pages often depict hierarchical versions of them
Q3-7. The sandwich rule states that:
a. You should only create logic diagrams that have some ‘‘meat’’ in them
b. Every diagram should have a cover page and a summary page
c. A processing symbol should be between an input and an output symbol
d. In DFDs, there should always be data ﬂow lines leading to and from ﬁles
Q3-8. Which of these is not a good guideline to follow when creating DFDs?
a. Avoid detail in high-level DFDs
b. Avoid drawing temporary ﬁles in DFDs
c. Classify most of the ﬁnal recipients of system outputs as external entities
d. Avoid showing error routines or similar exception tasks
Q3-9. A meeting in which computer programmers outline their logic to others is called a:
a. Decision meeting
b. RAD meeting
c. Mythical event
d. Structured walkthrough
Q3-10. A decision table shows:
a. The possible conditions and processing alternatives for a given situation
b. Who sat where at a board meeting
c. The rules for drawing DFDs
d. The local outsourcing vendors in the area for documentation tasks
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
3-1. Why is documentation important to accounting information systems? Why should accountants
be interested in AIS documentation?
3-2. Distinguish between document ﬂowcharts, system ﬂowcharts, data ﬂow diagrams, and program
ﬂowcharts. How are they similar? How are they different?
3-3. What are document ﬂowcharts? How does a document ﬂowchart assist each of the following
individuals: (1) a systems analyst, (2) a systems designer, (3) a computer programmer, (4) an
auditor, and (5) a data security expert?
3-4. Although ﬂowcharting is an art rather than a science, some guidelines can be used to make
better ﬂowcharts. What are these guidelines for document, system, and data ﬂow diagram
ﬂowcharts?

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
103
3-5. What are the four symbols used in data ﬂow diagrams? What does each mean?
3-6. Why are data ﬂow diagrams developed in a hierarchy? What are the names of some levels in
the hierarchy?
3-7. Look at the process map in Figure 3-13. Trace the steps in the order fulﬁllment process.
Do you think this ﬁgure is more helpful than a narrative would be in understanding the ﬂow
of events in the process?
3-8. What is the purpose of a decision table? How might decision tables be useful to accountants?
3-9. What are CASE tools? How are they used? How do CASE tools create documentation for AISs?
If you were a systems analyst, would you use a CASE tool?
3-10. What is end-user computing? Why is documentation important to end-user computing? What
guidelines should companies develop to control end-user computing?
PROBLEMS
3-11. To view the Drawing ToolBar of Microsoft Excel, select the following options from the
main menu: View\Toolbars\Drawing. (You can also click directly on the Drawing icon in
the Standard Toolbar.) After the Drawing Toolbar appears, select Autoshapes\Flowchart and
observe the symbols that appear in the selection list. There should be approximately 28 of
them (using Ofﬁce 2000). If you allow your mouse to hover over a speciﬁc symbol, its title and
meaning will appear in a tool-tip box. Finally, if you click on a speciﬁc symbol, your mouse
icon will change to a cross-hair and you will be able to draw this symbol on your spreadsheet.
Create a list with items similar to the one below that contains all the symbols in your version
of Excel.
Predeﬁned Process
3-12. Draw a document ﬂowchart to depict each of the following situations.
a. An individual from the marketing department of a wholesale company prepares ﬁve copies
of a sales invoice, and each copy is sent to a different department.
b. The individual invoices from credit sales must temporarily be stored until they can be
matched against customer payments at a later date.
c. A batch control tape is prepared along with a set of transactions to ensure completeness of
the data.
d. The source document data found on employee application forms are used as input to create
new employee records on a computer master ﬁle.
e. Delinquent credit customers are sent as many as four different inquiry letters before their
accounts are turned over to a collection agency.
f. Physical goods are shipped back to the supplier if they are found to be damaged upon
arrival at the receiving warehouse.
g. The data found on employee time cards are keyed onto a hard disk before they are processed
by a computer.
h. The data found on employee time cards are ﬁrst keyed onto a ﬂoppy diskette before they
are entered into a computer job stream for processing.
i. A document ﬂowchart is becoming difﬁcult to understand because too many lines cross
one another. (Describe a solution.)

104
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
j. Three people, all in different departments, look at the same document before it is eventually
ﬁled in a fourth department.
k. Certain data from a source document are copied into a ledger before the document itself is
ﬁled in another department.
3-13. Develop a document ﬂowchart for the following information ﬂow. The individual stores in the
Mark Goodwin convenience chain prepare two copies of a goods requisition form (GRF) when
they need to order merchandise from the central warehouse. After these forms are completed,
one copy is ﬁled in the store’s records and the other copy is sent to the central warehouse.
The warehouse staff gets the order and ﬁles its copy of the GRF form in its records. When the
warehouse needs to restock an item, three copies of a purchase order form (POF) are ﬁlled
out. One copy is stored in the warehouse ﬁles, one copy goes to the vendor, and the third
copy goes to the accounts payable department.
3-14. The Garcia-Lanoue Company produces industrial goods. The company receives purchase
orders from its customers and ships goods accordingly. Assuming that the following conditions
apply, develop a document ﬂowchart for this company:
a. The company receives two copies of every purchase order from its customers.
b. Upon receipt of the purchase orders, the company ships the goods ordered. One copy of
the purchase order is returned to the customer with the order, and the other copy goes
into the company’s purchase order ﬁle.
c. The company prepares three copies of a shipping bill. One copy stays in the company’s
shipping ﬁle, and the other two are sent to the customer.
3-15. The data-entry department of the Ron Mitchell Manufacturing Company is responsible for
converting all of the company’s shipping and receiving information to computer records.
Because accuracy in this conversion is essential, the ﬁrm employs a strict veriﬁcation process.
Prepare a document ﬂowchart for the following information ﬂow:
a. The shipping department sends a copy of all shipping orders to the data-entry department.
b. A data-entry operator keys the information from a shipping order onto a diskette.
c. A supervisor checks every record with the original shipping order. If no errors are detected,
the diskette is sent to the computer operations staff and the original shipping order is ﬁled.
3-16. Amanda M is a regional manufacturer and wholesaler of high-quality chocolate candies. The
company’s sales and collection process is as follows. Amanda M makes use of an enterprise-wide
information system with electronic data interchange (EDI) capability. No paper documents
are exchanged in the sales and collection process. The company receives sales orders from
customers electronically. Upon receipt of a sales order, shipping department personnel prepare
goods for shipment, and input shipping data into the information system. The system sends
an electronic shipping notice and invoice to the customer at the time of shipment. Terms are
net 30. When payment is due, the customer makes an electronic funds transfer for the amount
owed. The customer’s information system sends remittance (payment) data to Amanda M.
Amanda M’s information system updates accounts receivable information at that time.
Draw a context diagram and a level 0 logical data ﬂow diagram for Amanda M’s sales and
collection process.
3-17. The order-writing department at the Winston Beauchamp Company is managed by Alan Most.
The department keeps two types of computer ﬁles: (1) a customer ﬁle of authorized credit
customers and (2) a product ﬁle of items currently sold by the company. Both of these ﬁles are
direct-access ﬁles stored on magnetic disks. Customer orders are handwritten on order forms
with the Winston Beauchamp name at the top of the form, and item lines for quantity, item
number, and total amount desired for each product ordered by the customer.
When customer orders are received, Alan Most directs someone to input the information
at one of the department’s computer terminals. After the information has been input, the
computer program immediately adds the information to a computerized ‘‘order’’ ﬁle and
prepares ﬁve copies of the customer order. The ﬁrst copy is sent back to Alan’s department;

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
105
the others are sent elsewhere. Design a system ﬂowchart that documents the accounting data
processing described here. Also, draw a data ﬂow diagram showing a logical view of the
system.
3-18. The LeVitre and Swezey Credit Union maintains separate bank accounts for each of its 20,000
customers. Three major ﬁles are the customer master ﬁle, the transaction ﬁle of deposits and
withdrawal information, and a monthly statement ﬁle that shows a customer’s transaction
history for the previous month. The following lists the bank’s most important activities during
a representative month:
a. Customers make deposits and withdrawals.
b. Employers make automatic deposits on behalf of selected employees.
c. The bank updates its master ﬁle daily using the transaction ﬁle.
d. The bank creates monthly statements for its customers, using both the customer master ﬁle
and the transactions ﬁle.
e. Bank personnel answer customer questions concerning their deposits, withdrawals, or
account balances.
f. The bank issues checks to pay its rent, utility bills, payroll, and phone bills.
Draw a data ﬂow diagram that graphically describes these activities.
3-19. The Jeffrey Getelman Publishing Company maintains an online database of subscriber records,
which it uses for preparing magazine labels, billing renewals, and so forth. New subscription
orders and subscription renewals are keyed into a computer ﬁle from terminals. The entry
data are checked for accuracy and written on a master ﬁle. A similar process is performed for
change-of-address requests. Processing summaries from both runs provide listings of master
ﬁle changes.
Once a month, just prior to mailing, the company prepares mailing labels for its production
department to afﬁx to magazines. At the same time, notices to new and renewal subscribers are
prepared. These notices acknowledge receipt of payment and are mailed to the subscribers.
The company systems analyst, Bob McQuivey, prepared the system ﬂowchart in Figure 3-19
shortly before he left the company. As you can see, the ﬂowchart is incomplete. Finish the
ﬂowchart by labeling each ﬂowcharting symbol. Don’t forget to label the processing runs
marked computer.
3-20. The Bridget Joyce Company is an ofﬁce products distributor that must decide what to do with
delinquent credit-sales accounts. Mr. Bob Smith, the credit manager, divides accounts into the
following categories: (1) accounts not past due, (2) accounts 30 days or less past due, (3)
accounts 31 to 60 days past due, (4) accounts 61 to 90 days past due, and (5) accounts more
than 90 days past due. For simplicity, assume that all transactions for each account fall neatly
into the same category.
Mr. Smith decides what to do about these customer accounts based on the history of the
account in general and also the activity during the account’s delinquency period. Sometimes,
for example, the customer will not communicate at all. At other times, however, the customer
will either write to state that a check is forthcoming or make a partial payment. Mr. Smith
tends to be most understanding of customers who make partial payments because he considers
such payments acts of good faith. Mr. Smith is less understanding of those customers who only
promise to pay or who simply ignore follow-up bills from the company.
Mr. Smith has four potential actions to take in cases of credit delinquency. First, he can
simply wait (i.e., do nothing). Second, he can send an initial letter to the customer, inquiring
about the problem in bill payment and requesting written notiﬁcation of a payment schedule
if payment has not already been made. Third, he can send a follow-up letter indicating that a
collection agency will be given the account if immediate payment is not forthcoming. Fourth,
he can turn the account over to a collection agency. Of course, Mr. Smith prefers to use one
of the ﬁrst three actions rather than turn the account over to a collection agency, because
his company only receives half of any future payments when the collection agency becomes
involved.

106
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Computer
Change of
address
forms
Computer
Computer
(monthly
processing)
Mailing labels
To new subscribers and
renewal subscribers
?
MF
New subscription
orders, renewals,
and checks
FIGURE 3-19
System ﬂowchart for processing the subscription orders and changes for the
Jeffrey Getelman Company.
a. Create a decision table for the Bridget Joyce Company and provide a set of reasonable
decision rules for Mr. Smith to follow. For now, ignore the inﬂuence of a customer’s credit
history.
b. Expand the decision table analysis you have prepared in question ‘‘a’’ to include the credit
history of the customer accounts. You are free to make any assumptions you wish about
how this history might be evaluated by Mr. Smith.
3-21. Follow the directions in Exercise 3-11 to access Excel’s drawing tools and then recreate the
two program ﬂowcharts shown in Figure 3-20. Draw each ﬂowchart on a separate work sheet.
Rename the ﬁrst sheet ‘‘Main’’ and the second sheet ‘‘Sub.’’ To embed text inside a symbol,
right-click on that symbol with your mouse and then choose ‘‘Add Text’’ from the dropdown
menu that appears. To center text inside a symbol, highlight the text and then click on the
centering icon in the main toolbar.
Create the words ‘‘Yes’’ and ‘‘No’’ that appear in this ﬂowchart using Text Box symbols from
the drawing toolbar. To eliminate the black (default) borders around these words, right-click
on a Text Box border (not the text inside the symbol). When the context menu appears,
select the ‘‘Colors and Lines’’ tab, and then ‘‘No Line’’ from the ‘‘Line\Color’’ section of that
tab. Finally, you can ﬁne-tune the position of any object by clicking on its border and then
using the Ctrl key plus an arrow key to reposition it as desired.

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
107
Process
record
Read a
record
Print out-
put line
EOF?
No
Yes
Stop
Start
Compute
gross wages
Compute
withholding at
20%
Compute net
= gross –
withholding
Stop
Start
FIGURE 3-20
Draw the ﬂowchart on the left on one Excel sheet and the ﬂowchart on the right
on a second sheet.
After drawing these two ﬂowcharts, we want to link them together. In this case, we want
the user to click on the ‘‘Process Record’’ symbol in the main ﬂowchart and then be able to
view the second spreadsheet you’ve created on the alternate sheet. To create this link, click on
the border of the ‘‘Process Record’’ symbol, and then select Insert\Hyperlink from the main
menu. Again, be sure to click on a symbol border—not the text inside the border.
When the Insert Hyperlink dialog box appears, ﬁrst select ‘‘Place in this Document’’ from
the choices on the left side of the box, and then click on the name of the sheet in which
you’ve drawn the second ﬂowchart (‘‘Sub’’) in the lower box on the right. If you wish, you can
also select a particular cell for linking in the top box—a handy feature if you’ve drawn your
ﬂowchart in a lower portion of the Sub sheet. That’s it! Now, when you move your mouse
over the ‘‘Process Record’’ symbol in the ‘‘Main’’ sheet, your mouse icon should turn into a
hand, indicating that clicking on this symbol links you to the supporting document’s sheet.
Using Excel software and the skills described above, recreate the documents from the list
below or the ones required by your instructor:
a. The document ﬂowchart in Figure 3-3.
b. The system ﬂowchart in Figure 3-6.
c. The process map in Figure 3-8.
d. The context diagram in Figure 3-11.
e. The physical DFD in Figure 3-12.
f. The logical data ﬂow diagram shown in Figure 3-13.
g. Link the DFD in part ‘‘e’’ to a new DFD similar to Figure 3-14.
h. The program ﬂowchart shown in Figure 3-15.

108
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
CASE ANALYSES
3-22. The Berridge Company (Drawing Document Flowcharts)
The Berridge Company is a discount tire dealer that operates 25 retail stores in a metropoli-
tan area. The company maintains a centralized purchasing and warehousing facility and
employs a perpetual inventory system. All purchases of tires and related supplies are
placed through the company’s central purchasing department to take advantage of the
quantity discounts offered by its suppliers. The tires and supplies are received at the central
warehouse and distributed to the retail stores as needed. The perpetual inventory system at
the central facility maintains current inventory records, which include designated reorder
points, optimum order quantities, and balance-on-hand information for each type of tire or
related supply.
The participants involved in Berridge’s inventory system include (1) retail stores, (2)
the inventory control department, (3) the warehouse, (4) the purchasing department, (5)
accounts payable, and (6) outside vendors. The inventory control department is responsible
for maintenance of the perpetual inventory records for each item carried in inventory.
The warehouse department maintains the physical inventory of all items carried by the
company’s retail stores.
All deliveries of tires and related supplies from vendors are received by receiving clerks in
the warehouse department, and all distributions to retail stores are ﬁlled by shipping clerks
in this department. The purchasing department places every order for items needed by the
company. The accounts payable department maintains the subsidiary ledger with vendors
and other creditors. All payments are processed by this department. The documents used
by these various departments are as follows:
Retail Store Requisition (Form RSR).
The retail stores submit this document to
the central warehouse whenever tires or supplies are needed at the stores. The shipping
clerks in the warehouse department ﬁll the orders from inventory and have them delivered
to the stores. Three copies of the document are prepared; two of which are sent to the
warehouse, and the third copy is ﬁled for reference.
Purchase Requisition (Form PR).
An inventory control clerk in the inventory
control department prepares this document when the quantity on hand for an item falls
below the designated reorder point. Two copies of the document are prepared. One copy
is forwarded to the purchasing department, and the other is ﬁled.
Purchase Order (Form PO).
The purchasing department prepares this document
based on information found in the purchase requisition. Five copies of the purchase
order are prepared. The disposition of these copies is as follows: copy 1 to vendor, copy
2 to accounts payable department, copy 3 to inventory control department, copy 4 to
warehouse, and copy 5 ﬁled for reference.
Receiving Report (Form RR).
The warehouse department prepares this document
when ordered items are received from vendors. A receiving clerk completes the document
by indicating the vendor’s name, the date the shipment is received, and the quantity of
each item received. Four copies of the report are prepared. Copy 1 is sent to the accounts
payable department, copy 2 to the purchasing department, and copy 3 to the inventory
control department; Copy 4 is retained by the warehouse department, compared with the

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
109
purchase order form in its ﬁles, and ﬁled together with this purchase order form for future
reference.
Invoices.
Invoices received from vendors are bills for payment. The vendor prepares
several copies of each invoice, but only two copies are of concern to the Berridge Company:
the copy that is received by the company’s accounts payable department and the copy
that is retained by the vendor for reference. The accounts payable department compares
the vendor invoice with its ﬁle copy of the original purchase order and its ﬁle copy of the
warehouse receiving report. Based on this information, adjustments to the bill amount on
the invoice are made (e.g., for damaged goods, for trade discounts, or for cash discounts),
a check is prepared, and the payment is mailed to the vendor.
Requirements
1. Draw a document ﬂowchart for the Berridge Company using the symbols in Figure 3-2.
2. Could the company eliminate one or more copies of its RSR form? Use your ﬂowchart
to explain why or why not.
3. Do you think that the company creates too many copies of its purchase orders? Why or
why not?
3-23. FreezeTime, Inc. (Drawing Systems Flowcharts)
Carly Riccardi and her mother Nancy own and operate FreezeTime, Inc., a company
specializing in freeze-drying ﬂowers from clients’ memorable events, such as proms and
weddings. The company not only freezes the ﬂowers, but also presents them in a variety
of display packages. Each of these packages includes materials such as glass and frames
that FreezeTime purchases from local suppliers. In addition to supplies for display, the
company purchases ofﬁce supplies and packaging materials from several vendors.
FreezeTime uses a low-end accounting software package to prepare documents and
reports. As employees note a need for supplies and materials, they inform Carly or Nancy,
who act as ofﬁce manager and company accountant. Either Carly or Nancy enters order
information into the accounting system and creates a purchase order that they fax to the
supplier. Occasionally, Carly or Nancy will also call the supplier if there is something special
about the product ordered. When ordered materials and supplies arrive at FreezeTime’s
small factory, either Carly or Nancy checks the goods received against a copy of the
purchase order and enters the new inventory into the computer system.
Nancy pays bills twice each month, on the ﬁrst and the ﬁfteenth. She checks the
computer system for invoices outstanding, and veriﬁes that the goods have been received.
She then enters any information needed to produce printed checks from the accounting
system. FreezeTime mails checks and printed remittance advices (portions of the vendor
bill to be returned) to suppliers.
Requirements
1. Create a systems ﬂowchart for FreezeTime’s purchase and payment process.
2. Comment on the value, if any, that having a systems ﬂowchart describing this process
would have to Carly or Nancy.

110
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
3-24. The Dinteman Company (Document Analysis)
The Dinteman Company is an industrial machinery and equipment manufacturer with
several production departments. The company employs automated and heavy equipment
in its production departments. Consequently, Dinteman has a large repair and maintenance
department (R&M department) for servicing this equipment.
The operating efﬁciency of the R&M department has deteriorated over the past two
years. For example, repair and maintenance costs seem to be climbing more rapidly than
other department costs. The assistant controller has reviewed the operations of the R&M
department and has concluded that the administrative procedures used since the early
days of the department are outmoded due in part to the growth of the company. In
the opinion of the assistant controller, the two major causes for the deterioration are an
antiquated scheduling system for repair and maintenance work, and the actual cost to
distribute the R&M department’s costs to the production departments. The actual costs of
the R&M department are allocated monthly to the production departments on the basis of
the number of service calls made during each month.
The assistant controller has proposed that a formal work order system be implemented
for the R&M department. With the new system, the production departments will submit
a service request to the R&M department for the repairs and/or maintenance to be
completed, including a suggested time for having the work done. The supervisor of the
R&M department will prepare a cost estimate on the service request for the work required
(labor and materials) and estimate the amount of time for completing the work on the
service request. The R&M supervisor will return the request to the production department
that initiated the request. Once the production department approves the work by returning
a copy of the service request, the R&M supervisor will prepare a repair and maintenance
work order and schedule the job. This work order provides the repair worker with the
details of the work to be done and is used to record the actual repair and maintenance
hours worked and the materials and supplies used.
Production departments will be charged for actual labor hours worked at a predetermined
standard rate for the type of work required. The parts and supplies used will be charged
to the production departments at cost. The assistant controller believes that only two
documents will be required in this new system—a Repair/Maintenance Service Request
initiated by the production departments and a Repair/Maintenance Work Order initiated
by the R&M department.
Requirements
1. For the Repair/Maintenance Work Order document:
a. Identify the data items of importance to the repair and maintenance department and
the production department that should be incorporated into the work order.
b. Indicate how many copies of the work order would be required and explain how
each copy would be distributed.
2. Prepare a document ﬂowchart to show how the Repair/Maintenance Service Request
and the Repair/Maintenance Work Order should be coordinated and used among the
departments of Dinteman Company to request and complete the repair and maintenance
work, to provide the basis for charging the production departments for the cost of
the completed work, and to evaluate the performance of the repair and maintenance
department. Provide explanations in the ﬂowchart as appropriate.
(CMA Adapted)

CHAPTER 3 / Documenting Accounting Information Systems
111
3-25. Lois Hale and Associates (Drawing Data Flow Diagrams)
Lois Hale and Associates is a medium-size manufacturer of musical equipment. The accounts
payable department is located at company headquarters in Asbury Park, New Jersey, and
it consists of two full-time clerks and one supervisor. They are responsible for processing
and paying approximately 800 checks each month. The accounts payable process generally
begins with receipt of a purchase order from the purchasing department. The purchase
order is held until a receiving report and the vendor’s invoice have been forwarded to
accounts payable.
At that time, the purchase order, receiving report, and invoice are matched together
by an accounts payable clerk, and payment and journal entry information are input to
the computer. Payment dates are designated in the input, and these are based on vendor
payment terms. Company policy is to take advantage of any cash discounts offered. If there
are any discrepancies among the purchase order, receiving report, and invoice, they are
given to the supervisor for resolution. After resolving the discrepancies, the supervisor
returns the documents to the appropriate clerk for processing. Once documents are
matched and payment information is input, the documents are stapled together and ﬁled
in a tickler ﬁle by payment date until checks are issued.
When checks are issued, a copy of the check is used as a voucher cover and is afﬁxed to
the supporting documentation from the tickler ﬁle. The entire voucher is then defaced to
avoid duplicate payments. In addition to the check and check copy, other outputs of the
computerized accounts payable system are a check register, vendor master list, accrual of
open invoices, and a weekly cash requirements forecast.
Requirements
Draw a context diagram and data ﬂow diagram similar to those in Figures 3-11 and 3-12 for
the company’s accounts payable process, using the symbols in Figure 3-10.
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Baraban, Regina. ‘‘Look Out for SOX’’ Meetingsnet.com Vol. 24, No. 2 (February 2005), pp. 23–24.
Bradford, Marianne, Sandra B. Richtermeyer, & Douglas F. Roberts. ‘‘System Diagramming Techniques:
An Analysis of Methods Used in Accounting Education and Practice,’’ Journal of Information
Systems Vol. 21, Iss.1 (Spring 2007), pp. 173–213.
Cozad, Matthew A., ‘‘Top 5 SOX Best Practices for Small Companies’’ Strategic Finance Vol. 87, No.
4 (October 2005), pp. 1–7.
Campbell, Gillian. ‘‘Flowing Through a Process’’ Quality Vol. 43, No. 6 (June 2004), pp. 50–52.
Hoffman, Thomas. ‘‘Calibrating Toward Compliance’’ Computerworld Vol. 40, No. 6 (February 6,
2006), pp. 21–24.
Hubbard, Larry. ‘‘Limits to Process Documentation’’ Internal Auditor Vol. 62, No. 3 (June 2005),
pp. 26–27.
Jones, Roberta Ann, Jeffrey J. Tsay, & Kenneth Griggs. ‘‘An Empirical Investigation of the Task Speciﬁc
Relative Strengths of Selected Accounting and Information Systems Diagramming Techniques’’
Journal of Computer Information Systems Vol. 46, No. 2 (Winter 2005–2006), pp. 99–114.
Klamm, Bonnie K., & Marcia L. Weidenmier, ‘‘Linking Business Processes and Transaction Cycles’’
Journal of Information Systems Vol. 18, No. 2 (Fall 2004), pp. 113–125.

112
PART ONE / An Introduction to Accounting Information Systems
Koutoupis, Andreas G., ‘‘Documenting Internal Controls,’’ The Internal Auditor Vol. 64, Iss.5,
pp. 23–25.
Lehman, Mark W. ‘‘Flowcharting Made Simple’’ Journal of Accountancy, Vol. 190, No. 4 (October
2000), pp. 77–88.
Matsumoto, Isao T., John Stapleton, Jacqueline Glass, & Tony Thorpe, ‘‘Use of Process Maps to
Develop a Management Brieﬁng Sheet for a Design Consultancy’’ Engineering Construction &
Architectural Management Vol. 12, No. 5 (2005), pp. 458–469.
Murphy, Michael. ‘‘Demystifying Flowcharts’’ Materials Management in Health Care Vol. 14, No. 8
(August, 2005), p. 52.
Panell, Chris. ‘‘Teaching Computer Programming as a Language’’ Tech Directions Vol. 62, No. 8
(March, 2003), pp. 26–27.
Paradiso, J., ‘‘The Essential Process: The Quick and Painless Path to Successful Process Mapping,’’
Industrial Engineer, Vol. 35, (April 2003), pp. 46–49.
Pojasek, Robert B., ‘‘Putting Hierarchical Process Maps to Work’’ Environmental Quality Manage-
ment Vol. 15, No. 3 (Spring, 2006), pp. 73–80.
Shanker, Sheila. ‘‘Write On’’ Journal of Accountancy Vol. 201, No. 5 (May, 2006), p. 28.
Tuggle, Francis D., & Wendy E. Goldﬁnger ‘‘A Methodology for Mining Embedded Knowledge from
Process Maps’’ Human Systems Management Vol. 23, No. 1 (2004), pp. 1–13.
Vogt, Nancy. ‘‘Simplifying HIPAA for Staff is One Way to Ensure Good Decisions are Made about
Patient Privacy’’ Journal of Health Care Compliance Vol. 7, No. 5 (September/October, 2005),
pp. 75–76.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. a
2. c
3. c
4. d
5. c
6. b
7. c
8. d
9. d
10. a

PART TWO
DATABASES
CHAPTER 4
Data Modeling
CHAPTER 5
Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
CHAPTER 6
Database Forms and Reports
A major task for an accounting information system is to collect, record, store, and manipulate
ﬁnancial data, and to covert these data into meaningful information for management
decision making. The chapters in Part Two discuss various techniques for accomplishing
these tasks using relational databases.
Chapter 4 discusses database concepts in general, and explains the importance of databases
to AISs. The chapter also explains data hierarchy concepts, record structures, and record
keys. The chapter then outlines in detail the steps needed to design the database ﬁles and
relationships needed to support important business functions using the REA framework.
The ﬁnal section of the chapter explains how to use these theoretical tools to create
database records and tables in Microsoft Access 2007.
Chapter 5 explains how to organize, validate, and manipulate the data in databases. The
ﬁrst section describes normalization of data in databases—a classical design approach com-
patible with the REA model. The second section discusses methods for validating the data
entered into databases—important controls that safeguard the accuracy, completeness, and
integrity of the data stored in them. The third section describes procedures for extracting
data from existing database tables. This section also explains how to create ‘‘select’’ queries
in Access 2007 as well as such other extraction techniques as online analytical processing
and data mining. The chapter concludes with a discussion of object-oriented databases,
multimedia databases, and data warehouses.
Chapter 6 focuses on the development of database forms and reports. The ﬁrst section of
the chapter explains why database forms are important, describes how to create simple
forms as well as forms with subforms, and provides guidelines for creating such database
objects. The second section of the chapter explains why database reports are important,
describes how to create simple reports as well as complex reports based on multi-table
queries using Access 2007, and provides guidelines for creating professional outputs.
113


Chapter 4
Data Modeling
INTRODUCTION
AN OVERVIEW OF DATABASES
What is a Database?
The Importance of Databases to AISs
Storing Data in Databases
Additional Database Concerns
STEPS IN CREATING A DATABASE USING REA
Identify Business and Economic Events
Identify Entities
Identify Relationships Among Entities
Create Entity-Relationship Diagrams
Identify Attributes of Entities
Organizing Database Records
CREATING DATABASE TABLES AND RECORDS
An Introduction to Microsoft Access
Creating Database Tables
Creating Records
Creating Database Relationships
Guidelines for Creating Database Tables and Records
AIS AT WORK—RETAILERS NOW SAVE
QUESTIONS AS WELL AS ANSWERS TO
IMPROVE CUSTOMER SERVICE
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Furry Friends Foundation I
Carl Beers Enterprises
Martin Shoes, Inc.
Souder, Oles, and Franek LLP
BSN Bicycles
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Appreciate the importance of databases to AISs.
2. Be able to describe the concepts of the data
hierarchy, record structures, and record keys.
3. Understand the uses of data dictionaries.
4. Be able to explain why such design concerns as
processing accuracy, concurrency, and security
are important to multiuser databases.
5. Know how to model a database with REA.
6. Be able to name three database structures com-
monly used to create databases.
7. Know how to create tables, records, and rela-
tionships using Microsoft Access.
115

116
PART TWO / Databases
No one likes data integration. It’s painstaking to automate and hard to measure in
terms of ROI. Yet it’s required for making systems work together.. . .
Galen Gruman, ‘‘Whipping Data Into Shape’’ Infoworld Vol. 28, No. 6
(February 6, 2006), p. 27.
INTRODUCTION
Civilizations have stored accounting data in systematic fashion for at least 6,000 years. The
ancient Babylonians, for example, stored clay tablets in their temples that recorded such
information as inventory receipts and disbursements, payroll information, and real estate
transactions. Modern AISs use computers rather than clay tablets, but much of the same
organizing requirements remain—the systematic recording of data, convenient and useful
formats, and easy access to required information. This chapter examines how to design
a database, while the next two chapters look at how to use a database effectively. We
begin by examining some database concepts and then describe database design and data
modeling techniques in depth.
AN OVERVIEW OF DATABASES
In some ways, not much has changed since ancient Babylonian days. For example, even
the most basic AIS needs to record accounting data in systematic fashion and to organize
accounting records in logical ways. Usually, this is done in a database.
What is a Database?
A database is a large collection of related data that are typically stored in computerized,
linked ﬁles and manipulated by specialized software packages called database manage-
ment systems (DBMSs). Examples of databases include the repositories of information
and related ﬁles for inventory systems, general ledger systems, and production scheduling
systems. In most applications, these systems are complex combinations of data, processing
software, and perhaps separate hardware that interact with one another to support the
speciﬁc storage and retrieval tasks required of them.
Technically, not every collection of data is a database. For example, the time-card data
from a weekly payroll system might be stored in a computer, but a single ﬁle containing
such data alone is generally too simplistic to be called a ‘‘database.’’ Similarly, the budget or
other ﬁnancial information typically created in spreadsheet programs such as Excel is not
a database. Most commercial databases are very large, invaluable collections of proprietary
data that developers carefully design and protect, and that often form the core of efﬁcient
accounting information systems.
The Importance of Databases to AISs
It is difﬁcult to overstate the importance of computerized databases to AISs. For example,
accounts receivable applications must store information about customers, accounts payable

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
117
applications must store information about suppliers, and payroll applications must store
information about employees. Here are several other reasons why databases are important.
• Valuable information. The information stored in an organization’s databases is some-
times its most important asset. Equifax, for example, is one of the nation’s largest credit
bureaus, maintaining credit information about millions of Americans. Its credit ﬁles are
its business.
• Volume. Some of the nation’s largest databases are truly spectacular. For example, the
U.S. Internal Revenue Service maintains records on over 75 million taxpayers. Ford
Motor Company maintains a customer database of 50 million records. Citicorp uses a
database of 30 million records. For General Foods, the number is 25 million. Organizing
and managing databases of such great size are enormous and often daunting tasks.
• Complexity. The databases of some organizations are centralized (i.e., stored in a single
location at corporate headquarters or maintained on a single ﬁle server in a local area
network). Many other databases, however, are distributed (i.e., duplicated in local or
regional computers as processing needs dictate). But distributing information makes it
harder to (1) ensure data accuracy, consistency, and completeness, (2) secure information
from unauthorized access, and (3) recreate ﬁles with backups in the event of system
failures.
• Privacy. Databases often contain sensitive information—for example, employee pay
rates or customer credit card numbers. This information must be protected from those
unauthorized to have it. Some of the most important control procedures for an AIS are
those that protect databases from unwarranted access.
Case-in-Point 4.1
According to a recent GAO report, over 200 agencies of the federal
government now have data mining initiatives designed to collect and analyze personal
information about U.S. citizens. Many of these projects use data purchased from commercial
database sources. Agencies such as the Department of Homeland Security defend such
actions as part of the war against terrorism, but civil rights organizations challenge such
activities, partly because the accuracy of the information is not known.1
• Irreplaceable data. The information of most AISs is necessarily unique to the organiza-
tion that created it and, therefore, often priceless. This is why a special dimension of
database management is again ﬁle security.
• Need for accuracy. The data stored in commercial databases must be complete, com-
prehensive, and numbingly accurate. This is especially true for government databases. It
is also vital that such systems are easy to use and serve their strategic missions.
Case-in-Point 4.2
The U.S. Army maintains separate payroll, medical, and personnel
databases which investigators say are antiquated, complex, and overtaxed. A recent GAO
internal audit of the system estimated that as many as 4,000 U.S. soldiers who were
seriously wounded in Iraq were either overpaid or underpaid, and found that even trained
ﬁnance ofﬁcers often couldn’t unravel the mess.2
• Internet uses. As you might imagine, databases are critical components for both internal
and external corporate web systems. These databases store such things as product infor-
mation for online catalog sales, emails, product registration data, and current corporate
1Caron Carlson, ‘‘GAO Reports Rampant Federal Data Mining’’ eWeek Vol. 21, No. 23 (June 7, 2004), p. 31.
2Alex Kingsbury, ‘‘Of Insult and Injury’’ U.S. News and World Report, Vol. 140, No. 16 (May 1, 2006), p. 31.

118
PART TWO / Databases
data about employment opportunities, stock prices, and executive ofﬁcers. Internet
applications often also store customer-entered data such as online product orders, credit
card numbers, subscription information, airline reservations, and university-student
registration data.
Storing Data in Databases
To be useful, the data in an organization’s databases must be stored efﬁciently and organized
systematically. Three important ideas along these lines are the concepts of (1) the data
hierarchy, (2) record structures, and (3) record keys.
The Data Hierarchy.
Storing accounting data in computer ﬁles means organizing the
data into a logical structure. In ascending order, this data hierarchy is:
bit →character →data ﬁeld →record →ﬁle →database
To illustrate, imagine a payroll ﬁle. The lowest level of information in this ﬁle is a
binary digit or bit. At the second level, a computer combines eight bits to create a byte
of data that can represent a single character—for example, a letter of the alphabet or a
special symbol such as a plus sign. The third level combines several characters to form a
data ﬁeld—for example, an account balance. Other names for a data ﬁeld are ‘‘attribute,’’
‘‘column,’’ or simply ‘‘ﬁeld.’’
At the fourth level, data ﬁelds combine to form a complete record. A database record
stores all the information about one ﬁle entity—for example, one inventory part in an
inventory ﬁle, one employee in a payroll ﬁle, or one customer in a customer ﬁle. At this
level, it may be helpful to liken the structure of a database to the data in a spreadsheet.
Each column deﬁnes an individual data ﬁeld, and each row deﬁnes a separate record or
tuple.
At the ﬁfth level of the data hierarchy, a set of common records forms a ﬁle, or
in Access parlance, a table. Thus, a ﬁle or table contains a set of related records—for
example, a set of inventory records or customer records. Master ﬁles typically store
permanent information—for example, part number, part description, and location code
for the individual records in an inventory parts master ﬁle. Transaction ﬁles typically
store transient information—for example, inventory disbursements and replenishments for
a speciﬁc time period.
Finally, at the highest level, several tables and related ﬁles create a complete database
(i.e., a collection of ﬁles that contain all the information for an accounting application). In
an inventory application, for example, this database might contain a part-number master
table, a supplier table, a price table, an order transaction table, and so forth, as well as
several other ﬁles (that we shall identify shortly) that might help end users organize, access,
or output inventory information efﬁciently.
Record Structures.
The speciﬁc data ﬁelds in each record of a database table are part
of what is called the record structure. In many accounting applications, this structure is
ﬁxed, meaning that each record contains the same number, same type, and same-sized data
ﬁelds as every other record on the ﬁle. This would probably be the case for the payroll
record illustrated in Figure 4-1. In other applications, either the number of data ﬁelds in
each record might vary, or the size of a given data ﬁeld in each record might vary. For
example, in a ﬁle of customer complaints, the memo ﬁeld in each record might vary in
length to accommodate different-sized descriptions of customer problems.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
119
Social Security number 
575-64-5589 
Last 
name 
Smythe 
First 
name 
Teri 
Dept. 
code 
A 
Pay 
rate 
12.85 
Date of 
hire 
10-15-2001 
Over- 
time OK? 
yes 
Other 
info. 
.... 
FIGURE 4-1
Some of the data ﬁelds in a computerized payroll record.
Record Keys.
The primary record key, or just ‘‘primary key’’ for short, is the data
ﬁeld in each record that uniquely distinguishes one record from another in a database
table. For the payroll record in Figure 4-1, for example, the primary record key might be
the employee’s Social Security number. End users and computer programs use primary
record keys to ﬁnd a speciﬁc record—for example, the record for a particular employee,
inventory item, or customer account. Businesses sometimes combine two or more data
ﬁelds to serve as the record key for a computer record. For example, a bank might combine
its branch code with a customer’s account number to serve as the record key. Another
example would be a ten-digit phone number for a customer, separated into an area code
and a local phone number. End users often create a primary key ﬁeld as the ﬁrst ﬁeld in a
record, but this is not a requirement.
It is also possible for a computer record to have more than one record key. For
the payroll ﬁle of Figure 4-1, some examples are the employee’s last-name ﬁeld or the
department-code ﬁeld. These data ﬁelds, which are typically not unique across records but
can also be used to search records for speciﬁc information, are examples of secondary
record keys.
Finally, some accounting records contain data ﬁelds called foreign keys that enable
them to reference one or more records in other tables. For example, in addition to the
payroll table in Figure 4-1, a ﬁrm might have a department table with the data ﬁelds shown
in Figure 4-2. The primary key for the department table is the department code (e.g., ‘‘A,’’
‘‘B,’’ and so forth). With this arrangement, the department code ﬁeld in the payroll record
of Figure 4-1 would be a foreign key that the database system could use to reference the
appropriate department record from the department table. These foreign keys enable a
database system to combine the information from both tables to produce a report such as
the one in Figure 4-3.
Note that each line of this report contains information from the records in two tables:
the employee records in Figure 4-1 and the department records in Figure 4-2. To create this
report, the designers for the entire application must examine the data carefully and organize
them efﬁciently. The following sections of the chapter explain this analysis in detail.
Additional Database Concerns
Small database systems such as the kind used by very small businesses or sole proprietorships
tend to be fairly straightforward and manageable. However, large, multiuser databases pose
Manager
B. Wright
Location
Bldg. 23
Number
of
employees
45
Department
code
(primary key)
A
Secretary
phone
x8734
Other
info.
...
FIGURE 4-2
A sample record from a department ﬁle.

120
PART TWO / Databases
Employee Roster
Friday, July 28, 20XX
Last
First
Secretary
Name
Name
Dept.
Manager
Location
Phone
Garadis
Sue
B
Garadis
Bldg. 23
ext. 9330
Gold
Karen
A
Wright
Bldg. 23
ext. 8734
Hale
Lois
C
Hale
Bldg. 24
ext. 8655
Smythe
Teri
A
Wright
Bldg. 23
ext. 8734
Wright
Barbara
A
Wright
Bldg. 23
ext. 8734
FIGURE 4-3
A formatted report that uses data from two tables.
special challenges for their designers because of their size and complexity. Here, we
describe some database design concerns that are of special importance to accounting
applications.
Administration.
Without an overall supervisor, a large commercial database is some-
what akin to a rudderless ship—i.e., an entity without cohesion or direction. Similarly, it
does not make sense to permit database designers to work unsupervised, or to develop
large databases of critically important information without also creating accountability for
subsequent changes. A database administrator supervises the design, development, and
installation of a large database system, and is also the person responsible for maintaining,
securing, and revising the system’s data.
Case-in-Point 4.3
‘‘A qualiﬁed database administrator must be a jack of all trades,’’
says Ed Tittel of iLearning.com, a training institute. Skill requirements include designing
database systems from scratch, maintaining and updating database information, backing up
and restoring database systems, creating user reports, and assisting users with data mining
tasks. And as valuable as training is for such jobs, ‘‘experience beats certiﬁcation hands down’’
he says.3
Documentation.
Database developers often change database elements during the
design phase, as well as later to an operating database system. This makes documentation
critical. Descriptions of database structures, contents, security features, E-R diagrams
(discussed later in this chapter), and password policies are other examples of important
documentation materials. In addition to all these items, it is usually vital to document ‘‘what
stores what.’’ The data dictionary of a database describes the data ﬁelds in each database
record. In other words, a data dictionary is a data ﬁle about data. Although a data dictionary
can be manual, it is usually a separate computer ﬁle that database administrators create and
maintain.
Figure 4-4 identiﬁes some generic information that a data dictionary might contain
(listed under the ‘‘Entry’’ column) and an example of such information for a Social Security
number (listed under the ‘‘Example’’ column). In this ﬁgure, the data dictionary indicates
that the Social Security number data ﬁeld must be nine characters, is a ‘‘text’’ data ﬁeld
(rather than a ‘‘number’’ data ﬁeld because it is not manipulated mathematically), has no
3Source: Ed Tittel, ‘‘Certiﬁed Expert: Working as a Database Administrator’’ Vol. 5, No. 1 (January 2003), p. 44

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
121
Item
Entry
Example
1
Field name
Social Security number
2
Field size
9 characters
3
Type of data ﬁeld
text
4
Default value
none
5
Required?
yes
6
Validation rule(s)
all digits must be numeric characters
7
Range
none
8
Source document
employee application form
9
Programs used to modify it
payroll X2.1
10
Individuals allowed access
payroll personnel
11
Individuals not allowed access
non-payroll personnel
FIGURE 4-4
Examples of information that might be stored in a data dictionary for the Social
Security number data ﬁeld of a payroll database.
default value, and so forth. From this illustration, it should be clear that the entries in the
data dictionary describe each data ﬁeld in each record of each table (ﬁle) of an AIS database.
When developers add a new data ﬁeld to the record structure of an existing table, they also
add the appropriate information about the new ﬁeld to the data dictionary.
Data dictionaries contain metadata or data about data, and have a variety of uses. One
is as a documentation aid for those who develop, correct, or enhance either the database
or the computer programs that access it. As suggested in items 10 and 11 of Figure 4-4, an
organization can also use a data dictionary for security purposes—for example, to indicate
which users can or cannot access sensitive data ﬁelds in a database.
Case-in-Point 4.4
How can you store a database on a mobile device like a cell phone?
One way is to compress the data. An alternate approach by the WindSprings corporation is
to use a data dictionary with index pointers. Using this technology, the company was able to
shrink a 125k byte map of San Diego to 24k—small enough to ﬁt most mobile devices—while
still enabling the user to pan and zoom without further calls to an Internet server.4
Accountants can also make good use of a data dictionary. For example, a data dictionary
can help establish an audit trail because it identiﬁes the input sources of data items, the
potential computer programs that use or modify particular data items, and the managerial
reports on which the data items are output. When accountants help design a new computer
system, a data dictionary can help them trace data paths in the new system. Finally, a data
dictionary can serve as a useful aid when investigating or documenting internal control
procedures because the basis for data-entry tests, methods of data security, and so forth,
can be stored in the data dictionary.
Data Integrity.
IT professionals estimate that it costs about ten times as much to
correct information that is already in a database as it does to enter it correctly initially.
Then, too, even simple errors in databases can lead to costly mistakes, bad decisions, or
disasters. (Think about air trafﬁc controllers as an example!) For these reasons, the software
used to create databases should also include edit tests that guard databases from erroneous
4Source: John R. Quain, ‘‘Sizing Down and Speeding Up’’ PC Magazine Vol. 24, No. 12 (July 1, 2005), p. 22.

122
PART TWO / Databases
data entries. These data integrity controls are designed by the database developers and
are customized for the application at hand. Examples include tests for data completeness,
conformance to the data type speciﬁed for the data ﬁeld, valid code tests (e.g., a state
code such as ‘‘CA’’), and reasonableness tests (e.g., regular payroll hours worked must be
between ‘‘0’’ and ‘‘40’’). We shall return to this point in Chapter 5.
Processing Accuracy and Completeness.
Within the context of database systems,
transaction processing refers to the sequence of steps that a database system uses to
accomplish a speciﬁc processing task. AISs need transaction controls to ensure that
the database system performs each transaction accurately and completely. To illustrate,
imagine an inventory application with two types of inventory records: raw materials records
and work-in-process records. An inventory manager wishes to subtract 200 units from a
particular raw materials record and add the same number of units to a corresponding
work-in-process record.
Now suppose that the database system executes the ﬁrst part of this transaction (i.e.,
subtracts 200 units from the raw materials record) and then stops operating for some
reason. This is a problem because the transaction has not been executed completely and
the balance-on-hand ﬁeld in the current work-in-process record is wrong. To overcome this
problem, databases should either process a transaction entirely or not at all. To achieve
this goal, database systems maintain an auditable log of transactions. When a speciﬁc
transaction only partially executes, the system is now able to recover by verifying that
a problem has happened, reversing whatever entries were made, and starting anew. In
accounting applications, therefore, the ability to audit any particular transaction to ensure
processing accuracy and completeness is critical.
Concurrency.
In multiuser systems, it is possible for more than one user to access
the same database at the same time. Without concurrency controls, it is also possible
for two or more users to access the same record from the same table at the same time.
This creates problems. To illustrate, imagine the same inventory ﬁle as the one discussed
previously and suppose that ‘‘user A’’ and ‘‘user B’’ access the same inventory record at
the same time. The initial balance-on-hand ﬁeld for this record is 500 units. When User A
accesses this record, the system transfers the entire record to A’s work area. User A wants
to add 100 units to the balance-on-hand ﬁeld. The result is a new balance of 600 units. User
A completes this transaction, the system writes the new record back on disk, and the new
balance on hand in this record is now ‘‘600 units.’’
When User B accesses this same record, the system also transfers the same initial record
to B’s work area. User B wants to decrease the balance on hand by 200 units. This results
in a balance of 300 units because this user also starts with an initial balance on hand of
500 units. Because B completes this transaction after A is done, the system replaces the
current record in the database with the new one. The end result is an inventory record
with a balance on hand of 300 units, not the correct value of 400 ( = 500 + 100 −200). To
guard against this problem, database systems must prevent multiple-user access to the same
ﬁle record. Rather, these systems must execute transactions serially (i.e., sequentially).
Backup and Security.
As noted earlier, the information in many accounting databases
is both invaluable to the day-to-day operations of a company and, because it is unique,
irreplaceable. It must be protected. A key security feature of any database, therefore, is
backup procedures that enable an organization to recreate its data if the original copies are
lost or damaged.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
123
Case-in-Point 4.5
Several companies found out just how complete their disaster recovery
and backup procedures were when terrorists attacked the World Trade Center on September
11, 2001. For many, the damage included the loss of (1) data, (2) personnel most knowl-
edgeable about that data, and (3) the building in which the data were stored. Dean Witter
and Company, a large brokerage house, had prepared for such a contingency and resumed
business within two days in makeshift quarters across the Hudson River from the WTC towers
in New Jersey. In contrast, Visa was among the 25 companies in the WTC that had subscribed
to an elite, EDS ‘‘hot-site service.’’ For these companies the delay was much shorter—in the
case of Visa, three minutes!5
In addition to backup security, an organization must also protect databases from unau-
thorized access. Another security feature, therefore, is a system’s ability to assign, maintain,
and require employees to use passwords and guard against unwarranted intrusions. Simi-
larly, database systems can use encryption techniques to scramble data into unintelligible
formats, thereby protecting ﬁle data even if an unauthorized user obtains access to the
company’s database.
Case-in-Point 4.6
A recent survey by Cisco Systems, Inc., found that, over 67% of the
(more than 2,000) respondents had performed at least one act that threatened their company’s
database security. The most common breach, at 37%, was failing to log off before stepping
away from a personal computer with access to corporate data.6
A ﬁnal database security feature is to use view controls that limit each user’s access
to information on a need-to-know basis. In an inventory application, for example, a defense
contractor might limit employee access to its supplier ﬁles, inasmuch as information
about supplier identities and perhaps part prices might be sensitive information. We cover
intrusion detection systems and controls in Chapter 12.
STEPS IN CREATING A DATABASE USING REA
At a state department of social services, the director wants to know how many inquiries
were made for a certain type of medical assistance last month. At the headquarters of a
department store chain, a vice president wants to know how many credit customers made
partial payments to their accounts last month. At a local university bookstore, a manager
wants to know how many book orders went unﬁlled last month.
In each case above, the decision-maker needs information. AISs must gather pertinent
data and store the information in formats that enable managers to obtain timely answers
to important organizational questions. The challenge of creating large, useful databases
is to determine what data to collect, and how to gather, record, organize, and store
the data in ways that satisfy a number of objectives. One obvious goal is to satisfy the
informational output requirements of the system. A second task is to ﬁnd hardware and
software solutions that can adequately perform the data-gathering, storage, and reporting
tasks involved. Another goal is to keep the databases manageable—for example, keep them
from becoming too large, complex, and unwieldy. A fourth goal is to protect the privacy of
5Source: David O. Stephens, ‘‘Protecting Records in the Face of Chaos, Calamity, and Cataclysm’’ Information
Management Journal Vol. 37, No. 1 (2003), pp. 33–40.
6Source: No author, ‘‘Worker’s Circumventing IT Security, Putting Company Data at Risk’’ Security Director’s
Report Vol. 8, No. 12 (December 2008), p. 8.

124
PART TWO / Databases
sensitive information. A ﬁfth goal is to reduce data redundancy, which means storing the
same data repeatedly in different tables. These goals make it obvious that databases must
be carefully designed to serve their intended uses. The question is, ‘‘How do we do this?’’
When a company wants to create a database, it normally hires a database consultant
to help it design a new database that meets the organization’s needs. Based on the
information obtained from managers and end users, the expert then uses a process called
data modeling to design the database. This is usually the most challenging step in the
process of creating a database because the designer must collect a considerable amount of
information by investigation and interviews, and then integrate the needs of all stakeholders
as accurately and completely as possible.
Although there are a number of different models that may be used to design a database,
the one we will describe and use here is the REA Model. This model is an acronym for
resources (R), events (E), and agents (A). The REA model requires the following steps:
(1) identify business and economic events, (2) identify entities, (3) identify relationships
among entities, (4) create entity-relationship diagrams, (5) identify the attributes of data
entities, and (6) create database tables and records to populate the database. The following
discussions describe each of these steps in detail, using the sales process as an example.
Identify Business and Economic Events
Chapters 7 and 8 will discuss business processes and explain that these processes involve
a series of events or identiﬁable activities. There are primarily two types of events:
economic events and business events. Economic events impact an organization’s ﬁnancial
statements, and AISs therefore record data about them in accounting transactions. An
example would be a sale on account. This economic event increases an entity’s accounts
receivable and revenue accounts on its ﬁnancial statements.
As noted previously, critics sometimes claim that ﬁnancial accounting systems often
ignore organizational activities and events that are important to managers, investors, and
creditors. Such business events do not affect ﬁnancial statements but can impact an
organization in a value-added way. One example of such an event is a sales order from a
customer. Because sales orders do not require journal entries, they do not appear anywhere
in a company’s ﬁnancial statements. However, suppose that a company received a sales
order from a customer that was equal to all its revenues for the previous quarter. This
would certainly be important information that many individuals, both inside and outside
the ﬁrm, would want to know. Another example is when a ﬁrm hires a new CEO. Again,
this event does not require a journal entry, but is important information for stakeholders.
When creating a database using an REA approach, a systems designer will try to record
all events in the database, whether they are business or economic ones. By including both
types of events in the database, users can access important information about both business
and economic activities.
Identify Entities
Databases contain data about objects of interest called entities. Database entities include
business and economic events, plus information about ‘‘who’’ and ‘‘what’’ were involved in
those activities—i.e., the system’s agents and resources. Agents are the ‘‘who’’ associated
with events. For example, both a salesperson and a customer participate in creating a
merchandise sale. We would classify both of them as ‘‘agents.’’

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
125
Events use or generate resources. For example, a merchandise sale may require an
inventory resource and generate a cash resource. Resources are very similar to accounting
assets, but they are more all-inclusive. For instance, we might classify a contract as a
resource, but it would not appear as an asset on a ﬁnancial statement. To determine whether
or not something constitutes a resource associated with an event, the resource should pass
two tests. First, it should be an object of value associated with an event. Second, it should
be an object of sufﬁcient interest that you would want to collect information about it.
The REA model helps identify database entities because each resource, event, and
agent is an entity in a relational database. Figure 4-5 provides several additional examples
of each type of entity. You may notice that Figure 4-5 does not list accounts receivable as a
resource. This is because the REA model does not recognize ‘‘receivables’’ or ‘‘payables’’
as resources. Rather, receivables and payables are by-products of an information event and
only represent claims on resources rather than resources themselves. Similarly, the REA
model does not treat ‘‘billing’’ as a business or economic event because a bill really just
conveys information about an economic event such as a sale or purchase.
Identify Relationships Among Entities
A database should contain a table for each entity. The table consists of rows of records,
each containing data ﬁelds that describe the entity’s attributes. Figure 4-6 shows four
database tables for our merchandise sale example: (1) an event table (Customer Order),
(2) a resource table (Inventory), (3) an agent table (Customer), and (4) another agent table
(Salesperson).
Entities are usually related to each other. For instance, a sale may be of merchandise
inventory and made to a customer. The relationship between a sale and inventory or
between a sale and a customer is a direct relationship. Inventory and customer also share
a relationship, but it is an indirect relationship. Typically, events have direct relationships
with resources and agents, and also with other events. The links between resources and
agents are through events.
Data modelers need to know about entity relationships so that they can create links
between database tables. Without these links, database users could not access data from
more than one table at a time. Referring again to the tables in Figure 4-6, in the absence of
any database links, users could obtain reports about order data, inventory data, or customer
data. But the database system would not be able to show the customer name on a customer
invoice because it would require information from more than one table for this task.
Before we can decide on the best way to link database tables, we must ﬁrst understand
the nature of the relationships among entities. We describe these relationships in terms
of cardinalities. Cardinalities are a notation showing the nature of relationships among
Resources:
Events:
Agents:
Cash
Sales Order
Employee
Contracts
Sales
Customer
Inventory
Purchase Order
Vendor
Equipment
Purchase
Manager
Plant Facilities
Receive Goods
Stockholder
Hire an Employee
Creditor
FIGURE 4-5
Examples of resource, event, and agent entities.

126
PART TWO / Databases
Customer Order Table (Event)
Order #
Employee #
Customer #
Date
Comments
1003
M24SP
B104
01/03/02
1004
R63SP
P202
01/03/02
Ship ASAP
1005
M24SP
S200
01/03/02
1006
W11SP
C100
01/03/02
Inventory Table (Resource)
Item #
Description
Unit Cost
Sales Price
Beg QOH
1400
Goodie Bar
$0.20
$0.40
13025
1500
Almond Delight
$0.25
$0.45
5010
1600
Gummy Lions
$0.60
$0.95
20109
1700
Pecan Bar
$0.70
$1.09
4508
1800
Milky Bars
$0.18
$0.30
2207
Customer Table (Agent)
Customer #
Name
Address
City
State
Zip Code
Credit Limit
A101
Amanda Wills
22 Yellow Ln.
Charlotte
NC
79803
$20,000.00
B104
Boris Bailey
321 Church St.
Oxford
OH
45056
5,000.00
C100
Carly Riccardi
1899 Green St.
Dayton
OH
43299
10,000.00
P202
Peggy Martin
1260 Main St.
Columbus
OH
43320
10,000.00
S200
Bill Safer
860 Broad St.
Fairfax
VA
22030
5,000.00
Salesperson Table (Agent)
Employee #
Name
Address
City
State
Zip Code
Dept ID
Date Hired
A06SP
Sally Anderson
3026 Skye Ln.
Columbus
OH
43213
247
1/31/1989
M24SP
Randy Merit
262 Main St.
Bexley
OH
43209
182
7/2/1999
R63SP
Barry Rogers
80 N. Long St.
Gahanna
OH
43215
247
1/16/2001
R73SP
Jim Rudolph
64 Lantern Ave.
Columbus
OH
43213
76
8/15/2000
W11SP
John Walker
1028 Fields Ln.
Lancaster
OH
43307
182
9/1/1992
FIGURE 4-6
Four sample tables in a relational database.
entities as one-to-one, one-to-many, none-to-one, none-to-many, or many-to-many. A
one-to-one relationship between two entities, shown as (1,1), means that the entities relate
to each other a minimum of one time and a maximum of one time. An example of a
one-to-one relationship is the relationship between sales and customers. In a particular
organization, the relationship might be that a sale is to a minimum of one customer (a sale
cannot exist without a customer) and a maximum of one customer (an individual sale can
be to only one customer).
Entity relationships are two-way. Not only does a sale relate to a customer, but
customers also have relationships to sales. The relationship between a customer and a sale
may be none-to-many (0,N). This would be the case if a customer could exist without a
sale (for example, you ﬁrst research the credit ratings of potential customers before selling
them goods). There are also many sales to each customer (the usual case). The two-way
relationship between a sale and a customer, then, can be shown as:
(Sale 1,1; Customer 0,N)

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
127
We would read this cardinality as: each sale is to a minimum of one customer and
a maximum of one customer, and each customer has a minimum of zero sales and a
maximum of many sales.
Cardinalities are sometimes difﬁcult to grasp at ﬁrst but they become easier to under-
stand with practice. So let’s try another one. What does the following cardinality tell us?
(Inventory 0,N; Sale 1,N)
Part of the answer is that inventory relates to a sale a minimum of zero times and a
maximum of many times. This makes sense in a business organization that keeps inventory
on hand to meet future sales. It is also likely that in most businesses, each type of inventory
item can be involved in more than one sale. (Think about, for instance, a retail clothing
store that stocks several white shirts in a speciﬁc size and style.) The rest of the answer is
that a sale relates to inventory a minimum of one time and a maximum of many times, or
each sale must be for at least one inventory item and may be for many inventory items. (So
you would have to buy something in order to have a sale and you could be buying a white
shirt plus some jeans and a jacket.)
Cardinal relationships are not ﬁxed across organizations, but vary according to the
rules or controls of the speciﬁc enterprise. To illustrate using our sales example, recall that
a company could have a customer with no sales or a customer with many sales (0, N). This
is probably true for some businesses, but not for others. For example, a video rental store
will usually collect information about customers before renting movies to them. In contrast,
a retail clothing shop may not consider someone a customer until it sells something to this
person. Thus, cardinalities can be helpful in describing an organization’s rules and thus can
also tell us something about the controls for a given business process.
There is just one more point to make about cardinalities. In the case of a sequence of
events, you will nearly always have a situation where subsequent events require a minimum
cardinality of 1, and earlier events have a minimum of 0. This would be the case between
Customer Order (0,N) and Sale (1,N). What these cardinalities mean is that each order
relates to a sale (signiﬁed by a shipment of goods) a minimum of zero times and a maximum
of many times. In plain English, this says that an order may result in no sales or many sales.
This makes sense because a customer may place an order that is never shipped or, perhaps
due to backorders, requires several shipments.
The other side says that each sale relates to an order a minimum of one time and a
maximum of many times. Again, plainly stated, this means that you cannot have a sale
without an order, but you could ship several orders at once. Do you see why you could
have an earlier event that might not result in a later event but, as a rule, would require an
earlier event to take place before a later one was possible? It would be bad business to ship
goods without an order.
Create Entity-Relationship Diagrams
Database
designers use a graphical documentation technique called the entity-
relationship (E-R) diagram to depict the entities and their direct relationships. The
model consists of four symbols: rectangles, diamonds, ovals, and connecting lines.
Rectangles represent entities; diamonds describe the nature of relationships; ovals denote
an entity’s attributes; and connecting lines depict relationships. Figure 4-7 provides
examples of these symbols. For the sake of convenience, we may drop the diamonds and
ovals, thus showing only entities and relationships.
Figure 4-8 is an E-R diagram that includes cardinalities for a sample business enterprise.
Remember that these cardinalities could change, depending on an organization’s rules or

128
PART TWO / Databases
Date of 
Hire 
Ovals denote 
attributes. 
Connecting lines 
show relationships. 
A rectangle depicts 
an entity. 
The diamond 
describes the 
relationship. 
Social Security 
Number 
Salesperson 
Salesperson 
Is made 
by 
Sale 
Hourly Pay 
Rate 
FIGURE 4-7
Examples of entity-relationship (E-R) diagram symbols.
policies. For example, suppose a business starts selling services in addition to products.
The cardinality between sale and inventory could change from (Inventory 0,N; Sale 1,N)
to (Inventory 0,N; Sale 0,N). Do you see the difference? The cardinality now speciﬁes
that each sale can be for no inventory items, in the case of selling a service, or for many
inventory items.
1,1 
1,1 
1,1 
1,1 
1,1 
1,1 
1,1 
0,N 
0,N 
0,N 
0,N 
0,N 
0,N 
0,N 
0,N 
1,N 
0,N 
1,N 
1,N 
1,N 
0,N 
0,N 
Customer 
Order 
Receive 
Payment 
Salesperson 
Shipping 
Clerk 
Cash 
Customer 
A/R Clerk 
Sale 
(Ship Goods) 
Inventory 
FIGURE 4-8
A sample E-R diagram for the sales process, including cardinalities.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
129
Identify Attributes of Entities
Entities have characteristics or attributes that describe them. We know that in a database
model, a database table represents each entity. But what data appears in the table? The
data within a table will be based on the attributes. For example, a salesperson is an agent,
which is an entity. The attributes are the data ﬁelds describing each salesperson. What data
should you collect about a salesperson? Because each salesperson within the Salesperson
database table is a unique record, one attribute should be unique to that record. This is the
database primary key that we discussed earlier. The salesperson’s identiﬁcation number,
which could be the employee’s social security number, would be a likely attribute of a
salesperson entity. Other attributes might be last name, middle name, ﬁrst name, phone,
address, email, date of birth, date hired, department assignment, salary, and so on.
It is not always easy to decide what to include as attributes of an entity. There are,
however, two guidelines you can use. First, the attributes should describe one entity and
that entity only. For example, if you have an inventory table, you would not include
information about the vendor in this table. You can reference the vendor, but the name,
address, and other information about the vendor belongs in a separate Vendor table. A
second guideline for determining entity attributes is to keep in mind that the attributes
included in the tables will determine the outputs of the database system. What you fail
to include as an attribute is data that you will not collect and cannot report. For instance,
have you ever been asked for your Zip code while shopping in a retail store? If so, the store
is collecting an attribute of a sales transaction that can also be of value—for example, data
that can help the store determine where to advertise or perhaps where to build another
store.
Organizing Database Records
There are several ways to organize the individual records in a database. The particular
method used is called the database structure. As with other design elements, the objective
is to develop an efﬁcient structure that enables users to access data quickly and store data
efﬁciently. Three types of database structures are (1) hierarchical, (2) network, and
(3) relational.
Hierarchical Structures.
Accounting data are often organized in a hierarchy. For
example, a sales ofﬁce will have several salespersons, each salesperson will have several
customers, each customer can make several purchases, and each customer invoice can have
several line items. The result is a natural hierarchical structure, with successive levels of
data in an inverted, tree-like pattern. For this reason, hierarchical database structures are
also known as tree structures.
Typically, hierarchical data structures have a genealogy that naturally organizes the
data into a series of one-to-many relationships. For any two adjacent records, the ‘‘elder’’
or higher-level record is called the parent record, while the ‘‘younger’’ or lower-level
record is called the child record. Two records on the same level (e.g., two line items on
the same purchase invoice) are called sibling records.
Network Structures.
Often, the data stored in an AIS are interrelated in several
ways (i.e., in many-to-many relationships), and thus a single hierarchical structure cannot
capture their relationships adequately. At a university, for example, students each take

130
PART TWO / Databases
several classes, and each class has many students. In such instances, AIS databases can
use a network structure to link related records together and capture these relationships.
This linking is usually accomplished with pointer ﬁelds embedded in each record that
contain the disk addresses of related records. For example, the payroll record of Figure 4-1
could contain a pointer ﬁeld for another employee working in Department A. The pointers
maintain the data relationships, thereby enabling an AIS to prepare familiar reports—for
example, a list of all employees working in Department A.
Relational
Structures.
Hierarchical
and
network
database
structures
require
advanced planning. This means that, if accounting data of one type (e.g., employee
information) must be used with accounting data of another type (e.g., payroll information),
the database must be planned to create these linkages. But many relationships can exist
among data items, and it is difﬁcult to anticipate all of them at the time designers ﬁrst
create a database. Thus, hierarchical and network data structures afford little additional
ﬂexibility once further data processing needs are discovered.
This problem is overcome with a relational database structure, which enables
designers to identify relationships at the time the database is ﬁrst created, or later, as users
discover new informational requirements in the future. Each entity in the E-R diagram will
be a table in the database. However, a database is likely to contain more tables than those
representing entities. This is because we must provide links among the database tables to
represent relationships among tables. As noted earlier, without these links a user would be
unable to produce any database outputs that use information contained in more than one
table.
The rows of a database table are individual records for database entities and the
columns are entity attributes. Two important features of records are: (1) within a record,
there should be no attributes that are a result of a mathematical computation, and (2) there
should be no repeating attributes. The reason that attributes should not be mathematical
computations is because the system itself can recalculate them as needed. For example,
in a student-records database, there is no reason to store a student’s grade point average
(GPA)—this can be calculated from other information in the database about that student.
Repeating attributes typically occur when you attempt to store too much data in the
same table, or too much data in the data ﬁeld of the same record of one table. For example,
suppose a charity creates a ‘‘Contributors’’ table in a database and uses a single data ﬁeld in
each record in that table for an individual’s donation. How would you store the information
for a donor who made two donations? Creating duplicate records for the same contributor
table doesn’t make sense (because it duplicates the contributor information), and neither
does storing the two donation values in the single donation ﬁeld of the same record
(because this isn’t possible).
The solution to this problem is to create two tables: one table for contributors and a
separate table for donations. Then, the problem is how to link the two tables together.
There are two ways to do this within a relational database. The ﬁrst uses foreign keys
as described earlier. For example, in Figure 4-6, the Customer Number in the Customer
Order table is a foreign key that references the primary key of a particular customer in the
Customer table. As noted earlier, therefore, this value enables database software to link
the two tables together—for example, to create a customer orders report that shows the
name of the customer associated with each order.
Linking tables with foreign keys is only appropriate when you do not have a
many-to-many relationship between two entities. Looking at the sample E-R diagram
for a sales process in Figure 4-8, for example, we see that the cardinality between Customer
Order and Salesperson is (Customer Order 1,1; Salesperson 0,N). This is not a many-to-many

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
131
relationship, so we can use a foreign key to link the tables to one another. In deciding
which key to use as a foreign key, the general rule is to use the primary key from the table
closest to a relationship (nearest the cardinality in the E-R diagram) containing a ‘‘many’’
or N, as the foreign key in the other table. In our example, this means that we would use
the primary key from the Salesperson table as the foreign key in the customer order table.
Looking at Figure 4-6, this is the case. The primary key for the Salesperson table, Employee
#, appears in the Customer Order table.
A second way to represent relationships between two database tables is by creat-
ing a separate relationship table. Relationship tables are necessary when you have
many-to-many relationships between database entities. The reason for this is that, without
them, you would need to have repeating ﬁelds in a database table. For example, there
is a many-to-many relationship between Sale and Inventory in Figure 4-8: (Inventory 0,N;
Sale 1,N). Because a sale can be for multiple inventory items, if we posted inventory items
in the Sale table, we would have to leave many ﬁelds available for the primary key for
inventory.
Alternatively, because a company can sell each inventory item many times, there would
have to be repeating ﬁelds for the sales number ﬁeld in the Inventory table to allow for this.
To avoid these repeat ﬁelds, data modelers use relationship tables. A simple relationship
table just lists the primary keys of the two tables that it joins. More complex relationship
tables may include other data, such as quantity. Figure 4-9 shows a relationship table joining
the Customer Order and Inventory tables. Notice that some of the orders are for more than
one type of inventory item.
How many tables, including join tables, will we have for a complete database and
the sales process described in Figure 4-8? Looking at the diagram, we see that there are
nine entities. If we have a table for each entity, the database would require nine tables.
There are also three many-to-many relationships: (1) Inventory and Customer Orders,
(2) Inventory and Sales, and (3) Sales and Receive Payment. Therefore, we might have as
many as twelve tables in the ﬁnished database: nine tables for entities and three additional
‘‘joining’’ tables. There is another possibility, though: three of the entities are employees.
It might be possible therefore to use just one database table for employees if we include a
ﬁeld or identiﬁer that speciﬁes the employee type. For instance, we could have a column
or attribute for employee classiﬁcation, and within that you would specify salesperson,
cashier, and so on. This reduces the table count to ten.
Figure 4-10 lists all the database tables and their attributes for our sales-process
example. Because data modeling is a creative effort, there are many other possible sets of
database tables and other attributes that you might include in a database for a sales process.
Figure 4-10 is only an example.
Sale #
Item #
Quantity
1003
1400
230
1004
1400
430
1005
1600
180
1005
1800
200
1005
1900
360
1006
1400
80
1006
1800
100
FIGURE 4-9
A relationship table joining the Customer Order and Inventory tables.

132
PART TWO / Databases
Inventory Table
Item#, Description, Unit Cost, Sales Price, Beginning Quantity on Hand, Beginning Quantity on Hand
Date
Cash Table
Account#, Account Type, Bank, Beginning Balance, Beginning Balance Date
Customer Order Table
Order#, [Employee#], [Customer#], Date, Comments
Sales Table
Sale#, [Employee#], [Customer#], Ship Date, [Order#]
Receive Payment Table
Cash Receipt#, Amount Received, Date, [Employee#], [Account#]
Employee Table
Employee#, First Name, Middle Name, Last Name, Address, City, State, Zip Code, [Department#], [Job
Classiﬁcation Code], Date of Birth, Date Hired, Last Date of Review
Customer Table
Customer#, Company Name, Address1, City, State, Zip Code, Contact Person, Credit Limit
Inventory/Order Relationship Table
Order#, Item#2, Quantity
Inventory/Sale Relationship Table
Sale#, Item#, Quantity
Sale/Receive Payment Relationship Table
Sale#, Cash Receipt#
Order/Sale Relationship Table
Order#, Sale#
1May use multiple addresses for different departments or for shipping versus billing.
2Relationship tables require two ﬁelds together to represent a primary key. Either ﬁeld alone would not be
unique to a record.
FIGURE 4-10
A schematic of database tables for the Sales Process. (Note: Underlining signiﬁes
a primary key and brackets denote foreign keys.)
CREATING DATABASE TABLES AND RECORDS
It is only after system designers have gone through the steps outlined above that they can
begin to create database tables with records. This section of the chapter explains how to
perform these tasks using Microsoft Access. The procedures for creating tables and records
in alternate database systems are similar.
An Introduction to Microsoft Access
Microsoft Access is a popular relational database that many businesses and individuals use
for small database applications. Although this software has many of the same tools, dialog
boxes, and menu options as Microsoft Word or Excel, there are some important differences.
In Access 2007, tabs and buttons have replaced many of the menus. One capability of

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
133
FIGURE 4-11
Opening screen for Access Database Program.
Access 2007 is the ability to use predeﬁned templates. Some of them are Assets, Contacts,
Issues, and Events (Figure 4-11). If you click on one of these, you can name your database
and download the template from the web. These templates are ready to use and allow you
to add ﬁelds, delete ﬁelds, or use pre-made queries or reports.
Figure 4-12 shows the starting screen for Access 2007. If you click on the ‘‘Blank
Database’’ icon in the top portion of the screen in Figure 4-11, you will launch the option
to open a new blank database (Figure 4-12). A panel will appear on the right side of your
screen asking you to name your database. The default name is ‘‘Database1.accdb.’’ The
‘‘accdb’’ sufﬁx stands for ‘‘Access database’’ and Access will attach it automatically if you
rename your database (which you should!)—you don’t need to add it.
File name textbox
File folder icon
to select a storage
location
Click this button to
begin creating the
database
FIGURE 4-12
The screen for getting started with Microsoft Access.

134
PART TWO / Databases
Creating Database Tables
As you already know, database tables store data about speciﬁc table entities—e.g., cus-
tomers, vendors, or employees. To illustrate how to create tables in Access, let’s create a
table of payroll records similar to the one in Figure 4-1.
Getting Started.
Your ﬁrst task is to rename your database something more
meaningful—for example, ‘‘My First Database.’’ (Blanks are permitted in Access database
names.) Type your new name in the ﬁlename box. Your next task is to decide where to
store it. To do this, note the ﬁle folder icon with an arrow to the right of the ﬁlename
textbox. Clicking on this icon will display a Microsoft ‘‘Save As’’ dialog box (not shown)
that enables you to select where to store your database. After you have done this, click
on the ‘‘Create’’ button in the lower-right portion of Figure 4-12. A larger version of the
screen shown in Figure 4-13 will appear.
Deﬁning a Record Format.
The Ribbon across the top of the screen in Figure 4-13
shows ﬁve tabs: Home, Create, External Data, Database Tools, and Datasheet. The ﬁgure
also shows two important components. First, Access assumes that your next job is to create
a table of records, and accordingly supplies the default name ‘‘Table1’’ in the left portion
of the screen in Figure 4-13. Second, the system assumes that each record will have at least
one data ﬁeld with default name ‘‘ID’’ as shown in the right side of the screen.
Before you enter data in your new database, you must ﬁrst deﬁne the record structure
for your table. It is much easier to spend time developing this format prior to entering
data than to spend hours changing it later. Figure 4-14 displays the form for developing
your database. To get to this screen, right click on the table name ‘‘Table1: Table’’ and
select ‘‘Design View’’ from the set of choices in the drop-down menu that subsequently
appears.
The screen in Figure 4-14 is a template for creating the record format (i.e., the data
ﬁelds) of your records. To deﬁne a record format, begin typing the name of the ﬁrst data
ﬁeld you wish to create—e.g., the term ‘‘SocSecNum’’—in the upper right portion of the
screen in Figure 4-14. When you do, the following three columns will appear in that area
of the screen: (1) Field Name (which is required), (2) Data Type (also required), and (3)
Description (optional). Let’s look at each of these items separately.
FIGURE 4-13
The opening screen for creating a table in Access.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
135
FIGURE 4-14
Payroll Master File table displaying ﬁeld name, data type, description, and ﬁeld
properties for SocSecNum.
Field Name.
Field names are the names you assign to the data ﬁelds in your record.
As illustrated in Figure 4-14, you can embed blanks in ﬁeld names and capitalize selected
letters in names as desired. Two general rules to follow when naming data ﬁelds are
(1) use mnemonic names (that help you remember their use such as ‘‘Zip code’’), and
(2) do not use long names (which are cumbersome to use).
Although it isn’t obvious from Figure 4-14, you can use the same ﬁeld name in each of
two tables—the ﬁeld names in tables are completely independent of one another. In fact,
using the same ﬁeld names for the same data—for example, ‘‘VendorNumber’’—in both
a Vendor table and a Vendor Invoices table often makes sense because this makes it easy
to identify the data ﬁeld (foreign key) that can link the tables together. We’ll look at this
shortly.
Data Type.
For each data ﬁeld you create in a table, you must also specify a data type.
This tells Access how to store the data—for example, as text, a number, or a date. Several
examples of such data are, ‘‘text’’ data types for an employee’s First Name and Last Name,
a ‘‘currency’’ data type for the employee’s pay rate, a ‘‘date’’ data type for the employee’s
date of hire, a ‘‘Yes/No’’ data type for the employee’s qualiﬁcations to earn overtime pay,
and a ‘‘Memo’’ data type (that stores variable-length text) for the Remarks data ﬁeld.
Each data ﬁeld you specify in a table also includes a set of ﬁeld properties, whose
values show in the lower portion of the screen in Figure 4-14. These include such settings
as ‘‘ﬁeld size’’ (e.g., a length of 9 bytes), ‘‘format’’ (e.g., a number with a percent sign),
and ‘‘input mask’’ (e.g., a template for entering a phone number). Figure 4-14 shows the
ﬁeld properties for the SocSecNum ﬁeld in our table. Note the Input Mask entry, which
you can select from a drop down set of items if you click on this property. You might also
be curious why we deﬁned this as a ‘‘text’’ ﬁeld rather than a ‘‘number’’ ﬁeld. The reason
is because this data value is not really a number that we will mathematically manipulate,
but rather a code. Thus, we create it as a text ﬁeld and limit its Field Size property to
9 characters (see the bottom portion of Figure 4-14).

136
PART TWO / Databases
Finally, if you use a ‘‘number’’ data type, you must also select the type of number you
wish to use—for example, Integer, Long Integer, Single (a small decimal value), or Double
(a large decimal value). These choices are important when using numeric data ﬁelds to link
tables together—the ﬁeld types must match exactly for the join to work.
Description.
The last item that you can create for each data ﬁeld in a table is its
description. This is an optional ﬁeld that you can ignore when deﬁning record structures.
However, as you can see from the ﬁgure, data ﬁeld descriptors help document the table
itself, and can also describe exception conditions or contain special notes.
Identifying a Primary Key.
Recall that a primary key is the data ﬁeld in each record
that uniquely identiﬁes the record. After you have deﬁned the data ﬁelds in your table,
you can also designate a primary key. This is optional but usually a good idea. For our
payroll ﬁle example, we will use the employee’s Social Security number (SocSecNum) for
the primary key. One way to designate this ﬁeld as the primary key is to click on the name
of this ﬁeld and then select ‘‘Primary Key’’ icon ( ) from banner at the top of the screen.
An alternate way is to right click on the ﬁeld with your mouse and select ‘‘primary key’’
from the set of choices in the drop down list. The end result in either case will be the
same—a little key icon appearing in the ﬁrst column opposite the data ﬁeld you selected,
as illustrated in Figure 4-14.
Finally, some tables such as join tables do not have an obvious primary key. In such
instances, you can ask Access to assign an artiﬁcial one by creating a Transaction Number
or similar data ﬁeld name and use an AutoNumber data type for it (see the ﬁrst column
in Figure 4-9). In so doing, Access will automatically assign sequential numbers to each
record you create, which can also act as a primary key.
Saving a Table.
Because you named your database when setting it up, it already has a
name. However, if you look at the left of your screen (Figure 4-13) you will see that the
table is still named Table1: Table. If you attempt to close your table at this point, Access
will prompt you for a name. You can of course use the default name ‘‘Table1,’’ but it is
better to create your own name for it—for example, ‘‘Payroll Master File.’’ You should also
include the conventional tbl preﬁx in any name you create for a table. Thus, for example,
we used the name ‘‘tblPayroll Master File’’ for our table name in Figure 4-14.
Creating Records
After specifying the names, data types, sizes, descriptions, and perhaps primary key for the
data ﬁelds in your table, you can create individual records for it. To do so, you must switch
to ‘‘datasheet’’ (or run) view. An easy way to do this is to close the design view of this table
and then select the ‘‘Datasheet’’ view from the View menu in the upper-left portion of the
Access screen in Figure 4-14.
After making these choices, you should see a screen similar to Figure 4-15. This is a
table in datasheet view, and you are now free to input the data for individual records.
Begin by entering data in the row with the asterisk (∗) and use the tab key to transition
from data ﬁeld to data ﬁeld. Every time you complete the data entry for a new record,
Access will save the record in the appropriate table automatically.
If you make a mistake while entering data, you can use your backspace key or delete
key to correct it just as you would when correcting text in a word processor. Also, if you
wish, you can delete an entire record by clicking on the ﬁrst column to select an entire
row (record) and then hitting the delete key. Because Access saves changes immediately, it

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
137
FIGURE 4-15
Dataview sheet for Payroll Master File table.
will ﬁrst remind you (via a small dialog box) that such a change will be permanent. If you
indicate that this is your intent, Access will proceed to delete the record.
Creating Database Relationships
Lastly, it is important to know how to create relationships between database tables. As
you’ve seen from earlier discussions, these relationships link tables together. They also
enable users to create multi-table reports, such as the one in Figure 4-3. To illustrate how to
create relationships in Access, assume that you have created a department table with records
similar to the one in Figure 4-2. Figure 4-16 illustrates the record structure for this table,
which you name ‘‘tblDepartments.’’ The department code is the primary key for this table.
You now have two tables—‘‘tblDepartments’’ and ‘‘tblPayroll Master File.’’ They are
related in a one-to-many relationship because each department has many employees, but
each employee belongs to only one department. The department code is common to both
sets of records, although its name differs slightly from one table to another. (We purposely
used different names to demonstrate the fact that the names do not have to match exactly
to link tables.) This ﬁeld will act as the foreign key in the Payroll Master File table. To create
a relationship between the two tables, follow these steps:
Step 1: Select Tables.
First, select the choices Relationships/Show Table from the
main menu in Figure 4-13. From the tables listed on the left of your screen, right click on
the table you wish to link (tblPayroll Master File: Table) and drag it into the Relationships
FIGURE 4-16
Departments table with properties for the department code.

138
PART TWO / Databases
FIGURE 4-17
Linking tables and enforcing referential integrity of table relationships.
window and release the mouse. Now do the same with the tblDepartments: Table. As a
result, you should see boxes for the two tables in the Relationships window of Figure 4-17,
but there will not be a line drawn between the two tables. That’s our next task.
Step 2: Link the Tables.
To link the two tables together, drag and drop the department
code name from either table to the similar name in the other table. When you do, you should
also see the Edit Relationships dialog window of Figure 4-17. This window enables you to
enforce referential integrity. Check this box. In the context of this example, referential
integrity is a control that prohibits users from creating employee records with references
to non-existent departments. (It does not affect your ability to create a department with no
employees, however.)
If you follow these steps successfully, you should end up with a Relationships window
with linked tables as shown in Figure 4-17. What you’ve done is link the tables together,
using the department code as a foreign key. One dramatic way to see this linkage is to
open the Departments table in run view (Figure 4-18). Note that there are now plus marks
to the left of each department, indicating linked records. If you click on one of these
plus marks with your mouse, you’ll be able to see them, as illustrated for department A in
Figure 4-18. Although it isn’t obvious, the relationship you’ve created for your two tables
will also enable you to create the multi-table report illustrated in Figure 4-3. We’ll explain
how to do that in Chapter 6.
FIGURE 4-18
Showing subordinate data for multi-table relationships.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
139
Guidelines for Creating Database Tables and Records
The preceding discussions both described how to design databases and how to create
individual tables and records within a database. There are many things that can go wrong
when performing these tasks. Here are some guidelines to help you avoid them.
1. Design ﬁrst; create tables and records last.
Some people don’t have time to
do things right—only time to do things over. Don’t be one of them. A careful deﬁnition of
database entities and their relationships can avoid many problems later.
2. Name tables systematically and use conventional tbl preﬁxes.
Even small
databases contain many tables, queries, forms, and reports. Using conventional preﬁxes
such as ‘‘tbl’’ for tables and ‘‘qry’’ for queries enables database designers to distinguish
among them. You may also ﬁnd it useful to name related tables systematically—e.g.,
use names like ‘‘tblCustomer_MasterFile’’ or ‘‘tblCustomer_Returns’’ for different types of
customer ﬁles.
3. Use mnemonic names for data ﬁelds.
Each data ﬁeld within a record must have
a name, and mnemonic names help you remember what each ﬁeld means. For example, the
name ‘‘State’’ is better than ‘‘Address Line 3’’ to represent the data ﬁeld for the customer’s
state. Similarly, the names ‘‘State Abbreviation’’ or ‘‘State Code’’ may even be better if you
allocate just 2 digits for this ﬁeld.
4. Assign correct data types to data ﬁelds.
If you plan to manipulate a data ﬁeld
mathematically, you must deﬁne this ﬁeld as a number—not a text ﬁeld. Alternately, you
should use text data types for such ﬁelds as Social Security, credit card, or phone numbers.
These numbers are really codes that are too long to store as numbers, but ones that Access
can store easily as text values.
5. Data ﬁelds that link tables together must be the same data type.
If you
use the data ﬁelds from separate tables to link two tables together, these ﬁelds must be of
the exact same data type. Thus, you cannot link tables together if the foreign key in one
table is a text ﬁeld and the other is a date ﬁeld. As noted earlier, when using ‘‘number’’ data
ﬁelds, the type of number must also match—e.g., each data ﬁeld must be a Long integer.
Violating this rule is one of the most common errors novices make when creating database
tables and relationships in Access.
6. Limit the size of data ﬁelds to reasonable lengths.
Access assigns a default
size of ‘‘255’’ characters to text ﬁelds. If, for example, you designate a state code of only
two digits, you should change the default size to two digits. This will limit users to entering
no more than two digits. A similar guideline applies to Social Security numbers, telephone
numbers, product numbers, and similar values of predetermined, ﬁxed length.
7. Use input masks.
An input mask is a template that outlines the expected values
for a data ﬁeld. An example of a phone number input mask is (999) 000-0000, which limits
the values in a phone number ﬁeld to 10 numeric digits. Input masks help ensure accurate
data input and help reduce mistakes.

140
PART TWO / Databases
AIS AT WORK
Retailers Now Save Questions as well as Answers to Improve
Customer Service
Retailers throughout the world know that fast responses to customer questions help
them provide better customer service—a hallmark of proﬁtable retailing. For some time,
therefore, large organizations such as department stores and airlines have maintained large
banks of computer-enabled agents and more recently, sophisticated websites, to answer
customer questions quickly, and, hopefully, sell these same customers goods and services
on the spot.
These retailers are now also learning that saving the questions these customers ask—for
example, using the search engines these organizations provide on their websites—can also
help sell merchandise. Thus, several companies such as Ask Jeeves, Vality Technology, and
SAS are developing ‘‘natural language software tools’’ that can detect patterns in customer
inquiries and alert such users as Dell, E-Trade, Nike, and Williams Sonoma to customer
search patterns or difﬁculties using websites. ‘‘If lots of people are asking questions on
something and they’re not ﬁnding information, the search engine will tell us’’ says Joan
Broughton, director of web publishing at Ofﬁce Depot.
One retailer that is beneﬁting from such analyses is Amazon.com. By examining what
products a website user requests, the e-commerce retailer’s website can match that user
to a speciﬁc ‘‘customer proﬁle’’ and therefore suggest similar products that ‘‘others like
you have bought.’’ Similarly, Nordstroms (a department store chain) now uses website
monitoring software from DigiMine to analyze customer ‘‘clickstream data’’ and detect
patterns. The company was surprised to learn that one of the top-ten search phrases entered
by customers was ‘‘Kate Spade,’’ a shoe and handbag maker. The company responded to
this discovery by redirecting these customers to ofﬂine phone personnel to provide more
personal service and sell these products.
Etown.com sells electronic products on the web. The company’s Ask Ida software
asks consumers questions to determine desired features and price-feature tradeoffs. In
one analysis, the company learned that buyers of upgraded, feature-rich HD-TVs preferred
smaller TV screens to save money. Finally, when Ofﬁce Depot web designers examined web
customer inquiries, they found that many asked about ‘‘next-day delivery’’—information
that was already on their website, but not easily found. The discovery helped this company
redesign its website.
‘‘You get in one question an entire snapshot of what’s going on in that person’s mind,’’
says Michael Callahan, director of advance development at Ask Jeeves. And the better a
retailer understands its customers, the better it can make a sale.
Source: L. Scott Tillett, ‘‘A 24-Hour Focus Group—Sites Dig Into Search Queries to Learn
Customer Preferences’’ Internetweek (April 10, 2000).
SUMMARY
• Almost every AIS uses databases to store accounting data. The hierarchy of data in such databases
is ‘‘bit, character, data ﬁeld, record, ﬁle, and database.’’
• Primary, secondary, and foreign record keys enable database systems to identify database records
uniquely as well as link records to one another.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
141
• Large, multiuser accounting databases pose additional design concerns. These include the admin-
istration and supervision of database development and maintenance, the need for documentation,
the importance of data integrity, data processing accuracy and data completeness, database security
and backup, and the usefulness of concurrency controls to safeguard data when two users wish to
access the same record.
• Databases must be designed carefully. The REA model is a methodology that encourages designers
to think of database components in terms of resources, events, and agents.
• Using E-R diagrams, the REA model graphically depicts the entities involved in a database application
and the types of relationships between them. The ultimate goal is to determine what to store in
sets of records, and how to organize these records efﬁciently.
• Three database structures are hierarchical, network, and relational. The relational model is most
commonly used today.
• Microsoft Access is a popular database management system that small businesses can use to create
complete accounting systems. The ﬁnal section of the chapter illustrated the techniques you can
use to create database tables, records, and relationships with this software.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
agent (REA model)
business events (REA model)
cardinalities
child record
concurrency controls
data dictionary
data ﬁeld
data hierarchy
data integrity controls
data modeling
data redundancy
data type (Access data ﬁeld)
database
database administrator
database management system
database transaction
economic events (REA model)
entity (REA model)
entity-relationship (E-R) diagram
foreign key
hierarchical data structure
input mask
master ﬁle
metadata
network data structure
parent record
primary record key
REA model
record
record structure
referential integrity
relational data structure
relationship table
resources (REA model)
secondary record key
sibling record
table
transaction controls
transaction ﬁle
view controls
TEST YOURSELF
Q4-1. Which of these does not characterize a typical database?
a. Large number of records
b. Irreplaceable data
c. High need for accuracy
d. Simple systems

142
PART TWO / Databases
Q4-2. Which of these is not part of the ‘‘data hierarchy’’ (within the context of databases)?
a. Record
b. Bit
c. Character
d. Data type
Q4-3. Which of these would not be a good primary key for a ﬁle of employee records?
a. Social security number
b. Last name
c. Company employee number
d. All of these would make equally good primary keys
Q4-4. In the REA model, the ‘‘A’’ stands for:
a. Agents
b. Additions
c. Accounts
d. Associations
Q4-5. In the REA model, which of these would not be classiﬁed as an event?
a. Cash sale
b. Credit sale
c. Hiring a new chief executive
d. Date of the ofﬁce picnic
Q4-6. Which of these is not a cardinality between two database entities?
a. One-to-one
b. None-to-none
c. One-to-many
d. Many-to-many
Q4-7. E-R diagrams use all the following symbols except:
a. Ovals
b. Rectangles
c. Circles
d. Diamonds
Q4-8. A parent-child relationship between two records is characteristic of:
a. Pyramid databases
b. Network databases
c. Hierarchical databases
d. Family databases
Q4-9. To link the records in a many-to-many relationship within a relational database:
a. You must create an intermediate ‘‘relationships’’ table
b. You must instead use a network database
c. You must use foreign keys and a spreadsheet system
d. You cannot link records together under these circumstances
Q4-10. Within the context of databases, the term ‘‘concurrency’’ refers to the possibility that:
a. A customer of one store might also be a customer of another store
b. Two database users might want to access the same record at the same time
c. A credit entry for a customer requires a debit entry for a matching account
d. None of these
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4-1. Why is the storage of accounting data important to an accounting information system? Describe
some important concerns, and explain why each one is important.
4-2. What is the hierarchy of data in databases? Provide an example for a particular accounting
application.
4-3. Describe some generic types of record keys in typical accounting databases. Are such keys
simple or complicated?
4-4. Name some speciﬁc accounting ﬁles and a potential primary key for each one.
4-5. Describe each of the following database concerns, and give an example of each: (1)
data integrity, (2) transaction accuracy and completeness, (3) concurrency processing, and
(4) security.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
143
4-6. What is the REA model of database design? How does REA differ from more traditional
accounting views of data collection and storage? Hint: would a traditional accounting database
store data about personnel matters?
4-7. What are database cardinalities? Give some examples of such cardinalities for an accounting
application other than sales.
4-8. What is an entity-relationship diagram? Describe some symbols used in ER modeling, and
explain the function of each one.
4-9. Suppose that a data modeler creates a database that includes a Sales table and a Salesperson
table. Would you be likely to need a relationship table to link these two entities? Why or why
not?
4-10. Why is it important to store primary key values consistently within different tables of the same
database?
4-11. Access has ﬁve choices on the Menu bar. One of them is Create. What are the other four?
PROBLEMS
4-12. An internal auditor should have a sound understanding of basic data processing concepts such
as data organization and storage in order to adequately evaluate systems and make use of
retrieval software.
a. Deﬁne the following terms as used in a data processing environment (all are nouns):
(1) ﬁeld, (2) record, (3) ﬁle.
b. (1) Deﬁne a database. (2) List two advantages and two disadvantages of a database system.
(CIA adapted)
4-13. What attributes (database table columns) would you be likely to include in a Cash table?
In a Cash Receipts table?
4-14. Describe the meaning of each of the entity-relationship diagrams shown in Figure 4-19.
4-15. Draw entity-relationship diagrams for each of the following:
a. The attributes of a customer in an accounts receivable database include name, address, and
charge card number.
b. The attributes of a student in a student database include student number (primary key),
name, and class rank.
c. The attributes of an asset in a general ledger database include inventory number (primary
key), description, and date of purchase.
d. The relationship between an employee and ‘‘is assigned parking’’ is one-to-many.
e. The relationship between an employee and ‘‘completes training program’’ is many-to-many.
f. The relationship between ‘‘employee’’ and ‘‘health plan’’ is many-to-one.
g. A customer can be a cash customer or a credit customer. If the customer is a credit
customer, an attribute is his or her credit card number.
h. A patient is either an outpatient or an inpatient. If the patient is an inpatient, he or she is
assigned a bed (one-to-one).
i. An investment asset could be cash, a stock, a bond, or a certiﬁcate of deposit (CD).
j. An account at a bank could be a checking account, a savings account, or a loan account.
Each type of account requires an account or loan number. If it is a loan account, another
attribute is the monthly payment amount.

144
PART TWO / Databases
Student 
Number 
Name 
Address 
a. 
b. 
Student 
Sales 
account 
representative 
Customers 
has 
c. 
d. 
Credit 
card 
PIN number 
is 
assigned 
a 
is a 
is a 
Airline 
passenger 
business-class 
passenger 
coach-class 
passenger 
first-class 
passenger 
is a 
FIGURE 4-19
Entity-relationship diagrams for Problem 4-14.
4-16. Guido Geerts at the University of Delaware has created a website tool for learning more about
database cardinalities. You can access the site, Stevie, at www.aisvillage.com/stevie. There are
two sets of exercises. Use the entries basicpatterns/public as the username/password for one
set, and the entries intro/public for the other set.7
4-17. This chapter described how to create tables and records in Microsoft Access. What other
database management systems are available? Use the Internet to determine their current retail
prices.
4-18. Give some examples of ﬁeld names that you would use for the Customer table in Figure 4-6.
What data type would you assign to each ﬁeld using Microsoft Access, and how large would
you make each text ﬁeld? Would you use one data ﬁeld or two for the customer name? Why?
4-19. Identify the different data types available for creating data ﬁelds in Microsoft Access. Similarly,
identify the different types of numbers (e.g., Long integer) you can use if you deﬁne a ﬁeld
as a ‘‘number’’ data type. (Hint: create a data ﬁeld in a throwaway database table, assign it
a ‘‘number’’ data type, and examine the possibilities for the Field Size property as shown in
Figure 4-14).
7Instructors who are interested in creating their own problems and customized assignments can send an email to
Professor Geerts at geertsg@lerner.udel.edu to obtain a User ID and Password to enter the system.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
145
4-20. Create a Salesperson table and a Customer Order table using the data in Figure 4-6. Create
records for each table using the data provided. Add one more Salesperson record with your
own name and an employee number of your choosing. Also add at least one customer order
with your number as the salesperson. Finally, create a relationship for the two tables. Create
hard-copy documentation of your work.
CASE ANALYSES
4-21. Furry Friends Foundation I (Creating a New Database from Scratch)
The Furry Friends Foundation is a non-proﬁt organization that ﬁnds homes for abandoned
animals that are suitable for adoption. FFF began operations with a bequest from a wealthy
gentleman who lived his life taking care of stray animals and wanted to be sure that such
animals were looked after once he was gone. Although the amount the foundation started
with was sufﬁcient to set up an ofﬁce and begin operations, it depends upon continuing
donations to run daily operations.
FFF has been keeping its records on 4 × 6 cards. Over the years, the foundation has had
requests from contributors for year-end statements that document their donations to the
Foundation for tax purposes. (Usually, donations are given with a particular type of animal
in mind—for example, ‘‘for dogs.’’) Now that the number of contributors exceeds 500,
the president has decided to develop a database to handle the foundation’s accounting and
reporting needs. The following is a sample of some of the records at FFF.
FFF Contributor File
Contri-
Last
First
Street
Phone
butor ID
Name
Name
Address
City
State
Zip
Number
13456
Smythe
Jonathan
1845 Backpack Lane
Franktown
NV
55655
501 666–1234
13480
Lawrence
Marie
9190 Teepee Road
Doolittle
NV
54984
501 767–1114
13484
Funky
Robert
5815 Pearly Gate Lane
Happiness
NV
53887
502 995–7654
FFF Donation File
Donation Date
Animal Code
Amount
Contributor ID
September 30, 2009
C
25
13456
September 20, 2009
D
125
13456
October 15, 2009
C
25
13456
October 15, 2009
D
10
13456
October 31, 2009
C
20
13456
October 31, 2009
D
20
13456
November 30, 2009
D
250
13456
November 15, 2009
C
25
13456
December 1, 2009
O
70
13456
December 10, 2009
C
100
13480
September 10, 2009
C
250
13480
October 10, 2009
C
500
13480
November 11, 2009
C
150
13480
December 14, 2009
D
100
13484
September 5, 2009
C
100
13484
October 10, 2009
O
100
13484
November 8, 2009
O
100
13484
December 15, 2009
D
50
13484
FFF Animal Code Table
Contribution for
Code
Dogs
D
Cats
C
Hamster
H
Guinea Pig
G
Rabbit
R
Other
O

146
PART TWO / Databases
Requirements
1. Using Access or a similar relational database, create the tables needed to set up a
database for contributors, contributions, and animals.
2. What data ﬁeld did you use for the primary record key of the FFF contributor table?
Why did you use it?
3. Using Access or similar software as required by your instructor, add yourself as a
contributor.
4. Create relationships for the tables.
5. Document your work by printing hard copies of each table in datasheet view and the
relationships report that shows how they are related.
4-22. Carl Beers Enterprises (Using a Relational Database)
Carl Beers Enterprises manufactures and sells specialized electronic components to cus-
tomers across the country. The tables in Figure 4-20 illustrate some of the records in
its accounting databases. Thus, for example, the ‘‘Sales by Inventory Number’’ records
show detailed sales data for each of the company’s inventory items, and the ‘‘Customer
Payments’’ records indicate customer cash payments, listed by invoice number. Use the
information in these tables to answer the following questions.
Requirements
1. The ‘‘Sales by Inventory Number’’ records are listed by inventory item number. How is
this useful? Why might this information also be useful if it were listed by invoice number
instead of inventory number?
2. In the ‘‘Sales by Invoice Number,’’ invoice V-3 shows a sales amount of $16,000. What
was the name of the customer that made this purchase? What speciﬁc inventory items
did this customer purchase? How much did this customer pay for each item?
3. Customers can choose among one of three payment options: (1) 5% discount if
immediate cash payment, (2) 2% discount off list amount if total invoice paid by the
ﬁfteenth day of the month following purchase, or (3) deferred payment plan, using six
monthly payments. Which option does J. P. Carpenter appear to be using for invoice
V-2?
4. Using just the information provided, what are the quarterly sales amounts for salespeople
S-10, S-11, and S-12?
5. Assume that customers C-1 through C-5 began this quarter with net accounts receivable
balances of zero. What are their balances now?
4-23. Martin Shoes, Inc. (Planning a Database Using REA
and E-R Methodology)
Martin Shoes, Inc. manufactures and distributes orthopedic footwear. To sell its products,
the marketing department requires sales personnel to call on the shoe retailers within
their assigned geographic territories. Each salesperson has a laptop computer, which he

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
147
Sales by Inventory Number
Item
Invoice
Price
Number
Number
Quantity
Each
I-1
V-1
1
2,000
V-3
1
2,000
V-6
3
1,575
I-2
V-5
2
3,000
V-6
10
3,500
I-3
V-3
6
1,000
I-4
V-1
2
600
V-5
2
300
I-5
V-3
2
4,000
V-7
3
3,000
I-6
V-2
2
5,000
V-4
2
5,000
V-5
2
5,000
V-7
2
7,000
Sales by Invoice Number
Invoice
Customer
Salesperson
Number
Amount
Number
Date
Number
V-1
7,200
C-1
July 1
S-12
V-2
10,000
C-2
July 12
S-10
V-3
16,000
C-5
July 22
S-10
V-4
10,000
C-2
July 26
S-10
V-5
16,600
C-5
July 31
S-10
V-6
35,000
C-3
Aug 1
S-10
V-7
23,000
C-4
Aug 2
S-11
Sales by Salesperson
Salesperson
Quarterly
Commission
Number
Sales
Rate
S-10
?
.10
S-11
?
.10
S-12
?
.12
S-78
0
.08
Customer Payments
Invoice
Remittance
Number
Advice Number
Amount
V-1
R-3
7,200
V-2
R-1
1,666
V-2
R-5
1,666
V-3
R-4
16,000
V-4
R-2
10,000
V-5
R-4
16,600
Customer Data
Accounts
Customer
Customer
Receivable
Sales-
Number
Name
Amount
person
C-1
Dunn, Inc.
?
S-12
C-2
J. P. Carpenter
?
S-10
C-3
Mabadera Corp.
?
S-10
C-4
Ghymn and Sons
?
S-99
C-5
D. Lund, Inc.
?
S-10
FIGURE 4-20
Sample of some of the records in the Beers Enterprise Accounting databases.
or she uses to record sales orders during the day and to send these sales orders to Martin’s
network nightly for updating the company’s sales order ﬁle.
Each day, warehouse personnel review the current sales orders in its ﬁle, and where
possible, pick the goods and ready them for shipment. (Martin ships goods via common
carrier, and shipping terms are generally FOB from the shipping point.) When the shipping
department completes a shipment, it also notiﬁes the billing department, which then
prepares an invoice for the customer. Payment terms vary by customer, but most are
‘‘net 30.’’ When the billing department receives a payment, the billing clerk credits the
customer’s account and records the cash received.
Requirements
1. Identify the resources, events, and agents within Martin’s revenue process.
2. Develop an E-R diagram for this process.
3. With a particular DBMS in mind, design the tables for this revenue process. Note that
you will need tables for each resource, event, and agent, as well as tables for each
many-to-many relationship.

148
PART TWO / Databases
Merchandise 
inventory 
Receiving 
clerk 
Purchasing 
agent 
Order 
goods 
Receive 
goods 
Vendor 
Cashier or A/P 
clerk 
Cash 
Pay for 
goods 
FIGURE 4-21
An E-R diagram for the purchasing system of Souder, Oles, and Franek LLP.
4-24. Souder, Oles, and Franek LLP (Data Modeling with REA)
Souder, Oles, and Franek is an international consulting ﬁrm headquartered in Chicago,
Illinois. The Entity-Relationship diagram in Figure 4-21 shows a simpliﬁed version of the
company’s process for purchasing and paying for equipment and supplies.
Requirements
1. Insert appropriate pairs of cardinalities for the relationships in the Entity-Relationship
model developed with the REA data modeling approach.
2. Describe the database table attributes for this model. You will need a table for each
entity, as well as one or more relationship tables. First identify the table name and then
indicate the primary key by underlining it. Show any foreign keys by framing them
in brackets (e.g., [Vendor#]). Include at least three ﬁelds in each table. Below is an
example for the Vendor table and the Order Goods table:
Vendor#, Name, Street Address 1, Street Address 2, City, State, Zip Code, Phone,
Email, Fax, Contact, Comments.
Order#, Date, [Vendor#], [Employee#], Shipping Instructions, Comments.
4-25. BSN Bicycles (Creating a Database from Scratch with Microsoft Access)
Bill Barnes and Tom Freeman opened their BSN bicycle shop in 2005. Not counting Jake—a
friend who helps out occasionally at the store—Bill and Tom are the only employees. The
shop occupies a small commercial space that was once a restaurant. The former kitchen
now stores spare parts and provides space for bicycles repairs, while the former dining

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
149
area in the front is now the retail sales area. The ‘‘corporate ofﬁce’’ is just a desk and ﬁle
cabinet in the back corner of the retail area.
Bill and Tom are more friends and bicycling enthusiasts than businessmen. They’ve
pretty much sunk their life savings into the shop and are anxious that it succeed. In the
ﬁrst year of operations, they worked hard to convert the space into its present condition,
which includes an old-timey sign above the door with their name ‘‘BSN Bicycles.’’
With all the other work that had to be done the ﬁrst year, marketing efforts have been
limited to chatting with friends, distributing ﬂyers at bicycle races and similar sporting
events, and placing a few ads in the local newspaper. Similarly, the owners haven’t paid
much attention to accounting tasks. Who has time with all the other things that had to
get done? But at least two things are now clear to the owners: (1) some of their loyal
customers prefer to buy items on credit, and (2) all of their suppliers want to be paid
on time.
Right now, BSN’s ‘‘customer credit system’’ is a box of 3x5 cards. Each hand-written
card contains customer information on the front and invoice information on the back
(Figure 4-22). When a customer pays an invoice, one of the owners simply crosses off the
invoice information on the card. The ‘‘supplier accounts system’’ is similar, except that the
vendor box of 3x5 cards is green whereas the customer box is grey.
Jake is a part-time student at the local community college. He recently completed a
course on microcomputer applications that included a segment on Microsoft Access. He
doesn’t know very much about database theory, but thinks that converting the shop’s
current ‘‘accounting systems’’ to a DBMS might be a good idea. He thinks, for example,
(a) The front of a 3x5 BSN customer card.
(b) The back of a 3x5 BSN customer card.
FIGURE 4-22
A customer record for the BSN company.

150
PART TWO / Databases
that BSN needs a customer table and a vendor (supplier) table. He also thinks that BSN will
need an inventory table to keep track of inventory, but that even more tables might be
required. Can you help them?
Requirements
1. Identify the resources, events, and agents for BSN’s accounting systems. Draw one or
more E-R diagrams that illustrate the relationships between these items.
2. Identify the tables that you would need to create a working database for the company’s
receivables, payables, and inventory.
3. Using Access or similar software as required by your instructor, create at least three
records for each of the tables you identiﬁed in part 2. Hints: (1) Use the information on
the front of the 3x5 card in Figure 4-22 for the customer record structure. (2) The data
ﬁelds for the Vendors table should include the vendor ID, vendor name and address
information, phone number, fax number, and contact person. (3) The data ﬁelds for the
Inventory table should include item number, item description, units (e.g., dozen, each,
etc.), unit cost, unit retail sales price, and quantity on hand.
4. Create relationships for your various tables.
5. Document your work by printing hard copies of each table in data sheet view and each
relationship.
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Ames, Anton & Ben Scaff. ‘‘Preparing for a Data Disaster’’ Beneﬁts & Compensation Digest Vol 45,
No. 11 (November 2008), pp. 40–45.
Barbellotto, Gianluca. ‘‘How Good Are Your Standards?’’ Strategic Finance Vol. 89, No. 12 (June
2008), pp. 67–68.
Britt, Phil. ‘‘Records Management: Beware, Prepare’’ KM World Vol. 17, No. 10 (November 2008),
pp. 12–26.
Carlson, Caron. ‘‘GAO Reports Rampant Federal Data Mining’’ eWeek Vol. 21, No. 23 (June 7, 2004),
p. 31.
Codd, E. F., The Relational Model for Database Management Version 2 (Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1990).
Curtin, Matthew. ‘‘Database Security: Solve the Right Problem Now for Fewer Headaches Tomorrow’’
Accounting Today Vol. 21, No. 4 (February 26, 2007), pp. 18–26.
Egana, Nilva & Fiona, Bruinsma. ‘‘Data Dictionaries—What do They Have to do with Public Health?’’
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Public Health Vol. 32, No. 3 (June 2008), pp. 286–287.
Farrell, Mike, ‘‘Linking Databases, Easing Headaches’’ Multichannel News Vol. 26, No. 30 (July 25,
2005), pp. 58–59.
Garbellotto, Glanluca. ‘‘How Good are Your (XBRL) Standards?’’ Strategic Finance Vol. 89, No. 12
(June 2008), pp. 67–68.
Gerard, Gregory J. ‘‘The REA Pattern, Knowledge Structures, and Conceptual Modeling Performance’’
Journal of Information Systems Vol. 19, No. 2 (Fall 2005), pp. 57–77.
Gruman, Galen. ‘‘Whipping Data Into Shape’’ InfoWorld Vol. 28, No. 6 (February 6, 2006),
pp. 26–32.

CHAPTER 4 / Data Modeling
151
Hoberman, Steve ‘‘Data Dictionary, Are You Out There?’’ DM Review Vol. 17, No. 8 (August 2007),
p. 30.
Joseph, George & George Asha. ‘‘Merging Management Accounting with Database Design’’ Manage-
ment Accounting Quarterly Vol. 6, No. 2 (Winter, 2005), pp. 34–43.
McCarthy, William E., ‘‘An Entity-Relationship View of Accounting Models,’’ The Accounting Review
(October 1979), pp. 667–686.
McCarthy, William E., ‘‘The REA Accounting Model: A Generalized Framework for Accounting
Systems in a Shared Data Environment,’’ Accounting Review (July 1982), pp. 554–578.
Mutel, Glen. ‘‘Industry Talks to Put Value on Data’’ Precision Marketing Vol. 18, No. 34 (June 23,
2006), p. 1.
Nemes, Judith. ‘‘Keep on Target as Database Grows’’ B to B Vol. 93, No. 13 (September 29, 2008),
p. 16.
Quain, John R., ‘‘Sizing Down and Speeding Up’’ PC Magazine Vol. 24, No. 12 (July 1, 2005), p. 22.
Samuels, Janet A. & Robert E. Wood ‘‘Want More Effective and Efﬁcient Data Analysis? Use Access!’’
Strategic Finance Vol. 89, No. 4 (October 2007), pp. 47–51.
Solomon, Martin D. ‘‘It’s all About the Data’’ Information Systems Management Vol. 22, No. 3
(Summer, 2005), pp. 75–80.
Spinelli, Lisa. ‘‘Data Mining Tools Drilling into Small Business Market’’ Accounting Today Vol. 19,
No. 16 (September 9, 2005), pp. 5 and 23.
Syracuse, Amy. ‘‘Data Integration Helps Pitt-Ohio Express Get to Know its Customers’’ B to B
Vol. 93, No. 8 (June 9, 2008), pp. 39–46.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. d
2. d
3. b
4. a
5. d
6. b
7. c
8. c
9. a
10. b


Chapter 5
Organizing and Manipulating the Data
in Databases
INTRODUCTION
NORMALIZATION
First Normal Form
Second Normal Form
Third Normal Form
VALIDATING THE DATA IN DATABASES
Database Management Systems
Data Validation
EXTRACTING DATA FROM DATABASES: DATA
MANIPULATION LANGUAGES (DMLS)
Creating Select Queries
Creating Action Queries
Guidelines for Creating Queries
Structured Query Language (SQL) and HyperText
Sorting, Indexing, and Database Programming
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) and Data Mining
OBJECT-ORIENTED DATABASES,
MULTIMEDIA DATABASES, AND DATA
WAREHOUSES
Object-Oriented and Multimedia Databases
Data Warehouses
AIS AT WORK—RUN YOUR DATA WAREHOUSE
LIKE A FINE RESTAURANT
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Swan’s Supplies
Bonnie P Manufacturing Company
Clifford Cohen University
BSN Bicycles II
Furry Friends Foundation II
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Understand the process of normalization.
2. Be familiar with database techniques for vali-
dating data inputs.
3. Understand the importance of extracting data
from databases and AIS uses of such extractions.
4. Know how to create simple and multi-table
queries using Microsoft Access.
5. Understand object-oriented and multimedia
databases.
6. Be familiar with data warehouses and their uses
in accounting applications.
153

154
PART TWO / Databases
‘‘Why let valuable information remain untouched within your company databases?
Data mining has a wide range of uses, from searching for unknown patterns in
company databases to identifying fraudulent activity.’’
Raymond Landry Jr., et. al., ‘‘Grab your Picks and Shovels:
There’s Gold in Your Data’’ Strategic Finance Vol. 85, No. 7 (January 2004), p. 28.
INTRODUCTION
In theory, system developers should ﬁrst design databases, using the techniques described in
Chapter 4, and then construct them later. In practice, organizations create many commercial
databases from collections of preexisting manual ﬁles, nonintegrated computerized ﬁles,
personal or informal ﬁles, or the databases of acquired companies. Thus, the key databases
of a company are typically in a state of continuous evolution, reevaluation, and revision.
The previous chapter introduced the concept of databases and discussed data
modeling—the process of designing database records and tables. This chapter focuses
on ways to use databases in AISs. We begin with a discussion of normalization and then
look at several methods of querying Access database tables in practice. Finally, we examine
a few special types of databases: object-oriented databases, multimedia databases, and data
warehouses.
NORMALIZATION
Chapter 4 made clear that, without advanced planning, accounting data are likely to
wind up in ﬂat ﬁles—i.e., ﬁles with no sequence or order to them, except perhaps a
chronological sequence. An example would be a ﬁle in which a professor enters the student
grades of an examination in random order. Flat ﬁles make it almost impossible to ﬁnd a
particular record easily (because the records are not stored systematically), to link ﬁles to
one another to provide information from related records, or to store ﬁle data efﬁciently.
The databases of most AISs require more discipline than this.
Normalization is the process of examining and arranging ﬁle data in a way that helps
avoid problems when organizations use or modify them later. Consider, for example,
the long waiting period that a university student may encounter when applying for
ﬁnancial aid. If student records are not integrated in a complete database, the scholarship
director will have to request a copy of the student’s transcript from one source, ﬁnancial
records from other sources, and perhaps additional information from other sources—a
time-consuming process.
In commercial applications, an organization generally knows what data are involved in
a speciﬁc application. The challenge is to organize the data intelligently. Normalization is
a methodology for accomplishing this objective. There are several levels of normalization,
but we shall only examine the ﬁrst three of them: ﬁrst normal form, second normal form,
and third normal form.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
155
Social
Security
Last
First
Phone
License Plate
Ticket
Number
Name
Name
Number
State
Number
Number
Date
Code
Fine
123-45-6789
Curry
Dorothy
(916)358-4448
CA
123 MCD
10151
10/15/10
A
$10
10152
10/16/10
B
$20
10121
11/12/10
B
$20
134-56-7783
Macon
Richard
(916)563-7865
CA
253 DAL
10231
10/23/10
C
$50
12051
12/5/10
A
$10
FIGURE 5-1
A set of unnormalized parking ticket data.
First Normal Form
A database is in ﬁrst normal form (1 NF) if all the record’s attributes (data ﬁelds) are
well deﬁned and the information can thus be stored as a ﬂat ﬁle. Interestingly enough, not
every set of data automatically satisﬁes this requirement. For example, Figure 5-1 shows a
set of university parking ticket data with repeating groups in its rightmost four columns.
(Real parking tickets will contain many more data ﬁelds than shown here, but we will
keep things simple to focus on normalization tasks.) Databases cannot store more than one
value in the same data ﬁeld (i.e., column) of the same record, so we must do something to
overcome this limitation.
One solution to this problem is to use a separate record to store the information for
each parking ticket. Figure 5-2 illustrates the results. For this ﬁle, the ticket number serves
as the primary key. There are no repeating groups for any one column, so we can now
store these records in a conventional computer ﬁle. Our data are now in ﬁrst normal form.
Although we now have a well-deﬁned ﬁle of student data, several problems remain.
One difﬁculty is a large amount of data redundancy (i.e., the fact that much of the
information in this ﬁle is repetitive). Another problem is that we have created an insertion
anomaly—the fact that this database only stores information about students with parking
tickets. Students with registered cars but no parking tickets will have no records in this
ﬁle—a difﬁculty if school administrators also want to use this ﬁle for car-registration
purposes. A third problem is a deletion anomaly—the fact that those students who pay
their ticket ﬁnes will no longer have a car registration record on ﬁle.
Social
Security
Last
First
Phone
License Plate
Ticket
Number
Name
Name
Number
State
Number
Number
Date
Code
Fine
123-45-6789
Curry
Dorothy
(916)358-4448
CA
123 MCD
10151
10/15/10
A
$10
123-45-6789
Curry
Dorothy
(916)358-4448
CA
123 MCD
10152
10/16/10
B
$20
123-45-6789
Curry
Dorothy
(916)358-4448
CA
123 MCD
10121
11/12/10
B
$20
134-56-7783
Mason
Richard
(916)563-7865
CA
253 DAL
10231
10/23/10
C
$50
134-56-7783
Mason
Richard
(916)563-7865
CA
253 DAL
12051
12/5/10
A
$10
FIGURE 5-2
The data of Figure 5-1 in ﬁrst normal form.

156
PART TWO / Databases
Second Normal Form
To solve these problems, let us redesign our database into second normal form (2 NF).
A database is in second normal form if it is in ﬁrst normal form and all the data items in
each record depend on the record’s primary record key. To satisfy this requirement for our
student-parking ticket example, let us split our student information into two ﬁles—a ‘‘Car
Registration File’’ and a ‘‘Ticket File’’—as shown in Figure 5-3. This approach not only
results in a more efﬁcient design but also eliminates much of the ﬁrst ﬁle’s data redundancy.
In our new Car Registration File (or table), what should serve as the primary key? At
ﬁrst glance, you might guess ‘‘social security number.’’ If students are only able to register
one car, then this choice might be satisfactory. If students can register more than one car,
then it makes more sense to use the license plate number as the primary key. Remember:
the primary key must uniquely identify a record, and this would not be possible if one
person (with one Social Security number) had two records in this table. Finally, we note
that in an actual application, it is more likely that the license’s ‘‘State’’ and ‘‘Number’’
data ﬁelds together would serve as the primary record key, but again we shall keep things
simple here.
What about a primary key for our new Ticket File? In this table, the ‘‘ticket number’’
serves this purpose, while the student’s license plate number serves as the foreign key.
Again, recall from Chapter 4 that a foreign key enables a database to link appropriate
records together—for example, to trace a particular parking ticket to the car’s registered
owner. It also enables database users to answer such questions as ‘‘Does a particular student
have any outstanding parking tickets?’’
Car Registration File
Social
(primary key)
Security
Last
First
Phone
License Plate
Number
Name
Name
Number
State
Number
123-45-6789
Curry
Dorothy
(916)358-4448
CA
123 MCD
134-56-7783
Mason
Richard
(916)563-7865
CA
253 DAL
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
Ticket File
(primary key)
(foreign key)
Ticket
License Plate
Number
State
Number
Date
Code
Fine
10151
CA
123 MCD
10/15/10
A
$10
10152
CA
123 MCD
10/16/10
B
$20
10231
CA
253 DAL
10/23/10
C
$50
10121
CA
123 MCD
11/12/10
B
$20
12051
CA
253 DAL
12/5/10
A
$10
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
FIGURE 5-3
The data of Figure 5-2 in second normal form.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
157
Third Normal Form
Although we are making headway in our database design, our goal is to create a database
that is in third normal form (3 NF). A database is in third normal form if it is in second
normal form and contains no transitive dependencies. This means that the same record
does not contain two data ﬁelds in which data ﬁeld A determines data ﬁeld B. A simple
example is a student record that stores both the number of credits taken at a university and
his or her class standing of ‘‘junior’’ or ‘‘senior’’ (assuming ‘‘credits taken’’ dictates ‘‘class
standing’’). The Ticket File of Figure 5-3 also suffers from this problem because the ticket
code data ﬁeld (e.g., a code of ‘‘A’’) determines the amount of the ﬁne (e.g., ‘‘$10’’).
One way to solve this problem is to store the data for parking ﬁnes in a new ‘‘Parking
Violations Code File’’ as shown in Figure 5-4. This enables us to eliminate the redundant
information (the Fine data ﬁeld) in the Ticket File of Figure 5-3 and streamline our data.
Figure 5-4 illustrates the results. The ticket codes (A, B, and so forth) in the Ticket File
Car Registration File
Social
(primary key)
Security
Last
First
Phone
License Plate
Number
Name
Name
Number
State
Number
123-45-6789
Curry
Dorothy
(916)358-4448
CA
123 MCD
134-56-7783
Mason
Richard
(916)563-7865
CA
253 DAL
Ticket File
(primary key)
(foreign key)
Ticket
License Plate
(foreign key)
Number
State
Number
Date
Code
10151
CA
123 MCD
10/15/10
A
10152
CA
123 MCD
10/16/10
B
10231
CA
253 DAL
10/23/10
C
10121
CA
123 MCD
11/12/10
B
12051
CA
253 DAL
12/5/10
A
Parking Violations
Code File
(primary key)
Code
Fine
Explanation
A
$10
meter expired
B
$20
parking in no-parking zone
C
$50
no parking sticker
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
FIGURE 5-4
The data of Figure 5-3 in third normal form.

158
PART TWO / Databases
serve as foreign keys that link the information in the Ticket File to an entry in the Parking
Violations Code File. We now have a database in third normal form.
Chapter 4 noted that databases tend to become complicated, with multiple ﬁles that
are linked together with foreign keys. The database in Figure 5-4, for example, is more
complex than our data in Figure 5-1, but it is also more efﬁcient. For example, this database
design will allow its users to (1) store the car registration information of all students, even
if they do not have any parking tickets, (2) alter a student’s name, phone number, or
license plate by altering only one record in the Car Registration ﬁle—not several of them,
as would be required using the ﬂat ﬁle of Figure 5-2, and (3) easily change the ﬁne amount
for a parking ticket. Finally, this database design allows us to eliminate a lot of redundant
information and therefore makes ﬁle storage more efﬁcient.
VALIDATING THE DATA IN DATABASES
After data have been normalized, it remains to actually create database tables and records.
Typically, this is done with a database management system.
Database Management Systems
A database management system (DBMS) is a separate software system that enables
users to create database records, delete records, access speciﬁc information, query (select
subsets of) records for viewing or analysis, alter database information, and reorganize
records as needed. This section of the chapter explains how to perform some of these
tasks in greater detail.
A DBMS is not a database. Rather, a DBMS is a set of separate computer programs that
enable users to create, modify, and utilize database information efﬁciently, thus allowing
businesses to separate their database system operations from their accounting system
applications. This enables organizations to change record structures, query and report
formats, video displays, and similar items without also having to reprogram the accounting
software that accesses these database items. It also enables businesses to upgrade either
system independently of the other one.
Examples of microcomputer DBMS packages include Access, Alpha 5, dQuery, File-
maker Pro, and Lotus Approach. Examples of DBMSs that run on client/server systems or
mainframes include ADABAS, Microsoft SQL Server, DB2, Oracle, MySQL, Sybase, Ingrus,
and Supra. Most microcomputer DBMSs are single-user systems, whereas others (for larger
applications) are multiuser systems. Most of these larger systems are limited in how many
concurrent users they support, the maximum number of transactions per day they can
process, and so forth. Also, not every accounting package can interface with every database,
so managers should make sure that any new accounting software they acquire can also
read their existing databases, and vice versa.
Case-in-Point 5.1
IDC Company, a research company specializing in IT, estimates that the
annual market for relational database management systems in the U.S. is $14.6 billion—and
growing by nearly 10% per year. Reasons for such demand and growth include expanding
international economies, new data warehousing applications, and increasing demand for such
software by U.S. companies.1
1Source: Penny Crosman, ‘‘Database Bubble?’’ Intelligent Enterprise Vol. 9, No. 7 (July 2006), p. 15.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
159
Data Validation
The data deﬁnition language (DDL) of a DBMS enables its users to deﬁne the record
structure of any particular database table (i.e., the individual ﬁelds that each record will
contain). For example, to create the record structure for the car registration ﬁle shown in
the top portion of Figure 5-4, you might deﬁne the following data ﬁelds and characteristics:
Data Field
Date Type
Size
Required?
Social Security number
text
9
yes
Last name
text
50
yes
First name
text
30
yes
Home phone number
text
14
no
License plate state
text
2
yes
License plate number
text
10
yes
Chapter 4 explains how to deﬁne this record structure using Microsoft Access. Here,
we will focus on the data-validation capabilities DBMSs.
Case-in-Point 5.2
Geographic information systems (GISs) rely heavily on databases to
store information about streams, roads, utility installations, and similar geographic infor-
mation. In regional planning environments—for example, water-resource planning—local
districts often need to share data from different databases. One of the biggest problems:
disparate proprietary record structures, which sometimes cost local governments hundreds of
thousands of dollars to convert to consistent formats. Members of the Northern Kentucky GIS
standards task force spent more than 600 hours grappling with this problem and developing
new formatting standards.2
Mistakes in the important data ﬁelds of AIS databases are costly to a company in terms
of the time and trouble required to correct them, as well as the potential inconvenience
and confusion caused by such errors until they are corrected. Simple examples include
typing ‘‘4)’’ instead of ‘‘40’’ for hours worked, ‘‘NU’’ instead of ‘‘NY’’ for the state code in a
mailing address, or ‘‘UPC’’ instead of ‘‘UPS’’ for the shipper code. Although it is impossible
to guard against every possible type of error, database designers can use the following tools
of a typical DBMS to catch many of them.
Proper Data Types for Fields.
Using Microsoft Access, one input control is inherent
in the data type that you assign to a particular data ﬁeld. For example, if you create a data
ﬁeld as a ‘‘number’’ data type, Access will reject all character inputs that are not numbers.
Similarly, if you declare a data ﬁeld as a ‘‘date’’ data type, Access will reject all input values
(including alphabetic letters or punctuation marks) that cannot be part of a date. This is
why it is often better to use data types other than text for data ﬁelds.
Input Masks.
Input masks limit users to particular types of data in speciﬁc formats—for
example, ‘‘123-45-6789’’ for a Social Security number,‘‘(123) 456-7890’’ for a telephone
number, or ‘‘8/9/10’’ for a date. Although system designers use special symbols for the
mask, the DBMS interprets these symbols as input requirements and acts accordingly.
At data-entry time, the user will see just the formatted part of the mask—for example,
‘‘
-
-
’’ (see the ‘‘Input Mask’’ row in Figure 4-14 of the previous chapter). Input masks
2Source: Lisa Martin, et al., ‘‘Sharing Data’’ Geospatial Solutions Vol. 15, No. 3 (February 2005), pp. 26–31.

160
PART TWO / Databases
help users input data correctly in databases by indicating a general input format, thereby
reducing data-entry errors. Such masks also enable the system to reject incompatible
data—for example, a letter character mistakenly input in a numeric ﬁeld.
Default Values.
A third input control is to specify a default value for the data ﬁelds
of new records. Examples include the number ‘‘40’’ for an hours-worked data ﬁeld or a
‘‘coach’’ seating code of ‘‘Y’’ for an airline passenger. Again, such default values help guard
against input errors as well as speed data entry.
Drop-Down Lists.
You probably have already seen combo boxes on web pages that
contain drop-down lists of choices. Databases like Access enable you to use similar boxes
for your tables or forms (Figure 5-5). Although such boxes are convenient alternatives to
typing data manually, they also control data-entry because they limit user entries to valid
inputs. In Access, another advantage of using a combo box is that you can store the choices
for it as the values of a separate table, adding to the ﬂexibility of the database itself.
Validation Rules.
One of the most versatile data entry controls is the ability to create
custom validation tests using a validation rule. Using Microsoft Access, for example,
you create such rules as a record-structure property of a data ﬁeld. Figure 5-6 illustrates
an example for the ‘‘Fine Amount’’ data ﬁeld of the Parking Violations Code table in
Figure 5-4. This (numeric) data ﬁeld shows the amount of money that a person must pay
for a particular parking violation. In Figure 5-5, the expression Between 1 And 100 that
appears in the properties window on the left side speciﬁes the acceptable range of values.
The error message in the message box on the right displays the ‘‘Validation Text’’ that you
specify in this ﬁeld’s properties window. This is what will appear in a message box when
a user attempts to enter a value (such as ‘‘200’’) that falls outside the allowable range.
Validation rules can be simple, such as the one in Figure 5-6, or much more complex.
For example, Access also enables you to use mathematical computations, predeﬁned
functions, and logical operators to create more complex validation rules. An example is
Between 1 And 100 AND Not 77, which means that the entry value must fall in the speciﬁed
range and cannot be ‘‘77.’’ Another example is Between [ﬂdStartDate] and [ﬂdEndDate],
which means that the date entered must be between an employee’s hire date and his or
her termination date.
FIGURE 5-5
An example of a combo box at run time for the violation code of the Ticket ﬁle
table.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
161
FIGURE 5-6
Left: The properties window for the Fine Amount data ﬁeld of the Parking Violations table. Right:
The error message that a user would see if he or she attempts to enter a value for this ﬁeld that falls outside the
speciﬁed range.
Case-in-Point 5.3
The consulting team had a massive task: consolidating the payroll
records of 110,000 employees stored in ﬁve different systems into the database of a grocery
chain’s ERP system. Because the project was over budget, company executives instructed the
team to ignore validating taxes for terminated employees. But some of those employees didn’t
stay terminated, and the validation costs that the team would have incurred for such validation
was ‘‘chump change’’ compared to the cost of correcting the erroneous tax records for the
rehires.3
Referential Integrity.
A ﬁnal data-entry control is to enforce referential integrity in
relational database tables. This feature controls certain inconsistencies among the records
in relational tables. Consider, for example, the possibility of deleting a parking violations
code record from the third database table in Figure 5-4 (e.g., deleting the record for Code
A—meter expired). We can’t allow such a deletion because this would disrupt all the
references to that record in the Tickets table. For the same reason, we can’t allow new
records in the ticket table to reference nonexistent codes in the parking violations code
ﬁle—for example, a ticket with code ‘‘Z’’ (if such a code didn’t exist). This would be a
parking ticket for a nonexistent violation.
Database management systems make it easy to enforce referential integrity. In Access,
for example, you simply check a box in the Edit Relationships dialog window at the time
that you create the relationship—see Figure 5-7. This enforcement performs two vital
functions. First, it does not allow record deletions in the ‘‘one’’ table of a one-to-many
relationship. Second, it does not allow a user to create a new record in the ‘‘many’’ table
of a one-to-many relationship that references a nonexistent record on the ‘‘one’’ side. Case
5–25 illustrates these concepts in more detail.
In Figure 5-7, note that the Edit Relationships window in Access provides two
additional boxes that you might check: one that allows ‘‘cascade update related ﬁelds’’ and
one that allows ‘‘cascade delete related records.’’ These options enable you to override the
referential integrity rules just described for parent records (although Access will warn you
ﬁrst). If you chose the ﬁrst of these options, for example, you could delete a record in the
3Source: No author, ‘‘Anonymous Tales from the Front Lines: Do It Fast or Do It Right,’’ Infoworld Vol. 28, No. 9
(February 26, 2006), p. 46.

162
PART TWO / Databases
FIGURE 5-7
This dialog box appears when you ﬁrst create a relationship in Microsoft Access.
Clicking the check box to Enforce Referential Integrity does just that.
Parking Violations Code File, and Access would also delete the reference to that record in
the records of the Ticket File. (This would not be desirable here, however—it would leave
you with tickets in the Tickets File with no violation code in them.) The second option
allows you to delete a parent record, even if there are matching child records for it. For
example, if you delete a record in the Car Registration table, Access will then delete all the
ticket records associated with that record (car) in the Ticket File table.
EXTRACTING DATA FROM DATABASES: DATA
MANIPULATION LANGUAGES (DMLs)
The totality of the information in a database and the relationships of its tables is called
the database schema. Thus, the schema is a map or plan of the entire database. Using
the previous student-parking example, the schema would be all the information that a
university might store about car registrations and parking tickets.
Any particular user or application program will normally be interested in (or might
be limited to) only a subset of the information in the database. This limited access is a
subschema, or view, in database parlance. For example, one subschema for our parking
database might be the information required by the university registrar—e.g., the student’s
name, Social Security number, and outstanding parking tickets. (Many universities do not
allow students to graduate with outstanding parking tickets.) Subschemas are important
design elements of a database because they dictate what data each user needs, and also
because they protect sensitive data from unauthorized access. This is one reason why a
university might design several subschemas for its parking database that purposely exclude
student Social Security numbers.
The terms schema and subschema describe a simple idea—the distinction between
the design of a database on one hand and the uses of a database on the other. The goal is to
design a database schema that is ﬂexible enough to satisfy the subschema uses required of
it. This design can make the difference between an AIS that barely works and an AIS that

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
163
provides a very real competitive edge to a proﬁt-seeking business. Here are some ways of
creating subschemas.
Creating Select Queries
The purchasing agent of a manufacturing company needs to know what inventory parts
balances are now below their reorder points. A payroll manager wants to know which
employees are eligible to receive year-end bonuses. A tax assessor is interested in those
areas of the city that have experienced the most real estate appreciation.
What these applications have in common is the need for selective information from
one or more database tables. Queries allow database developers to create customized
subschemas. For example, using the student car registration database, you might want to
(1) look up something about a speciﬁc student (e.g., the license plate number of his or
her car), (2) change the information in a speciﬁc record (e.g., update a student’s phone
number), (3) delete a record (e.g., because a student sells his or her car), or (4) list ﬁle
information selectively (e.g., prepare a list of all students with California license plates).
A dynaset is a dynamic subset of a database that you create with such queries, and the
purpose of a data manipulation language (DML) is to help you create such dynasets.
One-Table Select Queries.
A select query creates a dynaset of database information
based on two types of user-speciﬁed criteria: (1) criteria that determine which records to
include, and (2) criteria that determine which data ﬁelds to include from those records.
Figure 5-8 illustrates a simple select query that displays particular information from a
single table using Microsoft Access. This example asks the system to display the last name,
ﬁrst name, phone number, license plate state, and license plate number for all cars with
California license plates.
You can create several types of queries with Access 2007. One is a simple ﬁlter query
that references only one table. Another combines the information from several tables. A
third type is an action query. We look at each of these queries in order.
FIGURE 5-8
A simple query to select all car registrations with CA (California) license plates.

164
PART TWO / Databases
Single Criterion.
To create a simple ﬁlter query, ﬁrst click the Create option on the main
menu bar. In the Create menu, click ‘‘Query Design.’’ Access will display a small dialog
box that allows you to select the table(s) on which to base your query. To create the query
in Figure 5-8, we only need the tbl Car Registrations File. The bottom portion of Figure 5-8
shows the layout in which to enter your data ﬁelds and the selection criteria for them.
Your next task is to select the data ﬁelds in each record you wish to display. One way
to do this is to click on the ﬁrst (left-most) cell in the Field row in the lower portion of the
Query panel. An arrow will appear in this cell. Click on this arrow and a drop-down list of
available data ﬁelds will appear. Select the ﬁeld from this list that you wish to display in the
current column (we selected Last Name in the ﬁgure). Continue across the panel until you
have selected all the ﬁelds you need. Alternate methods of selecting data ﬁelds for queries
in Access 2007 are (1) double clicking on the desired ﬁeld name in the table list of the
upper panel or (2) dragging the ﬁeld name in the table list to the column.
Next, you must specify the selection criteria for the query. For example, to display
only those records with California licenses enter ‘‘=CA’’ in the criteria box under ‘‘State
Licensed.’’ You will see CA is now enclosed with quotation marks, which Access auto-
matically adds for you. To specify criteria in general, all basic comparison operators are
available—i.e., =(equals), <(less than), >(greater than), >=(greater than or equal to),
<=(less than or equal to), and <>(not equal to).
You are now ready to run the ﬁlter. To do this, click the exclamation point with the
word ‘‘Run’’ on the left portion of the main menu. The results of your query will appear
as shown in Figure 5-9. You can toggle back and forth between design and run modes by
clicking on the View option in the Results section of the left side of the main menu.
After you have created a query, most DBMSs enable you to save it in a separate ﬁle
for later use, thus eliminating the need to rewrite it. This saves developer time as well as
spares end users the work of creating such queries in the ﬁrst place. The letters ‘‘qry’’ are
the standard naming preﬁx for queries. Thus, as you can see on the tab in Figure 5-9, we
named our query ‘‘qryCalifornia License Plates.’’
Multiple Criteria.
It is also possible to specify multiple criteria in a query. For example,
suppose you wanted a list of all car registrants whose cars had California license plates and
whose last names were ‘‘Curry.’’ To create such a query in Access, simply type the name
‘‘Curry’’ in the ‘‘Last Name’’ column and in the same Criteria row as the ‘‘CA.’’ Access
interprets criteria appearing in the same row as an ‘‘and’’ operation. The results will be all
those records with last name ‘‘Curry’’ and whose license plate state is ‘‘CA.’’ Similarly, if
you specify three criteria in the same row, then Access will ﬁnd database records in the
table satisfying all three requirements.
FIGURE 5-9
The result of the query in Figure 5-8.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
165
Sometimes,
you
might
want
to
search
for
records
that
satisfy
alternate
requirements—for example, car registrants whose cars have California license plates or
whose last names are ‘‘Curry.’’ To create such a query in Access, use multiple lines at
the bottom of the Query dialog box in Figure 5-8. The result of this query will be all
records that satisfy either requirement. (The system will also include records satisfying
both requirements.)
Multi-Table Select Queries.
Many accounting applications require information that
must be drawn from more than one database table. For example, suppose you wanted to
create a report similar to the following:
Ticket
License
Registered
Listed
Amount of
Number
Plate
Car Owner
Phone Number
Ticket
10151
CA 123 MCD
Dorothy Curry
(916) 358–4448
$10.00
10152
CA 123 MCD
Dorothy Curry
(916) 358–4448
$20.00
10231
CA 253 DAL
Richard Mason
(916) 563–7865
$50.00
etc.
Notice that the information in this report comes from three different tables: the ticket
number and license plate number come from the Tickets table, the registered car owner’s
name and phone number come from the Car Registrations table, and the amount of each
ticket comes from the Parking Violations Code table. To create such a report, you must
ﬁrst join the tables using the Relationships window. Chapter 4 explains how to perform
this task.
Your next step is to construct the query. Follow the steps outlined above for creating
simple queries, being careful to select the data ﬁelds shown in Figure 5-10. The results
should be similar to those shown in Figure 5-11.
The tasks performed by the query shown in Figure 5-10 are nontrivial. To appreciate
this, imagine that you had to create the report above manually, using the information
shown in Figure 5-4. If there were hundreds of parking tickets in a given week and
thousands of car registration records, the work required for this job would be enormous.
But a computerized DBMS using a DML can do this quickly and automatically in just a few
seconds—an amazing feat if you think about it!
FIGURE 5-10
A multiple-table query.

166
PART TWO / Databases
FIGURE 5-11
The results of the multiple-table query in Figure 5-10.
Creating Action Queries
Although most queries simply extract information from database tables, some accounting
tasks require users to update, match, or delete multiple records in a single operation.
Microsoft Access supports the action queries listed below. You can create any of these
queries by selecting the appropriate choice from the New Query dialog box shown in
Figure 5-12. (To launch this dialog box, select ‘‘Query Wizard’’ from the Query dialog box
in the Access database main menu.)
1. Simple query Wizard does the same thing as described previously under ‘‘One-table
Select Queries.’’
2. Crosstab queries enable you to perform a statistical analysis of the data in a table and
provide the cross-tabulation results in a row-and-column format similar to a pivot table
in a spreadsheet. For example, a crosstab query might show the average invoice amount
for each vendor in a vendor table, or the average credit purchase for each customer
living in a speciﬁed zip code.
FIGURE 5-12
The Query Wizard screen of options available in Access.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
167
3. Find-Duplicates queries enable you to ﬁnd those records with duplicate entries
in a speciﬁed ﬁeld. Many common auditing tasks require such queries—for example,
ﬁnding duplicate customer orders, ﬁnding employees with the same employee or Social
Security number, or searching for different vendor records with the same address. Note
that a simple select query might enable you to ﬁnd one example of such duplicates. A
ﬁnd-duplicates query enables you to ﬁnd all duplicates with a single query.
4. Find-unmatched queries enable you to ﬁnd the records in one table with no matching
record in another table. For example, such queries enable auditors to identify those
payroll records with no matching employee records or identify those vendor invoices
with no matching supplier record.
5. Delete queries enable you to delete table records selectively. Applications include the
ability to delete the records of (1) employees who quit the organization, (2) students
who drop out of school or graduate from school, or (3) inventory products no longer
sold by the company.
6. Append queries enable you to append records from one table to the end of another
table. Accounting examples include the ability to add the payroll records for the current
period to a year-to-date table or to consolidate the employees from two departments
into a single table.
7. Sum a column by clicking the Sum ﬁgure. The word ‘‘Total’’ will be added in the ﬁrst
column, and click under the ‘‘Fine’’ amounts and the column will be added together.
8. Update queries enable you to alter selected table records systematically. Accounting
applications include the ability to raise all suggested retail prices of a particular product
line by 10%, lower the salaries of all those employees with a low performance rating by
5%, or delete shipping charges for all customer purchases over a set limit.
9. Make-table queries enable you to create a new table from the records that you select
in an existing table. For example, a university might want to create a separate table of
all graduating seniors. A common accounting application is to create a separate table of
all the records you are about to delete using a delete query.
Guidelines for Creating Queries
The preceding discussions explained various kinds of select queries and action queries.
Here are some guidelines to help you create error-free queries using Microsoft Access:
1. Spell accurately and be sensitive to capitalization. The criteria for Access select
queries are case sensitive. For example, you will not get matches if you specify California
licenses as ‘‘Cal’’ or ‘‘Ca’’ in a criteria line if the entries in the underlying database table
are ‘‘CA.’’
2. Specify AND and OR operations correctly. If you want a query to satisfy two
conditions simultaneously (i.e., perform an AND operation), enter the criteria on the
same line of your query. If you want a query to satisfy either of two conditions (i.e.,
perform an OR operation), place them on successive criteria lines.
3. Tables must be joined properly. If you wish to construct a multi-table query, the
tables must ﬁrst be joined properly in Access’ Relationships window.
4. Name queries systematically. Query names should begin with the standard ‘‘qry’’
preﬁx. It also helps to assign mnemonic query names—for example, ‘‘qryCustomer-
s_in_California,’’ ‘‘qryGraduating_Seniors’’ and so forth.

168
PART TWO / Databases
5. Choose data ﬁelds selectively. Double-clicking on the asterisk (∗) in the data ﬁeld
list of a table (e.g., the ﬁrst symbol in each of the three table lists in Figure 5-10) enables
you to include all the data ﬁelds from that table in your query. Because most commercial
database tables have many data ﬁelds, using this option can result in a large number of
data ﬁelds (i.e., columns in the lower portion) of your query. This makes query design
unwieldy.
Structured Query Language (SQL) and HyperText
In addition to using a DML in a DBMS, you can also access selected information from a
database using a data query language. The American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
has adopted standards for one such query language: structured query language (SQL).
This language is important because many relational databases such as Access support it.
Figure 5-13 shows how you might construct the request for records with California license
plates using SQL.
SQL is a useful tool for auditors. In Microsoft Access, the user points to a database table
to include in a query. With SQL, the user speciﬁes a table and ﬁelds, using commands such
as FROM, SELECT, and WHERE. FROM identiﬁes the table source, and SELECT chooses
the data ﬁelds to include in the query. The WHERE command can specify criteria, such as
‘‘State = CA.’’ An auditor could select ﬁles for review using these commands. For example,
the WHERE command could refer to sales orders in excess of a speciﬁed dollar amount.
Yet another way of ﬁnding such information is with hypertext. DBMSs use hypertext
by highlighting key words or display text in different-colored characters. Clicking on
a keyword with your mouse directs the DBMS to move directly to that entry. One
hypertext example is Apple’s Hypercard for Macintosh microcomputers. Another example
is Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), the language for creating web pages. Hypertext
systems are especially useful for researching technical materials in which you ﬁnd it
convenient to jump from subject to subject or web page to web page.
Case-in-Point 5.4
Wikipedia.org hosts one of the largest encyclopedias or compendiums
of online information, containing (for example) almost 3 million articles in English. Most
articles explain a term or concept such as ‘‘accounting information systems’’ in simple
language, and include hyperlinks (in blue) to explanations of the technical terms contained in
each article.4
It is also possible to store hypertext entries directly in databases. For example, you
might want to store a ‘‘live’’ web address or email address within the records of a table.
SELECT (LastName, FirstName, PhoneNumber, LicPlateState, LicPlateNo)
FROM CarRegistrationFile
WHERE LicPlateState = CA;
FIGURE 5-13
An example of SQL instructions for the example of Figure 5-7. These instructions
will list the last name, ﬁrst name, phone number, license plate state, and license plate number of
all cars with license plate state code ‘‘CA.’’
4Source: from the authors.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
169
Conversely, you might want to store hypertext links within the body of database forms or
other screen objects. Modern databases such as Access provide tools for performing such
tasks. An additional version of hypertext is eXtensible Markup Language (XML), which
allows end users to create their own tagging standards as well. We discuss XML in greater
detail in Chapter 12.
Sorting, Indexing, and Database Programming
In addition to accessing or listing records selectively, a DBMS also enables you to reorganize
an entire table. One way to do this is by sorting records, which means physically rewriting
records on a disk in the desired order. This is both time consuming and usually unnecessary.
It is faster and easier to index your records (refer back to the last row of Figure 5-5), which
merely creates a table of record keys and disk addresses that accomplishes the same purpose
as sorting. Thus, when users specify ‘‘sort’’ in queries, Access does not physically reorder
records but instead merely temporarily assembles the information for display purposes.
Finally, even the best DBMS software cannot anticipate every user’s processing needs.
For this reason, advanced DBMSs include programming tools that enable users to develop
their own processing applications. One common requirement is for customized data-entry
screens, which enable users to include better data descriptions and more detailed instruc-
tions on input screens. Similarly, programming languages (such as VBA for Microsoft Access)
enable users to create custom processing routines—for example, to create their own
data-validation routines. This end-user programming is important because it enables users
to perform their own data processing without the technical assistance of IT professionals.
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) and Data Mining
Although SQL enables users to extract data from one or more database tables, online
analytical processing (OLAP) allows users to extract complex information that not
only describes ‘‘what’’ happened, but helps explain why it happened. Several software
developers now market OLAP packages. Examples include Integration Server (Arbor
Software), Holos (Seagate Technology), PowerDimensions (SyBase), Plato (Microsoft), and
WhiteLight (WhiteLight Systems). Some of these tools only work with speciﬁc databases,
while others interface with several of them. Most allow end users to perform their own
database analyses, including data mining (discussed shortly).
OLAP Features.
An important feature of OLAP is the ability to conduct multidimen-
sional analyses (Figure 5-14). One dimension may be ‘‘time.’’ Other dimensions might be
‘‘customer,’’ ‘‘product,’’ or ‘‘geography.’’ For example, OLAP can help you examine sales
over time for a particular product in a speciﬁc geographical region. Another feature of
OLAP is a ‘‘drill-down’’ capability. This allows you to examine data at increasing levels of
detail. As an example, you can take sales for one quarter shown by geographical region
and drill down to see sales for each state, and then for each major city within that state.
Similarly, you can drill down sales from a product line to a speciﬁc product, and then to
a speciﬁc product size or color. This type of analysis can provide the ‘‘why’’ behind what
has happened.
OLAP has a variety of other helpful features. One is the ability to create pivot tables,
which are two-dimensional statistical summaries of database information (and similar to the
pivot tables of Microsoft Access or Excel). The example in Figure 5-14 is a two-dimensional

170
PART TWO / Databases
Sales Report—Best Multimedia
2nd Quarter 20xx
Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Midwest
TOTAL
Total Sales
CDs
$50,000
$45,000
$37,000
$34,100
$34,000
$200,100
Pop Rock
$30,500
$20,000
$22,000
$17,000
$19,000
$108,500
Jazz
$4,200
$7,500
$5,000
$4,100
$2,200
$23,000
Show Tunes
$8,200
$10,000
$4,800
$6,000
$4,700
$33,700
Rap
$7,100
$7,500
$5,200
$7,000
$8,100
$34,900
DVDs
$80,800
$92,000
$78,000
$56,000
$60,200
$367,000
Action
$12,000
$13,000
$11,000
$9,700
$9,000
$54,700
Classics
$14,000
$18,000
$25,000
$ 11,000
$7,000
$75,000
Comedy
$16,000
$17,000
$16,200
$13,400
$17,600
$80,200
Drama
$15,900
$17,100
$16,100
$13,400
$17,600
$80,100
Horror
$14,900
$17,900
$1,700
$1,500
$1,000
$37,000
Mystery
$8,000
$9,000
$8,000
$7,000
$8,000
$40,000
Suspense
$2,000
$3,800
$1,800
$3,000
$2,000
$12,600
Thrillers
$4,000
$4,000
$5,000
$3,000
$5,000
$21,000
True Crime
$2,000
$1,200
$1,200
$1,000
$1,000
$6,400
Software
$22,000
$20,800
$19,700
$20,000
$25,000
$107,500
Total
$152,800
$157,800
$134,700
$110,100
$119,200
$674,600
FIGURE 5-14
A pivot table showing a drilldown of sales totals by product type and region.
analysis of sales by product (on the vertical axis) and region (along the horizontal axis). Pivot
tables enable users to choose what type of summary information to display (e.g., total sales,
average sales, or maximum sales), as well as to change an overall selection category (e.g.,
change the period in which to view sales data). Further information about OLAP features,
products, and reviews about OLAP software can be found at www.altaplana.com/olap and
www.olapreport.com.
Data Mining.
Closely connected to OLAP is the concept of data mining, which means
using a set of data analysis and statistical tools to detect relationships, patterns, or trends
among stored data. For example, data mining tools might enable an auditor to reveal
suspicious payments by a governmental agency. Data mining also helps advertisers in
cross-selling products or offering tie-in promotions, retailers decide product placements
in their stores (e.g., placing snacks near the frozen pizza section), and sales managers
increase customer satisfaction. Because data-mining tools can sift through massive amounts
of corporate data to detect patterns, they can be particularly effective tools for ﬁrms seeking
to better understand their customers and what they want or need.
Case-in-Point 5.5
Talbots is a leading retailer of women’s wear whose legacy batch
reporting system was unable to provide managers with timely information. To address this
problem, the company recently installed SQL Server 2005—a data warehouse system from
Microsoft—and additional software that transfers POS data such as purchases directly into the
warehousing system in real time. The new software provides managers with up-to-the-minute

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
171
information on sales and inventory, thereby enabling them to make better stafﬁng decisions
as well as respond more quickly to changing market conditions.5
A wide variety of software tools now provide data mining capabilities. One possibility
is to use the data-mining tools that already exist in OLAP software, database software, or
artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms. Alternately, users can purchase speciﬁc software packages
for data-mining tasks—for example, Darwin (Oracle), Intelligent Miner (IBM), Enterprise
Miner (SAS), or Clementine (SPSS).
Although the most popular uses of data mining are related to sales and marketing, there
are many accounting applications as well. One possibility is for auditors to use data mining
to detect credit-card anomalies or suspicious behavior. For example, fraudulent credit card
transactions may follow a pattern, such as an increase in the total amount of purchases
immediately following a credit card theft or products with special characteristics (such as
ones that can easily be sold). Another application is for investors to use data-mining tools to
predict corporate bankruptcies. A third application is for government workers to use such
tools to identify fraudulent claims for worker’s compensation or excessive uses of welfare
services.
OBJECT-ORIENTED DATABASES, MULTIMEDIA
DATABASES, AND DATA WAREHOUSES
The databases that we have discussed so far are traditional ones that mostly handle text
data (i.e., data that can be neatly organized and categorized according to the values stored
in text or numeric data ﬁelds). Not all databases are this simple.
Object-Oriented and Multimedia Databases
An object-oriented database (OODB) is a database that contains both the text data of
traditional databases and information about the set of actions that can be taken on these
data ﬁelds. For example, a payroll ﬁle might contain not only traditional information about
an employee, but also instructions that indicate how to compute an employee’s net pay.
Case-in-Point 5.6
Geotagging means using an object-oriented database to store geo-
graphic information about entities of interest using a digital geographic map. In a typical
application, the system allows users to indicate where they live or work, thereby helping
individuals arrange for car pools. Flickr (ﬂickr.com/map) allows camera users to upload
pictures to indicate where the pictures were taken. Marketers suggest that such systems will
soon allow advertisers to better target their customers.6
Many OODBs are multimedia databases that include graphics, audio information, and
animation. These databases also typically store information about how to display graphics,
how to play audio clips, and so forth. Multimedia databases are used by real estate brokers
to store pictures and perhaps narrated tours of listed properties, by companies to train
5Source: (No author),‘‘Talbots to Boost Efﬁciency with Microsoft-based Retail Data Warehouse’’ Apparel Magazine
Vol. 47, No. 6 (February 2006), p. 18.
6Source: Rubel, Steve ‘‘Location, Location, Location’’ Advertising Age Vol. 77, No. 39 (September 25, 2006),
p. 29.

172
PART TWO / Databases
FIGURE 5-15
The employee records of this security database contain both text data and the
picture of each employee.
employees, by police departments to store ‘‘mug shots’’ and voice prints of prisoners,
and by publishing houses to enhance the descriptions of everything from cookbooks to
encyclopedias. Your employer might even use such a database to store your picture in an
employee ﬁle (Figure 5-15).
Specialized accounting applications of multimedia databases include those that store
the audio portions of audit interviews, pictures of important assets, or images of critical
ﬁnancial contracts. These ‘‘unstructured objects’’ require a new deﬁnition of what we
mean by ‘‘data’’ and how we organize them. But OODB records can still be manipulated.
For example, a speech still has such characteristics as ‘‘speaker,’’ ‘‘subject,’’ and ‘‘length,’’
and these characteristics can be used to search a database table and retrieve the desired
object, whatever that might be.
Like multimedia databases, multidimensional databases store large quantities of
data. The ultimate goal of such databases is to enable employees at various levels of an
organization to deﬁne their own tables and reports in formats that are most useful to them.
Some multidimensional databases accomplish this goal by combining data from several
independent data sources. Others do so with unique data schemas, while still others do
so by enabling users to scale existing data ﬁelds or otherwise deﬁne their own data ﬁelds.
Because it is not clear how best to deliver quality data to organizational users, the subject
of multidimensional database development is an active area of research.
Data Warehouses
Where feasible, it often makes sense to pool the data from separate applications into a large,
common body of information called a data warehouse. The data in a data warehouse are
rarely current. Rather, they are typically ‘‘older information’’ that were initially collected
for other reasons during the conduct of normal operations and daily activities of an
organization. For example, a sales transaction creates data that help management make
decisions about production, cash availability, and so on. The sales transaction data also
impact ﬁnancial statements. Managers are learning, though, that much of the data gathered
about sales and other operational activities can also be useful strategically. For example,
in recording a sale, an AIS collects data about the customer, the product, the timing of
the sale, and so on. This information can be helpful in predicting future sales of speciﬁc

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
173
products or by a certain category of customers. To obtain these beneﬁts from the data
collected, the data must be amassed in a central location—the data warehouse.
To be useful, the data in data warehouses should have the following characteristics:
(1) free of errors, (2) deﬁned uniformly, (3) span a longer time horizon than the company’s
transaction systems, and (4) optimized data relationships that allow users to answer complex
questions—for example, queries requiring information from several diverse sources.
One advantage of a data warehouse is to make organizational information available on
a corporate-wide basis. For example, with such an approach, the marketing representatives
of a company might then gain access to the company’s production data and thereby
be better able to inform customers about the future availability of desired, but as yet
unmanufactured, products. This idea is also central to the concept of an enterprise-wide
database (i.e., a large repository of organizational data that comes from, and is available
to, a wide range of employees). Another advantage is to facilitate data mining.
Case-in-Point 5.7
With more than 9 million customers, KeyBank (www.key.com) is the
thirteenth largest bank in the United States. To help market ﬁnancial products, the bank
created a million-dollar DB2 data warehouse that allows its managers to determine what
investments its customers prefer (e.g., CDs or mutual funds), and how best to sell products
(e.g., direct mail or Internet). Bank ofﬁcials credit the data warehouse, the decision tools that
mine it, and the ability of different departments to share data for increasing customer contacts
by 200%, and a 100% return on the investment in 14 months.
Building a data warehouse is a difﬁcult job. The developers must ﬁrst decide what data
to collect, how to standardize and scrub (clean) the data to ensure uniform accuracy and
consistency, and how to deal with computer records that typically begin in a non-normalized
form. One reason for these difﬁculties is that the data in data warehouses may come from
several sources—for example, an AIS in one case and a production application in another
case. As a result, the same data element could have two different representations or
values—for example, an eight-digit numeric product code in the AIS and a six-digit
alphabetic character code in the production application. Similarly, one corporate division
might capture sales daily while another collects the same data weekly. The developers
must determine data standards in both cases, reconcile any discrepancies, and account for
missing ﬁelds and misspellings. Another challenge is to build the data warehouse in such
a way that users can access it easily and ﬁnd answers to complex questions.
If data warehouses are so costly, difﬁcult, and time consuming to develop, why do
companies bother with them? The answer is that they generate many beneﬁts in return,
including increased employee access to valuable information, the ability to answer complex
questions, and a potential return on investment that can exceed 400%.
Case-in-Point 5.8
Provident Central Credit Union is one of the largest credit unions in
the United States. Recently, it created a data warehouse to make use of the rich transaction
and customer data it gathers. The company plans to use the data in the warehouse to
conduct one-to-one marketing campaigns for custom products and to improve its pricing and
responsiveness to its membership of almost 96,000 customers. The data warehouse holds the
answers to many complex questions such as, ‘‘Who are the most proﬁtable customers?’’ and
‘‘How can we improve our customer relationships through product and service offerings?’’7
Where corporate executives believe the rewards for building a data warehouse are
not high, they can opt instead to build a data mart. Data marts are smaller than data
7Source: www.taborcommunications.com/dstar/01/0508/103021.html.

174
PART TWO / Databases
warehouses in storage size and typically focus on just one application area—for example,
marketing data. However, in most other ways, they are similar to data warehouses.
AIS AT WORK
Run Your Data Warehouse Like a Fine Restaurant
What do a data warehouse and a ﬁne restaurant have in common? According to Margy
Ross and Ralph Kimball of the Kimball Group—a consulting company specializing in data
warehousing—quite a bit. Here are several ideas:
In the restaurant:
Restaurant staffers create meal plans and then develop customer menus
based on these offerings.
In the data warehouse:
Data warehouse developers provide menus of what data are available,
typically through online display screens.
In the restaurant:
The physical layout is highly efﬁcient, with concern for high levels of
throughput.
In the data warehouse:
Thus, the same concern for efﬁciency and high levels of throughput
applies. Patrons don’t want to wait for data any more than restaurant
patrons want to wait for their meals. This is why the data warehouse
was created in the ﬁrst place—to streamline the delivery of information
to end-users.
In the restaurant:
Good meals depend upon quality raw materials.
In the data warehouse:
Good outputs also depend upon quality inputs. Thus, the system validates
incoming data for such factors as (1) reasonableness, (2) integrity, and
(3) value to end-users.
In the restaurant:
Professional employees staff the restaurant and use professional tools in
their jobs.
In the data warehouse:
Professionals create, monitor, and develop the policies that govern
operations—not patrons. This is no place for amateurs.
In the restaurant:
‘‘Hard work’’ and ‘‘high quality’’ are the watchwords of the operation,
because what gets delivered to the customer can make or break the
restaurant. Delivering consistent, high-quality meals is important because
the restaurant’s reputation depends on them.
In the data warehouse:
The same requirements of high data quality, integrity, and consistency
are the order of the day. Consumers don’t want half-baked (incomplete
or ﬂawed) information any more than they want half-baked food.
In the restaurant:
The kitchen itself is off limits to patrons. Security is important both for
the safety of the customers and the kitchen staff.
In the data warehouse:
The same security concerns apply. Customers stay outside the prepara-
tion area, and are conﬁned to the ‘‘eating area.’’
In the restaurant:
Managers often check with diners to ensure their satisfaction.
In the data warehouse:
Customer needs are also very important, and monitoring user satisfaction
is just as desirable.
Source: Margy Ross and Ralph Kimball. ‘‘Data Warehouse Dining Experience’’ Intelligent
Enterprise Vol. 7, No. 1 (January 1, 2004), pp. 12–14.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
175
SUMMARY
• Databases must be designed carefully. The process of normalization enables designers to minimize
data redundancy, insertion and deletion anomalies, and transitive dependencies. The goal is to
develop a database that is at least in third normal form.
• Database management systems (DBMSs) enable users to create their own databases using data
deﬁnition languages (DDLs) and to manipulate ﬁle data using data manipulation languages (DMLs).
• Designers use a variety of data-validation techniques to help ensure data accurancy and integrity.
Examples include choosing data types carefully for data ﬁelds, using input masks, using default
values, creating a wide variety of validation rules, and enforcing referential integrity.
• An important use of databases is to extract selected information, and Access provides a number
of tools for constructing select queries and action queries. These tools allow users to extract data
from a single table or from multiple tables. Following the guidelines in this chapter can help you
avoid errors when creating such queries.
• Three additional ways of extracting information from databases are to use structured query
language (SQL), online analytical processing (OLAP) tools, or hypertext.
• Users can also manipulate database information by sorting, indexing, using data mining tools, or
performing specialized tasks with end-user programming languages.
• Object-oriented databases (OODBs) enable users to store both data and instructions on how the
data should be displayed or computed. Multimedia databases are OODBs that enable users to store
graphics, pictures, sound clips, and animation clips in addition to text data.
• Data warehouses typically combine the information from separate databases into large sets of
cross-functional data repositories that can help businesses increase data-retrieval efﬁciency, output
productivity, and long-term proﬁtability.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
action query
data deﬁnition language (DDL)
data manipulation language (DML)
data mart
data mining
data warehouse
database management system (DBMS)
default value
dynaset
enterprise-wide database
ﬁrst normal form (1 NF)
ﬂat ﬁle
hypertext
hypertext markup language (HTML)
multidimensional database
multimedia database
normalization
object-oriented database (OODB)
online analytical processing (OLAP)
pivot table
query
query wizard
referential integrity
schema
second normal form (2 NF)
select query
structured query language (SQL)
subschema
third normal form (3 NF)
transitive dependencies
validation rule
XML (extensible markup language)
TEST YOURSELF
Q5-1. A database is in third normal form (3 NF) if it is second normal form and:
a. All the data attributes in a record are well deﬁned

176
PART TWO / Databases
b. All the data attributes in a record depend upon the record key
c. The data contain no transitive dependencies
d. The data can be stored in two or more separate tables
Q5-2. The difference between (1) a database management system (DBMS) and (2) a database, is:
a. Nothing—these terms are synonyms.
b. The ﬁrst is hardware, the second is software
c. The ﬁrst is program software, the second is proprietary data and related ﬁles
d. The ﬁrst refers to a complete accounting system, the second refers to a subset of that
Q5-3. An example of a validation rule is:
a. An input value must be an integer
b. An input value must also have a default value
c. An input value must be between 0 and 40
d. You cannot delete parent records that have child records associated with them
Q5-4. To construct a select query in Microsoft Access in which you want to satisfy two conditions
simultaneously—i.e., implement an and operation—you should:
a. Specify both criteria in separate ﬁelds of the same Criteria line of the query
b. Specify both criteria in the same ﬁeld of the Criteria line of the query
c. Specify each criteria in separate ﬁelds and in separate Criteria lines of the query
d. Give up; this is not possible in Microsoft Access
Q5-5. To adjust the minimum wage of all payroll employees to the current federal level, you should
use a(n):
a. Update query
b. Append query
c. Find minimums query
d. Tax expert
Q5-6. To identify all those employees receiving payroll checks but who have no matching record
in a payroll master ﬁle, you should use a(n):
a. Auditor
b. Find unmatched records query
c. Cross-tabs query
d. Update query
Q5-7. All of the following are examples of DBMSs except:
a. Access
b. Oracle
c. DB2
d. SQL
Q5-8. All of the following are examples of action queries except:
a. Update query
b. Append query
c. Delete query
d. Find missing data query
Q5-9. The difference between (1) using an update query and (2) updating a single record is:
a. Nothing—these are the same thing

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
177
b. The ﬁrst updates all selected records, the second only affects one record
c. The ﬁrst updates more than one table, the second updates only one record
d. None of these is correct.
Q5-10. Which of these database tools is an accounting manager most likely to use to perform online,
‘‘drill-down’’ analyses?
a. Creating pivot tables
b. OLAP
c. HTML web pages
d. SQL
Q5-11. SQL is an example of:
a. A tool to perform online analytical processing
b. A database management system
c. A query language
d. A multimedia database
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
5-1. What is the process of normalization? What levels are there, and why do database developers
seek to normalize data?
5-2. What are database management systems? Are they the same as databases? Why are DBMSs
classiﬁed as software and not hardware?
5-3. What are data deﬁnition languages (DDLs)? How are they related to DBMSs?
5-4. What is a record structure? When deﬁning a record’s structure, what is meant by the term
‘‘data type?’’ Give some examples of data types.
5-5. Why do database developers link tables together? How is this done using Access?
5-6. What is data validation? Why is it important? Give some examples of how to validate data
inputs using Access.
5-7. What is a database schema? What is a database subschema? Give some examples of database
schemas and subschemas for the payroll ﬁle of Figure 5-1.
5-8. What are data manipulation languages? How are these languages related to database manage-
ment systems? How are these languages related to databases?
5-9. What is SQL? How is SQL like an Access query? How is it different?
5-10. What is online analytical processing? How is OLAP related to databases? What is a pivot table,
and how are pivot tables and OLAP related?
5-11. What is the difference between ‘‘sorting records’’ and ‘‘indexing records’’ in a database?
5-12. What is ‘‘data mining?’’ How is data mining useful to proﬁt-seeking companies? What are
some accounting uses of data mining?
5-13. What are object-oriented databases? What are multimedia databases? How are these two
types of databases alike? How are they different?
5-14. What are data warehouses? How are they like databases? How do they differ from databases?
5-15. Why would a company be interested in creating a data warehouse? Why would a company
not be interested in creating a data warehouse?

178
PART TWO / Databases
PROBLEMS
5-16. Discuss both the advantages and disadvantages of using a computerized database system
rather than a manual system for storing and processing accounting data. In your discussion,
provide some speciﬁc accounting examples that illustrate your advantages and disadvantages.
5-17. What words are used to form each of the following acronyms?
(a) DBMS (b) DDL (c) DML (d) SQL (e) OLAP (f) OODB
5-18. The Wilmer Ruiz Corporation employs the individuals listed in the data shown in Figure 5-16.
Use a DBMS to create a database of this information.
a. What record structure did you use for this database? Identify the names, widths, and other
characteristics of each ﬁeld you created.
b. List all employees in Department 5. Print this list.
c. List all employees with ﬁrst name ‘‘Brenda.’’ Print this list.
d. List all those employees with pay rates over $6.50. Print this list.
e. List all those employees eligible for overtime (T = yes; F = no). Print this list.
5-19. Use the web to ﬁnd business applications of data warehousing. Why do companies create
data warehouses, and what are some accounting uses of such warehouses?
5-20. Use the web to ﬁnd business applications of online analytical processing (OLAP). Why do
companies use OLAP? What is the connection between OLAP and databases?
Social
Record
Last
First
Security
Pay
Over-
Number
Name
Name
Number
Dept
Rate
time
1
ADCOX
NORMAN
901795336
1
6.50
Yes
2
KOZAR
LINDA
412935350
1
6.50
Yes
3
MCLEAN
KAY
405751308
1
7.50
No
4
CUNNINGHAM
TOM
919782417
3
7.50
Yes
5
DANIELS
PATRICIA
517351609
3
5.50
Yes
6
MCGUIRE
ANNE
201891647
3
5.50
Yes
7
REEDER
BRENDA
619294493
3
5.50
Yes
8
BLOOM
BRENDA
513321592
4
6.25
Yes
9
DAVIS
DENISE
517351608
4
5.50
Yes
10
DUFFY
LESLIE
314532409
4
8.50
No
11
HARPER
LINDA
615824130
4
5.75
Yes
12
MORGAN
MEREDITH
704563903
4
6.25
Yes
13
WELSH
KAREN
216253428
4
8.25
No
14
CHAPIN
GEORGE
203767263
5
7.50
Yes
15
FINN
JOHN
715386721
5
6.25
Yes
16
HALPIN
MARSHA
913541871
5
6.50
Yes
17
LAURIN
PHILIP
514484631
5
6.50
Yes
18
MIAGLIO
PEGGY
414224972
5
6.25
Yes
19
TURNER
BRENDA
713589164
5
8.50
No
20
ZORICH
MILDRED
504455827
5
6.50
Yes
FIGURE 5-16
Employees of the Wilmer Ruiz company.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
179
Personnel File
Date: October 10, 20xx
Score on
Employee
Aptitude
Department
Current
Number
Test
ID
Pay Rate
Sex
BAKER, JEFFREY L.
1692
73
A
$7.50
M
BARRETT, RAYMOND G.
3444
53
B
7.45
M
BLISS, DONALD W.
6713
55
D
6.80
M
BOWERS, PAUL D.
2084
42
B
5.90
M
BUCHANAN, CINDY
3735
41
E
7.80
F
CHEUNG, WAI KONG
8183
55
C
7.80
F
CONRAD, MARK E.
8317
58
D
9.60
M
DAILY, REBECCA E.
2336
45
D
8.90
F
DRISCOLL, DAVID M.
5210
47
D
7.70
M
ERICKSON, KURT N.
2217
53
B
8.50
M
FRANTZ, HEIDI L.
6390
55
A
6.90
F
GARROW, SCOTT D.
8753
61
A
7.40
M
HARDENBROOK, LISA A.
7427
40
C
6.70
F
JACKSON, GREG W.
4091
67
D
8.90
M
LANGLEY, JERRY W.
3262
86
E
9.40
M
LUBINSKI, TRAVIS M.
3865
37
D
7.50
M
LYNCH, SHERENE D.
7857
66
D
8.90
F
MARKHAM, KYLE R.
6766
62
A
7.90
M
MCGUIRE, TANA B.
4052
55
A
9.20
F
MONACH, SHERI L.
8082
48
B
9.10
F
MOORE, MICHAEL S.
2431
67
E
8.50
M
NELSON, JOHN R.
5873
46
B
7.40
M
PAPEZ, PETER M.
7799
41
E
8.30
M
PETTINARI, DARIN M.
1222
56
B
8.40
M
FIGURE 5-17
Employee data for the Marcia Felix Corporation.
5-21. The information in Figure 5-17 is for the employees of the Marcia Felix Corporation. Use a
DBMS software package to create a database for it.
a. What record structure did you design? Identify the names, widths, and other characteristics
of each ﬁeld in a typical record.
b. Sort these employees by department. Print this list.
c. Sort these employees by pay rate. Print this list.
d. Sort these employees by test score. Print this list.
e. Sort these employees by department and alphabetically by last name within department.
f. What is the average test score for these employees?
g. What is the average score for females? What is the average score for males?
h. What is the average pay rate for these employees?
i. What is the average pay rate for females? What is the average for males?
j. What females scored over 70 on their examinations? What males scored over 50?

180
PART TWO / Databases
5-22. Bonadio Electrical Supplies distributes electrical components to the construction industry.
The company began as a local supplier 15 years ago and has grown rapidly to become a
major competitor in the north central United States. As the business grew and the variety of
components to be stocked expanded, Bonadio acquired a new computer and implemented
an inventory control system and a computerized accounting sysem. Because of its operational
importance, the inventory system has been upgraded to an online system, while all the other
applications are operating in batch mode. Over the years, the company has developed or
acquired more than 100 application programs and maintains hundreds of ﬁles.
Bonadio faces stiff competition from local suppliers throughout its marketing area. At
a management meeting, the sales manager complained about the difﬁculty in obtaining
immediate, current information to respond to customer inquiries. Other managers stated
that they also had difﬁculty obtaining timely data from the system. As a result, the controller
engaged a consulting ﬁrm to explore the situation. The consultant recommended installing a
database management system (DBMS), and the company complied, employing Jack Gibbons
as the database administrator.
At a recent management meeting, Gibbons presented an overview of the DBMS. Gibbons
explained that the database approach assumes an organizational, data-oriented viewpoint,
as it recognizes that a centralized database represents a vital resource. Instead of being
assigned to applications, information is more appropriately used and managed for the entire
organization. The operating system physically moves data to and from disk storage, and the
DBMS is the software program that controls the data deﬁnition library that speciﬁes the data
structures and characteristics. As a result, both the roles of the application programs and
query software, and the tasks of the application programmers and users are simpliﬁed. Under
the database approach, the data are available to all users within security guidelines.
a. Explain the basic difference between a ﬁle-oriented system and a database management
system.
b. Describe at least three advantages and at least three disadvantages of the database
management system.
c. Describe the duties and responsibilities of Jack Gibbons, the database administrator.
(CMA Adapted)
CASE ANALYSES
5-23. Swan’s Supplies (Normalizing Data)
Swan’s Supplies is a wholesaler of sporting goods equipment for retailers in a local
metropolitan area. The company buys sporting goods equipment direct from manufacturers
and then resells them to individual retail stores in the regional area. The raw data in
Figure 5-18 illustrate some of the information required for the company’s purchase order
system. As you can see, this information is characteristic of accounting purchase order
Purchase
Customer
Order
Customer
Customer
Phone
Item
Item
Unit
Quantity
Number
Date
Number
Name
Number
Number
Description
Cost
Unit
Ordered
12345
8/19/03
123-8209
Charles Dresser, Inc.
(752) 433-8733
X32655
Baseballs
$33.69
dozen
20
X34598
Footballs
53.45
dozen
10
Z34523
Bball Hoops
34.95
each
20
12346
8/19/03
123-6733
Patrice Schmidt’s Sports
(673) 784-4451
X98673
Softballs
35.89
dozen
10
X34598
Footballs
53.45
dozen
5
X67453
Soccer balls
45.36
dozen
10
FIGURE 5-18
Some purchasing data for Swan’s Sports Supplies.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
181
systems but is not well organized. In fact, because of the repeating groups in the right-most
columns, it cannot even be stored in a computer system.
Requirements
Store this data in a spreadsheet to make it easy to manipulate. Then perform each of the
following tasks in turn:
1. Reorganize the data in ﬁrst normal form and print your spreadsheet. Why is your data
in ﬁrst normal form?
2. Reorganize the data from part 1 into second normal form and print your spreadsheet.
Why is your data in second normal form?
3. Reorganize the data from part 2 into third normal form and print your spreadsheet. Why
is your data in third normal form?
5-24. Bonnie P Manufacturing Company (Data Validation Using a DBMS)
The payroll department at the Bonnie P Manufacturing Company has deﬁned the following
record structure for employee records.
Date Field
Data Type
Example
Last Name
Text
Kerr
First Name
Text
Stephen
Social Security number
Text
123-45-6789
Home phone number
Text
(987) 456–4321
Work phone extension
Number
123
Payrate
Currency
$12.34
Number of tax exemptions
Number
3
Department
Text
A
All ﬁelds are required. The employee’s Social Security number serves as the record key.
Work phone extensions are always greater than ‘‘100’’ and less than ‘‘999.’’ Pay rates are
always at least $7.75 and no more than $29.85. The maximum number of tax exemptions
allowed is ‘‘10.’’ Finally, there are only three departments: A, B, and C.
Requirements
1. Using a DBMS such as Access, create a record structure for the company.
2. Create data validation rules for as many data ﬁelds as you can. For each data validation
rule, also create validation text that the system can use to display an appropriate error
message. Create a list of such rules on a separate piece of paper.
3. Create employee records for yourself, and employees with the last names Anderson,
Baker, and Chapman using data that you make up. Print this information.
4. Attempt to create one more record that violates a data validation rule. Create a screen
capture of one or more violations, as suggested by your instructor.

182
PART TWO / Databases
5-25. Clifford Cohen University (Enforcing Referential Integrity)
Clifford Cohen University was founded as a small, liberal arts school just three years ago.
Since that time, the institution has grown to the point where parking on campus is difﬁcult
and parking in illegal areas is common. Accordingly, the Board of Directors has reluctantly
approved a policy requiring campus police to issue parking tickets.
Currently, the university requires students and faculty to register their cars with the
parking ofﬁce, which issues them parking decals that registrants must display inside the
front windshield of their cars. At present, all record keeping at the parking ofﬁce is done
manually, severely limiting the ability of ofﬁce personnel to create reports or perform
meaningful statistical analyses about parking on campus. For example, it is currently not
known how many students of each class (freshman, sophomore, etc.) register their cars
or how many full-time faculty, part-time faculty, or clerical staff register their cars. The
new policy of writing parking tickets will only add to this problem because it will require
ofﬁce staff to match parking tickets to student or faculty names. In addition, the Board of
Directors would like an end-of-semester report indicating how many parking violations of
each type (meter violation, invalid parking sticker, etc.) are issued by the campus police.
To help solve these problems, the University Board of Directors has hired you to create
a computerized system for them. You realize that a database system might work for this,
and accordingly propose a database of tables with record structures similar to those in
Figure 5-4. The Board of Directors approves your plan, but asks that you create a small
system to demonstrate its features before creating a full-blown system.
Requirements:
1. Use Microsoft Access (or an alternate DBMS designated by your instructor) to create the
three tables illustrated in Figure 5-4. What data type did you specify for each data ﬁeld
in each table?
2. Create at least three records in the car registration table. Be sure to use your own name
as one of the registrants. Also, create at least three records for the Parking Violations
Code File. Make up your own ﬁne amounts instead of using the ones shown in the
ﬁgure.
3. For each record you create in the car registration ﬁle in step 2 above, create at least
three parking tickets and input this information to the Tickets File. Thus, you should
have at least nine records in this ﬁle. Be sure that at least one record in the Tickets File
contains a reference to each of the records in the Parking Violations Code File (i.e., at
least one person breaks every possible parking violation). Print copies of the records in
each table for your instructor.
4. Attempt to create a record in the Ticket File that contains a nonexistent ticket code in
the parking Violations Code File. Were you successful?
5. Link the tables together, following the directions in Chapter 4. (Be sure to check ‘‘enforce
referential integrity’’ when you see the dialog box illustrated in Figure 4-19.) When you
ﬁnish, your relationships window should resemble the one shown in Figure 5-10. What
are the relationships among the records in the three tables? Print a copy of this window
as documentation for your project.
6. Now return to the Tables portion of Access and display the Car Registration table.
You should now see the plus symbols illustrated in Figure 4-18. Click on one of these
symbols. Are you able to view the linked records?

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
183
7. Now again attempt to create a record in the ticket ﬁle that contains a nonexistent ticket
code in the parking Violations Code File. Were you successful this time?
8. Finally, attempt to delete a record in the Parking Violations Code File. Why can’t you
do it?
9. If required by your instructor, create an example of the parking-violations-by-type report
desired by the Board of Directors using the database you just created.
5-26. BSN Bicycles II (Creating Queries in Access)
Business has been growing at BSN Bicycles, and the store owners have been using their
Access database to store information about their customers. Now that the store is a little
more established, the owners are thinking more about how best to attract more customers
to their store. One idea is to see where their current customers live. The owners also want
a complete list of their credit customers.
Requirements:
1. If you have not already done so, create a database for BSN and the customer’s table
described in Case 4–25 in Chapter 4. Be sure to create at least 10 customer records for
the company, including one with your name. Several of the customers should also live
in the state of Virginia (VA) and several customers should have zip code ‘‘12345.’’ The
Virginia customers and the customers with zip code 12345 do not have to be the same.
2. If you have not already done so, create several invoices for your customers.
3. Create a query that selects all customers living in Virginia. Print your results.
4. Create a query that selects all customers living in zip code 12345. Print your results.
5. Create a query that selects all customers living in Virginia who also have zip code 12345.
Print your results.
6. Create a query that selects all credit customers. (Hint: use the word ‘‘Yes’’ for the
criteria in this query.) Print your results.
5-27. Furry Friends Foundation II (Creating Queries for Databases)
Recall from Case 4–21 in Chapter 4 that the Furry Friends Foundation is a nonproﬁt organi-
zation that ﬁnds homes for abandoned animals. The foundation has recently computerized
some of its operations by storing its accounting data in a relational database. One reason for
this was to enable it to more easily answer questions about donations. This portion of the
case provides some examples of such questions and gives you practice creating database
queries to answer them.
Requirements:
1. If you have not already done so, create the tables and relationships described in Case
4–21.

184
PART TWO / Databases
2. Using Access or similar software as required by your instructor, create three donations for
yourself. You should donate to dogs in one contribution, cats in the second contribution,
and unspeciﬁed (‘‘other’’) in the third contribution.
3. Create a query that selects all customers donating to cats. Print your results.
4. Create a query that selects all contributors who donated over $50. Print your results.
5. Create a query that selects all contributors who donated over $100 to dogs. Print your
results.
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Adelman, Sid and Suzan, Dennis. ‘‘Capitalizing the Data Warehouse’’ DM Review Vol. 15, No. 7 (July
2005), pp. 26–32.
Anonymous. ‘‘Anonymous Tales from the Front Lines: Do It Fast or Do It Right,’’ Infoworld Vol. 28,
No. 9 (February 26, 2006), p. 46.
Bange, Carsten. ‘‘Commentary: The OLAP Revival’’ the OLAP Report (2008), accessible at
http://www.olapreport.com/Comment OLAP revival.htm.
Borthick, A. Faye and Donald Jones. ‘‘Analyzing a Potential Warranty Call Center Budget Overrun:
Using Database Queries to Solve Business Problems,’’ Journal of Information Systems Vol. 19,
No. 1 (Spring 2005), pp. 97–111.
Borthick, A. Faye, and Mary B. Curtis. ‘‘Due Diligence on Fast Fashion Inventory Through Data
Querying’’ Journal of Information Systems Vol. 22, No. 1 (Spring 2008), pp. 77–93.
Calderon, Thomas G., John J. Cheh, and Il Woon Kim. ‘‘How Large Corporations Use Data Mining to
Create Value’’ Management Accounting Quarterly Vol. 4, No. 2 (Winter 2003), pp. 2–13.
Crosman, Penny. ‘‘Database Bubble?’’ Intelligent Enterprise Vol. 9, No. 7 (July 2006), p. 15.
Fadairo, S. A., Rosemary Williams, Ronald Trotman, and Anthony Onyekelu-Eze. ‘‘Using Data Mining
to Ensure Payment Integrity’’ Journal of Government Financial Management Vol. 57, No. 2
(Summer 2008), pp. 22–24.
Garbellotto, Gianluca. ‘‘The Data Warehousing Disconnect’’ Strategic Finance Vol. 89, No. 4 (October
2007), p. 59–61.
Helms, Michael. ‘‘Spanning the Business’’ Best’s Review Vol. 105, No. 11 (March 2005), p. 44.
Keating, Barry. ‘‘Data Mining: What is it and How is it Used?’’ Journal of Business Forecasting
Vol. 27, No. 3 (Fall 2008), pp. 33–35.
Kimball, Ralph, and Margy Ross. ‘‘Differences of Opinion (on Data Warehousing)’’ Intelligent
Enterprise Vol. 7, No. 3 (March 6, 2004), pp. 16–18.
Lamoreaux, Matthew. ‘‘Internal Auditor Used Computer Tool to Detect Worldcom Fraud’’ Journal
of Accountancy Vol. 204, No. 1 (July 2007), p. 35.
Landry, Raymond Jr., Roger Debreceny, and Glen L. Gray. ‘‘Grab Your Picks and Shovels: There’s
Gold in Your Data’’ Strategic Finance Vol. 85, No. 7 (January 2004), pp. 25–8.
Martin, Lisa, Trisha Bruce, J. Kyle Snyder, Steve Gay, and Ken Chaffman. ‘‘Sharing Data’’ Geospatial
Solutions Vol. 15, No. 3 (February 2005), pp. 26–31.
Milligan, Jack. ‘‘Data Chase’’ Banking Strategies Vol. 81, No. 5 (September/October 2005), pp. 5–19.
Perry, Gail. ‘‘At Your Fingertips: the Next Generation of Usage in Data Warehousing’’ Practical
Accountant (no volume or issue numbers), (May 2005), pp. 6, 23.

CHAPTER 5 / Organizing and Manipulating the Data in Databases
185
Ross, Margy, and Kimball, Ralph. ‘‘Data Warehouse Dining Experience’’ Intelligent Enterprise Vol. 7,
No. 1 (January 1, 2004), pp. 12–14.
Slansky, Dick. ‘‘Object-Oriented Databases: the Next Wave in Complex Data Management’’ Manu-
facturing Business Technology Vol. 25, No. 6 (June 2007), p. 51.
Tittel, Ed. ‘‘Managing Data with Database Tools’’ Certiﬁcation Magazineg Vol. 7, No. 8 (August
2005), pp. 20, 39.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. c
2. c
3. c
4. a
5. a
6. b
7. d
8. d
9. b
10. b
11. c


Chapter 6
Database Forms and Reports
INTRODUCTION
FORMS
Creating Simple Forms
Using Forms for Input and Output Tasks
Subforms: Showing Data from Multiple Tables
Concluding Remarks about Forms
REPORTS
Creating Simple Reports
Creating Reports with Calculated Fields
Creating Reports with Grouped Data
Concluding Remarks about Reports
AIS AT WORK—MOTHER LODE BICYCLES
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
A Form for BSN Suppliers
A Form and Subform for BSN Suppliers
A Listing of BSN Suppliers
Furry Friends Foundation III
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Understand how to create simple forms in
Access.
2. Understand the difference between a bound
control and an unbound control on an Access
form or report.
3. Know how to create advanced forms in Access
with subforms.
4. Understand how to create simple reports in
Access.
5. Know how to create reports based on queries.
6. Know how to create reports that contain cal-
culated ﬁelds and understand why databases do
not store such ﬁelds in their tables.
7. Know how to create reports containing grouped
data with control breaks in them.
187

188
PART TWO / Databases
. . . accountants have a greater opportunity to support corporate strategy when they
are involved in developing IT databases. . . .
George Joseph and Asha George, ‘‘Merging Management
Accounting with Database Design’’ Management Accounting
Quarterly Vol. 6, No. 2 (Winter 2005), pp. 34–43.
INTRODUCTION
The previous chapters illustrated how to design a database with several tables and also
how to construct queries to select information from these tables. Two additional database
tools are those that help you create forms and those that help you create hard-copy reports.
The ﬁrst section of this chapter discusses how to create forms, and also how to use forms
for input and output tasks. The second section of this chapter discusses how to create
reports. Both sections illustrate these tasks using Microsoft Access, but almost all the skills
discussed here have counterparts in other database software such as FoxPro or Oracle.
FORMS
Figure 6-1 illustrates an example of a database form—i.e., a custom-designed screen for
entering new records in, or displaying existing records from, a database table. As you can
see in Figure 6-1, a form has three major sections: (1) a heading section, which appears
at the top of the form, (2) a detail section, which usually occupies the most room on
the form and which typically displays the record information, and (3) a navigation bar,
which always appears at the bottom of the form.
Header Section
Detail Section
Navigation Bar
FIGURE 6-1
An example of a database form.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
189
FIGURE 6-2
A portion of the customers table (in datasheet view) from the BSN Database.
Although there is no requirement to use a form for entering data into a database table,
there are several reasons why using a form is better than using a default, datasheet screen
such as the one in Figure 6-2 for this task. One is that a datasheet displays many records at
once, making it possible to accidentally type over existing information instead of creating
a new record. Another is that a form can display all the data-entry textboxes for an entire
record in one screen, whereas a datasheet typically requires users to keep tabbing to the
right to enter data for off-screen items (see again Figure 6-2).
A third advantage of forms is that you can customize them. Figure 6-1 illustrates several
examples of such customization, including: (1) custom header information (e.g., the label
with the words ‘‘BSN Customers’’) at the top of a form, (2) text, logos, artwork, and (as
shown) pictures for graphic interest, (3) more complete names (instead of the default
database names) to identify each ﬁeld in the database table (e.g., ‘‘Customer Number’’
instead of ‘‘CustNo’’), (4) the ability to group similar ﬁelds together in the form (e.g., the
phone numbers in Figure 6-1), (5) the ability to add explanations or special instructions in
the form to help users understand how to enter data (e.g., see the label for the State ﬁeld),
and (6) customized tab ordering that governs the order in which textboxes become active
on the form.
Creating Simple Forms
To create a custom form for a database table in Access, ﬁrst select ‘‘More Forms’’ from the
‘‘Create’’ tab (Figure 6-3). You can design a form from scratch by selecting Blank Form
Report Wizard option
FIGURE 6-3
Create menu showing the Form Wizard in Access 2007.

190
PART TWO / Databases
from the Form menu in Figure 6-3, but it is usually easier to use the Form Wizard for this.
When you select the second option click on ‘‘More Forms’’ and then Form Wizard.
You will see dialog boxes similar to the ones in Figure 6-4. Follow these steps to create
a form in Access:
Step 1. Enter the appropriate settings in the Form Wizard dialog boxes.
In the
drop down option on the left side of Figure 6-4a, select the table you want your form to
reference (e.g., tbl BSN Customer Master Table). You will also need to select the ﬁelds
you want to display on the form. Clicking on the button with the >> symbol selects all the
ﬁelds from your table in your form—a typical choice. You can also click on individual ﬁeld
names with your mouse and then click on the> button to select data ﬁelds one by one.
Use the second dialog box in Figure 6-4b to select a layout for your form—typically
‘‘Columnar’’ because this setting enables you to include all the data ﬁelds on one form.
The third dialog box of the Form Wizard enables you to choose from several alternate
preformatted styles for a form—i.e., different settings for the overall appearance of the
form that dictate the back color of labels, the font sizes of the text in textboxes, and
(a) First screen.
(b) Second screen.
(c) Third screen.
(d) Fourth screen.
FIGURE 6-4
The four dialog boxes in the Form Wizard.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
191
so forth. The dialog box in Figure 6-4c illustrates some of the different choices. You can
experiment with different ones to ﬁnd one that suits your application.
Finally, in the fourth dialog box of the Form Wizard (Figure 6-4d), you will need
to create a name for your form. As with the many other database objects, you should
use the conventional preﬁx for a form name—frm—and then create a name that helps
you remember the form’s application.1 In Figure 6-4d, for example, we have named the
form frm Customers. At this point, you can click on the Finish button in the last dialog
box—you’re done. Access’ Form Wizard will then create the form with the settings you’ve
indicated and list the completed form among those available for use in the main menu for
forms.
Step 2: Customize the Form.
If you open your form in design view, you will see
something like the one in Figure 6-5. This ﬁgure helps make clear that a form has two
modes—Form or run mode, which looks like Figure 6-1, and design mode, which looks
like Figure 6-5. In fact, the form in Figure 6-5 was the starting point for the completed
form in Figure 6-1. This screen contains form objects such as labels and textboxes
that you can delete (by ﬁrst clicking on the object and then hitting the Del key on
your keyboard), reposition (by dragging them with your mouse), or customize in many
other ways.
The objects such as textboxes and labels that appear on a form are examples of
form controls. When customizing a form, it is important to distinguish between bound
FIGURE 6-5
The starting format for the form in Figure 6-1.
1Thoughout Chapters 4, 5, and 6 we have recommended preﬁxing all ﬁles with tbl, frm, and rpt. However, if you
use Access 2007 and prefer, you can look at the icon on the left side of each ﬁle name and see the different icons
provided by Microsoft. Therefore, it is your choice how to indicate what each database item represents.

192
PART TWO / Databases
controls and unbound controls. Bound controls are textboxes, drop down boxes, and
similar controls that depend upon the underlying data and therefore change from record
to record. In contrast, unbound controls are labels, pictures, and similar items that
are consistent from record to record in a form and do not display underlying database
information. On Access forms, labels and textboxes typically appear in pairs, but they are,
in fact, separate objects. Thus, for example, you can delete the label for a particular data
ﬁeld on a form and the accompanying (bound) textbox will continue to display database
information.
You can include additional controls to your form by selecting them from the Form
Design Tools (Figure 6-6a). Typical objects that you’ll use for this task are labels and picture
boxes, but you can also add bound control such as textboxes if you wish. You can only
view the Toolbox when your form is in design mode.
To add a control to your form, left click on the control in the Toolbox and then use
your mouse to draw the selected object on your form. For example, in Figure 6-1, you can
see additional labels (e.g., the heading ‘‘BSN Bicycles’’ in the header portion of the form
or the label ‘‘Phone Numbers’’ in the detail portion of the form) and also a picture of a
bicycle (which we created with an Image object from the Toolbox). The size of the object
depends upon how large you drew it when you ﬁrst created it, but you can resize any
control on your form using the dots, or sizing handles, that appear on the border of your
control when you click on it in the form.
Finally, to customize a control on a form, use the object’s Property Sheet window
(Figure 6-6b) to make individual settings for control objects. In effect, each form object
has separate settings and therefore, its own Property Sheet window. To view the one for
a particular control, right click on an object in your form and select ‘‘Properties’’ from the
drop-down list of choices that appears. This window allows you to make a wide range of
(a) Selected controls in Design Tools.
(b) An example of a Properties window. Note the “Control Source” and “Input Mask” settings for this particular control—a
 
textbox that displays a work phone number.
FIGURE 6-6
An example of (a) the Forms Controls window, and (b) a Properties window.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
193
settings—for example, the font size, font weight, italics, or boldness of the text in labels.
Of particular importance is the Control Source property of an object, which you will
ﬁnd among the settings in the Data tab portion of the Property Sheet window and which
links the control to an underlying data ﬁeld. Bound controls have a Control Source setting,
whereas unbound objects do not.
Step 3: Reﬁne your Design.
You can toggle back and forth between run mode and
design mode by clicking on the Form and Design options—for example, from the View
portion of the Design option of the main screen. Form (Run) mode allows you to see how
your form looks at run time, and therefore what further work you need to perform to
complete your form’s design. For example, in design mode, you can select multiple form
objects at once (by depressing the Ctrl key and clicking on several objects successively)
and then use the formatting options from Access’s Format menu (on the main menu bar)
to resize, align, and consistently space objects on your form.
Step 4: Reset the Tab Order.
If you rearrange objects in your form in design mode,
there is a good chance you will also want to reset the tab order of your form controls—i.e.,
the order in which each control becomes active in run mode. To do so, click on the Arrange
tab in Figure 6-6a. One of the options you will see there is ‘‘Tab Order.’’ If you click on
this choice, Access will provide a small dialog window that enables you to reset this order.
Here, you can create a custom order for the objects in your form or, more simply, click
on the ‘‘Auto Order’’ button at the bottom of this window to have Access automatically
reset the tab order. The new, auto-order sequence makes form controls become active
sequentially from top to bottom and left to right.
Using Forms for Input and Output Tasks
As noted earlier, database forms provide a convenient tool for inputting data into, and
displaying data from, a database table. Both tasks require use of the navigation bar at the
bottom of the form—i.e., the portion of the screen that looks like this:
You can use this navigation bar for both the input and output tasks explained here.
Displaying Information.
The number in the middle of the navigation bar (e.g. ‘‘2’’)
indicates which record currently displays in your form. Clicking on the ◀symbol causes
Access to display the ﬁrst record in the underlying database table, and clicking on the ▶
symbol displays the last record in the table. Clicking on the ◀symbol displays the record
just before the current one, and clicking on the ▶symbol displays the next record after the
current one. You can also access the ‘‘previous record’’ or ‘‘next record’’ using the ‘‘Page
Up’’ and ‘‘Page Down’’ keys on your keyboard.
Forms also enable you to change the information already in a database table. For
example, if a customer moves to a new address or changes his or her phone number, you
would want to update this information in the appropriate table. It is a simple matter to enter
the new information for the appropriate record using a form for this task. Changing data
in a form causes Access to automatically update the information in the underlying table.

194
PART TWO / Databases
Using Forms to Create New Records.
If you wish to add a new record, you can use
a form for this task as well. First, click on the ▶∗symbol in the navigation bar. The system
will then display the ﬁrst available empty record (i.e., the one at the end of the underlying
table) and allow you to enter the information for a new table entity—for example, the data
for a new customer.
A nice feature about Access is that any data ﬁeld that you include in a form automatically
inherits all the properties that you set for that ﬁeld at the time you initially created it in a
table. This means that the same edit tests and data restrictions apply to the ﬁeld for data
entry, whether you enter the data in datasheet view or in form view. For example, if you
create an input mask for a phone number that looks like this: (999) 000-0000, Access will
display the mask for this data ﬁeld when you start entering data for this ﬁeld in your form at
run time. Similarly, if you restrict a certain ﬁeld to Integer data (e.g., a zip code), the system
will not allow you to enter alphabetic text for that ﬁeld. Finally, if you create a range test in
your form (e.g., limit input to values between ‘‘0’’ and ‘‘40’’ hours), Access will not allow
you to enter a value of ‘‘50’’ for that ﬁeld in your form.
Case-in-Point 6.1
A growing use of database forms is to conduct survey research. Respon-
dents enter the answers to questions in a form customized to the needs of the survey, often
not realizing that the form itself is simply the front end of a database system. Each response
is stored as a record, which the researchers can then combine with others for data analysis.2
Printing Forms.
You can print a form just as easily as you print any other Microsoft
document—i.e., by using the familiar ‘‘Print’’ option from the Ofﬁce button on the main
screen. When you click this button and select ‘‘Print,’’ Access will display a familiar Print
dialog box that enables you to print a single form, print several forms (pages), or print
selected records. Be careful not to select ‘‘All’’ from the dialog choices—you will print
separate forms for each record in your underlying table, even if there are thousands of them!
Subforms: Showing Data from Multiple Tables
A subform is a form within a form—i.e., a display of data that is related to the information
in the main form. Figure 6-7 is an example—the original customer form from Figure 6-1
with a new subform showing a list of invoices for a particular customer. This explains why
there are two navigation bars in the ﬁgure—the initial one at the bottom of Figure 6-1 and a
new one in the subform of Figure 6-7. If you advance through the records of the customer
table using the lower navigation bar, you will see the information for each customer of the
main form. Conversely, if you advance through the records of the subform, you will see
the invoices for a particular customer—if they exist.
Some Advantages of Subforms.
One advantage of subforms is their ability to display
subordinate information related to the information in the main form. This reﬂects the
parent-child or one-to-many relationship of the underlying data. In Figure 6-7, for example,
each customer might have several invoices, but each invoice is related to only one customer.
Other examples for the BSN Company include invoices with many detail lines, vendors
with many purchase orders, or purchaser orders with many detail lines.
2Source: Bonometti, Robert J. and Jun Tang. ‘‘A Dynamic Technique for Conducting Online Survey-Based
Research’’ Competitiveness Review Vol. 16, No. 2 (2006), pp. 97–105.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
195
FIGURE 6-7
A form with a subform.
Another advantage of subforms is that you can use them for data entry in the same
manner that you use regular forms. Thus, if you wish, you could create the data for a new
invoice in the subform of Figure 6-7. An advantage of entering data in this manner is that it
helps ensure that you create an invoice for the right customer.
Creating Subforms.
As noted above, a key requirement of a subform is that the data
in it must be in a one-to-many relationship with the data in the main form. For example, in
Figure 6-7, this requires that ‘‘customers’’ and ‘‘invoices’’ have a one-to-many relationship.
Thus, to create a form with a subform in Access, your ﬁrst task is to make sure that the data
in the two tables are related via the Relationships window. Chapter 4 explains the tasks for
creating such relationships using the Relationships window.
In Access, there are two principle ways of creating a form with a subform. One way is
to identify the subform at the time you use the Form Wizard. To use this option, you would
use the dialog box in Figure 6-4a to select the data for the main form as explained above.
But before continuing to the next form, you would also click on the drop down menu in
this dialog box and select a second table from this list. If a one-to-many relationship exists
between the two tables, the Form Wizard will recognize your wish to create a subform
within your main form and will create one for you.
A second way to create a subform is to add one to an existing form after you’ve
created it. This is what we did here. To duplicate our work, open the form of Figure 6-1
in design view and use your mouse to extend the size of the details section of the form
(to make room for the subform). Then, click on the Subform icon in Toolbox shown in
Figure 6-6a and use your mouse to draw a rectangle in the detail section of your form. This
procedure causes Access to launch the Subform Wizard, which will ask you for setting
information similar to those shown in Figure 6-4—e.g., ‘‘which table do you want to use
for the subform,’’ ‘‘how do you want the data to appear in the subform,’’ and so forth.

196
PART TWO / Databases
In design mode, your resulting form and subform will not look exactly like the one
in Figure 6-7. For example, you will probably have to resize the outer dimensions of the
subform to ﬁt the data and perhaps reword the text in the heading in the label at the top
of the subform. With a little bit of work, however, you should be able to design things to
look like Figure 6-7. If you need to resize the column widths of your subform, however,
you can do that at run time rather than at design time—a helpful advantage because you
can see live data at run time.
Concluding Remarks about Forms
Database forms enable you to add records to a database table, modify the data in existing
records of a table, and simply view the data in a table. Although forms are not needed
for such tasks, the ability to customize a form, provide explanations for data-entry ﬁelds
within forms, and create convenient tab orderings are especially useful features of them.
In commercial environments, the database developer is rarely the same person who enters
data in database tables on a daily basis. Anything that developers can do to make this job
more convenient and straightforward for an hourly worker helps avoid errors, streamlines
the data-entry process, and saves money. Experts estimate that it costs about ten times as
much to correct an error in a database as it does to enter the data initially. Get the picture?
Case-in-Point 6.2
CheckPoint is a company that provides background screening, authen-
tication, and criminal record identiﬁcation services for its clients. To avoid errors, the company
uses database forms with very exacting deﬁnitions and safeguards that help data entry per-
sonnel avoid mistakes. A key ﬁnding is the idea that the data stored in a database about an
individual can be consistent, but still be wrong!3
REPORTS
Database reports provide custom information to database users. Reports can be simple
documents that only output the contents of a table, or complex outputs that combine
the information from several tables and show selected subsets of database information. If
you’re using Access to print something to paper, the chances are high that you are using
a report to perform this task. This means that many items that you might not consider a
‘‘report’’ are treated as one by Access—for example, an invoice for a particular customer
or a document that shows the name and address of only one vendor.
Case-in-Point 6.3
The National Motor Vehicle Title Information System requires all insur-
ance companies and salvage yards to forward the VIN numbers of vehicles that have been
totaled to a national database. The reports from this database will enable consumers to obtain
such information as a car’s odometer reading or theft report, as well as the reason for its
condition—e.g., a ﬂood.4
Unlike forms, reports are strictly outputs and do not allow users to input data into
databases. This section of the chapter explains how to create simple reports, how to create
reports containing calculated ﬁelds, how to create reports based on queries instead of
tables, and how to create reports containing grouped data.
3Source: Carr, David F. ‘‘Gotcha! Pitfalls in Personal Proﬁles’’ Baseline Vol. 45 (June 2005), p. 41.
4Source: Jones, Candice Lee. ‘‘Used Car Blacklist’’ Kiplinger’s Personal Finance Vol. 63, No. 1 (January 2009),
p. 17.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
197
FIGURE 6-8
A print preview of a portion of a simple Access report.
Creating Simple Reports
Figure 6-8 illustrates the print preview of a simple report—a listing of selected information
about the customers in BSN’s Customers table. The ﬁrst step in creating such reports is
not to use your database system at all, but rather to decide what information to include in
the report and how best to display that information in a printed document. We stress again
that spending a few minutes designing the general format of a report on the back of an old
envelop may save you hours of redesign work later.
A typical report has seven major components: (1) report header, (2) page header,
(3) group header, (4) detail or body, (5) group footer, (6) page footer, and (7) report footer.
Figure 6-9 describes these items in greater detail. Perhaps the most important is the Detail
section, which is similar to the detail section of a form, and which repetitively displays
information from the records of database tables. After you have a general idea of the format
for your report, you can develop the report itself using these components. An easy way to
do so is by using the Report Wizard in Access, following these steps:
Step 1: Launch the Report Wizard.
To launch the Report Wizard, select the Create
option from the main menu and then select ‘‘Report Wizard’’ (see again Figure 6-3). The
ﬁrst dialog box you will see is the one in Figure 6-10a.
Component
Where it appears
Typical content
Report Header
First page of the report
Company name and address, date prepared
or relevant time period, company logo
Page Header
Top of each page
Identiﬁcation of each data ﬁeld below it
Group Header
Beginning of each group of
records
Identiﬁcation of a new group of data
Detail Lines
Body of the report
The individual data ﬁelds of, and computed
data ﬁelds from, underlying database tables
Group Footer
End of each group
Control totals or other statistics such as
maximums, minimums, or averages for the
group
Page Footer
Bottom of each page
Page number, report number
Report Footer
Last page of the report
End-of-report identiﬁer, grand totals
FIGURE 6-9
The components of a database report.

198
PART TWO / Databases
(a) The first screen in the Report Wizard.
(b) The second screen in the Report Wizard.
(c) The third screen in the Report Wizard.
(d) The fourth screen in the Report Wizard.
(e) The fifth screen in the Report Wizard.
(f) The sixth screen in the Report Wizard.
FIGURE 6-10
The Report menu in Access and the dialog boxes of the Report Wizard.
Step 2: Select the Underlying Data Source and Desired Fields.
You can base a
report on a table, as we will do in this case, or a query (which in turn might integrate the
data from several tables). To create the report in Figure 6-8, however, we will only need
the Customers table. Thus, to replicate our work, select tbl BSN Customer Master Table
from the drop-down list in Figure 6-10a and then select the appropriate ﬁelds using the
data ﬁeld selector buttons (> and >>) as needed.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
199
Notice that not all the information in the Customers table appears in the Customer
report of Figure 6-8. For example, the customer’s home and cell phone numbers are
missing. This is typical of output reports—only selected information from underlying tables
appears in them. The more information you include, the more complete the report, but
also the more crowded the report becomes and the harder it is to format properly or read.
As you know from Chapter 1, sometimes ‘‘less is more,’’ and this is one reason to ‘‘plan
before you program.’’
Step 3: Indicate any Grouping Levels.
When you click ‘‘Next’’ in Figure 6-10a, you
will see the dialog box of Figure 6-10b. This is where you tell the Report Wizard how you
would like to group your data. For example, if you wish, you can group your customers by
zip code. For the simple report in Figure 6-8, however, we do not need any such groupings
and you can simply click the Next button in this dialog box.
Step 4: Indicate any Sort Fields and Select the Desired Report Format.
The Report
Wizard also allows you to sort up to four different ﬁelds. For example, Figure 6-10c indicates
the settings to create a report of customers sorted by customer last name within zip code.
After you have selected the sort ﬁelds, click Next in the dialog box. The fourth screen in the
Report Wizard appears (Figure 6-10d) and allows you to select a particular report layout.
For line-by-line listings—the typical choice in simple reports—select ‘‘Tabular.’’ You can
also choose either ‘‘Portrait’’ or ‘‘Landscape’’ print options here.
Step 5: Select a Desired Report Style and Name the Report.
After clicking Next
in the dialog box of Figure 6-10d, you will see the dialog box in Figure 6-10e. This screen
of the Report Wizard enables you to select a report style, which determines the color of
the text, the default font sizes for data ﬁelds and labels, and similar design elements. Select
the one you want by clicking on the desired style in the menu box. In Figure 6-10e, we
selected ‘‘Module,’’ for example.
Finally, when you click Next in the dialog screen of Figure 6-10f, you will see the
ﬁnal screen of the Report Wizard. Here, you have the opportunity to name your report.
The standard preﬁx for a report is rpt, which is the reason why we’ve named our report
rptCustomers_by_ZipCode.
Step 6: Modify the Design of the Report as Desired.
When you ﬁnish with the
Report Wizard, you will probably need to modify the report design still further. If you open
your new report in design view, you will see a screen similar to the one in Figure 6-11.
FIGURE 6-11
An Access report at design time.

200
PART TWO / Databases
This interactive screen enables you to modify the height or width of labels or textboxes
(using their sizing handles), change the font size, italics, or boldness of headings (using the
Properties Window for each element), or reposition items (as we did for the second line of
the address). You can also change your mind and delete any element in the report by left
clicking on it and hitting the Del key on your keyboard.
In design view, the bar of any section of your report will darken to indicate which
section of the report is active for design purposes. There are many additional things you
can do to modify your report’s appearance. For example, you can cut and paste (or copy
and paste) elements from one portion of your report to another. Thus, we moved the date
(with content ‘‘ = Now( )’’) from the footer section of the report to the header section
using this cut-and-paste method. As with designing forms, you can also add charts, pictures,
or logos to your report. To do so, select the Image tool in the Toolbox control section by
left clicking on this tool with your computer mouse and drawing it in the desired portion of
your report. When adding ﬁgures, you will probably also have to change the Size Mode (in
the Properties Window of your Image control) to ‘‘Stretch’’ in order to expand or shrink
your image properly.
Finally, you should be careful when moving anything into the ‘‘Detail’’ section of the
report because the report will repeat any element in this section for each line of the report.
For this same reason, you should try to make the detail section of the report as small as
possible—it will save room on lengthy reports.
Creating Reports with Calculated Fields
A common task when creating reports is to include calculated ﬁelds in them. For example,
a report of employee information might also include a ﬁeld entitled ‘‘years of service,’’
which the system can calculate from the employee’s date of hire. Sometimes, you want
a calculated ﬁeld to appear in the detail section of a report, and at other times you want
group or grand totals to appear in the group footer or the report footer sections of your
report. In this section of the chapter, we review the steps needed to accomplish the ﬁrst
task—creating a calculated ﬁeld for the detail section of a report. In the following section,
we review the steps needed to accomplish the second task—creating group summaries.
In AISs, a common task is to multiply prices by quantities in order to compute an
extension (line total) in an invoice. There is no reason to store such values in the records
of a relational database because we can recompute such values whenever we need them.
This is why we only stored prices and quantities in the Customer_Invoice_Details table.
However, when we print customer invoice information on a report, we need to show such
computations.
It is usually easiest to create calculated ﬁelds using queries rather than tables for the
underlying data. To illustrate, suppose we wanted to create the report shown in Figure
6-12—a report that shows invoice extensions for all current invoices for BSN. To create
such a report, follow these steps:
Step 1: Create the Query with a Calculated Field.
Figure 6-13 shows the query for
our report. To create this query, we begin by selecting the tables needed for this task. One
such table is the Customer_Invoice_Details table. The records in this table contain the item
number and the quantity ordered, but not the name of the item purchased or its price. For
this information, we need the Products_And_Services table.
Figure 6-13 is the design view for our query. We have selected the two tables we
need for our task and also the desired ﬁelds—i.e., the item number and the description of

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
201
FIGURE 6-12
The print preview of a report that contains a calculated ﬁeld (in the last column of the report).
FIGURE 6-13
A query with a calculated ﬁeld.
the good or service (both taken from the Products_And_Services table), and the quantity
(taken from the Customer_Invoice_Details table). For convenience, it is a good idea to
select these items in the order in which you want them to appear in your ﬁnal invoice, but
this isn’t required.
To create the calculated ﬁeld, select the ﬁrst available column in the query design
screen and type the name of your calculated ﬁeld. We chose the name ‘‘Extension’’ but this
choice is arbitrary. You can also choose a name with more than one word (e.g., ‘‘Extension
Calculation’’), but be careful not to choose a term with the same name as an existing data
ﬁeld.
Type a colon following your calculated ﬁeld name and then input the formula for
your calculated ﬁeld. Use an asterisk for a multiplication sign and a forward slash (/) for
a division sign. Also, be careful to spell the ﬁeld names in your formulas exactly as they
appear in your underlying database tables. (If you misspell a ﬁeld name, Access will not
indicate that you’ve made an error, but instead will assume you’re creating a parameter

202
PART TWO / Databases
FIGURE 6-14
Partial results for the query in Figure 6-13 at run time.
query and ask you for the data at run time.) Finally, place square brackets around your ﬁeld
names to indicate that you are referencing existing data ﬁelds.
When you have completed your query, you can test it by clicking on the Run button
(with exclamation point icon) in the main menu. If things work properly, you will see
something like the screen in Figure 6-14. Note that although the data in Figure 6-14 is from
a query, the screen in Figure 6-14 is interactive. Thus, if you change the item number of
a given line, for example, Access will look up the new product description and the new
price, change the new extension, and display everything as quickly as you can enter the
new item number in the screen.
Step 2: Create the Report Based on Your Query.
It now remains to create the report.
Using the steps outlined above, you can use the Report Wizard to create the ﬁnal report in
Figure 6-13. Base your report on the query you created in Step 1 above and select all the
ﬁelds offered.
The second screen of the Report Wizard will ask you if you wish to group your data
(refer back to Figure 6-10b). Access will recognize that you have a one-to-many relationship
between ‘‘invoice numbers’’ and ‘‘invoice details’’ and should show you this possibility by
default. If it does not, however, select this option so that all your invoice details for the
same invoice will be grouped together. Then continue with the remainder of the Report
Wizard questions. Be sure to name your report something appropriate—for example,
rptInvoice-Details. When you ﬁnish answering questions in the Report Wizard, you should
then reformat your report as needed. The results should look similar to Figure 6-12.
Creating Reports with Grouped Data
The report in Figure 6-12 contains useful data, but obviously lacks some critical information.
What is the name of the customer associated with each invoice? What is his or her address?
What is the total for each invoice? A typical manager might also want this information to
appear in an invoice report, but it is missing in Figure 6-12. Finally, he or she might want
the report organized by customer last name rather than by invoice number.
A control break is the technical term for the point at which a group changes from
one type to the next in a report. Examples of control breaks include a change in zip code
for the addresses in customer listings, a change in the department number for a listing of
employees, and a change in a service classiﬁcation for the yellow pages of a phone book.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
203
FIGURE 6-15
The invoice report of Figure 6-12, expanded to include customer information
and invoice totals.
Control breaks are often the point at which managers want to see subtotals, maximums,
minimums, averages, or similar subgroup summaries.
To create control breaks for the report in Figure 6-12, we need to modify its design to
include group totals for each invoice. Figure 6-15 illustrates the format for the ﬁnal report,
which includes new information and provides totals for each invoice. To create it, we will
follow the steps outlined above for creating reports with calculated ﬁelds—i.e., (1) create
a query to generate the desired information, (2) use the Report Wizard to create an initial
report based on this query, and (3) reformat our report as needed to achieve the desired
end product. Here are the detailed steps:
Step 1: Create the Underlying Query.
Our ﬁrst task is to create the underlying query
for this report. Figure 6-16 shows a part of this query at design time, but not the entire set
of ﬁelds—there were too many of them to ﬁt conveniently in the ﬁgure.
FIGURE 6-16
Part of the query used to create the report illustrated in Figure 6-15.

204
PART TWO / Databases
The upper portion of the query screen in Figure 6-15 identiﬁes the four tables required
to build it. If you study the information contained in the ﬁnal report of Figure 6-15, you
will realize why we needed four tables for this task. We needed the Customers table to
provide the name and address information for each customer. We needed the Invoice
table to provide the customer number for each invoice. We needed the Customer Invoice
Details table to provide the item number and the order quantity for each detail line of
an invoice. We needed the Products and Services table to provide the item description
and sales price per unit for each item purchased. Finally, we had to create a calculated
ﬁeld—the extension of quantities times prices for each detail line—as described in the
previous section of this chapter.
When queries become as complex as this one, it is a good idea to run them and make
sure they work, even though the only reason you’ve created them is for a report. Again,
you can perform this task by clicking on the exclamation point (run icon) in Access main
menu. (You must be working on a query, however, and not working on a form, table, or
report.)
Step 2: Use the Report Wizard to Create the Initial Report.
After creating our initial
query, we will then go the Reports portion of Access and use the Report Wizard to create
an initial report. You already know how to perform such a task so we will not describe the
process again here. The result is a report whose format will not look very much like the
ﬁnished product in Figure 6-16, so we have additional work to do!
Step 3: Reformat the Report as Desired.
It remains to reformat our report. Because
we have also reviewed the activities for this step, we will not repeat them here. Again, it is
useful to remember the following items: (1) you should expand the size of unbound labels
so that their entire text shows, (2) you can delete any control you don’t need, (3) you can
move both bound and unbound controls from one part of a report to another, and (4) the
Format menu enables you to resize, align, and reposition multiple objects consistently on
your report.
Concluding Remarks about Reports
Although experts had high hopes for paperless ofﬁces and a society that only used softcopy
(screen) reports, it appears that hardcopy reports will be with us for some time. This
section of the chapter illustrated how to create reports in Access, including reports that
contain calculated ﬁelds and reports that calculate subtotals for grouped data.
One additional point is that you can modify the underlying queries for reports that
further restrict what gets printed on them. For example, suppose we included a Yes-No
logic ﬁeld in our Invoice records that indicated whether or not a customer has paid a given
invoice. Then, we could modify the underlying query for the Invoice report in Figure 6-13
to only print line information in Figure 6-15 for unpaid customer invoices.
Finally, forms and reports are related in that many of the formatting techniques that
you can use for the one you can also use for the other. For example, you can create a form
based on a query instead of a table, just as you can create a report based on a query instead
of a table. As a result, you can create calculated ﬁelds in forms as well as in reports. For
example, if an employee table contained a ‘‘Date of Hire’’ ﬁeld, you could compute the
years of service for this employee as part of your form. Similarly, you can create unbound
data ﬁelds in reports as well as in forms.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
205
Case-in-Point 6.4
If you think about it, Access is a great tool for creating a
name-and-address book for yourself. Each record contains the name and address of one of
your friend, and you can use a Yes/No ﬁeld to indicate whether or not to send a Christmas
card. Birthday lists become easy to create using an underlying query to determine the
birthday list (report) for each month. Finally, you can print your entire name and address
book (formatted, of course!) once a year as a hard-copy backup of your database table.
AIS AT WORK
Mother Lode Bicycles
Although the BSN Bicycle Company is ﬁctitious, Mother Lode Bicycles in Sparks, Nevada,
is not. Founded in 1996 by two friends—Dave McDonald and Mark Kennedy—the
2,400-square-foot shop sells road and mountain bikes to local customers as well as
out-of-towners visiting the area. Bike prices range from $200 to $5,000. Sales of bikes,
clothing, and biking accessories are 90% of the store’s income; repairs make up the rest.
In many ways, running a bike shop is similar to running any small business. One
partner manages the inventory, stocks the store shelves, and deals with the marketing
and advertising parts of the business. The other partner deals with employees, supervises
repairs, and interacts with customers. Their biggest problems: (1) making enough money
to cover the overhead (especially during the months after Christmas and prior to spring
cycling) and (2) the fact that the store must stay open seven days a week.
For accounting tasks, the store’s owners rely on QuickBooks™from Intuit and the
bookkeeping expertise of Mark’s wife. With the exception of employees, the store does not
sell items on credit, so there are no receivables. Mark personally supervises payables, taking
advantage of cash discounts where possible and negotiating longer payment schedules with
suppliers during the slower-selling seasons of the year.
Most of the shop’s inventory consists of items that sit on shelves and racks in the
retail portion of the store, with just a few parts and unassembled bikes stored in the
back room—a combination storeroom-warehouse-ofﬁce-dining room. ‘‘Inventory control’’
is also a combination of elements, including ‘‘visual inspection,’’ working with sales
representatives to keep merchandise levels up, and the expertise of the owners for ordering
or not ordering items for the slower or busier season to follow. Mark is considering acquiring
a point-of-sale system with a backend database, which he thinks will help the company
become better aware of its best sellers as well as keep closer tabs on stock on hand.
Source: From the authors.
SUMMARY
• You can use database forms both to input data to, and to view data from, the records in tables.
• If you use forms to create new records, the data ﬁelds in the customized forms automatically inherit
the same properties, attributes, and input restrictions that were created for them in the design of
the table.
• The navigation bar at the bottom of a form enables you to view the ﬁrst, last, next, and previous
record in the underlying table.
• You can use subforms to display those ‘‘many’’ records related to the record in the main form in a
one-to-many relationship—for example, the outstanding invoices for a speciﬁc customer.

206
PART TWO / Databases
• You typically design and develop reports to create hard-copy outputs. In Access, reports are either
based directly on tables, or on queries that in turn reference tables.
• A typical report has seven major components: (1) report heading, (2) page headings, (3) group
headings, (4) detail or body, (5) group footer, (6) page footer, and (7) report footer.
• You should name forms and reports systematically. The standard preﬁx for a form is frm and the
standard preﬁx for a report is rpt.
• Most databases do not store calculated ﬁelds such as invoice line extensions (prices times quantities)
in them. Instead, we calculate these ﬁelds with queries.
• Many reports contain grouped data in them—for example, the set of lines for a given invoice, or
the set of invoices for a given customer. It is also possible to require a report to show control
totals, averages, maximum, or minimum values for each such group. In Access, you can create
such tasks using the Report Wizard and its grouping options.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
bound control
calculated ﬁeld
control break
control source property (form control)
datasheet screen
design mode
detail section (form or report)
form
Form Wizard
heading section (form or report)
navigation bar
Property Sheet window
report
Report Wizard
run mode
sizing handles
subform
tab order
unbound control
TEST YOURSELF
Q6-1. In Access, you can use a form to perform all the following tasks except:
a. Create a new record in a speciﬁc table
b. Change the information in an existing record of a table
c. View the information from many different records sequentially
d. All of these are tasks that can be performed with an Access form
Q6-2. Each record in a database table of student records contains the name, address, total university
credits, and total quality points for a speciﬁc student. The student’s grade point average
(GPA) is equal to total quality points divided by total university credits. Where would a
database typically store a student’s GPA information?
a. In the same table as the student’s other information
b. In a new table of student details
c. In a report stored in the Reports section of the database
d. Nowhere. This is a calculated ﬁeld that is typically created by a query at run time
Q6-3. A form control that does not change from record to record is probably:
a. A design-time control

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
207
b. A bound control
c. An unbound control
d. A mistake
Q6-4. The database of a veterinary clinic has records for the pets it treats in one table, records for
pet owners in another table, and records for employees in a third table. Which of these is
most likely to describe a database form and subform for this application?
a. Employees in the main form and pets in the subform
b. Pets in the main form and owners in the subform
c. Owners in the main form and pets in the subform
d. Owners in the main form and employees in the subform.
Q6-5. If the form onscreen appears with grid lines and you can view the Toolbox, this form is
mostly likely in:
a. Design mode
b. Run mode
c. Sleep mode
d. Wizard mode
Q6-6. What happens when you click on this symbol ▶on a form’s navigation bar?
a. You will transition from run mode to design mode
b. You will transition from design mode to run mode
c. You will go to the ﬁrst record in the table
d. You will go to the last record in the table
Q6-7. Which of these best identiﬁes the underlying data source for an Access report?
a. Only tables
b. Only queries
c. Both tables and queries
d. Tables, queries, and forms
Q6-8. The term ‘‘control break’’ most closely associates with which of the following terms in
Access?
a. Groups of data
b. Bathroom break
c. Form control
d. Report header
Q6-9. Which of these is not a typical part of a printed report using Access?
a. Report header
b. Report footer
c. Navigation bar
d. Detail line
Q6-10. A column in an employee report contains the number of years each employee has worked
for the company. This value is most likely:
a. A raw value stored in a database table for each employees
b. An unbound value that was created in the report itself
c. A value that was calculated from each employee’s date of hire
d. A group summary value

208
PART TWO / Databases
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
6-1. What are some of the advantages and disadvantages of database forms?
6-2. Would you rather use a form or a datasheet for entering data into a database table? Why?
6-3. To create a form, would you rather use the Form Wizard in Access or create the form from
scratch? Why?
6-4. What is a subform? Why do forms have subforms? How do you create subforms in Access?
6-5. Why do database developers customize forms? Why isn’t it sufﬁcient to use the form as
initially created by the Form Wizard?
6-6. What is the purpose of a database report? What information do such reports contain?
6-7. The chapter suggested that it is important to design the format of a report before creating
the report itself. Do you agree with this suggestion? Why or why not?
6-8. Do you think that we will still use hardcopy reports in the future, or will they be replaced
with softcopy ones? Defend your answer.
6-9. Would you rather use the Report Wizard to create the format of a report or design one
yourself from scratch? Why?
6-10. What is a calculated ﬁeld in a report? Provide some examples. Why do reports contain
calculated ﬁelds?
6-11. Why don’t databases store calculated ﬁelds as normal ﬁelds in database tables? Do you think
they should?
6-12. Why are calculated ﬁelds created with database queries? Why not create them directly with
reports?
PROBLEMS
6-13. A form’s navigation bar has ﬁve symbols on it. Identify each one and indicate its use.
6-14. A database report has seven major sections in it.
a. Identify each one and provide a short explanation of each section.
b. Identify a report that might be generated in a database application and indicate what data
might be found in each section of the report for your example.
6-15. Provide a short explanation of the difference between each of the following sets of terms:
a. bound control versus unbound control
b. design mode versus run mode
c. ◀symbol versus ▶symbol on a form’s navigation bar
d. form versus subform
e. normal data ﬁeld versus calculated data ﬁeld
f. page header versus page footer
g. report header versus report footer
h. a report based on a table versus a report based on a query
6-16. Using the Customers table in the BSN database that accompanies this book and following
the directions in this chapter, create the form in Figure 6-1. Make sure that you reformat the
default positions of the various textboxes as shown in the ﬁgure.
a. Add a label in the heading portion of your form that contains the term ‘‘Prepared by:’’
and add your name. Print a single copy of your completed form.

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
209
b. Use the navigation bar at the bottom of your form. What is the ﬁrst record? What is the
last record?
c. Add a new record to this form with your name as the customer. Print a copy of this form.
d. Close your form, go to the Tables portion of the database, and open the Customers table
in datasheet view (see Figure 6-2). Verify that your new record is there. Now, add a
second record with your name again. Are you surprised that you can do this?
6-17. If you have not done so already, use the Customers table in the BSN database that accompanies
this book and the directions in this chapter to create the form in Figure 6-1. Make sure that
you reformat the default positions of the various textboxes as shown in the ﬁgure. Now add
a subform of customer invoices to your form so that it looks like Figure 6-7. To do this, open
your initial form in design view, select the subform tool from the Toolbox Controls, and add
a subform. Answer the questions for the Subform Wizard to select the Invoices table. When
you have completed these tasks, also do the following:
a. Use the navigation bar of the main form to go to the last record in the Customers table.
Print the form for this record.
b. Use the navigation bar of the main form to ﬁnd a record with invoices. Then use the
navigation bar of the subform to select a particular invoice. Which one did you select?
Print this form.
6-18. Using the Customers table in the BSN database that accompanies this book and following the
directions in this chapter, create the report in Figure 6-8. Note that you will have to reformat
and perhaps reposition several labels in the detail section of the report. You will also have
to add both labels and a graphic to the header portion of the report.
a. Add a label in the heading portion of your report that contains the term ‘‘Prepared by:’’
and add your name. Print a single copy of your completed report.
b. Who is the ﬁrst customer in your report? Who is the last customer in your report?
6-19. Use the Customers table in the BSN database that accompanies this book and the Report
Wizard to create the report in Figure 6-15. Note that you will have to reformat and perhaps
reposition several labels, and add both labels and a graphic in the header portion of the
report. Note that you will ﬁrst have to create the underlying query for this report. Use Figures
6-12 through 6-16 as guides for this task. Print the ﬁnal report.
CASE ANALYSES
6-20. A Form for BSN Suppliers (Creating a Simple Form in Access)
The BSN Company requires a form with which to view its existing suppliers conveniently
and also to create records for new suppliers. Figure 6-17 contains a suggested format for
this form.
Requirements:
a. Using the Vendors table in the BSN database that accompanies this book, create the
initial form using the Form Wizard. Note that you will have to reposition some of the
data ﬁelds in the form, add the term ‘‘Abbrev.’’ to the label for the State ﬁeld, and add
the following items in the heading of the form: (1) a label with text ‘‘BSN Vendors,’’ (2)
a label with your name, and (3) a graphic (which can be different than the one shown
in the ﬁgure).
b. Run your completed form to make sure it works. What is the ﬁrst record that shows in
your form? What is the last record?

210
PART TWO / Databases
FIGURE 6-17
A form for entering and viewing vendor information in the BSN database.
c. While in run mode, tab through the individual data ﬁelds of any particular record and
note that you do not tab through the data ﬁelds column by column. Return to design
view and adjust the tab order by selecting View/Tab Order from the main menu and
make the necessary adjustments. What is the correct Tab Order and how did you make
these adjustments?
d. Go back to run mode for your form and click on the ▶∗symbol to add the information
in Figure 6-17 to the Vendors table. Note that you should use your own name as the
Contact Person for this vendor.
e. Print just this form to document your work, following the steps in the text for this task.
f. Now that you have used your new form, what additional improvements would you
make to further streamline data entry tasks?
6-21. A Form and Subform for BSN Suppliers (Creating Forms with Subforms
in Access)
Create the form in Figure 6-17 and then add a subform to it that shows purchase orders
for each vendor. Figure 6-18 provides a suggested format. To accomplish this task, follow
these steps: (1) start with the Vendor form of Figure 6-17 in design mode, (2) click on
the subform control in the Toolbox, and (3) follow the steps in the Subform Wizard to
complete your work.
Requirements:
a. Run your new form to make sure it works properly and then print a copy of your new
form to document your work. Make sure your name is in the header portion of the form.
b. Select a vendor for which there are outstanding purchase orders. Click on the ▶symbol
in the navigation bar of the main form. What happens?

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
211
FIGURE 6-18
A suggested format for the form and subform of Problem 6-21.
c. Click on the ▶symbol in navigation bar of the subform. What happens?
d. Create a new purchase order for your current vendor using your new subform. Do you
think it makes sense to be able to create a new purchase order that has no detail lines?
Why or why not?
6-22. A Listing of BSN Suppliers (Creating Simple Reports in Access)
The BSN Company would like a hard copy report of all the current vendors in its database.
Figure 6-19 provides a suggested format for the report. Note that your report header should
include the company title, the current date, your name, and a graphic. Also note that the
detail section contains multiple lines. Create a similar report for this assignment.
FIGURE 6-19
A suggested format of the report required by Problem 6-22.

212
PART TWO / Databases
Requirements:
a. Print the complete report.
b. Who is the ﬁrst supplier and who is the last supplier?
6-23. Furry Friends Foundation III (Creating Forms and Reports)
Recall from Case 4–21 in Chapter 4 and Case 5–27 in Chapter 5 that the Furry Friends
Foundation is a nonproﬁt organization that ﬁnds homes for abandoned animals. The
foundation has created a relational database to help it store data more easily and answer
questions about donations. This portion of the case requires you to create database forms
and reports for the organization.
Requirements:
1. If you have not already done so, create the tables and relationships described in Case
4–21.
2. Create an intake form for the Contributor’s Table. The form should be similar to
Figure 6-1 and contain two columns for data entry. Make sure that the system tabs
properly, so that data entries proceed logically from left to right and from top to bottom.
To document your work, provide a screen capture of your report at run time, which
includes your name as the entered contributor.
3. Create an intake form for the Donation’s Table. Again, the form should be similar to
Figure 6-1 and contain two columns for data entry. Make sure that the system tabs
properly, so that data entries proceed logically from left to right and from top to bottom.
Provide a screen capture of your report at run time.
4. Create a report that contains a current list of contributors (including yourself as a one of
them). The report should include the following information in the header: Foundations
Title, a graphic of a furry pet, your name as the developer, and the current date.
The body of the report should contain the name, address, and phone number of all
contributors, listed alphabetically by contributor’s last name. The information for each
contributor should all be on one line. Print the complete report.
5. Expand the set of contributors to include at least 10 individual records, and then change
the entries in the donations ﬁle to include donations from each of them. Create reports
for both tables and then print complete lists. Finally, create a report that contains a
complete list of all contributors who gave donations during the months of November
and December 2009. (Hint: base your report on a query instead of a table.) The report
should include a header with the Foundations Title, a graphic of furry pets, your name
as the developer, and the current date. The body of the report should list donations in
order of the donator’s last name and should include the donator’s address and phone
number. An example set of lines is as follows:
Date
Contributor
Phone Number
Animal Code
Amount
November 11, 2009
Lawrence, Marie
(501) 767–1114
C
150
9190 Teepee Road
Doolittle, NV
54984

CHAPTER 6 / Database Forms and Reports
213
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Briggs, Anthony D. Microsoft Ofﬁce Access 2003 (United States: Thomson Course Technology, 2005).
George Joseph and Asha George. ‘‘Merging Management Accounting with Database Design’’ Man-
agement Accounting Quarterly Vol. 6, No. 2 (Winter 2005), pp. 34–43.
Graurer, Robert T. and Maryann Barber. Microsoft Access 2003 (Upper Saddle River, Prentice Hall,
2004).
Hayes, David C., James E. Hunton, and Robert D. Slater. ‘‘Data Menus at Your Fingertips’’ Journal of
Accountancy Vol. 195, No. 6 (June 2003), pp. 30–37.
Marks, Gene. ‘‘Why Isn’t Microsoft Access Your Accounting Database?’’ Pennsylvania CPA Journal
Vol. 71, No. 4 (Winter 2001), p. 10.
Munson, Kurt I., and Michelle Frisque. ‘‘How We Treated Our Clients Need for Remote Access
Through a Single Interface’’ Computers in Libraries Vol. 24, No. 9 (October 2004), pp. 10–15.
Perry, James T., and Gary P. Schneider. Using Access 2002 in Accounting (United States, Southwestern
Publishing Company, 2004).
Shelly, Gary B., Thomas J. Cashman, and Misty E. Vermaat. Microsoft Ofﬁce 2003 (United States:
Thomson Course Technology, 2004).
Zanzig, Jeffrey S., and Bor-Yi Tsay. ‘‘Hands-on Training in Relational Database Concepts’’ Journal of
Accounting Education Vol. 22, No. 2 (Spring 2004), pp. 131–152.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. d
2. d
3. c
4. c
5. a
6. d
7. c
8. a
9. c
10. c


PART THREE
USING ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
CHAPTER 7
Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
CHAPTER 8
Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
CHAPTER 9
Accounting and Enterprise Software
This section of the book is about business processes—what they are, why they are
important, and what you need to know about these processes. First, we identify the
fundamentals of a business process: journals, coding systems, and the basics of collecting
and reporting accounting information. Chapter 7 identiﬁes characteristics of the two
core business processes that are most common to all businesses: the sales process and
the purchasing process. Chapter 7 concludes with a discussion of a major trend that is
occurring in today’s businesses as a result of networked enterprises and globalization—it’s
called ‘‘business without boundaries.’’ To support this trend, companies use Business
Process Management solutions to help maximize the efﬁciency and effectiveness of their
processes.
Chapter 8 continues our discussion of core business processes. In this chapter we examine
resource management processes, production processes, and ﬁnancing processes, especially
the events associated with these processes. Chapter 8 also considers the accounting
information needs of specialized industries.
Regardless of the size of a business, it is hard to imagine any successful business that
does not use information technology (IT). Managers and accountants at all levels of today’s
organization must be familiar with the hardware and software tools that are available to
help make the ﬁrm more effective and efﬁcient. Furthermore, as business entities globalize
their operations, they typically ﬁnd it useful to integrate the systems that track and control
these operations. As a result, many ﬁrms now use an enterprise-wide systems approach.
Accordingly, in Chapter 9 we focus on the accounting and enterprise software options
that are available to ﬁrms—everything from entry-level accounting software to enterprise
resource planning (ERP) systems.
215


Chapter 7
Accounting Information Systems and
Business Processes: Part I
INTRODUCTION
BUSINESS PROCESS FUNDAMENTALS
Overview of the Financial Accounting Cycle
Coding Systems
COLLECTING AND REPORTING ACCOUNTING
INFORMATION
Designing Reports
From Source Documents to Output Reports
THE SALES PROCESS
Objectives of the Sales Process
Inputs to the Sales Process
Outputs of the Sales Process
THE PURCHASING PROCESS
Objectives of the Purchasing Process
Inputs to the Purchasing Process
Outputs of the Purchasing Process
CURRENT TRENDS IN BUSINESS PROCESSES
Business Processes Outsourcing (BPO)
Business Process Management Software
AIS AT WORK—WILL OFFSHORING CHANGE
TO ONSHORING?
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
The Caribbean Club
Larkin State University
Uptown Bucks
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Know the steps in the ﬁnancial accounting pro-
cess.
2. Understand the use of journals and ledgers in
processing accounting transactions.
3. Recognize different types of coding systems
used by AISs.
4. Understand why planning an AIS begins with
the design of outputs.
5. Recognize the objectives, inputs, and outputs of
the sales and purchasing processes.
6. Understand why businesses choose outsourc-
ing and offshoring of business processes.
217

218
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
‘‘Purchasing isn’t just a supply chain activity—it’s a value-adding market activity that
can make a signiﬁcant contribution to proﬁtability.’’
Richard Gerardo and Andrew Spanyi, ‘‘The CFO’s Best Friend,’’
Strategic Finance, December 2008, pp. 25.
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter and the following chapter, we introduce the fundamentals of a business
process and then focus on several core business processes that are common to almost
every business. We begin with a brief refresher of the basics of ﬁnancial accounting.
Although you may be wondering why we talk about the ‘‘bookkeeping’’ process in this
textbook, these concepts are actually at the heart of an AIS. That is, these fundamental
elements are embedded in the accounting information system and they are the basis for
a company’s annual ﬁnancial statements. These fundamental elements include journals,
ledgers, accounts, trial balances, and ﬁnancial statements.
The nature and types of business processes vary, depending on the information needs
of a speciﬁc organization. Nevertheless, a number of business processes are common to
every organization. In this chapter, we examine business transactions related to the sales
process (sales and cash collection) and the purchasing process (expenditures for materials
and supplies, and cash payment).
Modern businesses are under tremendous pressure to cut costs, reduce capital expendi-
tures, and become as efﬁcient as possible at their core competencies. As a result, companies
search globally to achieve efﬁciencies—it’s called ‘‘business without boundaries.’’ In the
ﬁnal portion of this chapter, we give examples of business processes that are commonly
outsourced or offshored. We then examine some business process management solutions
that are available to improve business processes regardless of their location.
BUSINESS PROCESS FUNDAMENTALS
An accounting cycle can begin in a number of different ways. For instance, accounting
personnel can create a transaction from a source document, or a customer may order
products online. Regardless of how the process starts, at the end of the process we issue
annual ﬁnancial reports and close the temporary accounts in preparation for a new cycle.
Overview of the Financial Accounting Cycle
Based on the preparation of source documents, an AIS records each transaction or business
event affecting an organization’s ﬁnancial condition in journals or ledgers.
Journals.
Accounting personnel record transactions in a journal. Of course, this is rarely
an actual paper journal anymore—it’s more likely an electronic entry in an accounting
information system. The journal is a chronological record of business events by account.
A journal may be a special journal or a general journal. Special journals capture a speciﬁc

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
219
type of transaction. They are usually reserved for transactions occurring frequently within
an organization. In a computerized system, special journals may take the form of special
modules with their own ﬁles. For example, an accounting clerk would likely record a credit
sale in an accounts receivable module.
Companies can set up a special journal for virtually any type of transaction. Common
ones are sales journals, purchase journals, cash receipts journals, and cash disbursements
journals. If you think about it, almost all accounting transactions a business organization
records fall into one of these categories. Special journals include entries for all but a few
types of transactions and adjusting journal entries, such as for depreciation. The general
journal records these entries.
Ledgers.
Journal entries show all aspects of a particular transaction. Each entry shows
debit and credit amounts, the transaction date, the affected accounts, and a brief description
of the event. Once an AIS records a journal entry, it next posts the entry in the general
ledger. Within an AIS, a general ledger is a collection of detailed monetary information
about an organization’s various assets, liabilities, owners’ equity, revenues, and expenses.
The general ledger includes a separate account (often called a ‘‘T account’’ because of its
shape) for each type of monetary item in an organization. Although journal entries record
all aspects of business transactions, an AIS separately posts the monetary amounts in each
account to the various accounts in the general ledger. A company’s chart of accounts
provides the organizational structure for the general ledger. The chart of accounts makes
use of a block coding structure (discussed in the next section of this chapter).
Trial Balances and Financial Statements.
Once an AIS records journal entries and
posts them to the general ledger, it can create a trial balance. The trial balance is a listing of
all accounts and their debit and credit balances. After debit and credit dollar amounts in this
trial balance are equal, an accountant will record any necessary adjusting journal entries.
Adjusting entries include journal entries for depreciation and other unrecorded expenses,
prepaid expenses, unearned revenues, and unrecorded revenue. Once the debit and credit
amounts in this trial balance are equal, an AIS is ready to produce ﬁnancial statements.
Financial statements are the primary output of a ﬁnancial accounting system. These
ﬁnancial statements include an income statement, balance sheet, statement of owners’
equity, and cash ﬂow statement. The accounting cycle does not end when an AIS generates
ﬁnancial statements. The computerized system must close temporary accounts, such as
revenue and expense accounts, so that a new cycle can begin. This is necessary because
users are interested in income information for a speciﬁc period of time. Because balance
sheet accounts show ﬁnancial performance at a speciﬁc point in time, they are permanent
and need not be closed. Thus, an AIS will carry these amounts forward to the next
accounting cycle. Figure 7-1 summarizes the steps in the accounting cycle.
Coding Systems
Accounting information systems depend on codes to record, classify, store, and retrieve
ﬁnancial data. Although it is possible in a manual system to use simple alphabetic
descriptions when preparing journal entries, computerized systems use numeric codes
(codes that use numbers only) or alphanumeric codes (codes that use numbers and
letters) to record accounting transactions systematically. For example, a manual journal
entry might include a debit to the ‘‘Direct Materials Inventory’’ account. In a computerized
system, the debit might be to account ‘‘12345.’’ Alphanumeric codes are important in

220
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
1. 
Record transaction in a journal.
2. 
Post journal entries to a ledger.
3. 
Prepare an unadjusted trial balance.
4. 
Record and post adjusting journal entries.
5. 
Prepare an adjusted trial balance.
6. 
Prepare financial statements.
7. 
Record and post closing journal entries.
8. 
Prepare a post-closing trial balance.
FIGURE 7-1
A summary of the steps in the accounting cycle.
computerized systems, as they help to ensure uniformity and consistency. Suppose that a
clerk entered a debit to ‘‘Direct Materials Inventory’’ one time and another time entered the
debit to ‘‘Dir. Materials Inventory.’’ A computer would set up a new account the second
time, rather than recognizing the intended account.
Types of Codes.
AISs typically use several types of codes: (1) mnemonic codes, (2)
sequence codes, (3) block codes, and (4) group codes. Mnemonic codes help the user
remember what they represent. The product codes S, M, L, and XL are examples of
mnemonic codes describing apparel sizes. As the name implies, a sequence code is simply
a sequential set of numbers used to identify customer accounts, employee payroll checks,
customer sales invoices, and so forth. Block codes are sequential codes in which speciﬁc
blocks of numbers are reserved for particular uses. In a typical application, the lead digit,
or two lead digits, in the sequence code acts as the block designator and subsequent digits
are identiﬁers. AISs use block codes to create a chart of accounts (Figure 7-2). Combining
two or more subcodes creates a group code, which are often used as product codes in
sales catalogs.
100
Cash
110
Marketable securities
120
Common stock
121
Preferred stock
122
Bonds
123
Money market certificates
124
Bank certificates
125
Accounts receivable
130
Prepaid expenses
140
Inventory
150
Notes receivable
100-199
Current assets
200-299
Noncurrent assets
300-399
Current liabilities
400-499
Long-term liabilities
500-599
Owners’ equity
600-699
Revenue
700-799
Cost of goods sold
800-899
Operating expenses
900-999
Nonoperating income &
expenses
Major Accounts
Current Assets Detail
FIGURE 7-2
A block code used for a company’s chart of accounts.

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
221
Design Considerations in Coding.
There are a number of important factors to
consider when designing an accounting code. First, it must serve some useful purpose. For
example, if a product code in a manufacturing ﬁrm is part of a responsibility accounting
system, at least one portion of the code must contain a production department code.
Second, it must be consistent. Using Social Security numbers as employee identiﬁers is a
good example of this design consideration. Third, managers must plan for future expansion
(e.g., the creation of extra accounts).
COLLECTING AND REPORTING ACCOUNTING
INFORMATION
As you might imagine, most of the accounting data collected by an organization ultimately
appear on some type of internal and/or external report. Thus, the design of an effective AIS
usually begins with the outputs (reports) that users will expect from the system. Although
this might seem counterintuitive, we discuss the reasons for this in Chapter 13.
Among the outputs of an AIS are: (1) reports to management, (2) reports to investors
and creditors, (3) ﬁles that retain transaction data, and (4) ﬁles that retain current data about
accounts (e.g., inventory records). Perhaps the most important of these outputs are the
reports to management because these reports aid decision-making activities. As you might
imagine, the formats of these various reports might be very different. These reports might
be hard-copy (paper) reports, soft-copy (screen) reports, e-copy (CD and other electronic
media) reports, or audio outputs. If a manager queries a database system, the monitor
shows the requested data and the system produces a hard-copy report only upon demand.
Graphics enhance reports in any form. Many reports today appear on company websites.
Although web page design is beyond the scope of this book, it is important to recognize
that the rules for preparing good reports apply to web page reports as well as hard-copy
and other multimedia reports.
Designing Reports
Users need many different types of accounting reports—some might be every hour and
others not as often. An AIS might issue some reports only when a particular event occurs.
For example, an AIS might issue an inventory reorder report only when the inventory for
a certain product drops below a speciﬁed level. Such an event would probably generate
an exception report, which is a list of exceptional condition(s). As another example,
suppose that a purchase order has an authorization signature but contains some inaccurate
or missing information. In this case, the AIS would generate an exception report. The
report would include a table that identiﬁes the error or errors, and would suggest a
possible solution to ﬁx the error. After correcting the error, the purchase order would
require a new authorization signature. This signature would clear the exception from the
report.
Characteristics of Good Reports.
Good output reports share similar characteristics
regardless of their type, such as: (1) useful, (2) convenient format, (3) easy to identify, and
(4) consistent. For example, summary reports should contain ﬁnancial totals, comparative
reports should list like numbers (e.g., budget versus actual ﬁgures) in adjacent columns,
and descriptive reports (e.g., marketing reports) should present results systematically.

222
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Sports Hats
22%
Baseballs
27%
Baseball Bats
11%
Golf Balls
5%
The Lu Company Sales by Product Line for the Month of January 2003
Basketballs
35%
Baseballs
Baseball Bats
Basketballs
Golf Balls
Sports Hats
FIGURE 7-3
A pie chart showing the percentage of sales from various product lines.
Sometimes the most convenient format is graphical, such as a pie chart (Figure 7-3). Other
graphical formats include bar charts and trend lines.
Identiﬁcation and Consistency.
Good managerial reports always contain funda-
mental identiﬁcation, including headings (company name, organizational division or
department, etc.), page numbers, and dates. For example, a report loses its informa-
tion value if you do not know the time period it covers. Balance sheets and similar reports
should show the date as of a speciﬁc point in time. Reports such as lists of current
employees, customers, and vendors should also indicate a speciﬁc date. Income statements
and similar reports should show a span of dates for the reporting period (e.g., for the
month ended January 31, 2010).
AIS reports should be consistent: (1) over time, (2) across departmental or divisional
levels, and (3) with general accounting practice. Consistency over time allows managers
to compare information from different time periods. For example, a manager might want
to compare a sales report for June with a similar report for the month of May of the same
year. This manager might also look at sales for June of prior years to evaluate whether
performance is improving or deteriorating. Similarly, reports should be consistent across
departmental levels so that supervisors may compare departmental performance. Finally,
report formats should be consistent with general accounting practice so that managers and
investors can understand and use these reports.
From Source Documents to Output Reports
Companies use a variety of source documents to collect data for the AIS. The chief concerns
in the data collection process are accuracy, timeliness, and cost-effectiveness. An example
of a source document is the purchase order in Figure 7-4. This source document represents
a computer-generated purchase order by BSN Bicycles, a bicycle shop, to purchase goods
from the Lu Company, a sporting goods distributor. Typically, employees prepare several
copies of a purchase order for internal use (these may be hard copies or computer images).
For instance, the purchasing department keeps one copy to document the order and to
serve as a reference for future inquiries. Accounting and receiving departments also receive
copies. The purchase order number is 36551. Purchase orders are normally sequentially
numbered for easy reference at a later date.

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
223
ORDERED BY
BSN BICYCLES
1 Sports Lane
Sports Shop, XX 12345
Lu Company
222 Main Street
Pleasantville, XX 23456
To:
Date
Item
G124-464
G453-324
Authorized Signature
Hot Rider Gloves-Women
Mogul Tire Pumps
15.00
20.00
24.95
34.95
374.25
699.00
Total
$1,073.25
Description
Quantity
Unit Price
Total
Good Through
3/1/2010
3/30/2010
2/10, n/30
Account No.
Terms
Purchase
Purchase Order No:
36551
FIGURE 7-4
A sample purchase order.
Based on this purchase order, the Lu Company ships merchandise and sends a sales
invoice to BSN Bicycles. Figure 7-5 illustrates the sales invoice document. The sales invoice
duplicates much of the information on the original purchase order. New information
includes the shipping address, a reference to the purchase order number, the shipping
date, due date, the sales invoice number, and the customer identiﬁcation number. The Lu
Company might produce as many as six copies of the sales invoice. Two (or more) copies are
the bill for the customer. The shipping department keeps a third copy to record that it ﬁlled
the order. A fourth copy goes to the accounting department for processing accounts receiv-
able. The sales department retains a ﬁfth copy for future reference. Finally, the inventory
department receives a sixth copy to update its records on the speciﬁc inventory items sold.
Source documents of the types illustrated here help manage the ﬂow of accounting data
in several ways. First, they dictate the kinds of data to be collected and help ensure legibility,
consistency, and accuracy in recording data. Second, they encourage the completeness
of accounting data because these source documents clearly enumerate the information
required. Third, they serve as distributors of information for individuals or departments.
Finally, source documents help to establish the authenticity of accounting data. This is
useful for such purposes as establishing an audit trail, testing for authorization of cash
disbursement checks or inventory disbursements, and establishing accountability for the
collection or distribution of money.

224
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Voice: 
Fax: 
Customer ID 
Quantity 
Item 
Description 
Unit Price 
Total 
15.00 
20.00 
G124-464 
G453-324 
Hot Rider Gloves-Women 
Mogul Tire Pumps 
$24.95 
$34.95 
374.00 
699.00 
$1,073.25 
 
$1,073.25 
0.00 
$1,073.25 
Subtotal 
Sales Tax 
Total Invoice Amount 
Payment Received 
TOTAL 
Check No. 
Sales Rep 
Shipping Method 
Ship Date 
Due Date 
BSN001 
Rail 
3/30/2010
4/3/2010
36551 
2/10, n/30 
Customer PO 
Payment Terms 
Duplicate 
Sold To: 
BSN BICYCLES 
1 Sports Lane 
Sports Shop, XX 12345 
Ship To: 
BSN BICYCLES 
1 Sports Lane 
Sports Shop, XX 12345 
Invoice
Invoice Number:
15563
Invoice Date:
3/3/2010
Page:
1
W. Loman 
FIGURE 7-5
A sample sales invoice.
Both manual and computerized AISs use source documents extensively. In many AISs
today, source documents are still written or printed on paper. However, large companies
are moving to paperless ofﬁces via the Internet, electronic data interchange, or scanning
documents and saving them electronically. Improving the design of source documents
prepared online can save a business money, as in the following case.
Case-in-Point 7.1
Woerner Turf is a company that produces turf grass and sod for
landscaping. The company recently implemented a new software package by Microsoft Great
Plains Business Solutions that consolidated its sales order screen. It eliminated or condensed
data entry ﬁelds to create a single screen. It is not uncommon for a sales person to enter
orders as often as 50–100 times each day. The new design, which is similar to the paper form
used previously, reduces order entry time from three minutes to one. This increased efﬁciency
allows sales staff to spend more time selling and less time entering data.1
1Source: www.greatplains.com/solutions.

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
225
THE SALES PROCESS
A business process is a collection of activities and work ﬂows in an organization that
creates value. An AIS collects and reports data related to an organization’s business
processes. The nature and type of business processes might vary from industry to industry,
but most businesses and government agencies have some common core processes. Two
core business processes that are common to almost every business are sales and purchasing.
Information processing requires recording, maintaining, grouping, and reporting business
and economic activities that make up a business process. For example, the sales process
includes such activities as taking sales orders, ﬁlling orders, managing customer inquiries,
and receiving payment. The AIS collects and stores data for each of these activities as part
of the sales process.
An economic event is an activity that involves an increase and/or decrease in dollar
amounts on the ﬁnancial statements. An example would be collecting cash from a customer
on account. Because economic events impact ﬁnancial statements, they are often called
accounting transactions. A business event is an activity that does not impact the ﬁnancial
statements, but is nevertheless important to the business. A sales order from a customer is
an example of a business event. Although accountants do not record all business events
in journals, they most likely record this information to support decision-making (e.g.,
customer relationship management, discussed later in this chapter).
The sales process begins with a customer order for goods or services and ends
with the collection of cash from the customer. Figure 7-6 summarizes the AIS objectives,
inputs, and outputs related to the sales process, assuming that sales are on credit and for
merchandise rather than services.
Objectives of the Sales Process
Revenues result from an organization’s sale of goods or services. They may also result
from donations or gifts, as in the case of many nonproﬁt organizations. An organization
that generates revenues, but fails to collect these revenues regularly, may ﬁnd it cannot
The Sales Process
OBJECTIVES
Tracking sales of goods and/or services to customers
Filling customer orders
Maintaining customer records
Billing for goods and services
Collecting payment for goods and services
Forecasting sales and cash receipts
Inputs (Source Documents)
Outputs (Reports)
• Sales order
• Sales invoice
• Remittance Advice
• Shipping Notice
• Debit/Credit Memoranda
• Financial Statement Information
• Customer Billing Statement
• Aging Report
• Bad Debt Report
• Cash Receipts Forecast
• Customer Listing
• Sales Analysis Reports
FIGURE 7-6
Objectives, inputs, and outputs associated with processing revenue transactions.

226
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
pay its bills. Many people unfamiliar with accounting make the incorrect assumption that
companies with positive incomes cannot go out of business. The reality is that bankruptcy
results from inadequate cash ﬂow, not from insufﬁcient income. The primary objective in
processing revenues is to achieve timely and efﬁcient cash collection.
To process sales in a timely and efﬁcient manner, an organization must be able to
track all revenues that customers owe the ﬁrm. Once the AIS recognizes these revenues,
the revenue portion of the system needs to monitor the resulting cash inﬂows. A good
AIS matches each revenue with a valid transaction. Maintaining customer records is an
important function of the AIS for the revenue process. This includes validating a customer’s
bill-paying ability and payment history, assigning credit limits and ratings to customers,
and tracking all customers’ outstanding invoices. Processing revenues includes ﬁlling
customers’ orders. This requires an interface with the inventory control function. The AIS
should bill customers only for products shipped. The sales process must also allow for
certain exceptions—for example, sales returns.
Forecasting is another objective of the AIS to help management in its planning
function. The AIS must analyze sales orders, sales terms, payment histories, and other data.
For example, sales orders are a good indicator of future revenues, and the terms of sale
provide information about likely dates of collection on accounts.
Events in the Sales Process.
Figure 7-7 illustrates an AIS for the sales process in
a systems ﬂowchart. This view assumes an online sales order. Notice that emails and
electronic images replace many of the paper documents. The ﬂowchart also assumes
that the AIS uses a centralized database that integrates all the data ﬁles (discussed in
Chapters 4, 5, and 6). The following ﬁctitious example describes the sales process shown
in Figure 7-7.
Example.
Hiroshi Ajas needs to purchase books for his classes this semester. He decides
to buy the books online from textbooks.com. In verifying the order, textbooks.com’s
AIS also veriﬁes Hiroshi’s credit card and checks its inventory to make sure the books are
available. The company then sends Hiroshi an email conﬁrmation, verifying the transaction.
Textbooks.com’s AIS notiﬁes its warehouse via email to pack and ship the books. The
warehouse processes the shipment information and creates a packing slip. Warehouse
personnel then package the packing slip with the books and send them to Hiroshi. The day
that textbooks.com ships the books, it also charges Hiroshi’s credit card.
The major events in textbooks.com’s sales process are the sales order, the shipment
of goods, and the customer payment. The company will record information about each of
these events. This information allows them to produce a variety of reports, such as book
sales by regions of the country. The next two sections describe the information inputs and
outputs of the sales process.
Inputs to the Sales Process
Figure 7-8 shows a data ﬂow diagram of the sales process, which identiﬁes the data inputs
and information outputs of the process. As noted in the example, an AIS typically creates
a sales order at the time a customer contracts for goods or services. In this example, an
accounts receivable clerk uses this sales order to prepare a sales invoice or the customer
might generate one herself using the web page of an online retailer. The sales invoice
reﬂects the product or products purchased, the price, and the terms of payment. When
the customer makes a payment, a remittance advice may accompany the payment. When

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
227
Customer
places online
order
System checks
inventory and
credit
Process
customer
payment
information
Send email
notice to 
warehouse to
pick and ship
Inventory,
sales order, &
customer files
Payment &
customer
files
Inventory &
sales files
Send email
order
confirmation
to customer
Process
shipping
information
Create and
print packing
slip
Send packing
slip to customer
with goods
Packing
slip
Cash
receipts
forecast
Management
reports
Customer
listing
Financial
statements
Process and
print reports
FIGURE 7-7
High-level systems ﬂowchart of the sales process in an online environment.

228
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Management
Sales Analysis Reports
Invoice Data
Cash Receipts Forecast
Aging Reports
Customer Data
Bad Debt Reports
Accounts Receivable
Master File
Billing
Invoice
Sales
Order
Customers
Debit/Credit
Memo
Sales Return Notification
Receiving
Department
Customers
Banks
Check and
Remittance
Advice
Deposit Slips
and Checks
Receive
Payment
Manage
Customer
Accounts
FIGURE 7-8
Data ﬂow diagram of the sales process.
you pay your Visa or MasterCard bill, for example, the portion of the bill you return with
your check is a remittance advice.
In addition to sales orders, sales invoices, checks, and remittance advices, shipping
notices are another input to sales processing. When the warehouse releases goods for
shipment, the warehouse clerk prepares a shipping notice. A copy of this notice may serve
as a packing slip and would be included in the package with the goods. A copy of this
document is also sent to the accounts receivable department and is used as a prompt for
the department to bill the customer.
Debit/credit memoranda are source documents affecting both the sales and pur-
chasing processes. An organization issues these memoranda to denote the return of
damaged goods or discrepancies about the amount owed. For example, let’s assume that
Hiroshi’s package with the textbooks arrived, but two of the books were damaged and
two were the wrong textbooks. Of course, Hiroshi returned the four books (worth $400)
to textbooks.com. However, Hiroshi must wait until the company receives the books and
processes the return before he will be issued a credit to his account (credit card) for
the $400.
If a company ﬁnds that it has charged a customer too little for goods sold, the
company would issue a debit memorandum. This debit memorandum signiﬁes a debit to
the customers account receivable with the company to reﬂect the amount not charged
originally. The customer now owes more to the company.
Business organizations use the data they collect about their customers and sales
transactions to improve customer satisfaction and increase proﬁtability. As a result, they

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
229
are purchasing or developing customer relationship management (CRM) software to
gather, maintain, and use these data to provide better customer service and customer
loyalty. However, think broadly here about potential uses of CRM software. For example,
many universities are now purchasing CRM solutions to help them better manage their
current and potential customers (i.e., students). These software packages help various
schools and colleges within a university manage course enrollments, communications,
invoice and payment processing, and perhaps most importantly, stay connected with
graduates who will hopefully become donors!
Case-in-Point 7.2
FedEx purchased CRM technology and combined information from all
of their business units. This allowed the company to offer new customer services. For example,
a customer can now track a package, regardless of whether the package is traveling express,
ground, or freight. FedEx also captures data at the customer level, and can determine whether
a customer needs a scheduled pickup. In one instance, FedEx told a customer that it couldn’t
deliver a package on time because the president was in town and streets were blocked.2
Outputs of the Sales Process
Processing sales transactions creates several outputs. An AIS uses some of these outputs
to produce external accounting reports (such as ﬁnancial statements) as well as internal
reports (such as management reports). Management reports can be in any format and
contain the information they need for decision-making. In this and the following sections
of the chapter, we discuss a few of the many reports that may be created by AISs.
One output of the sales process is a customer billing statement. This statement
summarizes outstanding sales invoices for a particular customer and shows the amount
currently owed. Other reports generated by the sales revenue process include aging
reports, bad debt reports, cash receipts forecasts, approved customer listings, and various
sales analysis reports. The aging report shows the accounts receivable balance broken
down into categories based on time outstanding. The bad debt report contains information
about collection follow-up procedures for overdue customer accounts. In the event that a
customer’s account is uncollectible, the account is written off to an allowance account for
bad debts. A detailed listing of the allowance account may be another output of the sales
process.
All of the data gathered from source documents in processing sales transactions serve
as inputs to a cash receipts forecast. Data such as sales amounts, terms of sale, prior
payment experience for selected customers, and information from aging analysis reports
and cash collection reports are all inputs to this forecast.
We previously indicated that maintaining customer records is an important function
of the AIS in the sales process. The billing or accounts receivable function should approve
new customers, both to ensure that the customers exist and to assess their bill-paying
ability. This may require obtaining a credit report from a reputable credit agency such
as Dun and Bradstreet. The billing function assigns each new customer a credit limit
based on credit history. From time to time, the AIS produces an approved customer
listing report. This report is likely to show customer ID numbers (for uniquely identifying
each customer), contact name(s), shipping and billing addresses, credit limits, and billing
terms.
2Kathleen Hickey, ‘‘A Winning Combination: Integration of CRM,’’ Trafﬁc World, (January 5, 2004) p. 18.

230
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
If an AIS captures (or converts) appropriate sales data electronically, it can also produce
various sales analysis reports. These include sales classiﬁed by product line, type of sale
(cash, credit, or debit card), or sales region. However, the sales process can only produce
effective sales analysis reports if the AIS captures appropriate sales data. Again, customer
relationship management solutions help managers take advantage of this data to maximize
revenue and to provide better customer service.
THE PURCHASING PROCESS
The purchasing process begins with a request (or an order) for goods or services and
ends with payments to the vendor. Figure 7-9 shows the objectives, inputs, and outputs
associated with purchasing events. Our discussion assumes that credit purchases are for
goods (i.e., manufacturing inventory) rather than for services. But in general, purchases
may be for either goods or services and for cash or on credit.
Objectives of the Purchasing Process
Credit transactions create accounts payable. Accounts payable processing closely resembles
accounts receivable processing; it is the ﬂip side of the picture. With accounts receivable,
companies keep track of amounts owed to them from their customers. An accounts payable
application tracks the amounts owed by a company to vendors. The objective of accounts
payable processing is to pay vendors at the optimal time. Companies want to take advantage
of cash discounts offered, and also avoid ﬁnance charges for late payments.
Maintaining vendor records is as important to the purchasing process as maintaining
customer records is for the sales process. The purchasing department is responsible for
maintaining a list of authorized vendors. This entails ensuring the authenticity of vendors as
well as ﬁnding reputable vendors who offer quality goods and services at reasonable prices.
Vendor shipping policies, billing policies, discount terms, and reliability are also important
The Purchasing Process
OBJECTIVES
Tracking purchases of goods and/or services from vendors
Tracking amounts owed
Maintaining vendor records
Controlling inventory
Making timely and accurate vendor payments
Forecasting purchases and cash outﬂows
Inputs (Source Documents)
Outputs (Reports)
• Purchase Requisition
• Purchase Order
• Vendor Listing
• Receiving Report
• Bill of Lading
• Packing Slip
• Debit/Credit Memoranda
• Financial Statement Information
• Vendor Checks
• Check Register
• Discrepancy Reports
• Cash Requirements Forecast
• Sales Analysis Reports
FIGURE 7-9
Objectives, inputs, and outputs associated with the purchasing process.

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
231
variables in the approval process. Businesses today are strengthening their relationships
with their vendors or suppliers, recognizing that they are partners in a supply chain.
Probably one of the most successful supply chain management ‘‘partnerships’’ is that of
Wal-Mart and Procter & Gamble.
Case-in-Point 7.3
Wal-Mart and P&G started collaborating in the 1980s, at a time when
retailers shared very little information with manufacturers. But these two companies decided
to build a software system to connect P&G to Wal-Mart’s distribution centers. When P&G’s
products run low at the distribution centers, the information system sends an automatic alert
to P&G to ship more. In some cases, the system communicates at the individual store level,
which allows P&G to monitor the shelves through real-time satellite link-ups. Just recently,
P&G and Wal-Mart started using RFID technology to achieve even more efﬁciencies in the
supply chain.3
The purchase of goods affects inventory control. The objective of inventory con-
trol is to ensure that an AIS records all goods purchased for, and dispensed from,
inventory. The inventory control component of the purchasing process interfaces with
production departments, the purchasing department, the vendor, and the receiving
department.
A ﬁnal objective of the purchasing process is forecasting cash outﬂows. The addition
of outstanding purchase requisitions, purchase invoices, and receiving reports provides an
estimate of future cash requirements. With the forecast of cash receipts produced by the
sales process, this estimate allows an organization to prepare a cash budget.
Events in the Purchasing Process.
Figure 7-10 shows a systems ﬂowchart that
describes the purchasing process. As with the sales process, the ﬂowchart assumes a
centralized database and a mix of paper documents and electronic images. The following
ﬁctitious example describes the purchasing process shown in Figure 7-10.
Example.
Sandra Michaels is an employee at textbooks.com who needs to purchase a
new computer. She pulls up the purchase requisition form from the company’s intranet
and ﬁlls in the appropriate information. She then sends the completed form to her
supervisor for approval, who approves the request and clicks the ‘‘Submit’’ button to
forward Sandra’s request electronically to the purchasing department. A purchasing agent
creates an electronic purchase order based on the information Sandra provided. The
agent consults the vendor ﬁle to locate an authorized vendor for the requested computer.
The AIS then sends an electronic version of the order to the receiving department and
another copy to the vendor. When the computer arrives from the vendor, a receiving
clerk consults the AIS system to verify that a purchase order exists for the goods received.
The clerk then enters information about the receipt (e.g., date, time, count, and condition
of merchandise) to create an electronic receiving report. Upon receipt of an electronic
vendor invoice and the receiving report, the accounts payable system remits payment to the
vendor.
The economic and business events in textbooks.com’s purchasing process are the
purchase request, purchase order, receipt of goods, and payment to the vendor. The
company’s AIS records information about each of these events and produces a variety of
reports. The next two sections describe the information inputs and some of the reports
associated with the purchasing process.
3Source: http://www.cio.com/article/40940/Supply Chain Management Deﬁnition and Solutions?page = 3.

232
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Electronic
requisition to
purchase
department
Electronic
purchase
order to
vendor
Vendor
sends
electronic
invoice
Inventory and
purchase
requisition
files
Vendor &
purchase
order files
Purchase
order &
receiving
files
Purchasing
agent creates
electronic
purchase order
Receiving
creates
electronic
receiving
report
A/P system
matches
electronic
documents &
sends payment
Cash
payment
forecast
Management
reports
Vendor
listing
Financial
statements
Employees key in
requests or
automated requests
for raw materials
Process and
print reports
Request for
goods or
services
Process
requisition
Electronic
purchase
order to
receiving
FIGURE 7-10
High-level Systems ﬂowchart of the purchasing process in an online environ-
ment.

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
233
Inputs to the Purchasing Process
As explained earlier, the purchasing process often begins with a requisition from a
production department for goods or services. Sometimes, an AIS triggers purchase orders
automatically when inventories fall below pre-speciﬁed levels. The purchase requisition
shows the item requested and may show the name of the vendor who supplies it.
In Figure 7-11, the accounts payable system matches three source documents before
remitting payment to the vendor: the purchase order, the receiving report, and the
purchase invoice. A purchase invoice is a copy of the vendor’s sales invoice. The
purchasing organization receives this copy as a bill for the goods or services purchased.
The purpose of matching the purchase order, receiving report, and purchase invoice is
to maintain the best possible control over cash payments to vendors. For example, the
absence of one of these documents could signify a duplicate payment. A computerized AIS
can search more efﬁciently for duplicate payments than a manual system. For example,
auditors can instruct an AIS to print a list of duplicate invoice numbers, vendor checks for
like dollar amounts, and similar control information.
The purchase requisition initiates the purchase order. Besides the information on
the requisition, the purchase order includes vendor information and payment terms (see
Figure 7-4). The purchasing department typically prepares several copies (or images) of
the purchase order. In a paper-based system, the purchasing clerk sends one copy of the
purchase order to the receiving department to serve as a receiving report or, preferably,
to prompt the receiving department to issue a separate receiving report. This copy of the
Management 
Purchase Requisition
Notice of Receipt 
Accounts Payable 
Master File 
Receive 
Goods or 
Services 
Maintain 
Accounts 
Payable 
Receiving Report 
Receiving Report 
Purchase Order 
Purchase Order 
Cash Requirement Forecast 
Purchase Analysis 
Purchase 
Goods or 
Services 
Vendor 
Purchase Invoice 
Payment 
Shipping Notice 
Inventory 
Control 
Production 
Departments 
Materials 
Requisition 
Form 
Invoice and Payment Data 
FIGURE 7-11
Data ﬂow diagram of the purchasing process.

234
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
purchase order is specially coded (or color-coded) to distinguish it from other copies of
the purchase order if there is no separate receiving report. The receiving department copy
might leave out the quantities ordered that are identiﬁed in the purchase order. This is
done for control purposes, so that workers receiving the goods must do their own counts,
rather than simply approving the amounts shown on the purchase order.
Another source document, a bill of lading, accompanies the goods sent. The freight
carrier gives the supplier a bill of lading as a receipt, which means the carrier assumes
responsibility for the goods. It may contain information about the date shipped, the point
of delivery for freight payment (either shipping point or destination), the carrier, the route,
and the mode of shipment. The customer may receive a copy of the shipping notice
with the purchase invoice. This is important to the accounts payable subsystem, because
accounts payable accruals include a liability for goods shipped free on board (FOB) from
the shipping point. Goods shipped this way have left the vendor, but the customer has not
yet received them. Another source document, the packing slip, is sometimes included in
the merchandise package. This document indicates the speciﬁc quantities and items in the
shipment and any goods that are on back order. The next time you order goods through a
catalog or over the Internet, look for a packing slip, such as the one shown in Figure 7-12,
in the container with your merchandise.
Outputs of the Purchasing Process
Typical outputs of the purchasing process are vendor checks and accompanying check
register, discrepancy reports, and a cash requirements forecasts. The check register lists all
checks issued for a particular period. Accounts payable typically processes checks in batches
and produces the check register as a byproduct of this processing step. Discrepancy
reports are necessary to note any differences between quantities or amounts on the
purchase order, the receiving report, and the purchase invoice.
The purpose of a discrepancy report is to ensure that no one authorizes a vendor
check until the appropriate manager properly reconciles any differences. For example,
assume that a receiving report indicates the receipt of twelve units of product, whereas the
purchase order shows that a company ordered twenty units and the purchase invoice bills
the company for these twenty units. The accounts payable function records the liability
for twenty units and notes the situation on a discrepancy report for management. This
report would trigger an investigation. For example, it is possible that the vendor made two
shipments of merchandise, and one shipment has yet to be received. If this is the case,
receipt of the second shipment clears this discrepancy from the next report. However,
it this is not the case, it is important for management to determine the cause of the
discrepancy as soon as possible.
The purchasing process produces a cash requirements forecast in the same manner
that the sales process produces a cash receipts forecast. By looking at source documents
such as outstanding purchase orders, unbilled receiving reports, and vendor invoices, an
AIS can predict future cash payments and their dates. Naturally, this forecast is easier to
make with a computerized system than with a manual system.
Information Technology (IT) Used in the Sales and Purchasing Processes.
Much of the input and output related to business processes is now electronic, and that
includes the sales and purchasing processes. For instance, inputs (sales order or purchase
requests) can be voice inputs, touch-tone telephone signals, bar codes, video signals,
magnetic ink characters (as on checks), scanned images, or keystrokes from a computer.

http://www.amazon.com
Amazon.com
Coffeyville Ind. Park
2654 N. Highway 169
Coffeyville, KS 67337
USA
Toll–Free:        (800) 201-7575
Voice: +1 (206) 266—2992
FAX: +1 (206) 266—2950
Carolyn S. Norman
10906 River Terrace
Richmond, VA 23284
United States
Carolyn S. Norman
10906 River Terrace
Richmond, VA 23284
United States
Coffeyville Ind. Park
2654 N. Highway 169
Coffeyville, KS 67337
US +1 (206) 266—2992
orders@amazon.com
hhvv8429/4b/11414/std-us/1304086/513 524–1154
UPS_GR
Total
Our Price
Format
Description
Item
In This Shipment
Rough Draft (P—2—A25B23)
1
The Brethren (R—1—O43A1)
1
The Business of Consulting : The Basics and Beyond
(P—2—D4E5)
1
Flawless Consulting: A Guide to Getting Your Expertise Used
(Second Edition) (P—5—K56F3) 
Hall, James W.
Grisham, John
Biech, Elaine
Block, Peter
This shipment completes your order.
You can always check the status of your orders from the "Your Account" link on our homepage.
Thanks for shopping at Amazon.com, and please come again!
Hardcover
Hardcover
Hardcover
Hardcover
$17.47
$16.77
$39.95
$39.95
$17.47
$16.77
$39.95
$39.95
$114.14
6.96
121.10
121.10
0.00
Subtotal
Shipping & Handling
Order Total
Paid via Visa
Balance Due
1
Qty
Your order of June 29, 2010 (Order ID 102–4721982–4436814)
FIGURE 7-12
A packing slip from amazon.com.
235

236
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Salespeople in the ﬁeld typically use laptop computers, portable bar code scanners, or
other types of input devices to enter data. With a wireless capability, they can also enter
the information in real-time.
Case-in-Point 7.4
If you have moved lately, you probably watched a moving company
representative walk through your home with a barcode scanner and a sheet of paper with
various barcodes for different pieces of furniture and other items in your home. After the
walkthrough, the representative can quickly download the information to a laptop, print out an
estimate of the cost of your move, and discuss the estimate with you—all in the same visit!4
Automated data-entry technology helps companies save money as well as provide better
customer service. For example, bar code scanners that are commonly used in most retail
stores gather essential inventory data (and help to avoid human error) for the retailer, and
they also can help expedite the checkout process for customers. In addition, some retailers
are using biometric technology that offers customers convenience and faster-checkouts,
and offers retailers savings in transaction costs. Here’s how biometric payment works:
To set up an account, customers scan their ﬁngerprint at an in-store kiosk, enter their
phone number, and then submit checking and credit card account information. To make
a purchase, they place their ﬁnger on a scanner at the register, enter their phone number,
and choose how they want to pay (credit, debit, or checking).5
Case-in-Point 7.5
In 1916, Clarence Saunders (a very innovative businessman in Mem-
phis, TN) opened the ﬁrst Piggly Wiggly® grocery store—the very ﬁrst self-service grocery
store. Saunders recently decided to be innovative again and started a pilot program to test the
use of biometric payments. Within three months of starting the pilot program at four Piggly
Wiggly grocery stores, 15% of its customers who normally did not pay by cash enrolled in the
Pay By Touch system. Those users increased their store visits by 15%, which translates into
an additional 7,350 transactions a year. Not only did they come more often, those shoppers
also spent 12% more on groceries.6
IT supports the purchasing process in a variety of ways. For example, an organization
might determine that some inventory items can be reordered automatically and electron-
ically when the company reaches a predetermined minimum quantity of those inventory
items. An automatic reorder can be generated by the computer system, sent electronically
to the vendor, and the vendor can be paid electronically by using EDI. We discuss this
aspect of e-commerce more in depth in Chapter 15. After purchases arrive, our next
concern is inventory management. To effectively manage inventory, we might use different
technologies. Below, we describe two cases where organizations decided to use RFID
tags (a computer chip with a tiny antenna) to manage inventory. The ﬁrst is the Boeing
Company and the second is the Department of Defense. In both cases, the vendors of
the manufactured goods place the RFID tags on the items. The interesting point about
RFID tags is that they can contain a complete history of the individual part, and then the
purchaser can add or delete information to or from the tag as the part proceeds through
the supply chain.
Case-in-Point 7.6
The Boeing Co. uses RFID tags to track between 1,700 and 2,000
mission-critical parts on each of its new 787 jetliners, but that’s really not very many when
4Source: from the authors.
5Source: http://money.cnn.com/2006/01/24/magazines/fortune/pluggedin fortune biometrics.
6Sources: http://www.pigglywiggly.com/cgi-bin/customize?aboutus.html and http://money.cnn.com/2006/01/
24/magazines/fortune/pluggedin fortune biometrics.

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
237
you consider that each of these jetliners has about 6 million parts. The parts that are tagged
with RFID are those that are either very expensive or frequently require maintenance and
replacement. Information stored on the RFID tag helps trace parts and reduces cycle time to
solve service problems. For example, before RFID, if one of the three computers in the cockpit
of a 747 needed to be replaced, a mechanic would have to get on his back with a ﬂashlight
and a mirror to search for a serial number. Now, the mechanic can walk into a cockpit with an
RFID reader and locate the faulty computer with just a couple of clicks.7
Case-in-Point 7.7
The Department of Defense (DOD) requires its largest suppliers to
attach RFID tags to all pallets of merchandise shipped to the DOD. The DOD wants to use
RFID tags to improve business functions, all aspects of the defense supply chain, and inventory
management. This is particularly important because the DOD has more than 43,000 suppliers,
and 100 of these suppliers account for 80% of the dollar value of supplies.8
CURRENT TRENDS IN BUSINESS PROCESSES
Organizations frequently divide business processes into ‘‘core processes’’ and ‘‘other pro-
cesses.’’ In the past, managers and management accountants focused on cost management,
while managers and internal auditors primarily focused on improving core processes. In
all cases, the goal was typically to make these processes as efﬁcient as possible. Now,
organizations are critically examining their processes to determine which ones to keep and
which ones to outsource. Results from a 2008 Accenture survey suggest that companies
outsource for strategic advantages as much as for cost savings, as we highlight in the
following case-in-point.
Case-in-Point 7.8
The senior executives who responded to the Accenture survey credit
outsourcing with increasing their sense of control over business performance, and the most
common control gains that they mentioned are:
• Improved planning (47%)
• Greater reliability of business information (39%)
• A stronger grasp of business outcomes (37%)
• More effective implementation of ideas (33%)
• Increased revenue (32%)9
Business Processes Outsourcing (BPO)
Companies outsource such business processes as human resources, ﬁnance and accounting,
customer services, learning services and training, and information technology. A recent
survey estimated the global BPO market for human resources services to be $50 billion.
See Figure 7-13 for examples of outsourcing.
7Source: http://epsﬁles.intermec.com/eps ﬁles/eps cs/Boeing cs web.pdf
8Sullivan, Laurie, ‘‘Department of Defense Turns to IBM for RFID Expertise,’’ InformationWeek (March 17, 2004).
RFID tags are similar to bar codes, but can store more information. Both require a transmitter gun to collect the
data.
9Accenture. ‘‘High Performance Outsourcing: Gaining Control through Outsourcing in the Manufacturing and
Consumer Industries,’’ (2008), at http://accenture.com.

238
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Company/Industry
Business Process Outsourced
Proctor & Gamble
HR function to IBM
EarthLink Inc.
Most of its billing, sales, tech-support calls, and other customer-
support functions
Many banks and other corporations
General and Specialty Printing (expected to grow from $30B in
2002 to $35B in 2007)
Owens & Minor
Information Technology to Perot Systems
Sun Microsystems, Inc.
Training for Sun employees and Sun’s customers to Accenture
City of Copenhagen
Payroll and HR function to Accenture
University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston
Physician billing and collection services to Atlanta-based Per-Se
Technologies
Sprint
Call center operations to IBM Corp.
FIGURE 7-13
Examples of Business Process Outsourcing (BPO).
Case-in-Point 7.9
CNA is one of the largest insurance company in the United States, pro-
viding such services (core processes) as risk management, information services, underwriting,
and claims administration. Rather than develop training programs for their employees, CNA
outsourced this business process to another company. Similarly, many universities outsource
a number of operations they used to perform themselves—for example, landscaping, food
services, or janitorial services—so that they can focus on core functions more directly related
to educating students.
Today’s combination of networked enterprises and globalization has given rise to a
business model called ‘‘business without boundaries.’’ Companies no longer have all
of their employees in one location, working on various business processes such as HR,
accounting, production, and others. Employees may be located anywhere in the world,
and they are. The result is a new dimension to outsourcing called offshoring—moving
jobs offshore—to countries like India, China, Canada, Mexico, or Malaysia.
Of course, not all outsourced business processes are accomplished by employees in
foreign countries. Many of these processes are still accomplished by businesses in the
United States. Nevertheless, all business processes are under a great deal of scrutiny by
managers and management accountants as companies become more strategically oriented
toward revenue generation and more vigilant about managing costs.
The important point for accountants is that, at some point, you will most likely be on
a team of professionals in your organization that will study the costs and beneﬁts of either
keeping a business process in-house or outsourcing the function. If the team decides that the
organization should keep the process, then the next task might be to decide what business
process management (BPM) software the company should use to automate that process.
Software companies are developing a wide variety of business process solutions to help
managers integrate their existing data and applications into efﬁcient and effective business
systems. If the decision is to outsource the process, then accountants will most certainly be
involved in analyzing the many costs and beneﬁts/concerns associated with the decision.
Business Process Management Software
Business Process Management (BPM) software packages help companies collect
corporate knowledge, data, and business rules into a business system to improve core
business processes. Think of BPM as a combination of software tools and management

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
239
practices that enable entities to accomplish business processes more efﬁciently. As a result,
managers have timely access to performance data related to clients, projects, ﬁnancials,
and people to improve company performance—and these beneﬁts are available even to
smaller businesses, as the following case-in-point describes. The market for these software
packages is substantial—over $1 billion.10
Case-in-Point 7.10
The Sleeter Group is a nationwide community of experts who provide
QuickBooks consulting services to small business owners—and they also announce their
Annual Award List of ‘‘Awesome Add-ons for QuickBooks’’. For 2009, this list includes
Attitude Positive (a Point of Sale BPM solution for the retailer and restaurant industries);
Bill.com (a web-based service to automate accounts payable processes); Right Networks
ASP (for remote hosting of desktop applications); and a number of other very innovative BPM
solutions!11
AIS AT WORK
Will Offshoring Change to Onshoring?12
For the past decade, we read one story after another of yet another company that had
outsourced or offshored a business process to another ﬁrm. Most troubling to Americans
were the business processes and the many jobs associated with those functions that were
moved to other countries, especially India, China, and the Philippines. Management of
these ﬁrms claimed that such business decisions were necessary for their companies to
remain competitive and to generate value for shareholders.
However, some companies are beginning to reconsider earlier decisions to offshore,
and may bring those jobs back to the United States. One such company, DESA Heating
Products (DHP) of Bowling Green, Kentucky, is doing just that. In July 2008, DHP
announced that the company would move their manufacturing production from China
back to Bowling Green. Although DHP had outsourced hundreds of manufacturing jobs
to China, management decided to reverse that decision and bring those jobs back to its
Kentucky factory. The rationale for this decision focuses on two factors: quality and cost.
And when you think about it, these are both critical factors for a company’s success
because today’s customers demand the best quality products at the lowest price.
The Governor of Kentucky claimed that DHP’s decision to bring their production
back to the United States is a strong indicator of evolving outsourcing trends in the global
economy. So what exactly are these trends? A recent report from a global consulting ﬁrm
contains a number of clues: transportation costs, wage inﬂation, currency ﬂuctuations, and
quality issues.
Perhaps DHP’s experience with offshoring can help us understand the Governor’s
claim. First, Chinese workers are now demanding higher wages for their labor, which
means that Chinese workers are no longer an economical solution to labor costs in the
US (19% increase in China compared to 3% in the US since 2003). Second, signiﬁcant
10Business Editors, ‘‘Business Process Management Engine Markets Expected to Reach $1.1 Billion by 2008,’’
M2Presswire (February 19, 2004).
11Business Editors, ‘‘Awards Announced for QuickBooks Add-ons,’’ PR Newswire (November 11, 2008).
12Sources: ‘‘Is the Practice of Offshoring Jobs Headed for an About-Face?’’ HR Focus (December 2008), pp. 3–4;
Denise Dube, ‘‘Could Onshoring become the New Offshoring?’’ http://www.networkworld.com/news/2007/
081707-study-onshoring.html; http://www.bgchamber.com/media room/blog/2008/07/desa-to-expand-bowling-
green.php.

240
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
ﬂuctuations in oil prices cause great difﬁculty in budgeting the costs of transportation of
goods produced in China—especially for the large, heavy products that DHP produces.
Third, Kentucky’s central location in the United States means that DHP is only one
day’s drive from 70% of the population in the US. That translates to products in the hands
of DHP’s customers in 12 hours instead of the 6–8 weeks to ship from China. And ﬁnally,
DHP expects to save money in warranty repairs and replacement costs—manufacturing
costs that tripled on the products made in China.
SUMMARY
• The fundamentals of any business process include journals, ledgers, accounts, trial balances, and
ﬁnancial statements.
• When planning a new AIS, developers usually start by designing the outputs from the system.
• The fundamental instrument for collecting data in a typical AIS is the source document.
• Two business processes that are common to every business organization are the sales process and
the purchasing process.
• The sales process begins with a customer order and ends with the collection of cash from the
customer.
• Important source documents associated with the sales process are sales orders, sales invoices,
remittance advices, shipping notices, and customer checks.
• The primary outputs of the sales process are reports such as a cash receipts report, a bad debt
report, and a customer listing report.
• For the purchasing process, the AIS is concerned with timely payment for purchased goods and
services.
• Source documents common to the purchasing process include purchase requisitions, purchase
orders, receiving reports, purchase invoices, and bills of lading.
• The primary output of the purchasing process is the checks for vendors.
• Although companies still outsource to better manage costs, they now outsource and offshore
business processes for strategic advantages.
• Some of the business processes that are most likely to be outsourced or offshored are human
resources, ﬁnance and accounting, customer services, learning services and training, and informa-
tion technology.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
alphanumeric codes
block codes
business event
business process
Business Process Management (BPM) software
business process outsourcing (BPO)
business without boundaries
customer relationship management (CRM)
discrepancy reports
economic event
exception reports
group code
mnemonic codes
numeric codes
offshoring
purchasing process
RFID tags
sales process
sequence code
supply chain

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
241
TEST YOURSELF
Q7-1. Which of the following provides the organizational structure for the general ledger?
a. Special journals
b. A source document
c. General journals
d. The chart of accounts
Q7-2. AISs depend on codes to record, classify, store, and retrieve ﬁnancial data. Which of the
following codes is a group of numbers reserved for particular uses?
a. Block codes
b. Mnemonic codes
c. Alphanumeric codes
d. Numeric codes
Q7-3. AIS reports should be consistent in at least three ways. Which of the following is NOT one
of those ways?
a. Over time
b. Across product lines
c. Across departmental or divisional levels
d. With general accounting practice
Q7-4.
is (are) a collection of activities or ﬂow of work in an organization that creates
value.
a. An economic event
b. Accounting transactions
c. A business process
d. A chart of accounts
Q7-5. Which of the following is NOT an objective of the sales process?
a. Controlling inventory
b. Tracking sales of goods and/or services to customers
c. Billing for goods and services
d. Forecasting sales and cash receipts
Q7-6. Which of the following report(s) is (are) common to both the sales and the purchasing
processes?
a. Cash receipts forecast and cash requirements forecast
b. Financial statement information
c. Discrepancy reports and bad debt report
d. None of the above
Q7-7. Which of the following source document(s) is (are) common to both the sales and the
purchasing processes?
a. Debit/credit memoranda
b. Financial statement information
c. Discrepancy reports and bad debt report
d. None of the above
Q7-8. Which of the following business processes is most often targeted for offshoring?
a. Janitorial services

242
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
b. Landscaping maintenance
c. Information technology
d. Employee training
Q7-9. If a manager wanted to sort out any differences between quantities or amounts on the
purchase order, the receiving report, and the purchase invoice, which of the following AIS
reports would be most useful?
a. A purchase analysis report
b. An inventory control report
c. A check register report
d. A discrepancy report
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
7-1. As you might imagine, the chart of accounts for a manufacturing ﬁrm would be different
from that of a service ﬁrm. Not surprisingly, service ﬁrms differ so much that software now
exists for almost any type of ﬁrm that you could name. Think of yourself as an entrepreneur
who is going to start up your own business. Now, go to an Ofﬁce Depot, Staples, or similar
ofﬁce supply store (or search online) to ﬁnd at least two different software packages that you
might use for the type of ﬁrm you are going to start up. What does the Chart of Accounts
include? Are both software packages the same? What differences are there?
7-2. What are the purposes of accounting codes? How are they used? Bring to class some examples
of codes used by manufacturing ﬁrms, accounting ﬁrms, and merchandising ﬁrms.
7-3. What are some typical outputs of an AIS? Why do system analysts concentrate on managerial
reports when they start to design an effective AIS? Why not start with the inputs to the
system instead?
7-4. What are some criteria that systems designers should consider when developing managerial
reports for an AIS? Can you think of any others beyond those described in the chapter? If so,
what are they?
7-5. Visit a local business and collect some examples of source documents used in an AIS. For
each source document example you collect, discuss its purpose(s). Are different source
documents required for manufacturing ﬁrms versus merchandising organizations? Are all the
business’ source documents paper based?
7-6. This chapter discussed many inputs to an organization’s sales process. What are the speciﬁc
data items needed to add a new customer and record a sales order?
7-7. How does a data ﬂow diagram for the sales process differ from a system ﬂowchart describing
that process?
7-8. How are the inputs and outputs of the purchasing process likely to be different for a
restaurant versus an automobile manufacturer?
7-9. Explain the term ‘‘business without boundaries.’’ How is this changing the nature of
organizations and who accomplishes various business processes?
7-10. What do we mean when we say companies are offshoring business processes?
7-11. Some businesses choose offshoring to solve the issue of expertise, especially for IT personnel.
These companies claim they simply cannot ﬁnd enough qualiﬁed employees in the United
States to do certain technology jobs. Do you agree with this assessment? Why or why not?
7-12. Search the web for unusual and interesting uses of RFID tags. Find at least two that are
unusual and share those with your classmates.

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
243
7-13. How do you feel about RFID tags? Do you think they offer more advantages or disadvantages?
Identify the various advantages and disadvantages. Do you support the use of RFID tags for
personal ID? Why or why not?
PROBLEMS
7-14. Listed below are several types of accounting data that might be coded. For each data item,
recommend a type of code (mnemonic, sequence, block, or group) and support your choice.
a. Employee identiﬁcation number on a computer ﬁle
b. Product number for a sales catalog
c. Inventory number for the products of a wholesale drug company
d. Inventory part number for a bicycle manufacturing company
e. Identiﬁcation numbers on the forms waiters and waitresses use to take orders
f. Identiﬁcation numbers on airline ticket stubs
g. Automobile registration numbers
h. Automobile engine block numbers
i. Shirt sizes for men’s shirts
j. Color codes for house paint
k. Identiﬁcation numbers on payroll check forms
l. Listener identiﬁcation for a radio station
m. Numbers on lottery tickets
n. Identiﬁcation numbers on a credit card
o. Identiﬁcation numbers on dollar bills
p. Passwords used to gain access to a computer
q. Zip codes
r. A chart of accounts for a department store
s. A chart of accounts for a ﬂooring subcontractor
t. Shoe sizes
u. Identiﬁcation number on a student examination
v. Identiﬁcation number on an insurance policy
7-15. Novelty Gadgets is a marketer of inexpensive toys and novelties that it sells to retail stores,
specialty stores, and catalog companies. As an accountant working for the company, you
have been asked to design a product code for the company. In analyzing this problem, you
have discovered the following:
a. The company has three major product lines: (1) toys and games, (2) party and magic tricks,
and (3) inexpensive gifts. There are major subproducts within each of these product lines,
and the number of these categories is 25, 18, and 113, respectively.
b. The company has divided its selling efforts into ﬁve geographic areas: (1) the United
States, (2) the Far East, (3) Europe and Africa, (4) South America, and (5) International (a
catchall area). Each major geographic area has several sales districts (never more than 99
per area). Between 1 and 20 salespeople are assigned to each district.

244
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
New vendor 
authorization 
form 
Authorized 
purchase 
recquisitions 
Purchase 
orders (to 
vendors) 
Purchase 
order 
summary 
Key 
Add new 
vendors to 
vendor master 
file 
Prepare 
purchase 
order 
Key 
Vendor 
master 
file 
New product 
authorization 
form 
Key 
Add new 
products to 
products 
master file 
Purchase 
order 
pending 
file 
Product 
master 
file 
FIGURE 7-14
System ﬂowchart illustrating the preparation of purchase orders for P. Miesing
and Company.
c. As noted earlier, there are three major categories of customers, and certain customers
can also purchase goods on credit. There are ﬁve different classes of credit customers
and each rating indicates the maximum amount of credit the customer can have. Design
a group code that Novelty Gadgets could use to prepare sales analysis reports. Be sure to
identify each digit or position in your code in terms of both use and meaning.
7-16. Figure 7-14 is a system ﬂowchart for P. Miesing and Company’s purchase order event. Prepare
a narrative to accompany the ﬂowchart describing this purchase order event. Include in your
narrative the source documents involved, the computerized data processing that takes place,
data inputs used to prepare purchase orders, and the outputs prepared from the processing
function.
7-17. SSR-Save is a national discount retail store chain with annual revenues of more than $1
billion. It’s a typical bricks-and-mortar operation with accounting software that records

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
245
sales transactions in real time and tracks inventories on a perpetual basis. Management is
considering an online store and will sell the same products as in the stores. Customers will
be able to use credit cards only for online payments (vs. cash, credit card or debit card in
the stores). The marketing manager is interested in learning about customers and using the
information to improve both in-store and online sales.
a. Contrast the sales process of their retail store operation with the sales process in an online
store environment. Would any of the events in the process change?
b. At what points do you collect data about customers and sales transactions in the retail
store? In the online environment?
c. What data might you collect about retail store and online customers to improve your
proﬁtability? What data might you collect to improve customer satisfaction?
d. How is the sales process different for a public accounting ﬁrm? What data can they collect
to improve customer relationships and grow revenues?
CASE ANALYSES
7-18. The Caribbean Club (Customer Relationship Management)
The Caribbean Club is one of the Virgin Island’s hottest night spots. It’s a great place for
locals to meet after work and relax with friends, it’s a popular destination for tourists who
stay on the island, and it’s always on the list of fun entertainment choices for the crowds
from the cruise ships that dock in the harbor.
The reason the Club is so popular with such a variety of customers is because the
founder of the club, Ross Stewart, always has such innovative and visionary ideas that
delight the patrons. For example, every night of the week the Club features different
activities or shows, including beach volleyball, Caribbean shows with calypso singers,
world-class musicians who play steel drums, and other island delights.
Because Ross was a former accountant and auditor with one of the largest public
accounting ﬁrms in New Zealand, he is very accustomed to brainstorming sessions to
generate ideas and surface concerns. He brought this practice with him to the Caribbean
and holds brainstorming sessions with his ‘‘club associates’’ (which is what he calls all of
the employees at the club) once every month to identify new and novel ideas to increase
the popularity and proﬁtability of the club.
As you might imagine, the patrons of a night club are there to relax and enjoy themselves.
Therefore, the associates thought it would be a great idea to somehow be able to recognize
their regular patrons so that they wouldn’t have to trouble them with a bill every time a
server came to their table with another round of drinks. After all, if the Club wanted these
people to ‘‘feel like they were at home with friends’’, the patrons shouldn’t have to bother
with trying to decide who owed what to pay the bill. What a nuisance!
So Ross and his associates came up with the idea to implant their regular customers
with an implantable microchip. The idea was to make the chip ‘‘fun’’—to give it an elite
status so that their regular patrons would want to be implanted. To dramatize the elite
status of the chip, Ross decided that the Club would have a special area where only those
with chips, the ‘‘VIPs’’, would be admitted. And of course, this area would have various
exclusive services for these members. The chip would allow the VIPS to be ‘‘recognized’’
and to be able to pay for their food and drinks without any ID—they would simply pass by
a reader and the Club would know who they are and their credit balance. Ross also wanted

246
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
the information system supporting the chip to be a customer relationship management
tool.
Requirements:
1. What do you think of this idea? That is, what are the advantages and disadvantages of
this idea for the Caribbean Club?
2. If you were Ross, what information would you want the CRM to collect? Search the
Internet to see if you can ﬁnd a CRM software package that seems appropriate for the
Club. Why did you select this particular software?
3. What are the advantages and disadvantages for the patrons?
4. If you were a passenger on a cruise ship, or staying at a resort on the island, would you
get the chip implanted? Why or why not?
7-19. Larkin State University (Purchasing Process)
Larkin State University is a medium-sized academic institution located in the Southeastern
United States. The university employs about 250 full-time faculty and 300 staff personnel.
There are 12,000 students enrolled among the university’s four colleges.
The Purchase Process
The university’s budget for purchases of equipment and supplies is about $25 million
annually. Peter Reese is in charge of the Purchasing Department. He reports directly to
the Vice President of Finance for the university. Pete supervises four purchasing clerks
and three receiving personnel. The ofﬁce is responsible for purchases of all equipment
and supplies except for computer equipment and software, and plant purchases or
additions.
The Payment Process
The various departments across campus manually ﬁll out hard copy purchase requisition
forms when there is a need for equipment/supplies. Each department forwards these forms
to the Purchasing Department. If the request is for computer equipment or software, the
requisition is forwarded to the Department of Information Technology for action.
Purchase requisitions are assigned to one of the three purchasing clerks by department.
For instance, one purchasing clerk makes purchases for all university departments begin-
ning with the letters A through G (Accounting—Geology). Purchasing clerks check the
requisition to make sure it is authorized and then consult the Approved Vendor Listing
to ﬁnd a supplier. The clerk may contact a supplier for pricing and product speciﬁcation.
Once this task is complete, the purchasing clerk enters the purchase requisition and vendor
and price information into the computer system, which prints out a multiple-part purchase
order. Clerks send copies of the purchase order to Central Receiving, to the vendor, and to
the Accounts Payable Department. (The university considered using EDI for its purchases,
but chose not to adopt it due to the large number of vendors used.)

CHAPTER 7 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part I
247
When Central Receiving receives an order, a receiving clerk consults the Purchase Order
ﬁle to make sure the correct product and quantity have been delivered. The clerk also
checks the product for damage. Central receiving does not accept any over-shipments.
Receiving clerks forward accepted shipments to the adjacent warehouse for distribu-
tion to the appropriate department. Clerks ﬁle one copy of the Receiving Report,
send one copy to the Purchasing Department, and forward a third copy to Accounts
Payable.
George Vaughn is the Supervisor of Accounts Payable. Two accounting clerks report to
him. He assigns invoices to them for payment based on vendor name. One clerk processes
payments for vendors A–M and the other clerk handles payments to all vendors with names
beginning with letters N–Z. The clerks match each vendor invoice with a copy of the
receiving report and purchase order before entering it into the computer for payment by
due date. There are often discrepancies among the three documents. This requires frequent
phone calls to the vendor, the Receiving Department, or Purchasing for resolution. As a
result, the company frequently makes payments late and loses out on cash discounts.
Requirements:
1. Identify the important business events that occur within Larkin’s purchase/payment
process.
2. What changes would you suggest to the current process to take advantage of information
technology?
7-20. Uptown Bucks (Sales Process)
Uptown Bucks (UB) is an off-campus meal plan business in Oxford, Ohio. Students or their
families buy debit cards with ﬁxed amounts that they can use to purchase food at more
than 18 local restaurants. Customers can buy the cards at UB’s ofﬁce in the center of town,
or they may purchase the cards online. The following paragraph describes the online card
sale process.
A customer enters their credit card information online and then the amount of purchase.
UB’s software automatically checks the card number to determine that it is a valid credit
card number; for instance, there are certain digits that indicate Visa cards. The software
displays an error message if the number is not valid. The usual cause of these errors is typo-
graphical. Once the customer completes the card order screen, the software sends the data
in an encrypted form to UB’s host computer. Periodically, the UB accountant retrieves trans-
actions from the server. This is done by clicking on the ‘‘Get Transactions’’ screen button.
For each online transaction, the accountant then manually copies down the credit card
number on a scrap of paper, walks across the ofﬁce to the credit card machine, and keys
in the credit card number, the amount, and the numerical portion of the address. The
credit card software checks to see if the card is valid and charges it for the amount. The
accountant next writes down the validation number, returns to the host computer, and
enters it. She prints a receipt for the transaction and puts it in a ﬁle. The customer database
now reﬂects the new customer. When a customer purchases a card off-line with a credit
card, the accountant swipes the card directly, checks its validity, charges the card, and
then writes down the validation number and enters it in the host computer.
UB is considering the purchase of credit card software that can reside on the host
computer and interact with their accounting software. The credit card software costs

248
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
about $400. The credit card company rates are likely to increase by about. 5% because
cards could no longer be swiped directly—all credit card purchases would need to go
through the online software. The rate UB has to pay the credit card company is based on
this mix. Credit card companies typically charge more if card numbers are punched rather
than swiped because they have more chance of invalid transactions due to theft. It’s easier
to steal a number than a card. Currently about half of UB’s sales transactions arise from
online sales; the other half result from sales through the ofﬁce.
Requirements:
1. Should UB buy the credit card software?
2. Use the skills you developed from Chapter 3 to develop a ﬂowchart for UB’s online sales
process.
3. What are the business risks associated with this process?
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Anonymous. ‘‘EarthLink Cuts Jobs, Closes Centers: Needs to Outsource More,’’ Information Week
(January 7, 2004).
Business Editor. ‘‘Biometrics: Payments at your ﬁngertips,’’ Business Week Online (March 28, 2006).
Croysdale, D. ‘‘Outsourcing: It’s What We Do,’’ The Daily Reporter (Dolan Media Newswires)
(March 3, 2004).
Dubie, D. ‘‘Could onshoring become the new offshoring?’’ http://www.networld.com/news/2007/
081707-study-onshoring.html.
Gerardo, R. & A. Spanyi. ‘‘The CFO’s best friend,’’ Strategic Finance (December 2008), pp. 25–30.
Lamont, J. ‘‘BPM: Not just for the big kids on the block,’’ KMWorld (January 2004), p. 8–10.
Malone, T. ‘‘Performance Management: Enabling Smarter Business,’’ Financial Executive (September
2005), p. 60–63.
McGinn, D. ‘‘Help Not Wanted. Jobs: Where Did They Go? Offshoring’s a Problem,’’ Newsweek
(March 1, 2004), p. 31.
Reingold, J. ‘‘Into Thin Air,’’ Fast Company (April 2004), p. 76–82.
Sahut, J. ‘‘The adoption and diffusion of electronic wallets,’’ Journal of Internet Banking and
Commerce (April 2008); http://www.arraydev.com/commerce/jibc/ (an open access Internet
journal).
Worthen, B. ‘‘Business Process Management: A New Glue or the Old Soft Shoe?’’ CIO.com (November
15, 2004). http://www.cio.com/archive/111504/bpm.html.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. d
2. a
3. b
4. c
5. a
6. b
7. a
8. c
9. d

Chapter 8
Accounting Information Systems and
Business Processes: Part II
INTRODUCTION
THE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
Human Resource Management
Fixed Asset Management
THE PRODUCTION PROCESS
Objectives of the Production Process
Inputs to the Production Process
Outputs of the Production Process
THE FINANCING PROCESS
Objectives of the Financing Process
Inputs to the Financing Process
Outputs of the Financing Process
BUSINESS PROCESSES IN SPECIAL
INDUSTRIES
Professional Service Organizations
Not-for-Proﬁt Organizations
Health Care Organizations
BUSINESS PROCESS REENGINEERING
Why Reengineering Sometimes Fails
AIS AT WORK—REENGINEERING THE
DOCTOR’S OFFICE
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Hammaker Manufacturing I
Hammaker Manufacturing II
Hammaker Manufacturing III
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Appreciate the many ways technology is chang-
ing management’s ability to monitor and control
business processes across the organization.
2. Know the objectives, inputs, and outputs of the
resource management, production, and ﬁnanc-
ing processes.
3. Understand how business strategy affects the
data that are collected in the ﬁrm’s AIS and how
that impacts performance measures.
4. Be able to explain why some organizations have
special accounting information needs.
5. Recognize the special information needs of sev-
eral different types of organizations.
6. Understand how companies use business pro-
cess reengineering (BPR) to cut costs and
improve their operational efﬁciency.
249

250
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
‘‘Companies using lean accounting have better information for decision-making; have
simple and timely reports that are clearly understood by everyone in the company;
understand the true ﬁnancial impact of lean changes; and focus the business around
the value created for the customers.’’
Brian Maskell and Frances Kennedy, ‘‘Why Do We Need Lean Accounting and
How Does it Work?’’ The Journal of Corporate Accounting & Finance,
(March/April 2007), p. 59.
INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapter we identiﬁed two processes that are common to almost every
organization: the sales process and the purchasing process. This chapter continues the
discussion of business processes by exploring three additional processes: resource man-
agement, production, and ﬁnancing. The resource management process includes human
resources and ﬁxed assets. The production manufacturing cycle entails the conversion of
raw materials (another resource) into ﬁnished goods available for sale. Finally, the ﬁnancing
process involves the ways that organizations fund their operations. Because organizations
must ﬁnance activities either through borrowing or by selling shares of ownership, we
discuss the objectives, inputs, and outputs of the ﬁnancing process.
Many organizations, such as government agencies, have specialized information needs,
apart from the typical AIS requirements for information about revenues, purchases, and
resources. The second section of this chapter considers the unique aspects of such
organizational entities that need different accounting information.
Maximizing the efﬁciency of every business process is critical to business success
in today’s ‘‘business without boundaries’’ operating environment. Sometimes managers
decide that a current business process just isn’t working and must be replaced. This is
usually the case when a ﬁrm decides to implement a new enterprise-wide IT system. As a
result, they turn to business process reengineering, which is the topic of the ﬁnal section
of this chapter.
THE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
Two resources that managers must closely manage, and therefore capture data for an AIS,
are an organization’s human resources and its ﬁxed assets. Because the inputs, processing,
and outputs for human resources and ﬁxed assets are quite different, we examine them
separately (see Figure 8-1).
Human Resource Management
The ‘‘economic meltdown’’ in the fall of 2008 has been one of the most challenging times
for resource managers as they try to deal with cash ﬂow problems, bankruptcies, plant
closings, and layoffs. An organization’s human resource (HR) management activity
includes the personnel function, which is responsible for hiring or laying off employees.
HR must properly maintain the personnel and payroll records for employees, as well as

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
251
The Human Resource Management Process
OBJECTIVES
Hiring, training, and employing workers
Maintaining employee earnings records
Complying with regulatory reporting requirements
Reporting on payroll deductions
Making timely and accurate payments to employees
Providing an interface for personnel and payroll activities
Inputs (Source Documents)
Outputs (Reports)
• Personnel Action Forms
• Time Sheets
• Payroll Deduction Authorizations
• Tax Withholding Forms
• Financial Statement Information
• Employee Listings
• Paychecks
• Check Registers
• Deduction Reports
• Tax (Regulatory) Reports
• Payroll Summaries
FIGURE 8-1
Objectives, inputs, and outputs for the human resource management process.
handle the many actions associated with employee terminations. Nevertheless, the primary
objective of the personnel function is to hire, train, and employ appropriately qualiﬁed
people to do an organization’s work.
In the past, HR professionals used technology to handle such administrative tasks
as time clocking and payroll. However, many business process management (BPM)
software packages are now available to automate the core processes that normally occur
in an HR ofﬁce. For example, HR departments are increasingly turning to technology to
help with such diverse responsibilities as recruitment, oversight of legal and regulatory
compliance, beneﬁts administration, training, performance evaluation, and safeguarding
conﬁdential employee information.
Case-in-Point 8.1
Merix, a global supplier of advanced technology and printed circuit
boards, focuses on the ﬁnancial performance of its recruiting process. Using a cost-per-hire
calculation, Merix determines whether its recruiting process is functioning at peak efﬁciency.
Goals for this measure are set to assure that HR is ﬁnancially responsive to the organization
and is an efﬁcient support service. Further, tracking this measure allows Merix to more
effectively budget human resources expenditures for the coming year based on projections of
stafﬁng needs.1
Although the main purpose of payroll processing information systems is to pay
employees for their work, such systems also maintain employee earnings records (a payroll
history), comply with various government tax and reporting requirements, report on
various deduction categories (e.g., pension funds and group insurance), and interact with
other personnel functions. Figures 8-2 and 8-3 show system ﬂowcharts for the personnel
function and for the payroll function.
Inputs to Human Resource Management Processing.
The source documents
used in payroll processing are personnel action forms, time sheets, payroll deduction
authorizations, and tax withholding forms. The personnel department sends personnel
1Source: http://www.merix.com.

252
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Various
Personnel
Reports
Process New
Employee
Maintain
Employee
Records
Record
personal, tax,
and payroll
data
Update
personal, tax,
and payroll
data
Personnel
and Payroll
Files
Hire
Employee
FIGURE 8-2
Systems ﬂowchart of the AIS for the personnel function.
Record 
Employee 
Time 
Personnel 
and Payroll 
Files 
Employee 
Performs 
Services 
Various 
Payroll 
Reports 
Paychecks 
Create 
Employee 
Pay Checks 
& Reports 
FIGURE 8-3
Systems ﬂowchart of the AIS for the payroll function.
action forms to payroll that document the hiring of new employees or changes in
employee status. For example, payroll receives a personnel action form when an employee
receives a salary increase. This document is very important for control purposes. For
example, auditors will detect an employee who increases his or her own salary when they
fail to ﬁnd a personnel action form authorizing the increase.
Many companies use time sheets to track the hours that employees work. The source
of information for these time sheets varies widely with the level of technology that

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
253
the organization employs. For example, some companies use a time clock that requires
employees to ‘‘punch in’’ (on time cards) when they arrive for work. Others use picture
ID cards or RFID-enabled ID cards that record the time and verify employees when they
enter and leave the workplace. To guard against employees having their friends punch in
for them, some organizations now use various biometric devices (e.g., ﬁngerprints or iris
scans) to identify employees and capture their entry and departure from workplaces.
At the end of the pay period, the employee’s supervisor veriﬁes the number of hours
worked and authorizes payment. Next, either a payroll clerk (or an internal control embed-
ded in the payroll processing information system) looks for the appropriate authorization
before processing these hours. Companies that use a job cost information system can
cross-reference employee time sheets with time recorded on individual jobs.
Employees ﬁll out payroll deduction authorizations that direct the payroll processing
system to deduct amounts from gross pay for items such as health and life insurance,
parking fees, retirement plan contributions, and union dues. An authorization form should
document each deduction. In the U.S., every employee must also complete tax-withholding
forms, which authorize the payroll system to reduce gross pay by the appropriate withhold-
ing tax. The information system uses each employee’s W-4 withholding form to calculate
the correct withholding for federal income taxes.
Outputs of Human Resource Management Processing.
The outputs of human
resource management processing include employee listings, check registers, paychecks,
deduction reports, tax reports, and payroll summaries. As you might imagine, the processing
of paychecks should include very strict internal control procedures (covered in Chapters 11
and 12). Employee listings show current employees and may contain addresses and other
demographic information. Check registers accompany each printing of paychecks and list
gross pay, deductions, and net pay. Payroll clerks use the check register information to
make journal entries for salary and payroll-tax expenses. Deduction reports can contain
summaries of deductions for all employees in a department, a division, or company-wide.
Finally, the payroll function issues various payroll summaries that help managers analyze
expenses. A typical payroll summary report might classify payroll expenses by department
or job, or show total overtime hours worked in each department.
Case-in-Point 8.2
The city of Reno, Nevada, is one of many cities in the U.S. seeking ways
to lower its expenditures. Recently, the issue of overtime pay for ﬁremen came to the attention
of the city council because reports showed there was so much of it. Apparently, the number
of ﬁremen that the city could hire was limited, but not the amount of overtime pay these
individuals could earn.2
The U.S. government requires various tax reports for income tax, Social Security
tax, and unemployment tax information. Employees pay some taxes in their entirety,
but employers share others. For instance, both the employee and the employer pay
equal amounts of Social Security taxes. The payroll system allocates shared taxes to the
appropriate accounts. Taxes paid by employees are allocated to payroll expense, but
employer taxes are part of the employer’s tax expense.
Because manual payroll processing can be tedious, repetitive, and error-prone, the
payroll function was one of the ﬁrst accounting activities to be computerized in many
organizations. Today, some companies ﬁnd it easier and more cost-effective to outsource
the process for paychecks and payroll reports.
2Source: from the authors.

254
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Case-in-Point 8.3
Automatic Data Processing, Inc., or ADP, is the world’s largest payroll
service provider. Almost a half-million companies in ﬁfteen countries outsource their payroll
processing and, in some cases, their human resource administration to ADP. The company
has been in business for more than 50 years and pays more than one-in-six private sector
employees in the U.S.3
Fixed Asset Management
Even small organizations generally own many ﬁxed assets, which management must track as
they are purchased and used. The objective of the ﬁxed asset management (FAM) func-
tion is to manage the purchase, maintenance, valuation, and disposal of an organization’s
ﬁxed assets (also called ‘‘long-term assets’’ because they last more than one year).
In thinking about how complex it might be to track ﬁxed assets, consider all the ﬁxed
assets found in a typical college classroom. There are desks, chairs, computers, projectors,
podiums, and so on. A university must record each of these ﬁxed assets on its books when
it purchases the asset. In addition, the university must maintain depreciation schedules for
its ﬁxed assets. Not only can an AIS calculate the depreciation for a company’s ﬁnancial
statements, it can also prepare separate depreciation schedules for income tax reporting
purposes. Employees often move ﬁxed assets around within an organization, and although
an AIS should keep track of all asset locations, this can be quite difﬁcult in practice. Bar
codes afﬁxed to physical assets make this job easier.
Because ﬁxed assets often require repairs, an AIS should also track repair costs, and dis-
tinguish between revenue expenditures and capital expenditures. (Revenue expenditures
are ordinary repair expenses, whereas capital expenditures add to the value of assets.)
Finally, the AIS calculates the amount of gain or loss upon disposal of individual ﬁxed
assets. By comparing the amount received for the asset with the asset’s book value, the AIS
can compute a gain or loss. Fortunately, software companies offer a variety of solutions to
help managers.
Case-in-Point 8.4
Some Fixed Asset Management (FAM) software helps enterprises
record and track details about their ﬁxed assets before placing them into service (e.g., Best
Software). Depreciation Solution[R] offers a ‘‘Method/Life Wizard’’ so a company can select a
depreciation method and estimate the life of an asset. FixedAssets∗32 allows companies to
automate and monitor depreciation of ﬁxed assets.
Increasingly, organizations are adopting enterprise asset management (EAM) sys-
tems to automate the management of a broad spectrum of assets. For example, Green
Bay Packaging, Inc. is using an EAM solution to streamline purchasing, reduce inventory,
and trim machine downtime and maintenance costs. Because of reduced overall operating
expenses, the company expects the software to pay for itself in six months. Avantis makes
a global EAM solution that focuses on maintenance, inventory, procurement, and invoicing
efﬁciencies. Finally, the U.S. government purchased a $1.9 million EAM system to integrate
data and coordinate logistics for the 5,000-plus major rebuilding projects underway in Iraq.
Inputs to Fixed Asset Management Processing.
Fixed asset processing begins
with a request for a ﬁxed asset purchase. The individual making the request enters the
appropriate information on a purchase requisition form (typically an e-form). Fixed asset
requests usually require approval by one or more managers, especially where purchases
3Source: http://www.adp.com/corporate/adp corpoverview main.html

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
255
require substantial investments. Other documents associated with ﬁxed asset purchases
are receiving reports, supplier invoices, and repair and maintenance records. The receiving
department either scans in the information electronically to the AIS or ﬁlls out a receiving
report upon receipt of a ﬁxed asset. The asset’s supplier sends an invoice when it ships
the asset. Sometimes a company builds a ﬁxed asset, for example, a warehouse, rather than
acquiring it from an outside vendor. Here, processing ﬁxed assets requires a work order
detailing the costs of construction.
There is no source document that prompts depreciation expense. However, there
may be documentation dictating the appropriate depreciation method or methods for
this allocation. AISs often allocate ﬁxed asset costs using multiple depreciation methods.
Companies commonly use a separate depreciation method for tax versus ﬁnancial reporting
purposes. In addition, government or industry regulations may require businesses to use
still other depreciation methods for special reports.
Those responsible for a particular ﬁxed asset should complete a ﬁxed asset change
form when transferring ﬁxed assets from one location to another. The ﬁxed asset change
form also records the sale, trade, or retirement of ﬁxed assets. Fixed asset management
requires maintaining repair and maintenance records for each asset individually or for
categories of ﬁxed assets. The department performing this service should record these
activities on a repair and maintenance form. This form notiﬁes the AIS to update expense
or asset accounts. Figure 8-4 is a systems ﬂowchart that shows ﬁxed asset acquisition,
maintenance, and disposition.
Outputs of Fixed Asset Management Processing.
One output of the ﬁxed asset
processing system is a listing of all ﬁxed assets acquired during a particular period. A
ﬁxed asset register lists the identiﬁcation number of all ﬁxed assets held by a company
Various Fixed
Asset Reports
Record New
Asset
Maintain
Fixed Asset
Records
Create Fixed
Asset
Reports
Update for
depreciation,
maintenance, repair,
betterment, disposal
Fixed
Asset
Files
Invest in
Fixed Assets
FIGURE 8-4
Systems ﬂowchart of the AIS for the ﬁxed asset management function.

256
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
The Fixed Asset Management Process
OBJECTIVES
Tracking purchases of ﬁxed assets
Recording ﬁxed asset maintenance
Valuing ﬁxed assets
Allocating ﬁxed asset costs (recording depreciation)
Tracking disposal of ﬁxed assets
Inputs (Source Documents)
Outputs (Reports)
• Purchase Requisition
• Receiving Reports
• Supplier Invoices
• Construction Work Orders
• Repair & Maintenance Records
• Fixed Asset Change Forms
• Financial Statement Information
• Fixed Asset Register
• Depreciation Register
• Repair & Maintenance Reports
• Retired Asset Report
FIGURE 8-5
Objectives, inputs, and outputs for the ﬁxed asset management process.
and each asset’s location. The depreciation register shows depreciation expense and
accumulated depreciation for each ﬁxed asset. Repair and maintenance reports show
the current period’s repair and maintenance expenses, as well as each ﬁxed asset’s repair
and maintenance history. Finally, a report on retired assets reﬂects the disposition of ﬁxed
assets during the current period. Figure 8-5 summarizes the objectives, inputs, and outputs
of the ﬁxed asset management process.
THE PRODUCTION PROCESS
The production process (sometimes called the conversion process) begins with a request
for raw materials and ends with the transfer of ﬁnished goods to warehouses.
Objectives of the Production Process
The objective of a manufacturing organization’s production process is to convert raw
materials into ﬁnished goods as efﬁciently as possible. Today’s production of goods and
services often requires expensive factory machinery, such as computer-assisted design
(CAD) technology or robotics (used in the manufacture of automobiles).
Accounting for the acquisition and use of production machinery is part of the ﬁxed
asset management process described in the previous section of this chapter. Another
important objective of an AIS’s production process is collecting cost accounting data for
operational managers, who then can make informed decisions with respect to the products
produced in their departments. Figure 8-6 identiﬁes the objectives, inputs, and outputs
associated with the production of goods and services.
Cost Accounting Subsystem.
Because the cost of goods sold is likely to be the largest
expense on a manufacturing ﬁrm’s income statement, an important part of the production
process is an AIS’s cost accounting subsystem. The cost accounting subsystem provides
important control information (e.g., variance reports reﬂecting differences between actual

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
257
The Production Process
OBJECTIVES
Track purchases and sales of inventories
Monitor and control manufacturing costs
Control inventory
Control and coordinate the production process
Provide input for budgets
Inputs (Source Documents)
Outputs (Reports)
• Materials Requisition Form
• Bill of Materials
• Master Production Schedule
• Production Order
• Job Time Cards
• Financial Statement Information
• Material Price Lists
• Periodic Usage Reports
• Inventory Status Reports
• Production Cost Reports
• Manufacturing Status Reports
• Value Stream Reports
FIGURE 8-6
Objectives, inputs, and outputs commonly associated with the production process.
and standard production costs) and varies with the size of the company and the types of
product produced. As you might guess, a bakery producing baked goods would collect
very different data in its AIS than that of an automobile manufacturer. Cost accounting
subsystems for manufacturing organizations will most likely be job costing, process costing,
or activity-based costing systems.
A job costing information system keeps track of the speciﬁc costs for raw materials,
labor, and overhead associated with each product or group of products, called a ‘‘job.’’
This type of costing system is most appropriate for manufacturers of large-scale or custom
products, such as home-builders or book publishers. Manufacturers of homogeneous
products (such as soft drinks or toothbrushes) that are produced on a regular and
continuous basis use a process costing information system. In this system, it is not
feasible or practical to keep track of costs for each item or group of items produced.
Instead, process costing systems use averages to calculate the costs associated with goods
in process and ﬁnished goods produced.
Activity-based costing systems help managers describe processes, identify cost
drivers of each process, and then determine the unit costs of products created in each
process. By studying their business processes, managers are in a better position to recognize
opportunities to improve those processes. Thus, activity-based costing gives managers a
better understanding of their processes, an improved ability to allocate indirect costs to
those processes, and a better understanding of the true cost of each product. The systems
ﬂowchart in Figure 8-7 shows the information ﬂow for production in a manufacturing ﬁrm.
Just-in-Time (JIT) Inventory Systems.
Inventory control ensures that the produc-
tion process handles inventory transactions appropriately so that the ﬁnancial statements
correctly state the value of the inventory and cost of goods sold accounts. Carrying inven-
tory has a number of costs associated with it, including storage, obsolescence, shrinkage,
or reduction in sales value.
Toyota (of Japan) popularized the use of just-in-time (JIT) inventory systems.
Some managers refer to a JIT system as a ‘‘make-to-order inventory system.’’ This phrase
indicates that the organization produces goods to ﬁll an order rather than to ﬁll inventory.
The objective of a JIT system is to minimize inventories at all levels. Each stage in the
production operation manufactures (or acquires) a part just in time for the next process to

258
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
No
Yes
Miscellaneous 
Management 
Reports 
Resource 
Usage & 
Cost Reports 
Create Labor 
Schedules 
Order Raw 
Materials 
Produce Cost 
Accounting 
& Production 
Reports 
Inventory 
Files 
Personnel 
Files 
Production 
Schedule 
Raw 
Materials 
On Hand? 
Production 
Status 
Reports 
FIGURE 8-7
Systems ﬂowchart of the AIS for the production process in a manufacturing orga-
nization.
use it. Although the best possible JIT system would maintain zero inventory balances, this
is often not practical in real-world applications. Manufacturing organizations need some
inventories to protect against interruptions in supply from manufacturers and ﬂuctuations
in demand for their ﬁnished goods that are beyond the manufacturers’ control.
A JIT system depends on an AIS. If the AIS does not process transactions on a
timely and accurate basis, manufacturing processes may lack the raw materials inventory
necessary to maintain a constant work ﬂow. Inefﬁcient processing of transactions can also
lead to shortages of ﬁnished goods that in turn translate into lost sales. This leads some
organizations to be proactive and reengineer the process.
Case-in-Point 8.5
JIT is a great concept for a company that is intent on efﬁciently
managing stock, but it makes life difﬁcult for the accounts payable department that is
responsible for paying all those JIT invoices. For example, Dell Computer Company found itself
ordering certain parts as frequently as 12 times a day. The A/P department was inundated
with paper invoices. GE Capital dispatched several of its Six Sigma analysts, known as ‘‘black
belts,’’ to Dell to analyze its A/P process. The consultants mapped out the entire process and
then recommended that Dell change to an Internet-based electronic ﬁling process. The move
saves Dell about $2.4 million per year.4
4Source: http://www.ge.com/sixsigma.

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
259
TYPES OF
NON-VALUE-ADDED
WASTE
Over
Production
Inventory
Waiting
Transportation
Human
Potential
Defects
Motion
Processing
FIGURE 8-8
Categories of waste that are the focus of lean operations management.
Sources: Daniel Tracy & John Knight, ‘‘Lean Operations Management,’’ Journal of American Academy of
Business (March 2008), pp. 8–14; Burton, T. and S. Boeder, The lean extended enterprise: Moving beyond
the four walls to value stream excellence (2003), Boca Raton, FL: J. Ross Publishing.
Lean Production/Manufacturing.
Although JIT inventory systems are an impor-
tant step for manufacturing companies to control costs associated with inventory, the
truth is that companies must learn to eliminate waste throughout the manufacturing
process—indeed, throughout the organization, if they hope to become a world-class orga-
nization. The concept of lean manufacturing is that a company makes the commitment to
eliminate waste throughout the organization (not just in production), which is a philosophy
that is often attributed to the Toyota Production System (TPS). The TPS essentially focuses
on elimination or reduction of non-value-added waste to improve overall customer value
and to increase the proﬁtability of the products or services that the organization offers. So
we might say that lean manufacturing developed through the concepts of JIT as well as
Total Quality Management.
Figure 8-8 depicts eight different categories of waste that companies hope to reduce or
eliminate. In the ﬁgure, overproduction means producing more than your customers want
to purchase. Waiting refers to the time that is lost when employees, products, services,
or machines wait for the next step in a process to occur. Transportation identiﬁes the
unnecessary movement of materials or information around a ﬁrm or organization. Excessive
processing can be the result of an organization that has poor products, defective inputs,
or an inefﬁcient business process. From JIT principles, we know that it is wasteful to
store more inventory than the minimum required to produce the goods or services of
the company. Excess (or unnecessary) motion of people, materials, products, or anything
should be avoided. Whenever substandard products are produced, companies end up with
defects, scrap, rework, and/or paperwork errors. Finally, when organizations do not fully
engage the skills, talents, and abilities of their employees, they lose some of the human
potential that is available to the ﬁrm.
Lean Accounting.
Accountants are quick to point out that you cannot have lean
manufacturing without lean accounting. A company that follows lean manufacturing
concepts must identify value from the perspective of their customers, organize production

260
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
(and data collection) in value streams, empower employees to make decisions, and then
continually pursue excellence in all areas of the organization. Thus, you can’t use the same
old performance measures—you need new ones. Why is that the case? Because the goal
of performance measures is to communicate, motivate, clarify, and evaluate. Management
accountants use performance measures to give managers information and feedback for
decision-making. Traditional performance measures typically support only managers as
decision-makers. The premise behind lean manufacturing is that empowered team members
(also called continuous operational improvement leaders) are also decision-makers, which
means they need timely information to be effective.
Although reengineering the traditional performance measures would be ideal, this is
usually not possible. However, management accountants, managers, and empowered team
members can work together to identify critical data that the AIS must collect to support lean
production. As a minimum, these data should include metrics that will help managers and
team members make wise decisions regarding methods to reduce or eliminate waste that
is identiﬁed in Figure 8-8 (overproduction, waiting, transportation, processing, inventory,
motion, defects, and human potential).
Jan Brosnahan, the controller for Watlow Electric Manufacturing Co. (WEM) describes
how her team adopted lean accounting, which means measuring and evaluating results by
value stream management rather than by traditional departments (such as customer
service, purchasing, etc.). For example, an order fulﬁllment value stream includes all
metrics from the sales/order entry point, through manufacturing, all the way to after-sales
support. Each value stream has a leader who is responsible for coaching and proﬁtability of
the speciﬁc metrics identiﬁed for that value stream. Standard costs, variances and overhead
allocations are not used—rather, only directly-incurred costs are used for decision-making.
Case-in-Point 8.6
In 2005, 17 of the ﬁnance and continuous operational improvement
leaders at WEM attended a Lean Accounting Summit. They learned how to transform their AIS
from a traditional system to a lean accounting system. This process included (1) identifying
the company’s main value streams, (2) mapping out key metrics to monitor achievement,
(3) organizing into three or four value streams per site, (4) changing the chart-of-accounts
structure to a few value stream groupings rather than by traditional departments, (5) zeroing
out labor and overhead rates from the system and stopping collection of these data, (6)
splitting out material costs from other conversion costs, and (7) using a memo line in internal
ﬁnancial statements to increase visibility of inventory purchases.5
Clearly, we can see the implications that lean accounting might have throughout
organizations of the future. Based on the many changes that WEM implemented in their
company to support lean accounting, we can quickly see that two areas might need
to be evaluated by management accountants—the collection of data in the AIS and the
chart-of-accounts that the company uses. Fortunately, AISs that are built upon a relational
database (see Chapters 4 and 5) can be modiﬁed to support lean accounting. Regarding the
chart-of-accounts (covered in Chapter 7), apparently the accountants at each organization
will need to work with managers and team leaders to determine the most appropriate
coding system to use, based on the value streams that are identiﬁed.
Inputs to the Production Process
When a production manager needs raw materials, he or she issues a materials requisition
form to acquire more material from a storeroom or warehouse where the raw materials
5Source: Jan Brosnahan, ‘‘Unleash the Power of Lean Accounting,’’ Journal of Accountancy (July 2008), pp.
60–66.

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
261
are kept. If the level of inventory falls below a certain predetermined level, the inventory
control clerk issues a purchase requisition to the purchasing department (probably an
e-form, but this might also be an automatic determination that is transmitted electronically
to the vendor). Finished goods consist of a complex array of parts or subassemblies. For
example, an armchair consists of four legs, a seat, two arms, and a back. The bill of
materials shows the types and quantities of parts needed to make a single unit of product.
An important input to the production process is the master production schedule,
which shows the quantities and the timing of goods needed to meet quantities required for
anticipated sales. The marketing department’s sales projections, combined with desired
inventory levels, are inputs to the production order, which authorizes the manufacture
of goods and dictates the production schedule. Tracking labor time is important to a job
costing system because one employee may work on many jobs and one job might require
the work of many employees. An input to a job costing system is the job time card.
This card shows the distribution of labor costs to speciﬁc jobs or production orders. Each
worker completes a job time card (usually daily or weekly), detailing the hours worked on
speciﬁc operations and jobs.
Typically, large and medium-sized ﬁrms use enterprise resource planning (ERP) sys-
tems to collect essential data about their production operations so that they can better
manage these processes. ERPs are multi-module application software packages that help
a manufacturer effectively track, monitor, and manage product planning, parts purchas-
ing, maintaining inventories, interacting with suppliers, providing customer service, and
tracking orders. We discuss ERP software in more depth in Chapter 9.
In conjunction with ERPs, manufacturers are also replacing manual data entry with
such automated technologies as bar code readers, radio frequency (RF) technology, RFIDs,
or other advanced electronic tags. These input technologies can be used individually or
combined in innovative ways to signiﬁcantly reduce input errors (compared to human data
entry) and support fast, accurate, real-time production and data collection.
Case-in-Point 8.7
Mail-order fulﬁllment of drug prescriptions is a booming business for
the U.S. Veteran’s Administration, CVS, Kaiser Permanente, and others. When mail-order
prescription centers ﬁrst started, a worker would stand next to a printer, wait for a label
to be printed, wrap the label around the bottle, and put it in a box. The box traveled to the
next worker who read the label, found the correct pill-counter station, held the bottle under
the counter as the bottle ﬁlled, replaced the lid on the bottle and sent the prescription down
the line for ﬁnal packing. It took 20–30 people to complete the operation. Now, a computer
system using plastic transport carriers (called ‘‘pucks’’) with RFID tags in the base automates
this entire process. The prescription and the puck are linked in the system and travel along
the conveyor automatically, eliminating the need for human intervention until the prescription
is ready to be placed in the mailing envelope.6
Other technologies are being combined in innovative ways to improve management’s
ability to track and monitor production. For example, the production of United Parcel
Service (UPS) is to effectively and accurately collect, track, and deliver packages, not only
for the beneﬁt of management information, but also for customers who demand almost
real-time tracking ability. Rather than use RFID technology, UPS uses a mix of Bluetooth
and Wi-Fi technology.
Case-in-Point 8.8
UPS made a $120 million investment in Bluetooth-equipped ring scan-
ners (worn on an individual’s ﬁnger), paired with belt-worn terminals (wireless receivers)
to more quickly and efﬁciently scan the bar codes on over 14 million parcels daily. This
6www.intermec.com/eprise/main/Intermec/Content/Technology/DataCapture/DataCapture?section = casestud-
ies

262
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
technology was approved for each of the 55,000 sorting workers at 1,700 worldwide facil-
ities. UPS estimated that the new equipment would pay for itself within 16 months of full
deployment.7
Outputs of the Production Process
Examples of output reports for the production process include materials price lists,
periodic usage reports, inventory reconciliation reports, detailed inventory status reports,
production cost reports, and manufacturing status reports. The materials price list shows
the prices charged for raw materials. The purchasing department updates this list. Cost
accountants use price lists to determine the standard costs needed to budget production
costs. Periodic usage reports show how various production departments use raw materials.
Managers scrutinize these reports to detect waste by comparing raw material usage to
output (ﬁnished goods) produced.
A company using a perpetual inventory system issues an inventory reconciliation
report. When auditors take a physical inventory, the accounting subsystem compares the
physical inventory results with book balances, and notes discrepancies on this inventory
reconciliation report. Another report important for inventory control purposes is the
periodic detailed inventory status report. This report allows purchasing and production
managers to monitor inventory levels.
Cost accountants use production cost reports to calculate budget variances. Some
manufacturing organizations use standard costing systems that allow them to compare
standard costs with actual costs and compute variances for materials, labor, and overhead.
The production cost report details the actual costs for each production operation, each
cost element, and/or each separate job. Manufacturing status reports provide managers
with information about the status of various jobs. Because manufacturing a product usually
requires coordination of many operations, it is important to report on production status
regularly.
Of course, as more companies move to lean production and manufacturing methods,
some of these production reports will be replaced with value stream management metrics
that will be more useful for decision-making.
THE FINANCING PROCESS
The ﬁnancing process describes how a company acquires and uses such ﬁnancial
resources as cash, other liquid assets, and investments. Cash and liquid assets are an orga-
nization’s working capital. The ﬁnancing process interfaces with the revenue, purchasing,
ﬁxed asset, and human resource processes. Much of the capital available in an organization
comes from sales revenue and is used to pay expenses and personnel, and to buy ﬁxed
assets.
Besides obtaining ﬁnancial resources through the sales of goods and services, most
organizations also acquire funds by borrowing cash or selling ownership shares. The
ﬁnancing process includes managing these activities. Figure 8-9 is a data ﬂow representation
of the ﬁnancing process.
7Source: Mashbert, Tom, ‘‘Brown Goes Bluetooth,’’ Technology Review (June 2005), p. 42.

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
263
Fin'l Instit. 
Profiles 
Loan 
Requests 
Debt and 
Interest Reports 
Market 
Data 
Authorization 
to Sell Shares 
Cash 
Stock 
Certificates 
Cash 
Bank 
Statements 
Deposit Slips 
Stock Certifs. 
Other Fin'l. Paper 
Maintain 
Investment 
Accounts 
Record Stock
Sales
Record Stock
Sales
Track 
Borrowed 
Funds 
Management and 
Board of Dirs. 
Investments 
Shareholders 
Banks/Lending 
Institutions 
Investment 
Services 
General Ledger 
FIGURE 8-9
A data ﬂow diagram of the ﬁnancing process. This data ﬂow diagram does not
include cash management related to sales revenue, purchases, payroll, or ﬁxed assets.
Objectives of the Financing Process
The ﬁnancing process has a number of objectives. These include managing cash effectively,
minimizing the cost of capital, investing for maximum returns, and projecting cash ﬂows.
Effective cash management requires collecting cash as soon as possible and spending it
carefully. To collect cash quickly, an organization’s AIS can provide useful information
about how quickly customers pay their bills. An AIS can also show trends in cash collections.
Organizations can use lockbox systems to reduce the ﬂoat period during which
checks clear the bank. A lockbox system is an effective cash management tool because
banks typically require several days, and sometimes a full week, to provide an organization
with credit for out-of-state checks. With a lockbox system, a company directs its customers
to mail their checks on account to a lockbox in their home state. A local bank collects the
checks in the lockbox, clears the checks, sends the customer payment data in an electronic
format, and deposits the cash into the company’s account. In this way, cash is available for
use more quickly. Figure 8-10 identiﬁes additional beneﬁts that companies might realize by
using a lockbox system.
Electronic funds transfer (EFT), or electronic payment, is another cash management
technique. Using EFT, business organizations eliminate paper documents and instead trans-
fer funds electronically. Similarly, most companies today pay their employees electronically
by directly depositing the funds to each employee’s bank account directly rather than
issuing a paper check.
Managing cash on the expenditure side means paying cash as bills come due and taking
advantage of favorable cash discounts. Although an organization wants to make sure there is
cash available for timely payments to vendors and employees, it is also possible to have too

264
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
• Better-managed large-volume deposit customers
• Capture market share with lockbox services
• Process any coupon payment format
• Reduce operating costs
• Increase efﬁciencies
• Cross-selling opportunities through daily access
• Online home page marketing capabilities
• Flexible implementation options
• Archive all check payment information online
• Research images for all lockbox transactions
• Capture greater share of wallet
FIGURE 8-10
Additional beneﬁts ﬁrms may realize by using a lockbox system.
Source: website for ImageWay® Payment Processing.
much cash on hand. Idle cash is an unproductive asset and short-term investments typically
earn less of a return than long-term investments. Effective cash management means cash
balances are not unreasonably high and managers invest excess cash wisely. Managers in
large companies monitor excess cash and invest it for very short times, sometimes less than
a day.
Minimizing the cost of capital (i.e., the cost of obtaining ﬁnancial resources) requires
management to decide how much cash to borrow and how many shares of ownership
(stock) to sell. Borrowed funds require interest payments. Although businesses do not
pay interest to shareholders, they do pay dividends. Financial managers frequently use
ﬁnancial planning models to help them select an optimum strategy for acquiring and
investing ﬁnancial resources. These models require an information system that can make
complex calculations and consider alternative investment, borrowing, and equity (sales of
stock) strategies.
A ﬁnal objective of the ﬁnancing process is to project cash ﬂows. An output of the
revenue process is a cash receipts forecast, and the purchasing and human resource
processes contribute to a forecast of cash disbursements. The ﬁnancing process makes use
of these forecasts to invest excess funds and decide debt and equity strategies. The AIS for
the ﬁnancing process contributes to cash ﬂow predictions through estimates of interest
and dividend payments and receipts. Figure 8-11 summarizes the objectives, inputs, and
outputs of this process.
The Financing Process
OBJECTIVES
Effective cash management
Cost of capital optimization
Earn maximum return on investments
Project cash ﬂows
Inputs (Source Documents)
Outputs (Reports)
• Remittance Advices
• Deposit Slips
• Checks
• Bank Statements
• Stock Market Data
• Interest Data
• Financial Institution Proﬁles
• Financial Statement Information
• Cash Budget
• Investment Reports
• Debt and Interest Reports
• Financial Ratios
• Financial Planning Model Reports
FIGURE 8-11
Objectives, inputs, and outputs associated with the ﬁnancing process.

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
265
Inputs to the Financing Process
Many inputs to the ﬁnancing process originate outside an organization. Externally-generated
data or source documents might include remittance advices, deposit slips, checks, bank
statements, stock market data, interest data, and data about ﬁnancial institutions. Chapter 7
explained that a remittance advice accompanies a customer’s payment on account. Banks
provide deposit slips to document account deposits. For example, you receive a deposit
slip when you make a cash deposit to your account through an automated teller machine
and a credit slip when you purchase gasoline with your debit card.
Regardless of whether companies transfer funds electronically or receive/issue paper
checks, accountants use the company’s bank statement to reconcile any account discrep-
ancies and as proof of payment. Accountants use bank statements to reconcile the cash
account balance in the company’s ledger against the cash balance in the bank account.
Discrepancies between these two accounts arise from outstanding checks, deposits in
transit, and various other transactions. Sometimes, of course, discrepancies are due to
errors or even fraud. Because cash is a company’s most liquid asset, AISs use control
procedures to help protect against misappropriations.
Outputs of the Financing Process
Like all other business processes, the ﬁnancing process provides general ledger information
to help an AIS produce periodic ﬁnancial statements. Examples include interest revenue
and expense amounts, dividend revenue and expense reports, and summaries of cash
collections and disbursements. It also provides information about balances in debt, equity,
and investment accounts. Besides providing general ledger information, the ﬁnancing
process of an AIS produces a cash budget showing projected cash ﬂows.
The AIS for the ﬁnancing process can produce a variety of reports about investments
and borrowings. Investment reports may show changes in investments for a period,
dividends paid, and interest earned. Reports on borrowings could show new debt and
retired debt for a period. These reports should list the lending institutions, interest rates
charged, and payments of principal and/or interest for the period.
Managers perform ratio analyses to manage an organization’s capital effectively.
Signiﬁcant ratios, such as return on investment and debt to equity, help management
decision-making regarding investment and borrowing strategies. A company’s ﬁnancial
planning model calculates and reports these ratios. The planning model also prepares
recommendations regarding the appropriate mix of debt versus equity ﬁnancing, and short-
versus long-range investments. Figure 8-12 is a systems ﬂowchart of an AIS for the ﬁnancing
process.
BUSINESS PROCESSES IN SPECIAL INDUSTRIES
The term vertical market refers to markets or industries that are distinct in terms of
the services they provide or the goods they produce. When you think about it, most
organizations ﬁt into a vertical market category. For example, an accounting ﬁrm is a
professional service organization, and a grocery store is in the retail industry. However,
large conglomerates may operate in several different vertical markets—for instance, many
large manufacturers have branched out to also provide professional and ﬁnancial services.

266
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Various
Financial
Reports
Various
Reports
Financial
Statement
Information
Financial
Planning
Models
Cash
Management
System
Various
AIS Files
Cash
Forecasts
External
Data
FIGURE 8-12
Systems ﬂowchart of the AIS for the ﬁnancing process.
The same is true of retail ﬁrms. Consider, for example, Sears and Roebuck. While still
known primarily as a retailer, a large share of the company’s proﬁt comes from providing
consumer credit.
Vertical markets with specialized AIS-related needs include professional services,
not-for-proﬁt, health care, retail, construction, government, banking and ﬁnancial services,
and hospitality. This section describes a few of these organizations in terms of their unique
characteristics and AIS needs.
Professional Service Organizations
Professional service organizations are business establishments providing a special service
to customers, such as accounting, law, engineering, consulting, and architectural ﬁrms.
Compared with organizations that provide tangible goods (such as automobile manufactur-
ers), professional service organizations have several unique operating characteristics: (1) no
merchandise inventory, (2) emphasis on professional employees, (3) difﬁculty in measuring
the quantity and quality of output, and (4) small size. These are common characteristics,
although not every organization in this industry segment has all of them. For instance,
some accounting and consulting ﬁrms are not small. They have hundreds of partners and
international ofﬁces in cities around the world.
Because professional service organizations do not maintain a product inventory,
they do not need an AIS that tracks inventory levels. Instead, the primary accounting
information needed by professional service organizations relates to time and billing for
their professional staff. Time and billing information systems are similar to job order
costing systems—they track hours and costs associated with each job (i.e., each client) and
each employee (i.e., professional staff). There are two major outputs of the time and billing

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
267
MARTIN & ASSOC.
10385 Spartan Dr.
Cincinnati, OH 45215
Office 513/772-7284
Fax 513/772-4529
Mr. Richard Wilson
WMI, Inc.
5917 Hamilton Ave.
Cincinnati, OH 45224
Work Type
Date
Comments/Description
Staff
Hours
Chargeable
No Charge
Chargeable
Chargeable
Chargeable
Chargeable
Chargeable
Chargeable
No Charge
Chargeable
2/04/10
2/09/10
2/10/10
2/17/10
2/18/10
2/19/10
2/19/10
2/22/10
2/22/10
2/24/10
Connectivity Planning
F9 issues/set-up
AP processing Error
AP and ODBC errors
Bank lock/GL detail/plan
Drive to and from WMI
Hard drive reformat
Training on GL and AP
Shipping
GL recap file/Adrian
ADB
KMM
KMM
KMM
KMM
KMM
KMM
ADB
CLP
KMM
WMI Total Hours:
Not Charged Hours:
Chargeable Hours:
Invoice Dollar Total:
0.50
0.25
0.25
0.50
3.00
1.00
0.50
1.25
0.25
0.25
7.75
0.50
7.25
$1,087.50
Invoice #
Invoice Date
Terms
Due Date
Customer Number
FOR SERVICES RENDERED
7031
4/14/2010
Net 15 Days
4/29/2010
WMI
FIGURE 8-13
A sample client bill for a software consulting ﬁrm. (Printed with permission from
Kevin Martin and Associates)
system: (1) the client bill and (2) the professional staff member’s record of billable hours
(hours actually spent working on client business).
Figure 8-13 shows an example of a software consulting ﬁrm’s client bill. The client
bill may detail the number of hours worked by every professional staff member and the
rate charged by each. For example, an audit client might incur charges for audit staff,
supervisors or seniors, managers, and partners. An AIS multiplies the hours worked by
each staff member by his or her respective billing rate to compute the total charge. Time
and billing systems can also show other charges on the bill or client invoice—for example,
charges for overhead and detailed charges for phone, fax, mail, support staff, and copy
costs.
Billable hours are important in a professional service organization. Law ﬁrms, for
example, stress the importance of accumulating an accurate accounting of the number
of billable hours. Nonbillable hours are hours spent in training, marketing, and general
research. Although these latter activities are important, they do not directly generate
revenue for a law ﬁrm. A time and billing system can track each staff member’s hours in
many ways. The increments of time recorded vary by ﬁrm. Some professional service ﬁrms
record every ﬁfteen minutes spent working on a client job. Some law ﬁrms may record time
in six-minute increments. Because time is literally money, it is important to keep records
as detailed and accurate as possible.

268
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Automation helps professional service organizations keep accurate records on billable
hours. For example, phone systems can record the amount of time spent on calls to client
numbers and can enter values directly into the time and billing system. A copy machine
in which users enter client numbers for each job is another tool that helps assign copy
costs to client accounts. Finally, as professional staff members rely increasingly on their
computers for their work, special computer programs can automatically record the time
spent on each job as the staff member logs on to different programs with client-oriented
passwords.
Not-for-Proﬁt Organizations
Not-for-proﬁt organizations provide services for the protection and betterment of soci-
ety. Examples include public schools, museums, churches, and governmental agencies.
Not-for-proﬁts differ from for-proﬁt businesses in that they: (1) are usually staffed by vol-
unteers as well as professional employees, (2) are usually not as affected by market forces,
and (3) sometimes have a political emphasis.
As with other vertical markets, not-for-proﬁt organizations have special accounting
information needs that reﬂect their unique characteristics. For example, public schools
(such as a university) must keep records of students’ schedules, grades, health records, and
so on. Religious organizations, on the other hand, must track members and account for
donations. The federal government (certainly the largest not-for-proﬁt organization) must
value various unique assets that are not traded in a market. How much, for instance, is the
Lincoln Memorial worth, and how would you determine the annual depreciation for this
national landmark? As daunting as this task may sound, the Commonwealth of Virginia did
undertake such a task in 2004 to estimate deferred maintenance costs for all state-owned
facilities, as described in the following case-in-point. Not surprisingly, the State Auditors
turned to a facility asset management software package.
Case-in-Point 8.9
After a period of budget difﬁculties, the Virginia state legislature asked
the Auditor of Public Accounts (APA) to estimate the total cost of deferred maintenance for
public buildings so that the cost of these repairs could be included in the upcoming budget.
The APA quickly determined that there was no complete inventory of all Commonwealth-owned
buildings and no current information on the condition of any of the buildings. That is, no
data were available to make the estimate! The APA quickly researched the available software
packages available for this task and recommended a Facility Asset Management System
(FAMS), which included a phased approach to collect the necessary data. In May 2006, the
responsibility for FAMS was turned over to the Department of General Services.8
In general, it is the lack of a proﬁt goal that most inﬂuences the special AIS needs
of not-for-proﬁt organizations. Accounting standards, such as the Financial Accounting
Standards Board’s Statement No. 117, Financial Statements of Not-for-Proﬁt Organizations,
now require the ﬁnancial statements to more closely resemble those of proﬁt-seeking
entities. However, the internal reporting systems of not-for-proﬁt organizations focus on
funds, rather than income. Fund accounting systems show the resources available for
carrying out an organization’s objectives. Funds may be restricted for special purposes
(e.g., funds donated to a university for student scholarships) or available for general use. To
reconcile the internal and external accounting systems, an AIS of a not-for-proﬁt institution
must be able to reconcile between these two different reporting structures.
8Source: http://www.apa.state.va.us/deferred maintenance.htm.

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
269
Although not-for-proﬁt organizations cannot be evaluated using proﬁt measures, some
mechanism for performance evaluation is still desirable. A frequently used mechanism is
a budgetary AIS. By comparing actual performance against planned activity, the man-
agers in not-for-proﬁt entities can determine how well they met their goals. Many
not-for-proﬁt entities (especially governmental organizations) employ formal long-range
budgetary techniques. These budgets include projections of future activity that may serve
as performance measures when compared with actual data. One difﬁculty often encoun-
tered in not-for-proﬁt budgetary systems is the lack of a monetary measure of performance
output. Consequently, managers must often use process measures (i.e., nonmonetary mea-
sures) to measure performance. In a police department, for example, the process measures
might be number of arrests, number of homicides, or burglary rates. Public universities
might use the number of students graduating each academic year or persistence rates.
A good short-range budgetary planning and controlling system is typically more
important to a not-for-proﬁt entity than to a proﬁt-oriented company. The reason is the
ﬁxed, rather than ﬂexible, nature of these organizations’ annual budgets. In a not-for-proﬁt
organization, budgetary revisions are difﬁcult, if not impossible, to carry out once the
budget year begins. For example, at publicly-ﬁnanced state universities, biannual state
legislators approve annual operating budgets years in advance—budgets that cannot be
changed in off years. Thus, in those not-for-proﬁt organizations subject to ﬁxed or static
budgets, good short-range planning is necessary to obtain accurate budget projections for
the coming year.
Health Care Organizations
The dollars spent for the health care industry have made this vertical market segment the
target of much controversy and concern as the United States struggles to contain health care
costs. As a result, health care reform remains a very important political issue. Interestingly,
the AISs associated with health care are a large part of the controversy. Paperwork has been
a major bottleneck in delivering efﬁcient health care, and it is also a major cost. Figure 8-14,
which shows the many subsystems in a health care organization’s AIS, demonstrates part
of the problem.
Health care entities share many characteristics with professional service organizations
and not-for-proﬁt institutions. Like these entities, health care organizations do not provide
tangible goods to their customers (except for drugs). In addition, health care organizations
also count professional staff as their most important asset resource. Some health care
organizations are public and operate on a not-for-proﬁt basis. Finally, output is exceptionally
difﬁcult to measure for this industry. For example, a patient may get well due to the quality
of health care received, or the patient may simply get well due to his or her body’s ability
to overcome an illness. On the other hand, some patients die despite excellent health care
and heroic measures.
The special accounting information needs of health care organizations primarily relate
to third-party billing. Health care organizations usually do not bill their customers directly
for services received. Rather, they bill insurance companies or government agencies who
in turn reimburse these service providers. Typically, bills to third-party payers (insurance
companies) use standardized codes for both the medical diagnosis and the procedures
performed by medical personnel. Although standardized codes promote efﬁciency in
processing information, coding can still be difﬁcult. For example, sometimes a diagnosis
is hard to pinpoint, and medical personnel often do procedures for multiple purposes.
Reimbursement from an insurance company depends on the codes used. In addition, one

270
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Patient 
Census 
Inventory 
Control 
Fixed 
Assets 
Preventative 
Maintenance 
Patient 
Registration 
A - D - T 
MHS 
(Mini-based 
hospital system) 
Patient Control 
Subsystem 
Materials 
Management 
Subsystem 
Patient 
Accounting 
Subsystem 
Revenue 
Control 
Accounts 
Receivable 
Patient and 
Insurance 
Billing 
Patient 
Account 
Management 
Payroll & 
Personnel 
Accounts 
Payable 
General 
Ledger 
Responsibility 
Reporting 
General 
Accounting 
Subsystem 
FIGURE 8-14
Mini-based hospital system. (Used with the permission of McDonnell Douglas
Corporation, Hazelwood, Missouri)
plan may cover a particular procedure, and another may not. Because doctors often have
discretion in making a diagnosis or prescribing a procedure, the accounting staff needs to
understand the nuances of the codes and general classiﬁcations. Errors in coding can be
costly, and not just in terms of the processing costs associated with them. Errors can also
lead to fraud charges by insurance carriers.
Payment policies and ﬁling forms may vary among third-party insurers. Government
insurance (Medicare and Medicaid) presents another problem in terms of claim forms. These
health care programs are state administered and each state has special ﬁling requirements.
The several hundred medical insurance carriers in the United States all use the same
coding base. However, clerical personnel and AISs do not uniformly apply these codes.
As previously mentioned, special AIS needs for the health care industry relate mostly to
third-party billing, but other features of the industry also require special processing.
Health care AISs generally need to maintain patient information. Hospitals, doctors’
ofﬁces, and nursing homes all need systems to efﬁciently schedule patients. Home health
care services need to keep track of travel costs for employees. Information needs may
be unique to very speciﬁc industry segments. For instance, physical therapy ofﬁces,
chiropractic practices, ophthalmologists, optometrists, and dental ofﬁces each have some
very special information needs. For example, physical therapy ofﬁces are different from
other medical ofﬁces in that a patient may spend an hour in therapy on many different
kinds of equipment. An AIS might charge differently for ten minutes spent in the whirlpool
versus ten minutes on exercise equipment. The following case describes one specialized
health care software program.

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
271
Case-in-Point 8.10
Chiropractic software programs help chiropractors with many of their
business processes. For example, Advantage Software includes scheduling, medical records
management, accounting, insurance claims, and other features that are desirable for this
industry. The software tracks patient histories, treatments, payments, appointments, and
claims.9
BUSINESS PROCESS REENGINEERING
Business process reengineering (BPR) is about redesigning business processes that are
no longer efﬁcient or effective. As an example, consider the order process that begins
with inquiries from a customer about the products available for sale and ends when the
customer pays cash to complete a sale. In many organizations, several individuals handle
the order process. Each person has responsibility for a particular function: a receptionist or
secretary may handle inquiries, a salesperson follows up on product inquiries, warehouse
personnel assume responsibility for ﬁlling the order, an accounts receivable clerk bills the
customer, and so on. This division of responsibility makes it difﬁcult for some organizations
to ﬁll customer orders quickly. The result: dissatisﬁed customers.
Reengineering the order process may result in an integration of functional activities so
that one speciﬁed individual handles customers from start to ﬁnish. This redesign means
a customer knows who to talk to when an order is late and the customer is not passed
around from one person to another when problems occur. As we discussed earlier in this
chapter, this might be an opportunity for the ﬁrm to evaluate the possibility of value
stream management.
Case-in-Point 8.11
Approving an insurance application at Mutual Beneﬁt Life previously
included 30 steps performed by 19 people in ﬁve departments. Because paperwork moved
among so many workers, an approval took from 5 to 25 days. When the insurance company
reengineered its system, it abolished existing job descriptions and departmental boundaries.
In their place, the company created the position of ‘‘case manager’’ and provided each manager
with the authority to perform all application approval tasks. Because every case manager is
in charge of the entire process associated with approving applications, ﬁles are not passed
around. The results have been fewer errors, decreased costs, and a signiﬁcantly reduced
turnaround time for approval. A new application can now be processed in approximately four
hours, with an average approval turnaround time of two to ﬁve days.
Why Reengineering Sometimes Fails
Despite the best efforts of their managers, some BPR initiatives fail. There are several
reasons for these failures, including unrealistic expectations, employee resistance, and
lack of top management support. Some organizations that contract with consultants for
BPR services expect signiﬁcant improvements in their products and services, and expect
signiﬁcantly lower costs. Successful BPR projects can result in increased proﬁt and more
satisﬁed customers, but often not to the extent envisioned. Employees frequently dread
hearing the term ‘‘BPR’’ because it has become synonymous with ‘‘downsizing.’’ It is often
a challenge to get employees to embrace change, especially change that may make what
they do unnecessary or possibly more difﬁcult.
9Source: http://www.advantagesoftware.com/chiropractic.html.

272
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Although employee resistance is often fatal to BPR efforts, management support can
help overcome some of the obstacles. BPR needs champions in top management who
are willing to push projects forward despite potential employee resistance. Successful
BPR efforts also need top managers who are good communicators and are willing to give
employees both good and bad news. Managers who try to mask the downside of change
are likely to run into difﬁculty. Finally, managers should consider the professional help
of change management consultants to facilitate this complex process and overcome
potential negative behavioral aspects.
AIS AT WORK
Reengineering the Doctor’s Ofﬁce10
Imagine if you still went to the grocery store and the clerk at the register had to manually
enter the price of every item you purchased. Imagine if airlines still used only paper
tickets—the ones with the carbon paper on the back of each ﬂight segment. Imagine
. . . well, you get the point. But, isn’t that still the way business is accomplished at most
doctors’ ofﬁces? At almost every visit, you’re handed a clipboard with a form (or several
forms) and must ﬁll out the exact same information you did the last time you came for an
appointment!
According to Charles Fishman, the information systems at any McDonald’s are far more
advanced, and more useful, than those in your doctor’s ofﬁce or any hospital, although the
stakes couldn’t be more different. Estimates suggest that fewer than 25% of all hospitals
and health care providers in the United States use electronic medical records or digitized
clinical systems. Even fewer physician practices use such technology.
However, there are exceptions. Take for example, a gynecologist in Missouri who
decided to move from his paper-based practice to a digital, paperless medical ofﬁce. He
took out a loan to buy the necessary hardware and software and, with his staff of three,
switched everything over to the new system. Patient information is now electronic, rather
than paper-based, and the doctor takes notes using a tablet PC.
After several months of complete chaos, the doctor is ﬁnally reaping the beneﬁts of his
investment in technology. The cost of dictation services dropped from $1200 per month
to $60; claims are ﬁled electronically and the doctor gets paid by insurance companies in
10 to 14 days instead of 1 to 2 months. The doctor can access patient charts from home
at night, view ofﬁce records from the hospital, and can always ﬁnd patient charts because
they’re safe on a server rather than being misplaced, misﬁled, or left on the wrong counter.
Of course, doctors (or the medical profession) are not the only ones who beneﬁt from
digital medical records—patients beneﬁt, too. One study estimated that 100,000 people in
the United States die each year because of preventable medical errors that digital medical
records can help eliminate. For example, if a particular drug is pulled off the market, a
doctor could quickly and easily identify the patients who need to be notiﬁed. That’s a great
use of BPR!
10‘‘Computerized Records Help UNC Health Care Doctors Treat Patients,’’ InformationWeek (June 1, 2006): NA;
Charles Fishman, ‘‘Record Time,’’ Fast Company (April 2006), pp. 63–66.

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
273
SUMMARY
• This chapter discusses three additional business processes: resource management, production, and
ﬁnancing.
• The resource management process actually includes two areas of interest: human resource
management and ﬁxed asset management. Human resource management encompasses both the
personnel activities in an organization and the payroll events.
• The production process includes the events related to converting raw materials into ﬁnished goods
inventories. Controlling all costs is an important objective of today’s ﬁrms.
• The concept of lean manufacturing is a commitment to eliminate waste throughout the organization
(not just in production).
• A company that follows lean manufacturing concepts must identify value from the perspective of
their customers, organize production (and data collection) in value streams, empower employees
to make decisions, and then continually pursue excellence in all areas of the organization.
• To support lean manufacturing concepts, the ﬁrm must also adopt lean accounting concepts, which
means measuring and evaluating results by value stream management rather than by traditional
departments.
• The ﬁnancing process overlaps all the other processes because it is concerned with the acquisition
and use of funds needed for operations.
• The ﬁnancing process also includes investing, borrowing, and stock-selling activities.
• Cash management is an important part of the ﬁnancing process. Sound cash management requires
companies to constantly monitor cash balances, investing any excess and covering temporary
shortfalls with bank loans.
• There are many other business processes unique to speciﬁc industries. Each industry, or vertical
market segment with specialized processes, has associated custom AIS needs.
• This chapter only described three of these AISs: professional services, not-for-proﬁts, and health
care organizations.
• Current technology, combined with management scrutiny of business processes, provides oppor-
tunities to reengineer business processes in ways that help organizations achieve their objectives.
• Business process reengineering (BPR) is the practice of examining business processes and redesign-
ing them from scratch.
• Many companies today are engaged in BPR as a way to improve customer service and satisfaction,
increase proﬁtability, and decrease costs.
• Accounting processes and procedures are also being reengineered to make them more efﬁcient
and cost-effective.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
activity-based costing systems
business process reengineering (BPR)
business process management software
change management consultants
cost accounting subsystems
electronic funds transfer (EFT)
enterprise asset management (EAM)
ﬁnancial planning models
ﬁnancing process
ﬁxed asset management
human resource management
JIT information systems
job costing information systems
lean accounting

274
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
lean production/manufacturing
lockbox systems
non-value-added waste
payroll processing information systems
process costing information systems
third-party billing
time and billing information systems
value stream management
vertical market
TEST YOURSELF
Q8-1. All of the following activities are common to the Human Resource Management function
except:
a. Hiring, training, and employing workers
b. Reporting on payroll deductions
c. Maintaining employee earnings records
d. Certiﬁed ﬁnancial planning for employees
Q8-2. Which of the following outputs (reports) is common to all of the processes described in
this chapter?
a. Financial statement information
b. Deduction reports
c. Supplier invoices
d. Budget reports
Q8-3. What is the objective of the ﬁxed asset management function?
a. To track purchases of ﬁxed assets
b. To manage the purchase, management, valuation, and disposal of an organization’s ﬁxed
assets
c. To record maintenance and depreciation of ﬁxed assets
d. To keep a current listing of approved vendors
Q8-4. Why do companies use BPM solutions for the ﬁxed asset management function?
a. Decrease machine downtime and maintenance costs
b. Reduce inventory
c. Integrate data and coordinate logistics
d. All of the above
Q8-5. Which of the following automated systems help minimize inventory costs?
a. JIT systems
b. ABC systems
c. Job order costing systems
d. Process costing systems
Q8-6. Automated point-of-sale technology offers many advantages to retailers as well as customers.
Which of the following is the most commonly used POS technology?
a. Cell phones
b. RFID
c. Bar code scanners
d. None of these
Q8-7. The concept of lean production or manufacturing includes all of the following, except:
a. Commitment to eliminate ‘‘waste’’ throughout the manufacturing process
b. Eliminate or reduce non-value added waste
c. Improve overall customer value and the proﬁtability of products or services
d. There are 12 categories of waste that companies hope to reduce or eliminate

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
275
Q8-8. Lean accounting is:
a. An AIS that is generally considered low cost (i.e., an entry-level system)
b. Designed to support traditional ﬁnancial performance measures
c. New performance measures that support decision-making by managers and operational
improvement leaders
d. None of these
Q8-9. Business process reengineering:
a. Is an incremental approach to redesigning business processes
b. Involves redesigning business processes from scratch
c. Is rarely successful in cutting an organization’s costs
d. Is usually welcomed by an organization’s employees
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
8-1. The resource management process includes events associated with both personnel and
payroll functions. Describe four data items that could be used by both functions. Describe
two data items for each function that would not necessarily be needed by the other (e.g.,
spouse name for personnel but not payroll).
8-2. Why are accounting transactions associated with payroll processing so repetitive in nature?
Why do some companies choose to have payroll processed by external service bureaus
rather than in-house?
8-3. In this chapter, we discussed many data inputs to an organization’s production process.
What are the speciﬁc data items to input to a system when adding a new raw materials
inventory item? What speciﬁc data items need to be input when a worker records time
spent on the production line?
8-4. What non-ﬁnancial information would be important for an AIS to capture about a manufac-
turing ﬁrm’s production process?
8-5. What are the basic concepts of lean manufacturing? What concepts are the ‘‘root’’ of lean
production and lean manufacturing?
8-6. Find an example of a ﬁrm that is using lean manufacturing concepts. Has the company
realized any improvements? What are they?
8-7. Can you ﬁnd an example (other than the one described in case-in-point 8-6) of a ﬁrm that
is using lean production concepts that are supported by lean accounting? How are they
doing?
8-8. Are the inputs and outputs of a production process likely to be different for a home builder
than for a cement company? How?
8-9. There are many vertical market industries with special accounting information needs apart
from the industries discussed in this chapter. Identify three additional vertical market
industries. What are the unique characteristics of these industries that affect their AISs?
8-10. Discuss speciﬁc steps you would take as a manager to ensure that a business process
reengineering effort is successful.
PROBLEMS
8-11. Choose an industry described in this chapter and ﬁnd out what vertical market accounting
software is available for that industry. You may use resources such as the library, trade
associations, interviews with organizations within the industry, or interviews with software
consultants.

276
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
8-12. Literally thousands of business process management (BPM) solutions are available to help
managers accomplish tasks in a more effective, efﬁcient manner. Assume that you work
in a payroll processing function and your supervisor asked you to select a BPM for your
company. Which BPM software would you select and why? Identify the vendor, the name of
the software package, and several of the features that you thought would be most beneﬁcial
to your company.
8-13. Now, assume that you work in the internal audit function at a company that is considering
a software package to help automate the process of complying with the requirements of
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Which BPM software would you select and why? Identify
the vendor, the name of the software package, and several of the features that you thought
would be most beneﬁcial to your company.
8-14. Assume that you started your own law practice ten years ago, specializing in estate planning,
and you currently employ ﬁve attorneys, two legal assistants, one legal secretary, and a
bookkeeper/receptionist. The ﬁrm has always used a manual accounting system, which
includes procedures for time and billing. How could an automated time and billing system
help your ﬁrm? Search the Internet for a speciﬁc technology to automatically capture a
professional employee’s time spent on a particular client engagement. What is the name of
the software package and what are the primary features of this BPM software?
8-15. Search the Internet for a picture of a dashboard (save the picture to include in your
report). Next, prepare a single-spaced one-page report that (1) describes the content of
the dashboard and (2) identiﬁes at least 3–4 reasons this dashboard would help a manager
make decisions.
CASE ANALYSES
8-16. Hammaker Manufacturing I (AIS for New Manufacturing Firm)
Dick Hammaker has been fascinated with Corvette cars, especially convertibles, since he
was a teenager. Dick grew up in Michigan and worked part-time through his high school
and college years at a car manufacturer, so he knew the business well. Not surprisingly,
when he graduated from college he bought his ﬁrst car, a used Corvette convertible, and
became a member of the local Corvette Club of America.
As an accounting graduate, Hammaker was hired by one of the large automobile
manufacturers in Michigan and was selected for the ‘‘fast-track’’ management training
program. After ﬁve years, Hammaker decided to leave Michigan and start a specialty parts
manufacturing company strictly for Corvettes. Before he even left Michigan, a potential
customer contacted him—the repair shop was replacing the black convertible top on a
1967 Corvette that the owner was going to sell for $76,995!
Hammaker decided to locate his company, Hammaker Manufacturing Co. (HMC), in
Northern Virginia because this is the site of the oldest Corvette Club of America. Dick
knows he will need the appropriate technology to support his company, so he decided
to focus on this aspect of his company prior to starting any production activities. His
ﬁrst action was to hire a CFO (Denise Charbonet) who could work with Lloyd Rowland
(a software consultant) to determine the inputs and outputs needed for an AIS for the
new company. Of particular concern is the data the AIS will need to collect regarding
inventories. As Dick, Denise, and Lloyd know, inventory management will be a key factor
for the success of HMC because Corvette cars are unique—parts are needed for these cars
since the 1960s!

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
277
Dick believes that an AIS will give him the data and information needed for good
decision-making, especially to manage inventory investments. HMC’s customers are pri-
marily Corvette specialty repair shops and they typically demand parts only as needed, but
exactly when needed. Inventory can be very costly for HMC if they must stockpile many
specialty parts to be able to quickly meet customer orders.
Hammaker knows from his work experience in Michigan that there are a number
of costs associated with holding inventories (warehousing, obsolescence, and insurance
costs)—money that could be put to better use elsewhere. Dick knows that he will need
to buy raw materials from suppliers and hold raw materials inventories plus make-to-stock
parts, or customers will ﬁnd other parts suppliers.
Denise and Lloyd meet to discuss the issues. They decide that they need to do two
things. First, they need to determine what AIS software package would be best for the new
company, one that is particularly focused on inventory control, or one with an inventory
control module that would be well-suited for HMC. Second, they need to decide what
data elements they need to capture about each inventory item to optimize inventory
management and control. Denise notes that though some inventory descriptors are easy
to determine, such as item number, description, and cost, others are more difﬁcult.
For instance, inventory on hand and inventory available for sale could be two different
data items because some of the inventory on hand might be committed but not yet
shipped.
Requirements:
1. Explain how an AIS could help HMC optimize inventory management and control.
2. What data elements should HMC include in the new AIS to describe each inventory
item?
8-17. Hammaker Manufacturing II (Business Process Reengineering or
Outsource)
Implementation of a new AIS went smoothly, for the most part. It is 15 years later, and
now HMC is interested in mapping a variety of their business processes to determine
whether improvements can be made and whether business process reengineering should
be considered. Hammaker asked Denise to work with the consulting ﬁrm analysts to
determine the feasibility of these two options and also to consider the possibility of
outsourcing. Denise does not know much about outsourcing and she is not sure which
process (or processes) Dick might want to outsource.
Denise discovers that a number of developing countries have the capacity and the
labor to make the parts that HMC is currently producing, and at much cheaper prices.
Further, Denise discovers that many companies are outsourcing and offshoring a number
of processes that used to be accomplished by company employees. Denise makes a note
to herself to check the number of employees in each of the following departments:
HR, computer support, accounting, and janitorial services. She also decides to query the
AIS to determine what performance measures are available to assess the efﬁciency and
effectiveness of each of these departments. Denise places a call to Lloyd Rowland to discuss
this issue with him.

278
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
HMC is not unionized, but Denise ponders the legal and social issues associated with
outsourcing jobs, because many of the 365 employees at Hammaker Manufacturing have
been with the company for well over a decade.
Requirements:
1. Identify tools that would help Denise and Rowland map HMC’s business processes.
Which processes do you think they should work on ﬁrst? Why those processes?
2. Identify at least six reasons why companies choose to outsource or offshore a business
process. Which of these reasons might Dick use to make his decision to outsource or to
attempt BPR?
3. Is producing automotive parts a ‘‘core’’ business process for Hammaker manufacturing?
Explain.
4. Do companies ever outsource ‘‘core’’ business processes? Search the Internet to see if
you can ﬁnd an example of a company or an industry that oursources core business
processes. What are they? Why are they doing this?
5. What social or legal issues might Denise consider? Be speciﬁc and explain why these
issues might be important to Hammaker manufacturing.
6. What would you recommend if you were one of the analysts at the consulting ﬁrm?
Explain.
8-18. Hammaker Manufacturing III (Lean Production/Lean Accounting)
HMC continues to be proﬁtable. Although Denise and Lloyd Rowland mapped several
business processes ﬁve years ago to determine whether HMC should work on process
improvements or consider business process reengineering, they never really ﬁnished that
effort, nor did HMC decide whether to outsource any processes. Hammaker still thinks
that HMC could be more efﬁcient and more proﬁtable, but he’s not really sure how the
company can achieve this ‘‘next level’’ of excellence.
About a year ago, Denise started reading books and trade journals on the topics of
business strategy, lean production, and lean manufacturing. So when Dick approached
her regarding his intent to improve the company, she began to share with him some of
the insights she had gained over the past year on business strategy and how their current
AIS might not be capturing the most useful metrics for optimal decision-making. Denise
mentioned that the next Lean Accounting Summit will be in September and suggested
that she and her three ﬁnancial analysts go to the four-day conference to gain a better
understanding of lean production and accounting concepts to determine how they might
be able to better support HMC and Dick’s goal of improving the company.
Requirements:
1. If Dick decided to adopt the business strategy of lean production, what changes might
he and his managers consider?
2. Explain how HMC might beneﬁt from implementing lean production/manufacturing
concepts.

CHAPTER 8 / Accounting Information Systems and Business Processes: Part II
279
3. Why would it be important for Denise and her ﬁnancial analysts to attend the Lean
Accounting Summit? What beneﬁts would you expect them to acquire from this
conference that would be useful at HMC?
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Burton, T. and S. Boeder. The lean extended enterprise: Moving beyond the four walls to value
stream excellence (2003), Boca Raton, FL: J. Ross Publishing.
Brosnahan, J. ‘‘Unleash the Power of Lean Accounting,’’ Journal of Accountancy (July 2008), pp.
60–66.
Cleveland, M. ‘‘Seeking Core Capabilities: Business Process Improvement begins with Productivity
Improvements,’’ Fleet Equipment (January 2004), pp. 10–12.
Johnson, D., J. Sun, and M. Johnson. ‘‘Integrating multiple manufacturing initiatives: Challenge for
automotive suppliers,’’ Measuring Business Excellence (Vol. 11, No. 3, 2007), pp. 41–56.
Kannan, V. and K. Tan. ‘‘Just in time, total quality management, and supply chain management:
understanding their linkages and impact on business performance,’’ Omega 33 (April 2005), pp.
153–162.
Kennedy, F., L. Owens-Jackson, L. Burney, & M. Schoon. ‘‘How do your measurements stack up to
lean?’’ Strategic Finance (May 2007), pp. 32–41.
Maskell, B. and F. Kennedy. ‘‘Why do we need lean accounting and how does it work?’’ The Journal
of Corporate Accounting & Finance (March/April 2007), pp. 59–73.
Shepard, J. and N. Macchione. ‘‘Improving health care access in San Diego County: the county’s
Health and Human Services Agency reengineers business processes,’’ The Public Manager 35
(Summer 2006), pp. 25–28.
Sullivan, L. ‘‘Department of Defense Turns to IBM for RFID Expertise,’’ InformationWeek (March 17,
2004).
Tracy, D. and J. Knight. ‘‘Lean operations management: Identifying and bridging the gap between
theory and practice,’’ Journal of American Academy of Business (March 2008), pp. 8–14.
Wirtz, S. ‘‘Making the transition to electronic invoicing,’’ New Jersey Law Journal (June 19, 2006).
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. d
2. a
3. b
4. d
5. a
6. c
7. d
8. c
9. b


Chapter 9
Accounting and Enterprise Software
INTRODUCTION
INTEGRATED ACCOUNTING SOFTWARE
PROGRAMS
Small Business Accounting Software
Mid-Range and Large System Accounting Software
Specialized Accounting Information Systems
ENTERPRISE-WIDE INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Enterprise System Functionality
The Architecture of Enterprise Systems
Business Processes and Enterprise Systems
Risks and Beneﬁts of Enterprise Systems
SELECTING A SOFTWARE PACKAGE
When is a New AIS Needed?
Selecting the Right Accounting Software
AIS AT WORK—SHELDON NEEDLE AND CTS
GUIDES
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
The RETAIL Cooperative
Linda Stanley and State University
Springsteen, Inc.
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Know the evolution of accounting and enter-
prise software.
2. Understand the differences among various
types of accounting and enterprise software.
3. Be able to explain how various functions in
enterprise software work together.
4. Understand the architecture of enterprise sys-
tems, including their use of a centralized
database.
5. Be able to describe the relationship between
business process reengineering and enterprise
system implementation.
6. Be able to assess the costs and beneﬁts associ-
ated with enterprise systems.
7. Recognize when an organization needs a new
AIS.
8. Understand how organizations go about select-
ing accounting and enterprise software.
281

282
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Accounting software packages are standard tools in today’s business environment.
Selecting the right software, however, can be challenging.
F. Elikai, D. Inancevich, and S. Ivancevich,
‘‘Accounting Software Selection and User Satisfaction,’’
The CPA Journal (May 2007), p. 26.
INTRODUCTION
Because of the repetitive nature of many tasks in accounting, it is not surprising that
these tasks have been automated. With advances in hardware and software technology,
accounting software has become increasingly sophisticated and customized for speciﬁc
industry needs. This chapter describes various types of accounting and enterprise software
for today’s business environments. Initially, accounting software packages were very
basic. Typically they simply processed bookkeeping transactions for businesses. Now,
accounting and enterprise-wide software are incredibly powerful, complex, and are capable
of collecting a wide variety of data to support business decisions for multinational ﬁrms
that operate globally and require information in various foreign languages and currencies.
Further, specialized accounting software packages can accommodate speciﬁc industry
information needs driven by some of the unique business processes described in the
previous chapter.
Today, accounting software is evolving into yet another phase as these business
solutions become a part (module) of integrated enterprise software called enterprise
resource planning (ERP) systems. Examples include ﬁnancial functions interfaced with
manufacturing, sales and distribution, human resources applications, and others. The
largest enterprises today, realizing the beneﬁts of integrating their information systems,
extend their ERP systems up and down their supply chains. This chapter discusses various
aspects of integrated accounting software and enterprise-wide systems in some detail,
including their functionality, architecture, impact on business processes, and associated
costs and beneﬁts. Because the impact of enterprise-wide software packages is so important
to accountants, we cover this software in depth.
Knowing when to upgrade to a new accounting information system can be a challenge.
In some cases, changes in an organization’s external environment, such as increased
competition, may force an upgrade. In other cases, management must identify and assess
problem symptoms to make a decision. Because the software market has experienced a
considerable number of consolidations and mergers since the mid-1990s, software selection
can be even more complicated. As we point out with the opening quote for this chapter,
selecting the right software for an organization can be very challenging. The last section of
the chapter discusses the topic of software selection in detail.
INTEGRATED ACCOUNTING SOFTWARE PROGRAMS
Integrated accounting software programs process all types of accounting transactions.
These include transactions affecting accounts in both general and special journals, such
as sales and purchases. Integrated accounting software programs organize transaction

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
283
• Audit trails
• Budgeting capability
• Check and invoice printing
• E-commerce features
• Financial analysis tools
• Graphic reports
• Inventory management
• Recurring journal entries
• Ability to handle multiple users
• Ability to handle multiple companies
• Customizable ﬁnancial reporting
• Cash-based and accrual-based accounting options
• Scalability (accommodates business growth)
• Variance analysis (budget to actual)
FIGURE 9-1
A sample of features commonly found in integrated accounting software programs.
processing in modules and provide links among these modules. The general ledger module,
which includes the chart of accounts, is the foundation for the system. Using the accounting
software, personnel record the general journal transactions in this module. Other modules
typically found in integrated accounting software programs include accounts receivable,
accounts payable, inventory, and payroll. These modules correspond to the business
processes we discussed in the previous two chapters.
Journal entries recorded in accounting software modules update the general ledger
module on a periodic or real-time basis. Depending on an accounting program’s level of
sophistication, it may include additional modules such as job costing, purchasing, billing,
invoicing, and ﬁxed assets. Figure 9-1 lists several features commonly found in integrated
accounting software programs.
Small Business Accounting Software
At the low end, commercial programs are available for about $100, or even for free!
For example, Microsoft now offers a small business program, Microsoft Small Business
Accounting, bundled with selected versions of its Microsoft Ofﬁce Suite. Currently, the free
version of MS Accounting (called MS Accounting Express) is included in certain editions of
MS Ofﬁce 2007, and can also be downloaded free from their website.1 The latest version
of Microsoft Ofﬁce Accounting (2008) is intended to serve small businesses that have
approximately 25 employees or fewer.
As you might imagine, these accounting software packages are fully integrated with
all other Microsoft Ofﬁce programs. This means, for example, that you can easily import
data from an Excel spreadsheet into the accounting program. Small business owners are
usually most concerned with cash ﬂows and determining if they have been proﬁtable. This
package and other low-end accounting software programs focus on this information.
Two other popular examples of inexpensive small business accounting software are
Quickbooks by Intuit, and Peachtree products. These packages are really a set of scalable
products, meaning that the software can grow as the business grows (i.e., the organization
can add modules to the software or upgrade to a more powerful software without
reinstalling or reconﬁguring data). For example, the Quickbooks product line includes a
low-end package with very basic ﬁnancial accounting features for about $100. However, a
company that becomes comfortable with the package and grows the business can choose
1Source: http://ofﬁce.microsoft.com/en-us/accountingexpress/FX101729681033.aspx.

284
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
from the Quickbooks product line that includes an enterprise-wide software package
selling for several thousand dollars.
Even the lowest end programs typically include a chart of accounts and process general
ledger, accounts receivable, and accounts payable transactions. They produce many kinds
of accounting reports, including basic ﬁnancial statements and budget reports as well as
bar graphs and pie charts. Even low-end accounting software is quite sophisticated and
generally has several sample charts of accounts for different types of organizations. Users
can select one of these charts of accounts and then customize the selection to match their
organizations’ account structures.
A trend in low-end and mid-level accounting software has been the consolidation of
vendors and the availability of more extensive product lines. For example, Intuit sells
over twenty different versions of its accounting software, and you can select among ten
Peachtree offerings. The variety of features offered in these software packages continues to
grow. One feature that even low-end packages incorporate today is Internet connectivity,
which permits small businesses to create websites and engage in electronic commerce.
For example, Peachtree Accounting has a special link that allows companies to take orders
and receive payments over the Internet.
Low-end accounting software is typically a good AIS solution for businesses with less
than $5 million in revenue and few employees. The number of transactions processed
monthly is another factor impacting the choice between low-end software and more
sophisticated programs. For example, if a company processes only a few accounts receivable
transactions daily, an inexpensive package should handle this processing satisfactorily.
However, scalability is important because the cost of the software package itself is small in
comparison to the costs associated with implementing and using the package. Each time a
company changes software, employees must enter historical and current transaction data,
and create new codes for customers, employees, products, and so on. Cost savings are
signiﬁcant when the software vendor offers programs that allow data to be transferred
automatically to higher-end packages.
Because there are so many low-end accounting software packages readily available
to small businesses, you would think that all small businesses have already adopted one.
However, even though the software is cheap, the challenge is for the owner and employees
to learn how to get the greatest value from the product. For example, how many features
are there in MS Word that you don’t use—or don’t even know are available? Similarly, to
gain the most beneﬁt from any accounting software, a business owner should consider
the ﬁrm’s CPA ﬁrm or a local software consultant who can help select the software, train
employees, help the ﬁrm identify useful reports for decision-making, or maybe even help
with rescue and recovery needs should a disaster occur.
Mid-Range and Large System Accounting Software
When transaction processing needs grow in volume and complexity, a mid-range or large
system software package may be a better choice. Some examples of accounting software
packages of this type are Microsoft’s Dynamics GP, SAP Business One, Epicor, Sage
software’s MAS 90 and MAS200, Everest, Made2Manage, and Accpac. These software
packages, ranging in cost from $2,000 to well over $300,000, offer many features needed
by mid-size and larger companies. For example, many large companies do business
internationally and need software to handle transactions in multiple currencies. Some
software packages can convert transactions from one currency to another and can even
write checks in foreign currencies. Another example of a specialized feature that may

FIGURE 9-2
An example of mid-range Accounting Software’s integration of business processes. (Used with permission,
Everest Software, Inc.)
285

286
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
be included in higher-end accounting software is the ability to split commissions among
multiple salespersons. Mid-range and large system accounting software also may handle
more than just accounting functions.
Case-in-Point 9.1
Sage software’s Accpac product line includes modules for ﬁnancial
accounting, purchasing, sales and receivables, inventory management, project management,
and payroll. The software can integrate with other solutions, extending its usefulness for cus-
tomer relationship management (CRM), business intelligence, e-commerce, human resource
management, point-of-sale, management of ﬁxed assets, and supply chain (warehouse)
management. Accpac’s Extended Enterprise Suite now includes dashboards, a ﬁxed asset
management module, and other desirable features.2
In addition to offering a variety of modules and interfaces, mid-level and large account-
ing systems software vendors also allow customers to choose from an array of deployment
options. For example, the software can be made available on a desktop computer, through
a web-browser, or a hosted solution. Accounting software can be expensive. Even low-end
packages require a signiﬁcant investment to install the software, convert old data for the
new system, customize features, and train users. Although the software itself is not the
major cost component, some companies are choosing to purchase cloud computing ser-
vices rather than buy the software outright. This arrangement is called a hosted solution
and is available from several vendors, including Peachtree and Accpac. Two advantages
of a hosted solution are that it is easily scalable and the programs and data are accessible
anywhere, anytime.
Specialized Accounting Information Systems
In addition to vendors serving general industry categories, there are literally thousands of
vendors that sell accounting software specially designed to ﬁt a particular industry or even
a very small niche within an industry. Some examples of these packages are accounting
software programs for dental ofﬁces, pet retailers, video stores, and schools. In addition,
many integrated accounting software package developers offer add-on modules that ﬁrms
can use to process special information. These extra modules might be job-cost modules
that are useful to construction companies or point-of-sale features tailored to retailers.
For instance, the hotel industry needs software that includes many specialized functions.
Hotel™, by Execu/Tech, integrates property management functions, reservations systems,
housekeeping management, sales and marketing, online booking, event management,
dining reservations, phone call and in-room movie accounting, with a back ofﬁce accounting
system that processes general ledger, payroll, and accounts payable transactions.
Case-in-Point 9.2
Not-for-proﬁt accounting software allows users to track records by
individual fund, which is sometimes required by donors or contributors. They also allow
users to track projects and grants. Cougar Mountain Fund Suite3 is an example of this type
of software. This package features the ability to handle transfers among funds, multiple
grants with varying year-ends, and the ability to track restricted, temporarily restricted, and
unrestricted contributions and assets in separate categories.
Some vendors of general integrated accounting packages offer programs written by
independent developers to interface with their packages and provide features needed
2Source: http://www.sageaccpac.com.
3Source: http://www.cougarmtn.com.

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
287
by customers in specialized industries. Other software vendors include the source code
with their programs so that businesses can customize the software to ﬁt their specialized
processing needs. Customizing software is a good business for value-added resellers or
consultants who have programming ability and an understanding of the specialized needs
of some businesses.
ENTERPRISE-WIDE INFORMATION SYSTEMS
An organization’s information system must do much more than process strictly ﬁnancial
data. The capabilities of accounting software programs to process enterprise-wide data
expand with the price and complexity of the software. Examples of software in this cate-
gory, known as enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, enterprise software,
and business application suites include Microsoft Dynamics AX, SAP All-in-One, Sage
MAS 500, NetSuite Enterprise Solution, Exact Synergy, Infor Enterprise Solutions, Epicor,
and Oracle. Two important features of this type of technology are its integration and a
central database. Typically, the software integrates the ﬁnancial or accounting subsystem
with customer relationship management (CRM), business services, human resources (HR),
and supply chain management (SCM).
Because SAP’s high-end products can cost millions of dollars to implement, they are
mostly used by the world’s largest business organizations. Large-scale ERP software forces
companies to reengineer or redesign their business processes for maximum efﬁciency.
Such multinational corporations as Eastman Kodak Company, Owens-Corning Fiberglass
Corporation, and Procter and Gamble have spent millions of dollars implementing SAP for
its potential cost savings. Cost savings (discussed in detail later in the chapter) often come
from streamlining, speeding, or consolidating processes.
Case-in-Point 9.3
Kimball Electronics, an electronics manufacturing services provider,
spent ﬁve years deploying an SAP ERP solution at all six of its facilities. The new system gave
managers access to information not previously available to them in a number of separate
systems. As a result, they can collect and analyze information about spending in a variety of
views, such as by supplier, product, and customer. The new software has allowed the company
to reduce its cost of materials by about 4%.4
Enterprise System Functionality
Basic ERP Functions.
Today’s ERP systems provide integration among many of an
organization’s major business processes—e.g., order processing and fulﬁllment, manufac-
turing, purchasing, and human resources functions—all of which provide data to each
other and to the ﬁnancial system. This integration means, for example, that a salesperson
taking an order in a manufacturing company is able to check inventory availability imme-
diately. If inventory exists, the information system will notify shipping to pick the goods
and ﬁll the order. If no inventory is on hand, the ERP system can trigger the manufacturing
subsystem to make more of the product. The integration between the customer order and
manufacturing subsystems can result in a revision to production schedules to accommodate
the new orders. Human resources may also be involved if the new order requires extra
4Carbone, James, ‘‘Consolidation Is the Key,’’ Purchasing (January 12, 2006), pp. 62–63.

288
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
workers or workers to be reassigned. In short, all functional areas of the organization can
use the same information to perform their tasks efﬁciently to meet customer needs.
Extended ERP Systems.
The business processes integrated by ERP systems are
known as back-ofﬁce functions because they primarily concern an enterprise’s internal
systems. Traditional ERP systems focus on internal data, generated for use primarily by
internal processes (e.g., human resources and manufacturing) and an enterprise’s own
decision-makers. Today’s ERP systems are extended with e-business and other front-ofﬁce
capabilities. Extended enterprise systems bring customers, suppliers, and other business
partners, such as investors and strategic business relations, into the picture.
Today’s ERP systems interface with suppliers and customers through supply chain
management (SCM) applications. The supply chain for a single enterprise extends from
the suppliers, from whom it purchases raw materials, to its end customers. However, the
supply chain of one company is but part of a linked supply chain. Figure 9-3 demonstrates
this concept for an automotive manufacturer. Note that goods and money are not the only
commodities exchanged by partners along the chain. Information ﬂows backward from
customers to suppliers. SCM applications provide suppliers with access to the buyer’s
internal data, including inventory levels and sales orders. These data allow a business to
reduce the cycle time for procuring goods for manufacture and sale. At the same time, the
customer is able to view the supplier’s information related to his or her order.
Case-in-Point 9.4
Catholic Healthcare West (CHW) spent almost 10 years implementing
an ERP solution that integrated systems among 40 hospitals and medical centers. CHW’s
$54 million ERP software outlay consolidated 200 applications that used approximately 20
different databases. By sharing information, CHW can now close its books in a day, versus two
weeks, and units can run their own departmental reports, rather than waiting for a regional
Mining Company
Raw Ore
Goods
& $$$
Goods
& $$$
Steel Manufacturer
Steel
Auto Parts Manufacturer
Automotive Parts
Goods
& $$$
Auto Maker
Automotive Equipment
Goods
& $$$
Auto Dealer
Automotive Equipment
Goods
& $$$
Customer
Automotive Equipment
Information
Information
Information
Information
Information
Information
Information
Information
Information
Information
FIGURE 9-3
The supply chain for a component of the automotive industry.

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
289
ofﬁce to do so. The organization expects to realize a 144% return on investment from reduced
supply costs, cost savings in IT and paper support, and consolidated systems.5
Another tool that helps companies optimize their supply chain is customer relation-
ship management (CRM). CRM is not an application per se, but rather a collection of
applications, including databases, sales order and customer service systems, and ﬁnancial
packages. The integrated CRM collects the data from these disparate applications and inte-
grates them for use in decision-making. Businesses use CRM to analyze customer data—for
example, looking for trends and buying patterns. This analysis can improve customer
relations when the business uses the information to better meet customer needs.
Business intelligence (BI) tools are data analysis software that help managers get the
most information from their CRM. CRM combined with BI analysis enables businesses to
serve their customers better and also impact the bottom line. For example, CRM combined
with BI can help a company learn which of their customers are most proﬁtable and can
then direct sales efforts towards those customers. Analysis of buying trends and special
customer features can increase revenues and cut costs, as demonstrated in the following
case-in-point.
Case-in-Point 9.5
A key to repeat sales for an auto dealer is bringing customers back for
repairs and maintenance. At a Hyundai dealership in Florida, managers note that the sales
department sells the ﬁrst car, and the service department sells the customer their next ones.
To compete against national chains, the company uses Autobytel’s Retention Performance
Marketing software. This product sends customers mail and email offers that match the dates
and mileage with their cars’ schedule for maintenance. The CRM solution also targets inactive
customers and allows all customers to schedule appointments online. Online scheduling
creates cost savings through better scheduling and workﬂow planning.6
Other ERP applications link strategic partners to an enterprise. Of course, many of these
partners are suppliers and customers, but others include investors, creditors, and other
channel partners with whom the enterprise might ‘‘team up with’’ to offer special services.
Collaborative business partnerships are becoming more common as organizations ﬁnd
that there are often advantages to working with other businesses, even their competitors,
to increase their power to meet customer demands. Partner Relationship Management
(PRM) software enhances the working relationship of partners, particularly when they use
the Internet.
Case-in-Point 9.6
Cartridge World, the leader in printer cartridge reﬁlling and recycling,
is the fastest-growing franchise in the $80 billion printer cartridge industry. Recently, it
successfully integrated NetSuite into its operations to oversee hundreds of its 1,650 worldwide
franchise locations and manage a rapidly growing business. The company saved about
$200,000 in annual IT and administrative costs. Their B2B e-commerce capabilities supported
a 200% increase in sales across their 1,650 stores worldwide, which helped grow sales to
$425 million in 2007.7
5Havenstein, Heather, ‘‘Health Care Provider Nears End of 10-Year ERP Journey,’’ Computerworld (December
19, 2005), pp. 1–2.
6Britt, Phillip, ‘‘Autobytel’s Key to Automotive Success,’’ Customer Relationship Management (June 2006),
p. 44.
7Source: http://www.netsuite.com/portal/customers/main.shtml.

290
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Human
Resources
Finance
Operations
Enterprise Application Integration
Portal
Bolt-ons
Architecture of an ERP
Central
Database
External
Parties
Supply Chain
Management
Business
Intelligence
Legacy
Application
Legacy
Application
Legacy
Application
Product
Lifecycle
Management
Core ERP
FIGURE 9-4
A diagram of the architecture of enterprise resource systems.
Source: Adapted from www.army.mil/armybtkc/focus/sa/erp ent i1.htm.
The Architecture of Enterprise Systems
Four components that form an ERP’s architecture or technical structure are the (1) systems
conﬁguration, (2) centralized database, (3) application interfaces, and (4) Internet portals.
Please refer to Figure 9-4 as we examine each of these components in greater detail.
Systems Conﬁguration.
Although ERP systems are most often licensed software that
run on a company’s computer system, some organizations are choosing the hosted solution
we discussed earlier. Organizations with concerns about the high cost of ERP and uncertain
beneﬁts may choose to purchase ERP services on the Internet. The customer doesn’t own
the software, and saves on the high purchase price, hardware costs, and maintenance and
upgrade expenses.
In addition, there may be security advantages of the hosted option because the
software provider assumes the responsibility for security and disaster recovery. A business
that operates in a region at risk for natural disaster, such as hurricanes and earthquakes,
may ﬁnd that the hosted solution provides a greater comfort level regarding business
continuity because the hardware and software are off-site. However, organizations in some
industries where data security is especially important (e.g., healthcare and banking), may
be concerned about a hosted solution because they give up control over their data and
information.
Case-in-Point 9.7
Thermos, Inc. needed better information than they were getting from
their current ERP system. However, the IT staff and others who had invested heavily in the
current system were reluctant to upgrade. Management decided to take a risk and move to
a hosted system, Oracle On Demand. The switch led to a downsize in IT stafﬁng, and an
increase in productivity. Estimated beneﬁts from the hosted solution are expected to exceed
$6 million.8
8Edwards, John, ‘‘Pay-per-View ERP,’’ CFO Magazine, (February 2, 2006); access at: http:// www.cfo.com.

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
291
A Centralized Database.
To accomplish integration, ERP systems architecture is
conﬁgured around a central database. The database stores information about each data
item just once (thus avoiding data redundancy) and makes it immediately available to all
the various functions in an organization. Having a central database means that the data in
an ERP system have data integrity, are collected just once, are accurate, and are current.
To appreciate the value of a central database, consider the following example.
Example: Most businesses maintain price lists of product selling prices. The mar-
keting department, which sets the prices, creates and maintains a price list. Accounts
receivable also has a price list to reference for invoicing. The production department
will have a price list for reference purposes. Finally, the web master uses a price list
to update the selling prices displayed at the company’s online store site. Suppose
the marketing department makes a price change. Will all the other price lists also
be updated? The point is that in an information system where various departments
keep their own ﬁles or databases, a change by one requires a change by all.
Application Interfaces.
Although an ERP system has the capacity to integrate data
from many business units within one organization, the ﬂexibility of choosing the best
software in different categories may argue for a best-of-breed approach. For instance,
a company might implement an ERP system from SAP and then choose to interface it
with a supply chain management, a customer relationship management, or business intelli-
gence product from another software manufacturer (these products are commonly called
bolt-ons). Cost might be another reason for an organization to forego the ‘‘one-system’’
approach. For example, a company might run out of money during the implementation of
an ERP and choose to complete its system with a module or two from another vendor.
Case-in-Point 9.8
Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond, Virginia, implemented
an ERP system called Banner in 2006 that is widely used in higher education. This ERP has
modules to support student registrations and payments, faculty course management, ﬁnancial
aid, ﬁnance, HR, and advancement. However, when the School of Business moved into its new
building in the spring of 2008, decision-makers determined that the CRM module in Banner did
not have the functionality desired. Accordingly, they selected a bolt-on CRM called Intelliworks
Program Management. This CRM is a comprehensive solution to help current and prospective
students through the initial exploration and inquiry stages, and also allows them to register
for courses and submit payments online.9
Another useful interface to businesses is enterprise application integration (EAI).
EAI allows companies with legacy applications and databases to integrate and continue to
use those systems. This is particularly beneﬁcial if these ﬁrms decide to implement an ERP
or acquire new applications that exploit the Internet, e-commerce, extranet, and other
new technologies. EAI can accomplish this integration so that companies do not incur the
cost of building their own custom interfaces to tie their multiple applications together.
Internet Portals.
Extended ERP systems interface with individuals inside and outside
an organization through portals. A portal is a gateway to other websites or services to
enhance communication and productivity among employees, customers, partners, and
suppliers. For example, a company can allow its suppliers to see its price lists and also
to learn the payment status of its invoices on a real-time basis. University portals allow
9Source: http://www.intelliworks.com/news/press releases/2008/VCU

292
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
students and faculty to access a wide variety of university resources, such as university
calendars, course information, and online databases through the library. Company portals
provide users access to corporate-wide systems, data, and information from across the
enterprise to connect people for meaningful collaboration.
Business Processes and Enterprise Systems
Accountants and others record an organization’s accounting transactions in the ﬁnance
module of an ERP system, and this module can interact with any subsystems that are
supported by the ERP (e.g., human resources, manufacturing, customer relationship
management, or distribution). For example, the ﬁnance module can exchange payroll
and tax data with the human resources subsystem. When a customer places an order,
the distribution subsystem can check the customer’s credit limit and accounts receivable
balance in the ﬁnance module. A salesperson can check inventory levels, and better
manage the customer account through the CRM. In a manufacturing environment, if
an order requires additional inventory to be made, the customer order can impact the
production schedule.
Business Process Reengineering and ERPs.
Buying an ERP system can be akin
to buying a new way of doing business. It entails reengineering an organization, hopefully
to conform to the best practices of the industry.
Case-in-Point 9.9
When the University of Wisconsin-Superior (UWS), a small liberal-arts
college, decided to implement an ERP, the biggest lesson it learned was that an organization
needs to be proactive with reengineering and should plan for changes to business processes
before implementing each module. In addition, many more processes had to be reengineered
even after the system went live. Some of the beneﬁts include the fact that students and faculty
now have access to many more web-based services than before. For example, students can
enroll for courses online, check on ﬁnancial aid, fees, holds, and many other services.10
Clearly, implementing an ERP and reengineering business processes can be very
demanding on employees throughout an organization. Knowing the lessons learned from
those who have been through the process should be very useful. Although the above
case-in-point identiﬁes several key points about the business processing reengineering
(BPR) efforts of one small university, a recent survey of 327 organizations (including over
13 major industry sectors) offers a more comprehensive understanding of BPR. The survey
respondents identiﬁed the following as the most critical success factors in their BPR: (1)
planning, where scope and roles were decided, (2) high-level review of current process,
and (3) support from top management. Figure 9-5 lists several additional key aspects that
should be considered to help ensure successful BPR initiatives.11
Sometimes multiple business units within one company do the same thing in many
different ways. For instance, their accounts payable processes may differ. Another advantage
of implementing an ERP system is that it encourages, if not demands, that the separate
units conform. If all units standardize to adopt the best practice, the company should be
more productive overall.
10Yakovlev, Ilya, ‘‘An ERP Implementation and Business Process Reengineering at a Small University,’’ Educause
Quarterly (2002), pp. 52–57.
11Source: http://www.prosci.com/bprbestpractices.htm.

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
293
• 
Allocation of Time on Project:
 
 
o 
2/3 time planning and designing
 
 
o 
1/3 time on development and implementation
• 
Duration of average BPR project: 13.8 months
• 
Excellent or very good Change Management directly correlates
 
with teams that meet or exceed project objectives
• 
Successful BPR teams:
 
 
o 
are dedicated to project
 
 
o 
have support from top management
 
 
o 
have a clear vision of objectives and goals
• 
Use Consultants:
 
 
o 
as leader/key facilitator of project
 
 
o 
to coordinate team efforts
 
 
o 
for IT or technical systems advice and expertise
BPR Project
FIGURE 9-5
Key aspects of a successful BPR project.
Source: http://www.prosci.com/bprbestpractices.htm.
A company considering an ERP system may choose to conduct a business process
reengineering (BPR) initiative before implementing the software, or it may undertake BPR
concurrent with the implementation. The choice depends on how unique the business
may be. For enterprises operating in a fairly straightforward industry, it’s likely that the ERP
software incorporates the best ways of doing business. This means that the organization
can change its own processes to conform to those incorporated in the software and there
may be no need for up-front BPR work. However, many companies may choose to conduct
BPR ﬁrst to ﬁgure out what processes they already have that incorporate best practices.
Doing the BPR work at this time will help management to understand what kinds of process
changes it needs, and this can also dictate which ERP software is best.
When an organization’s practices and the processes dictated by the ERP system don’t
agree, a business must either change its processes or change its software. Usually, you
want to change the process. Customizing ERP software should be done as a last resort
because it can introduce bugs into the system and it also creates problems with software
upgrades. Each time the software vendor issues an upgrade, the company must recreate
the customized features.
Sometimes changing processes is desirable but not feasible, or at least problematic, for
political or behavioral reasons. An enterprise that has had a nonintegrated legacy system for
some time may struggle quite a bit during the ERP implementation. People who are used
to doing their job in a certain way might resist the changes brought about by redesigned
processes. This is sometimes true even when everyone knows the change is for the better.
For instance, employees may be used to ﬁlling out travel request forms in a certain way.
It may be a great improvement for them to be able to complete these forms online and in
a new improved format that speeds up their reimbursement. However, if they’re used to
doing it the old way, they must learn how to do it the new way. This learning takes time
and almost always meets with some resistance. To obtain the most beneﬁts from a new ERP
system, employees often have to learn to accept changes. This is why change management
activities are such a critical aspect of an ERP implementation.

294
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Risks and Beneﬁts of Enterprise Systems
Because ERP systems are so expensive, require training and consultation with change
management specialists, and take so long to implement, the potential risks and rewards
associated with these systems are substantial. Unfortunately, there are many examples
of failed ERP implementations, and these failures often have a disastrous impact on the
ﬁnancial statements of a business—if the business even survives.
Case-in-Point 9.10
Waste Management was looking for a new revenue management
system and selected SAP’s ERP software. After two years and over $100 million in project
expenses, Waste Management discovered that their ERP software had signiﬁcant gaps between
its functionality and Waste Management’s business requirements. So the implementation that
should have been completed by December 2007 is now projected for sometime in 2010,
without any assurance of success.12
Risks and Costs of ERPs.
As depicted in the preceding case-in-point, one risk is
that the system won’t work. Besides the risks from failed implementations, ERP systems
have many costs associated with them. Figure 9-6 identiﬁes the costs and beneﬁts normally
associated with ERP systems. Implementation costs include hardware, software, and
professional services. There are also costs for training, data conversion, and reengineering.
Training costs involve technical training as well as training for those employees who are
impacted by the new business processes. Data conversion can be very expensive. Imagine
a multinational corporation that is replacing more than 100 legacy systems with an ERP
system. It’s possible, for example, that each of the 100 systems represented an employee
number in a different format. The new system will have just one uniform employee number.
Management must agree on the format of the new employee number, and staff working
on the implementation will have to convert all employee data to the new standard. For
very large ﬁrms, the cost of a software conversion program may be a wise investment to
guarantee an efﬁcient and error-free conversion of the data.
Costs
Beneﬁts
• Hardware
• Software
• Training:
– technical
– business processes
• Data conversion
• Interfaces and customization
• Professional services
• Reassigned employees
• Software maintenance
• Software upgrades
• Reduced inventory investment
• Improved asset management (e.g., cash
and receivables)
• Improved decision-making
• Resolved data redundancy and integrity
problems
• Increased ﬂexibility and responsiveness
• Improved customer service and
satisfaction
• Global and supply chain integration
FIGURE 9-6
A summary of costs and beneﬁts typically associated with ERP systems.
12Source: http://www.cio.com/article/205852/Waste Management Sues SAP Over ERP Implementation.

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
295
There are also many costs that don’t always make it into the cost/beneﬁt equation.
These include internal staff costs. An ERP implementation will need some inside help, even
if an organization hires specialized consultants for various aspects of the implementation.
Company employees who are dedicated to the project cannot do their normal jobs. If they
are assigned to the implementation, their salaries should be too.
Many ERP costs will continue even after implementation. These include software
maintenance and upgrade costs. One company noted that it had not realized how much
it would cost for the highest level of vendor support, to constantly send their IT staff to
training on the software, and to continually upgrade the system. ERP operating costs can
vary from a hundred thousand to hundreds of millions of dollars.
Beneﬁts of ERPs.
Despite the high costs, there are many compelling reasons to
implement an ERP system. These beneﬁts can sometimes be difﬁcult to quantify. For
example, how can you estimate precisely what dollar beneﬁt arises from improved
decision-making or more satisﬁed customers? On the other hand, management might decide
the business imperative to integrate an organization’s IT systems is to match competitors.
Typically, most organizations make an attempt to identify the beneﬁts they expect from
the new ERP system. Many of the beneﬁts are from cost reductions, such as reductions in
inventory and employees. Spend management describes an approach to cutting expenses
to their bare minimum. These include reducing employee travel expenses, procurement
expenses, and even the costs associated with invoice processing.
Case-in-Point 9.11
Microsoft, one of Purchasing magazine’s Spend Analysis award win-
ners, created its own in-house software tool to capture and report procurement data. The
software links to Microsoft’s SAP enterprise system and captures data every time an employee
places an order. A feature of the system is that buyers must select a United Nations Standard
Products and Services Code (UNSPSC) for each transaction. This categorization allows for
tracking and analysis that cut several weeks from the time needed to analyze spending.13
Another beneﬁt from ERP systems is the wealth of information collected in the
transactional data. Most ERP systems offer predeﬁned reports, but do not offer the ability
to analyze the data to provide managers a decision-making advantage. However, strategic
companies use software tools to extract data directly from the ERP system, analyze the data
instantly, and get any kind of report desired.14
Yet another beneﬁt of ERP systems is the ability to monitor business processes in new
and different ways—with dashboards and enterprise mashups. In Chapter 1, we introduced
the idea of dashboards and how they are used by senior management to monitor corporate
performance with respect to the balanced scorecard. However, the use of dashboards is
actually one of the biggest trends in business intelligence, and they can be used successfully
throughout the organization.15
Digital dashboards and scorecards are essential tools for organizations to monitor a
wide variety of business processes. For example, a sales dashboard would probably monitor
key sales activities so that managers could identify sales trend information, such as best
customers, products, and salespeople (and measure these by revenue, units, margin, or
region). Figure 9-7 shows an example of a sales dashboard that managers might use.
Production dashboards are used to monitor and compare real-time production ﬁgures with
13Porter, Anne, James Carbone, Susan Avery, & David Hannon, ‘‘Super Spend Analysis,’’ Purchasing (March 18,
2004), pp. 28–39.
14Menninger, David, ‘‘Information on Demand,’’ Strategic Finance (September 2003), pp. 50–53.
15Curt Hall, ‘‘Dashboards & Scorecards Chart Business Performance,’’ (http://softwaremag.com), December 2004.

296
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
FIGURE 9-7
Example of a sales dashboard. Source: http://www.infommersion.com/demos/dashboards.
historical trends to put current events in perspective. Dashboards are used in universities
by deans and department chairs to monitor processes, such as assessment data for reporting
to accrediting bodies, student enrollments, budget status, and others.
The examples just cited indicate how managers might use dashboards that are based
on data collected from within the organization. However, the VP for Emerging Internet
Technologies at IBM is encouraging managers to experiment with enterprise mashups.16
Visualize a dashboard that collects data from a variety of sources—both inside and
outside the ﬁrm—that’s a mashup. In a recent pilot of a mashup, IBM developed such a
content-oriented application for one of the national home improvement retail chains. The
idea was to merge weather reports with inventory management. For instance, if a Category
3 or higher hurricane is predicted, it makes sense to transfer inventories of plywood to
stores near the area of the storm. Normally, weather reports of a possible hurricane would
not be an event that would trigger a transfer of inventory in most ERP systems. And,
unlike more formal corporate applications, mashups do not take as much time to develop.
Figure 9-8 illustrates the anatomy of a digital dashboard.
Quantifying the Business Value.
The decade of the 1990s will probably be remem-
bered for large investments in IT. However, many IT departments were unable to quantify
the business value of these huge expenditures, and managers did not agree as to how
16Tony Baer, ‘‘IBM Pushes Enterprise Mashups,’’ (www.computerwire.com), June 16, 2006.

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
297
Client
Server
Internet
File Synchronization
Outlook
Sync
Exchange
Public
Folders
SQL Data
Warehouse
Back End Data
Office
Document Data
MSDE
SQL
Replication
FIGURE 9-8
The anatomy of a digital dashboard. This dashboard has three possible data
sources: the Internet, Microsoft Exchange, and relational data in a SQL Server table. All of these
sources are available ofﬂine as well as online.
Source: http://msdn.microsoft.com/msdnmag/issues/0700/Dashboard
1. Determine how you will measure success.
2. Set up specific metrics based on your industry.
3. Perform regular post-implementation audits.
4. Analyze your performance numbers.
5. Set up universal processes.
6. Create a continuous learning loop.
7. Prepare for inevitable security failures.
FIGURE 9-9
Methodology for measuring the value of an ERP.
technology should be measured. Erik Keller, research fellow in residence at AMR Research,
suggests a measure of business value—productivity—which is an increase in a given output
at a constant or declining cost.17 This means that a company holds the line on IT spending
but increases the business beneﬁt received from it, or decreases IT spending for a business
function. Trish Saunders is a contributing author to Customer Insights, a Microsoft newslet-
ter for midsize businesses in the US. She claims that whatever methodology a company uses
to measure the value of an ERP, it should be applied consistently across the organization at
speciﬁc points following the implementation.18 Saunders offers guidelines to help a typical
organization conduct such an audit. Figure 9-9 includes the steps she recommends—if a
17Source: http://www.informationweek.com/shared/printableArticle.jhtml?articleID = 18201406.
18Source: http://www.microsoft.com/dynamics/community/mbs measuring your erp.mspx.

298
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
company does not establish speciﬁc performance metrics, it will be very difﬁcult to gauge
how well the ERP meets organizational objectives or how to correct any performance gaps.
SELECTING A SOFTWARE PACKAGE
It should be clear from reading this chapter so far that an organization has many choices
when selecting accounting information systems. The table in Figure 9-10 summarizes these
choices. In this section we brieﬂy discuss how managers and owners can recognize when
they need a new AIS, and how they might go about selecting one. Chapter 13 covers the
process of developing new systems and selecting hardware and software in more detail.
When is a New AIS Needed?
Believe it or not, there are still many small businesses that keep their accounting systems in
a shoebox, a ﬁling cabinet, or similar storage. Small business entrepreneurs often begin with
an idea to sell goods or services. They likely do not have accounting degrees, and therefore
they need to rely on others for expertise in keeping their books. It is not unusual for
Software Type
Business Characteristics
Cost Range
Examples
Entry-Level
Smaller businesses
Revenues < $5 million,
up to 20 employees
$100–$4,500
ACCPAC Simply Accounting,
Peachtree, QuickBooks, Microsoft
Small Business Accounting
Small–Medium Business
(SMB)
Sales up to $100 million,
up to 100 employees
$3,000–$100,000
Sage ACCPAC Advantage Series,
Sage MAS 90 and MAS 200,
Macola ES, Cougar Mountain,
NetSuite, Microsoft Dynamics GP
Small–Medium
Enterprise (SME)
Sales up to $500 million,
up to 500 employees
$20,000–$500,000
Sage MAS 500, e by Epicor, Lawson,
Microsoft Dynamics AX, mySAP
All-in-One
High-End Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP)
Sales > $500 million, more
than 500 employees
$400,000–$300 million∗
SAP, PeopleSoft, J.D. Edwards,
Oracle
Special Industry
Not-for-proﬁt, retail,
construction, banking,
health care, insurance,
government, and many
others
$300–$300,000+
Peachtree Nonproﬁt, Cougar
Mountain Fund (NFP), AccuBuild
(construction), Everest POS (retail),
Phoenix (insurance)
Custom-Built
Medium–large ﬁrms with
very speciﬁc information
needs
Sales > $20 million
$100,000–hundreds of
millions of dollars
Available from software developers
and consultants
∗Based on a survey by Meta Group of 63 companies. Total cost of ownership (TCO) of ERP includes hardware,
software, professional services, and internal staff costs. TCO includes getting the software installed and the two
years following installation.
Source: Adapted from R. Johnston, ‘‘A Strategy for Finding the Right Accounting Software’’ (September 2003),
pp. 39–46, www.ctsguides.com, www.ﬁndaccountingsoftware.com and www.2020software.com.
FIGURE 9-10
A summary of types of accounting and enterprise software.

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
299
1. Late payment of vendor invoices, which means late fees and lost cash discounts.
2. Late deliveries to customers.
3. Growth in inventories, accompanied by an increase in stockouts.
4. Slowdown in inventory turnover.
5. Increased time in collecting on receivables.
6. Late periodic reports.
7. Increasing length of time to close out books at the end of a period.
8. Managers concerned about cash ﬂows and ﬁnancial picture of organization.
9. Manager complaints about lack of information needed for decision-making.
10. Owner worries about cash ﬂows, taxes, and proﬁtability.
FIGURE 9-11
Indicators that a company needs a new (or upgraded) AIS.
these businesses to use paper for receipts, invoicing, and reporting. The owner may deliver
ﬁnancial records to a bookkeeper or accountant periodically to see how well their business
is doing. Of course, this is not likely to be the most ideal way to run even a small business,
but small business owners who are largely preoccupied with sales and keeping customers
and vendors satisﬁed may feel that implementing and using an accounting software package
is just not something they can afford to take the time to do. The problem with manual
accounting systems is that they cannot easily classify sales by customers, amount of sale, or
product line, do not automatically alert their owners to impending deadlines for purchase
discounts, and of course are incapable of generating even the simplest ﬁnancial statements.
For those already using computer-based AISs, there are many signals to business owners
and managers that a new accounting software package, or an upgrade in software, is a
good idea. Often, these signs concern cash and operating a business better. Figure 9-11 lists
ten such signals. When a business owner or manager recognizes that it is time to purchase
new (more powerful) software, the next question is, ‘‘Which software should I select?’’ or
‘‘How do I know which software package is the best ﬁt for my company?’’
Sometimes owners and managers of companies observe external warning signs that
alert them to their need for a new AIS. These signs may have nothing to do with the
company itself, or its vendors or customers. One example might be new regulations or
legislation that changes the way companies must operate. Compliance with rules or laws,
such as the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act of 2002, is often a reason to move to new software,
or to purchase a bolt-on to an ERP. Compliance with SOX calls for built-in controls, visible
audit trails, workﬂow and documentation software features, and management alerts.
Selecting the Right Accounting Software
The approach to buying accounting software varies with the complexity of the business and
the software. At the low end, for small businesses, the approach is much quicker and less
expensive than when a large company decides on an ERP system. Large organizations with
specialized accounting information needs may decide to build a custom AIS from scratch.
Although custom systems are difﬁcult and expensive to develop, they are becoming less
so with advances in object-oriented programming, client/server computing, and database
technology. Custom systems are likely to be costly and take longer to develop than
management anticipates, which is why most ﬁrms retain consultants to help with the
selection and implementation of AISs. Consultants usually ﬁnd that packaged software can

300
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
handle about 80% of a client’s processing needs. A company can either ignore the other
20%, meet their needs with such other software as spreadsheet or database programs, or
develop its own modules.
Today’s accounting software is easy to use and feature-rich. Internet research and
discussions with other business owners in a similar industry may be enough to help a
business owner select a software package. A number of helpful sites are available on the
Internet to help with this selection process.
Case-in-Point 9.12
Two websites, www.2020software.com and www.ctsguides.com, list
features in accounting software packages, describe these features, and allow individuals to
compare the various features in the software packages. The ﬁrst, 2020 software, provides
software demos, offers purchase discounts, and includes a free software evaluator. If the
individual gives 2020 contact information and software speciﬁcations, 2020 will email the
person a software recommendation. The second, CTS, offers detailed online software reviews
and other services to business owners—once the owner answers questions, such as type of
business, annual sales, server operating system, desired functions, and software budget.
Shopping mall software retailers typically do not sell middle-range or high-end account-
ing software packages. Instead, business owners and managers at larger ﬁrms are most
likely to purchase them from a value-added reseller (VAR) or a qualiﬁed installer. VARs
and qualiﬁed installers make special arrangements with the software’s vendor to sell the
programs. They also provide buyers with services such as installation, customization, and
training. These services are necessary due to the complexity of the middle-range accounting
programs. A VAR offers a broader array of services for more software programs than a
qualiﬁed installer. Chapter 13 elaborates further on this topic and discusses tools available
to help in making software selection decisions.
Because ERP systems can cost millions of dollars and take years to implement, it is
always advisable to get the help of an expert in choosing among them. Consultants conduct
a thorough analysis of your organization and its processes to determine not only which
software vendor has the best solution, but also what customization might be needed.
There are many types of ERP consultants, including those who work for the vendors,
professionals who work in IT consulting ﬁrms, and specialists within large accounting and
professional service ﬁrms. The best way to choose a consultant is to look for someone who
has experience with your industry, and who is familiar with more than one package in
some depth. As you would expect, vendor consultants are unlikely to suggest any solution
other than the one or ones offered by their employer.
AIS AT WORK
Sheldon Needle and CTS Guides
In 1983, Sheldon Needle left his full-time accounting job to start his own business, Computer
Training Services (CTS). He knew a lot about accounting software and decided to create
a company that would evaluate software and publish guides for various businesses.
He published a paperback book that compared ﬁve small business software programs,
advertised the book in the Journal of Accountancy, and waited for the orders. His phone
quickly began ringing off the hook, and he knew that the service he offered was in high
demand.
Sheldon next developed a spreadsheet rating system that compared the major features
of top-selling accounting software programs. The program, called Requirements Analyst,

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
301
also allowed users to determine whether a software feature was necessary, desirable, or
optional. The program user, usually a software consultant, could then use Requirements
Analyst to choose the best software for a given client. CTS grew, adding guides for special
industries and different levels of accounting software. Competition came from other
consultants and services that also offered software comparisons. But CTS had an advantage
in that the evaluations were performed by Sheldon or the independent contractors he
hired. Other comparison programs typically used vendors to supply the data about what
their programs could and could not do.
The Internet began to impinge on the value proposition for CTS as search engines and
vendor websites decreased the value of the software guides to users. For example, a decade
ago, a business in the construction industry would need to do exhaustive research to ﬁnd
the top industry accounting software packages, and lists of their features. Now Internet
search engines make this information accessible to anyone. Also, some consultants began
to offer their services in helping companies select software for a low fee, over the Internet.
A small business owner could answer a few questions about the company, such as number
of users, annual sales dollars, numbers of customers, employees, and suppliers, industry
niche, and so on—and the website would instantly recommend a software package.
In 2003, CTS changed their business model so that now most information is available at
no cost to visitors at www.ctsguides.com. Rather than earning proﬁts from customers, the
company now receives income from software vendors. The vendors use CTS for advertising
and distributing information about their product. Sheldon shares his expertise personally
and talks with clients, either on the phone or via email. His company also continues to sell
guides, tips on software selection, and tools such as one that helps users create a Request
for Proposal (RFP). The new business model is working well and CTS has successfully
navigated the constantly changing world of technology and accounting software.
SUMMARY
• Categories of integrated accounting software include entry-level, small to medium business, ERP,
special industry, and custom-built software.
• Integrated accounting software packages may include modules or transaction groupings for general
ledger, accounts receivable or sales, accounts payable or purchasing, inventory, and payroll.
• Entry level accounting programs usually include a chart of accounts that users can customize,
along with the ability to produce a variety of accounting reports, including ﬁnancial statements
and budgets.
• Mid-range and large system accounting software packages include special features and options,
such as international currency translation.
• Deployment options for accounting software and high-end ERP systems include hosted solutions,
where users lease software as a service and customer data resides on the vendors’ hardware.
• ERP systems integrate both ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial information from an organization’s business
processes.
• Traditional ERP systems are back-ofﬁce information systems, integrating ﬁnancial, manufacturing,
sales and distribution, and human resource systems. Extended ERP systems add front-ofﬁce features
to the traditional systems, helping an organization to integrate its supply chain.
• ERP systems have a central database that allows them to reduce data redundancy, enhance the
integrity of the data, and make more information available for decision-making.

302
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
• There are many costs and beneﬁts associated with ERP systems, and managers need to consider
all of them in making a decision about implementing such a large system. Savings often accrue
from redesigned and more efﬁcient business processes that lead to increases in revenues and cost
savings.
• There are several warning signals that indicate when a company needs to upgrade its AIS, including
dissatisﬁed vendors, customers, or employees. Sometimes the impetus is external, such as with
Sarbanes-Oxley legislation or other regulations.
• The Internet provides many tools to help in selecting a new AIS, but consulting or VAR help is
usually needed to select and implement a new system.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
application interface
back-ofﬁce
best-of-breed
bolt-ons
business application suites
business intelligence (BI) tools
central database
collaborative business partnerships
customer relationship management (CRM)
enterprise application integration (EAI)
enterprise mashups
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems
enterprise software
extended ERP systems
front-ofﬁce
hosted solution
integrated accounting software programs
Internet connectivity
partner relationship management (PRM)
portals
scalable
spend management
supply chain management (SCM)
value-added reseller (VAR)
TEST YOURSELF
Q9-1. Low-end accounting software is increasingly complex and sophisticated. However, software
costing only a few hundred dollars is not likely to:
a. Provide information to multiple stores where a company operates more than one
b. Include a chart of accounts that users may customize to suit their industry
c. Provide all the information needed to optimize customer and supplier relationships
d. Provide information for budgeting decisions
Q9-2. Which of the following reasons might explain why a small business owner would hire a CPA
ﬁrm or a software consultant to help select accounting software?
a. To train employees to use the software
b. To help the ﬁrm identify useful reports for decision-making
c. To help with rescue/recovery needs should a disaster occur
d. All of the above
Q9-3. Which of the following accounting software programs would be appropriate for a small
business (e.g., a sole proprietorship with 20 employees)?
a. SAP
b. QuickBooks
c. NetSuite
d. Oracle

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
303
Q9-4. Mid-level accounting software:
a. Can only be deployed through a server networked with desktop computers
b. May be purchased in modules that match various business processes
c. Will not be appropriate for a multinational company because these programs cannot
handle foreign currencies
d. Is generally inappropriate for a company operating in a specialized industry, such as retail
or not-for-proﬁt
Q9-5. Which of the following is NOT a distinguishing characteristic of an enterprise-wide (ERP)
system?
a. Hosted solution
b. A central database
c. Integration
d. Best practices for business processes included in the software
Q9-6. Which of the following is correct regarding ERP systems?
a. Early ERP systems focused on back-ofﬁce functions
b. ERP systems evolved largely from a manufacturing environment
c. ERP systems do not include CRM or SCM functionality
d. Both a and b are true
Q9-7. An organization will always need to upgrade to a new AIS if:
a. A major competitor buys a new package
b. Customers complain about late deliveries
c. The company wants to begin doing business over the Internet
d. None of the above are necessarily reasons to buy new accounting software
Q9-8. Accounting and enterprise software can be expensive. Which of the following is likely to be
the highest cost associated with a new AIS?
a. The cost of new hardware
b. The cost of implementing and maintaining the new system
c. The cost of the software
d. The cost of converting old data for the new system
Q9-9. In selecting a new AIS, a company’s management should:
a. Always hire a consultant
b. Always consult with your accountant during the decision process
c. Never rely on your accountant for help in this decision
d. Always use an Internet software service to make the decision
Q9-10. Components of an ERP’s architecture typically include:
a. A centralized database and application interfaces
b. Internet portals and multiple databases
c. A centralized database running on a mainframe computer
d. Business intelligence and multiple databases
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
9-1. Which accounting software features are likely to be most important for the following
businesses? Search the Internet for an example of an AIS that you would recommend for
each of these owners and include your rationale for that product.

304
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
a. a boutique shop that sells trendy ladies clothing
b. a small business specializing in custom golf clubs, replacement shafts for clubs, replace-
ment grips for clubs, and similar repairs
c. a local CPA ﬁrm with 3 partners, 5 associates, and 2 administrative employees
d. a pet breeder that specializes in Burmese kittens
e. a business that sells and rents Segways in Washington, DC, that is located on Constitution
Avenue, near the Lincoln Memorial
f. a high-end men’s clothing business that has 4 stores that are all located in the same large
metropolitan city (56 employees), and the owner is contemplating additional locations
for stores in nearby cities
9-2. The difference between the price tag for middle-market accounting software versus an ERP
system can be millions of dollars. What can these high-end systems do that the less expensive
enterprise accounting packages cannot?
9-3. Discuss the differences between traditional ERP and extended enterprise systems.
9-4. Discuss some of the basic features of an ERP. How do these features distinguish an ERP from
an integrated accounting software program?
9-5. What are some of the beneﬁts of a centralized database architecture? What are some of the
difﬁculties in moving from multiple databases or ﬁles to a centralized database structure?
9-6. A new company will have no business processes in place. How would the owner go about
selecting an appropriate AIS for the new company? Should the owner consider acquiring an
ERP package immediately?
9-7. Find an article about a company that has adopted a business application suite. Identify the
company and its basic characteristics (such as location, products, number of employees).
What are some cost savings realized by the company? Were there speciﬁc efﬁciencies
identiﬁed as a result of the ERP implementation? Were there problems implementing the
system? How long did it take for the company to complete the implementation? Were there
cost or time over-runs?
9-8. Although you are likely to purchase a middle-end accounting software package from a
value-added reseller (VAR), why should you be cautious about hiring one to recommend a
software package for your business?
9-9. What are some of the consequences to a company that makes a poor decision in selecting a
new AIS?
9-10. Why do businesses typically need to engage in business process reengineering when they
adopt an ERP? Identify at least 5 key aspects of a successful BPR project.
9-11. Assume that your company is considering the purchase of an ERP. In anticipation of this
purchase, you must identify some processes that the company should target for BPR. But
ﬁrst, your supervisor asked you to suggest a ‘‘framework’’ that the company should use
for these BPR projects. Explain the steps that should be included in this framework. HINT:
search the internet for information to answer this question.
PROBLEMS
9-12. Visit the software websites of two low-end accounting software package vendors and then
two ERP vendors. Do you see a relationship between the complexity of the website and the
price of the software? Identify a number of differences.
9-13. Deﬁne the concept of ‘‘scalability’’. Explain why it might be a good idea for owners of small
businesses—and managers in larger businesses—to understand this concept.

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
305
9-14. Tom O’Neal always wanted to own his own business. When he was in high school, he
worked evenings and most weekends at a neighborhood bicycle shop. When Tom went to
college at the nearby State University, he still came home in the summers and worked at
the bike shop. Upon graduation from college, with his accounting degree in hand, the sole
proprietor (Steven Judson) of the bike shop invited Tom to become a full partner in the bike
shop. Steven told Tom that he really wanted to grow the business and thought that Tom was
just the person to help him do this. Tom decided to join Steven.
Over time the business grew and they opened two more bike shops in neighboring cities.
Sales increased to more than $3.5 million dollars during the past year and the three bike shops
now employ 14 full-time workers and another six part-time employees. Although Steven and
Tom hired an accountant who was keeping their books for them and producing the ﬁnancial
statements each year, the partners thought they needed much more information to really
run their business efﬁciently. They thought that they might need to make an investment in
information technology to take their business to the next level.
a. Would you recommend that Steven and Tom consider an investment in IT?
b. Visit the websites of the vendors that offer the appropriate-sized software packages for
this business. What are some of the features of possible software packages that Steven
and Tom should consider?
c. Would you advise Steven and Tom to hire a consultant? Support your recommenda-
tion with appropriate research citations (e.g., business articles that offer this type of
advice—what rationale do they give?).
9-15. B&R, Inc. is one of the world’s largest manufacturers and distributors of consumer products,
including household cleaning supplies and health and beauty products. Last year, net sales
revenues exceeded $5 billion. B&R has multiple information systems, including an integrated
accounting system, a computerized manufacturing information system, and a supply chain
management software system. The company is considering an ERP system to be able to
conduct more of its business over the Internet.
B&R hired National Consulting Firm (NCF), and NCF recommended the move to an ERP
system, which would have electronic commerce interfaces that will allow B&R to sell its
products to its business customers through its website. The cost/beneﬁt justiﬁcation for
the new software, which comes with an estimated price tag of $100 million (including
consultant fees, all implementation, and training costs) shows that B&R can expect great
cost savings from improved business processes that the ERP system will help the company
to adopt. NCF implements the ERP, adopting the industry’s best practices for many of the
business processes.
a. What are the likely advantages of an ERP system for B&R?
b. Visit the websites of the major ERP vendors. What are some of the characteristics you
notice about their customers?
c. B&R has heard some horror stories from other CEOs about ERP implementations. What
are some of the concerns B&R should address as they move forward with this project?
CASE ANALYSES
9-16. The RETAIL Cooperative (Enterprise Portal)
Over the past decade, The RETAIL Cooperative (TRC) successfully acquired a number of
smaller retailers. These strategic acquisitions enabled TRC to grow signiﬁcantly. In fact,

306
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
TRC is now one of the largest retailers in Europe, and employs over 230,000 people in 25
countries. The company has three primary business units: Department Stores, Hardware
Stores, and Food Stores. TRC has many cross-division service companies in both Europe
and Asia to support the three primary business units. These support companies provide
a variety of services, such as purchasing, information technology, advertising, human
resources, and others.
In early 2007, the CEO scheduled a full-day strategy session with the vice-presidents of
the business units. By the end of the day, these senior managers decided on a set of speciﬁc
strategic objectives to continue the growth of the company. In particular, the CEO and
vice-presidents of TRC determined that the company needed to: (1) attract well-educated,
skilled managers to succeed in future expansions, and (2) focus on optimizing distribution
channels so that managers at all levels of the organization would have immediate access
to information for decision-making. The goal was to link TRC’s management expertise
with the geographic area of operation so that the company would continue to be dynamic
and responsive to customers 24/7. Essentially, the senior managers wanted TRC mid-level
managers in each of the business units to have the ability to ‘‘Coordinate Globally—Act
Locally.’’
The consensus was that the Human Resources support company would develop and
implement appropriate procedures to ﬁnd the quality managers that TRC requires. How-
ever, the VPs of the business units wanted to be directly involved in the distribution
channel optimization. As a result of TRC’s rapid growth, the VPs of the business units were
encountering a number of recurring problems, such as lapses in customer service, inability
to respond to customer queries, and coordination problems with product availability and
delivery dates. In addition, the manager for the travel department of the company noticed
a signiﬁcant increase in travel expenses for each of the business units and sent each of the
VPs a memo. Based on these concerns, the VPs decide to meet with the Controller and
Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO) to discuss these problems and to identify possible options
to resolve these issues.
To prepare for the meeting, Robin Frost (the CIO) talked with several top-level managers
to collect their ideas and suggestions of the features that might be required of any new
technology the ﬁrm might purchase. Each of the managers agreed that TRC would need
an e-business application(s) that would give its managers a detailed online view of the
status of the purchasing process that is shared among TRC’s employees, suppliers, and
customers. For example, each purchasing agent would like to access all the purchase
prices, inventories, and selling prices that are in place in any store no matter where it
is located. He/she should also be able to see TRC’s manufacturing prices for its own
brands, the bids made by TRC’s suppliers, and the comments or complaints made by TRC’s
customers.
In addition, the new technology would have to link TRC’s suppliers, distributors,
and resellers with the company’s Logistic, Production, and Distribution departments. The
Accounting and Finance departments would need access to information so they could track
the status of TRC’s sales, inventory, shipping, and invoicing in any TRC store, worldwide.
And ﬁnally, the Marketing and Sales departments would also need access to manage and
update the company’s product catalogs, price lists, and promotional information for any
TRC outlet, regardless of its geographic location.
At the meeting with the VPs, Robin made a 10-minute presentation on Internet portals.
Her research on this new technology leads her to believe this might help the VPs solve the
problem of information asymmetries—that is, information not being readily available to
mid-level managers working with customers. At this point, Robin just knows that software
packages exist that can make information available to company employees. She’s not able

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
307
to articulate all the pros and cons of the technology, and has not yet called any outside
consultants for advice. Robin believes that the primary challenge for this new technology
will be to create a real-time ‘‘retail connectivity’’ that will allow vendor collaboration,
multi-channel integration, and public and private trading exchanges across the globe.
Requirements:
NOTE: Research is required to properly respond to the following case questions, which
could include journal articles on enterprise portals, and Internet research that could include
online journal articles as well as vendor websites for product information.
1. Assume you are a consultant with one of the application platform vendors (e.g., IBM,
Oracle, SAP, Microsoft) and Robin called you for information regarding Enterprise
Portals. Prepare a one-page summary of the advantages TRC might be able to achieve
if they used an Enterprise Portal for each of the business units (and for TRC-wide
operations).
2. After preparing the one-page summary, now prepare a 10-minute PowerPoint presen-
tation on Enterprise Portals, focusing on the advantages for TRC of implementing this
technology. (HINT: As a minimum, be sure to address such issues as scalability of the
portal, reliability, performance, and fault-tolerance.)
3. What sort of implementation schedule would you recommend for TRC, that is, what
steps are important in an orderly implementation of this technology? Explain.
4. Based on your research, which system do you recommend for TRC? Prepare a matrix
that compares the different features of the different Enterprise Portal solutions that you
considered.
9-17. Linda Stanley and State University (Legacy Systems to an ERP)
Linda Stanley is the Vice President for Computing and Information Services at State
University (SU), a large, urban university that has experienced a 3% growth in enrollments
every year for more than a decade. The university how has almost 27,000 students,
just under 12,000 faculty and staff, nearly $1 billion in revenues, and can currently
accommodate 5,000 students in residence halls. In addition, the state legislature has
ﬁnancially supported infrastructure development for SU to help accommodate the sustained
growth in enrollments. The campus has signiﬁcantly and positively impacted the visual
appearance and the economy of the city where it is located.
The number of legacy systems across campus has adequately served SU in the past, but
with the growth in enrollments, the university has also increased the number of faculty,
support staff, and services. Currently, the core applications at SU include Blackboard, Lotus
Domino, web self service, and legacy administrative applications for all other purposes.
In recent meetings with the Provost of the university, Linda and her staff have responded
to a number of concerns and problems from the Deans of academic departments on
campus, as well as a number of the support departments, such as payroll, student ﬁnancial
aid, and HR. As Linda pointed out to the Provost and Deans, universities have unique
technology challenges, such as an open technology environment 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week, and that is 365 days a year, not just when school is in session. She also mentioned that
SU has other factors that impact the effectiveness of IT services, such as their urban location

308
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
and the rapid growth of the university over the past decade. Linda reminded the Provost
that she and her staff were diligently working on a number of major technology initiatives
for SU, including network reengineering, email consolidation, telephony modernization,
helpdesk/customer care redesign, and classroom technology.
Last week, the Provost called Linda and asked her to meet him at the coffee shop in
the Student Commons—he wanted to ask her opinion about a technology issue. In the
discussion, the Provost reﬂected on the growth of SU and wondered aloud if the university
might be at a stage of maturity where they really should consider the entire technology
infrastructure of the university. He pointedly asked Linda what she thought—should they
consider purchasing an ERP?
Of course, Linda was not prepared to discuss this question in great depth and told the
Provost that she would do some research and make an appointment in a couple of weeks
to have a more meaningful discussion of the issue. When she returned to her ofﬁce, she
scheduled a meeting with her staff for the next day so that she could go over the Provost’s
request with them and then assign different parts of this research project to them. Linda
reminded everyone that they had a limited amount of time to pull the information together,
and that she needed to deliver the Executive Summary to the Provost in the next few
weeks.
Requirements:
NOTE: Some Internet research is required to properly respond to the following case
questions.
1. Search the Internet and ﬁnd ERP solutions that might be suitable for a university, such
as SU. What are the primary modules for this type of ERP? Brieﬂy describe the functions
of each module.
2. What business processes would most likely be affected if SU implemented an ERP?
3. Because this is a state university, the Board of Visitors and the State Legislature will
need to see a report on the expected costs and beneﬁts of an ERP, both tangible and
intangible. Although you don’t have any dollar amounts, identify some typical costs and
beneﬁts that Linda should include in her executive summary.
4. Should Linda use consultants? If so, what types of support should she expect from
them?
5. Search the Internet—can you ﬁnd an expected timeline for implementation of an ERP
at a university? Do you think Linda should include a possible timeline in her report to
the Provost? Why or why not?
9-18. Springsteen, Inc. (Enterprise Resource Planning System)
Springsteen, Inc. is a large furniture manufacturer, located in Asbury Park, New Jersey. They
sell to furniture wholesalers across the United States and internationally. Revenues last year
exceeded $500 million. Currently, the company has over 100 legacy information systems.
Recently Wendy Stewart, the Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO), met with Bruce Preston,
Chief Financial Ofﬁcer (CFO), and CEO Patricia Fisher, to discuss some technical problems
occurring in these systems. Patricia noted that several competitors have implemented ERP
systems and she wondered if maybe it wasn’t time for Springsteen to do the same. Wendy

CHAPTER 9 / Accounting and Enterprise Software
309
and Bruce agreed, with some reservations. Each had heard that Hershey couldn’t ship its
candy bars one Halloween because of problems with an SAP implementation. They’d heard
other horror stories as well. Bruce thought maybe a Best of Breed solution would be less
costly. Patricia suggested that they all meet with a consulting team from Warren-Williams
(WW), a global consulting ﬁrm.
The
meeting takes
place
the
next week.
Present are:
Wendy
Stewart—CIO;
Bruce Preston—CFO; Patricia Fisher—CEO; Clarence Martin—Analyst, WW; Rosalita
Jones—Analyst, WW; and Steve Johnson—Analyst, WW.
Patricia opens the meeting. Her role is to manage the discussion and look for a decision.
She talks about what she thinks an ERP might be able to do in terms of providing competitive
advantages, particularly with respect to business processes.
Bruce discusses what the dollar costs and beneﬁts of an ERP are and the expected effect
on the bottom line.
Wendy explains the architecture of an ERP and explains the technical issues associated
with implementing these systems.
Clarence tries to sell the project any way he can. He also tells the company rep-
resentatives what his ﬁrm will do for them, the expected cost of the system, and the
implementation schedule to be expected.
Rosalita explains the potential risks and beneﬁts of such a system for Springsteen,
focusing on the beneﬁts.
Steve describes the functionality of an ERP—what the various modules are, etc. He also
talks about options for extending the ERP through the Internet to integrate the supply
chain.
Requirements:
This case is designed for in-class role play. Each actor and assigned support staff have 20
minutes to prepare for the meeting. The support staff are the other class members. During
the meeting one support staff member for each role will capture the main points brought
out during the meeting, relative to that role. For example, a scribe for Wendy Stewart
would make a list of every technical issue brought out in the meeting. The meeting is
scheduled to last approximately one-half hour.
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Arnesen, S., and J. Thompson. ‘‘ERP merger mania,’’ Strategic Finance (October 2003), pp. 31–36.
Bressler, L., and M. Bressler. ‘‘How entrepreneurs choose and use accounting information systems,’’
Strategic Finance (June 2006), pp. 57–60.
Collins, J. ‘‘Small business software grows up,’’ Journal of Accountancy (March 2006), pp. 50–56.
Davis, Riccardo A. ‘‘SOX worthy?’’ Accounting Technology (June 2006), pp. 39–43.
Edwards, John. ‘‘Pay-per-view ERP,’’ CFO Magazine (February 1, 2006), p. 1.
Elikai, F., D. Inancevich, and S. Ivancevich. ‘‘Accounting software selection and user satisfaction,’’
The CPA Journal (May 2007), pp. 26–31.
Garbellotto, G. ‘‘It’s time for GL-enabled software,’’ Strategic Finance (February 2007), pp. 55–56.
Hedtke, John. ‘‘Natural selection and low-cost accounting,’’ Accounting Technology (June 2006),
pp. 34–38.

310
PART THREE / Using Accounting Information
Johnston, R. ‘‘A strategy for ﬁnding the right accounting software,’’ (September 2003), pp. 39–46.
Leibs, Scott. ‘‘Core values,’’ CFO (February 2002), pp. 53–58.
Menninger, D. ‘‘Information on demand,’’ Strategic Finance (September 2003), pp. 50–53.
Telberg, R. ‘‘Make money with basic accounting software,’’ Journal of Accountancy (January 2004),
pp. 67–71.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. c
2. d
3. c
4. b
5. a
6. d
7. c
8. b
9. b
10. a

PART FOUR
CONTROLS, SECURITY, PRIVACY, AND ETHICS
FOR ACCOUNTING INFORMATION SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 10
Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
CHAPTER 11
Introduction to Internal Control Systems
CHAPTER 12
Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
Managers have many responsibilities within an organization and one of the most important
is to safeguard the assets of the ﬁrm. This is no small task. Although people normally think
ﬁrst about safeguarding cash and other physical assets, the huge electronic data repositories
of most ﬁrms might well be their most valuable assets. Protecting this sensitive information
is critical.
Chapter 10 discusses the important topic of computer crime and fraud. This is a growing
problem that requires the attention of management at all levels in an organization. We
include examples of real world cases of computer crime in this chapter and also describe
procedures that organizations can implement to protect their assets. For example, to
prevent and detect fraudulent acts within the environment of computerized AISs, ﬁrms can
perform audit procedures, train employees to recognize symptoms of fraud, and implement
stronger security measures.
In practice, organizations with computerized AISs may encounter difﬁculties with their
internal control systems. Chapter 11 introduces the subject of internal control by analyzing
the components and control activities within organizations’ internal control systems. We
provide examples of control procedures throughout this chapter. We also introduce the
concept of enterprise-wide risk management, which must be considered ﬁrst to determine
what controls are necessary to mitigate the risks that are identiﬁed.
Chapter 12 examines various types of computer controls that are commonly used within
AISs: general controls for organizations, general controls for IT, and application controls
for transaction processing. This chapter also includes a discussion of business continuity
planning. In light of the fact that natural and man-made disasters are becoming more
frequent, ﬁrms and organizations of all sizes must now become more intentional about
developing and testing a disaster recovery plan in support of general controls.
311


Chapter 10
Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
INTRODUCTION
COMPUTER CRIME, ABUSE, AND FRAUD
Distinguishing Between Computer Crime, Computer
Abuse, and Fraud
Computer Crime Legislation
Computer Crime Statistics
The Importance of Computer Crime and Abuse to AISs
THREE EXAMPLES OF COMPUTER CRIME
Compromising Valuable Information: The TRW Credit
Data Case
Wire Fraud and Computer Hacking: Edwin Pena and
Robert Moore
Denial of Service: The 2003 Internet Crash
MITIGATING COMPUTER CRIME AND FRAUD
Enlist Top-Management Support
Increase Employee Awareness and Education
Assess Security Measures and Protect Passwords
Implement Controls
Identify Computer Criminals
Don’t Forget Physical Security
Recognize the Symptoms of Employee Fraud
Employ Forensic Accountants
ETHICAL ISSUES, PRIVACY, AND IDENTITY
THEFT
Ethical Issues and Professional Associations
Meeting the Ethical Challenges
Privacy
Company Policies with Respect to Privacy
Identity Theft
AIS AT WORK—FIGHTING COMPUTER CRIME
AT THE BANK
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Ashley Company
Mark Goodwin Resort
The Department of Taxation
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Understand why it is difﬁcult to deﬁne com-
puter crime.
2. Know why there is an absence of good data on
computer crime.
3. Be able to provide reasons why computer crime
might be growing.
4. Be familiar with several computer crime cases
and the proper controls for preventing them.
5. Be able to describe a proﬁle of computer crimi-
nals.
6. Understand the importance of ethical behavior
within the environment of computerized AISs.
313

314
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
‘‘Our personal experiences, along with a host of anecdotal evidence . . . [indicates
that occupational fraud has] a massive impact on all sectors of the economy
. . . .—approximately $994 billion in fraud losses.’’
James D. Ratley, President, Association of Certiﬁed Fraud Examiners,
2008 Report to the Nation on Occupational Fraud and Abuse,
available at: www.acfe.com/resources/publications.asp.
INTRODUCTION
The connection between AISs and computer crime and fraud is both straightforward
and important. Managers, accountants, and investors all use computerized information
to control valuable resources, help sell products, authenticate accounting transactions,
and make investment decisions. But the effectiveness of these activities can be lost if
the underlying information is wrong, incomplete, or seriously compromised. This is why
digital information is itself a valuable asset that must be protected. The more managers and
accountants know about computer crime and fraud, the better they can assess risks and
implement controls to protect organizational assets.
This chapter describes computer crime, fraud, and other irregularities that have
occurred in the past and that may also occur in the future. In the ﬁrst section, we take a
closer look at computer crime, abuse, and fraud. In the second section, we examine three
speciﬁc cases involving computer crime. The third section of this chapter identiﬁes what
organizations can do to protect themselves from computer crime and abuse. For example,
this section describes ways of recognizing potential problems and what organizations can
do to control them.
Not all computer-related offenses are illegal—some are simply unethical. Because of
the importance of ethical behavior within the environment of computerized AISs, we also
discuss the topic of computers and ethical behavior here. Finally, the last section of our
chapter addresses the importance of privacy and identity theft. The dramatic increase in
the number of individuals, companies, and organizations using the Internet draws our
attention to the question of personal privacy. What information is collected about us and
how much of it is authorized? We focus on the issue of collection and protection of this
information.
COMPUTER CRIME, ABUSE, AND FRAUD
Articles in Fortune, Business Week, The Wall Street Journal, Computerworld, Security
Focus, and WIRED all testify to the high level of public interest in computer crime, abuse,
and fraud. Although data on computer crime and fraud are limited, at least three reputable
organizations conduct surveys that help us understand the breadth and depth of these
crimes. First, the Computer Security Institute (CSI) conducts an annual survey to help
determine the scope of computer crime in the United States. The respondents to this survey
are computer security practitioners in U.S. corporations, government agencies, ﬁnancial
institutions, medical institutions, and universities.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
315
Second, KPMG, a global network of professional ﬁrms providing audit, tax, and
advisory services, conducts surveys on fraud and business integrity. Survey participants
are the business professionals who work for one of the top 2,000 companies listed in
Dun and Bradstreet. Third, the Association of Certiﬁed Fraud Examiners (ACFE)—an
international professional organization committed to detecting, deterring, and preventing
fraud and white-collar crime—conducts a biannual survey and publishes the results in its
Report to the Nation on Occupational Fraud and Abuse. The participants in this survey
are its members, each of whom provides detailed information on one occupational fraud
case he or she had personally investigated within the past two years.
Distinguishing Between Computer Crime, Computer Abuse,
and Fraud
Although the terms ‘‘computer crime’’ and ‘‘computer abuse’’ seem to describe the
same problem, there is a subtle difference between them. Computer crime involves the
manipulation of a computer or computer data, by whatever method, to dishonestly obtain
money, property, or some other advantage of value, or cause a loss. In contrast, computer
abuse means the unauthorized use of, or access to, a computer for purposes contrary
to the wishes of the computer’s owner.1 Thus, a perpetrator commits a computer crime
when he or she gains an illegal ﬁnancial advantage or causes measurable loss to a person,
company, or organization, and computer abusers are mischievous pests with such motives
as ‘‘revenge’’ or ‘‘challenge.’’
Case-in-Point 10.1
In September 2003, armed with an arrest warrant, the FBI searched
for Adrian Lamo. The 22-year old had become well-known for exposing gaping security holes
at large corporations and then voluntarily helping the companies ﬁx the vulnerabilities he
exploited. At the New York Times site, Lamo obtained access to the names and Social Security
numbers of employees, as well as conﬁdential information on customers and business opera-
tions at the Times. Lamo told the Times of their vulnerability through a SecurityFocus reporter.
Unfortunately for Lamo, the New York Times was not grateful and initiated an investigation.2
The term ‘‘computer crime’’ is really a misnomer because computers do not commit
crimes—people do. Figure 10-1 describes several cases that might qualify as computer
crimes or abuses. In the ﬁrst case, the primary objective was to disrupt a computer
network—not personal gain. The second case is neither a computer crime nor an abuse.
Rather, ‘‘misrepresentation’’ would probably more accurately describe the problem. In the
third case, a computer screen was damaged but the loss would probably not be a criminal
charge. In the fourth case, the attempt to sell credit information would be a criminal
offense. In the ﬁfth case, no computer was used, so it is difﬁcult to call this a ‘‘computer
crime.’’ Finally, although the sixth case involved a computer and resulted in personal gain,
it is perhaps more accurate to describe this as ‘‘fraud.’’
Another example of a computer offense that could be either a crime or an abuse is
a logic bomb. This is a computer program that remains dormant until some speciﬁed
circumstance or date triggers the program to action. Once ‘‘detonated,’’ a logic bomb
program sabotages a system by destroying data and/or disrupting computer operations.
Case-in-Point 10.2
Donald Burleson was a disgruntled computer programmer who set
off a logic bomb that erased 168,000 sales commission records at his former company.
1Vogon International website: www.vogon-international.co.uk.
2Kevin Poulsen, Security Focus, September 2003.

316
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
1. A graduate student infected a computer network with a virus that eventually disrupted over 10,000
separate systems.
2. A company accused a computer-equipment vendor of fraudulently representing the capabilities of
a computer system, charging that the full system was never delivered and that the software was
inadequate.
3. In a ﬁt of resentment, a keyboard operator shattered an LCD screen with her high-heeled shoe.
4. Some employees of a credit bureau sent notices to some of the individuals listed as bad risks in its
ﬁles. For a fee, the employees would withhold the damaging information, thereby enhancing the credit
worthiness of the applicants.
5. A computer dating service was sued because referrals for dates were few and inappropriate. The owner
eventually admitted that no computer was used to match dates, even though the use of a computer was
advertised.
6. A programmer changed a dividends-payment program to reduce the dividends of selected stock-holders,
and to issue a check to himself for the sum of the reductions—$56,000.
FIGURE 10-1
Examples of computer crimes.
Consequently, company paychecks were held up for a month. He embedded the logic bomb
in a legitimate program, which he designed to go off periodically to erase still more records.
But a fellow programmer who was testing a new employee bonus system discovered the bomb
before it could execute again. The company’s computers were shut down for two days while
the bomb was located and diffused.
The type of computer crime with which most professional accountants are familiar
is ﬁnancial fraud. Statement on Auditing Standards No. 99 identiﬁes two types of such
fraud: (1) fraudulent ﬁnancial reporting and (2) misappropriation of assets.3 Fraudulent
ﬁnancial reporting (‘‘cooking the books’’) happens when corporate ofﬁcials such as
senior-ranking executives intentionally falsify accounting records to mislead analysts,
creditors, or investors. As a result, the annual ﬁnancial statements do not fairly represent
the true ﬁnancial condition of the ﬁrm. The corporate scandals discussed in Chapter 1 are
examples of this type of fraud.
Misappropriation of assets is usually committed by employees within an organization,
although individuals can collude with outside conspirators to perform such acts as well.
The ACFE calls this type of crime occupational fraud and has developed a ‘‘fraud tree’’ to
describe the many ways that employees can misappropriate assets from an organization.
Examples (Figure 10-2) include skimming, larceny, payroll tampering, and check tampering.
Most of these activities directly involve accounting information systems.
Case-in-Point 10.3
Computer programmers use the salami technique to steal small
amounts of money from many accounts over time. In one instance, the frustrated chief
accountant for a California produce grower systematically increased each of the company’s
production costs by a fraction of a percent, which he subsequently raised over time. Because
all business expenses were rising during the same period, no single account or expense called
attention to the fraud, and the accountant was able to enter these small amounts into the
accounts of dummy customers, which he then pocketed. He was eventually caught when an
alert bank teller brought a check to her manager’s attention that the accountant tried to cash
because she did not recognize the payee’s name on it.
3Statement on Auditing Standards (SAS) No. 99, Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit (AICPA
2003).

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
317
Asset Class
Type of Fraud
Example
Cash
Larceny
Direct theft or removal from bank deposit
Skimming
Non-reporting or under-reporting of sales
Write-offs of legitimate receivables as bad debts
Lapping schemes
Fraudulent disbursements
Payments to ghost companies or employees
Payments for ﬁctitious goods or services
Multiple payments for the same bill
Forged checks
Altered payee on legitimate check
False refunds
Inventory and all
other assets
Misuse
Use of corporate limousine or jet for personal travel
Larceny
Theft of raw materials or ﬁnished goods
Fictitious inventory adjustments
Non-reporting or under-reporting of received goods
FIGURE 10-2
Examples of asset misappropriation.
Computer Crime Legislation
A strict deﬁnition of computer crime must be found in the law. Such deﬁnitions are
important because they determine what law enforcement ofﬁcials can prosecute as well
as how statistics on such crimes are accumulated. Both federal and state statutes govern
computer usage.
Federal Legislation.
Figure 10-3 lists some important federal legislation governing
activities involving computers. Of these acts, the most important is probably the Computer
Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 (CFAA), which was amended in 1994 and 1996. This act
deﬁnes computer fraud as any illegal act for which knowledge of computer technology
is essential for its perpetration, investigation, or prosecution. The following paragraphs
identify the fraudulent acts found in the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act and give examples
of each type of crime.
1. Unauthorized Theft, Use, Access, Modiﬁcation, Copying, or Destruction of
Software or Data. The PC manager at a King Soopers supermarket in Colorado was
called repeatedly to correct computer errors that were thought to be responsible for
a large number of sales voids and other accounting errors. Eventually, the company
discovered that this manager was in fact the cause of these problems. Over the course
of ﬁve or more years, ofﬁcials estimate that he and two head clerks used a number
of simple methods to steal more than $2 million from the company—for example, by
voiding sales transactions and pocketing the customers’ cash payments.
2. Theft of Money by Altering Computer Records or the Theft of Computer
Time. To commit an inventory fraud, several employees at an east coast railroad
entered data into their company’s computer system to show that more than 200 railroad
cars were scrapped or destroyed. These employees then removed the cars from the
railroad system, repainted them, and sold them.

318
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970. This act requires that an individual be informed why he or she is denied
credit. The act also entitles the individual to challenge information maintained by the credit-rating
company and to add information if desired. Seven years after this law was put into effect, the annual
number of complaints ﬁled under it exceeded 200,000.
Freedom of Information Act of 1970. This is a federal ‘‘sunshine law’’ guaranteeing individuals the right to
see any information gathered about them by federal agencies.
Federal Privacy Act of 1974. This act goes further than the Freedom of Information Act of 1970 by
requiring that individuals be able to correct federal information about themselves, by requiring that
agency information not be used for alternate purposes without the individual’s consent, and by making
the collecting agency responsible for the accuracy and use of the information. Under this act, an
individual may ask a federal judge to order the correction of errors if the federal agency does not do so.
Small Business Computer Security and Education Act of 1984. This act created an educational council
that meets annually to advise the Small Business Administration on a variety of computer crime and
security issues affecting small businesses.
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986. This act makes it a federal crime to intentionally access a
computer for such purposes as (1) obtaining top-secret military information, personal ﬁnancial or credit
information; (2) committing a fraud; or (3) altering or destroying federal information.
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (1996 amendment). This act prohibits unauthorized access to a
protected computer, and illegal possession of stolen ‘‘access devices,’’ which includes passwords and
credit card numbers.
Computer Security Act of 1987. This act requires more than 550 federal agencies to develop computer
security plans for each computer system that processes sensitive information. The plans are reviewed by
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
USA Patriot Act of 2001. This act gives federal authorities much wider latitude in monitoring Internet usage
and expands the way such data is shared among different agencies. However, a judge must oversee the
FBI’s use of an email wiretap and the FBI must disclose what was collected, by whom, and who had
access to the information that was collected.
Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2002. This act permits the United States Sentencing Commission to
review, and if appropriate, amend guidelines and policy statements applicable to persons convicted of a
computer crime to reﬂect the serious nature of (1) the growing incidence of computer crimes, (2) the need
for an effective deterrent, and (3) appropriate punishment to help prevent such offenses.
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003. This act requires unsolicited commercial email messages to be labeled, to include
opt-out instructions, and to include the sender’s physical address. It prohibits the use of deceptive
subject lines and false headers in messages. This law took effect on January 1, 2004.
FIGURE 10-3
Federal legislation affecting the use of computers.
3. Intent to Illegally Obtain Information or Tangible Property Through the Use
of Computers. One case of industrial espionage involved Reuters Analytics, whose
employees were accused of breaking into the computers of their competitor, Bloomberg,
and stealing lines of programming code. These instructions were supposedly used in
software that provides ﬁnancial institutions with the capability to analyze historical data
on the stock market.
4. Use or the Conspiracy to Use Computer Resources to Commit a Felony. Paul
Sjiem-Fat used desktop publishing technology to perpetrate one of the ﬁrst cases of
computer forgery. Sjiem-Fat created bogus cashier’s checks and used these checks
to buy computer equipment, which he subsequently sold in the Caribbean. He was
caught while trying to steal $20,000 from the Bank of Boston. The bank called in the
Secret Service, which raided his apartment and found nine bogus checks totaling almost
$150,000. Sjiem-Fat was prosecuted and sent to prison.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
319
5. Theft, Vandalism, or Destruction of Computer Hardware. A disgruntled tax
payer became enraged over his tax bill. He was arrested for shooting at an IRS computer
through an open window of the building.
6. Trafﬁcking in Passwords or Other Login Information for Accessing a Com-
puter. Two former software developers of Interactive Connection (now known as
Screaming Media) were arrested for breaking into Interactive’s computer system one
night. They allegedly stayed on the system for about four hours and copied proprietary
ﬁles and software.
7. Extortion that Uses a Computer System as a Target. A disgruntled employee of
a European company removed all of the company’s tape ﬁles from the computer room.
He then drove to an off-site storage location and demanded half a million dollars for their
return. He was arrested while trying to exchange the data ﬁles for the ransom money.
State Legislation.
Every state now has at least one computer crime law. Most of the
laws have provisions that (1) deﬁne computer terms (many of which vary from state to
state), (2) deﬁne some acts as misdemeanors (minor crimes), and (3) declare other acts
as felonies (major crimes). These laws also require willful intent for convictions. Thus,
words like maliciously, intentionally, or recklessly often appear in the wording of the
computer-crime laws, and willful intent must be established for a successful prosecution.
The National Center for Computer Crime Data (NCCCD), a collector of computer-crime
statistics, reports that 77% of computer cases brought to state courts end in guilty pleas
and that another 8% of the defendants are found guilty at trials.
Computer Crime Statistics
No one really knows how much is lost each year as the result of computer crime and abuse.
One reason for this is the fact that a large proportion of computer crime and abuse takes
place in private companies, where it is handled as an internal matter. We have no laws that
require organizations to report computer offenses. According to the 2005 Computer Crime
and Security Survey, fewer than 40% of the respondents who had experienced computer
intrusions in the past 12 months reported them. The principal reason managers gave for not
reporting intrusions was negative publicity that might negatively impact their stock price
or image (43%), and the next most important reason was their fear that competitors would
use the information to advantage (33%). The 2008 ACFE Report to the Nation suggests
that the number of occupational fraud cases referred to law enforcement is somewhat
higher—almost 69%.4
The most important reason we know so little about computer offenses is because we
believe that most of it is not discovered. Recently, for example, the FBI estimated that only
1% of all computer crime is detected. Other estimates of computer crime detection are
between 5–20%. We mostly catch computer criminals through luck, chance, or accident.
This is why experts believe the computer crime that is detected is only the tip of the iceberg.
Despite our lack of complete statistics, there are several reasons why we believe
computer crime is growing. One reason is the exponential growth in the use of computer
resources—e.g., microcomputers, computer networks, and the Internet. As more people
become knowledgeable about how to use computers, more people are in a position to
compromise computer systems.
4Source: http://www.acfe.com/fraud/report.

320
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Another reason why we believe computer crime is growing is because of continuing
lax security. There are millions of microcomputer users in the world, but many of them
are not aware of, or conscientious about, computer security. Then, too, some users are dis-
honest and have a new tool with which to commit frauds. Lastly, many websites now give
step-by-step instructions on how to perpetrate computer crimes. For example, an Internet
search found more than 17,000 matches for ‘‘denial of service,’’ and there are now thou-
sands of websites that detail how to break into computer systems or disable web servers.
Case-in-Point 10.4
Dan Farmer, who wrote SATAN (a network security testing tool),
tested 2,200 high-proﬁle websites at governmental institutions, banks, newspapers, and so
forth. Only three of these websites detected his probes and contacted him to ﬁnd out what he
was trying to do. His conclusion: two out of every three websites have serious vulnerabilities
and most of the control procedures at these sites are ineffective.5
The FBI, in partnership with the National White Collar Crime Center, established the
Internet Fraud Complaint Center (IFCC) in May 2000 to provide cyber crime victims a
point of contact for reporting computer crime and abuses. The IFCC changed its name in
December 2003 to the Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3—see www.ic3.gov) to reﬂect
the broad nature of complaints that it handles, including international money laundering,
online extortion, intellectual property theft, identity theft, online scams, and computer
intrusions. In 2008, almost 275,300 online fraud complaints were reported, compared to
only 75,000 in 2002. The majority of the complaints in 2008 concerned non-delivered
merchandise purchased on the Internet (32.9% of complaints), followed by auction fraud
(25.5% of complaints).6
The Importance of Computer Crime and Abuse to AISs
The absence of good computer-crime statistics does not detract from the importance of
computer crime and abuse on accounting information systems. One reason for this is
because AISs help control ﬁnancial resources and thus are often the favored targets of
external crooks or dishonest employees. Also, as noted previously, AISs are prized targets
for disgruntled employees seeking to compromise computer systems for revenge. A third
reason is because accountants are responsible for designing, selecting, or implementing
the control procedures that protect AISs.
Finally, computer crime is important because both the government and the investing
public can be misled if such crime compromises the accuracy and completeness of corpo-
rate ﬁnancial statements. Using a computer, fraud perpetrators are able to steal more, in
much less time, with much less effort, and leave little or no evidence. Consequently, com-
puter fraud is typically much more difﬁcult to detect than other types of fraud. At any point in
time, the FBI is investigating approximately 800 separate incidents of economic espionage.
Computer crime and abuse are also signiﬁcant because of the large proportion of ﬁrms
that suffer million-dollar losses due to frauds, computer viruses, unauthorized access, and
denial of service attacks. As stated in the opening quote of this chapter, the 2008 ACFE
Report to the Nation estimates that the annual total losses from occupational fraud are
almost $1 trillion (not all of which is computer-based). The 2008 annual survey of the
Computer Security Institute estimates that the average cost to target organizations from a
computer-abuse incident is about $500,000—an amount whose ﬁnancial impact can range
from ‘‘substantial’’ to ‘‘catastrophic’’ to the victim.
5Source: http://www.g4tv.com/techtvvault/features/3392/Interview SATANs Dan Farmer.html.
6Source: http://www.ic3.gov/media/annualreports.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
321
THREE EXAMPLES OF COMPUTER CRIME
Computer crime is perhaps best understood by studying selected cases. As one reads
the fascinating accounts of different computer crimes, a pattern begins to emerge. One
type of crime depends mostly on the falsiﬁcation of input data, while others depend on
unauthorized access to computerized ﬁles. This section of the chapter examines three
speciﬁc cases of computer crime.
Compromising Valuable Information: The TRW Credit Data Case
A major class of computer crime involves illegal access to, or misuse of, the information
stored in an AIS, and is thus valuable-information computer crime. In the TRW Credit Data
case, the valuable information involved was computerized credit data. TRW (now called
Experian) was one of several large credit-rating companies in the United States. When the
fraud was discovered, the company was collecting and disseminating credit information
on approximately 50 million individuals. Clients of TRW included banks, retail stores, and
such credit-conscious concerns as Diner’s Club, American Express, MasterCard, Visa, Sears,
and several leasing establishments.
TRW advised its clients of bad credit risks on the basis of the information maintained
in its databases. However, that information could be changed. The fraud began when six
company employees, including a key TRW clerk in the consumer relations department,
realized this fact and began selling good credit to individuals with bad credit ratings. The
names and addresses of the bad credit risks were already on ﬁle. It merely remained to
contact these individuals and inform them of a newfound method of altering their records.
Accordingly, the perpetrators approached individuals with bad credit ratings and offered
them a clean bill of health in return for a ‘‘management fee.’’
Those people who decided to buy good credit ratings paid TRW employees ‘‘under the
table,’’ and the clerk in the consumer relations department then inserted into TRW’s credit
ﬁles whatever false information was required to reverse the individual’s bad credit rating.
In some cases, this required deleting unfavorable information that was already stored in the
individual’s credit record. In others, it required adding favorable information. Fees for such
services varied from a few hundred dollars to $1,500 per individual. Ironically, the TRW
clerk who ultimately input the false information to the computer system received only $50
for each altered record. However, the losses resulting from these activities were not so
inconsequential. Independent estimates have placed this ﬁgure at close to $1 million.
The principal victims of the fraud were TRW’s clients who acted on credit information
that ultimately turned out to be inaccurate. Exactly how many ﬁle records were altered
is difﬁcult to say. Lawyers for the prosecution documented 16 known cases of altered
ﬁle records, but had reason to believe the number exceeded 100 cases. Paradoxically, the
prosecution had difﬁculty acquiring testimonies because the buyers of good credit standing
as well as the TRW sellers were technically in violation of the law by conspiring to falsify
credit-rating information.
Analysis.
Data diddling means changing data before, during, or after they are entered
into a computer system. The change can delete, alter, or add important system data,
especially the data stored in corporate databases. This is a problem because most such data
are (1) proprietary, (2) may give a ﬁrm a competitive advantage, and (3) are sometimes
an organization’s most valuable asset (think eBay, for example). Finally, because the data

322
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
processing tasks in most computerized AIS job streams are automated, the data that are
input manually to a system are particularly vulnerable to compromise.
There have been many cases of computer crime involving the alteration of corporate
data. In one instance, a clerk for a Denver brokerage altered a transaction to record 1,700
shares of Loren Industries stock worth about $2,500, as shares in Long Island Lighting
worth more than $25,000. In a second case, a ring of travel agents in California received
prison sentences for compromising an American Airlines reservations system and stealing
$1.3 million worth of frequent-ﬂier tickets.
The TRW case involves two key issues: (1) the propriety of the input information used
in updating a speciﬁc AIS, and (2) the protection afforded both consumers and users in the
accuracy and use of credit information that is gathered by a private company. With regard
to the ﬁrst point, it is clear that the fraud was successful only because the perpetrators were
able to enter false information into the computer system. This observation points to the
importance of control procedures (e.g., the authorization and validation of credit changes)
that safeguard the accuracy and completeness of ﬁle information. As with many cases of
computer crime, the six TRW employees involved in the fraud were caught only by chance:
an individual approached with an offer to buy a good credit rating for $600 became angry
and called the FBI. Later, the TRW clerk in the consumer relations department decided to
turn state’s evidence.
The second point involving the protection of the consumer and user of credit
information encompasses a much larger issue. In 1970, Congress passed the Fair Credit
Reporting Act, which requires that an individual be told why he or she is denied credit.
The consumer also has the right to contest the information maintained by the credit-rating
company, although there is clearly a vast difference between the right to challenge, versus
the right to change, credit information.
Directly after the Fair Credit Reporting Act went into effect, TRW reported consumer
inquiries increased a hundred fold, and at the time the fraud was detected, approximately
200,000 consumers annually were complaining about their credit ratings. The fact that, by
TRW’s own admission, fully one third of these inquiries resulted in a ﬁle change or update
is unsettling. Moreover, it is not known how much more information collected by TRW is
still inaccurate but simply not challenged—for example, because an individual is not aware
of an inaccuracy, or because the consumer does not know his or her rights under the law.
Wire Fraud and Computer Hacking: Edwin Pena and Robert Moore7
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) is a technology that allows you to make telephone
calls using a broadband Internet connection instead of a regular telephone line. This
technology converts your voice signal into digital ones that travel over the Internet and are
then converted back to audio ones at the receiver’s end.
Edwin Pena, who owned two Florida VoIP wholesale companies, was arrested on June
7, 2006 for hacking into other providers’ networks, routing his customers’ calls onto those
platforms, billing those companies, and then pocketing the proceeds. He was charged with
one count of wire fraud and one count of computer hacking. The government claimed
that Pena embezzled over $1 million from this scheme, which he used to purchase real
estate, cars, and a 40-foot boat. To avoid attention, Pena apparently purchased these items
in someone else’s name.
7Source: http://www.technologynewsdaily.com/node/3252.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
323
The federal government also ﬁled a criminal complaint against Robert Moore of
Spokane, Washington, the professional hacker who penetrated the networks for Pena.
However, Moore admitted his part in the fraud, disclosing that Pena paid him $20,000
for his work. Apparently, Moore scanned a lot of other companies’ computer networks
searching for vulnerable network ports with which to route calls. For instance, he made
over 6 million scans of just AT&T ports between June and October of 2005. After Moore
obtained proprietary codes (known as preﬁxes), he and Pena allegedly ﬂooded providers
with test calls until they were able to match up preﬁxes. Once they matched preﬁxes, Pena
programmed the networks of other companies to use his preﬁx to route his customers’ calls.
Analysis.
Hacking is a widespread problem. This is due, in part, to the fact that many
computer applications now run on local and wide area networks, where computer ﬁles
become accessible to unauthorized users. Then, too, the Internet enables users to log onto
computers from remote sites, again increasing vulnerability to hacking.
Computer hacking is common in universities, where students often view the activity
as a harmless game of ‘‘beating the system.’’ Recently, for example, a group of student
hackers called the ‘‘Legion of Doom’’ stole data from the BellSouth Telephone Company
and disrupted its 911 emergency phone system just to see if they could do it. Educational
institutions view hacking as a particularly perplexing problem because the need for tight
system security conﬂicts with the objective of providing easy and simple computer access
to bona ﬁde users.
Many hackers brag that they can compromise any type of ﬁle information once they
have successfully logged into a computer system. One way they achieve this is to elevate
their system status to that of a ‘‘privileged user’’ or ‘‘network manager,’’ which is a
security level that gains the hackers access to password ﬁles, system control data, and
other high-security information. These activities are thwarted by using system programming
routines that test for, and deny, such bootstrapping and that also immediately communicate
such attempts to computer supervisors as possible security violations.
Case-in-Point 10.5
When hackers invaded NDA (a consulting ﬁrm in Woburn, Mas-
sachusetts), the hackers installed a program that enabled them to record users’ passwords
and access the network freely. The invaders copied ﬁles containing ID codes for cellular
phones, gathered sensitive information on NDA’s business customers, and then launched
similar attacks on those companies.8
The maximum penalty for wire fraud is 20 years in prison and a $250,000 ﬁne, and
the penalty for computer hacking is a maximum of 5 years in prison and a $250,000
ﬁne. Provisions of the USA Patriot Act of 2001 may help discourage computer hacking
by helping federal authorities locate and prosecute hackers. However, the most effective
deterrents are likely to be preventive rather than punitive. One helpful tactic is user
education—i.e., making potential hackers aware of the ethics of computer usage and the
inconvenience, lost time, and costs incurred by victim organizations. Another safeguard
is to require user passwords, which limit computer access to bona ﬁde users. But
passwords are not foolproof mechanisms, because at present, computers cannot distinguish
between authorized employees using their own passwords and unauthorized users entering
compromised passwords. Thus, until bio-authorizations such as retina or ﬁngerprint
scanners or other cost-effective intrusion detection systems replace them, protecting
passwords is paramount. We will review some methods for this in the next section of the
chapter.
8Source: http://ﬁndarticles.com/p/articles/mi m1154/is n11 v85/ai 19969629.

324
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Denial of Service: The 2003 Internet Crash9
A number of computer viruses and computer worms have gained media attention, but
none have been as swift or as ‘‘deadly’’ as the Slammer worm. In 2003, this computer
worm nearly shut down the Internet in less than 15 minutes. Internet service providers
(ISPs) on the east coast of the United States were the ﬁrst to recognize the problem, but
the full impact of this computer worm quickly spread to other countries.
How did this happen? The Slammer worm took advantage of a weakness in Microsoft’s
SQL Server 2000 software—a weakness that allowed applications to automatically ﬁnd
the right database. As a result, just after midnight on January 25, 2003, over 55 million
meaningless database server requests were crossing the globe. The Slammer worm was
able to spread hundreds of times faster than any prior worm attack. The unfortunate part
is that the total cost to ﬁx the problem was estimated at over $1 billion, and we still do not
know who did it or when it might happen again.
Analysis.
Denial of service (DOS) attacks take many forms, including (1) computer
viruses, (2) computer worms, or (3) distributed systems. A computer virus is an attachment
to other ﬁles or programs that destroys computer ﬁles, disrupts operating system activities,
or damages program software. A computer worm is a separate entity (often considered a
type of virus program) that makes working replicas of itself to infect more systems and/or
to ﬂood computer networks with excessive email trafﬁc.10 As suggested by Figure 10-4,
‘‘viruses’’ continue to be the number one security problem for modern organizations. A
recent survey of 300 private and public computer sites conducted by the International
Computer Security Association, in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, found viruses in more than 3% of
the survey sites.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Viruses
Insider abuse
Laptop theft
Unauthorized access
Denial of service
Instant messaging abuse
Bots
Theft/loss of customer data
Abuse of wireless network
System penetration
Financial fraud
Misuse of web application
Theft of proprietary information
Password sniffing
DNS attacks
Website defacement
Telecom fraud
Sabotage
Type of attack
Percent of respondents
FIGURE 10-4
Percentage of respondents experiencing common types of computer crime and
abuse. (Source: 2008 CSI Survey).
9Source: P. Boutin, WIRED, Issue 11.07, July 2003 (www.wired.com).
10Source: J. Elizabeth Strohm, The America’s Intelligence Wire, August 25, 2003.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
325
Computer worms do not actually destroy data, but merely replicate themselves
repeatedly until the user runs out of internal memory or disk space. Unfortunately, the
Internet facilitates the spread of virus and worm programs from one system to another,
making them the most popular form of computer crime or abuse. Finally with distributed
denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks, a single virus or worm program manages to enlist
the aid of innocent ‘‘zombie computers’’ which then send email messages to, or request
services from, the target system. The barrage of incoming mail or service requests then
overwhelms the target system, typically requiring its owners to disable it.
Most computer viruses reside on secondary storage media, where they hide until
ﬁnding an opportunity to execute. There are several variations of these viruses. Boot-sector
viruses hide in the boot sectors of a disk, where the operating system accesses them every
time it accesses the disk itself. Trojan horse programs reside in legitimate copies of
computer programs, for example, spreadsheet programs. Logic bomb programs are similar
to Trojan horse programs, except that they remain dormant until the computer system
encounters a speciﬁc condition, such as a particular day of the year or a particular Social
Security number in a ﬁle. (Trojan horse and logic bomb programs are termed ‘‘programs’’
rather than ‘‘viruses’’ because they sometimes contain code to defraud users rather than
viruses that destroy or disrupt computer resources.)
The Internet is a perfect environment for computer viruses because so many people
use it for email, conducting research, and downloading ﬁles or software. For example, a
virus might be stored in a java applet (i.e., a small program that is stored in a web page
and designed to run by web browser software). Friendly applets animate web pages, allow
users to play games, or perform processing tasks. But unfriendly applets contain viruses
that can infect other computers and cause damage.
Once a programmer stores a computer virus program on the ﬁle server of a computer
network, the program can affect thousands of other computers or disks before it is detected
and eradicated. Estimating the business costs of recovering from a virus infection is difﬁcult.
The costs can be small—for example, limited to the inconveniences of reformatting a hard
disk and reloading a few software programs. On the other hand, some experts estimate
such costs in the billions of dollars annually.
There are a number of ways to thwart computer viruses. These include, but are not
limited to: (1) ﬁrewalls, which limit external access to company computers, (2) anti-virus
software, and (3) anti-virus control procedures. Anti-virus software are computer pro-
grams that scan computer inputs for virus-like coding, identify active viruses that are
already lodged in computer systems, clean computer systems already infected, or perform
some combination of these activities. Recent versions of Microsoft’s Windows operating
system incorporate software of this type. Generally speaking, however, anti-virus programs
provide less than complete protection because misguided individuals continuously write
new, more powerful viruses that can avoid current detection schemes. Even worse, some
older anti-virus programs have themselves contained virus routines.
Perhaps one of the most vulnerable areas for many ﬁrms and universities is email.
Consider the number of emails you send and receive every day, and then multiply that
by the number of people at your university—the risk of passing a virus around is very
high. Unfortunately, viruses can hide in emails from friends and colleagues because their
computer systems have been infected. To help mitigate this problem, your university most
likely uses an anti-spam software solution in addition to anti-virus software.
For many microcomputer users, anti-virus control procedures are often better safe-
guards. These include: (1) buying shrink-wrapped software from reputable sources, (2)
avoiding illegal software copying, (3) not downloading suspicious Internet ﬁles, (4) deleting
email messages from unknown sources before opening them, and (5) maintaining complete
backup ﬁles in the event you must rebuild your system from scratch. Additional safeguards

326
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
include loading operating systems only from your own disks, being wary of public-domain
software available on Internet bulletin boards, and being suspicious of unusual activity on
your computer system—for example, spontaneous disk writing that you did not initiate.
In organizational settings, effective control procedures against computer viruses
include educating users about viruses and encouraging computer users to follow the virus
prevention and detection techniques just discussed. Additional control procedures include
(1) adopting policies that discourage the free exchange of computer disks or externally
acquired computer programs, (2) requiring strong passwords that limit unauthorized access
to computing resources, and (3) using anti-virus ﬁlters on local and wide-area networks.
MITIGATING COMPUTER CRIME AND FRAUD
What can organizations do to protect themselves against computer abuse? Experts note
that, for all their intricacy and mystique, we can protect computer systems from crimes,
abuses, and fraud just as well as we can manual systems, and sometimes better. For
example, computers can be programmed to automatically search for anomalies and to
print exception conditions on control reports. These computerized monitoring systems
are often superior to manual surveillance methods because they are automatic and can
screen 100%, instead of merely a sample, of the target population data. An illustration
is the New York Stock Exchange, which now uses an Integrated Computer-Assisted
Surveillance System (ICASS) to search for insider trading activities. This section of the
chapter discusses several methods for thwarting computer crimes, abuses, and fraud.
Enlist Top-Management Support
Most experts agree that computer security begins with top management and security poli-
cies. Without such policies, for example, organizations can only expect limited employee
(1) compliance with security procedures, (2) sensitivity to potential problems, or (3)
awareness of why computer abuse is important. Unfortunately, many top managers are
not fully aware of the dangers of computer crime, abuse, and fraud, and therefore are not
sufﬁciently concerned about this type of offense. Computer safeguards are only effective
if management takes computer crime seriously and chooses to ﬁnancially support and
enforce control procedures to stop, or at least minimize, computer crimes. The complaint
of many mid-level security managers is that they must justify their funding requests for
investments in appropriate levels of computer security for a ﬁrm. Thus, the importance
management places on computer safeguards might be measured by the level of funding
allocated to IT security.
Increase Employee Awareness and Education
Ultimately, controlling computer crime means controlling people. But which people? The
idea that computer crimes are ‘‘outside jobs’’ is a myth. With the exception of hackers,
most computer abusers are the employees of the same companies at which the crimes take
place. Many retail ﬁrms have clear prosecution policies regarding shoplifting. In contrast,
prosecution policies associated with other types of employee fraud are notable for their
absence in most organizations. Yet, the evidence suggests that prosecuting computer
crimes may be one of the most effective restraints on computer crime.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
327
In fairness, employees cannot be expected to automatically understand the problems or
ramiﬁcations of computer crime. Thus, another dimension of preventing computer crime is
employee education. Informing employees of the signiﬁcance of computer crime and abuse,
the amount it costs, and the work disruption it creates helps employees understand why
computer offenses are serious matters. Studies suggest that informal discussions, periodic
departmental memos, and formal guidelines are among the most popular educational
tools for informing employees about computer crime and abuse. Requiring new hires to
sign security statements indicating that they have received, read, and understand policy
statements can also help.
According to the 2005–2006 KPMG Integrity Survey,11 companies with comprehensive
ethics and compliance programs have more favorable results across the board than
companies without such programs. For example, organizations with these programs
reported fewer observations of misconduct and higher levels of employee conﬁdence
in management’s integrity. These programs were also cited as mitigating a number of
conditions that might foster misconduct, such as: (1) pressure to do whatever it takes to
meet targets, (2) belief that policies and procedures are easy to bypass or override, and (3)
belief that rewards are based on results, regardless of the method used.
One ﬁnal idea regarding employee conduct comes from the 2008 Association of
Certiﬁed Fraud Examiners Report to the Nation. This survey revealed that almost half of
all the fraud discussed in the report was ﬁrst discovered by tips from fellow employees,
customers, or vendors. Providing formal channels through which individuals can inform
management of suspect activity—for example, through company websites—as well as
rewarding those who provide such information, seem to be two of the most effective
things that organizations can do to curb occupational fraud and embezzlement.
Assess Security Measures and Protect Passwords
Common sense dictates that organizations should regularly survey their computer security
measures and assess potential areas of vulnerability. Nearly all organizations use ﬁrewalls,
anti-virus software, and access controls, but many are not as conscientious about performing
periodic security reviews. An important security process that organizations should consider
is evaluating employee practices and educating users to protect their own computers.
Figure 10-5 provides a list of ten recommended steps for safeguarding personal computers.
Protecting passwords is an important dimension of computer security because they are
the ‘‘keys to the kingdom’’ (of valuable corporate data). Hackers use a variety of tactics to
steal such passwords, including (1) posing as a legitimate user and ‘‘borrowing’’ them from
unsuspecting employees, (2) creating phishing websites that pose as surveys that ask users
to input their passwords for security purposes, or (3) using simulation programs that try all
the words in a standard dictionary as potential passwords. To thwart these strategies, users
should (1) be trained to not ‘‘loan’’ their passwords to others or tape them to their monitors,
(2) understand that most businesses will not ask for their passwords on a web screen,
and (3) use strong passwords—i.e., passwords that are difﬁcult to guess. Examples are
long passwords (e.g., 20 characters), nonsense words (e.g., non-English words not found
in dictionaries) or words with embedded capitals or random numbers. Another control is
to require employees to change their passwords periodically. A third control is to install
password-checking software in ﬁle servers that test passwords for such requirements.
11KPMG Forensic Integrity Survey 2005–2006, http://www.us.kpmg.com/news/index.asp?cid = 2051.

328
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
1. Keep your ﬁrewall turned on. Firewalls help protect your computer from hackers who might try
to gain access to it, delete information, or steal passwords or other sensitive information.
2. Install or update your anti-virus software. Anti-virus software helps protect your computer from
such malicious code as viruses or worms, and can be set to update automatically.
3. Install or update your anti-spyware technology. Spyware is just that—software that is secretly
installed on your computer and that allows others to observe your activities on it. Inexpensive
anti-spyware software is readily available for download on the Internet or at local computer stores.
4. Keep your operating system up to date. Software developers regularly update their operating
systems to stay current with technology requirements and ﬁx security holes.
5. Do not provide personal information online. Hackers create phishing websites to lure visitors
into providing their personal information and therefore steal their identity. Most companies will not
ask you to provide your login name, password, account number, or similar personal information
online.
6. Be careful what you download. Downloading email attachments can thwart even the most
vigilant anti-virus software. Never open an email attachment from someone you don’t know, and
be wary of forwarded attachments from anyone.
7. Turn off your computer at night. Although it’s nice to always have your computer ready for
action, the downside of ‘‘always on’’ is that it makes it more susceptible to hacker attacks. The
safest computer is one that isn’t on.
8. Create backups often. Computers are not infallible, and all hard disk drives eventually fail.
Creating duplicate copies of your important ﬁles and storing them offsite enables you to easily
recover from such problems. The authors recommend the automated backup services of a cloud
service provider, as discussed in Chapter 2.
9. Use surge protectors. Power surges can ‘‘fry’’ your computer, but even the least-expensive
surge protector can guard against most such events.
10. Protect passwords. Many websites and computer systems now require logon names and
passwords, but writing them on sticky notes stuck to your computer’s monitor or keyboard is not
a good idea. Try to ﬁnd safer places to store the ones you can’t commit to memory.
FIGURE 10-5
Ten simple steps to safer personal computers.
Hackers often use a tactic called social engineering to gain access to passwords
(i.e., posing as bona ﬁde employees and convincing network administrators to give them
passwords over the phone). In general, the practice of giving passwords to unknown
employees over the telephone compromises standard security procedures, and therefore
should not be allowed.
Two additional password safeguards are lock-out systems and dialback systems.
Lock-out systems disconnect telephone users after a set number of unsuccessful login
attempts, thereby thwarting microcomputer users from using dictionary programs. Simi-
larly, dialback systems ﬁrst disconnect all login users but reconnect legitimate users after
checking their passwords against lists of bona ﬁde user codes. Dialback systems may be even
more effective than lock-out systems because only authorized users at already-recognized
stations are reconnected. Dialback security is also a useful strategy against social engineer-
ing, because hackers are unwilling to reveal their identities when making bogus requests
for passwords.
Implement Controls
Most computer crime and abuse succeeds because of the absence of controls rather than
the failure of controls. There are many reasons why businesses do not implement control
procedures to deter computer crime. One is the all-too-common belief of those managers

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
329
who have not suffered a computer crime that they have nothing to fear. Further, charities
and not-for-proﬁt organizations often believe that their missions somehow insulate them
from such crimes. Then, too, those businesses that do not have a speciﬁc computer security
ofﬁcer have no one to articulate this concern or to argue for speciﬁc control procedures.
Finally, at least some businesses do not feel that security measures are cost-effective—until
they incur a problem!
Case-in-Point 10.6
To execute a disbursement fraud, one man used a desktop publishing
package to prepare ﬁctitious bills for ofﬁce supplies that he then mailed to companies across
the country. He kept the dollar amount on each bill less than $300, and found that an amazingly
large percentage of the companies paid the bills without question—probably because many
organizations automatically pay vendor invoices for small amounts.
The solution to the computer-security problems of most organizations is straightfor-
ward: design and implement controls. This means that organizations should install control
procedures to deter computer crime, managers should enforce them, and both internal
and external auditors should test them. Experts also suggest that employee awareness of
computer controls and the certainty of prosecution may also act as deterrents to computer
crime. Certainly, the enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 has placed a much
greater emphasis on strong internal controls, including criminal offenses for senior execu-
tives who knowingly disregard such precautions. We talk more about internal controls in
Chapters 11 and 12, and cover the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in more depth in Chapter 14.
In the United States, a disproportionate amount of security break-ins occur during
the end-of-the-year holiday season. Reasons for this include: (1) extended employee
vacations and therefore fewer people to ‘‘mind the store,’’ (2) students are out of
school and consequently have more free time on their hands, and (3) counterculture
hackers get lonely at year-end and increase their attacks on computer systems. Thus, it is
especially important to make sure that effective control procedures are in place during the
holidays.
Identify Computer Criminals
To prevent speciﬁc types of crimes, criminologists often look for common character traits
that can be used to screen potential culprits. What are the characteristics of individuals
who commit computer crimes or abuse, and what can be done to create a composite
proﬁle that organizations can use to evaluate job applicants?
Non-Technical
Backgrounds.
A
company’s
own
employees—not
external
hackers—perpetrate most computer crime and abuse. How technically competent are
such employees? Figure 10-6 identiﬁes the job occupations of computer criminals and
abusers from a survey performed by Hoffer and Straub. Although this ﬁgure suggests that
some computer offenses are committed by those with strong technical backgrounds, this
study found that almost as many computer offenses are perpetrated by clerical personnel,
data-entry clerks, and similar individuals with limited technical skills. A similar study by
the U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC) found that most of the 174 computer criminals
convicted under the Computer Crime and Abuse Act of 1986 were corporate insiders with
only ‘‘pedestrian levels’’ of computer expertise. There is good reason for this. It is usually
easier and safer to alter data before they enter a computer than midway through automated
processing cycles. Then too, input data can often be changed anonymously, whereas most
computerized data cannot. These facts explain why many computer criminals are not even
computer literate, and also why computer security must extend beyond IT personnel.

330
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Programmers and systems analysts
27%
Clerical, data entry, and machine operators
23%
Managers and top executives
15%
Other system users
14%
Students
12%
Consultants
3%
Other information processing staff
3%
All others
3%
Total
100%
FIGURE 10-6
Occupations of computer-abuse offenders.
Non-Criminal Backgrounds.
The USSC study also found that most of the convicted
computer criminals had no prior criminal backgrounds. In addition, most computer
criminals tend to view themselves as relatively honest. They argue, for example, that
‘‘beating the system’’ is not the same as stealing from another person or that they are merely
using a computer to take what other employees take from the supply cabinet. Furthermore,
many perpetrators think of themselves as long-term borrowers rather than thieves, and
several have exercised great care to avoid harming individuals when committing their
computer offenses.
Education, Gender, and Age.
Although most media reports suggest that computer
offenders are uniformly bright, motivated, talented, and college-educated individuals, the
average computer criminal often does not ﬁt this proﬁle. In the ACFE 2008 Report to
the Nation, for example, over half of the perpetrators did not have a college degree.
But, according to the report, highly-educated fraudsters were able to steal more—see
Figure 10-7. Because we believe that most computer crime and abuse are not detected—or
prosecuted when it is detected—we do not know how representative these observations
are for the ‘‘general population’’ of computer offenders.
$100,000
$196,000 $210,000
$550,000
$100,000
$200,000
$300,000
$400,000
$500,000
$600,000
High school
graduate
Some college
Bachelor's
degree
Postgraduate
degree
Education of perpetrator
Median loss
FIGURE 10-7
Median fraud losses, classiﬁed by the education level of the perpetrator.
Source: 2008 ACFE Report to the Nation.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
331
Don’t Forget Physical Security
An old adage in the computer security industry is that ‘‘a good hammer beats a strong
password every time.’’ What this means is that physical safeguards can be even more
important than logical ones in deterring computer crime and abuse. Examples of phys-
ical security include protecting LAN servers and administrative work stations, enforcing
‘‘clean-desk policies’’ for employees, and protecting employee laptops against theft (see
again Figure 10-4).
Case-in-Point 10.7
The administrators at one university believed that their desktop
computers were safe as long as employees locked their individual ofﬁce doors at night. But
the university usually kept the buildings unlocked. The folly of this thinking became clear one
morning when ofﬁcials discovered that thieves had simply brought a ladder that allowed them
to climb through the false ceiling of a building to steal over 30 PCs from one of the computer
labs on campus.12
Organizations must also be able to recover from computer security breaches or losses
when they do occur. One safeguard is to implement backup procedures, which we cover in
more detail in the next chapter. Another safeguard is to develop and test a disaster recovery
plan that enables a business to replace its critical computer systems in a timely fashion,
which we discuss more comprehensively in Chapter 12. As suggested by the Case-in-Point
above, monitoring cameras, motion detectors, and ‘‘insurance’’ are also important security
measures.
Finally, organizations should be careful about how they dispose of outdated computers.
Although state and federal environmental laws affect such disposals, our primary concern
is the sensitive data stored on the hard drives of these PCs. Reformatting these drives is
usually not enough—the data may still be retrieved with software tools available on the
web. A better approach is either to use specialized ﬁle deletion software programs or to
physically destroy the disk drives themselves.
Case-in-Point 10.8
In 2003, two MIT graduate students reported in an industry journal
that, after purchasing 129 used hard drives, they found more than a third of them still
contained ‘‘signiﬁcant personal information,’’ such as credit card numbers and a year’s worth
of transactions and account numbers from an ATM.13
Recognize the Symptoms of Employee Fraud
The clues that signal some computer offenses can be subtle and ambiguous, but many are
rather obvious. For example, the study conducted by KPMG concluded that nearly half
the employee fraud would have been detected more quickly if obvious telltale symptoms
had not been ignored. Although recognizing the symptoms of computer offenses will not
prevent computer crime, knowing the telltale signs may help individuals detect and report
it, which will help minimize the potential damage to the victim organization. Consider, for
example, Case-in-Point 10.9.
Case-in-Point 10.9
The Elgin Corporation was a manufacturing company that had created
its own health care plan for its employees. The plan was self-insured for medical claims under
12Source: From the authors.
13Source: http://www.whitecanyon.com/used-hard-drives-pc-05-2003.php.

332
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
$50,000, which it handled internally, but plan administrators forwarded claims for larger
amounts to an independent insurance company. The managers of Elgin Corporation believed
that the company had excellent control procedures for its system, which included both internal
and external audits. Yet, over a period of four years, the manager of the medical claims
department was able to embezzle more than $12 million from the company.
Although the ‘‘Elgin’’ name is ﬁctitious, the events described above are not. How can
such events be avoided? Here are ﬁve typical symptoms of computer fraud that actually
occurred at the Elgin Corporation.
Accounting Irregularities.
To embezzle funds successfully, employees commonly
alter, forge, or destroy input documents, or perform suspicious accounting adjustments.
An unusually high number of such irregularities are cause for concern. At the Elgin
Corporation, no one noticed that payments to 22 of the physicians submitting claims to
the company were sent to the same two addresses.
Internal Control Weaknesses.
Control procedures are often absent, weak, or
ignored in computer fraud. At the Elgin Corporation, the medical claims manager had
not taken a vacation for years, those employees submitting claims were never sent conﬁr-
mation notices of the medical payments made in their behalf, and the physicians receiving
these payments were never ﬁrst investigated or approved.
Unreasonable Anomalies.
Perhaps the most important clue to computer fraud is the
presence of many odd or unusual anomalies that somehow go unchallenged. Examined
critically, such anomalies are unreasonable and require observers to suspend common
sense. At the Elgin Corporation, for example, why were 100% of the medical payments to
those 22 physicians all paid from the self-insured portion of the company program? Why
were checks to those 22 physicians always endorsed by hand and deposited in the same
two checking accounts? And why did some of the medical claims include hysterectomies
for male employees?
Lifestyle Changes.
Employees who miraculously solve pressing ﬁnancial problems or
suddenly begin living extravagant lifestyles are sometimes merely broadcasting fraud. At the
Elgin Corporation, why did the medical claims manager announce that she had inherited a
lot of money but never took a vacation? And why did she treat her employees to lunches
in chauffeured limousines?
Behavioral Changes.
Employees who experience guilt or remorse from their crimes,
or who fear discovery, often express these feelings in unusual behavior. At the Elgin Corpo-
ration, employees joked that the medical claims manager had recently developed a ‘‘Jekyll
and Hyde personality,’’ including intense mood swings that were unusual even for her.
Employ Forensic Accountants
When an organization suspects an ongoing computer crime or fraud, it can hire forensic
accountants to investigate its problems, document ﬁndings, and make recommendations.
Many such individuals are professional accountants who have passed the two-day certiﬁed
fraud examiner (CFE) examination administered by the ACFE.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
333
Forensic accountants have the required technical and legal experience to research a
given concern, follow leads, establish audit trails of questionable transactions, document
their ﬁndings, organize evidence for external review and law enforcement bodies, and (if
necessary) testify in court. Most use specialized software tools to help them perform their
tasks—for example, Audit Command Language (ACL) for auditing tasks, and EnCase
for ﬁle copying, custody documentation, and other forensic activities. Forensic accounting
is one of the fastest-growing areas of accounting, and there are now more than 27,000 CFEs
working in organizations such as the FBI, CIA, law ﬁrms, and CPA ﬁrms.
ETHICAL ISSUES, PRIVACY, AND IDENTITY THEFT
Computerized AISs often raise ethical issues that we did not have to face under manual
AISs. An example is the practice of unauthorized software copying. Thus, thwarting
computer crime, abuse, or fraud is sometimes more dependent on ethical behavior than
observing legal restrictions. Ethics is a set of moral principles or values. Therefore, ethical
behavior involves making choices and judgments that are morally acceptable and then
acting accordingly. Ethics can govern organizations as well as individuals. In the context of
an organization, an underlying ethical principle is that each individual in the organization
has responsibility for the welfare of others within the organization, as well as for the
organization itself. For example, the managers of a company should make decisions that
are fair to the employees as well as beneﬁcial to the organization.
Ethical Issues and Professional Associations
Ethical concerns are often a part of of computer abuse. In cases involving hacking,
for example, ‘‘ignorance of proper conduct’’ or ‘‘misguided playfulness’’ may be the
problem. To some, the challenge of defrauding a computer system and avoiding detection
is irresistible because success brings recognition, notoriety, and even heroism. In these
cases, ethical issues are overlooked and the costs of recovering from the abuse are ignored.
The acceptability of these motives comes down to issues of morality. But ‘‘morality’’ in
corporate cultures is typically a relative value. In one case, for example, a man named Fred
Darm stole a computer program from a rival ﬁrm through his computer terminal. At his
trial, the defense argued that it was common practice for programmers of rival ﬁrms to
‘‘snoop’’ in each other’s data ﬁles to obtain competitive information. Thus, when he was
apprehended for his offense, Darm was not only surprised, he was quite offended!
Such professional associations as the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA), the
American Institute of Certiﬁed Public Accountants (AICPA), the Institute of Internal Auditors
(IIA), the Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA), the Association of
Informaton Technology Professionals (AITP), and the Association for Computer Machinery
(ACM) have developed codes of ethics or codes of professional conduct. These codes are
self-imposed and self-enforced rules of conduct. One of the most important goals of a code of
ethics or conduct is to aid professionals in selecting among alternatives that are not clear-cut.
Included within professional association codes are rules pertaining to independence,
technical competence, and proper practices during audits and consulting engagements
involving information systems. The certiﬁcation programs of these associations increase
awareness of the codes of ethics and are essential in developing professionalism. Figure 10-8
provides a few examples of ethical issues in computer usage.

334
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Ethical Issue
Example in Computer Usage
Honesty
Organizations expect employees to perform their own work, to refrain from
accessing unauthorized information, and to provide authentic results of
program outputs.
Protecting Computer
Systems
Examples include tying up network access ports with multiple logins, sending
voluminous (but useless) emails and computer ﬁles to others, complaining
to system administrators about ﬁctitious hardware or software failures,
introducing computer viruses into networks, or giving unauthorized users
access to private computer systems.
Protecting Conﬁdential
Information
Allowing unauthorized individuals to view private information—for example,
ﬁnancial data on a mortgage loan application or the results of diagnostic
medical tests stored in the ﬁles of local area networks.
Social Responsibility
Sometimes, social responsibility conﬂicts with other organizational goals. For
example, suppose a programmer discovers a possible error in a software
program that controls a missile guidance system. His boss tells him to
ignore it—the design team is already over budget and this is only a
possible error.
Acceptable Use
The availability of computer hardware and software in workplaces does not
automatically convey unrestricted uses of them. At universities, for
example, ethical conduct forbids downloading microcomputer software for
personal applications or using free mainframe time for personal gain.
Rights of Privacy
Do organizations have the right to read the personal email of their
employees? Do employees have the right to use their business email
accounts for personal correspondence? In 2002, the state of Montana
decided that monitoring computer activity on state-owned computers at
state universities is legal. Ofﬁcials at colleges and universities in Montana
are hoping to decrease the incidence of illegal activity by individuals who
are using campus property.
FIGURE 10-8
Examples of ethical issues in computer usage.
In recent years, professional accounting associations at both the national and state level
have established ethics committees to assist practitioners in the self-regulation process.
These ethics committees provide their members with continuing education courses, advice
on ethical issues, investigations of possible ethics violations, and instructional booklets
covering a variety of ethics case studies. Some of the ethics committees provide their
members with a ‘‘hot line’’ to advise them on the ethical and moral dilemmas experienced
in the workplace. These committees also encourage the instruction of ethics in accounting
curricula at colleges and universities.
Meeting the Ethical Challenges
Because a signiﬁcant amount of business activity and data communications now takes place
on the Internet, it is not surprising that an increasing amount of computer crime and abuse
also happens within the Internet’s environment. Examples include thieves supplying fake
credit card numbers to buy everything from investment securities to Internet access time
itself, copying web pages without permission, denying legitimate users Internet access,
and posing as someone else for any number of illegal or dishonest purposes.
How we respond to the ethical issues above is determined not so much by laws or
organizational rules as by our own sense of ‘‘right’’ and ‘‘wrong.’’ Ethical standards of
behavior are a function of many things, including social expectations, culture, societal

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
335
norms, and even the times in which we live. More than anything else, however, ethical
behavior requires personal discipline and a commitment to ‘‘do the right thing.’’
How can organizations encourage ethical behavior? Some argue that morals are only
learned at an early age and in the home—they cannot be taught to adults. However, others
suggest that it helps to (1) inform employees that ethics are important, (2) formally expose
employees to relevant cases that teach them how to act responsibly in speciﬁc situations,
(3) teach by example, that is, by managers acting responsibly, and (4) use job promotions
and other beneﬁts to reward those employees who act responsibly.
Case-in-Point 10.10
The ethical principles that apply to everyday community life also
apply to computing. At the University of Northern Colorado, every member has two basic
rights: privacy and a fair share of resources. It is unethical for any other person to violate
these rights. This code of ethics lays down general guidelines for the use of computing and
information resources. Failure to observe the code may lead to disciplinary action.
Privacy
Although Americans are concerned about various privacy issues, the events of September
11, 2001, changed our focus in some respects. For example, we are willing to accept less
privacy at airports, and to submit to increased security measures at various points in airport
terminals. On a day-to-day basis, we freely give our name, address, phone number and
similar information to receive value cards at a variety of retail establishments. In return,
we receive discounts, points that may be exchanged for goods or services, or advance
information about upcoming sales. But these credit-card-size or key-ring-size cards have a
barcode on the back side that also enables merchants to track our purchases.
Privacy also affects our use of the Internet. For example, when we order a book from
Amazon.com and the next time we visit that site, we’re greeted by name and told about
other books we might enjoy. A remarkable marketing tool, but how do they know? They
know because most commercial websites deposit a cookie on your computer, which is
a small text ﬁle that stores information about your browsing habits and interests, as well
as other information that you may supply by logging onto the site. Of course, cookies are
not necessarily bad. If you frequently purchase items from a particular online vendor, it is
very convenient to have your credit card and shipping information automatically recalled
so that you are not required to enter this information for every purchase.
Some individuals even claim that computers and privacy are mutually exclusive—and
that you can’t have both. The deﬁning issue is probably whether the invasion of our privacy
is with or without our permission. That is, did we agree or authorize the information to
be collected? Few object to (for example) Amazon.com tracking their browsing habits on
its website, but if we ordered a book or other item from that website, we would most
certainly object to unauthorized uses of our credit card information.
Company Policies with Respect to Privacy
Because of the widespread use of computers in business, coupled with the fact that many
employees travel and use laptops, employers should develop and distribute a company-wide
policy with respect to privacy. The Fair Employment Practices Guidelines suggest that these
policies cover such issues as (1) who owns the computer and the data stored on it, and (2)
what purposes the computer may be used (e.g., primarily for business purposes), and (3)

336
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
what uses are unauthorized or prohibited. Further, employers should speciﬁcally identify
the types of acceptable and unacceptable uses with some examples. Another idea is to
have a screen pop-up each time an employee signs on that reminds the employee of the
company policy.
Case-in-Point 10.11
In Oklahoma, police obtained a search warrant to look for down-
loaded pornography on a professor’s computer at Oklahoma State University. As a result, the
professor was arrested, prosecuted, and given a 51-month sentence. Although the professor
appealed, the court afﬁrmed the sentence based on the University’s policy barring employees
from using university computers to access obscene materials and stating that such misuse
could result in discipline or legal action. In addition, the University used a screen pop-up with
a warning that using the system to break the law or university policies was prohibited.14
Most commercial websites have a privacy policy, although they are sometimes
difﬁcult to ﬁnd. For example, at Amazon.com you need to click on the ‘‘Privacy Notice’’
link at the very bottom of its home page. There, you will ﬁnd a comprehensive list of
information that is covered by its privacy policy—including information you provide,
cookies it uses, email communications, and information Amazon.com receives about you
from other sources. Another online merchant, Lands’ End, provides an easy-to-ﬁnd link to
the privacy policy on its home page. Its privacy policy identiﬁes the information it does
and does not collect, and offers advice about managing cookies.
An important point to remember is that companies typically are very careful about
protecting your personal information. They understand that the future viability of the orga-
nization might depend on security of both your information as well as their proprietary data.
Identity Theft
Identity theft refers to an act in which someone wrongfully obtains and uses another
person’s personal data for fraud or deception. Unlike your ﬁngerprints, which are unique
to you and cannot be used by someone else, your personal data can certainly be used by
another individual if they have a mind to use it. Your personal data may be any one or
a combination of the following pieces of information: your Social Security number, your
bank account, your debit card number, your credit card number, your birth date, or your
mailing address. It was not until 1998 that Congress passed legislation making identity theft
a crime.
Thieves steal identities in a number of ways including dumpster diving (stealing
personal information from garbage cans), taking delivered or outgoing mail from house
mail boxes, or telephone solicitations that ask for personal information. Phishing scams
use an email or website that claims to be legitimate but that ask you to provide or ‘‘update’’
your personal information such as account number, credit card number, or password.
Smishing is a similar scam using text messages on cell phones.
In the United States and Canada, many people have reported that unauthorized persons
have taken funds out of their bank or ﬁnancial accounts. Even worse, some unscrupulous
individuals have gone so far as to take over an individual’s identity, incurring huge debts
and committing all sorts of crimes. Victims can incur enormous costs attempting to restore
their reputation in a community or correcting erroneous information. It is still the case
that many individuals do not realize how easily criminals can obtain their personal data.
Figure 10-9 identiﬁes a number of ways you can become a victim of identity theft if you are
not careful.
14Source: A Legal Posting in Workforce, June 2002, p. 102.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
337
Method
Examples
Shoulder surﬁng
• Watching you from a nearby location as you punch in your debit or credit
card number
• Listening to your conversation if you give your debit or credit card number
over the telephone to a hotel or rental car company
Dumpster diving
• Going through your garbage can or a communal dumpster or trash bin
to obtain copies of your checks, credit card or bank statements, or other
records that typically have your name, address, and telephone number
Applications for
‘‘preapproved’’ credit
cards
• If you discard them without tearing up the enclosed materials, criminals
may retrieve them and try to activate the cards
• If your mail is delivered to a place where others have access to it, criminals
may simply intercept and redirect your mail to another location
Key logging software
• Loading this type of software on computers in general use areas, such as
university computer labs or public libraries to obtain your personal data and
other identifying data, such as passwords or banking information
Spam and other emails
• Many people respond to unsolicited email that promises some beneﬁt but
requests identifying data, which criminals use to apply for loans, credit
cards, fraudulent withdrawals from bank accounts, or other goods
FIGURE 10-9
Examples of methods used by criminals to obtain your personal data.
The news media continues to report instances of compromised personal data. Some of
these describe breaches in the computer system of an organization. Other reports suggest
that a stolen laptop might have the personal data of hundreds or thousands of individuals.
For example, in the summer of 2006, two universities reported incidents in which outsiders
may have gained access to personal information, including Social Security numbers, on
nearly a quarter-million students.
Case-in-Point 10.12
In June 2006, Western Illinois University announced that a hacker
may have copied the Social Security or credit card numbers of 200,000 to 240,000 current
or former students. The credit cards had been used to purchase textbooks online or for stays
in a university hotel. The University immediately notiﬁed the individuals and advised them to
monitor their credit records for any attempts at identity theft.
AIS AT WORK
Fighting Computer Crime at the Bank15
When the judge asked Willie Sutton—a habitual bank robber—more than one hundred
years ago why he stole from banks, his answer became famous: ‘‘because that’s where the
money is.’’ In some ways, little has changed. Banking frauds in the U.S. total an estimated
$39 billion in 2006—and are growing. Credit card fraud touches one out of every 20
credit-card users.
15Source: Tommie Singleton, Aaron Singleton, & Geoff Gottlieb, ‘‘Cyber Threats Facing the Banking Industry’’
Accounting and Finance Vol. 19, No. 2 (February 2006), pp. 26–32.

338
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Having read this chapter, you are already familiar with the major types of computer
crimes perpetrated against banks—phishing, identity theft, worms and Trojan horses,
spyware, and denial-of-service attacks. Banks can ﬁght computer crime by ﬁrst performing
risk assessments that analyze potential risks and then implementing policies and procedures
to mitigate or prevent potential losses. One important control is the development and test
of a disaster recovery plan, especially a test of a general computer system failure. Another
is to develop an incident response plan that includes identifying who should do what in
the event of a breach of computer security.
Phishing is an especially important problem for banks because hackers often create
bogus websites that trick bank customers into revealing their account numbers and
passwords. Raising customer awareness to this problem—for example, in brochures that
accompany monthly bank statements—is one possibility. Providing similar information
on bank home pages, along with examples of spoofed emails, links to the FTC website
on identify theft, and consumer alerts about new threats are more ways to counter this
problem.
Because ‘‘people’’ are often the weakest link in computer security, banks should
pay special attention to employee safeguards. One important practice is ‘‘employee
education,’’ which includes periodic training and monthly reminders to employees about
speciﬁc computer security issues—especially guarding against social engineering attacks.
Another safeguard is stringent employee hiring practices, including drug and credit checks
and requiring employees to acknowledge and follow current security policies. Memos that
encourage employees to follow the simple security steps listed in Figure 10-5 to protect
individual computers from harm can also help. Finally, of all factors to successfully ﬁght
computer crime, none is more important than identifying a security ofﬁcer to champion
and proactively manage all the activities discussed here.
SUMMARY
• We know very little about computer crime because few cases are reported and we believe many
more cases go undetected.
• Computer crime is growing and is likely to be expensive for those organizations that suffer from it.
• This chapter discussed cases of real-world computer crime. The subjects of these cases included
compromising valuable information, wire fraud and computer hacking, and computer viruses.
• Organizations can use the following methods to protect themselves against computer offenses: (1)
solicit top management support, (2) educate users about computer crime and abuse, (3) conduct
a security inventory and protect passwords, (4) design and implement control procedures, and (5)
recognize the symptoms of computer crime and abuse.
• Organizations can help themselves by knowing which employees are most likely to become
computer offenders and by employing forensic accountants to investigate suspected problems.
• Managers can implement a program that focuses on ethical behavior. Examples of ethical behavior
include protecting conﬁdential information, being socially responsible, respecting rights of privacy,
avoiding conﬂicts of interest, and understanding unacceptable uses of computer hardware and
software.
• Organizations can encourage ethical behavior by educating employees about it, rewarding it, and
encouraging employees to join professional associations with ethical codes of conduct.
• Identity theft is a growing problem. Both individuals and organizations must adopt reasonable
precautions to protect personal data.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
339
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
anti-virus software applet
Association of Certiﬁed Fraud Examiners
(ACFE)
Audit Command Language (ACL)
boot-sector virus
computer abuse
computer crime
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986
Computer Security Institute (CSI)
computer virus
cookie
data diddling
distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack
dialback systems
disposal of outdated computers
dumpster diving
ﬁrewall
forensic accounting
hacker
Integrated Computer-Assisted Surveillance
System (ICASS)
lock-out systems
logic bomb program
Encase
Patriot Act of 2001
Phishing
privacy policy
salami technique
social engineering
smishing
strong passwords
Trojan horse programs
value cards
voice over Internet protocol (VoIP)
worm program
TEST YOURSELF
Q10-1. A computer program that remains dormant until some speciﬁed circumstance or date
triggers the program to action is called a
.
a. Trojan horse
b. Logic bomb
c. Data diddling
d. Cookie
Q10-2. Which of the following is NOT an example of computer fraud?
a. Entering invoices in the AIS for services that were not provided, and depositing the
check in a private bank account
b. Sending an email to everyone in your address book asking for a $1 donation
c. Programming a change to decrease the dividend payment to stockholders of a ﬁrm and
issuing a check to your friend for the total change
d. Using a university computer to set up a realistic looking virtual ‘‘store front’’ to sell toys,
although you don’t have any merchandise to sell.
Q10-3. Which of the following pieces of computer legislation is probably the most important?
a. Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2002
b. Computer Security Act of 1987
c. The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986
d. Federal Privacy Act of 1974
Q10-4. A computer program that is used to steal small amounts of money from many accounts over
a period of time is called a
.
a. Salami technique

340
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
b. Logic bomb
c. Data diddling
d. Cookie
Q10-5. What is it called when someone intentionally changes data before, during, or after they are
entered into the computer (with the intent to illegally obtain information or assets)?
a. Trojan horse
b. Logic bomb
c. Data diddling
d. A cookie
Q10-6. Which legislation might help discourage computer hacking?
a. Federal Privacy Act of 1974
b. Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986
c. USA Patriot Act of 2001
d. CAN-SPAM Act of 2003
Q10-7. The TRW Case is notable because:
a. The amount of dollars involved was not signiﬁcant
b. No one got caught
c. The fraud was detected by a surprise audit
d. The real victims were TRW customers
Q10-8. Which of these is not an acronym?
a. ACFE
b. Byte
c. Worm
d. DOS
e. VoIP
Q10-9. Which of these is not helpful in attempting to thwart computer crime and abuse?
a. Enlist the support of top management
b. Keep employees in the dark so that they cannot perpetrate them
c. Use strong passwords
d. Design and test disaster recovery programs
Q10-10. A local area network administrator receives a call from an employee, requesting his
password. The administrator asks for his name and phone number and tells him that he will
call back. This is an example of a:
a. DOS system
b. Bad computer security
c. A worm system
d. Dialback system
e. Bad security policy
Q10-11. Most computer criminals:
a. Have non-technical backgrounds
b. Have non-criminal backgrounds
c. Have little college education
d. Are young and bright
e. Have probably not been caught, so we don’t really know much about them

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
341
Q10-12. Which of these is the common name for a computer ﬁle that is written onto your personal
computer by a website?
a. Applet
b. web ﬁle
c. Cookie
d. Worm
Q10-13. Which of these is a software tool often used by forensic accountants?
a. MS-DOS
b. ACFE
c. Computer Spy
d. Logic bomb
e. Encase
Q10-14. Smishing is a form of:
a. Dialback system
b. Local area network.
c. Computer worm
d. Identity theft
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
10-1. The cases of computer crime that we know about have been described as just ‘‘the tip of
the iceberg.’’ Do you consider this description accurate? Why or why not?
10-2. Most computer crime is not reported. Give as many reasons as you can why much of this
crime is purposely downplayed. Do you consider these reasons valid?
10-3. Why have most computer experts suggested that computer crime is growing despite the
fact that so little is known about it?
10-4. Does a company have the right to collect, store, and disseminate information about your
purchasing activities without your permission?
10-5. What enabled the employees at TRW to get away with their crime? What controls might
have prevented the crime from occurring?
10-6. What is hacking? What can be done to prevent hacking?
10-7. What is a computer virus?
10-8. How can educating employees help stop computer crime?
10-9. What computer crimes are committed on the Internet? What assets are involved? What can
be done to safeguard these assets?
10-10. How would you deﬁne ‘‘ethics?’’ What types of ethical issues are involved in computerized
accounting information systems? How can organizations encourage their employees to act
ethically?
10-11. The Rivera Regional Bank uses a computerized data processing system to maintain both its
checking accounts and its savings accounts. During the last three years, several customers
have complained that their balances have been in error. Randy Allen, the information
systems bank manager, has always treated these customers very courteously and has
personally seen to it that the problems have been rectiﬁed quickly, sometimes by putting in
extra hours after normal quitting time to make the necessary changes. This extra effort has
been so helpful to the bank that this year, the bank’s top management is planning to give
Mr. Allen the Employee-of-the-Year Award. Mr. Allen has never taken a vacation. Comment.

342
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
PROBLEMS
10-12. Comment on each of the following scenarios in light of chapter materials. Hint: use the
references at the end of this chapter to help you.
a. A legitimate student calls the computer help desk from her cell phone because she has
forgotten her password to the university system. The ‘‘tech’’ on duty refuses to give it
to her as a matter of university policy. The student is unable to complete her assignment
and proceeds to ﬁle a formal complaint against the university.
b. An employee at a building supply company is caught downloading pornographic
materials to his ofﬁce computer. He is reprimanded by his boss, asked to remove the
offending materials, and told never do it again. The employee refuses on the grounds
that (1) there is no company policy forbidding these activities, (2) he performed all his
downloads during his lunch breaks, (3) his work reviews indicate that he is performing
‘‘above average,’’ and (4) the discoveries themselves were performed without a search
warrant and therefore violate his right to privacy.
c. The local community college installed a new, campus-wide local area network that
requires all staff members to enter a login name and password. Users can choose their
own passwords. Some pick the names of their pets or spouses as passwords, while
others tape their passwords to their computer monitors to help remember them.
d. An employee in a hospital was hardly ever at his desk, but almost always reachable
through his cell phone. When the department replaced his old computer with a new
one, his boss scanned the old hard drive and made the startling discovery that this
employee had a full-time second job as a beer distributor.
e. A routine audit of the computer payroll records of the local manufacturing plant reveals
that the address of over 20 employees in different departments is the same empty lot in
the city.
f. An analysis of online bidding on eBay reveals that one seller has bid on several of his
own merchandise in an effort to increase the ﬁnal sales price of his items.
g. A retailer sues a web hosting company when it discovers that the employees of the web
company have been visiting sites on which the retailer advertises. The retailer pays a fee
of $1 every time someone clicks on these advertising links.
10-13. (Library or Online Journal Research) Newspapers and such journals as Datamation and
Computerworld are prime sources of computer-crime articles. Find a description of a
computer crime not already discussed in this chapter and prepare an analysis of the crime
similar to the ones in the second section of this chapter.
10-14. Recall that the salami technique means using a computer to skim a small amount of money
from hundreds or thousands of accounts, and then diverting the proceeds for personal
gain. Suppose that a computer programmer uses this technique to skim a penny from each
customer’s account at a small bank. Over the course of three months, he takes $200,000
and is never caught. Assuming that this hacker took only one penny per month from each
customer, how many accounts did the bank have? If the bank had 100,000 accounts and
the hacker stole one penny from each account’s interest (which was computed daily), how
much could the hacker steal in three months?
10-15. What company policies or procedures would you recommend to prevent each of the
following activities?
a. A clerk at the Paul Yelverton Company faxes a ﬁctitious sales invoice to a company that
purchases a large quantity of goods from it. The clerk plans to intercept that particular
payment check and pocket the money.
b. The bookkeeper at a construction company has each of the three owners sign a different
paycheck for her. Each check is drawn from a separate account of the company.

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
343
c. A clerk in the human relations department creates a ﬁctitious employee in the personnel
computer ﬁle. When this employee’s payroll check is received for distribution, the clerk
takes and cashes it.
d. A clerk in the accounts receivable department steals $250 in cash from a customer
payment, then prepares a computer credit memo that reduces the customer’s account
balance by the same amount.
e. A purchasing agent prepares an invoice for goods received from a ﬁctitious supplier.
She sends a check for the goods to this supplier, in care of her mother’s post-ofﬁce box.
f. A hacker manages to break into a company’s computer system by guessing the password
of his friend—Champ, the name of the friend’s dog.
g. An accounts receivable clerk manages to embezzle more than $1 million from the
company by diligently lapping the accounts every day for three consecutive years.
h. The company’s local area network administrator traces a virus to an individual who
accidentally introduced it when he downloaded a computer game from the Internet.
i. A clerk at a medical lab recognizes the name of an acquaintance as one of those patients
whose lab tests are ‘‘positive’’ for an infectious disease. She mentions it to a mutual
friend, and before long, the entire town knows about it.
10-16. Download a copy of the Association of Certiﬁed Fraud Examiners Fraud Prevention
Checkup, which is available at www.acfe.com/documents/Fraud Prev Checkup IA.pdf.
On a separate piece of paper, list the seven areas, and the maximum number of points
suggested for each one. An example is:
1. Fraud Risk Oversight (20 points).
Do you think that this check list is likely to enable organizations to prevent most types of
fraud? Why or why not?
10-17. Download a copy of the ACFE Compensation Guide for Anti-fraud Professionals, which
is available at no charge at: www.acfe.com/documents/2008-comp-guide.pdf. Based on this
resource, answer the following questions:
a. How many people participated in the 2008 survey?
b. What is the median total compensation for certiﬁed forensic examiners (CFEs) and for
non-CFEs?
c. What is the modal years of experience for CFEs and for non-CFEs?
d. What is the modal highest level of education completed for CFEs and for non-CFEs?
e. What is the median total annual compensation for females and males holding CFE
certiﬁcation, and for CFEs versus non-CFEs? How can you explain these differences?
f. Do fraud examiners earn more if they work in one type of industry (e.g., healthcare)
than another? How about internal auditors?
g. Do anti-fraud practitioners tend to earn more in some areas of the country than in others?
If so, what explains these differences?
CASE ANALYSES
10-18. Ashley Company (Diskless PC System and Security Threats)
To address the need for tighter data controls and lower support costs, the Ashley Company
has adopted a new diskless PC system. It is little more than a mutilated personal computer
described as a ‘‘gutless wonder.’’ The basic concept behind the diskless PC is simple: A

344
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
LAN server-based ﬁle system of high-powered diskless workstations is spread throughout
a company and connected with a central repository or mainframe. The network improves
control by limiting user access to company data previously stored on desktop hard disks.
Because the user can destroy or delete only the information currently on the screen, an
organization’s ﬁnancial data are better protected from user-instigated catastrophes. The
diskless computer also saves money in user support costs by distributing applications and
upgrades automatically, and by offering online help.
Requirements:
1. What threats in the information processing and storage system do the diskless PC
minimize?
2. Do the security advantages of the new system outweigh potential limitations? Discuss.
10-19. Mark Goodwin Resort (A Valuable-Information Computer Offense)
The Mark Goodwin Resort is an elegant summer resort located in a remote mountain
setting. Guests visiting the resort can ﬁsh, hike, go horseback riding, swim in one of three
hotel pools, or simply sit in one of the many lounge chairs located around the property
and enjoy the spectacular scenery. There are also three dining rooms, card rooms, nightly
movies, and live weekend entertainment.
The resort uses a computerized system to make room reservations and bill customers.
Following standard policy for the industry, the resort also offers authorized travel agents
a 10% commission on room bookings. Each week, the resort prints an exception report
of bookings made by unrecognized travel agents. However, the managers usually pay the
commissions anyway, partly because they don’t want to anger the travel agencies and
partly because the computer ﬁle that maintains the list of authorized agents is not kept up
to date.
Although management has not discovered it, several employees now exploit these facts
to their own advantage. As often as possible, they call the resort from outside phones, pose
as travel agents, book rooms for friends and relatives, and collect the commissions. The
incentive is obvious: rooms costing as little as $100 per day result in payments of $10 per
day to the ‘‘travel agencies’’ that book them. The scam has been going on for years, and
several guests now book their rooms exclusively through these employees, ﬁnding these
people particularly courteous and helpful.
Requirements:
1. Would you say this is a ‘‘computer crime?’’ Why or why not?
2. What controls would you recommend that would enable the resort’s managers to thwart
such offenses?
3. How does the matter of ‘‘accountability’’ (tracing transactions to speciﬁc agencies)
affect the problem?
10-20. The Department of Taxation (Data Conﬁdentiality)
The Department of Taxation of one state is developing a new computer system for
processing state income tax returns of individuals and corporations. The new system

CHAPTER 10 / Computer Crime, Ethics, and Privacy
345
features direct data input and inquiry capabilities. Identiﬁcation of taxpayers is provided
by using the Social Security numbers of individuals and federal identiﬁcation numbers for
corporations. The new system should be fully implemented in time for the next tax season.
The new system will serve three primary purposes:
• Data will be input into the system directly from tax returns through computer terminals
located at the central headquarters of the Department of Taxation.
• The returns will be processed using the main computer facilities at central headquarters.
The processing includes (1) verifying mathematical accuracy; (2) auditing the reason-
ableness of deductions, tax due, and so forth, through the use of edit routines as well
as a comparison of the current year’s data with prior years’ data; (3) identifying returns
that should be considered for audit by revenue agents of the department; and (4) issuing
refund checks to taxpayers.
• Inquiry service will be provided to taxpayers on request through the assistance of Tax
Department personnel at ﬁve regional ofﬁces. A total of 50 computer terminals will be
placed at the regional ofﬁces.
A taxpayer will be able to determine the status of his or her return or to get information
from the last three years’ returns by calling or visiting one of the department’s regional
ofﬁces. The state commissioner of taxation is concerned about data security during input
and processing over and above protection against natural hazards such as ﬁres or ﬂoods.
This includes protection against the loss or damage of data during data input or processing,
and the improper input or processing of data. In addition, the tax commissioner and the
state attorney general have discussed the general problem of data conﬁdentiality that may
arise from the nature and operation of the new system. Both individuals want to have all
potential problems identiﬁed before the system is fully developed and implemented so that
the proper controls can be incorporated into the new system.
Requirements:
1. Describe the potential conﬁdentiality problems that could arise in each of the following
three areas of processing and recommend the corrective action(s) to solve the problems:
(a) data input, (b) processing of returns, (c) data inquiry.
2. The State Tax Commission wants to incorporate controls to provide data security against
the loss, damage, or improper input or use of data during data input and processing.
Identify the potential problems (outside of natural hazards such as ﬁres or ﬂoods) for
which the Department of Taxation should develop controls, and recommend possible
control procedures for each problem identiﬁed.
(CMA adapted)
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Brandt, Andres. ‘‘Phishers Put Their Lures on Cell Phones’’ PC World Vol. 25, No. 1 (January 2007),
p. 46.
Cronan, T., C. Foltz, and T. Jones. ‘‘Piracy, Computer Crime, and IS Misuse at the University,’’
Communications of the ACM 49 (June 2006), pp. 85–90.
Fadaghi, Foad. ‘‘Industry Sights Set on Click Fraud’’ Preview Vol. 29, No. 1 (January 11, 2007), pp.
60–61.

346
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Feldstein, D. ‘‘Horror Stories of Identity Theft Steal Attention,’’ Houston Chronicle (June 28, 2004).
Gentile, O. ‘‘Fraud Grows with the Economy,’’ Hartford Courant (January 16, 2000), pp. B1–B2.
Haines, J. ‘‘New Crimes, New Tools—Old Crimes, New Tools’’ Journal of Financial Crime Vol. 9,
No. 1 (September 2001), pp. 6–7.
Kiernan, V. ‘‘Two Incidents put More than 200,000 Students at Risk of Data Theft,’’ The Chronicle of
Higher Education 52 (June 30, 2006).
Larson, L., R. Larson, and J. Greenlee. ‘‘Privacy Protection on the Internet,’’ Strategic Finance (June
2003), pp. 48–53.
Ling, B. ‘‘Lines of Defense: Guarding against electronic privacy,’’ Utah Business (August 2003), pp.
42–43.
Lunsford, D. and W. Robbins. ‘‘Cyber-criminals and Data Sanitization: A Role for Forensic Accoun-
tants,’’ Forensic Examiner 14 (Summer 2005), pp. 50–54.
Macodrum, D., H. Nasheri, and T. O’Hearn. ‘‘Spies In Suits: New Crimes of the Information Age from
the United States and Canadian Perspectives,’’ Information & Communications Technology
Law, Vol. 10, No. 2 (June 2001), pp. 139–166.
Mangan, K. ‘‘Computer Security Breach Raises Fears at University of Texas,’’ The Chronicle of Higher
Education 52 (May 2, 2006).
Lim, Nena. ‘‘Crime Investigation: a Course in Computer Forensics’’ Communications of the AIS Vol.
2006, No. 18 (2006), pp. 2–34.
Nikitkov, Alex, and Darlene Bay. ‘‘Online Auction Fraud: Ethical Perspective’’ Journal of Business
Ethics Vol 79, No. 3 (May 2008), pp. 235–244.
Pearson, Timothy A., and Tommie W. Singleton. ‘‘Fraud and Forensic Accounting in the Digital
Environment’’ Issues in Accounting Education Vol. 23, No. 4 (November 2008), pp. 545–559.
Richardson, Robert. 2008 CSI Computer Crime & Security Survey Computer Security Institute,
2008.
Samuels, P., and M. Young. ‘‘Phishing and pharming and Trojans - oh my!’’ Utah Bar Journal 19
(March-April 2006), pp. 28–32.
Scarponi, D. ‘‘Hacker Steals Credit Card Numbers From CT Retailer,’’ Bristol Press (January 11, 2000),
pp. A1–A2.
Singleton, Tommie, Aaron Singleton, and Geoff Gottlieb. ‘‘Cyberthreats Facing the Banking Industry’’
Accounting and Finance Vol. 19, No. 2 (February 2006), pp. 26–32.
Wallace, R., A. Lusthaus, and J. Kim. ‘‘Computer Crimes: Annual Survey of White Collar Crime,’’
Criminal Law Review 42 (Spring 2005), pp. 223–276.
Wang, Y., J. Cannady, and J. Rosenbluth. ‘‘Foundations of Computer Forensics: A Technology for
the Fight Against Computer Crime,’’ Computer Law & Security Report 21 (March-April 2005),
pp. 119–127.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. b
2. b
3. c
4. a
5. c
6. b
7. d
8. b
9. b
10. d
11. e
12. c
13. e
14. d

Chapter 11
Introduction to Internal Control
Systems
INTRODUCTION
INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
Deﬁnition of Internal Control
1992 COSO Report—Components of Internal Control
2004 COSO Report—Enterprise Risk Management
2007 COBIT, Version 4.1
TYPES OF CONTROLS
Preventive Controls
Detective and Corrective Controls
Interrelationship of Preventive and Detective Controls
CONTROL ACTIVITIES
Good Audit Trail
Sound Personnel Policies and Practices
Separation of Duties
Physical Protection of Assets
Internal Reviews of Controls
EVALUATING CONTROLS
Requirements of Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Illustrations of Cost-Beneﬁt Analyses
A Risk Matrix
AIS AT WORK—USING THE COMPANY CREDIT
CARD AS A NEST EGG?
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Gayton Menswear
Cuts-n-Curves Athletic Club
Emerson Department Store
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Be familiar with the primary control frame-
works commonly used in organizations.
2. Be familiar with an internal control system and
the components of this system.
3. Understand the importance of enterprise-wide
risk assessment and the impact this has on inter-
nal controls.
4. Be familiar with the importance of COSO and
COBIT with respect to internal control systems.
5. Understand the difference between preventive,
detective, and corrective controls.
6. Be aware of some of the control activities that
should be included in an organization’s internal
control system.
7. Understand the reason an organization might
be willing to let customers shoplift some of its
merchandise inventory.
347

348
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
‘‘Ultimately, all stakeholders in the company should share the same high-level goal of
establishing a strong system of internal controls.’’
Robert Mueller, ‘‘Mending Broken Controls,’’ Internal Auditor
(August 2008), p. 85.
INTRODUCTION
Protecting the assets of an organization has always been an important responsibility of
management. However, the incredible advancements in IT, as well as the pervasive use of
IT across ﬁrms of all sizes, have dramatically changed how managers establish and monitor
internal controls. Indeed, the pervasiveness of IT also has a profound impact on internal and
external auditors, and how they assess the strength of the internal control environment.
Protecting such assets requires organizations to develop and implement an effective internal
control system—a system that can also perform such other functions as helping ensure
reliable data processing and promoting operational efﬁciency in an organization.
This chapter and the next cover the topic of internal controls—i.e., the controls
established to protect the assets of an organization. This chapter deﬁnes corporate
governance, IT governance, and internal controls. We also identify the components of
an internal control system, the different types of controls, and various control activities.
Finally, we illustrate a cost-beneﬁt analysis, which is a method managers use to determine
which control procedures are cost effective.
INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEMS
An internal control system consists of the various methods and measures designed into
and implemented within an organization to achieve the following four objectives: (1)
safeguard assets, (2) check the accuracy and reliability of accounting data, (3) promote
operational efﬁciency, and (4) enforce prescribed managerial policies. An organization
that achieves these four objectives is typically one with good corporate governance.
This means managing an organization in a fair, transparent, and accountable manner to
protect the interests of all the stakeholder groups.1 The 1992 COSO Framework is widely
used by managers to organize and evaluate their corporate governance structure. This
framework was developed to improve the quality of ﬁnancial reporting through business
ethics, effective internal controls, and corporate governance.2
Deﬁnition of Internal Control
Internal control describes the policies, plans, and procedures implemented by manage-
ment of an organization to protect its assets. Usually the people involved in this effort
are the entity’s board of directors, the management, and other key personnel in the ﬁrm.
1‘‘Corporate Governance: The New Strategic Imperative,’’ a White Paper from the Economist Intelligence Unit,
sponsored by KPMG International, http://www.eiu.com.
2Source: http://www.coso.org.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
349
The reason this is important is that these individuals want reasonable assurance that the
goals and objectives of the organization can be achieved (i.e., effectiveness and efﬁciency
of operations, reliability of ﬁnancial reporting, protection of assets, and compliance with
applicable laws and regulations).3
Figure 11-1 identiﬁes key laws, professional guidance, and reports that focus on internal
controls.
In 2001, the AICPA issued Statement on Auditing Standards (SAS) No. 94, ‘‘The Effect
of Information Technology on the Auditor’s Consideration of Internal Control in a Financial
Statement Audit.’’ This SAS cautions the external auditors that the way ﬁrms use IT might
impact any of the ﬁve internal control components (discussed in the next section). That
is, auditors must realize internal controls are both manual and automated, and therefore,
auditors might need to adopt new testing strategies to obtain sufﬁcient evidence that an
organization’s controls are effective. Because of the complexity of IT environments, auditors
will most likely need to use computer-assisted auditing techniques (CAATs) to test the
automated controls in an organization. We discuss these techniques in depth in Chapter 14.
An
important
piece
of
legislation
with
respect
to
internal
controls
is
the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. One key provision of this law is Section 404, which
reafﬁrms that management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an adequate
internal control structure, and at the end of each ﬁscal year must attest to the effectiveness
and completeness of the internal control structure, thus making managers personally
liable for this structure within the ﬁrm. We cover the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in more depth in
Chapter 14.
1992 COSO Report—Components of Internal Control
The 1992 COSO Report (see Figure 11-1) is important because it established a common
deﬁnition of internal control for assessing control systems, as well as determined how to
improve controls. According to the report, controls can serve many important purposes,
and for this reason many businesses look at internal control systems as a solution to
a variety of potential problems (such as dealing with rapidly changing economic and
competitive environments, as well as shifting customer demands and priorities). According
to the COSO report, an internal control system should consist of these ﬁve components:
(1) the control environment, (2) risk assessment, (3) control activities, (4) information and
communication, and (5) monitoring.
Control Environment.
The control environment establishes the tone of a company
and inﬂuences the control awareness of the company’s employees. It is the foundation for
all the other internal control components and provides discipline and structure. Factors
include:
• the integrity, ethical values, and competence of an organization’s employees
• management’s philosophy and operating style
• the way management assigns authority and responsibility as well as organizes and
develops its employees
• the attention and direction provided by the board of directors
3Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (CSOTC), Internal Control—Integrated
Framework (COSO Report), 1992.

350
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Date
Act/Report
Signiﬁcant Provisions Pertaining to Internal Controls
1977
Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act
• Requires publicly-owned companies to implement internal control sys-
tems
• Only applies to publicly-owned corporations registered under Section
12 of the 1934 Securities and Exchange Act
1977
Treadway
Commission
Report
• Recommends development of a common deﬁnition for internal control,
guidance for judging the effectiveness of internal control, and methods
to improve internal controls
1988
SAS No. 55
• Management should establish an internal control structure that includes
the following three components: the control environment, the accounting
system, and the control procedures
1992
Committee of
Sponsoring
Organizations
(COSO) Report
• Title: Internal Control—Integrated Framework
• Deﬁnes internal control and describes its components
• Presents criteria to evaluate internal control systems
• Provides guidance for public reporting on internal controls
• Offers materials to evaluate an internal control system
1992
COBIT—Control
Objectives for
Business and IT
• A Framework (set of best practices) for IT management
• Provides managers, auditors, and IT users a set of generally accepted
measures, indicators, processes, and best practices to maximize the
beneﬁts of IT and develop appropriate IT governance and control
1995
SAS No. 78
• Replaces deﬁnition of internal control structure in SAS No. 55 with the
deﬁnition of internal control given in the 1992 COSO report
2001
SAS No. 94
• Provides guidance to auditors about the effect of IT on internal
controls
• Describes beneﬁts and risks of IT to internal controls and how IT affects
the components of internal controls
2002
Sarbanes-Oxley
Act, Section 404
• Requires publicly-traded companies to issue an ‘‘internal control report’’
that states management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
an adequate internal control structure
• Management must assess the effectiveness of internal controls annually
• The independent auditor for the ﬁrm must attest to and report on
managements’ assessment annually
2004
Committee of
Sponsoring
Organizations
(COSO) Report
• Focuses on enterprise risk management
• Includes the ﬁve components of ICIF (control environment, risk assess-
ment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring)
and adds three components: objective setting, event identiﬁcation, and
risk response
2005
COBIT, Ver. 4.0
• Includes 34 high-level objectives that cover 215 control objectives cat-
egorized in four domains: Plan and Organize, Acquire and Implement,
Deliver and Support, and Monitor and Evaluate
2006
SAS No. 112
• Establishes standards and provides guidance to auditors of non-public
entities on communicating matters related to an entity’s internal control
over ﬁnancial reporting observed during a ﬁnancial statement audit
• To properly apply SAS No. 112, the auditor must have a working
knowledge of the COSO framework
2007
COBIT, Ver. 4.1
• Better deﬁnitions of core concepts; improved control objectives
• Application controls reworked; business and IT goals improved
FIGURE 11-1
Background information on internal controls.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
351
Case-in-Point 11.1
A commonly-used source of information on reported cases of material
weaknesses for publicly-traded companies is Audit Analytics (www.auditanalytics.com). One
of the categories in this database is ‘‘senior management, tone, or reliability.’’ A recent study
of this particular category shows that audit ﬁrms issued adverse internal control opinions to
93 public companies (2005 to early 2008) because of weaknesses in ‘‘tone at the top.’’4
The personnel policies and practices that management adopts are an important aspect
of the control environment. For example, an important control procedure is employee
training programs that inform new hires about the company’s various policies, outline
individual responsibilities, and explain how to perform duties efﬁciently. Similarly, an
organization should also conduct regular reviews of its operations to determine if they
conform to desired operating policies. Many large and medium-sized enterprises have
separate internal audit departments, whose internal auditors test existing internal controls
for proper functioning and use. Small enterprises usually cannot afford their own internal
audit departments, but they can hire outside consultants or ask managers to test compliance
with operating policies.
Risk Assessment.
It is not possible or even desirable to install controls for every
possible risk or threat. The purpose of risk assessment is to identify organizational risks,
analyze their potential in terms of costs and likelihood of occurrence, and implement only
those controls whose projected beneﬁts outweigh their costs. A general rule is: The more
liquid an asset, the greater the risk of its misappropriation. To compensate for this increased
risk, stronger controls are required. The COSO report recommends the use of a cost-beneﬁt
analysis (discussed and illustrated later in this chapter) to determine whether the cost
to implement a speciﬁc control procedure is beneﬁcial enough to spend the money. We
expand on the topic of risk management in the next section.
Control Activities.
These are the policies and procedures that the management of
a company develops to help protect all of the different assets of the ﬁrm. Control
activities include a wide variety of activities throughout the ﬁrm and are typically a
combination of manual and automated controls. Some examples of these activities are
approvals, authorizations, veriﬁcations, reconciliations, reviews of operating performance,
and segregation of duties. Through properly designed and implemented control procedures,
management will have more conﬁdence that assets are being safeguarded and that the
accounting data processed by the accounting system are reliable. This chapter provides
several examples of control procedures, and also illustrates control activities that should
be included in every company’s internal control system.
Information and Communication.
Managers must inform employees about their
roles and responsibilities pertaining to internal control. This might include giving them
documents such as policies and procedures manuals (discussed later) or posting memo-
randa on the company’s intranet. This could also include training sessions for entry-level
personnel and then annual refresher training for continuing employees. Regardless of the
method, all employees need to understand how important their work is, how it relates to
the work of other employees in the ﬁrm, and how that relates to strong internal controls. It
is equally important that management understand the importance of keeping good working
4Hermanson, D., Ivancevich, D., and Ivancevich, S., ‘‘Tone at the Top,’’ Internal Auditor (November 2008),
pp. 39–45.

352
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
relationships between all layers of management so that employees feel safe communicating
any possible problems they may ﬁnd. When this is the case, employees at all levels can
actually enhance the effectiveness of good internal controls. Also, they will be much more
likely to point out any problems they may detect, and corrective action can be initiated.
Case-in-Point 11.2
Whistle-blowing systems help employees feel safe communicating
problems or suspected wrongdoing to management. However, many potential whistleblowers
continue to struggle with reporting problems that they witness because they are not sure
how to report what they know, or fear possible consequences of doing so. One solution to
this problem is to outsource the whistle-blower system—in fact, a recent survey of Chief
Audit Executives reports that 60% of the organizations included in the survey have already
outsourced their reporting systems.’’5
Monitoring.
Evaluation of internal controls should be an ongoing process. Managers
at various levels in the organization must evaluate the design and operation of controls
and then initiate corrective action when speciﬁc controls are not functioning prop-
erly. This could include daily observations and scrutiny, or management might prefer
regularly-scheduled evaluations. The scope and frequency of evaluations depend, to a large
extent, on management’s assessment of the risks the ﬁrm faces.
2004 COSO Report—Enterprise Risk Management
The 2004 COSO Enterprise Risk Management – Integrated Framework focuses on
enterprise risk management (ERM) and builds upon the 1992 COSO Internal Control
– Integrated Framework (ICIF). The ERM Framework (Figure 11-2) includes the ﬁve
components of ICIF (control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information
and communication, and monitoring) and adds three additional components: objective
setting, event identiﬁcation, and risk response.6
Objective Setting.
ERM offers management a process for setting objectives for the
ﬁrm—that is, the purposes or goals the ﬁrm hopes to achieve. ERM helps an organization
determine if the objectives are aligned with the organizational strategy and that goals are
consistent with the level of risk the organization is willing to take. An enterprise’s objectives
are viewed from four perspectives: (1) Strategic: the high-level goals and the mission of the
ﬁrm, (2) Operations: the day-to-day efﬁciency, performance, and proﬁtability of the ﬁrm,
(3) Reporting: the internal and external reporting of the ﬁrm, and (4) Compliance: with
laws and regulations.
Event Identiﬁcation and Risk Response.
Organizations must deal with a variety
of uncertainties because many events are beyond the control of management. Examples
include natural disasters, wars, unexpected actions of competitors, and changing conditions
in the marketplace. However, it is critical for management to identify these external risks
as quickly as possible and then consider internal and external factors regarding each event
5Baker, N., ‘‘See No Evil, Hear No Evil, Speak No Evil,’’ Internal Auditor (April 2008), pp. 39–43.
6Sources: COSO website (www.erm.coso.org); F. Martens and L. Nottingham, Enterprise Risk Management: A
Framework for Success, RE: Business, September 2003; and C. Chapman, Bringing ERM into Focus, Internal
Auditor Magazine, June 2003.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
353
Objective Setting
Event Identification
Risk Assessment
RISK CUBE
Risk Response
Control Activities
Information & Communication
Monitoring
Internal Environment
ENTITY-LEVEL
DIVISION
BUSINESS UNIT
SUBSIDIARY
STRATEGIC
OPERATIONS
REPORTING
COMPLIANCE
FIGURE 11-2
2004 COSO Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Framework.
that might affect its strategy and achievement of objectives. Depending on the type or
nature of events, management might be able to group some of them together and begin to
detect trends that may help with risk assessment.
Case-in-Point 11.3
The responsibility of the Director of the Arkansas Department of
Finance and Administration (DFA) is to ensure that state agencies operate uniformly and
efﬁciently. To help the Director achieve these DFA objectives, each state agency is required
to perform a risk assessment once every two years, and must complete a ‘‘Risk Assessment
and Control Activities Worksheet.’’7 This worksheet (Figure 11-3) helps department managers
across the state to think about their operations through a risk-assessment lens.
The objective of risk assessment is to manage and control risk by identifying threats,
analyzing the risks, and implementing cost-effective countermeasures to avoid, mitigate,
or transfer the risks to a third party (through insurance programs). As they identify and
categorize these risks, management will be in a better position to determine the probable
effects on the organization. Management can then formulate and evaluate possible response
options for the organization. In developing options, managers need to consider the level
of risk they are willing to assume, as well as the trade-offs between costs and beneﬁts of
each choice. A number of computerized risk assessment software tools already exist to
help managers with this task.
Case-in-Point 11.4
Managers need to ask themselves about the possible impact of certain
risks—would it be minimal, signiﬁcant, serious, or catastrophic?8 RiskPAC, a business risk
software solution, helps organizations detect and eliminate vulnerabilities in information sys-
tems and data security. CPACS, the company that developed RiskPAC, deﬁnes risk assessment
as identiﬁcation of the major risks and threats to which an organization’s reputation, business
7Source: http://www.arkansas.gov/dfa/accounting/acc ia risk.html.
8Source: http://www.cpacsweb.com/riskpac.html (business continuity planning software products)

Goals & Objectives
Department:
Activity:
Prepared By:
Actions to Manage Risks/
Control Activities
Date Prepared:
Risk Assessment and Control Activities Worksheet
(1)
1 
List all operations, financial reporting and compliance objectives associated with the activity. Goals should be clearly
 
defined, measurable and attainable.
2 
List all identified risks to the achievement of each goal and objective. Consider both internal and external risk factors.
 
For each goal and objective, several different risks can be identified.
3 
For each risk, estimate the potential impact on operations, financial reporting or compliance with laws and regulations,
 
assuming that the risk occurs. Consider both quantitative and qualitative costs. Use Large, Moderate or Small.
4 
For each risk, assess the likelihood of the risk occurring. Use probable, reasonably possible, or remote. Alternatively
 
use High, Medium of Low.
5 
For each risk with large or moderate impact and probable (high) or reasonable (medium) likelihood of occurrence,
 
list both the actions to mitigate the risk to an acceptable level and the control activities that help ensure that those
 
actions are carried out properly and in a timely manner. If no action is present to manage the risk and/or no control
 
activity is present, an action plan to address the risk and an associated timeline should be included.
 
Risks
Risk Assessment
Significance/Impact
Likelihood
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
FIGURE 11-3
An example of a risk assessment and control activities worksheet.
Source: http://www.arkansas.gov/dfa/accounting/acc ia risk.html.
354

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
355
processes, functions, and assets are exposed. RiskPAC helps organizations determine the
possibility that a harmful incident will occur (very likely, possible, probable, very unlikely).
2007 COBIT, Version 4.19
The ﬁrst edition of Control Objectives for Information and related Technology (COBIT)
was issued in 1996, and the latest edition, version 4.1, was issued in 2007. The COBIT
framework was created to be business focused, process oriented, controls based, and
measurement driven. If we examine the mission statement for COBIT, we can quickly
understand why this framework is widely used in corporate environments.
‘‘To research, develop, publicize, and promote an authoritative, up-to-date,
international set of generally accepted information technology control objectives
for day-to-day use by business managers, IT professionals, and assurance
professionals.’’10
The COBIT framework takes into consideration an organization’s business require-
ments, IT processes, and IT resources to support COSO requirements for the IT control
environment. This suggests, rightfully so, that managers must ﬁrst tend to the requirements
outlined in the 1992 COSO Report and set up an internal control system that consists
of these ﬁve components: (1) the control environment, (2) risk assessment, (3) control
activities, (4) information and communication, and (5) monitoring. The next step managers
should take is to work through the guidelines contained in the 2004 COSO Report (perhaps
using a worksheet like the one in Figure 11-3) to set objectives, identify possible risk
events, and then consider appropriate risk responses the organization might need to take
should an event occur.
Once the internal control system is in place (i.e., managers have worked through the
1992 and the 2004 COSO Frameworks), IT managers work with operational managers
throughout the organization to determine how IT resources can best support the business
processes. To achieve appropriate and effective governance of IT, senior managers of the
organization will typically focus on ﬁve areas. First, managers need to focus on strategic
alignment of IT operations with enterprise operations. Second, they must determine
whether the organization is realizing the expected beneﬁts (value) from IT investment.
Third, managers should continually assess whether the level of IT investments is optimal.
Fourth, senior management must determine their organization’s risk appetite and plan
accordingly. And ﬁnally, they must continuously measure and assess the performance of IT
resources. Here again is an opportunity for managers to consider a ‘‘dashboard’’ to have
access to key indicators of these ﬁve focus areas to support timely decision-making.
Perhaps it was the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and the many governance lapses prior to the
enactment of this legislation, that prompted the IT Governance Institute (ITGI) to recognize
a need for and to develop a framework for IT governance. This governance framework,
called Val IT, is a formal statement of principles and processes for IT management. Val IT is
tightly integrated with COBIT. Although COBIT helps organizations understand if they are
doing things right from an IT perspective, Val IT helps organizations understand if they are
making the right investments and optimizing the returns from them. So, COBIT focuses on
9Source: IT Governance Institute, http://www.itgi.org.
10Source: IT Governance Institute, http://www.itgi.org.

356
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Value Question
Are the right metrics in place to
ensure that the company achieves
the expected benefits from the
IT investment? 
Strategic Question
From a strategic perspective, are
we doing the right things to obtain
maximum value from our IT
investment? 
Delivery Question
Do we have the resources
(effective management, change
management) to get the most
from our IT investment? 
Architecture Question
Is our IT investment consistent
with our IT architecture (business
processes, data, information flows,
software, hardware, technology)? 
FIGURE 11-4
The integration of COBIT and Val IT.
Source: Adapted from the ISACA website (http://www.isaca.org).
the execution of IT operations, and Val IT focuses on the investment decision. Figure 11-4
diagrams the integration of COBIT and Val IT, which is described in considerable depth
in ‘‘The Val IT Framework 2.0 Extract.’’11 In essence, this is also a model for continuous
improvement for an organization’s IT governance program.
Val IT includes three very helpful publications that may be downloaded for free at the
ISACA website (www.isaca.org), and these documents are: (1) Val IT Framework 2.0, (2)
Val IT Getting Started with Value Management, and (3) Val IT The Business Case.
TYPES OF CONTROLS
A company’s control procedures are often classiﬁed into three major types: preventive
controls, detective controls, and corrective controls. This section examines each of these
types of control procedures in more detail.
Preventive Controls
Preventive controls are controls that management puts in place to prevent problems from
occurring. For example, a company might install a ﬁrewall to prevent unauthorized access
to the company’s network, thereby safeguarding the disclosure, alteration, or destruction
of sensitive information from external hackers. Enterprise Risk Management (discussed
earlier) helps managers identify areas where preventive controls should be in place. Under
the section called ‘‘Event Identiﬁcation’’ we said that management must identify possible
11Source: http://www.isaca.org.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
357
events that represent a problem to the ﬁrm and then identify appropriate responses to
those problems. James Cash calls this scenario planning, and it means management
identiﬁes scenarios of minor concern to major disasters that could occur.12 Management
should include a number of informed individuals in these brainstorming sessions, such
as the IS team, IT auditors, external auditors, and perhaps risk-management consultants.
First, management documents each scenario. Then, management must establish preventive
controls to minimize the likelihood of each problem they identify. As Cash points out,
preventive controls are never fail-safe, so a ﬁrm always needs detective controls to help
discover when preventive controls fail. We’ll talk more about the relationship of these two
controls later in this chapter.
Detective and Corrective Controls
Because preventive controls cannot stop every possible problem from occurring, orga-
nizations also need strong detective controls that alert managers when the preventive
controls fail. As an example, assume that a company’s information system prepares daily
responsibility accounting performance reports for management that computes variations
of actual production costs from standard production costs. If a signiﬁcant variance occurs,
a manager’s report signals this problem and the manager can initiate corrective action.
Examples of detective security controls are log monitoring and review, system audits, ﬁle
integrity checkers, and motion detection.13
Organizations can initiate corrective action only if corrective controls are in place. A
company establishes corrective controls to remedy problems it discovers by the detective
controls. Let’s assume, based on the above detective control example, that performance
reports repeatedly disclose that the company’s actual direct labor hours for production
work signiﬁcantly exceed the standard direct labor hours. A corrective control procedure
might be training programs that teach employees to perform their job functions more
efﬁciently and effectively.
Corrective controls are procedures a company uses to solve or correct a problem. An
example of this type of corrective control procedure might be a change to the company’s
procedures for creating backup copies of important business ﬁles. More than ever before,
companies realize the importance of this corrective control since 9/11 and the many natural
disasters that have occurred over the past few years.
Case-in-Point 11.5
Faced with many instances of fraud, hotels considered possible cor-
rective controls to protect themselves from litigation and protect their guests from identity
theft, without sacriﬁcing customer service. Let’s assume a guest calls, claiming that she
forgot to pick up her folio (the record of charges and payments). She politely asks the hotel’s
accounting department to fax a copy. Hotels used to oblige the customer and fax the folio,
which of course includes such information as the guest’s name, address, signature, and credit
card number. This seems like a nice service to a customer, but what if the person who called
was not the guest? Many hotels now use the following procedures: (1) computers do not print
the entire credit card number on the folio, and (2) folios are not faxed to anyone for any
reason. Instead, hotels typically mail a folio only to the address on the reservation.14
12James Cash, ‘‘It’s Reasonable to Prepare,’’ Information Week, No. 654 (October 27, 1997), p. 142.
13Source http://www.giac.org/resources/whitepaper/operations/207.php.
14Michael Barrier, ‘‘Unmasking Hotel Fraud,’’ Internal Auditor, Vol. 58 (April 2001), p. 28.

358
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Interrelationship of Preventive and Detective Controls
Management should not treat preventive control procedures and detective control proce-
dures separately. As we discussed earlier, these two controls work together to protect a
company’s internal control system.
CONTROL ACTIVITIES
Because each organization’s accounting system is unique, there are no standardized control
procedures that will work for every company. This means that each organization designs
and implements speciﬁc controls based on its particular needs. However, certain control
activities are common to every organization’s internal control system. The ones that we
will examine here are: (1) a good audit trail, (2) sound personnel policies and practices,
(3) separation of duties, (4) physical protection of assets, (5) internal reviews of controls,
and (6) timely performance reports.
Good Audit Trail
The basic inputs to an organization’s AIS are business transactions that are monetarily
measured. Organizations must keep an audit trail (initially discussed in Chapter 1) of these
transactions within the organization’s AIS. A good audit trail enables managers and auditors
to follow the path of the data recorded in transactions from the initial source documents
(for instance, a sales invoice) to the ﬁnal disposition of the data on a report. In addition,
managers and auditors can trace data from transactions on reports (such as expenses on an
income statement) back to the source documents. In both of these processes, individuals
can verify the accuracy of recorded business transactions. Without a good audit trail, errors
and irregularities are more likely to happen and not be detected. To establish its audit trail,
a company needs a policies and procedures manual. These documents should include the
following items:
• A chart of accounts that describes the purpose of each general ledger account so
that employees enter the debits and credits of accounting transactions in the correct
accounts.
• A complete description of the types of source documents individuals must use to record
accounting transactions. Also, include the correct procedures to prepare and approve
the data for these documents.
• A comprehensive description of the authority and responsibility assigned to each
individual. For example, who authorizes credit limits to customers?
Sound Personnel Policies and Practices
The employees at every level of a company are a very important part of the company’s
system of internal control. This is becoming increasingly obvious as managers downsize
and right-size their organizations to streamline operations and cut costs. Consequently,
there are fewer employees and these employees have more responsibility and oversight
than in the past. The obvious result is that the opportunity for misappropriation is greater
than before.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
359
In addition, the capabilities of a company’s employees directly affects the quality
of the goods and services provided by the company. In general, competent and honest
employees are more likely to help create value for an organization. Employees work
with organizational assets (e.g., handling cash, acquiring and issuing inventory, and using
equipment). Competent and honest employees, coupled with fair and equitable personnel
policies, lead to efﬁcient use of the company’s assets. Most organizations post their
personnel policies and procedures on their website so that they are easily accessible to all
employees at any time.
Case-in-Point 11.6
Employees at the University of Arizona have ready access to a wealth
of information regarding the university’s personnel policies by searching the Human Resources
Policy Manual (HRPM). The HRPM is available on the university website and includes policies on
employment, beneﬁts, compensation, employee relations, training and employee development,
and additional university policies (e.g., conﬂict of interest, code of research ethics, and
others).15
In general, little can be done to stop employees who are determined to embarrass,
harm, or disrupt an organization. For example, several employees may conspire (collude)
to embezzle cash receipts from customers. But, companies can encourage ethical behavior
among employees in several ways. First, review the rules and the Code of Conduct. A
number of organizations have too many ‘‘picky’’ rules that employees do not understand. To
avoid this type of problem, managers should create rules that make a positive contribution
to the productivity and effectiveness of a company, and then explain the rationale for
these rules to employees. Secondly, managers should always lead by example. Figure 11-5
identiﬁes some examples of personnel policies that ﬁrms might adopt.
All employees should be required to take their earned vacations (personnel policy
6). This is important for two reasons. First, if an employee is embezzling assets from an
organization, the employee will probably not want to take a vacation. When an individual
must go on vacation, another employee performs that person’s job responsibilities and
this increases the likelihood of detecting an embezzlement. Second, required vacations
help employees to rest, enabling them to return refreshed and ready to perform their job
functions more efﬁciently.
1. Speciﬁc procedures for hiring and retaining competent employees.
2. Training programs that prepare employees to perform their organizational functions efﬁciently.
3. Good supervision of the employees as they are working at their jobs on a daily basis.
4. Fair and equitable guidelines for employees’ salary increases and promotions.
5. Rotation of certain key employees in different jobs so that these employees become familiar with
various phases of their organization’s system.
6. Vacation requirement that all employees take the time off they have earned.
7. Insurance coverage on those employees who handle assets subject to theft (ﬁdelity bond).
8. Regular reviews of employees’ performances to evaluate whether they are carrying out their functions
efﬁciently and effectively, with corrective action for those employees not performing up to company
standards.
FIGURE 11-5
Examples of personnel policies that ﬁrms might adopt.
15Source: http://www.hr.arizona.edu/09 rel/clsstaffmanual.php.

360
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
For employees who handle assets susceptible to theft, such as a company’s cash and
inventory of merchandise, it is a good personnel policy (number 7) to obtain some type
of insurance coverage on them. Many organizations obtain ﬁdelity bond coverage (from
an insurance company) to reduce the risk of loss caused by employee theft of assets. The
insurance company investigates the backgrounds of the employees that an organization
wants to have bonded. When an insurance company issues one of these bonds, it assumes
liability (up to a speciﬁed dollar amount) for the employee named in the bond.
Separation of Duties
The purpose of separation of duties is to structure work assignments so that one
employee’s work serves as a check on another employee (or employees). When managers
design and implement an effective internal control system, they must try to separate
certain responsibilities. If possible, managers should assign the following three functions
to different employees: authorizing transactions, recording transactions, and maintaining
custody of assets.
Authorizing is the decision to approve transactions (e.g., a sales manager authorizing
a credit sale to a customer). Recording includes functions such as preparing source
documents, maintaining journals and ledgers, preparing reconciliations, and preparing
performance reports. Finally, custody of assets can be either direct, such as handling cash
or maintaining an inventory storeroom, or indirect, such as receiving customer checks
through the mail or writing checks on a company’s bank account. If two of these three
functions are the responsibility of the same employee, problems can occur.
We describe three real-world cases that demonstrate the importance of separating
duties. Immediately following each case is a brief analysis of the problem.
Case-in-Point 11.7
The controller of a Philippine subsidiary confessed to embezzling
more than $100,000 by taking advantage of currency conversions. The controller maintained
two accounts—one in Philippine pesos to deposit funds collected locally and the other account
in U.S. dollars so he could transfer funds from the Philippine account to the US account. The
auditor became suspicious when he noticed that each transfer was rounded to the nearest
thousand in pesos and dollars. For example, one day the statements showed an $885,000
(pesos) transfer from the local-currency account and a transfer of exactly $20,000 into the
U.S.-dollar account. Further investigation revealed that the controller was actually withdrawing
cash from the peso account, keeping some of the money, and depositing only enough pesos in
the U.S. currency account to show a transaction of exactly $20,000. Because the withdrawal
and the deposit took place almost simultaneously, the U.S. controller never suspected any
wrongdoing.16
Analysis.
The control weakness here is that the controller had responsibility for both
the custody of the cash (depositing the locally-collected funds in pesos) and the recording
of the transactions (the deposit of the funds in the local account and the transfer of funds to
the U.S. account). Consequently, he had control of the money throughout the process and
was able to manipulate cash transfers to embezzle small amounts of money each time and
then falsify the transactions that were recorded in each of the bank accounts to conceal
the embezzlement activity.
Case-in-Point 11.8
The utilities director of Newport Beach, California, was convicted of
embezzling $1.2 million from the city of Newport Beach over an 11-year period. The utilities
16Source: J. Mike Jacka, ‘‘Rounding Up Fraud,’’ Internal Auditor, April 2001, p. 65.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
361
director forged invoices or easement documents that authorized payments, for example, to real
or ﬁctitious city property owners for the rights to put water lines through their land. Ofﬁcials
within the Finance Department gave him the checks for delivery to the property owners. The
utilities director then forged signatures, endorsed the checks to himself, and deposited them
in his own accounts.
Analysis.
The control weakness here is that the utilities director had physical custody
of checks for the transactions he previously authorized. Due to the lack of separation
of duties, the director could authorize ﬁctitious transactions and subsequently divert the
related payments to his own accounts.
Case-in-Point 11.9
The executive assistant (EA) to the president of a home improvement
company used a corporate credit card, gift checks, and an online payment account to embezzle
$1.5 million in less than three years. The EA arranged hotel and airline reservations and
coordinated activities for the sales team. She was also responsible for reviewing the corporate
credit card bills and authorizing payment. The president gave her the authority to approve
amounts up to $100,000. When the EA realized that no one ever asked to look at the charges
on the corporate credit card bill, she began making personal purchases with the card.17
Analysis.
The control weakness here is that the EA was responsible for both recording
the expenses and then authorizing payment of the bills. As a result, she quickly realized
that she had nearly unlimited access to a variety of sources of funds from the company,
and then found other ways to have the company pay for the things she wanted (i.e., gift
checks and a Paypal account that she set up).
The separation of duties concept is very important in IT environments. However, the
way this concept is applied in these environments is often different. In today’s information
systems, for example, the computer can be programmed to perform one or more of the
previously mentioned functions (i.e., authorizing transactions, recording transactions, and
maintaining custody of assets). Thus, the computer replaces employees in performing the
function (or functions). For example, the pumps at many gas stations today are designed
so that customers can insert their debit or credit cards to pay for their gas. Consequently,
the computer performs all three functions: authorizes the transaction, maintains custody
of the ‘‘cash’’ asset, and records the transaction (and produces a receipt if you want one).
Physical Protection of Assets
A vital control activity that should be part of every organization’s internal control system
is the physical protection of its assets. Beyond simple protection from the elements, the
most common control is to establish accountability for the assets with custody documents.
Three application areas for this are (1) inventory controls, (2) document controls, and (3)
cash controls.
Inventory Control.
To protect inventory, organizations keep it in a storage area
accessible only to employees with custodial responsibility for the inventory asset. Similarly,
when purchasing inventory from vendors, another procedure is to require that each
shipment of inventory be delivered directly to the storage area. When the shipment arrives,
employees prepare a receiving report source document. This report, as illustrated in
Figure 11-6, provides documentation about each delivery, including the date received,
17Source: Paul Sutphen, ‘‘Stealing Funds for a Nest Egg,’’ Internal Auditor, (August 2008), pp. 87–91.

362
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Sarah's Sporting Goods
Receiving Report
No. 7824
Date Received:
January 26, 2010
Purchase Order
Number: 4362
Vendor: Richards Supply Company
Item
Number
Remarks:
Container with footballs received with water damage on outside, but footballs
appear to be okay.
Received by:
Inspected by:
Delivered to:
Quantity
Description
7434
7677
8326
8687
100
120
300
600
Spalding basketballs
Spalding footballs
Spalding baseballs
Penn tennis balls
Shipped via: UPS
FIGURE 11-6
Example of receiving report (items in boldface are preprinted).
vendor, shipper, and purchase order number. For every type of inventory item received,
the receiving report shows the item number, the quantity received (based on a count), and
a description.
The receiving report also includes space to identify the employee (or employees)
who received, counted, and inspected the inventory items, as well as space for remarks
regarding the condition of the items received. By signing the receiving report, the inventory
clerk (Mark Langley in Figure 11-6) formally establishes responsibility for the inventory
items. Any authorized employee can request inventory items from the storage area (for
instance, to replenish the shelves of the store) and is required to sign the inventory clerk’s
issuance report, which is another source document. The clerk is thereby relieved of further
responsibility for these requisitioned inventory items.
Document Control.
Certain organizational documents are themselves valuable and
must therefore be protected. Examples include the corporate charter, major contracts
with other companies, blank checks (the following case-in-point), and registration state-
ments required by the Securities and Exchange Commission. For control purposes, many
organizations keep such documents in ﬁreproof safes or in rented storage vaults offsite.
Case-in-Point 11.10
The Finance Ofﬁce in Inglewood, California did not have adequate
controls over important documents. As a result, a janitor who cleaned the Finance Ofﬁce had
access to blank checks that were left on someone’s desk. The janitor took 34 blank checks,

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
363
forged the names of city ofﬁcials, and then cashed them for amounts ranging from $50,000 to
$470,000.
Organizations that maintain physical control over blank checks may still be at risk of
embezzlement. You might be wondering how this could happen—it’s due to the fact that
so many banking transactions are electronic, and the method is known as a demand draft.
If you write a check to your 12-year-old babysitter, she has all the information needed to
clean out your account, because all she needs is your account number and bank routing
number. Originally, demand drafts were used to purchase items over the phone (i.e.,
from telemarketers). Now, they’re commonly used to pay monthly bills by having money
debited automatically from an individual’s checking account. Not surprisingly, due to the
limited amount of information needed to make a demand draft, the potential for fraud is
substantial. The irony of the demand draft system is that it may mean that paper checks are
ultimately more risky to use than e-payments.
Case-in-Point 11.11
The Urban Age Institute, a nonproﬁt organization that focuses on
planning new urban sustainability initiatives, received an email from a would-be donor who
asked for instructions on how to wire a $1,000 donation into the agency’s account. Not thinking
anything unusual about the request, the group sent its account numbers. The ‘‘donor’’ used
this information to print $10,000 worth of checks, which the ‘‘donor’’ cashed and then used
Western Union to wire the money to her new Internet boyfriend in Nigeria. The Director at
the Institute later discovered that the ‘‘donor’’ used the Institute’s account number and bank
routing number to obtain checks at Qchex.com. Fortunately, the Institute discovered the fraud
and was able to close its checking account before money was withdrawn to cover the $10,000
in checks, which had already been deposited into the donor’s Bank of America account.18
Cash Control.
Probably the most important physical safeguards are those for cash. This
asset is the most susceptible to theft by employees and to human error when employees
handle large amounts of it. In addition to ﬁdelity bond coverage for employees who handle
cash, companies should also (1) make the majority of cash disbursements for authorized
expenditures by check rather than in cash, and (2) deposit the daily cash receipts (either
received in the mail from credit customers or through cash sales) intact at the bank.
If a company has various small cash expenditures occurring during an accounting
period, it is usually more efﬁcient to pay cash for these expenditures than to write checks.
For good operating efﬁciency, an organization should use a petty cash fund for small,
miscellaneous expenditures. To exercise control over this fund, one employee, called the
petty cash custodian, should have responsibility for handling petty cash transactions. This
employee keeps the petty cash money in a locked box and is the only individual with
access to the fund.
Cash Disbursements by Check.
A good audit trail of cash disbursements is essential
to avoid errors and irregularities in the handling of cash. Accordingly, most organizations
use pre-numbered checks to maintain accountability for both issued and unissued checks.
When paying for inventory purchases, there are two basic systems for processing
vendor invoices: nonvoucher systems and voucher systems. Under a nonvoucher system,
every approved invoice is posted to individual vendor records in the accounts payable ﬁle
and then stored in an open invoice ﬁle. When an employee writes a cash disbursement
check to pay an invoice, he or she removes the invoice from the open-invoice ﬁle, marks it
18Source: http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7914159/, Bob Sullivan, ‘‘Easy Check Fraud Technique Draws
Scrutiny’’.

364
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Sarah's Sporting Goods
Disbursement Voucher
No. 76742
Debit Distribution
Account No.
Amount
Date Entered: February 9, 2010
Prepared by: 
4632
4636
6/30/2010
7/5/2010
$1250.00
675.00
$150.00
0.00
$22.00
13.50
$1078.00
661.50
27-330
27-339
28-019
29-321
$750.00
450.00
300.00
425.00
$1925.00
$150.00
$35.50
$1739.50
Vendor Number: 120
Vendor Invoice
Voucher Totals:
Number
Date
Amount
Returns &
Allowances
Purchase
Discount
Net
Remittance
Remit to:
Valley Supply Company
3617 Bridge Road
Farmington, CT 06032
FIGURE 11-7
Example of disbursement voucher (items in boldface are preprinted).
paid, and stores it in the paid-invoice ﬁle. Under a voucher system, the employee prepares
a disbursement voucher that identiﬁes the speciﬁc vendor, lists the outstanding invoices,
speciﬁes the general ledger accounts to be debited, and shows the net amount to pay
the vendor after deducting any returns and allowances as well as any purchase discount.
Figure 11-7 illustrates a disbursement voucher.
As Figure 11-7 discloses, the disbursement voucher summarizes the information
contained within a set of vendor invoices. When the company receives an invoice from
a vendor for the purchase of inventory, an employee compares it to the information
contained in copies of the purchase order and receiving report to determine the accuracy
and validity of the invoice. An employee should also check the vendor invoice for
mathematical accuracy. When the organization purchases supplies or services that do not
normally involve purchase order and receiving report source documents, the appropriate
supervisor approves the invoice.
A voucher system has two advantages over a non-voucher system: (1) it reduces the
number of cash disbursement checks that are written, because several invoices to the
same vendor can be included on one disbursement voucher, and (2) the disbursement
voucher is an internally-generated document. Thus, each voucher can be pre-numbered to
simplify the tracking of all payables, thereby contributing to an effective audit trail over
cash disbursements.
Cash Receipts Deposited Intact.
It is equally important to safeguard cash receipts.
As an effective control procedure, an organization should deposit intact each day’s
accumulation of cash receipts at a bank. In the typical retail organization, the total cash

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
365
receipts for any speciﬁc working day come from two major sources: checks arriving
by mail from credit-sales customers and currency and checks received from retail cash
sales.
Because cash receipts are deposited intact each day, employees cannot use any of
these cash inﬂows to make cash disbursements. Organizations use a separate checking
account for cash disbursements. When organizations ‘‘deposit intact’’ the cash receipts,
they can easily trace the audit trail of cash inﬂows to the bank deposit slip and the monthly
bank statement. On the other hand, if employees use some of the day’s receipts for cash
disbursements, the audit trail for cash becomes quite confusing, thereby increasing the risk
of undetected errors and irregularities.
Internal Reviews of Controls
As a result of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (often referred to as SOX), the internal audit function of
an organization typically reports directly to the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
This makes the internal audit department independent of the other corporate subsystems
and enhances objectivity when reviewing the operations of each subsystem. The internal
audit staff makes periodic reviews, called operational audits, of each department (or
subsystem) within its organization. These audits focus on evaluating the efﬁciency and
effectiveness of operations within a particular department. Upon completion of such an
audit, the internal auditors make recommendations to management for improving the
department’s operations.
A company’s internal auditors may also be asked to perform a fraud investigation if
managers suspect fraud within the organization. However, such an investigation requires
specialized forensic accounting skills. If the audit department personnel do not have
the requisite experience or skill to do such an investigation, the ﬁrm’s external auditors
may be able to help. In addition, internal auditors might need specialized information
technology (IT) skills for their work, because they are often involved in IT auditing, which
we discuss in Chapter 14.
In performing regular reviews of their company’s internal control system, the internal
auditors may ﬁnd that certain controls are not operating properly. For example, the
corporate policy manual might state that separate individuals should receive and record
customer payments. However, that does not guarantee that this is what actually happens. If
practice is not according to policy, it is the internal auditor’s job to identify such problems
and to inform management.
EVALUATING CONTROLS
Once controls are in place, it is a wise practice for management to evaluate them. We
introduced several frameworks at the beginning of this chapter that companies might use
to evaluate their internal controls, but regardless of how management chooses to evaluate
their internal controls, it is clear that they must do this. Based on requirements contained
in SOX, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) adopted rules that require all companies
listed on this exchange to maintain an internal audit function to provide management and
the audit committee ongoing assessments of the company’s risk management processes
and system of internal control.

366
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Requirements of Sarbanes-Oxley Act
As previously discussed, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 signiﬁcantly changed the way
internal auditors and management view internal controls within an organization. In partic-
ular, Section 404 contains very speciﬁc actions that the management of a publicly-traded
company must perform each year with respect to the system of internal controls within
the organization. Speciﬁcally, the annual ﬁnancial report of the company must include a
report on the ﬁrm’s internal controls. This report must include the following:
• A statement that management acknowledges its responsibility for establishing and
maintaining an adequate internal control structure and procedures for ﬁnancial reporting.
• An assessment, as of the end of the ﬁscal year, of the effectiveness of the internal control
structure and procedures for ﬁnancial reporting.
• An attestation by the company’s auditor that the assessment made by the management is
accurate.
A number of experts believe that some interesting synergies may have happened as
a result of companies becoming SOX compliant. Recall that the purpose of SOX was to
improve transparency and accountability in business processes and ﬁnancial accounting.
For this to happen, internal auditors and the management of companies had to study their
processes very carefully. However, if these same ﬁrms already implemented an ERP, then
most likely they already have reengineered some of their business processes to ﬁt the ERP.
During the evaluation of those processes, it is likely that the appropriate internal controls
were considered and included, enabling SOX compliance. In addition, for management to
comprehensively consider the requirements of SOX, they most likely used the Enterprise
Risk Management framework in the 2004 COSO Report.
Illustrations of Cost-Beneﬁt Analyses
Companies develop their own optimal internal control package by applying the cost-beneﬁt
concept. Under this concept, employees perform a cost-beneﬁt analysis on each control
procedure considered for implementation that compares the expected cost of designing,
implementing, and operating each control to the control’s expected beneﬁts. Only those
controls whose beneﬁts are expected to be greater than, or at least equal to, the expected
costs are implemented.
To illustrate a cost-beneﬁt analysis, let’s assume that the West End Boutique sells fash-
ionable high-end ladies’ clothing, jewelry, and other accessories. The owner is concerned
about how much inventory customers have shoplifted during the last several months, and is
considering some additional controls to minimize this shoplifting problem. If no additional
controls are implemented, the company’s accountant estimates that the total annual loss to
the boutique from shoplifting will be approximately $120,000. The company is considering
two alternative control procedures to safeguard the company’s inventory (Figure 11-8).
Based on the owner’s goal of reducing shoplifting, Alternative #1 (hiring six security
guards) is the ideal control procedure to implement. Shoplifting should be practically
zero, assuming that the guards are properly trained and perform their jobs in an effective
manner. Even if shoplifting is completely eliminated, however, Alternative #1 should not be
implemented. Why not? It costs too much. The control’s expected cost ($240,000 a year)
is greater than the control’s expected beneﬁt ($120,000 a year, which is the approximate
annual shoplifting loss that would be eliminated).

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
367
Alternative #1
Hire six plain-clothed security
guards to patrol the boutique.
Based on the annual salaries that
would have to be paid to the
security guards, this control
would cost West End Boutique an
estimated $240,000 a year.
Alternative #2
Hire two plain-clothed security
guards who would patrol the aisles,
and install several cameras and
mirrors throughout the company’s
premises to permit managers to
observe any shoplifters. The
estimated annual cost of this control
would be $80,000.
FIGURE 11-8
Internal control alternatives for West End Boutique.
If the owner implements Alternative #2 (hiring two security guards plus installing
cameras and mirrors), the boutique’s accountant estimates that the total annual loss from
shoplifting could be reduced from $120,000 to $25,000. The net beneﬁt is $95,000
(=$120,000—$25,000). Because the second alternative’s expected beneﬁt ($95,000 a year
reduction of shoplifting) exceeds its expected cost ($80,000 a year), the boutique’s owner
should select Alternative #2.
The point of this cost-beneﬁt analysis example is that in some situations, the design
and implementation of an ideal control procedure may be impractical. We are using the
term ideal control to mean a control procedure that reduces to practically zero the risk
of an undetected error (such as debiting the wrong account for the purchase of ofﬁce
supplies) or irregularity (such as shoplifting). If a speciﬁc control’s expected cost exceeds
its expected beneﬁt, as was true with the Alternative #1 control procedure discussed
above, the effect of implementing that control is a decrease in operating efﬁciency for
the company. From a cost-beneﬁt viewpoint, therefore, managers are sometimes forced
to design and implement control procedures for speciﬁc areas of their company that are
less than ideal. These managers must learn to live with the fact that, for example, some
irregularities may occur in their organizational system that will not be detected by the
internal control system.
Another approach to cost-beneﬁt analysis attempts to quantify the risk factor associated
with a speciﬁc area of a company. Risk assessment, as discussed earlier, is an important
component of an internal control system. In general, the beneﬁts of additional control
procedures result from reducing potential losses. A measure of loss should include both
the exposure (that is, the amount of potential loss associated with a control problem) and
the risk (that is, the probability that the control problem will occur). An example of a loss
measure is expected loss, computed as follows:
expected loss = risk × exposure
The expected loss is based on estimates of risk and exposure. To determine the
cost-effectiveness of a new control procedure, management estimates the expected loss
both with and without the new procedure. On completing these calculations, the estimated
beneﬁt of the new control procedure is equal to the reduction in the estimated expected
loss from implementing this procedure. Employees compare the estimated beneﬁt to
the incremental cost of the new control procedure. Whenever the estimated beneﬁt
exceeds this incremental cost, the company should implement the newly designed control
procedure.

368
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Without Control
With Control
Net Expected
Procedure
Procedure
Difference
Cost of payroll reprocessing
$10,000
$10,000
Risk of data errors
15%
1%
Reprocessing cost expected
($10,000 × risk)
$ 1,500
$
100
$1,400
Cost of validation control procedure
(an incremental cost)
$ 0
$
600
$ (600)
Net estimated beneﬁt from validation
control procedure
$
800
FIGURE 11-9
Cost-beneﬁt analysis of payroll validation control procedure.
To demonstrate this method of cost-beneﬁt analysis, assume that a company’s payroll
system prepares 12,000 checks biweekly. Data errors sometimes occur that require
reprocessing the entire payroll at a projected cost of $10,000. The company’s management
is considering the addition of a data validation control procedure that reduces the error rate
from 15% to 1%. This validation control procedure is expected to cost $600 per pay period.
Should the data validation control procedure be implemented? Figure 11-9 illustrates the
analysis to answer this question.
Figure 11-9 indicates that the reprocessing cost expected (=expected loss) is $1,500
without the validation control procedure and $100 with the validation control procedure.
Thus, implementing this control procedure provides an estimated reprocessing cost
reduction of $1,400. Because the $1,400 estimated cost reduction is greater than the $600
estimated cost of the control, the company should implement the procedure: the net
estimated beneﬁt is $800.
A Risk Matrix
Cost-beneﬁt analyses suffer from at least three problems. One is that not all cost consider-
ations can be expressed easily in monetary terms, and that nonmonetary (or qualitative)
items are often as important in evaluating decision alternatives in a cost-beneﬁt analysis. For
example, when an airport contemplates whether or not to install a control that might save
lives, it might be difﬁcult to quantify the beneﬁts. Admittedly, this is an extreme example,
but the point remains: often qualitative factors exist in a decision-making situation, which
requires a degree of subjectivity in the cost-beneﬁt analyses.
Another problem with cost-beneﬁt analyses is that some managers are not comfortable
with computations involving probabilities or averages. What does it mean, for example,
to state that on average 2.5 laptops are lost or stolen each year? Finally, a third problem
with cost-beneﬁt analyses is that they require an evaluation of all possible risks, and a
case-by-case computation of possible safeguards. Typically, companies will run out of
money for controls long before they run out of risks to mitigate.
A possible solution to this third problem is to develop a risk matrix, such as the one
in Figure 11-10—a tool especially useful for prioritizing large risks. As you can see, a risk
matrix classiﬁes each potential risk by mitigation cost and also by likelihood of occurrence.
As a result, highly-likely, costly events wind up in the upper-right corner of the matrix, and
events with small likelihoods of occurrence or negligible costs wind up in the lower left
corner. This helps managers see which events are most important (the upper-right ones),
and therefore how to better prioritize the money spent on internal controls.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
369
Cost to Organization
Negligible
Marginal
Critical
Catastrophic
Likelihood of Occurrence
Certain
Busy Street 
Likely
Hit by car 
Possible
Hit by piano
Unlikely
Burst Dam
Rare
Locust
Swarm 
Stampede
FIGURE 11-10
Example of a risk matrix.
AIS AT WORK
Using the Company Credit Card as a Nest Egg?19
Laura Jones, 22-years old, was very excited! She just got hired at a regional home
improvement company as the executive assistant to the president. The company was
eagerly planning an aggressive expansion of operations and was looking for ambitious and
eager employees willing to work hard as team players. To realize growth, the president of
the company knew they had to be very active in the industry, so the company sponsored
booths at trade shows, attended industry conferences, and had morale-building events for
its sales team in exciting places such as Hawaii.
Jones’ responsibilities included making all the arrangements for these activities. She
made hotel and airline reservations and coordinated activities for the sales team. She was
also responsible for reviewing the corporate credit card bills and authorizing payments.
The president gave her the authority to approve amounts up to $100,000. However, when
Jones realized that no one ever asked to look at the charges on the corporate credit card bill,
she began making personal purchases with the card. If total charges exceeded $100,000,
she simply forged the president’s signature on the approval form. When she learned that
the accounts payable department accepted approvals from the president by email, she
would slip into the president’s ofﬁce when he was at a meeting or out of town, access his
computer, and send herself an ‘‘approval’’ email.
But the temptation was so great that she began to ﬁnd additional ways the company
could pay for things she wanted. For example, she soon discovered that she could also
purchase gift checks with the corporate credit card, and over a two year period she bought
more than $150,000 in gift checks to buy items for herself, her family, and some friends.
When Jones had been with the ﬁrm for slightly less than three years, her scheme was
discovered. An agent at the credit card company noticed some questionable transactions
involving Jones and the corporate credit card. When the internal auditors investigated the
transactions, they discovered that Jones had embezzled more than $1.5 million.
19Source: Paul Sutphen, ‘‘Stealing Funds for a Nest Egg,’’ Internal Auditor, (August 2008), pp. 87–91.

370
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
SUMMARY
• An organization’s internal control system has four objectives: (1) to safeguard assets, (2) to check
the accuracy and reliability of accounting data, (3) to promote operational efﬁciency, and (4) to
encourage adherence to prescribed managerial policies.
• It is management’s responsibility to develop an internal control system.
• The control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and
monitoring are the ﬁve interrelated components that make up an internal control system.
• Six control activities to include in each organization’s internal control system are: (1) a good audit
trail, (2) sound personnel policies and practices, (3) separation of duties, (4) physical protection
of assets, (5) internal reviews of controls by internal audit subsystem, and (6) timely performance
reports.
• Within these six activities, speciﬁc control procedures should be designed and implemented for
each company based on its particular control needs.
• To develop an optimal internal control package, management should perform a cost-beneﬁt analysis
on each potential control procedure.
• A company should only implement those controls whose expected beneﬁts exceed, or at least
equal, their expected costs.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
audit trail
control activities
control environment
COBIT
corporate governance
corrective controls
COSO Report, 1992
COSO Report, 2004
demand draft
detective controls
enterprise risk management (ERM)
event identiﬁcation
expected loss
ﬁdelity bond
ideal control
internal control
objective setting
operational audits
preventive controls
risk assessment
risk matrix
risk response
SAS No. 94
scenario planning
separation of duties
SOX, Section 404
Val IT
TEST YOURSELF
Q11-1. This term describes the policies, plans, and procedures implemented by a ﬁrm to protect the
assets of the organization.
a. Internal control
b. SAS No. 94
c. Risk assessment
d. Monitoring
Q11-2. Which of the following is not one of the four objectives of an internal control system?
a. Safeguard assets

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
371
b. Promote ﬁrm proﬁtability
c. Promote operational efﬁciency
d. Encourage employees to follow managerial policies
Q11-3. Section 404 afﬁrms that management is responsible for establishing and maintaining an adequate
internal control structure. This Section may be found in which of the following?
a. The 1992 COSO Report
b. The 2004 COSO Report
c. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
d. COBIT
Q11-4. Which of the following would a manager most likely use to organize and evaluate corporate
governance structure?
a. The 1992 COSO Report
b. The 2004 COSO Report
c. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
d. COBIT
Q11-5. Which of the following would a manager most likely use for risk assessment across the
organization?
a. The 1992 COSO Report
b. The 2004 COSO Report
c. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
d. COBIT
Q11-6. An internal control system should consist of ﬁve components. Which of the following is not one
of those ﬁve components?
a. The control environment
b. Risk assessment
c. Monitoring
d. Performance evaluation
Q11-7. COSO recommends that ﬁrms
to determine whether they should implement a speciﬁc
control.
a. Use cost-beneﬁt analysis
b. Conduct a risk assessment
c. Consult with the internal auditors
d. Identify objectives
Q11-8. Which of the following is not one of the three additional components that was added in the
2004 COSO Report?
a. Objective setting
b. Risk assessment
c. Event identiﬁcation
d. Risk response
Q11-9. Separation of duties is an important control activity. If possible, managers should assign which
of the following three functions to different employees?
a. Analysis, authorizing, transactions
b. Custody, monitoring, detecting
c. Recording, authorizing, custody
d. Analysis, recording, transactions

372
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
11-1. What are the primary provisions of the 1992 COSO Report? The 2004 COSO Report?
11-2. What are the primary provisions of COBIT?
11-3. Why are the COSO and COBIT frameworks so important?
11-4. Brieﬂy discuss the interrelated components that should exist within an internal control system.
In your opinion, which component is the most important and why?
11-5. Why are accountants so concerned about their organization having an efﬁcient and effective
internal control system?
11-6. Discuss what you consider to be the major differences between preventive, detective, and
corrective control procedures. Give two examples of each type of control.
11-7. Why are competent employees important to an organization’s internal control system?
11-8. How can separation of duties reduce the risk of undetected errors and irregularities?
11-9. Discuss some of the advantages to an organization from using a voucher system and pre-numbered
checks for its cash disbursement transactions.
11-10. What role does cost-beneﬁt analysis play in an organization’s internal control system?
11-11. Why is it important for managers to evaluate internal controls?
PROBLEMS
11-12. You have been hired by the management of Alden, Inc. to review its control procedures for the
purchase, receipt, storage, and issuance of raw materials. You prepared the following comments,
which describe Alden’s procedures.
• Raw materials, which consist mainly of high-cost electronic components, are kept in a locked
storeroom. Storeroom personnel include a supervisor and four clerks. All are well trained,
competent, and adequately bonded. Raw materials are removed from the storeroom only upon
written or oral authorization from one of the production foremen.
• There are no perpetual inventory records; hence, the storeroom clerks do not keep records of
goods received or issued. To compensate for the lack of perpetual records, a physical inventory
count is taken monthly by the storeroom clerks, who are well supervised. Appropriate
procedures are followed in making the inventory count.
• After the physical count, the storeroom supervisor matches quantities counted against a
predetermined reorder level. If the count for a given part is below the reorder level, the
supervisor enters the part number on a materials requisition list and sends this list to
the accounts payable clerk. The accounts payable clerk prepares a purchase order for a
predetermined reorder quantity for each part and mails the purchase order to the vendor from
whom the part was last purchased.
• When ordered materials arrive at Alden, they are received by the storeroom clerks. The clerks
count the merchandise and see that the counts agree with the shipper’s bill of lading. All
vendors’ bills of lading are initialed, dated, and ﬁled in the storeroom to serve as receiving
reports.
a. List the internal control weaknesses in Alden’s procedures.
b. For each weakness that you identiﬁed, recommend an improvement(s).
11-13. Listed below are 12 internal control procedures or requirements for the expenditure cycle
(purchasing, payroll, accounts payable, and cash disbursements) of a manufacturing enterprise.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
373
For each of the following, identify the error or misstatement that would be prevented or detected
by its use.
a. Duties segregated between the cash payments and cash receipts functions
b. Signature plates kept under lock and key
c. The accounting department matches invoices to receiving reports or special authorizations
before payment
d. All checks mailed by someone other than the person preparing the payment voucher
e. The accounting department matches invoices to copies of purchase orders
f. Keep the blank stock of checks under lock and key
g. Use imprest accounts for payroll
h. Bank reconciliations performed by someone other than the one who writes checks and
handles cash
i. Use a check protector
j. Periodically conduct surprise counts of cash funds
k. Orders placed with approved vendors only
l. All purchases made by the purchasing department
11-14. Rogers, North, & Housour, LLC is a large, regional CPA ﬁrm. There are 74 employees at their
Glen Allen, SC ofﬁce. The administrative assistant at this ofﬁce approached Mr. Rogers, one of
the partners, to express her concerns about the inventory of miscellaneous supplies (e.g., pens,
pencils, paper, ﬂoppy disks, and envelopes) that this ofﬁce maintains for its clerical workers.
The ﬁrm stores these supplies on shelves at the back of the ofﬁce facility, easily accessible to all
company employees.
The administrative assistant, Sandra Collins, is concerned about the poor internal control
over these ofﬁce supplies. She estimates that the ﬁrm loses about $350/month due to theft of
supplies by company employees. To reduce this monthly loss, Sandra recommends a separate
room to store these supplies, and that a company employee be given full-time responsibility
for supervising the issuance of the supplies to those employees with a properly approved
requisition. By implementing these controls, Sandra believes this change might reduce the loss
of supplies from employee misappropriation to practically zero.
a. If you were Mr. Rogers, would you accept or reject Sandra’s control recommendations?
Explain why or why not.
b. Identify additional control procedures that the ﬁrm might implement to reduce the monthly
loss from theft of ofﬁce supplies.
11-15. Ron Mitchell is currently working his ﬁrst day as a ticket seller and cashier at the First Run Movie
Theater. When a customer walks up to the ticket booth, Ron collects the required admission
charge and issues the movie patron a ticket. To be admitted into the theater, the customer then
presents his or her ticket to the theater manager, who is stationed at the entrance. The manager
tears the ticket in half, keeping one half for himself and giving the other half to the customer.
While Ron was sitting in the ticket booth waiting for additional customers, he had a ‘‘brilliant’’
idea for stealing some of the cash from ticket sales. He reasoned that if he merely pocketed some of
the cash collections from the sale of tickets, no one would ever know. Because approximately 300
customers attend each performance, Ron believed that it would be difﬁcult for the theater man-
ager to keep a running count of the actual customers entering the theater. To further support his
reasoning, Ron noticed that the manager often has lengthy conversations with patrons at the door
and appears to make no attempt to count the actual number of people going into the movie house.
a. Will Ron Mitchell be able to steal cash receipts from the First Run Movie Theater with his
method and not be caught? Explain.
b. If you believe he will be caught, explain how his stealing activity will be discovered.
11-16. The Palmer Company manufactures various types of clothing products for women. To accumulate
the costs of manufacturing these products, the company’s accountants have established a

374
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
computerized cost accounting system. Every Monday morning, the prior week’s production
cost data are batched together and processed. One of the outputs of this processing function
is a production cost report for management that compares actual production costs to standard
production costs, and computes variances from standard. Management focuses on the signiﬁcant
variances as the basis for analyzing production performance.
Errors sometimes occur in processing a week’s production cost data. The cost of the
reprocessing work on a week’s production cost data is estimated to average about $12,000.
The company’s management is currently considering the addition of a data validation control
procedure within its cost accounting system that is estimated to reduce the risk of the data errors
from 16% to 2%, and this procedure is projected to cost $800/week.
a. Using these data, perform a cost-beneﬁt analysis of the data validation control procedure that
management is considering for its cost accounting system.
b. Based on your analysis, make a recommendation to management regarding the data validation
control procedure.
CASE ANALYSES
11-17. Gayton Menswear (Risk Assessment and Control Procedures)
The Gayton Menswear company was founded by Fred Williams in 1986 and has grown
steadily over the years. Fred now has 17 stores located throughout the central and northern
parts of the state. Because Fred was an accounting major in college and worked for a large
regional CPA ﬁrm for 13 years prior to opening his ﬁrst store, he places a lot of value on
internal controls. Further, he has always insisted on a state-of-the art accounting system
that connects all of his stores’ ﬁnancial transactions and reports.
Fred employs two internal auditors who monitor internal controls and also seek ways
to improve operational effectiveness. As part of the monitoring process, the internal
auditors take turns conducting periodic reviews of the accounting records. For instance,
the company takes a physical inventory at all stores once each year and an internal auditor
oversees the process. Chris Domangue, the most senior internal auditor, just completed a
review of the accounting records and discovered several items of concern. These were:
• Physical inventory counts varied from inventory book amounts by more than 5% at two
of the stores. In both cases, physical inventory was lower.
• Two of the stores seem to have an unusually high amount of sales returns for cash.
• In 10 of the stores gross proﬁt has dropped signiﬁcantly from the same time last year.
• At four of the stores, bank deposit slips did not match cash receipts.
• One of the stores had an unusual number of bounced checks. It appeared that the same
employee was responsible for approving each of the bounced checks.
• In seven of the stores, the amount of petty cash on hand did not correspond to the
amount in the petty cash account.
Requirement
1. For each of these concerns, identify a risk that may have created the problem.
2. Recommend an internal control procedure to prevent the problem in the future.

CHAPTER 11 / Introduction to Internal Control Systems
375
11-18. Cuts-n-Curves Athletic Club (Analyzing Internal Controls)
The Cuts-n-Curves Athletic Club is a state-wide chain of full-service ﬁtness clubs that cater
to the demographics of the state (about 60% of all adults are single). The clubs each have
an indoor swimming pool, exercise equipment, a running track, tanning booths, and a
smoothie caf´e for after-workout refreshments. The Club in Rosemont is open seven days a
week, from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Just inside the front doors is a reception desk where
an employee greets patrons. Members must present their membership card to be scanned
by the bar-code reader, and visitors pay a $16 daily fee.
When the employee at the desk collects cash for daily fees, he or she also has the visitor
complete a waiver form. The employee then deposits the cash in a locked box and ﬁles
the forms. At the end of each day the Club accountant collects the cash box, opens it,
removes the cash, and counts it. The accountant then gives a receipt for the cash amount
to the employee at the desk. The accountant takes the cash to the bank each evening. The
next morning, the accountant makes an entry in the cash receipts journal for the amount
indicated on the bank deposit slip.
Susan Richmond, the General Manager at the Rosemont Club, has some concerns about
the internal controls over cash. However, she is concerned that the cost of additional
controls may outweigh any beneﬁts. She decides to ask the organization’s outside auditor
to review the internal control procedures and to make suggestions for improvement.
Requirements:
1. Assume that you are the outside (staff) auditor. Your manager asks you to identify any
weaknesses in the existing internal control system over cash admission fees.
2. Recommend one improvement for each of the weaknesses you identiﬁed.
11-19. Emerson Department Store (Control Suggestions to Strengthen a
Payroll System)
As a recently hired internal auditor for the Emerson Department Store (which has approxi-
mately 500 employees on its payroll), you are currently reviewing the store’s procedures
for preparing and distributing the weekly payroll. These procedures are as follows.
• Each Monday morning the managers of the various departments (e.g., the women’s
clothing department, the toy department, and the home appliances department) turn in
their employees’ time cards for the previous week to the accountant (Morris Smith).
• Morris then accumulates the total hours worked by each employee and submits this
information to the store’s computer center to process the weekly payroll.
• The computer center prepares a transaction tape of employees’ hours worked and
then processes this tape with the employees’ payroll master tape ﬁle (containing such
things as each employee’s social security number, exemptions claimed, hourly wage
rate, year-to-date gross wages, FICA taxes withheld, and union dues deducted).
• The computer prints out a payroll register indicating each employee’s gross wages,
deductions, and net pay for the payroll period.
• The payroll register is then turned over to Morris, who, with help from the secretaries,
places the correct amount of currency in each employee’s pay envelope.

376
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
• The pay envelopes are provided to the department managers for distribution to their
employees on Monday afternoon.
To date, you have been unsuccessful in persuading the store’s management to use checks
rather than currency for paying the employees. Most managers that you have talked with
argue that the employees prefer to receive cash in their weekly pay envelopes so that they
do not have to bother going to the bank to cash their checks.
Requirements:
1. Assume that the store’s management refuses to change its current system of paying
the employees with cash. Identify some control procedures that could strengthen the
store’s current payroll preparation and distribution system.
2. Now assume that the store’s management is willing to consider other options for paying
employees. What alternatives would you suggest?
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Campbell, D., M. Campbell, & G. Adams. ‘‘Adding signiﬁcant value with internal controls,’’ The CPA
Journal (June 2006), pp. 20–25.
Campbell, M., G. Adams, D. Campbell, & M. Rose. ‘‘Internal audit can deliver more value,’’ Financial
Executive (Jan-Feb 2006), pp. 44–47.
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (CSOTC). Enterprise Risk
Management—Integrated Framework (COSO Report), New York: 2004.
Harrington, C. ‘‘Internal audit’s new role,’’ Journal of Accountancy (September 2004), p. 65–70.
Jeffrey, C. ‘‘From lemons to lemonade,’’ Risk Management (July 2008), pp. 48–51.
Joseph, G. & T. Engle. ‘‘The use of control self-assessment by independent auditors,’’ The CPA
Journal (December 2005), pp. 38–43.
Nolan, M. ‘‘Internal audit at the crossroads,’’ Risk Management (November 2008), pp. 54–55.
Shaw, J. & L. Garvin. ‘‘ERM in motion,’’ Risk Management (July 2006), pp. 24–29.
Singh, G. ‘‘What can SOX do for you?’’ Risk Management (April 2008), p. 78.
Thomson, J., ‘‘SOX 404 and ERM: Perfect partners or not?’’ The Journal of Corporate Accounting &
Finance (March/April 2007), pp. 29–36.
Walker, K. ‘‘SOX, ERP, and BPM,’’ Strategic Finance (December 2008), pp. 47–53.
Wells, J. ‘‘When the boss trumps internal controls,’’ Journal of Accountancy (February 2006), pp.
55–57.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. a
2. b
3. c
4. a
5. b
6. d
7. a
8. b
9. c

Chapter 12
Computer Controls for Organizations
and Accounting Information Systems
INTRODUCTION
GENERAL CONTROLS FOR ORGANIZATIONS
Integrated Security for the Organization
Organization-Level Controls
Personnel Policies
File Security Controls
Business Continuity Planning
Computer Facility Controls
Computer Access Controls
GENERAL CONTROLS FOR INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
Security for Wireless Technology
Controls for Networks
Controls for Personal Computers
IT Control Objectives for Sarbanes-Oxley
APPLICATION CONTROLS FOR TRANSACTION
PROCESSING
Input Controls
Processing Controls
Output Controls
AIS AT WORK—BIOMETRICS ARE OPENING
MANY EYES
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Simmons Corporation
MailMed Inc.
Bad Bad Benny
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Be familiar with the term ‘‘general computer
control objectives’’ and understand how these
objectives are achieved.
2. Be able to identify general controls for an orga-
nization and understand why they are essential
for corporate governance.
3. Understand general controls for information
technology (IT) and why these should be
considered when designing and implementing
accounting information systems.
4. Be familiar with IT general security and con-
trol issues for wireless technology, networked
systems, and personal computers.
5. Understand the value of the COBIT framework
and the part this guidance can play in helping
IT managers in an organization.
6. Know what input controls, processing controls,
and output controls are, and be familiar with
speciﬁc examples of control procedures for
each of these categories of controls.
377

378
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
‘‘One way organizations can manage security risks from insiders is to implement
centralized and automated identity and access management (IAM) controls.’’
Georg Aldhizer, III, ‘‘The Insider Threat,’’
Internal Auditor (April 2008), p. 71.
INTRODUCTION
This chapter continues the discussion of internal controls from Chapter 11 by focusing on
speciﬁc security and control procedures that organizations use at three different levels. The
highest level takes the perspective of ‘‘enterprise-wide,’’ which encourages organizations
to use resources efﬁciently. At the next level, we discuss general controls for information
technology (IT) that the organization uses. As we know, IT is pervasive, as are the
networks that may be used to access information—anytime, anywhere. One of the primary
challenges associated with all this connectivity is security. How do we protect sensitive
data and information that is stored or transferred from one device to another? The answer
is that organizations must have the appropriate security and control procedures in place.
Although no organization can be 100% conﬁdent that its assets are protected 24/7, the goal
is to obtain a reasonable level of assurance.
Application controls are the third level of controls that we cover in this chapter.
Because these controls are designed to protect transaction processing (i.e., to ensure
complete and accurate processing of data), they are automatically performed by the
information system. We discuss the various categories of application controls near the end
of the chapter.
GENERAL CONTROLS FOR ORGANIZATIONS
General controls begin with a security policy, a comprehensive plan that helps protect
an enterprise from both internal and external threats. Figure 12-1 contains issues that
organizations should consider when developing this policy.
In developing its security policies, an organization should also consider ISO 17799,
the international information security standards that establish information security best
practices.1 This Standard includes ten primary sections: security policy, system access
control, computer and operations management, system development and maintenance,
physical and environmental security, compliance, personnel security, security organization,
asset classiﬁcation and control, and business continuity management. ISO certiﬁcation is
becoming an important consideration as more businesses maintain a web presence. The
ﬁrst step to becoming certiﬁed under ISO 17799 is to comply with the Standard, and one
way to measure and manage compliance is to use a risk analysis tool such as the COSO
enterprise risk management (ERM) framework that we discussed in Chapter 11.
1Source: http://iso-17799.com

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
379
Issue
Example/Explanation
Identify and evaluate assets
• What assets need to be protected?
Identify threats
• What are the sources of potential security problems?
• Examples of external threats are viruses, worms, retaliation from
former employees.
• Examples of internal threats are misuse of assets by employees
and embezzlement.
Assess risk
• Loss of data, privacy, legal liability, loss of customers, etc.
Assign responsibilities
• Choose a development team to help identify potential threats in all
areas of the enterprise.
Establish security policies
• Outline security responsibilities, and who owns the speciﬁc systems
and data.
• Be sure to document these relative to computing and technology
platforms.
Implement across the
organization
• To ensure compliance; appoint individuals to monitor compliance;
allot necessary funds.
Manage the security program
• Top-level management oversight is critical.
Source: enterprisesecurity-symantec.com, Article ID: 1128.
FIGURE 12-1
Issues that should be considered when developing a security policy.
Integrated Security for the Organization
A current trend in security practice is to merge physical security and logical security
across an organization. Physical security refers to any measures that an organization uses
to protect its facilities, resources, or its proprietary data that are stored on physical
media. Logical security uses technology to limit access to the organization’s systems and
information to only authorized individuals. Figure 12-2 identiﬁes a number of examples of
physical security and logical security measures that ﬁrms commonly use. The IT Governance
Institute published a document that is speciﬁcally targeted at this task, called Information
Security Governance: Guidance for Boards of Directors and Executive Management, 2nd
Edition (2006).
Physical Security
facility monitoring (surveillance systems,
 
cameras, guards, exterior lighting)
access controls to facilities/data
 
center/computers (biometrics, access
 
cards)
alarm systems (fire, burglar, water,
 
humidity, power fluctuations)
shred sensitive documents
proper storage/disposal of hard drives and
 
other electronic storage media
secure storage of backup copies of data
 
and master copies of critical software
Logical Security
e-IDs and passwords
system authentication
biometrics
logs of logon attempts
application-level firewalls
anti-virus and anti-spyware
 
software
intrusion detection systems
encryption for data in transit
smart cards
FIGURE 12-2
Examples of physical security and logical security measures.

380
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Many ﬁrms now use an integrated approach to security by combining a number of
logical and physical security technologies, including ﬁrewalls, intrusion detection systems,
content ﬁltering, vulnerability management, virus protection, and virtual private networks.
An integrated security system, supported by a comprehensive security policy, can
signiﬁcantly reduce the risk of attack because it increases the costs and resources needed
by an intruder. According to security experts, convergence (of physical and logical security)
is the single most overlooked gap in enterprise-wide security—that is, the most insidious
security risks are those that slip between physical and logical security systems.2 Figure 12-3
and the following example illustrate this.
Case-in-Point 12.1
Assume Greg Smith is authorized to scrap inventory. He also has an
access badge for the warehouse where the scrapped inventory is located and could enter the
warehouse after hours. Although independently these actions are not particularly interesting,
Logical Systems
Access
ERP
Check
Inventory
Order
Material
Scraping
Scraping
Order
Released
Physical Systems
Access
Warehouse
Check
Scrapped
Material
Separate systems make organizations vulnerable!
Load
Material for
Shipping
Ship
Scrapped
Material
Greg
8:00 p.m.
11:00 a.m.
FIGURE 12-3
Diagram of the example in Case-in-Point 12-1.
2Source: http://www.alertenterprise.net/

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
381
when combined they create a wide variety of problems that could go unnoticed if the physical
and logical security systems are not integrated, such as fraud, which could lead to misstated
ﬁnancial statements.
Organization-Level Controls
As we discussed in the previous chapter, management’s philosophy, operating style,
integrity, policies, and procedures are all important characteristics that inﬂuence the tone
of a company. These characteristics help to establish the level of security and control
consciousness in the organization, which is the basis for the control environment.
Organization-level controls are particularly important because they often have a pervasive
impact on many other controls, such as IT general controls and application-level controls.
In 2007, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) released Auditing
Standard No. 5, ‘‘An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting that is Integrated
with an Audit of Financial Statements.’’ This Standard introduces a three-level framework
describing entity-level controls at varying levels of precision (direct, monitoring, and
indirect).3 Certainly, if the external auditor must evaluate these controls, then management
of the organization must also attend to these controls. We identiﬁed a number of these
controls in Chapter 11: management’s ethical values, philosophy, assignment of authority
and responsibility, and the effectiveness of the board of directors. Additional controls that
are also very important include the following:
• Consistent policies and procedures, such as formal codes of conduct and fraud-prevention
policies. For example, a company may require all employees to periodically sign a formal
code of conduct stipulating that computer resources are to be used only for appropriate
business purposes, and any acts of fraud or abuse will be prosecuted.
• Management’s risk assessment process.
• Centralized processing and controls.
• Controls to monitor results of operations.
• Controls to monitor other controls, including activities of the internal audit function, the
audit committee, and self-assessment programs.
• The period-end ﬁnancial reporting process.
• Board-approved policies that address signiﬁcant business-control and risk-management
practices.
In addition to these controls, management must have controls over the human
resources and data resources of the ﬁrm. We examine ﬁve types of general controls for IT
environments within the organization: (1) personnel policies; (2) ﬁle security controls; (3)
business continuity planning; (4) computer facility controls; and (5) access to computer
ﬁles.
Personnel Policies
An AIS depends heavily on people for creating the system, inputting data into the system,
supervising data processing during computer operations, distributing processed data to
3Source: http://www.pcaobus.org/Rules/Docket 021/2007-05-24 Release No 2007-005.pdf

382
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
authorized recipients, and using approved controls to ensure that these tasks are performed
properly. General controls within IT environments that affect personnel include: separation
of duties, use of computer accounts, and informal knowledge of employees.
Separation of Duties.
Within IT environments, separation of duties should be
designed and implemented by requiring separate accounting and IT subsystems or
departments, and also by separate responsibilities within the IT environment.
Separate Accounting and Information Processing from Other Subsystems.
An organization’s accounting and information processing subsystems are support functions
for the other organizational subsystems and should be independent, or separate, from
the subsystems that use data (accumulated by the accounting function and processed by
the information processing subsystem) and perform the various operational activities. To
achieve this separation, the functional design identiﬁed in Figure 12-4 should exist within
organizations.
Separate Responsibilities within IT Environment.
Highly integrated AISs often
combine procedures that used to be performed by separate individuals. Consequently,
an individual who has unlimited access to the computer, its programs, and live data also
has the opportunity to execute and subsequently conceal a fraud. To reduce this risk, a
company should design and implement effective separation of duties control procedures.
Figure 12-5 describes several functions within a company’s IT environment where it is
essential to divide the authority and responsibility for these two functions.
The design and implementation of effective separation-of-duties control procedures
make it difﬁcult for any one employee to commit a successful fraudulent activity. However,
detecting fraud is even more challenging when two or more individuals collude to override
separation-of-duties control procedures. A recent survey by the Association of Certiﬁed
Fraud Examiners (ACFE) reports that over 36% of all fraud cases are committed by two or
more individuals who work together to embezzle organizational assets. The median loss in
these cases is $500,000, compared to a median loss of $115,000 in fraud cases that involve
only one person.4
Case-in-Point 12.2
The former D.C. tax manager, Harriette Walters, was able to embezzle
more than $48 million over two decades largely because the culture in the ﬁnance ofﬁce in the
District of Columbia was one of apathy and silence. As a result, Walters and 10 accomplices,
1. User subsystems initiate and authorize all systems changes and transactions.
2. Asset custody resides with designated operational subsystems.
3. Corrections for errors detected in processing data are entered on an error log,
referred back to the speciﬁc user subsystem for correction, and subsequently
followed up on by the data control group (discussed shortly).
4. Changes to existing systems as well as all new systems require a formal written
authorization from the user subsystem.
FIGURE 12-4
Functional design to separate accounting and information processing subsystems
from other subsystems.
4Source: 2008 ACFE Report to the Nation; http://www.acfe.com/documents/2008-rttn.pdf

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
383
Function
Explanation of Function/Division
Systems
Analysis
Function
• Analyze information; process needs; design/modify application programs.
• The person performing this function should not perform other related functions. For
example, do not allow a programmer for a bank to use actual data to test her program
for processing loan payments (she could conceivably erase her own car loan balance).
Data Control
Function
• Use a data control group; maintain registers of computer access codes; help acquire
new accounting software (or upgrades); coordinate security controls with speciﬁc
computer personnel (e.g., database administrator); reconcile input/output; distribute
output to authorized users.
• Should be independent of computer operations. This function inhibits unauthorized
access to computer facility and contributes to more efﬁcient data processing opera-
tions.
Programming
Function
• Require formal authorizations for program changes; submit written description of
changes to a supervising manager for approval; test changes to programs prior to
implementation.
Computer
Operations
Function
• Rotate computer operators among jobs to avoid any single operator always overseeing
the same application.
• Do not give computer operators access to program documentation or logic.
• Two operators in the computer room during processing of data; maintain a processing
log and periodically review for evidence of irregularities.
• Without these control procedures a computer operator could alter a program (e.g., to
increase his salary).
Transaction
Authorization
Function
• For each batch of input data, user subsystems submit signed form to verify input data
are authorized and proper batch control totals are compiled.
• Data control group personnel verify signatures and batch control totals before pro-
cessing data.
• These procedures help prevent errors (e.g., a payroll clerk cannot submit unauthorized
form to increase pay rate).
AIS Library
Function
• Maintain custody of ﬁles, databases, and computer programs in separate storage area
called the AIS library.
• Limit access to ﬁles, databases, and programs for usage purposes to authorized
operators at scheduled times or with user authorization; maintain records of all usage.
• The librarian does not have computer access privileges.
(Regularly, data control group personnel review records for evidence of unauthorized
computer access.)
FIGURE 12-5
Divide certain authority and responsibility functions within an IT environment.
who did not work for the city, pleaded guilty to creating and laundering bogus tax refund
checks. The embezzlement scheme is the largest involving a city or state government.5
Use of Computer Accounts.
Most computer networks maintain a system of separate
computer accounts. Each user has an account and each account has a unique password.
When the user logs onto the computer, the system checks the password against a master list
of accounts. Only users with current passwords can access computer resources. Some orga-
nizations also use account numbers to allocate computer charges to departments. This con-
trol procedure is important to protect scarce computer resources from unauthorized use.
5Source: D. Nakamura and H. Harris, ‘‘Report on Embezzlement Blames ‘Culture of Apathy and Silence’,’’
washingtonpost.com (December 16, 2008), p. B04

384
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Although passwords have been the most used security method to grant users access,
IT administrators have a variety of problems with them. Individuals paste their passwords
on their monitors, share them with others, or choose simple passwords that are relatively
easy for a hacker to guess. As a result, many ﬁrms now use biometric identiﬁcation instead
(see Chapter 2).
Informal Knowledge of Employees.
The 2008 ACFE survey notes that employees
who are defrauding their organizations often display certain behaviors (red ﬂags) that can
alert co-workers and supervisors to trouble. Examples include lavish spending or becoming
very irritable or secretive. In particular, the survey results indicate that in over 38% of the
cases of fraud the fraudsters were living beyond their means, 34% had ﬁnancial difﬁculties,
20% had ‘‘wheeler-dealer’’ attitudes, 19% were unwilling to share duties (control issues),
and 17% had family problems or were in the middle of a divorce. Sadly, the survey
results indicate that the highest percentage of fraud involved employees in the accounting
department (29% of all cases reported by survey participants).
Although it might be difﬁcult for co-workers or supervisors to know intimate details of
co-workers personal lives, some of these behaviors may be observed without directly con-
fronting the ‘‘suspicious’’ co-worker. The threats to an organization by its own employees
should never be underestimated. To add emphasis to the need to be alert, PWC’s Global
State of Information Security Study estimated that people inside organizations were the
culprits in 69% of database breaches, and new technologies (e.g., ERPs, B2B processes,
mobile devices) make organizational data even more vulnerable to potential misappropri-
ation.6 Accordingly, it is essential for organizations to safeguard computer ﬁles in an AIS
from both intentional and unintentional errors. Figure 12-6 describes several reasons for
these safeguards.
1. The computer ﬁles are not human-readable. Controls must be installed to ensure that these
ﬁles can be read when necessary.
2. The typical computer ﬁle contains a vast amount of data. In general, it is not possible to
reconstruct such ﬁles from the memories of employees.
3. The data contained on computer ﬁles are in a very compact format. The destruction of as
little as one inch of recording medium means the loss of thousands of characters of data.
4. The data stored on computer ﬁles are permanent only to the extent that tiny bits have been
recorded on the recording tracks. Power disruptions, power surges, and even accidentally
dropping a disk pack, for example, may cause damage.
5. The data stored on computer ﬁles may be conﬁdential. Information such as advertising
plans, competitive bidding plans, payroll ﬁgures, and innovative software programs must be
protected from unwarranted use.
6. The reconstruction of ﬁle data is costly no matter how extensive a company’s recovery
procedures. It is usually more cost-effective to protect against ﬁle abuse than to depend on
backup procedures for ﬁle protection.
7. File information itself should be considered an asset of a company. As such, it deserves the
same protection accorded other organizational assets.
FIGURE 12-6
Reasons for safeguarding computer ﬁles from both accidental and intentional
errors.
6Source: James Roth & Donald Espersen. ‘‘The Insider Threat,’’ Internal Auditor (April 2008), pp. 71–73.

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
385
File Security Controls
The purpose of ﬁle security controls is to protect computer ﬁles from either accidental
or intentional abuse. For example, this requires control procedures to make sure that
computer programs use the correct ﬁles for data processing. Control procedures are also
needed for the purpose of creating backup copies of critical ﬁles in the event that original
copies of a ﬁle are lost, stolen, damaged, or vandalized. Figure 12-7 provides examples
of ﬁle security control procedures to verify that the correct ﬁle is being updated and to
prevent accidental destruction of ﬁles.
Business Continuity Planning
Organizations develop and test business continuity plans to be reasonably sure that they
will be able to operate in spite of any interruptions, such as power failures, IT system
crashes, natural disasters, supply chain problems, and others. Although the distinction
between business continuity plans and disaster recovery is not always obvious, they are
different. Business continuity planning is a more comprehensive approach to making
sure organizational activities continue normally, whereas disaster recovery is the process
and procedures that organizations follow to resume business after a disruptive event such
as an earthquake, a terrorist attack, or a serious computer virus. In this section, we discuss
disaster recovery controls, controls to ensure fault-tolerant systems, and controls to back
up data.
Disaster Recovery.
Examples of natural disasters include such events as ﬁres, ﬂoods,
hurricanes, and earthquakes, as well as man-made catastrophes (such as terrorist attacks).
An organization’s disaster recovery plan describes the procedures to be followed in the
event of an emergency, as well as the role of every member of the disaster recovery
team (which is made up of speciﬁc company employees). The company’s management
should appoint one person to be in charge of disaster recovery and one person to be
second-in-command.
An important part of any disaster recovery plan is the designation of a speciﬁc backup
site(s) to use for alternate computer processing. These backup sites may be other locations
File Security Control
Purpose of File Security Control
External ﬁle labels
• Identify contents of a computer ﬁle and help prevent an individual from
accidentally writing over a disk ﬁle.
Internal ﬁle labels
• Record name of a ﬁle, date ﬁle created, and other identifying data on the
ﬁle medium that will be read and veriﬁed by the computer.
• Internal ﬁle labels include header labels and trailer labels.
◦Header label is a ﬁle description at the beginning of a ﬁle.
◦Trailer label indicates end of a ﬁle and contains summary data on
contents of ﬁle.
Lockout procedures
• Use to prevent two applications from updating the same record or data
item at the same time.
Read-only ﬁle designation
• Use to earmark data on ﬂoppy disks so that data is available for reading
only, data cannot be altered by users, nor can new data be stored on
the ﬁle.
FIGURE 12-7
Examples of ﬁle security control procedures.

386
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
owned by the company, such as another branch of the same bank, or a site that is owned
by other organizations that can be used for short-term periods in the event of a disaster. It
is a good idea for the various hardware locations for data processing to be some distance
away from the original processing sites in case a disaster affects a regional location. An
example would be companies located in ﬂood zones.
Case-in-Point 12.3
USAA, a large insurance company in San Antonio, TX, engaged outside
consultants to help determine where the company should locate an alternate data processing
center for operations in the event of an emergency. The consulting ﬁrm suggested the company
build a second data center in the area as a backup. After weighing the costs and beneﬁts
of such a project, USAA initially concluded that it would be more efﬁcient to rent space on
the East Coast. Ironically, USAA was set to sign the lease contract the week of September
11, 2001. Instead, USAA built a center in Texas, only 200 miles away from its ofﬁces—close
enough to drive to, but far enough away to pull power from a different grid and water from a
different source.7
Disaster recovery sites may be either hot sites or cold sites. A hot site has a computer
system with capabilities similar to the system it will replace. A hot site that also includes
up-to-date backup data is called a ﬂying-start site because it can assume full data processing
operations within a matter of seconds or minutes. A cold site is a location where power
and environmentally controlled space are available to install processing equipment on
short notice. If a disaster recovery plan designates a cold site, then arrangements are also
necessary to obtain computer equipment matching the conﬁguration of equipment lost
in the disaster. In practice, the type of disaster recovery site used by a company should
be determined by a cost-beneﬁt analysis. Finally, simply preparing a disaster recovery plan
does not provide assurance that the plan will work when needed. It is also important to
periodically test the disaster recovery plan by simulating a disaster, thereby uncovering
weaknesses in the plan as well as preparing employees for such emergencies.
Copies of a disaster recovery plan will not be of much use if they are located only in
computer systems that are destroyed by a disaster. For this reason, members of a company’s
disaster recovery team should each keep current copies of the plan at their homes. Finally,
in addition to periodic testing, a disaster recovery plan should be reviewed on a continuous
basis and revised when necessary. This process is an integral part of business continuity
planning.
Case-in-Point 12.4
The Deloitte & Touche 2005 Business Continuity Survey was designed
to measure the business continuity management (BCM) program initiatives in both the public
and private sectors. BCM programs are being elevated and extended to the enterprise level
as executives become more involved in BCM governance, most likely due to their overall
accountability for risk management. Further, 70% of all respondents reported that most or
all functions of their organization have a developed and documented business continuity plan;
almost one third of the respondents reported that their organization budgeted over $1 million
annually for BCM8
Fault tolerant systems.
Organizations use fault-tolerant systems to deal with
computer errors and keep functioning so that data is accurate and complete. Fault-tolerant
systems are often based on the concept of redundancy. Computer systems can be made
7Source: http://www.csoonline.com/article/print/204450.
8Source: http://www.deloitte.com/dtt/cda/doc/content/us assur 2005%20BCM%20SURVEY%20REPORT.pdf.

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
387
fault-tolerant with duplicate communication paths or processors. Two major approaches
are as follows: (1) Systems with consensus-based protocols contain an odd number of
processors; if one processor disagrees with the others, it is thereafter ignored. (2) Some
systems use a second watchdog processor. If something happens to the ﬁrst processor,
the watchdog processor then takes over the processing work.
Disks can be made fault-tolerant through a process called disk mirroring (also known
as disk shadowing). This process involves writing all data in parallel to two disks. Should
one disk fail, the application program can automatically continue using the good disk.
At the transaction level, a fault-tolerant system can use rollback processing, in which
transactions are never written to disk until they are complete. Should there be a power
failure or should another fault occur while a transaction is being written, the database
program, at its ﬁrst opportunity, automatically rolls itself back (reverts) to its pre-fault state.
Backup.
Backup is similar to the redundancy concept in fault-tolerant systems. For
example, if you write a research paper on a computer, you would be wise to back up your
work on a ﬂash drive. As we know, a variety of unfortunate events could occur and you
might lose all of your work! If you used a computer in a lab on campus, you are probably
aware of the fact that the hard drives are automatically ‘‘cleaned’’ every night, so your
paper would not be on the hard drive of that computer the next day. And of course other
events such as a power failure or human error might occur and—poof!—your paper is
gone. However, if you copied your paper on a ﬂash drive, you created redundancy so that
a problem will not cause you to lose your work.
Because of the risk of losing data before, during, or after processing, organiza-
tions have an even greater need to establish backup procedures for their ﬁles. The
backup and reconstruction procedure typically used under batch processing is called the
grandfather-parent-child procedure. Very large organizations might store more than three
such copies (i.e., great-grandfather, great-great-grandfather) and banks typically keep many
more copies because of the nature of their business.
Three generations of reference data (i.e., previously processed data stored on master
ﬁles) are retained with the transaction data used during the general ledger updating process.
If the most recent master ﬁle, the ‘‘child’’ copy, is destroyed, the data are reconstructed by
rerunning the pertinent transaction data against the prior copy of the reference data (the
‘‘parent’’ master ﬁle). Should a problem occur during this reconstruction run, there is still
one more set of backup data (the ‘‘grandfather’’ master ﬁle) to reconstruct the parent. The
‘‘parent’’ master ﬁle is then used to reconstruct the ‘‘child’’ master ﬁle. Figure 12-8 depicts
this procedure.
With the sophisticated real-time systems widely used today, online backups are
common. A hot backup is a backup performed while the database is on-line and available
for read/write, whereas a cold backup is performed while the database is off-line and
unavailable to its users. During processing, the reference data (master ﬁle) are periodically
copied on a backup medium. A copy of all transaction data is stored as a transaction
log as these data are entered into the system. The backup copies are stored at a remote
site, which allows data to be recovered in the event a disaster occurs. Through a process
called electronic vaulting, the data on backup media can be electronically transmitted to
a remote site. Should the master ﬁle be destroyed or damaged, computer operations will
roll back to the most recent backup copy of the master ﬁle. Recovery is then achieved by
reprocessing the contents of the data transaction log against this master ﬁle backup copy.
A good disaster recovery plan also includes backups for hardware. With regard
to electrical power backup, surge protectors provide protection in the case of short,
intermittent power shortages or failures. However, large data processing centers may

388
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Journal voucher 
batch of transaction 
data 
Error and 
exception report 
Key in journal 
voucher data 
Unsorted 
journal 
vouchers 
If we lost the "child" master file, 
we could process the transaction 
file against the "parent" master file. 
Sort vouchers 
in chart of 
account order 
Edit input 
and update 
master file 
Sorted 
journal 
vouchers 
General 
ledger 
master 
(Parent) 
Parent 
Child 
Grandfather 
"Old" general ledger master 
from preceding batch process run 
(not shown on this day's run) 
Old general 
ledger 
master 
New general 
ledger 
master 
Sorted 
journal 
vouchers 
FIGURE 12-8
Grandfather–parent–child procedure under batch processing.
require additional generators for backup power. An uninterruptible power system
(UPS) is an auxiliary power supply that can smooth the ﬂow of power to the computer,
thereby preventing the loss of data due to momentary surges or dips in power. Should
a complete power failure occur, the UPS provides a backup power supply to keep the
computer system functioning.
Computer Facility Controls
Computer security experts point out that a blunt hammer trumps a strong password every
time. What this means is that the physical assets of the data processing center (such as

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
389
the web servers, the peripheral devices, and the disk ﬁles of the computer library) must
be protected. Here are some computer facility controls that prevent both unintentional
and intentional physical harm.
Locate Data Processing Centers in Safe Places.
Usually, organizations locate
data processing centers where the public does not have access. Locations away from public
scrutiny and guarded by personnel are obviously preferred, especially when the location
has a secured entrance. The location of a data processing center should also take into
consideration natural disasters. Although it is impossible to protect data processing centers
completely from such hazards, advanced planning can minimize exposure to them. For
example, companies can increase their protection from ﬁres by locating computer facilities
away from boiler rooms, heating furnaces, or fuel storage areas. Similarly, locating computer
facilities on high ground or the upper stories of ofﬁce buildings provides protection from
ﬂoods. Finally, locating computer facilities in single-story buildings or in heavily reinforced
ones can limit earthquake damage.
Limit Employee Access.
Few people have reason to be inside a data processing
center. Thus, another facility control is to limit access to those company personnel who
wear color-coded identiﬁcation badges with full-face pictures. Security badges typically
have embedded magnetic, electronic, or optical codes that can be read only by special
badge-reading devices. With advanced identiﬁcation techniques, it is possible to have each
employee’s entry into and exit from the data processing center automatically recorded in
a computer log, which should be periodically reviewed by supervisory personnel.
Another facility control is to place a guard at the entrance to the data processing center.
A man trap is a small antechamber room between a public corridor and a controlled room.
The inner door to the center is self-locking and can be ‘‘buzzed’’ open only by the control
person, who permits only authorized personnel to enter. Finally, issuing keys to authorized
personnel or using dial-lock combinations limits access to the data processing center. With
regard to this last control, it is also a good idea to change locks or lock combinations often
and to use keys that cannot easily be duplicated.
Buy Insurance.
Although insurance is usually thought to be an important method of
protection for computer systems, it is actually the protection of last resort. Insurance
does not protect the purchaser from loss, it merely compensates for losses if they occur.
Insurance policies for computer damages are usually limited in coverage which means
that not all instances of loss may be recoverable by the policyholder. Furthermore,
compensation usually is restricted to the actual losses suffered by a company. As you might
imagine, a fair estimate of what these actual losses entail is not an easy matter. Of special
difﬁculty is placing dollar values on a company’s computer equipment that has long since
lost any real market value, yet performs vital data processing services for the company.
Computer Access Controls
Regulating who is permitted logical access to computers and ﬁles is an important general
control in terms of safeguarding sensitive organizational data and software. Remote termi-
nals may be placed anywhere in the country and hooked up to a company’s computer
by means of ordinary telephone lines or Internet connection. As a result, it is difﬁcult
to safeguard logical computer access with direct physical surveillance of terminals. Most

390
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
computer systems therefore use passwords to restrict access. Such codes vary in length
and type of password information required, but all have the same intent: to limit logical
access to the computer only to those individuals authorized to have it.
Organizations should encourage employees to create strong passwords. Each char-
acter that is added to a password increases the protection that it provides. Passwords
should be 8 or more characters in length; 14 characters or longer is ideal. For instance, a
15-character password composed only of random letters and numbers is about 33,000 times
stronger than an 8-character password composed of characters from the entire keyboard.9
An ideal password combines both length and different types of symbols. The greater the
variety of characters (letters, numbers, and symbols) that are included in a password, the
harder it is to guess.
As we discussed earlier, passwords can be a problem because they can be lost,
given away, or stolen. Thus, security can be increased signiﬁcantly by using biometrics
and/or integrated security measures. Biometric identiﬁcation devices identify distinctive
user physical characteristics such as voice patterns, ﬁngerprints, facial patterns and
features, retina prints, body odor, signature dynamics, and keyboarding methods (i.e., the
way a user types certain groups of characters). When an individual wants to access a
company’s computer system, his or her biometric identiﬁcations are matched against those
accumulated within the computer. A match must occur for the individual to be given
access to the computer system.
GENERAL CONTROLS FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The major objectives of an organization’s IT controls are to provide reasonable assurance
that (1) development of, and changes to, computer programs are authorized, tested, and
approved before their usage, and (2) access to programs and data is granted only to
authorized users to increase the likelihood that processed accounting data are accurate
and complete. These IT general controls apply to all information systems. Accordingly,
the controls at this level are critical for reliance on application controls. For example, if an
employee is allowed to change a program, and that change was not properly authorized or
tested, the reliability of company data may be jeopardized.
Firms design and implement cost-effective controls for computers and computer
network systems to minimize known vulnerabilities to help protect the data and information
contained in these systems. In the process of designing and implementing a system of
computer controls for a company’s accounting system, the consistency, speed, and
ﬂexibility of a computer raise a number of control concerns (see Figure 12-9).
Ironically, sensitive data can sometimes be compromised by the companies who hold
the data, although that was not the intent at all, as is illustrated in the following case-in-point.
Case-in-Point 12.5
In violation of its own privacy policy, JetBlue gave about 5 million
passenger records to Torch Concepts (a Defense Department contractor). The CEO for JetBlue
said the decision to provide the data was a well-intentioned attempt to help the DoD in a
national security matter. Subsequently, JetBlue hired Deloitte & Touche to review the airlines’
privacy policy implementation. Unfortunately, the lack of controls over this data may cost the
airline a lot of money because of class action suits that have been ﬁled against the company
for releasing private information.10
9Source: http://www.microsoft.com/athome/security/privacy/password.mspx.
10A. Compart. ‘‘JetBlue Rues the Day it Shared its PNR Data.’’ Travel Weekly, September 29, 2003,Vol. 62, p. 69.

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
391
Control Concern
Explanation
Errors may be magniﬁed
For example, a computer prepares sales invoices by taking the quantity
input and multiplying this input by a price from the sales price master
ﬁle. But, if the computer selects incorrect sales prices, all sales invoices
will likely be incorrect.
Inadequate separation of
duties
Due to decreased manual involvement within the accounting system
Audit trails
May be reduced, eliminated, or exist only for a brief time in
computer-readable form
Unauthorized changes
By individuals who lack sufﬁcient understanding of control procedures
and accounting policies, or such changes made without adequate
testing or without the consent of management
Greater access to data
Data are a critical organizational resource. When entities have online
computer systems and computer networks, individuals can access data
from various points where terminals and online PCs are located.
Knowledgeable but unauthorized persons might access important ﬁles.
Characteristics of
magnetic or optical
media
Data are invisible.
Data (except for read-only memory) are erasable; thus, valuable data may
be lost.
Data are stored in compressed form—a single magnetic disk can hold as
much data as several ﬁle cabinets. A single CD-ROM has the storage
capacity of 700 ﬂoppy disks, which is equivalent to approximately
300,000 pages of text. Thus, damage to a single disk can result in the
loss of a large quantity of valuable accounting data.
FIGURE 12-9
The consistency, speed, and ﬂexibility of computers raise control concerns.
The U.S. government also considers computer security a critical issue that should be
addressed. In 2005, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) issued ﬁnal
guidelines on computer security controls for federal information systems. NIST believes
that these security guidelines will play a key role in helping federal agencies effectively
select and implement security controls and, by using a risk-based approach, do so in a
cost-effective manner.11 This document, which is mandatory for most federal systems,
will probably inﬂuence controls for systems at all governmental levels, businesses, and
other entities. Security controls (management, operational, and technical safeguards) are
critical to protect the conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability of a computer system and
its information.
Security for Wireless Technology
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, an important change in today’s business environment is the
desire for instantly connecting with one another and rapidly exchanging ideas and data.
Wireless ﬁdelity (Wi-Fi) technology is based on radio wave transmissions, which makes the
transmitted information vulnerable to interception. As a result, organizations that rely on
wireless technology must understand the vulnerabilities that exist and explore the various
methods of compensating for this risk.
Probably one of the largest users of wireless technology is education. Worldwide,
colleges and universities are installing wireless local area networks (WLANs) for a variety of
11Source: http://www.nist.gov/public affairs/releases/computer security.htm.

392
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
reasons: a technologically savvy and highly mobile audience (students and faculty); older,
often historic buildings (which cannot be wired); as well as innovative curricula that make
use of wireless applications. Probably the most important control for wireless technology
is installing a virtual private network (VPN), which is a security appliance that runs behind
a university’s (or a company’s) ﬁrewall and allows remote users to access entity resources
by using wireless, handheld devices.
Case-in-Point 12.6
The University of Michigan’s network infrastructure connects more
than 200 departmental LANs on three geographically dispersed campuses spanning 3177 acres
and 538 major buildings. The University recently contracted with a ﬁrm that provides Wi-Fi
security so that authorized users can easily access the University’s network with whichever
mobile device they choose (PDAs, laptops, digital mobile phones). This type of security is
known as a virtual private network.12
The risk of unauthorized access to data through electronic eavesdropping is minimized
by using data encryption. It can be used to prevent a company’s competitors from elec-
tronically monitoring conﬁdential data transmissions. Through an encryption technique,
data are converted into a scrambled format prior to their transmission and converted back
in a meaningful form once data transmission is ﬁnished. The encrypted data can be read
only by a person with a matching decryption key. Data encryption is relatively inexpensive.
Case-in-Point 12.7
Lancaster, California is an example of a whole city that decided
to adopt wireless communications technology. The initial installation included high-speed
Internet access and has the capacity to transmit voice, data, and video over the same line
simultaneously with exceptional speed. All of the transmissions are guarded by military grade
security.13
Controls for Networks
When desktop computers became economically feasible, ﬁrms began placing them through-
out the organization and linked them to a centralized computer to form a distributed data
processing (DDP) system. The basic objective of each remote computer was to meet the
speciﬁc processing needs of the remote location and communicate summary results to the
centralized (host) computer.
DDP systems are still viable in today’s business organizations. Large volumes of data are
regularly transmitted over long-distance telecommunications technologies. As with wireless
technology, the routine use of systems such as DDP and client/server computing increases
the potential control problems for companies. These problems include unauthorized access
to the computer system and its data through electronic eavesdropping (which allows
computer users to observe transmissions intended for someone else), hardware or software
malfunctions causing computer network system failures, and errors in data transmission.
Managers use data encryption to protect information. For example, many companies are
encrypting all of their email messages on Local Area Networks (LANs) and Wide Area
Networks (WANs).
To reduce the risk of computer network system failures, companies design their
network capacity to handle periods of peak transmission volume. Redundant components,
12Website: www.bluesocket.com and ‘‘Interworks and Bluesocket Supply University of Michigan with Wireless
Security,’’ Business Wire, January 26, 2004.
13‘‘City of Lancaster, California First to Install Revolutionary New Wireless Communications Technology,’’ PR
Newswire, February 18, 2004.

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
393
such as servers, are used so that a system can switch to a backup unit in the event of
hardware failure. To recover from such a failure, a control procedure, such as a checkpoint,
helps. Under a checkpoint control procedure, which is performed at periodic intervals
during processing, a company’s computer network system temporarily does not accept
new transactions. Instead, it completes updating procedures for all partially processed
transactions and then generates an exact copy of all data values and other information
needed to restart the system. The system records the checkpoint data on a separate disk
ﬁle and repeatedly executes this process several times per hour. Should a hardware failure
occur, the system is restarted by reading in the last checkpoint and then reprocessing only
those transactions that have occurred since the checkpoint.
Two control procedures that reduce the risk of errors in data transmission are routing
veriﬁcation procedures and message acknowledgment procedures. Routing veriﬁcation
procedures help to ensure that no transactions or messages are routed to the wrong
computer network system address. They work in the following manner: any transaction
or message transmitted over a network should have a header label that identiﬁes its
destination. Before sending the transaction or message, the system should verify that the
transaction or message destination is valid and is authorized to receive data. Finally, when
the transaction or message is received, the system should verify that the identity of the
receiving destination is consistent with the transaction’s or message’s destination code.
Message acknowledgment procedures are useful in preventing the loss of part or
all of a transaction or message on a computer network system. For example, if messages
contain a trailer label, the receiving destination (or unit) can check to verify that the
complete message was received. Furthermore, if large messages or sets of transactions are
transmitted in a batch, each message or transaction segment can be numbered sequentially.
The receiving destination can then check whether all parts of the messages or transactions
were received and were in the correct sequence. The receiving unit will signal the sending
unit regarding the outcome of this evaluation. Should the receiving unit detect a data
transmission error, the data will be retransmitted once the sending unit has been signaled
about this error.
Controls for Personal Computers
Developing control procedures for an organization’s portable laptops and desktop PCs
begins by taking an inventory of them throughout the organization. The various applications
for which each PC is used should also be identiﬁed. This should be followed by classifying
each PC according to the types of risks and exposures associated with its applications. To
discourage outright theft of desktop PCs, many companies bolt them in place or attach
monitors to desks with strong adhesives. A control procedure for laptops is to lock them
in cabinets before employees leave at night. Additional control procedures for laptops are
identiﬁed in Figure 12-10.
PCs are relatively inexpensive. Therefore, it may not be cost-effective for a company
to go to elaborate lengths to protect them. What companies should do is use inexpensive,
yet effective, control procedures for PCs. It should be noted that because of the compact
nature of laptop PCs, theft of these assets has become a big problem for both corporate
entities and government agencies.
Case-in-Point 12.8
Recently, an insurance company handled $1 billion in claims for stolen
laptops in a single year. In a survey of major corporations and large government agencies
conducted a few years ago by the Computer Security Institute and the FBI computer crime
squad, 69% of the respondents acknowledged incidents of laptop theft. One hundred ﬁfty

394
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Identify your laptop
• Which model? What conﬁguration? What is the serial number? Are there
any other unique identiﬁers? Without these details, law enforcement
agencies, airlines, hotels, and so on, have little chance of retrieving your
company’s stolen laptop.
• Keep a copy of all relevant information about your laptop in a safe place.
Leave it in your desk at the ofﬁce or at your home. Never tape the
relevant information to the laptop or store the information electronically
on the laptop’s hard disk.
Use nonbreakable cables to
attach laptops to stationary
furniture
• For example, in a hotel room be sure to use a cable or other security
device to attach the laptop to some stationary object such as a desk or
some other piece of heavy furniture.
Load anti-virus software onto
the hard disk
• Automatically perform an anti-virus scan whenever the laptop is turned
on or whenever a diskette is inserted.
• Have anti-virus scanning software check all changed or new ﬁles.
• Keep anti-virus software current. Keep virus deﬁnitions current.
Back up laptop information
• Never keep backups in the laptop case.
• While traveling, keep backup diskettes in a pocket or briefcase.
• If possible, back up to your company’s internal network via modem,
when you are out of the ofﬁce.
• Back up frequently and test regularly to ensure data integrity.
FIGURE 12-10
Additional control procedures for laptops.
organizations cited a total of over $13 million in ﬁnancial losses. The average annual price tag
of losses per organization was $86,920.
As laptops become more sophisticated, people are using them as primary PCs and are
saving large amounts of critical data on portable drives. Three simple safeguards are (1)
back up important laptop data often, (2) password protect them, and (3) encrypt sensitive
ﬁles. Organizations can also install anti-theft systems in them—for example, software that
uses the integrated web cam to take a picture of whoever uses it next, or GPS systems to
track the equipment itself.
Case-in-Point 12.9
‘‘Laptops hardly ever get backed up,’’ laments Scott Gaidano, pres-
ident of DriveSavers, ‘‘and because laptops are portable, they get into more adventures.’’
Among the many disasters he has seen regarding laptop computers include: one fell into the
Amazon River, one melted in a car ﬁre, one run over by a bus, and four dumped in bathtubs.
In each case, although the machine was trashed, the data were salvaged.
IT Control Objectives for Sarbanes-Oxley14
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX) profoundly impacts public companies, their
managers, the internal auditors, and the external auditors as they each assess internal
controls throughout the company to comply with the provisions of the Act. Companies
must also consider the requirements of the PCAOB Standard No. 2 (discussed at the
14Sources of information for this section: Cook, Lynn, ‘‘IT control objectives for Sarbanes-Oxley: New guidance on
IT control and compliance,’’ (October 31, 2003) at www.deloitte.com; and www.itgi.org (resource center—entire
document available as a pdf ﬁle).

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
395
beginning of this chapter) and PCAOB Standard No. 5. To help organizations comply with
SOX and the PCAOB requirements, the IT Governance Institute (ITGI) issued ‘‘IT Control
Objectives for Sarbanes-Oxley’’ in April 2004.
Neither the SOX legislation, nor the PCAOB Standards, includes detailed guidance for
organizations. The ITGI publication provides that detail by starting with the IT controls
from COBIT and linking those to the IT general control categories in the PCAOB standards,
and then the control objectives are linked to the COSO framework. As we discussed in
Chapter 11, COBIT is an IT governance framework that provides company-level objectives
and controls around those objectives, as well as activity-level objectives and controls. It is
important to point out that COBIT identiﬁes controls that may be used for both operational
and compliance objectives; however, the ITGC document only focuses on controls that
support ﬁnancial reporting.
APPLICATION CONTROLS FOR TRANSACTION PROCESSING
General controls focus on organization-level issues, while IT general controls apply to
all information systems. The purpose of application controls is to prevent, detect, and
correct errors and irregularities in processing transactions. The ITGI document discussed in
the previous section states that IT general controls and application controls are becoming
more integrated—that IT general controls support application controls and together they
ensure complete and accurate information processing. The point is that organizations
process information 24/7, and the typical manager cannot afford to wait several weeks for
manual reconciliation of an error.
Application controls are those controls that are embedded in business process appli-
cations. The three major stages of data processing work are accumulating the input data,
processing the data, and reporting the processed data in some form of output (e.g., a
performance report). We discuss various application control procedures for AISs based on
these three stages. First, we examine application controls over data input (called input
controls). Next, we identify application controls that are intended to protect the processing
of data (called processing controls), and ﬁnally, we survey application controls related to
data output (called output controls).
Figure 12-11 emphasizes the important point that a company’s application controls
consist of input, processing, and output controls. Because every company’s system is
somewhat different, each company must consider the risk of errors and irregularities
going undetected in processing its accounting data. The company must then design and
implement its own cost-effective combination of input, processing, and output application
controls.
Output Controls 
Input Controls 
Application Controls 
Processing Controls 
FIGURE 12-11
The composition of a company’s application controls.

396
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Input Controls
Although many organizations are now using automated systems to collect data (e.g.,
barcode scanners), some applications still require employees to manually enter data in the
information system. As a result, the risk of undetected errors and irregularities is typically
higher in this stage compared to the processing and output stages. In an attempt to reduce
this risk factor, the strongest application controls are commonly found in the input stage
of data processing.
Input controls help ensure the validity, accuracy, and completeness of the data
entered into an AIS. It is usually cost effective to test input data for the attributes of validity,
accuracy, and completeness as early as possible. There are at least ﬁve reasons for this:
1. Data that are rejected at the time they are input can be more easily corrected—for
example, by reference to a source document.
2. Data that have been transcribed accurately are not necessarily good data, merely data
that have been copied correctly. Further data testing is useful.
3. It is not cost-effective to screen accounting data continuously throughout the processing
cycles of an AIS. Past some point in the job stream, all data are considered valid and
error-free.
4. It is vital that an AIS use accurate data in later data processing operations. This protects
master ﬁles from inaccuracies and safeguards computer processing in subsequent stages
of the data processing work.
5. An AIS cannot provide good outputs if it does not start with good inputs.
For discussion purposes, it is convenient to divide the topic of input application
controls into three categories: (1) observation, recording, and transcription of data; (2) edit
tests; and (3) additional input controls.
Observation, Recording, and Transcription of Data.
In general, data enter an
AIS when business transactions are recorded. An organization often ﬁnds it useful to
install one or more observation control procedures to assist in collecting data that will be
recorded. One such control procedure is the introduction of a conﬁrmation mechanism—
for example, requiring a customer to sign, and therefore conﬁrm, a sales order.
The data observation process can also make use of dual observation. Under this
control procedure, the accuracy of the data observation process is enhanced because more
than one employee participates in the process. In some organizations, the dual observation
control procedure is supervisory. Here, the supervisor of the employee (or employees)
involved in collecting data is required to conﬁrm the accuracy of the data gathered by the
employee.
Once accounting data have been collected, they must be recorded. Data collection and
the subsequent recording of these data are areas in which a great deal of automation has
taken place. For example, the use of point-of-sale (POS) devices (such as bar code readers
that interpret the universal product code—UPC—commonly printed on store products and
smart cash registers that are connected to offsite computers) to encode data have been
found to substantially decrease error rates in the recording process as well as to eliminate
the expense involved in rekeying data.
In some instances, automated data collection and recording are not feasible, and an
initial source document must be prepared manually. To encourage accuracy in the data
collection and recording processes in these situations, several control procedures are

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
397
Matt Camera Company 
3 4 7 6 2 9 4 
8 4 3 1 
6 9 4 4 
5 
6 
3 
9 
2
2
7
0
E 5 2 
S L R 
C A M E R A S 
4 0 
1 
Larry Burns 
5362143 
14 West Avon Road 
Avon, CT 06001 
Employee Name 
No. 11345736-A 
Employee Number 
Inventory Part Number 
Supplier Account Number 
Quant. Received 
Unit 
Code 
1 = each 
2 = dozen 
3 = gross 
Serial Number 
(If Applicable) 
Cost per Unit 
Date 
Alphabetic Description of Item 
Supervisor's Signature 
Inventory Receipts Form 
1 
7 
8 
15 
16 
20 
40 
35 
34 
28 
27 
22 
41 
55 
21 
0
1
FIGURE 12-12
A preprinted recording form for inventory receipts.
possible. One example is to use preprinted recording forms, such as the inventory receipts
form illustrated in Figure 12-12. In general, these forms ensure that all the data required
for processing have been collected and also enhance accuracy in the recording process.
For example, the exact number of spaces required for such ﬁeld items as the inventory
part number and the supplier account number is clear because a box has been provided
for each numerical digit, thus guarding against the loss or addition of digits in these ﬁelds.
Organizations can use similar controls on web pages.
When using transcription, the data on source documents should be organized to
facilitate the transcription process. Thus, well-designed, preprinted source-document forms
are an important input control because they encourage adherence to the general principle
of source-document and computer-input compatibility. Specially-designed input forms are
the most commonly used method to enter data in a database. The person who designs the
form can make the electronic version look just like the old paper version of the form that
employees are accustomed to using. A big advantage of a database form is that it can be
designed to lock certain ﬁelds to prevent changes, to control certain ﬁelds so that a user
cannot enter an unreasonable value, to limit data values in certain ﬁelds, and a variety of
other useful input controls.
Edit Tests.
Programs or subroutines that check the validity and accuracy of input
data after the data have been entered and recorded on a machine-readable ﬁle are called
input validation routines (or edit programs). The speciﬁc types of validity and accuracy
checks that input validation routines perform are called edit tests (or edit checks). Edit tests
examine selected ﬁelds of input data and reject those transactions (or other types of data
input) whose data ﬁelds do not meet the preestablished standards of data quality. Real-time
processing systems perform edit tests during the data-entry process. Batch processing
systems (illustrated in Figure 12-13) execute edit tests before regular data processing.
Edit tests can also be coordinated in what is called a redundant data check to ensure
data accuracy. The idea is to encode repetitious data on a ﬁle or transaction record, thereby
enabling a later processing test to compare the two data items for compatibility. For
example, the reason you are always asked for the expiration date of your credit card is

398
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Transactions 
Rejected 
transactions 
Corrected 
transactions 
Valid 
transactions 
To file 
maintenance 
Transaction 
edit 
program 
Error 
correction 
program 
Merge with 
next batch of 
transactions 
Error 
report 
Correction 
procedures 
Reentry 
FIGURE 12-13
Use of edit program to execute edit tests under batch processing.
because that value is also encoded in the credit card number as well. Examples of edit tests
are listed in Figure 12-14.
Additional Input Controls.
It is possible for a data ﬁeld to pass all of the edit tests
previously described and still be invalid. To illustrate, a bank might use the incorrect
account number 537627 (instead of the proper account number 537621) when processing
a customer’s transaction. When the incorrect account number is keyed into a remote
terminal and submitted to edit tests, it will, for example, (1) pass a test of numeric ﬁeld
content ensuring that all digits were numeric, (2) pass a test of reasonableness ensuring that
the account number itself fell within a valid range of values (e.g., account number greater
than 100,000 and less than 800,000), (3) pass a test of sign (i.e., account number positive),
and (4) pass a test of completeness (i.e., no blanks in ﬁelds).
Thus, additional control procedures are required for this error to be detected. One
control procedure is to incorporate an unfound-record test into the data processing

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
399
Tests of:
Purpose
Numeric ﬁeld content
To make sure that such data ﬁelds as Social Security number,
sales invoice number, and date contain only numbers
Alphabetic ﬁeld content
To make sure such ﬁelds as customer name contain only
alphabetic letters
Alphanumeric ﬁeld content
To make sure that ﬁelds such as inventory parts descriptions
contain letters and/or numbers, but no special characters
Valid codes
e.g., 1 = cash sale; 2 = credit sale
Reasonableness
e.g., total hours worked by an employee during a weekly pay
period does not exceed 50
Sign
e.g., paycheck amounts always positive
Completeness
To check that there are no blanks in ﬁelds that require data
Sequence
To make sure that successive input data are in some prescribed
order (e.g., ascending, descending, chronological, alphabetical)
Consistency
e.g., all transactions for the same sales ofﬁce have the same
ofﬁce code number
FIGURE 12-14
Examples of edit tests.
routine used to update the master ﬁle of bank records. With this approach, any transaction
for which there is no corresponding master ﬁle record would be recognized as invalid
and rejected from the transaction sequence (it would be returned for correction). But
what if a master ﬁle record did exist for account 537627—the incorrect account number?
This would indeed be unfortunate because our ‘‘unfound-record’’ control procedure
would not detect the error, and, even worse, the legitimate master ﬁle record with
account number 537627 would be updated with the transaction data generated by another
customer.
Continuing with our bank example, an alternative to this unfound-record test is to
expand the six-digit data ﬁeld of customer bank account numbers to seven digits with a
check-digit control procedure. Normally, the check digit is computed as a mathematical
function of the other digits in a numeric ﬁeld, and its sole purpose is to test the validity of
the associated data. To illustrate, consider the original (correct) account number 537621.
The sum of these six digits is 5 + 3 + 7 + 6 + 2 + 1 = 24. One type of check digit would
append the low-order digit of this sum ‘‘4’’ to the account number. The seven-digit value
5376214 would be used instead of the six-digit series 537621 to represent the account
number. The computer program would duplicate this computational procedure at the time
of data access, and therefore validate the accuracy of the data before the transaction data
were used to update a master ﬁle record.
A check digit does not guarantee data validity. For example, the check-digit procedure
described here would be unable to distinguish between the correct account number
5376214 and the transposed number 5736214 because the transposition of digits does not
affect the sum. There are, however, check-digit techniques that do include ‘‘ordering of
digits’’ in the construction of check-digit values. An example of one of these techniques
is the Modulus 11 technique. Through this technique, the check digit is calculated by
subtracting the sum of the digit products from the next highest multiple of 11. An example
to illustrate the calculation of a check digit under the Modulus 11 technique is provided in
Figure 12-15.

400
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Four digits of employee number:
3
4
7
8
Weighting factors:
5
4
3
2
Digit products:
15
16
21
16
Sum of digit products:
68
Next higher multiple of 11
(11 × 7):
77
Check digit (difference of
above two numbers):
9
Employee’s new payroll
number:
34789
Let’s assume that in preparing the Alan Company’s biweekly payroll, two of the employees have
the following payroll numbers: 3478 and 3748. To utilize the Modulus 11 technique for our check-
digit control procedure, we determine the check-digit value for an employee’s payroll number by
applying an algorithm based on each employee’s four digits. The calculation below shows under
the Modulus 11 technique how we arrived at the check-digit value of 9 to append to the pay-
roll number 3478 to come up with the employee’s new payroll number using the Modulus 11
technique.
Validation involves having the computer recompute the check digit, using the same algorithm
by which this digit was predetermined. The computer then compares the result of the recomputa-
tion to the original keyed-in value. If a particular payroll transaction involves the correct employee
number 34789 and this number was properly keyed into the system, the algorithm will generate
a 9 as the check digit. Since the digit 9 is the same as the last digit on the employee payroll
number, the computer accepts the number as correct. On the other hand, if the incorrect number
37489 is entered by mistake for the above payroll transaction (the digits 3748 represent the four
digits of the other employee’s payroll number before a check digit is added), the check digit gen- 
erated by the algorithm will be 6, computed as follows: (3 × 5) + (7 × 4) + (4 × 3) + (8 × 2) = 71.
The next highest multiple of 11 is 77:77 minus 71 = 6. Since this check digit of 6 is not the same
as the last digit on the entered number (which is a 9), the employee payroll number 37489 will be
rejected by the computer as incorrect.
FIGURE 12-15
Illustration of Modulus 11 technique for calculating a check digit.
Processing Controls
Processing controls focus on the manipulation of accounting data after they are input to
the computer system. An important objective of processing controls is to contribute to a
good audit trail. A clear audit trail is essential, for example, to enable individual transactions
to trace, to provide documentation for changes in general ledger account balances, to
prepare ﬁnancial reports, and to correct errors in transactions. To achieve a good audit
trail, require a printed transaction listing during each ﬁle-update by batch processing
systems and at the end of every day by online processing systems.
Furthermore, use a unique and sequentially assigned transaction reference designator
to identify each transaction in a listing. These transaction reference designators should
be posted to the general ledger account records and recorded on the speciﬁc source
documents pertaining to the transactions. Figure 12-16 illustrates an audit trail for a
computer-based system, showing how source documents can be easily located by tracing
back from an activity (or proof) listing, which is discussed shortly under output controls.
Control Totals.
Suppose you were the data processing manager at a bank that processed
over 100,000 bank checks per day. How would you make sure that all these checks are

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
401
CC 
AMOUNT 2 
Transaction 
listing 
AMOUNT 2 
AMOUNT 1 
Activity listing (here 
an account change report) 
AMOUNT 2 
AMOUNT 1 
AMOUNTS 
BAL YYYY.YY 
CC 
BB 
CHANGES 
ACCT. NO XXX 
CC 
BB 
Source 
document 
BB, CC are transaction reference designators 
BB 
AMOUNT 1 
FIGURE 12-16
An audit trail for a computer-based system.
correctly processed by the computer? One procedure is to batch the checks in separate
bundles of, say 200 checks, and prepare a special batch control document to serve as a
control on the contents of each bundle. The information on this document might include
the bundle number, today’s date, and the total dollar amount for the checks themselves.
The total dollar amount represents the batch control total. When computer processing
commences, the special information on the lead control record (i.e., the batch control
document) is accessed ﬁrst and the batch control total is stored in computer memory.
As the checks are accessed individually, their amounts are also accumulated in computer
memory. Once all the checks in the batch are read, the accumulated total is compared
with the batch control total. A match signals acceptable processing. A non-match signals
an error, which may then be traced either to an error in the batch control total or to some
difﬁculty in processing—e.g., the inability of the MICR reader to understand the data on
one or more checks.
In fact, MICR readers are themselves a form of control. An original check has a line of
magnetic ink with speciﬁc information that is recognized by highly reliable MICR readers.
Even the best printers do not use this magnetic ink and copied checks can therefore be
detected immediately.15
A control total that involves a dollar amount is called a ﬁnancial control total. Other
examples of ﬁnancial control totals include the sum of cash receipts in an accounts
receivable application, the sum of cash disbursements in an accounts payable application,
and the sum of net pay in a payroll application.
AISs also use nonﬁnancial control totals, which compute nondollar sums—for
example, the sum of the total number of hours worked by employees in a payroll
application. A similar control is a record count. With this control procedure, the number
of transaction items is counted twice: once when preparing transactions in a batch and
again when actually performing the data processing. Yet a third example is the exact byte
count of a legitimate computer program, which IT personnel can use to detect tampering.
Control totals do not have to make sense to be useful. For example, when cash receipts
from customers are processed, the manual sum of the customers’ account numbers in a
batch of transactions might be computed to form a hash total. This sum is meaningless,
but is useful as a check against an ‘‘internal’’ tally of this same hash total by the computer
at the time of data access.
Data Manipulation Controls.
Once data have been validated by earlier portions
of data processing, they usually must be manipulated (i.e., processed) in some way
by computer programs to produce decision-useful information, such as a report. One
15www.pointofsale.com

402
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
processing control procedure is to make sure that the computer programs are complete
and thorough in their data manipulation. Ordinarily, this is accomplished by examining
software documentation. System ﬂowcharts, program ﬂowcharts, data ﬂow diagrams, and
decision tables can also function as controls because they help systems analysts do a
thorough job in planning data processing functions.
After computer programs have been coded, they are translated into machine language
by an error-testing compiler. The compiler controls the possibility that a computer
program contains programming language errors. A computer program can also be tested
with specially designed test data that expose the program to all the exception conditions
likely to occur during its actual use.
Output Controls
Once data have been processed internally by a computer system, they are usually transferred
to some form of output medium for storage, screen display, or in the case of printed output,
prepared as a report. The objective of output controls is to ensure the output’s validity,
accuracy, and completeness. Two major types of output application controls within IT
environments are (1) validating processing results and (2) regulating the distribution and
use of printed output.
Validating Processing Results.
The validity, accuracy, and completeness of com-
puterized output in AISs can be established through the preparation of activity (or proof)
listings that document processing activity. (A simpliﬁed activity listing was illustrated in
Figure 12-16.) These listings provide complete, detailed information about all changes
to master ﬁles, and thus contribute to a good audit trail. Organizational employees use
such activity listings to trace ﬁle changes back to the events or documents that triggered
these changes and thereby verify current ﬁle information or printed information as valid,
accurate, and complete output.
Regulating Distribution and Use of Printed Output.
One of the more compelling
aspects of output control deals with the subject of forms control. Perhaps the most
interesting situations involve computerized check-writing applications in which MICR
forms or perforated printer forms become the encoding media for preparing a company’s
checks. Usually, these forms are preprinted with the company’s name, address, and bank
account number. Control over the forms associated with check writing is vital.
The most common type of control used with computer-generated check-writing
procedures is the coordination of a preprinted check number on the printer form with a
computer-generated number that is printed on the same form at run time. The numbers
on these pre-numbered forms advance sequentially and are prepared by the forms’
supplier according to the speciﬁcations of an organization. The computer-generated
numbers also run sequentially and are initialized by adding 1 to the check sequence
number stored from the last processing run. The numbers on the pre-numbered forms and
the computer-generated numbers should match during normal processing. Discrepancies
should be examined carefully and the causes fully resolved. Other examples of forms that
enjoy a special control advantage when pre-numbered include reports containing sensitive
corporate information and computer-generated lottery and athletic event tickets.
Computer reports often contain sensitive information, and it is important that such
information be restricted. Thus, for example, a payroll register, indicating the earnings of
each employee during a given pay period, is a type of report whose distribution should be

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
403
restricted. The most common approach to distributional control is through an authorized
distribution list. For each output report (hard copy or electronic), distribution is limited to
authorized users only. Where data processing activities are centralized, it is sometimes the
case that the user will physically visit the computer facility to pick up a copy of a sensitive
report. In these instances, a notebook, or log, of pickups can be maintained and the pickup
employee asked to sign the book. The employee’s identiﬁcation number is recorded for
security purposes at the time the report is taken.
In situations where it is not possible to have representatives from user groups pick up
reports, bonded employees can be authorized to deliver the reports to users. Subsequently,
random checks on the distribution of these reports can be made by the bonded employees’
supervisors to verify distribution. After sensitive reports are no longer needed, it is
important to properly destroy them (i.e., use a document shredder). Shredding reports is
a stronger control than throwing them away because discarded reports can be retrieved
from trash bins.
AIS AT WORK
Biometrics Are Opening Many Eyes16
Databases are one of the most critical assets of any Global 2000 enterprise and are
often overlooked by managers when assessing and ensuring the appropriate levels of
IT security. An increasing number of serious attacks by hackers and viruses, and the
frequent security-related patches and service packs, continue to vex security and database
administrators. And no wonder! A perfect example of this is the Internet Crash in 2003
that we discussed in Chapter 10. The attacker was able to achieve such widespread havoc
by taking advantage of a weakness in Microsoft’s SQL Server 2000 software. According to
Davoll at PentaSafe, ‘‘What we are seeing from customers is that while they are methodically
locking down operating systems and Web servers, they are not consistently taking the same
steps to secure their underlying databases.’’
A variety of integrated security solutions are available that speciﬁcally address the
security issues that concern database security managers. These include vulnerability
assessments, database auditing, and intrusion protection through passwords and biometrics.
United Bankers’ Bank (UBB) is one of the largest banks in the Federal Reserve’s
9th District, with more than 1,200 community banks. After a considerable amount of
investigation into various biometric options, UBB determined that ﬁngerprint authentication
was the most trusted, practical, and affordable. In 2004, UBB changed to ﬁngerprint
authentication to eliminate the hassles and security vulnerabilities associated with employee
and customer-driven password management. The ﬁngerprint system is used to authenticate
employees’ entry into the bank as they arrive in the morning and to access other applications
during their workday.
Attacks on databases can (and do) occur from both inside and outside the company’s
ﬁrewalls. Biometrics can be used in conjunction with other security measures to help
protect databases. After all, even Kevin Mitnick (probably still the most widely known
hacker in the U.S.) is quick to point out that the end-user is the weakest link in the security
chain.
16Sources: ‘‘Biometrics are Opening Many Eyes,’’ Banking Wire (2004) Vol. 8, p.54. ‘‘PentaSafe Extends Database
Security to Microsoft SQL Server,’’ PR Newswire (November 5, 2002).

404
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
SUMMARY
• Firms are using an integrated approach to security by combining a number of technologies,
including: ﬁrewalls, intrusion detection systems, content ﬁltering, vulnerability management, virus
protection, and virtual private networks.
• An integrated security system, supported by a comprehensive security policy, can signiﬁcantly
reduce the risk of attack because it increases the costs and resources needed by an intruder.
• Organization-level controls are so important because they often have a pervasive impact on many
other controls, such as IT general controls and application-level controls.
• At the organization level, examples of important controls are: management’s ethical values,
philosophy, assignment of authority and responsibility, and the effectiveness of the board of
directors.
• In addition, senior management must have controls over human resources and data resources.
These controls include: (1) personnel policies; (2) ﬁle security controls; (3) business continuity
planning; (4) computer facility controls; and (5) computer access controls.
• Business continuity planning and management are becoming an organization-level concern due to
the many natural disasters and other business disruptions over the recent past.
• IT general controls are controls that are embedded in IT processes and are applied to all IT service
activities. These controls are critical for reliance on application controls.
• Organizations are increasingly relying on wireless networks and must recognize the need for a
virtual private network (VPN) so that users may safely access entity data and other online resources.
• Due to increased mobility of employees, organizations must also develop controls for laptop
computers to protect those assets as well as the data that resides on them.
• At the transaction processing level, application controls are critical for preventing, detecting, and
correcting errors and irregularities.
• Three major types of application controls are: (1) input controls, (2) processing controls, and (3)
output controls.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
application controls
backup
batch control total
biometric identiﬁcations
business continuity plan (BCP)
checkpoint
cold backup
cold site
computer facility controls
consensus-based protocols
control environment
data encryption
data manipulation controls
disaster recovery
disk mirroring
disk shadowing
edit programs
edit tests
electronic eavesdropping
electronic vaulting
fault-tolerant systems
ﬂying-start site
hash total
hot backup
hot site
input controls
input validation routines
integrated security
IT general controls
logical security
man trap
message acknowledgment procedures
organization-level controls
output controls
physical security
processing controls

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
405
red ﬂags
rollback processing
routing veriﬁcation procedures
security policy
strong passwords
uninterruptible power system (UPS)
watchdog processor
virtual private network (VPN)
TEST YOURSELF
Q12-1. A
is a comprehensive plan that helps protect the enterprise from internal and
external threats.
a. Firewall
b. Security policy
c. Risk assessment
d. VPN
Q12-2. According to PCAOB Standard No. 2, which of the following is an example of a
company-level control?
a. Controls to monitor results of operations
b. Personnel controls
c. Access to computer ﬁles
d. All of the above
Q12-3. Fault-tolerant systems are designed to tolerate computer errors and are built on the concept
of
.
a. Redundancy
b. COBIT
c. COSO
d. Integrated security
Q12-4. A
site is a disaster recovery site that includes a computer system like the one the
company regularly uses, software, and up-to-date data so the company can resume full data
processing operations within seconds or minutes.
a. Hot
b. Cold
c. Flying-start
d. Backup
Q12-5. Disaster recovery plans may not be of much use if
.
a. They are not fully documented
b. The organization does not have a cold site for relocation purposes
c. The organization does not expect any natural disasters to occur
d. They are not tested periodically and revised when necessary
Q12-6. Which of the following is not a computer facility control?
a. Place the data processing center where unauthorized individuals cannot gain entry
b. Limit access to the data processing center to all employees of the company
c. Buy insurance to protect against loss of equipment in a computer facility
d. Use advanced technology to identify individuals who are authorized access to the data
processing center
Q12-7. A
is a security appliance that runs behind a ﬁrewall and allows remote users to
access entity resources by using wireless, hand-held devices.
a. Data encryption
b. WAN
c. Checkpoint
d. VPN
Q12-8. Organizations use
controls to prevent, detect, and correct errors and irregularities
in transactions that are processed.
a. Speciﬁc
b. General
c. Application
d. Input
Q12-9. All of the following are considered organization-level controls except:
a. Personnel controls
b. Business continuity planning controls
c. Processing controls
d. Access to computer ﬁles

406
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
12-1. What is a security policy? What do we mean when we say organizations should have an
integrated security plan?
12-2. What do we mean when we talk about convergence of physical and logical security? Why
might this be important to an organization?
12-3. What guidance or framework would you use to establish IT governance if you were a senior
executive in a ﬁrm? If you were a mid-level IT manager who was designing IT general controls?
A manager who was responsible for identifying the appropriate application controls?
12-4. Discuss the major differences between wireless LANs and hard-wired LANs. What controls
must be used to protect data that is transmitted over these networks?
12-5. Why is business continuity planning so important? What is it? Identify several reasons why
testing the plan is a good idea.
12-6. What is backup, and why is it important when operating an accounting system?
12-7. Discuss some of the unique control risks associated with the use of PCs and laptop computers
compared to using mainframes. List what you consider to be three of the most important
control procedures that should be implemented for PCs. For each control procedure, give
your reason for including this procedure as an important control.
12-8. Jean & Joan Cosmetics has a complete line of beauty products for women and maintains a
computerized inventory system. An eight-digit product number identiﬁes inventory items, of
which the ﬁrst four digits classify the beauty product by major category (hair, face, skin, eyes,
etc.) and the last four digits identify the product itself. Identify as many controls as you can
that the company might use to ensure accuracy in this eight-digit number when updating its
inventory-balance ﬁle.
12-9. Explain how each of the following can be used to control the input, processing, or output
of accounting data: (a) edit tests, (b) check digits, (c) passwords, (d) activity listings, and (e)
control totals.
12-10. What is the difference between logical access to the computer and physical access to the
computer? Why is the security of both important?
12-11. Discuss the following statement: ‘‘The separation of duties control is very difﬁcult in
computerized accounting information systems because computers often integrate functions
when performing data processing tasks. Therefore, such a control is not advisable for those
organizations using computers to perform their accounting functions.’’
12-12. Discuss the role of the control total in accounting information systems. Why are control
totals insufﬁcient to guard against data inaccuracies?
PROBLEMS
12-13. E. Wilson & Sons, Inc. hired a consulting team from Chesapeake and Associates to discuss
application controls for the company’s accounting data processing. In one of the workshops,
the seminar leader stated, ‘‘We can classify all errors in processing accounting data as either
accidental or intentional. Controls such as edit tests are primarily aimed at the former type of
error, whereas personnel controls are primarily aimed at the latter type of error.’’ Comment.
12-14. Mark Goodwin, a computer programmer, had a grudge against his company. To get even, he
coded a special routine in the mortgage loan program that erased a small, random number
of accounts on the disk ﬁle every time the program was run. The company did not detect
the routine until almost all of its records had been erased. Discuss what controls might have
protected this company from its own programmer.

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
407
12-15. Jack Drucker, an accountant working for a medium-size company, set up several dummy com-
panies and began directing the computer to write checks to them for ﬁctitious merchandise.
He was apprehended only when several of the company executives began to wonder how
he could afford a ski vacation in the Alps every year. What controls might have prevented
this fraudulent activity?
12-16. Identify one or more control procedures (either general or application controls, or both)
that would guard against each of the following errors or problems.
a. Leslie Thomas, a secretary at the university, indicated that she had worked 40 hours on
her regular time card. The university paid her for 400 hours worked that week.
b. The aging analysis indicated that the Grab and Run Electronics Company account was so
far in arrears that the credit manager decided to cut off any further credit sales to the
company until it cleared up its account. Yet, the following week, the manager noted that
three new sales had been made to that company—all on credit.
c. The Small Company employed Mr. Fineus Eyeshade to perform all its accounts receivable
data processing. Mr. Eyeshade’s 25 years with the company and his unassuming appearance
helped him conceal the fact that he was embezzling cash collections from accounts
receivable to cover his gambling losses at the racetrack.
d. The Blue Mountain Utility Company was having difﬁculty with its customer payments.
The payment amounts were entered directly onto a terminal, and the transaction ﬁle thus
created was used to update the customer master ﬁle. Among the problems encountered
with this system were the application of customer payments to the wrong accounts and
the creation of multiple customer master ﬁle records for the same account.
e. The Landsford brothers had lived in Center County all their lives. Ben worked for the local
mill in the accounts payable department, and Tom owned the local hardware store. The
sheriff couldn’t believe that the brothers had created several dummy companies that sold
ﬁctitious merchandise to the mill. Ben had the mill pay for this merchandise in its usual
fashion, and he wrote off the missing goods as ‘‘damaged inventory.’’
12-17. Identify one or more control procedures (either general or application controls, or both)
that would guard against each of the following errors or problems.
a. A bank deposit transaction was accidentally coded with a withdrawal code.
b. The key-entry operator keyed in the purchase order number as a nine-digit number instead
of an eight-digit number.
c. The date of a customer payment was keyed 2001 instead of 2010.
d. A company employee was issued a check in the amount of $135.65 because he had not
worked a certain week, but most of his payroll deductions were automatic each week.
e. A patient ﬁlled out her medical insurance number as 123465 instead of 123456.
f. An applicant for the company stock option plan ﬁlled out her employee number as
84-7634-21. The ﬁrst two digits are a department code. There is no department 84.
g. A high school student was able to log onto the telephone company’s computer as soon as
he learned what telephone number to call.
h. The accounts receivable department sent 87 checks to the computer center for processing.
No one realized that one check was dropped along the way and that the computer therefore
processed only 86 checks.
12-18. To achieve effective separation of duties within a company’s IT environment, the company’s
accounting and information processing subsystems should be separate from the departments
that use data and perform operational activities. Discuss some of the ways this ‘‘separation of
duties’’ is achieved.
12-19. Bristol Company has a high turnover rate among its employees. It maintains a very large
computer system that supports approximately 225-networked PCs. The company maintains
fairly extensive databases regarding its customers. These databases include customer proﬁles,

408
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Application
Field Name
Field Length
Example
Invoicing
Customer number
6
123456
Customer name
23
Al’s Department Store
Salesperson number
3
477
Invoice number
6
123456
Item catalog number
10
9578572355
Quantity sold
8
13
Unit price
7
10.50
Total price
12
136.50
Salesperson activity
Salesperson number
3
477
Salesperson name
20
Kathryn Wilson
Store department number
8
10314201
Week’s sales volume
12
1043.75
Regular hours worked
5
39.75
Overtime hours worked
4
0.75
Inventory control
Inventory item number
10
9578572355
Item description
15
Desk lamp
Unit cost
7
8.50
Number of units dispersed this week
4
14
Number of units added to inventory
4
20
Purchasing
Vendor catalog number
12
059689584996
Item description
18
Desk pad
Vendor number
10
8276110438
Number of units ordered
7
45
Price per unit
7
8.75
Total cost of purchase
14
313.75
FIGURE 12-17
Data for the Blatz Furniture Company’s applications.
past purchasing patterns, and prices charged. Recently, Bristol Company has been having
major problems with competitors. It appears that one competitor seems to be very effective at
taking away the company’s customers. This competitor has visited most of Bristol Company’s
customers, and identical products have been offered to these customers at lower prices in
every case.
a. What do you feel is the possible security problem at Bristol Company?
b. What can be done about this problem?
12-20. The Blatz Furniture Company uses an online data input system for processing its sales invoice
data, salesperson data, inventory control, and purchase order data. Representative data for
each of these applications are shown in Figure 12-17. Identify speciﬁc editing tests that might
be used to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the information in each data set.
CASE ANALYSES
12-21. Simmons Corporation (Problems with Computer-based Information
System)
Simmons Corporation is a multi-location retailing concern with stores and warehouses
throughout the United States. The company is in the process of designing a new, integrated,
computer-based information system. In conjunction with the design of the new system,

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
409
the management of the company is reviewing the data processing security to determine
what new control features should be incorporated. Two areas of speciﬁc concern are
(1) conﬁdentiality of company and customer records, and (2) safekeeping of computer
equipment, ﬁles, and data processing center facilities.
The new information system will be employed to process all company records, which
include sales, purchases, the ﬁnancial budget, customer, creditor, and personnel infor-
mation. The stores and warehouses will be linked to the main computer at corporate
headquarters by a system of remote terminals. This will permit data to be communicated
directly to corporate headquarters or to any other location from each location within the
terminal network.
At the current time, certain reports have restricted distribution because not all levels of
management need to receive them or because they contain conﬁdential information. The
introduction of remote terminals in the new system may provide access to these restricted
data by unauthorized personnel. Simmons’s top management is concerned that conﬁdential
information may become accessible and be used improperly.
The company’s top management is also concerned with potential physical threats to the
system, such as sabotage, ﬁre damage, water damage, or power failure. Should any of these
events occur in the current system and cause a computer shutdown, adequate backup
records are available so that the company could reconstruct necessary information at a
reasonable cost on a timely basis. However, with the new system, a computer shutdown
would severely limit company activities until the system could become operational again.
Requirements:
1. Identify and brieﬂy explain the problems Simmons Corporation could experience with
respect to the conﬁdentiality of information and records in the new system.
2. Recommend measures Simmons Corporation could incorporate into the new system
that would ensure the conﬁdentiality of information and records in this new system.
3. What safeguards can Simmons Corporation develop to provide physical security for its
(a) computer equipment, (b) ﬁles, and (c) data processing center facilities?
12-22. MailMed Inc. (Control Weaknesses and a Disaster Recovery Plan)
MailMed Inc. (MMI), a pharmaceutical ﬁrm, provides discounted prescription drugs through
direct mail. MMI has a small systems staff that designs and writes MMI’s customized software.
Until recently, MMI’s transaction data were transmitted to an outside organization for
processing on its hardware.
MMI has experienced signiﬁcant sales growth as the cost of prescription drugs has
increased and medical insurance companies have been tightening reimbursements in order
to restrain premium cost increases. As a result of these increased sales, MMI has purchased
its own computer hardware. The data processing center is installed on the ground ﬂoor
of its two-story headquarters building. It is behind large, plate-glass windows so that the
state-of-the-art data processing center can be displayed as a measure of the company’s
success and attract customer and investor attention. The computer area is equipped with
halon gas ﬁre suppression equipment and an uninterruptible power supply system.
MMI has hired a small computer operations staff to operate its data processing center. To
handle MMI’s current level of business, the operations staff is on a two-shift schedule, ﬁve
days per week. MMI’s systems and programming staff, now located in the same building,
has access to the data processing center and can test new programs and program changes

410
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
when the operations staff is not available. Because the systems and programming staff is
small and the work demands have increased, systems and programming documentation is
developed only when time is available. Periodically, but not on a scheduled basis, MMI
backs up its programs and data ﬁles, storing them at an off-site location.
Unfortunately, due to several days of heavy rains, MMI’s building recently experienced
serious ﬂooding that reached several feet into the ﬁrst-ﬂoor level and affected not only the
computer hardware but also the data and program ﬁles that were on-site.
Requirements:
1. Describe at least four computer control weaknesses that existed at MailMed Inc. prior
to the ﬂood occurrence.
2. Describe at least ﬁve components that should be incorporated in a formal disaster
recovery plan so that MailMed Inc. can become operational within 72 hours after a
disaster affects its computer operations capability.
3. Identify at least three factors, other than the plan itself, that MailMed Inc.’s management
should consider in formulating a formal disaster recovery plan.
12-23. Bad Bad Benny: A True Story (Identifying Controls for a System)17
In the early twentieth century, there was an ambitious young man named Arthur who
started working at a company in Chicago as a mailroom clerk. He was a hard worker and
very smart, eventually ending up as the president of the company, the James H. Rhodes
Company. The ﬁrm produced steel wool and harvested sea sponges in Tarpon Springs,
Florida for household and industrial use. The company was very successful, and Arthur
decided that the best way to assure the continued success of the company was to hire
trusted family members for key management positions—because you can always count on
your family. Arthur decided to hire his brother Benny to be his Chief Financial Ofﬁcer
(CFO), and placed other members of the family in key management positions. He also
started his eldest son, Arthur Junior (an accountant by training) in a management training
program, hoping that he would eventually succeed him as president.
As the company moved into the 1920s, Benny was a model employee; he worked long
hours, never took vacations, and made sure that he personally managed all aspects of
the cash function. For example, he handled the entire purchasing process—from issuing
purchase orders through the disbursement of cash to pay bills. He also handled the cash
side of the revenue process by collecting cash payments, preparing the daily bank deposits,
and reconciling the monthly bank statement.
The end of the 1920s saw the United States entering its worst Depression since the
beginning of the Industrial Age. Because of this, Arthur and other managers did not get
raises, and in fact, took pay cuts to keep the company going and avoid lay-offs. Arthur
and other top management ofﬁcials made ‘‘lifestyle’’ adjustments as well—e.g., reducing
the number of their household servants and keeping their old cars, rather than purchasing
new ones. Benny, however, was able to build a new house on the shore of Lake Michigan
and purchased a new car. He dressed impeccably and seemed impervious to the economic
downturn. His family continued to enjoy the theatre, new cars, and nice clothes.
17Source: Professor Constance Lehmann, Department of Accounting, University of Houston-Clear Lake.

CHAPTER 12 / Computer Controls for Organizations and Accounting Information Systems
411
Arthur’s wife became suspicious of Benny’s good fortune in the face of others’ hardships,
so she and Arthur hired an accountant to review the books. External audits were not yet
required for publicly-held companies, and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
had not yet been formed (that would happen in 1933–1934). Jim the accountant was
eventually able to determine that Benny had diverted company funds to himself by setting
up false vendors and having checks mailed to himself. He also diverted some of the cash
payments received from customers and was able to hide it by handling the bank deposits
and the reconciliation of the company’s bank accounts. Eventually, Jim determined that
Benny had embezzled about $500,000 (in 1930 dollars).
If we assume annual compounding of 5% for 72 years, the value in today’s dollars would
be about $17.61 million! Arthur was furious, and sent Benny ‘‘away.’’ Arthur sold most of
his personal stock holdings in the company to repay Benny’s embezzlement, which caused
him to lose his controlling interest in the company, and eventually was voted out of ofﬁce
by the Board of Directors.
Jim, the accountant, wrote a paper about his experience with Benny (now referred to as
‘‘Bad Bad Benny’’ by the family). Jim’s paper contributed to the increasing call for required
annual external audits for publicly-held companies. Arthur eventually reestablished himself
as a successful stockbroker and ﬁnancial planner. Benny ‘‘disappeared’’ and was never
heard from again.
Requirements:
1. Identify the control weaknesses in the revenue and purchasing processes.
2. Identify any general controls Arthur should have implemented to help protect the
company.
3. From Chapter 11, identify the internal control activities that Arthur should have
considered (or implemented) that would have thwarted Benny’s bad behavior.
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Aldhizer, G. ‘‘The Insider Threat,’’ Internal Auditor (April 2008), pp. 71–73.
Anonymous. ‘‘NIST Calls for Comments on Draft of Federal Computer Security Controls Guidelines,’’
M2 Presswire, November 4, 2003.
Campbell, D., M. Campbell, & G. Adams. ‘‘Adding Signiﬁcant Value with Internal Controls,’’ The CPA
Journal (June 2006), pp. 20–25.
Cleary, B. ‘‘How Safe is Your Data?’’ Strategic Finance (October 2008), pp. 33–37.
COBIT, version 4.1 at: http://www.isaca.org.
Contos, B. ‘‘The Convergence of Logical and Physical Security Solutions,’’ IT Defense (August 2006),
pp. 24–26.
Cook, L. ‘‘IT control objectives for Sarbanes-Oxley: New guidance on IT control and compliance,’’
(October 31, 2003) at wwww.deloitte.com.
Heffes, E. ‘‘Hurricane Season 2006 is Approaching. Are you Ready?’’ Financial Executive (April
2006), pp. 27–30.
Jensen, J. & C. Power. ‘‘Treasury’s Role in Planning for the Worst-Case Scenario: Business Continuity
Planning,’’ Financial Executive (June 2006), p 60.

412
PART FOUR / Controls, Security, Privacy, and Ethics for Accounting Information Systems
Mameli, P. ‘‘Protection Management: An Integrated Approach to Homeland Security,’’ The Public
Manager (Summer 2005), pp. 27–31.
Phelan, S. & M. Hayes. ‘‘Before the Deluge—and After’’ Journal of Accountancy (April 2003),
pp. 57–63.
Pugliese, A. & A. Kendal. ‘‘Support for CPAs in Post-Disaster Work,’’ Journal of Accountancy
(February 2004), pp. 19–21.
Siegel, J., M. Levine, & R. Siegel. ‘‘Security safeguards over Wireless Networks,’’ The CPA Journal
(June 2004), pp. 68–70.
Vijayan, Jaikumar. ‘‘Oracle adds ID Security to Database,’’ Computerworld (2003), p. 14.
Wade, J. ‘‘The Weak Link in IT Security,’’ Risk Management (July 2004), pp. 32–36.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. b
2. a
3. a
4. c
5. d
6. b
7. d
8. c
9. c

PART FIVE
SPECIAL TOPICS IN ACCOUNTING
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 13
Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
CHAPTER 14
Information Technology Auditing
CHAPTER 15
Accounting on the Internet
The primary emphasis throughout this textbook has been the impact of technology on AISs.
These next three chapters of the book highlight speciﬁc areas of technology that impact
accountants, and should therefore be particularly interesting to accounting students.
Chapter 13 describes the process of developing and implementing effective AISs. The
process is not that much different from implementing any type of IT, and it often follows
the traditional systems development life cycle. The chapter describes each phase of this
cycle, emphasizes the special nature of AISs, and identiﬁes the accountant’s role in systems
development and implementation.
Chapters 10, 11, and 12 of this book emphasized information systems security and control.
Chapter 14 continues that discussion, analyzing some of the important auditing activities
associated with computerized AISs and discussing the role of the IT auditor. The chapter
also describes important topics of interest to IT auditors today, including IT governance,
auditing for fraud, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and third-party information systems
reliability assurances.
Chapter 15 discusses the impact of the Internet and electronic commerce on accountants.As
an increasing number of business organizations engage in electronic commerce, it becomes
critical for accountants to understand the fundamentals of doing business electronically.
Chapter 15 describes the technology that underlies the Internet and electronic commerce,
including a comprehensive discussion of XBRL and how this reporting language is changing
ﬁnancial reporting. The chapter also discusses intranets and extranets as well as general
categories of electronic commerce, such as retail sales. The chapter concludes by identifying
a number of privacy and security issues for business enterprises engaged in electronic
commerce.
413


Chapter 13
Developing and Implementing Effective
Accounting Information Systems
INTRODUCTION
SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE
Four Stages in the Systems Development Life Cycle
Systems Studies and Accounting Information Systems
SYSTEMS PLANNING
Planning for Success
Investigating Current Systems
SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
Understanding Organizational Goals
Systems Survey Work
Data Analysis
Evaluating System Feasibility
SYSTEMS DESIGN
Designing System Outputs, Processes, and Inputs
Prototyping
The Systems Speciﬁcations Report
Choosing an Accounting Information System
Outsourcing
IMPLEMENTATION, FOLLOW-UP, AND
MAINTENANCE
Implementation Activities
Managing IT Implementation Projects
Post-Implementation Review
System Maintenance
AIS AT WORK—OUTSOURCING AND
OFFSHORING IT
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Wright Company
Kenbart Company
Stephen Kerr Cosmetics
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Understand the roles of accountants, analysis
teams, and steering committees in systems stud-
ies.
2. Understand why systems analysts must under-
stand the strategic and operational goals of a
company.
3. Become familiar with the deliverables in sys-
tems analysis work, especially the systems anal-
ysis report.
4. Be able to help plan and complete the analysis
and design phases of a systems study.
5. Know what a feasibility evaluation is and how
to conduct it.
6. Understand some of the costs, beneﬁts, tools,
and techniques associated with systems design
work.
7. Be able to evaluate alternative systems proposals
and make a selection or choose to outsource.
8. Be familiar with the activities required to imple-
ment and maintain a large information system.
415

416
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
‘‘Analysts, programmers, and other IT specialists frequently refer to ‘my system.’ This
attitude has, in part, created an ‘us versus them’ conﬂict between technical staff and
their users and management.’’
Jeffrey L. Whitten and Lonnie D. Bentley, Systems Analysis
and Design Methods, 7E, McGraw-Hill Irwin, 2007, p. 72.
INTRODUCTION
IT governance, part of an organization’s overall mission, goals, policies, and procedures, is
the process of ensuring that IT is used effectively, efﬁciently, and strategically. A compre-
hensive IT strategy requires careful systems study and should prioritize the acquisition or
development of various information systems, including operating and application systems,
such as accounting information systems.
The IT systems study includes planning and analysis through development, implemen-
tation, and a feedback loop for each new IT application. Some systems will be designed
in-house, while others may be purchased or leased. Selecting a system among alternatives
is part of the IT systems study process. In some cases, a company may decide to outsource
part or all of their IT.
As the quote at the top of this page suggests, a systems study should not just be
conducted by ‘‘systems people.’’ Developing effective, strategic information systems is
the job of systems programmers, analysts, designers, users, and managers. Accountants, as
auditors and general information users, should be involved with all IT studies, especially
accounting information systems.
SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE
As you might imagine, studying a large AIS is a large and difﬁcult task. A systems study
(also called systems development work) begins with a formal investigation of an existing
information system. Who actually performs a systems study? This varies from company to
company as well as among projects. Many large organizations have in-house professionals
to perform this work. In contrast, smaller organizations with limited technical expertise
as well as larger organizations with other priorities for their internal experts are more
likely to hire a team of outside consultants for this work. (Note: The Sarbanes-Oxley Act
of 2002 expressly forbids CPA ﬁrms from performing such systems work for a client with
whom it already has an audit relationship.) Our discussion assumes that most of the work
is performed by a generic ‘‘study team’’ of experts, who may or may not be outside
consultants.
Four Stages in the Systems Development Life Cycle
Traditionally, we can identify four major steps or phases of a systems study:
1. Planning and Investigation This step involves performing a preliminary investigation
of the existing system, organizing a systems study team, and developing strategic plans
for the remainder of the study.

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
417
2. Analysis This step involves analyzing the company’s current system in order to identify
the information needs, strengths, and weaknesses of the existing system.
3. Design In this step, an organization designs changes that eliminate (or minimize) the
current system’s weak points while preserving its strengths.
4. Implementation, Follow-up, and Maintenance This phase includes acquiring
resources for the new system as well as training new or existing employees to use
it. Companies conduct follow-up studies to determine whether the new system is
successful and, of course, to identify any new problems with it. Finally, businesses
must maintain the system, meaning correcting minor ﬂaws and updating the system as
required.
These four phases are the system development life cycle (SDLC) of a business
information system. Figure 13-1 illustrates that this life cycle spans the time during which
a company’s system is operating normally and is subsequently revised as a result of some
problem (or problems). Each time a newly revised system takes over the company’s daily
operating activities, a new life cycle begins.
The dashed arrows in Figure 13-1 emphasize that follow-up studies of a system should
be a continuous process. An organization reevaluates systems regularly to conﬁrm they are
still working well. If follow-up studies indicate that previous problems have recurred or
new ones have developed, an organization should take the dashed-arrow route from the
follow-up studies to the recognition of systems problems and begin a new systems study. In
practice there is usually much overlap between phases in the life cycle, and the steps in a
systems study don’t necessarily occur in sequence. Often, system developers will perform
two or more stages simultaneously or in parallel with each other.
Systems Studies and Accounting Information Systems
A systems study looks at all IT in an entity’s applications portfolio. This portfolio may
include an enterprise system, along with other specialized information systems, or it may
consist of many separate systems for functional areas such as accounting, marketing, and
human resources. Accounting information systems (AISs) are prime targets for systems
Preliminary
investigation
System operation on
a daily basis
Design of system revisions
to eliminate the problems
Implementation and
initial operation of
the revised system
Analysis of the system
to determine the cause
(or causes) of the problems
Follow-up studies to
determine if the newly
designed system is
operating efficiently
FIGURE 13-1
System development life cycle of a business information system.

418
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
studies—for example, because they may not currently support electronic commerce or do
not integrate data efﬁciently in data warehouses. But in general, a systems study means
more than just replacing or modifying existing information systems. Typically, altering an
information system also affects work ﬂows, data gathering and recording tasks, employee
responsibilities, and even the way an organization rewards its managers. Thus, one reason
why organizations perform systems studies is because such studies are part of the greater
task of reengineering one or more of its core systems.
SYSTEMS PLANNING
The ﬁrst phase of a systems study involves systems planning and an initial investigation.
Planning for Success
In large organizations, system redesigns (or new development work) typically involve
millions of dollars, making mistakes very costly. In smaller organizations, major errors can
be catastrophic, leading a ﬁrm to bankruptcy. What else can happen when organizations
do not plan carefully? Here are some examples:
• Systems do not meet users’ needs, causing employee frustration, resistance, and even
sabotage.
• Systems are not ﬂexible enough to meet the business needs for which they were designed
and are ultimately scrapped.
• Project expenditures signiﬁcantly overrun what once seemed like very adequate budgets.
• The time required to complete the new system vastly exceeds the development
schedule—often by years.
• Systems solve the wrong problems.
• Top management does not approve or support the new systems.
• Systems are difﬁcult and costly to maintain.
Studies of unsuccessful information systems projects suggest that mistakes made at
the outset of a systems study are the most common reason why such projects ultimately
fail. Careful systems planning and an initial investigation can avoid critical missteps that
lead to disaster. ‘‘Planning for success’’ means beginning a systems study with a focused
investigation that: (1) approaches speciﬁc organizational problems from a broad point of
view, (2) uses an interdisciplinary study team to evaluate an organization’s information
systems, and (3) makes sure the company’s study team works closely with a steering
committee (described below) in all phases of the work.
Case-in-Point 13.1
In a recent study of why systems development projects fail, the
Standish Group found that only about half the components initially speciﬁed for a new system
were actually created, and that about the same percentage of the functionality that was created
was actually used. The most common problem: poorly deﬁned requirements. ‘‘If a project can’t
get a handle on the basic system requirements,’’ the report concluded, ‘‘it is doomed to fail.’’1
1Charles Babcock. ‘‘The Art of Deﬁning Software Requirements,’’ Information Week (March 15, 2004).

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
419
Broad Viewpoint in a Systems Study.
When performing a systems study, the par-
ticipants should use a systems approach, that is, a broad point of view. This approach
aligns the systems study with the organization’s mission and strategic planning goals and
objectives. For example, if a company plans to consolidate divisions or discontinue unprof-
itable product lines, new IT systems will need to reﬂect these plans. In another scenario,
a company that is embarking on a growth strategy through merger and acquisition should
think twice about implementing a new enterprise system that could be incompatible with
newly acquired companies. Also, management should think strategically about whether
a potential new system could accommodate acquired businesses operating in different
industries.
The Study Team and the Steering Committee.
Using an interdisciplinary study
team follows from the need for a broad viewpoint when performing a systems study.
It also serves to correct the problem identiﬁed in our chapter quote—thinking that the
system belongs only to the IT staff. Because most accounting and computer professionals
are specialists, it is unlikely that any one or two people will have the broad background
and experience necessary to understand and change a large AIS. For this reason, the
recommended approach is to form (or hire) a team of specialists—a ‘‘study team’’—to
perform the system’s study.
It is important that the study team communicate closely and meaningfully with
the company’s top managers. To provide this continuous interface, the company’s top
management should also appoint a steering committee to work with each study team as
it performs its tasks. Ideally, the committee will include top management personnel—for
example, the controller, the vice president of ﬁnance, the top-level information systems
manager (information systems vice president or chief information ofﬁcer), perhaps one
or more staff auditors, and (for very important projects) even the chief executive ofﬁcer
of the company. The rationale for such involvement is straightforward: top management
commitment is critical to the ultimate success of a new or revised system.
Investigating Current Systems
Planning for IT includes constant monitoring of current systems. When any appear to
have problems, the systems study team performs a preliminary investigation of the
system in question and advises the steering committee of its ﬁndings. One important part
of this work is to separate symptoms from causes. In its deliberations, the study team may
consider alternatives to the current system, attempt to estimate the costs and beneﬁts of
its proposed solutions, or make recommendations for desired alternatives. In this phase of
the project, the study team enjoys wide latitude in what it can choose to examine, and
it is usually encouraged to ‘‘think outside the box’’ (i.e., to consider vastly different and
innovative approaches to address current problems).
The duration of a preliminary investigation is comparatively brief—typically, a matter
of a few weeks. The ‘‘deliverable’’ from this phase of the systems study is a preliminary
investigation report describing the problems or objectives the study team identiﬁed,
solutions or alternatives it investigated, and further course(s) of action it recommends.
The study team submits this report to the company steering committee for a ﬁnal
determination. The steering committee may decide to: (1) disband the study team and
do nothing, (2) perform further preliminary investigations, or (3) proceed to the formal
systems analysis stage of the systems study.

420
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
The basic purpose of the systems analysis phase is to examine a system in depth. The
study team will familiarize itself with the company’s current operating system, identify
speciﬁc inputs and outputs, identify system strengths and weaknesses, and eventually make
recommendations for further work. Figure 13-2 shows the logical procedures that the team
should follow.
In performing its work, the study team should strive to avoid overanalyzing a company’s
system. Instead, the team should try to identify and understand the organization’s goals for
the system, perform a systems survey, and prepare one or more reports that describe its
ﬁndings.
Understanding Organizational Goals
For the study team to do an adequate job—for example, determine the real problems
within a company’s information system—its members must ﬁrst understand the system’s
goals. Of special importance is determining which goals are not being achieved under
the present system and why this happens. Organization goals include: (1) general sys-
tems goals, (2) top management systems goals, and (3) operating management systems
goals.
General Systems Goals.
General systems goals apply to most organization’s informa-
tion systems and help an AIS contribute to an efﬁcient and effective organization. Principles
contributing to these goals are: (1) awareness that the beneﬁts of the new system should
exceed the costs, (2) concern that the output of the system helps managers make better
decisions, (3) commitment to designing a system that allows optimal access to information,
and (4) ﬂexibility so that the system can accommodate changing information needs.
The study team must determine whether the current information system helps to
achieve general systems goals. For example, if an AIS has excessive costs associated with
using traditional paper documents (e.g., purchase orders, receiving reports, and vendor
invoices), this will violate goal number one (cost awareness), and the study team might
recommend that the company use a web-based system instead.
Top Management Systems Goals.
AISs typically play key roles in satisfying top
management goals. For instance, AISs usually provide top managers with long-range budget
planning data so they can make effective strategic decisions regarding future product-line
Understand the systems goals
↓
Systems survey to acquire sufﬁcient information
relating to current systems problems
↓
Suggest possible solutions to solve the systems
problems through a systems analysis report
FIGURE 13-2
Systems analysis procedures.

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
421
sales or comparable business activities. Similarly, periodic performance reports provide
top management with vital control information about corporate operations, such as how
sales of new product lines are doing. Finally, top management needs to know about the
short-range operating performance of its organization’s subsystems—for example, summary
information about individual department operating results and how these results compare
with budgetary projections.
Operating Management Systems Goals.
Compared to top management, the infor-
mation needs of operating managers (i.e., managers working within speciﬁc organizational
subsystems) are normally easier to determine. This is because the decision-making functions
of operating managers typically relate to well-deﬁned and narrower organizational areas.
In addition, the majority of operating managers’ decisions are for the current business
year (in contrast to top management’s long-range decision-making functions). Much of
the information required for operating managers’ decisions is generated internally as a
by-product of processing a company’s accounting data.
Case-in-Point 13.2
Grupo Financiero Bital is a Mexican bank with almost 1,200 branches,
3 million customers, and $9 billion in assets. To work effectively, branch managers need access
to information about customer accounts at other branches. At one point in time, managers
could ask Bital’s massive databases for information, but the output was sometimes a 500-page
report instead of the speciﬁc information a manager required. A redesign of this information
system resulted in a corporate intranet. The intranet lets branch managers and top managers
access exactly the data they needed to view performance measures of the individual branches.
The company is realizing many indirect beneﬁts from the new system and saves almost $6,000
per month in printing costs alone!2
Systems Survey Work
The objective of a systems survey is to enable the study team to obtain a more
complete understanding of the company’s current operational information system and its
environment. Of special importance is identifying the strengths and weaknesses of the
current system. The overall objective is to retain the system’s strengths while eliminating
the system’s weaknesses, especially those weaknesses causing problems in the current
system. These weaknesses will likely relate to speciﬁc goals that the current system does
not now accomplish.
Understanding the Human Element and Potential Behavioral Problems.
Because the appearance of a study team on the work scene usually signals change,
employees are often resistant to help. Unless the study team deals directly with this
problem at the beginning, there is a good chance that employees will oppose the changes
that the team recommends. In short, a systems study must gain the full cooperation and
support of those employees who are crucial to the effectiveness of a new system. The best
designed system ‘‘on paper’’ is likely to cause behavioral problems when implemented if
the system does not have wide user support.
2http://itmanagement.earthweb.com/erp/article.php/602201 (Intranets Give New Life, Accessed December 8,
2008).

422
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Data Gathering.
A systems survey requires the study team to gather data about the
existing system. There are several ways of doing this, including:
• Review Existing Documentation. This documentation includes descriptive data such
as organizational charts, strategic plans, budgets, policy and procedure manuals, job
descriptions, and charts of accounts, as well as technical documentation such as
ﬂowcharts, process diagrams, and training manuals.
• Observe the Current System in Operation. Visiting various parts of the operation
on a surprise schedule and asking workers questions about their jobs can be extremely
helpful in learning whether the systems work as described, as well as discovering the
morale of employees, occurrence of down-time, and workload cycles and distribution.
• Use Questionnaires and Surveys. These can be anonymous so that respondents
share their views openly about sensitive issues. Open-ended questionnaires provide
an unstructured free-ﬂow of ideas that may bring new issues to light. Close-ended
questionnaires (Figure 13-3), on the other hand, are efﬁcient and allow for easy
tabulation of results.
• Review Internal Control Procedures. In earlier chapters of this book, we discussed
the importance of internal control systems. Weaknesses in these procedures can cause
major problems for a company. The study team should identify high-risk areas, strengths,
and weaknesses of the speciﬁc procedures.
• Interview System Participants. Face-to-face interviews allow the study team to gather
system information in the greatest depth and sometimes reveal surprises. For example,
an interview might reveal that a manager’s decisions don’t really require input from
several existing reports.
Data Analysis
Once the study team completes its survey work, they must analyze the results. Often, this
means nothing more than creating summary statistics, but it can also involve developing
ﬂowcharts and/or process maps that can highlight bottlenecks in information ﬂows,
redundant reporting, and missing information links.
Systems analysis work necessarily takes longer than a preliminary investigation, typically
months. Where required, the study team will provide interim reports to the steering
Example of an Open-Ended Question on a Systems Survey
Questionnaire:
Please explain why you are either satisﬁed or dissatisﬁed with the
current general ledger system.
Example of a Closed-Ended Question on a Systems Survey
Questionnaire:
Please indicate your level of satisfaction with the current general
ledger system by checking the appropriate response below:
Very satisﬁed
Somewhat satisﬁed
Neither satisﬁed nor dissatisﬁed
Somewhat dissatisﬁed
Very dissatisﬁed
FIGURE 13-3
Sample questions on a systems survey questionnaire.

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
423
committee about its progress. The most important deliverable from the analysis portion of
the systems study, however, is the ﬁnal systems analysis report, which signals the end
of the analysis phase of the systems study. Like other reports, the study team submits this
report to the steering committee, which then considers the report’s ﬁndings and debates
the recommendations it contains.
As representatives of top management, the steering committee has, within limits, the
ability to make a decision. The committee could abandon the project, ask for additional
analyses and a set of revised recommendations, or vote to proceed to the systems design
phase of the project.
Evaluating System Feasibility
After obtaining a positive response from the steering committee, the design team must
perform a detailed investigation of different potential systems. Figure 13-4 shows that
this work involves ﬁve major procedures or activities. The ﬁrst of these is a feasibility
evaluation in which the design team determines the practicality of alternative proposals.
Only after this step is completed can the design team tackle the other steps. For each system
alternative, the design team must examine ﬁve feasibility areas: (1) technical feasibility,
(2) operational feasibility, (3) schedule feasibility, (4) legal feasibility, and (5) economic
feasibility.
Perform 
feasibility evaluation 
Prepare detailed 
systems design 
Prepare systems 
specifications report 
Submit systems
specifications report
to vendors
Buy 
Make 
Select particular 
vendor proposal 
Develop application 
in-house 
Submit systems
specifications report
to internal IT department
FIGURE 13-4
Steps in the systems design phase of a systems study.

424
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Technical Feasibility.
The technical feasibility of any proposed system attempts
to answer the question, ‘‘What technical resources are required by a particular system?’’
Hardware and software are obvious components. A proposed system that can interface
with critical existing software is more desirable than one requiring the organization to buy
new software. Experts in computer systems typically work on this phase of the feasibility
evaluation because a thorough understanding of IT is essential.
In addition to developing a preliminary hardware conﬁguration for a proposed system,
the design team must also determine whether current employees have the technical skills to
use it. If a speciﬁc computerized system is too sophisticated for a company’s employees, it is
unlikely that using it in subsequent daily operations will be successful without appropriate
training.
Operational Feasibility.
The operational feasibility of a proposed system examines
its compatibility with the current operating environment. That is, how consistent will the
tasks and procedures required by the new system be with those of the old system? The
design team must analyze the capabilities of current employees to perform the speciﬁc
functions required by each proposed system and determine to what extent employees will
require specialized training.
Operational-feasibility analysis is mostly a human relations study because it is strongly
oriented toward ‘‘people problems.’’ For this reason, the participation of human-relations
specialists is critical. As noted earlier, employees commonly have negative attitudes toward
changes that might affect their organizational duties. If managers encourage employees to
suggest changes and keep them well-informed about how any new system will affect their
job functions, an organization can limit employee resistance.
Schedule Feasibility.
Timeliness is important. Schedule feasibility requires the
design team to estimate how long it will take a new or revised system to become
operational and to communicate this information to the steering committee. For example,
if a design team projects that it will take 16 months for a particular system design to
become fully functional, the steering committee may reject the proposal in favor of a
simpler alternative that the company can implement in a shorter time frame.
Legal Feasibility.
Are there any conﬂicts between a newly proposed system and the
organization’s legal obligations? A new or revised system should comply with all applicable
federal and state statutes about ﬁnancial reporting requirements, as well as the company’s
contractual obligations.
Case-in-Point 13.3
Nevada is one of ﬁve states in the United States that does not have
a state income tax. You would think, therefore, that any payroll system a Nevada company
chose to implement would not need a module to withhold state income taxes from employee
paychecks. But Reno, Nevada, is only ten miles from the California border, and California does
have a state income tax. As a result, Reno employees who live in California must pay state
income taxes even though they work in Nevada. So, companies in Reno, Nevada, must have
state withholding modules in their payroll systems for employees who live in California.
Economic Feasibility.
Through economic feasibility evaluation, the design team
attempts to assess whether the anticipated beneﬁts of the system exceed its projected costs.
This requires accountants to perform a cost-beneﬁt analysis. This analysis takes into account
all costs, including indirect costs such as time spent by current employees on implementing
the new system. It also considers beneﬁts, which are sometimes difﬁcult to foresee or

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
425
estimate. A mistake frequently made in thinking about new systems is underestimating
costs for implementation and continuing operations. Accountants conducting the analysis
need to separately identify one-time costs versus those that will be recurring. The point of
the economic feasibility analysis is to get a ‘‘best estimate’’ of the worthiness of a project.
SYSTEMS DESIGN
Once the steering committee approves the feasibility of a general system plan (project),
the design team can begin work on a detailed systems design. This involves specifying
the outputs, processing procedures, and inputs for the new system. Just as construction
blueprints create the detailed plans for building a house, the detailed design of a new
system becomes the speciﬁcations for creating or acquiring a new information system.
Figure 13-5 provides examples of the detailed requirements that the design team must
create, and these requirements in turn explain speciﬁcally what the proposed system must
produce.
From an accounting standpoint, one of the most important elements in a new system is
its control requirements. In this matter, the design team should have a ‘‘real-time’’ mentality
when designing control procedures for a system. In other words, rather than adding controls
after a system has been developed and installed, the team should design cost-effective
general and application control procedures into the system as integrated components. The
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the Treadway Commission (introduced
in Chapter 8) emphasizes the importance of this view:
Whenever management considers changes to its company’s operations or activities,
the concept that it’s better to ‘‘build-in’’ rather than ‘‘build-on’’ controls, and to do
it right the ﬁrst time, should be the fundamental guiding premise.3
Requirements
Discussion
Processes
Descriptions of the various processes to be performed in the revised system,
stressing what is to be done and by whom.
Data elements
Descriptions of the required data elements, including their name, size, format,
source, and importance.
Data structure
Preliminary data structure that indicates how the data elements will be organized
into logical records.
Inputs
Copies of system inputs and descriptions of their contents, sources, and who is
responsible for them.
Outputs
Copies of system outputs and descriptions of their purpose, frequency, and
distribution.
Documentation
Descriptions of how the revised system and each subsystem will operate.
Constraints
Descriptions of constraints such as stafﬁng limitations and regulatory requirements.
Controls
Controls to reduce the risk of undetected errors and irregularities in the input,
processing, and output stages of data processing work.
Reorganizations
Necessary changes such as increasing staff levels, adding new job functions, and
terminating certain existing positions.
FIGURE 13-5
Examples of detailed requirements for a system proposal.
3Summarized from Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (CSOTC), Internal
Control-Integrated Framework (COSO Report), New York: 1992.

426
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Designing System Outputs, Processes, and Inputs
Once the design team ﬁnds a system feasible and creates a general design, it can focus
on developing the system’s input, processing, and output requirements. When performing
design tasks, it is perhaps curious that the design team ﬁrst focuses on the outputs—not the
inputs or processing requirements—of the new system. The reason for this is that the most
important objective of an AIS is to satisfy users’ needs. Preparing output speciﬁcations ﬁrst
lets these requirements dictate the inputs and processing tasks required to produce them.
During the analysis phase and general system design, the study team develops bound-
aries for the new system. These boundaries deﬁne the project’s scope. However, as the
design team works with users, they are likely to be asked to do additional work. Outside
consultants often handle these requests by drafting proposals showing the additional costs
associated with them. These costs can include delays in meeting the schedule for delivering
the project.
Case-in-Point 13.4
Universities are large, complex organizations with many specialized
processes. These entities are good candidates for enterprise systems, but scope creep and
other problems can send these projects off track. To implement a Lawson Software system,
the University of Wisconsin spent $25 million and six years, but they still were not ready for a
system-wide rollout. One problem was customization, which required 251 programs and eight
additional large applications to be added to the Lawson software. The North Dakota University
System also had troubles as they worked to implement PeopleSoft ERP. The software project
cost was $49 million ($14 million over budget) and over three years behind planned rollout.
Extensive customized computing needs appear to be one source of the overruns for North
Dakota’s ERP.4
System Outputs.
The design team will use the data gathered from the prior systems
analysis work to help it decide what kinds of outputs are needed as well as the formats that
these outputs should have. Although it is possible for the design team to merely copy the
outputs of an older system, this would make little sense—the new system would be just
like the old one. Instead, the team will attempt to create better outputs—that is, design
outputs that will better satisfy their users’ information needs than did the old system.
Outputs may be classiﬁed according to which functional area uses them (e.g., mar-
keting, human resources, accounting, or manufacturing) as well as how frequently they
must be produced (e.g., daily or weekly). Where a speciﬁc report is not needed on a
regular basis, the system should be able to provide it when requested (a demand report) or
triggered when a certain condition is met (an exception report). For example, an accounts
receivable report on a speciﬁc customer’s payment history might be issued on demand, or
generated automatically when a customer owes more than a speciﬁed amount. Although
many organizations still rely heavily on hard-copy (printed) reports, systems designers
should also consider the possibility of creating soft-copy (screen) reports as an alternative.
Process Design.
Until now, the system designers have focused on what the system
must provide rather than how the system can provide it. After designing the outputs, their
next step is to identify the processing procedures required to produce them. This involves
deciding which application programs are necessary and what data processing tasks each
program should perform.
4Sources: Songini, Marc, ‘‘Delays, Added Costs Threaten University’s ERP Apps Rollout,’’ Computerworld (August
1, 2005), pp. 1–2 and Songini, Marc, ‘‘PeopleSoft Apps Vex N.D. Colleges,’’ www.computerworld.com (June 23,
2006).

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
427
There are a large number of tools for modeling computer processes. Among them are
the system ﬂowcharts, data ﬂow diagrams, program ﬂowcharts, process maps, and decision
tables discussed in Chapter 3. Another popular tool is the entity-relationship (E-R) diagram
discussed in Chapter 4. Common to all these design methodologies is the idea of structured,
top-down design, in which system designers begin at the highest level of abstraction and
then ‘‘drill down’’ to lower, more detailed levels until the system is completely speciﬁed.
Designing System Inputs.
Once the design team has speciﬁed the outputs and
processing procedures for a new project, its members can think about what data the
system must collect to satisfy these output and processing requirements. Thus, the team
must identify and describe each data element in the systems design (e.g., ‘‘alphabetic,’’
‘‘maximum number of characters,’’ and ‘‘default value’’) as well as specify the way data
items must be coded. This is no easy task, because there are usually a large number of data
items in even a small business application. Chapter 4 discusses the subject of data modeling
in detail.
After the design team identiﬁes and describes the input data, it can determine the
source of each data element. For example, customer information such as name, address,
and telephone numbers may be gathered directly from web screens, and the current date
can be accessed from the computer system itself. Wherever possible, the design team will
attempt to capture data in computer-readable formats, as noted in Chapter 2. This avoids
costly, time-consuming data transcription as well as the errors such transcription typically
introduce into the job stream.
Finally, system designers try to create systems that streamline data entry tasks because
this facilitates the process and helps users avoid errors. Examples include substituting
system default values, screen menus, and mouse clicks for system commands or other
inputs that must otherwise be entered manually. Additional examples include using
dialogue boxes for special user inputs and message boxes that help explain why a
particular input value is unacceptable (Figure 13-6).
Prototyping
Prototyping means developing a simpliﬁed model of a proposed information system.
A prototype is a scaled-down, experimental version of a nonexistent information system
that a design team can develop cheaply and quickly for user-evaluation purposes. The
prototype model does not run, but presents users with the ‘‘look and feel’’ of a completed
system. By allowing users to experiment with the prototype, the designers can learn what
users like and dislike in the mockup. They can then modify the system’s design in response
FIGURE 13-6
An AIS might display this error message if the user made a mistake entering a
Social Security number in a dialogue box.

428
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Identify 
information 
system 
requirements 
Develop an 
initial 
prototype 
User signs off 
on approved 
prototype 
Process continues until 
users are satisfied. 
Test and revise 
the prototype 
FIGURE 13-7
Steps in prototyping an accounting information system.
to this feedback. Thus, prototyping is an iterative process of trial-use-and-modiﬁcation that
continues until users are satisﬁed. Prototyping has four steps, as illustrated in Figure 13-7.
The following case-in-point describes how it works in practice.
Case-in-Point 13.5
A company hired a consulting ﬁrm to develop a large-scale student
management information system to manage its training and continuing education programs.
The consulting ﬁrm developed a prototype that showed the primary input screens and reports.
This prototype was used to obtain input to modify the inputs and outputs. For instance, users
experimented with the screens, thinking about how easy it would be to input data through
them. Users also considered whether the reports would give them the information they needed,
such as a listing of all students in a class and all classes taken by a student. The programming
to activate the screens and enable the processing, along with the database functionality, came
later. This prototyping approach ensured that the completed system would satisfy user needs.
Prototyping has various advantages and disadvantages compared to the traditional
design approach. In general, the procedure is useful when end users do not understand
their informational needs very well, system requirements are hard to deﬁne, the new system
is mission-critical or needed quickly, past interactions have resulted in misunderstandings
between end users and designers, and/or there are high risks associated with developing
and implementing the wrong system.
However, prototyping is not always the best systems design approach. For example,
both managers and IT professionals can distrust it—the managers, if they perceive prototyp-
ing as ‘‘too experimental’’ and the IT professionals, if they harbor fears that the results lead
to poor design solutions. Then, too, a design team can be misled if it relies on a small portion
of the user population for developing its models and thus satisﬁes the informational needs
of non-representative employees. For this reason, prototyping is not normally appropriate
for designing large or complex information systems that serve many users with signiﬁcantly
different informational needs. Finally, IT professionals do not recommend prototyping
for developing traditional AIS applications such as accounts receivable, accounts payable,

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
429
payroll, or inventory management, where the inputs, processing, and outputs are already
well known and clearly deﬁned.
The Systems Speciﬁcations Report
After the design team completes its work of specifying the inputs, outputs, and processing
requirements of the new system, the members will summarize their ﬁndings in a (typically
large) systems speciﬁcations report. Figure 13-8 provides some representative informa-
tion that might be included in such a report. The design team submits this report to the
steering committee for review, comment, and approval.
The Make or Buy Decision.
The project is now at a critical juncture. If the steering
committee approves the detailed design work, it now faces a make-or-buy decision. In large
organizations, one possibility is to use internal IT staff to develop the project. This choice
offers the tightest control over project development, the best security over sensitive data,
the beneﬁts of a custom product that has been tailor-made for the exact requirements of the
application, the luxury of replacing the old system piecemeal as modules become available,
and a vote of conﬁdence for the organization’s IT staff. But this choice also uses valuable
1. Historical background information about the company’s operating activities. Included here would be
facts about the types of products manufactured and sold by the company, the ﬁnancial condition of
the company, the company’s current data processing methods, the peak volume of data processing
activities, and the types of equipment currently being used in the company’s data processing system.
2. Detailed information about the problems in the company’s current system. By understanding the present
systems problems, the computer vendors should have a better idea of what type of speciﬁc computer
application will eliminate the company’s system weaknesses. The design team may also include informa-
tion about how soon they would like to receive the vendors’ recommendations and the approximate date
that the ﬁnal decision will be made by their client regarding which computerized system will be purchased
(or leased).
3. Detailed descriptions of the systems design proposals. For every design proposal, information should
be included about such things as the data input and output of speciﬁc computer processing runs, the
types of master ﬁles needed and the approximate volume of each ﬁle, the frequency of updating each
master ﬁle, the format of each output report, the approximate length of each output report, the types of
information included in each report and how often the various reports will be prepared, the organizational
managers to whom every report will be distributed, and the company’s available space for computer
facilities.
4. Indication of what the vendors should include in their proposals to the company. This section of the
systems speciﬁcations report, in effect, tells the vendors how detailed they should make their proposals.
The company might request information regarding the speed and size of the central processing unit
needed, the type of PCs needed for the company’s local area network, the type and quantity of input and
output devices as well as the capabilities of these devices, the availability of prewritten software packages
for speciﬁc processing activities, the training sessions offered by the vendors on the operating details
of the new system, the help provided by the vendors in implementing and testing the new system, the
maintenance services available from the vendors, and the vendors’ provisions for backup data processing
facilities.
5. Time schedule for implementing the new system. This ﬁnal section of the report will request the computer
vendors to estimate the number of weeks, months, or years that will be necessary to implement their
recommended computer systems within the company.
FIGURE 13-8
Systems speciﬁcations report information.

430
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
employee time and can divert the organization’s resources from its main objectives—for
example, manufacturing products.
Another possibility is to outsource the project’s development to a contractor. This
choice is useful when an organization lacks internal expertise to do the work or simply
wishes to avoid the headaches of internal project development.
Finally, the steering committee can purchase prewritten software (commonly called
canned software) and perhaps modify it to suit the ﬁrm’s needs. If the organization
requires both hardware and software, the committee may also choose to shop for a
complete, ‘‘ready-to-go’’ turnkey system. The steering committee can ask the computer
vendors to submit bid proposals for such a complete system, or alternatively, can ask each
vendor to provide separate bids for hardware and software.
Choosing an Accounting Information System
Because internal project management and systems development are beyond the scope of
this text, we’ll assume here that the steering committee opts to acquire most of its system
resources from outside vendors. This is the most common choice. If the committee takes
this course of action, the systems speciﬁcations report helps them create a request for
proposal (RFP) outlining the speciﬁc requirements of the desired system. Upon ﬁnalizing
the system’s speciﬁcations, the committee (with the help of the design team and perhaps
outside consultants) will send a copy to appropriate vendors. Typically, the RFP also
contains a deadline for bidding, the length of which varies—for example, just a few weeks
for hardware, and longer periods of time for systems requiring custom development tasks.
After the deadline has passed, an evaluation committee supervised by the steering
committee will review vendor submissions and schedule separate meetings with those
vendors who provide viable system proposals. The participants at each meeting include
representatives from the vendor, representatives from the steering committee, and repre-
sentatives from the design team. The vendor’s role is to present its proposal and to answer
questions from the other participants. The evaluation committee’s role is to listen to the
vendor proposals, provide input to the steering committee about the pros and cons of each
one, and perhaps make a recommendation for a preferred provider.
Selection Criteria.
The steering committee’s responsibility is to make a ﬁnal selection
and it is not restricted in its choices. It can accept one bid totally, negotiate with one
vendor for speciﬁc resources, or spread its purchases among two or more providers. Here
are some key factors that a steering committee should consider when evaluating vendor
proposals:
• The Performance Capability of Each Proposed System. A vendor system must be
able to process the organization’s data so that management will receive outputs when
they need them. There are many measures of performance, including speed, response
time, number of users supported, and system testing. One way to examine the operating
efﬁciency of a particular system is to use a benchmark test. With this approach, the
vendor’s system performs a data processing task that the new system must perform (e.g.,
payroll processing), and representatives of the organization then examine the outputs
for accuracy, consistency, and efﬁciency.
• Costs and Beneﬁts of Each Proposed System. The accountants on the design team
will analyze the costs of every vendor’s proposed system in relation to the system’s
anticipated performance beneﬁts. They will also consider the differences between

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
431
purchasing and leasing each vendor’s system. If the steering committee elects to
purchase a system, the accountants should then advise the committee on a realistic
depreciation schedule for the new system.
• Maintainability of Each Proposed System. This refers to the ease with which a
proposed computer system can be modiﬁed. For example, this ﬂexibility enables a ﬁrm
to alter a portion of a payroll system to reﬂect new federal tax laws. Because the costs
of maintaining a large information system are typically ﬁve times as much as the costs
of initially acquiring or developing a system, the evaluators should place considerable
emphasis on this dimension.
• Compatibility of Each Proposed System with Existing Systems. The new system
must interface and work with existing computer hardware, software, and operating
procedures. In some instances, this comes down to hardware issues. For example, it
may not be possible to run speciﬁc software modules of the new system on some
of the company’s older local area network servers, which will consequently have to
be upgraded. But compatibility issues can also involve the operating system, existing
application software, or operational concerns as well—for instance, the requirement
that employees learn a whole new set of procedures for inputting data.
• Vendor Support. Vendor support includes such things as (1) training classes that
familiarize employees with the operating characteristics of the new system, (2) help
in implementing and testing the new system, (3) assistance in maintaining the new
system through a maintenance contract, (4) backup systems for temporarily processing
company data if required, and (5) telephone assistance for answering user questions. The
availability of ‘‘business-hours-only’’ versus ‘‘round-the-clock’’ support and the availability
of domestic versus offshore customer support are other considerations. Most vendors
charge extra for enhanced services.
Making a Final Decision.
Because this book is about accounting information systems,
our focus here will be on acquiring accounting software. Selecting an accounting system
is a major responsibility that requires careful planning. After all, a software package that
fails to meet the needs of a company or its accounting staff can throw an organization
into turmoil, losing time and money. We discussed choosing software in some detail in
Chapter 9. Here we discuss an analytical approach to choosing hardware and software
vendors or AISs.
Point-Scoring Analysis.
A technical approach for evaluating hardware or software
that meets most of a company’s major requirements is a point-scoring analysis such as
the one illustrated in Figure 13-9. To illustrate, assume that in the process of selecting an
accounts payable system, an organization ﬁnds three independent vendors whose packages
appear to satisfy current needs. Figure 13-9 shows the results of the analysis. Because the
cost to purchase or lease each vendor’s accounts payable software package is about the
same, ‘‘cost’’ is not an issue in this selection process.
When performing a point-scoring analysis, the evaluation committee ﬁrst assigns
potential points to each of the evaluation criteria based on its relative importance. For
example, the committee feels that ‘‘adequate controls’’ (10 possible points) is more
important than whether other users are satisﬁed with the software (8 possible points).
After developing these selection criteria, the evaluation committee proceeds to rate each
vendor or package, awarding points as it deems ﬁt. The highest point total determines the
winner. In Figure 13-9, the evaluation indicates that Vendor B’s accounts payable software

432
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Possible
Vendor
Vendor
Vendor
Software Evaluation Criteria
Points
A
B
C
Does the software meet all mandatory speciﬁcations?
10
7
9
6
Will program modiﬁcations, if any, be minimal to meet
company needs?
10
8
9
7
Does the software contain adequate controls?
10
9
9
8
Is the performance (speed, accuracy, reliability, etc.)
adequate?
10
7
8
6
Are other users satisﬁed with the software?
8
6
7
5
Is the software well documented?
10
8
8
7
Is the software compatible with existing company software?
10
7
9
8
Is the software user-friendly?
10
7
8
6
Can the software be demonstrated and test-driven?
9
8
8
7
Does the software have an adequate warranty?
8
6
7
6
Is the software ﬂexible and easily maintained?
8
5
7
5
Is online inquiry of ﬁles and records possible?
10
8
9
7
Will the vendor keep the software up to date?
10
8
8
7
Totals
123
94
106
85
FIGURE 13-9
A point-scoring analysis for evaluating three independent vendors’ accounts
payable software packages.
package has the highest total score (106 points) and the committee should therefore
acquire this vendor’s system.
Although point-scoring analyses can provide an objective means of selecting a ﬁnal
system, many experts believe that evaluating accounting software is more art than science.
There are no absolute rules in the selection process, only guidelines for matching user needs
with software capabilities. Even for a small business, evaluators must consider such issues
as the company’s data processing needs, its in-house computer skills, vendor reputations,
software costs, and so forth.
Selecting a Finalist.
After each vendor presents its proposal to the organization, the
steering committee must select the best one. Although a vendor’s reputation is relative,
a buyer can obtain clues by checking with the Better Business Bureau and speaking with
some of the vendor’s other clients. It is also possible that, say, because of the cost factor,
none of the computer vendors’ proposals is satisfactory. For example, perhaps at the time
the design team performed their economic feasibility study, the results were favorable, but
the subsequent detailed design speciﬁcations result in actual costs that are considerably
higher than anticipated. At this point, the organization’s steering committee can (1) request
the design team to obtain additional systems proposals from other vendors, (2) abandon
the project, or (3) outsource needed services.
Outsourcing
An alternative to developing and installing internal accounting information systems is to
outsource them. As we discussed in Chapter 7, outsourcing occurs when a company hires
an outside organization to handle all or part of the operations for a speciﬁc business
function. Accounting tasks have long been a target for outsourcing, including accounts

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
433
payable, accounts receivable, payroll, general ledger, accounting for ﬁxed assets, and
ﬁnancial reporting. Interestingly, U.S. tax returns are even being outsourced to workers in
other countries, including India.
In the accounting area, the degree to which a company outsources its processing
operations can range from routine assistance with a single application such as payroll
or tax compliance to performing almost all the accounting functions of the organization.
Outsourcing contracts are typically signed for ﬁve to ten years. Annual costs depend on
the amount of data processing work to be performed and range from ‘‘thousands’’ to
‘‘millions’’ of dollars. When a large company decides to outsource its IT functions, it is not
uncommon for the vendor to purchase all of its clients’ hardware and software, and hire
almost all of that company’s IT employees. The outsourcing organization then operates
and manages the client company’s entire information systems, either on the client’s site or
by migrating the client’s systems to its own computers.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Outsourcing.
Often, making a decision to
outsource a process is not an easy one. One advantage is that an organization can focus
on its core competencies while ‘‘experts’’ do the other work. For example, hospitals
often outsource their data processing functions so they can focus on better patient care.
Outsourcing also frees managerial time, ﬁnancial assets, and related resources for other
purposes, and an organization doesn’t need to worry about keeping up with technology
in-house.
A primary motivator for outsourcing is cost savings. These come from economies
of scale where the process-provider is able to spread costs among several clients and
achieve high volumes for purchases. Another cost savings can come from moving selected
operations to areas where real estate prices, building rents, or labor costs are less—for
example, to offshore sites. This also enables a company to reduce its own labor force, save
money, and remain competitive.
Although the advantages of outsourcing are compelling, outsourcing is not always the
best alternative. One disadvantage is inﬂexibility. The typical outsourcing contract requires
a company to commit to services for an extended time period—ten-year contracts are
common. Should the contracting company become dissatisﬁed with the services it receives
during this period of time, however, it is usually difﬁcult to break the agreement. Even with
a termination clause, the company may still be locked into outsourcing itself—for example,
because it has already sold its data processing centers and terminated its IT staff.
Loss of control is another potential disadvantage. When an outsourcing vendor performs
a signiﬁcant portion of an organization’s data processing, that organization loses control
of its information systems. For example, the contracting company can no longer control
its data, data errors, or other processing irregularities that occur from the outsourcer’s
processing work. Finally, outsourcing can cause an organization to lose competitive
advantage. That is, when a company outsources its IT functions, it can also lose a basic
understanding of its own information system needs or how its information systems could
provide it with competitive advantages.
IMPLEMENTATION, FOLLOW-UP, AND MAINTENANCE
Systems implementation is often called the ‘‘action phase’’ of a systems study because the
recommended changes from the prior analysis, design, and development work are now put
into operation. But systems implementation can also be a stressful time. As the time draws

434
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
near for installing a new system, end users and clerical personnel become nervous about
their jobs, middle managers wonder if the new system will deliver the beneﬁts as promised,
and top managers become impatient when installations run longer than anticipated or
go over budget. Even if an organization did a perfect job of analyzing, designing, and
developing a new system, the entire project can fail if its implementation is poor.
Implementation Activities
Implementing a new accounting information system involves many activities and tasks
that will vary in number and complexity depending on the scale of the system and the
development approach. Some of the steps that may be involved are:
1. Prepare the Physical Site. An organization must have physical space for any new
hardware and personnel.
2. Determine Functional Changes. Whenever a company makes changes to a major
accounting system, it must also consider the effects of such changes on its reporting
structure and personnel relationships.
3. Select and Assign Personnel. Because the design team has developed detailed
speciﬁcations for the new system, the organization should now have a ﬁrm idea about
the job descriptions of system users.
4. Train Personnel. Both the implementation team and computer vendors can help
train company employees to work with the new system, and seminars can acquaint
other employees with the new system’s advantages and capabilities. Vendors may
provide technical training for free, or at reduced costs, to corporate users as incentives
to use their products.
5. Acquire and Install Computer Equipment. After preparing the physical site for
the new computer system, the company must acquire computer equipment such as
PCs, web servers, routers, modems, and printers from outside vendors.
6. Establish Internal Controls. Chapters 11 and 12 described why an organization
must install control procedures that safeguard its assets, ensure the accuracy and
reliability of accounting data, promote operating efﬁciency, and encourage employee
compliance with prescribed managerial policies. Again, these controls should be built
into a system rather than added later.
7. Convert Data Files. When converting to a new system, an organization may have
to convert its data ﬁles to alternate, more-useful formats. This activity is also common
when merging two systems—for example, when consolidating formerly separate
divisions of a company or merging the systems from two separate companies into one.
8. Acquire Computer Software. The implementation team must also install the soft-
ware that was acquired or developed for the project. The software from independent
vendors is often called canned software, which sometimes comes bundled (i.e., com-
bined) with hardware in complete turnkey systems. In general, the process of acquiring
(and possibly making modiﬁcations to) computer software from an independent vendor
takes considerably less time than developing the programs in-house.
9. Test Computer Software. Programs must be tested regardless of where they came
from to ensure day-to-day processing accuracy and completeness.
10. Convert to the New System. In switching to the new system, the ﬁrm may choose
to make a direct conversion by immediately discontinuing use of the old system and

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
435
letting the new system ‘‘sink or swim.’’ An alternative is parallel conversion, where
the organization operates both the new and the old system for some period of time.
Another choice is modular conversion, where the new system is implemented in
stages, one process or module at a time. An example would be ﬁrst implementing the
inventory module, then order processing, and so on.
The most difﬁcult issue in implementing a new system is change management.
The new system will bring with it changes to employee job descriptions and, in some
cases, new jobs and no jobs. Members of the implementation team and steering committee
should communicate openly with affected workers about how the new system will impact
them. Organizations should give those employees whose jobs are either eliminated or
materially altered an opportunity to apply for the new jobs and obtain retraining, if
necessary. Similarly, terminated employees should receive ample notice to enable them to
apply for other jobs before their employment ends. Some companies even set up internal
outplacement ofﬁces for displaced employees or create early retirement plans for qualiﬁed
employees.
Managing IT Implementation Projects
The preceding section made clear that there are many tasks involved in implementing a
new accounting system. Moreover, an organization cannot perform these tasks randomly,
but rather must complete them in a logical sequence. A good analogy is the process of
building a house, which requires completing the foundation, sub-ﬂoors, and load-bearing
walls before putting on the roof. Similarly, if an organization does not plan its systems
implementation in an orderly fashion, the project’s coordination is almost sure to suffer
and its completion may be prolonged unreasonably.
There are many tools available to help manage projects. Two of these, Program
Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) and Gantt charts, help managers schedule
and monitor the activities involved in large projects, such as implementation of a large-scale
information system. There are also software solutions that may be used for project
management, which we discuss below.
Program Evaluation and Review Technique.
With PERT, a project leader ﬁrst
prepares a list of systems implementation activities, identiﬁes the prerequisite activities
that must be completed before others can start, and estimates the amount of time required
to complete each activity. Figure 13-10 shows what a PERT diagram might look like for
the implementation tasks outlined above. In the chart, Activity A might take 17 weeks
and must be completed before Activity E. The activities A-E-H-I-J together, would take 55
weeks. The lines with arrows in this diagram conventionally ﬂow from left to right and
represent the activities required to implement the system. The circles (called nodes) in the
diagram represent project milestones—i.e., the starting points or completions of speciﬁc
activities—and therefore do not require any time.
Top managers may not be interested in PERT analyses, but they are usually very
concerned about the time required to ﬁnish the entire project. The project leader can
estimate this completion time by examining the various paths in the PERT network. Because
PERT diagrams in actual practice are so large (often covering entire walls), project leaders
normally use a computer to identify the longest paths through such networks. Within a
PERT diagram, the longest path to project completion is called the critical path, which
is also the shortest completion time of the entire project. The project leader will closely

436
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
A 
B 
C 
2 
F 
E 
17 
14 
7 
D 
6 
1 
4 
1 
G 
J 
H 
I 
6 
26 
6 
5 
5 
6 
7 
8 
2 
3 
FIGURE 13-10
PERT network diagram for a systems implementation project.
monitor the work on each critical-path activity to avoid setbacks. Slack time describes
the amount of delay time that can occur in each non-critical activity and still not delay the
project. Slack time along the critical path is zero because delays in activities on this path
automatically delay the entire project. PERT is a useful project management tool because
of its ability to help managers identify critical paths and areas where slack time occurs.
As the implementation team performs speciﬁc activities, it also provides feedback
reports to the steering committee that compare actual implementation times with planned
times. These reports enable both parties to focus on delays in completing speciﬁc activities
and to estimate what effect these delays may have on the entire installation project. If
a speciﬁc critical activity is behind schedule, the project leader may allocate additional
resources to speed its completion. Alternately, if another activity is ahead of schedule, the
project leader may reduce the resources assigned to it and use them elsewhere.
Gantt Charts.
Another tool that an organization can use in planning and controlling a
systems implementation project is a Gantt chart (Figure 13-11). Gantt charts are useful
for both scheduling and tracking the activities of systems implementation projects because
actual progress can be indicated directly on the Gantt chart and contrasted with the
planned progress.
Gantt charts are straightforward, easy to understand, and can be used with PERT to
compare estimated completion times against actual ones. A disadvantage of Gantt charts is
that they do not indicate the precedence of activities for the project, as do PERT charts.
Rather, a Gantt chart treats each activity as if it were independent of the others, which
of course is not really the case. For this reason, Gantt charts are better suited for systems
implementation projects that are not complex and have relatively few interrelationships
among implementation activities.
Project Management Software.
As noted above, PERT diagrams can become com-
plex, making the calculations required to compute and re-compute critical paths and slack
times difﬁcult. Project management software that runs on desktop or notebook com-
puters can perform these tasks easily and quickly, can enable a project leader to plan and

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
437
FIGURE 13-11
Gantt chart for systems implementation activities.
control implementation tasks, and can help a team install a new system on time and within
budget. Examples of project management software solutions include eProject, Microsoft
Project, PlanBee, and Time Line.
Project management software requires users to break down complex projects into
smaller, simpler activities and to estimate the time, cost, and other resources required for
each of them. The project leader then enters these estimates into the computer running
the project software, along with the priority of the various activities of the project. The
software can then schedule tasks, identify critical and non-critical activities, compute slack
times, and so forth. Project management software also allows the project leader to perform
what-if analyses—for example, to experiment with different systems implementation work
schedules or determine how delays in speciﬁc activities are likely to affect other project
tasks.
Interestingly, some of the more current project management information systems are
much more complex than some of the earlier software solutions. These new systems
are not limited to just scheduling and resource management—they are now much more
comprehensive and can support the entire life-cycle of projects.5
Post-Implementation Review
Regardless of which conversion method used, the new system will eventually become the
sole system in operation. This brings us to the ﬁnal, follow-up and maintenance phase of
our systems development life cycle. The purpose of this phase is to monitor the new system
and make sure that it continues to satisfy the three levels of organizational goals discussed
at the beginning of this chapter: (1) general systems goals, (2) top management systems
goals, and (3) operating management systems goals. When these goals are not adequately
satisﬁed, problems normally occur and the system requires further modiﬁcations.
5Source: F. Ahlemann, ‘‘Towards a conceptual reference model for project management information systems,’’
International Journal of Project Management (January 2009), pp. 19–30.

438
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
After the new system has been in operation for a period of time, the implementation
team should reevaluate the new system’s effectiveness by:
• Talking with top management personnel and operating management personnel about
their satisfaction with the new system.
• Talking with end users to determine their satisfaction.
• Evaluating the control procedures of the system to verify whether they are functioning
properly.
• Observing employee work performance to determine whether they are able to perform
their job functions efﬁciently and effectively.
• Evaluating whether computer processing functions, including data capture and prepara-
tion, are performed efﬁciently and effectively.
• Determining whether output schedules for both internal and external reports are met
with the new computer system.
At the conclusion of the initial follow-up study, the team prepares a report called
a post-implementation review report for the steering committee that summarizes the
implementation team’s ﬁndings. If the implementation team is satisﬁed that the new
system is working satisfactorily, no further revisions are required. If follow-up studies
reveal that problems still exist in the new system, the team will communicate these
ﬁndings to the steering committee and perhaps recommend further systems studies. Upon
receiving approval from the steering committee, the organization will then perform the
systems study steps again with the objective of making revisions to the system.
A post-implementation review is also beneﬁcial to the implementation team. At this
point in the systems development life cycle, the team members are now in a position to
evaluate their own work, learn from the mistakes they made or successfully avoided, and
become more skilled ‘‘systems people’’ in future engagements.
System Maintenance
In practice, implementation teams do not normally perform follow-up studies of their
company’s new information system. Instead, the team turns over control of the system to
the company’s IT function, which now shoulders the responsibility for maintaining it. In
effect, system maintenance continues the tasks created by the initial follow-up study,
except that experts from the company’s IT subsystem now perform the modiﬁcations
exclusively. For example, when users complain about errors or anomalies in the new
system, it becomes the IT subsystem’s responsibility to respond to these needs, estimate the
cost of ﬁxing them, and (often) perform the necessary modiﬁcations. The IT departments of
even medium-size companies typically have forms for such requests, policies for prioritizing
maintenance tasks, and formulas for allocating maintenance costs among the various user
departments.
It is common for business systems to require continuous revisions. Some of the common
reasons include: increased competition, new governmental regulations, or the information
needs of top management (or other levels of management) change. In fact, studies show
that, over the life of a typical information system, organizations spend only about 20–30% of
the total system costs developing and implementing it. They spend the remaining 70–80%
maintaining it, typically on further modiﬁcations or software updates. In other words,
‘‘maintenance’’ may not be the most glamorous part of a systems development life cycle,

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
439
Software costs
Systems
development
life cycle
Analyze,
design,
code, test
Maintenance
Development
Maintenance
Maintenance
FIGURE 13-12
In the systems development life cycle, the costs of analysis, design, develop-
ment, and implementation are often just the tip of the iceberg: software maintenance costs are
the most expensive part.
but it is almost always the most expensive part. For this reason, organizations try to develop
or acquire ﬂexible systems—that is, systems that are easily modiﬁed—because such systems
save businesses money in the long run (even if they cost more in the short run).
AIS AT WORK
Outsourcing and Offshoring IT
A recent research survey of 420 IT professionals found cost savings to be the primary
reason companies choose to outsource their IT. Some cost savings stem from increased
business ﬂexibility, and some from avoiding personnel costs (i.e., health care, pensions,
and other beneﬁts). Companies that use outsourced IT services have the ability to be more
ﬂexible and can adapt quickly to ebbs and ﬂows in business and demands for IT services.
Cost savings for labor is achieved by sending IT work to countries with lower wages. One
quarter of all outsourced IT dollars is spent on offshore IT, with much of that work going
to service providers in India.
In evaluating IT service providers domestically, ‘‘reliability’’ is the most important
criterion. Domestic US companies including IBM and Accenture are beneﬁting from the
trend to increased outsourcing of IT services.
When choosing an offshore vendor, it’s all about cost. Indian companies, such as
Satyam Computer Services, Tat Consulting Services (TCS), and Cognizant Technology
Solutions (CTS) are often selected for IT services.
CTS will soon reach the $1 billion revenue mark. Its fast growth may be partly due to
its ‘‘Americanism.’’ CTS is not purely an American company, nor is it Indian. It’s a hybrid
company that may be considered either American-Indian, or Indian-American. The CEO
resides in the company’s New Jersey headquarters and the company uses an American
approach to developing customers in that it develops strategic solutions. CTS emphasizes
specialization in business applications, primarily in the ﬁnancial services and health care
industries.

440
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
CTS, one of the NASDAQ 100, demonstrates the complex relationships that are
becoming more common in global business. The company was founded to take advantage
of India’s labor pool and low labor costs. Just as US companies once moved among states,
now it is the case that American, Indian, Chinese, and European companies look at earth’s
whole map—and they do the work where it can be done best and/or costs the least.6
SUMMARY
• The four stages in a systems development life cycle are: (1) planning and investigating, (2) analysis,
(3) design, and (4) implementing, follow-up, and maintenance.
• Planning requires creating a team to investigate the current system and make recommendations to
a steering committee.
• Systems analysis requires identifying general systems goals, top management systems goals, and
operating management systems goals.
• A systems survey uses a variety of data gathering techniques to understand and document the
system.
• The systems analysis report contains the study team recommendations.
• The components of a feasibility evaluation are technical, operational, legal, and economic feasibility.
• Detailed systems design begins with the design of outputs, and then inputs and processes. Designers
may choose a prototyping approach to create the new system.
• A systems speciﬁcations report contains detailed information about the organization and its desired
system.
• Choosing a system requires evaluating system performance capabilities, costs and beneﬁts, system
maintainability, system compatibility with other systems, and vendor support.
• An organization may choose to outsource its IT operations or accounting processes.
• Organizations use PERT, Gantt charts, and project management software to manage the implemen-
tation of information systems.
• Organizations need to follow-up to ﬁnd out if new systems are working as planned.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
applications portfolio
benchmark test
canned software
change management
critical path
detailed systems design
direct conversion
economic feasibility
feasibility evaluation
follow-up and maintenance phase
Gantt chart
legal feasibility
modular conversion
operational feasibility
parallel conversion
PERT
point-scoring analysis
preliminary investigation
project management software
prototyping
6Sources: Paul McDougall. ‘‘Cost Conscious, But Demanding,’’ InformationWeek, June 19, 2006, pp. 43–48,
and Nitya Varadarajan. ‘‘Its New Billion Dollar Baby; Cognizant Technology Solutions, Soon to Reach $1 Billion
in Revenues Will Be the Youngest Company to Enter Indian IT’s Exclusive Club. What Is Its Secret?’’ Business
Today, New Delhi, India, February 10, 2006, p. 70.

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
441
request for proposal (RFP)
schedule feasibility
scope creep
slack time
steering committee
system development life cycle (SDLC)
system maintenance
systems analysis
systems approach
systems implementation
systems speciﬁcations report
systems study
systems survey
technical feasibility
turnkey system
TEST YOURSELF
Q13-1. Which of the following statements is NOT true:
a. A preliminary investigation of a current system is conducted by the steering committee
b. Implementation, follow-up, and maintenance of IT includes acquiring resources for the
new system
c. In designing an AIS, the design team will begin with outputs
d. The more work done during planning and analysis, the less likely the new system will fail
Q13-2. The feasibility evaluation:
a. Is completed prior to detailed systems design
b. Includes economic, schedule, technical, legal, and operational feasibility
c. Both a and b are true
d. Neither a nor b is true
Q13-3. In developing and implementing IT, the study team and steering committee must consider
organizational goals. These include:
a. General, technical, and top management goals
b. General, operating management, and technical goals
c. Top management, operating management, and economic goals
d. Top management, operating management, and general systems goals
Q13-4. Prototyping, as an IT development approach, has both advantages and disadvantages. In
general, prototyping is most appropriate when:
a. The design team is not pressed for time in creating a new system
b. Users have a thorough understanding of their information needs
c. There are high risks associated with developing and implementing an ineffective system
d. System requirements are easily deﬁned
Q13-5. In selecting a new accounting information system, the steering committee should consider:
a. All expected costs and beneﬁts of the new systems, including maintenance and operating
costs
b. Support that a vendor can provide, including training, maintenance, and backup
c. Compatibility of a new system with existing systems
d. All of the above are considerations in selecting a new system
e. Only a and b are important considerations in selecting the new system
Q13-6. A point-scoring analysis:
a. Is a useful tool in conducting a feasibility analysis
b. Helps the systems study team to decide whether or not to outsource their AIS

442
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
c. Provides a systems study team with an objective means for selecting a ﬁnal AIS
d. Is a tool used for managing IT projects
Q13-7. Which of the following statements is NOT true with respect to managing IT projects:
a. Program evaluation and review technique (PERT) allows management to determine the
shortest time it will take to implement a new system, and any slack time that might exist
between implementation activities
b. An advantage of PERT is that it allows managers to identify the critical path in implemen-
tation
c. Both PERT and Gantt charts are manual techniques used in managing IT implementations
d. Gantt charts are useful in scheduling and implementing IT because they allow you to
indicate actual progress versus planned progress directly on the chart
Q13-8. When converting to a new system, which of the following conversion alternatives would be
the most risky for a ﬁnancial services ﬁrm?
a. Direct conversion
b. Modular conversion
c. Parallel conversion
d. Turnkey conversion
Q13-9. Which one of the four stages in the Systems Development Life Cycle is likely to be the most
costly for a new system?
a. Planning and Investigation
b. Analysis
c. Design
d. Implementation, Follow-up, & Maintenance
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
13-1. Discuss the major differences between the planning, analysis, and design phases of a systems
study.
13-2. What is a steering committee? Discuss its role in a systems study performed by a consulting
ﬁrm.
13-3. A systems study team should understand three levels of corporate goals: general systems
goals, top management systems goals, and operating management systems goals. If you had
to select one of these categories of systems goals as the most important to the effective
operation of an organization’s information system, which one would you choose? Explain the
reasons for your choice.
13-4. What is the purpose of a systems feasibility evaluation? Should this activity precede or follow
the preparation of a systems speciﬁcations report for computer vendor evaluation? Explain.
13-5. Discuss some of the annual cash beneﬁts and annual cash costs that a company might have
when it creates an online ordering system on the World Wide Web.
13-6. What is prototyping? Under what circumstances should prototyping be used? Under what
circumstances should it not be used?
13-7. What is the purpose of a systems speciﬁcations report? In what ways, if any, do the data
included in this report differ from the data accumulated by the design team during their
feasibility evaluation work?
13-8. When implementing a new computer system, two activities required are (1) establish controls
and (2) convert data ﬁles. What is the rationale for performing activity 1 before activity 2?
13-9. Three methods for implementing a new system in an organization are direct conversion,
parallel conversion, and modular conversion. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of
using each of these three systems implementation methods.

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
443
13-10. What is a PERT chart? What is a Gantt chart? Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of
using PERT network diagrams versus Gantt charts for planning and controlling the activities
involved in implementing an information system.
13-11. What is the purpose of follow-up in a systems study? Describe some of the speciﬁc activities
that the management implementation team would perform in their follow-up work.
13-12. Discuss the two major ways that a company’s software can be acquired. Which of these ways
for acquiring software do you recommend? Explain your reasoning.
13-13. What is business process outsourcing and why do ﬁrms outsource their IT functions?
PROBLEMS
13-14. The Valaria V Company manufactures and distributes low-priced bottled wines to retailers.
You are hired as a management consultant to help this company solve some of its systems
problems. Describe the types of decision-making information that probably would be needed
by the company’s (a) supervisor of the production plant, (b) top management, and (c)
marketing manager.
13-15. Stevenson Apparel is a manufacturer of fashion clothing that has just opened its ﬁrst large
retail store for selling in-season clothes at regular prices. The company’s competitive strategy
depends on a comprehensive point-of-sale (POS) system supporting online, up-to-the-minute
sales totals, day-to-day tracking of stock information, and quick checkout of customer
purchases. Because cashiers were already familiar with electronic cash registers, management
decided that only minimal training was required. Cashiers enter four-digit stock tracking
numbers (STNs) into one of the POS terminals that retrieves price and description data,
computes the tax and total amount due, accepts the type of payment, and controls the
cash drawer. A unique STN identiﬁes each of the 9,500 pieces of merchandise. The central
computer server maintains stock information.
In the ﬁrst month of operation, new cashiers were awkward using the new system. They
eventually became proﬁcient users but were frustrated with the slow printing of sales tickets
and the unpredictable action of their cash drawers. Each checkout stand has a telephone
that cashiers use to call for approval of credit-card transactions. Customers became impatient
when credit approvals delayed the checkout process or when the computer was down, thus
stopping all sales, including cash sales. Identify four problems with the system and describe
how you would remedy each of them.
13-16. Jay Beck works for the NSR Consulting Firm. His friend, Hank Henley, is the general manager
and majority stockholder of the Paciﬁc Worldwinds, a professional football team. Hank asked
Jay to design an online, real-time computer system for ‘‘the efﬁcient operation of the football
franchise.’’ Jay was quite confused because he could not think of any possible uses for an
online, real-time system within the operational activities of a football team (or any other
type of athletic team). Assume that you are also employed at the consulting ﬁrm. Provide
several suggestions to Jay concerning speciﬁc areas of athletic teams’ (football teams, baseball
teams, etc.) information systems where an online, real-time computer conﬁguration might be
beneﬁcial to managerial decision making.
13-17. Cook Consultants is currently in the process of completing the systems implementation
activities for converting The Samuel Company’s old system to a new one. Because of
unexpected delays in performing speciﬁc implementation activities, Jerry Hazen, the project
manager, is concerned about ﬁnishing the project on time. The one remaining activity is
testing the new computer system and subsequently eliminating the old one. Jerry’s assistant,
Jan Kramer, suggests that they can still meet their completion deadline if they use ‘‘direct
conversion’’ rather than ‘‘parallel conversion.’’ Assuming that you are the CIO of the company,
how would you react to Jan’s suggestion? Discuss.

444
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
13-18. With the help of your instructor, identify a particular information system that is not working
very well and perform a preliminary investigation of it. In your work, be sure to talk to (1)
at least one external ‘‘customer’’ who is affected by the system, (2) one employee who uses
the system daily, and (3) one person who manages this type of employee. For example, at
a university, you might study the student parking information system. The ‘‘customers’’ are
those car owners who purchase parking permits (e.g., students, faculty, and university staff
members), data input clerks are the employees who use the system daily, and the parking
manager is the person who supervises these employees. Ask each such person what he or
she feels are the problems of the system, and what they think should be done to address
these problems.
Prepare a preliminary investigation report that describes your system and outlines the
following items: (a) the problems that each person experiences with the system, (b)
the actions that each person thinks might solve the problems, and (c) your opinion of
which difﬁculties are the ‘‘real problems’’ and which are just symptoms of these problems.
Also include some recommendations. Should the present system be replaced, are minor
modiﬁcations required, or is the system mostly acceptable as it is?
CASE ANALYSES
13-19. Wright Company (Analyzing System Reports)
Wright Company employs a computer-based data processing system for maintaining all
company records. The current system was developed in stages over the past ﬁve years and
has been fully operational for the last 24 months.
When the system was being designed, all department heads were asked to specify the
types of information and reports they would need for planning and controlling operations.
The systems department attempted to meet the speciﬁcations of each department head.
Company management speciﬁed that certain other reports be prepared for department
heads. During the ﬁve years of systems development and operation, there have been
several changes in the department head positions due to attrition and promotions. The
new department heads often made requests for additional reports according to their
speciﬁcations. The systems department complied with all of these requests. Reports were
discontinued only on request by a department head, and then only if it was not a standard
report required by top management.
As a result, few reports were discontinued. Consequently, the information processing
subsystem was generating a large quantity of reports each reporting period. Company
management became concerned about the quantity of report information that was being
produced by the system. The internal audit department was asked to evaluate the effec-
tiveness of the reports generated by the system. The audit staff determined early in the
study that more information was being generated by the information processing subsystem
than could be used effectively. They noted the following reactions to this information
overload:
• Many department heads would not act on certain reports during periods of peak activity.
The department heads would let these reports accumulate with the hope of catching up
during subsequent lulls.
• Some department heads had so many reports they did not act at all on the information,
or they made incorrect decisions because of misuse of the information.

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
445
• Frequently, actions required by the nature of the report data were not taken until
the department heads were reminded by others who needed the decisions. These
department heads did not appear to have developed a priority system for acting on the
information produced by the information processing subsystem.
• Department heads often would develop the information they needed from alternative,
independent sources, rather than use the reports generated by the information processing
subsystem. This was often easier than trying to search among the reports for the needed
data.
Requirements:
1. Indicate whether each of the foregoing four reactions contributes positively or negatively
to the Wright Company’s operating effectiveness. Explain your answer for each of the
four reactions.
2. For each reaction that you indicated as negative, recommend alternative procedures
the Wright Company could employ to eliminate this negative contribution to operating
effectiveness.
(CMA adapted)
13-20. Kenbart Company (Redesigning Proﬁt Plan Report)
The managers at Kenbart Company have decided that increased emphasis must be placed
on proﬁt planning and comparing ‘‘results’’ to ‘‘plans.’’ A new proﬁt planning system has
been implemented to help with this objective. The company uses contribution margin
reporting for internal reporting purposes and applies the concept of ﬂexible budgeting for
estimating variable costs. Kenbart’s executive management uses the following terms when
reviewing and analyzing actual results and the proﬁt plan.
• Original Plan: proﬁt plan approved and adopted by management for the year
• Revised Plan: original plan modiﬁed as a consequence of action taken during the year
(usually quarterly) by executive management
• Flexed Revised Plan: the most current plan (i.e., either original plan or revised plan, if
one has been prepared) adjusted for changes in volume and variable expense rates
• YTD Actual Results: the actual results of operations for the year
• Current Outlook: the summation of the actual year-to-date results of operations plus
the ﬂexed revised plan for the remaining months of the year
Executive management meets monthly to review the actual results compared with the
proﬁt plan. Any assumptions or major changes in the proﬁt plan usually are incorporated
on a quarterly basis once the ﬁrst quarter is completed. Figure 13-13 provides an outline of
the basic Proﬁt Plan Report designed by the information processing subsystem. The current
system produces this report at the end of the month and whenever executive management
initiates a change or modiﬁcation in its plans. Consequently, many different versions of the
ﬁrm’s proﬁt plan exist, which makes analysis difﬁcult and confusing.
Several members of executive management have voiced disapproval of the Proﬁt Plan
Report because the ‘‘Plan’’ column is not well deﬁned and varies in meaning from one
report to another. Furthermore, the report does not include a current-outlook column.

446
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Kenbert Company Proﬁt Plan Report
Month, Year-to-Date
Month
Year-to-Date
Over/
Over/
(Under)
(Under)
Actual
Plan
$
%
Actual
Plan
$
%
Sales
Variable manufacturing costs
Raw materials
Direct labor
Variable overhead
Total variable manufacturing costs
Manufacturing margin
Variable selling expenses
Contribution margin
Fixed costs
Manufacturing
Sales
General administration
Income before taxes
Income taxes
Net income
FIGURE 13-13
Basic proﬁt plan report outline.
Therefore, the accounting subsystem has been asked to work with the information
processing subsystem in modifying the report so that users can better understand the
information being conveyed and the reference points for comparison of results.
Requirements:
1. Redesign the layout of the Proﬁt Plan Report so that it will be more useful to Kenbart’s
executive management in its task of reviewing results and planning operations.
2. Explain the reason for each modiﬁcation you make in the report.
13-21. Stephen Kerr Cosmetics (Point-Scoring Analysis)
Kerr Cosmetics distributes cosmetic products to large retailers across the country. The ﬁrm
was started in 1975 by its ﬁrst president, Stephen Kerr, who still serves as chairman of the
board. Over the years, the company has grown in size and complexity. As the company
has prospered, Richard Mason, the controller, has acquired and installed new accounting
software to accommodate the increasing demands on the ﬁrm’s accounting systems.
This year, Richard has convinced Stephen that it is time to upgrade their payroll system,
which is now 7 years old. The company hires an outside consultant, who examines their
situation and concludes that either one of two systems can meet their requirements.
Richard therefore asks two of his most competent employees, Fritz Bauman and Meg
Chrisman, to help him perform a point-scoring analysis and make a ﬁnal choice.

CHAPTER 13 / Developing and Implementing Effective Accounting Information Systems
447
The three individuals meet as a study team and agree upon ﬁve qualities for rating the
two vendors: (1) need for further modiﬁcations, (2) ease of use, (3) strength of internal
controls, (4) ﬂexibility for updating and Internet options, and (5) vendor support. To help
them rate the two vendors on these ﬁve criteria, the committee invites representatives
from each vendor to visit the company and make a presentation. Fritz makes arrangements
for the presentation team from Vendor A to present on a Friday morning, and a similar
team from Vendor B to visit that same afternoon. Unfortunately, an emergency makes it
impossible for Richard to attend either presentation. Meg and Fritz attend both sessions,
but come away with very different impressions of the competing software. The table below
provides some relevant data.
Requirements:
1. To start their analysis, Meg and Fritz decide to use their own ratings to perform separate
point scoring analyses. For this part, use equal weightings of 0.2 for each category.
Perform similar analyses using a spreadsheet. Which vendor does each person prefer?
2. Both Meg and Fritz decide that using equal weight for each category doesn’t make
sense. After some discussion, they agree to the ‘‘compromise weights’’ shown below.
They again perform their analyses. Which vendor does each person prefer now?
3. Fritz and Meg show their results to Richard, who suggests that they use their compromise
weights but use combined averages for their grades for each vendor. They perform yet
a third analysis. Which vendor receives the highest total now?
4. What do these exercises suggest about point scoring analyses? Does this method still
seem ‘‘objective’’ to you? Why or why not?
Fritz’s Weights
Meg’s Weights
Equal
Compromise Vendor Vendor Vendor Vendor
Weights
Weights
A
B
A
B
Required Modiﬁcations
0.2
0.2
3
2
3
3
Ease of Use
0.2
0.3
8
3
4
6
Internal Controls
0.2
0.1
3
4
2
4
Flexibility
0.2
0.1
4
5
3
7
Vendor Support
0.2
0.3
7
5
3
9
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Ahlemann, F. ‘‘Towards a conceptual reference model for project management information systems,’’
International Journal of Project Management (January 2009), pp. 19–30.
Babcock, C. ‘‘The Art of Deﬁning Software Requirements,’’ Information Week (March 15, 2004).
Bryde, D. ‘‘Project Management Concepts, Methods, and Application,’’ International Journal of
Operations and Production Management Vol. 23, No. 7 (2003), pp. 775–994.
Buskirk, R. & B. Moroney. ‘‘Extending Prototyping,’’ IBM Systems Journal Vol. 42, No. 4 (2003),
pp. 610–24.
Duggan, E. ‘‘Generating Systems Requirements with Facilitated Group Techniques,’’ Human-
Computer Interaction Vol. 18, No. 4 (December 2003), pp. 373–95.

448
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Greenemeier, L. ‘‘Analyzing the PC Vendors,’’ Information Week (December 1, 2003).
Hulme, G. ‘‘Identity Management: Pick Your Vendors Carefully,’’ Information Week (March 15,
2004).
Kropf, R. & G. Scalzi. ‘‘Great Project Management = IT Success’’ The Physician Executive Vol. 34,
No. 3 (May/Jun 2008), pp. 38–40.
Massue, M. ‘‘A Project Planning Tool,’’ T & D (Training and Development) Vol. 58, No. 2 (February
2004), p. 64.
Needleman, Ted. ‘‘Business Planning Software: Stick to the Plan’’ Accounting Today Vol. 18, No. 3
(February 9, 2004), pp. 18–21.
Willis, L. & F. Kordon. ‘‘Rapid System Prototyping’’ Journal of Systems and Software Vol. 70, No. 3
(March 2004), pp. 225–228.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. b
2. c
3. d
4. c
5. d
6. c
7. c
8. a
9. d

Chapter 14
Information Technology Auditing
INTRODUCTION
THE AUDIT FUNCTION
Internal versus External Auditing
Information Technology Auditing
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Information Systems
Controls
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUDITOR’S
TOOLKIT
Auditing Software
People Skills
AUDITING COMPUTERIZED ACCOUNTING
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Testing Computer Programs
Validating Computer Programs
Review of Systems Software
Validating Users and Access Privileges
Continuous Auditing
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUDITING
TODAY
Information Technology Governance
Auditing for Fraud: Statement on Auditing Standards
No. 99
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Third-Party and Information Systems Reliability
Assurances
AIS AT WORK—AN INTERNAL AUDIT ‘‘404’’
REVIEW
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
IT Auditing at Merriman, Davenport, and Walker, P.C.
Basic Requirements
Tiffany Martin, CPA
The Linz Company
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Know how external auditing differs from inter-
nal auditing.
2. Understand the information technology audit
process and types of careers in technology audit-
ing.
3. Understand the software and people skills
needed by information technology auditors.
4. Know how to determine the effectiveness of
internal controls over speciﬁc information sys-
tems.
5. Be familiar with various techniques auditors
use to evaluate computerized information sys-
tems.
6. Understand that IT governance is not just about
security.
7. Appreciate how auditors can use IT to prevent
and discover fraudulent activities.
8. Know how the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 inﬂu-
ences the role of IT auditors.
9. Be familiar with various types of third assur-
ance services related to IT.
449

450
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
‘‘Information Systems auditors, who evaluate how a company’s computer systems
safeguard assets and maintain data integrity, are in hot demand in the wake of
corporate scandals in recent years.’’
Sarah E. Needleman, ‘‘Sarbanes-Oxley Creates Special Demand; Need for Veteran IT
Auditors Intensiﬁes Amid Tightened Financial-Reporting Rules,’’
Wall Street Journal (Eastern edition). New York, NY, May 16, 2006, p. B8.
INTRODUCTION
Chapters 11 and 12 stressed the importance of control procedures in the efﬁcient operation
of an AIS. To make sure that these controls are functioning properly and that additional
controls are not needed, business organizations perform examinations or audits of their
accounting systems. Auditing is usually taught in one or more separate courses within the
typical accounting curriculum, and a single chapter of a book is not sufﬁcient to cover
the spectrum of topics involved in a complete audit of an organization. This chapter will
be merely introductory and limited to areas of immediate consequence to AISs and the IT
audit.
The discussion in this chapter is likely to complement, rather than repeat, the coverage
within a ﬁnancial auditing course. An accountant who specializes in auditing computerized
AISs is referred to as either an information systems (IS) auditor or an information
technology (IT) auditor. Both designations imply the same work, but we will use IT auditor
in this chapter as we describe the tasks done by such a person.
We begin our discussion with introductory comments about the nature of auditing,
including a discussion that emphasizes the distinction between internal and external
auditing. We then describe the relationship between an IT audit and a ﬁnancial audit.
Next, we discuss tools an IT auditor uses. Perhaps surprisingly, people and social skills
are as important as technical ones. The chapter next describes a variety of approaches for
evaluating internal controls in a computerized AIS.
We end Chapter 14 with several topics related to IT auditing today. These include dis-
cussion of information technology governance, fraud auditing, the impact of Sarbanes-Oxley
on IT audits, and discussion of third party and systems reliability assurance services.
THE AUDIT FUNCTION
To audit is to examine and to assure. The nature of auditing differs according to the subject
under examination. We can differentiate auditing in other ways as well. This section
discusses internal, external, and IT auditing.
Internal versus External Auditing
Conventionally, we distinguish between two types of audits: an internal audit and an
external audit. In an internal audit, a company’s own accounting employees perform the
audit, whereas accountants working for an independent CPA ﬁrm conduct an external

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
451
audit. Generally, internal auditing positions are staff positions reporting to top management
and/or the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Whereas an audit might be internal
to a company, it is invariably external to the corporate department or division being
audited. Thus, the auditing function preserves its objectivity and professionalism.
An internal audit investigates two matters: (1) employee compliance with organizational
policies and procedures, and (2) the development and evaluation of internal controls. It
is relatively broad in scope, including such activities as auditing for fraud and ensuring
that employees are not copying software programs illegally. Internal auditors can provide
assurance to a company’s top management about the efﬁciency and effectiveness of almost
any aspect of its organization.
The emphasis on internal control resulting from recent corporate scandals creates
more demand for internal auditors. These auditors often work as consultants, helping their
organizations to develop effective internal control systems and to comply with various
regulations.
Case-in-Point 14.1
A 2005/2006 survey conducted by the Institute of Internal Auditors
found that subsequent to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, audit committees of Boards of
Directors are relying on internal auditors to tell them more about a company’s ﬁnances and
operations. The survey also showed that internal auditors act as in-house consultants and
are helping management to detect fraud, design information systems, and develop control
systems. As a result, internal auditor salaries have increased signiﬁcantly each year between
2004 and 2006.1
In contrast to the broad perspective of internal auditors, the chief purpose of an
external audit is the attest function,—i.e., giving an opinion on the accuracy and fairness
of ﬁnancial statements. This fairness evaluation is conducted in the context of generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and requires application of generalized auditing
standards. In the past few years, the external auditor’s role has expanded with respect
to auditing for fraud. Statement on Auditing Standards (SAS) No. 99 Consideration of
Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit, requires auditors working for public accounting
ﬁrms to undertake a number of speciﬁc actions to ensure that an organization’s ﬁnancial
statements are free of erroneous or fraudulent material misstatements. (We discuss SAS 99
later in the chapter.)
Today there are specialized auditors called fraud auditors or forensic accountants
(described in Chapter 10). These auditors specialize in investigating fraud, and they often
work closely with internal auditors and attorneys. The fraud investigation units of the FBI,
large public accounting ﬁrms, the IRS, insurance organizations, and other types of large
corporations employ fraud auditors.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, external auditors are expanding the services they offer to
include a variety of assurance services. Many of these services involve IT in some way.
However, the attest function remains the external auditor’s main responsibility. Although
the primary goals of external and internal audits differ, they are complementary within
the context of an AIS. For example, the controls that internal auditors examine within a
company’s IT environment are in part designed to increase the accuracy of the external
ﬁnancial reports of interest to the external auditors. Similarly, the use of an acceptable
method of inventory valuation, as required by the external auditors, is likely to be an
important corporate policy falling under the domain of the internal auditors.
1Oxner, Tom & Karen Oxner. ‘‘Boom Time for Internal Audit Professionals,’’ The Internal Auditor Vol. 63, Iss, 3
(June 2006), pp. 50–57.

452
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Despite the difference in purpose between internal audits and external audits, internal
auditors and external auditors perform a number of similar functions in the area of auditing
computerized AISs. Therefore, most of the following discussion applies to both internal and
external auditors. We use the term auditor broadly to encompass both types of auditors.
Even though internal and external auditors perform a number of similar functions, this is
not to say that much audit work is duplicated. Instead, a large degree of cooperation and
interaction often exists between a company’s internal auditors and a public accounting
ﬁrm’s external auditors. For example, external auditors frequently review, and often rely
upon, the work of internal auditors as they assess an organization’s ﬁnancial statements.
Information Technology Auditing
Information technology (IT) auditing involves evaluating the computer’s role in
achieving audit and control objectives. The assurance aspect of IT auditing means proving
that data and information are reliable, conﬁdential, secure, and available as needed.
Traditional ﬁnancial audit objectives are also present in information technology auditing.
These include attest objectives such as the safeguarding of assets and data integrity, and
management objectives such as operational effectiveness.
The Information Technology Audit Process.
As illustrated in Figure 14-1, the
IT audit function encompasses all the components of a computer-based AIS: people,
procedures, hardware, data communications, software, and databases. These components
are a system of interacting elements that auditors examine to accomplish the purposes of
their audits described above.
External auditors examine an organization’s computer-based AIS primarily to evaluate
how the organization’s control procedures over computer processing affect the ﬁnancial
statements (attest objectives). The controls in place will directly inﬂuence the scope of the
audit. For instance, if computer controls are weak or nonexistent, auditors will need to
Databases 
Software 
People 
Data 
Communications 
Procedures 
Hardware 
Information 
Technology 
Audit 
Function 
FIGURE 14-1
The six components of a computer-based AIS examined in an information tech-
nology audit.

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
453
Preliminary review 
of information 
systems controls 
Rely on 
IT 
controls? 
YES 
NO 
Audit around 
the computer 
Audit through the computer 
Review general 
and application 
controls 
Perform compliance 
tests of computer 
controls 
Perform substantive 
test of 
account balances 
FIGURE 14-2
Flowchart of information technology audit process. Auditing through and
around the computer are discussed later in the chapter.
do more substantive testing—i.e., detailed tests of transactions and account balances. An
example of substantive testing is the conﬁrmation of accounts receivable with customers.
If the control procedures over a company’s computerized ﬁnancial accounting system are
strong, the auditors may limit the scope of their audit by examining fewer transactions
underlying accounts receivable account balances. For our example, this would mean
contacting fewer customers to conﬁrm accounts receivable than would be the case if little
or no reliance could be placed on the computer-based controls.
Figure 14-2 shows a ﬂowchart of the steps that generally take place in IT auditing.
These steps are similar to those performed in any ﬁnancial audit. What is different is that
the auditor’s examination in this case concerns a computer-based AIS. In Figure 14-2, the
process begins with a preliminary evaluation of the system. The auditor will ﬁrst decide if
computer processing of accounting data is signiﬁcant or complex enough to warrant an
examination of the computer-based information system itself. Sometimes, if the system is
neither large nor complex, the audit might proceed as it would in a manual data processing
environment. Most often, computer-based processing warrants a preliminary review by the
IT auditor to make a quick assessment of the control environment.
Typically, an auditor will ﬁnd enough computer-based controls in place to warrant
further examination. In this situation, an auditor will want to make a more detailed analysis
of both general and application controls (discussed in Chapter 11). After examining
these controls in some detail, the auditors will perform compliance testing to ensure
that the controls are in place and working as prescribed. This may entail using some
computer-assisted audit techniques (CAATs) to audit the computerized AIS. These
involve the use of computer processes or controls to perform audit functions, such as
sorting data to detect duplicate accounts payable invoice numbers. Finally, the auditor

454
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
will need to substantively test some account balances. As explained earlier, the results
of the previous analysis and testing affect the scope of this testing. Auditors often make
use of CAATs at this stage in auditing with the computer. Auditing through and with the
computer are discussed later in this chapter.
Careers in Information Technology Auditing.
As organizations increasingly rely
on computer-based AISs and as these systems become more technologically complex, the
demand for IT auditors is growing. The recent passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley bill has also
created a need for more IT auditors. IT auditing requires a variety of skills. Some information
technology auditors have college degrees in computer science or information systems, and
others have accounting degrees with perhaps some general audit experience. The ideal
background includes a combination of accounting and information systems or computer
science skills.
As Chapter 1 noted, IT auditors may choose to obtain a professional certiﬁcation such
as Certiﬁed Information System Auditor (CISA). Applicants achieve this certiﬁcation
by successfully completing an examination given by the Information Systems Audit and
Control Association a (ISACA), meeting speciﬁc experience requirements, complying with a
Code of Professional Ethics, undergoing continuing professional education, and complying
with the Information Systems Auditing Standards. Figure 14-3 describes the content areas
covered on the CISA examination. Notice that they not only concern evaluation of IT, but
also IT governance and the protection of IT assets.
A more general certiﬁcation for experienced information security professionals is the
Certiﬁed Information Security Manager (CISM), also granted by ISACA. Those seeking a
CISM designation need to have a business orientation and to understand risk management
and security from a conceptual viewpoint. The CISM evaluates knowledge in information
security governance, information security program management, risk management, infor-
mation security management, and response management. The CISA designation has been
granted since 1978, but the CISM is only a few years old.
IT auditors may be employed as either internal or external auditors. In both cases,
these professionals focus on evaluating control procedures rather than substantive testing.
Evaluating controls over information systems hardware and various AIS applications requires
a high level of expertise. As an example, an IT auditor evaluating controls that limit access to
certain information needs to be familiar with the way a particular application organizes its
access security. Compared to external auditors, internal auditors can more easily specialize
in knowledge about their particular organization’s hardware, operating system platform,
and application programs.
Job Practice Domains
Coverage
IS Audit Process
10%
IT Governance
15%
Systems and Infrastructure Lifecycle Management
16%
IT Service Delivery and Support
14%
Protection of Information Assets
31%
Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery
14%
FIGURE 14-3
Job practice domains covered on the Certiﬁed Information Systems Auditor
examination (www.isaca.org, effective 2006).

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
455
An external auditor is likely to audit the information systems of many different client
organizations, Alternately, however, an external auditor may specialize in a particular
operating system platform, security software package, or mainframe system. To perform
IT auditing effectively requires both specialized skills and a broad-based set of technical
knowledge. The external information systems auditor may or may not be part of the regular
ﬁnancial audit team. In some cases, the ﬁnancial audit team only calls on external infor-
mation systems auditors when a special risk assessment appears warranted. The Big Four
public accounting ﬁrms all employ IT auditors, and perform a variety of assurance-related
IT services for clients.
Case-in-Point 14.2
An IT auditor at Ernst & Young LLP may work within the Technology
and Security Risk Services (TSRS) practice within the Assurance and Business Advisory
Services area. These professionals help clients to evaluate their IT risk, improve the value of
IT, and provide IT security. Ernst & Young also offers specialized services that protect data
and systems from threats, such as cyber terrorism.
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Information Systems Controls
The more conﬁdence auditors have (as a result of strong controls) that data are input
and processed accurately in a computer-based system, the less substantive testing they
perform. On the other hand, a computer-based system with weak controls over data input
and processing will call for more detailed testing of ﬁnancial transactions.
Risk Assessment.
An external auditor’s main objective in reviewing information
systems control procedures is to evaluate the risks (associated with any control weaknesses)
to the integrity of accounting data presented in ﬁnancial reports. Control strengths and
weaknesses will affect the scope of the audit. A secondary objective of the external auditor’s
review is to make recommendations to managers about improving these controls. This
secondary objective is also an objective of internal auditors.
Under a risk-based audit approach to evaluating a company’s internal control
procedures, the following four steps provide a logical framework for performing the
risk-based audit of the company’s AIS:
1. Determine the threats (i.e., errors and irregularities) facing the AIS.
2. Identify the control procedures that should be in place to minimize each of these threats
and thereby prevent or detect the errors and irregularities.
3. Evaluate the control procedures within the AIS. The process of reviewing system
documentation and interviewing appropriate personnel to determine whether the
necessary control procedures are in place is called a systems review. In addition,
auditors investigate whether these control procedures are satisfactorily followed. The
tests include such activities as observing system operations; inspecting documents,
records, and reports; checking samples of system inputs and outputs; and tracing
transactions through the system.
4. Evaluate weaknesses (i.e., errors and irregularities not covered by control procedures)
within the AIS to ascertain their effect on the nature, timing, or extent of auditing
procedures. This step focuses on the control risks and whether a company’s control
system as a whole adequately addresses the risks. If a control deﬁciency is identiﬁed, the
auditor should determine whether there are compensating controls or procedures that

456
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
make up for the deﬁciency. Control weaknesses in one area of an AIS may be acceptable
if control strengths in other areas of the AIS compensate for them.
The risk-based audit approach provides auditors with a good understanding of the errors
and irregularities that can occur in a company’s AIS environment and the related risks and
exposures. This understanding provides a sound basis for the auditors’ development of
recommendations to the company’s management on how its AIS control system should be
improved.
The desirability of an internal control procedure is a function of its ability to reduce
business risk. In fact, it is the business risk itself that is important, not the internal
control system. For example, natural disasters such as ﬂoods or earthquakes pose a
risk to an organization’s ability to continue its business without interruption. A disaster
recovery or business continuity plan is an internal control procedure designed to reduce
this risk. Focusing on business risk ensures implementing only those controls that are
absolutely necessary and also cost-effective. One method by which an auditor can evaluate
the desirability of IT-related controls for a particular aspect of business risk is through
an information systems risk assessment. (Chapter 9 introduced the subject of risk
assessment and described the Enterprise Risk Management Framework.)
In addition to the risk of fraud or intentional manipulation, auditors must also consider
risk with respect to errors or accidents. Not only are assets vulnerable as a result of
intentional fraud, but mistakes impact them too. For instance, inputting data incorrectly
can lead to misrepresentation on ﬁnancial statements in the form of incorrect asset
valuations. An information systems risk assessment should take into account the risks
associated with errors or accidents as well as fraud.
The loss of company secrets, unauthorized manipulation of company ﬁles, and inter-
rupted computer access are all business risks in an IT environment. Although it is easier to
value a tangible asset, such as cash, than to place a value on information, it must be done.
Auditors make their best judgments about the probability of losses. For those areas where
estimated costs of protection are less than anticipated losses, the auditor recommends
implementing control procedures. In areas in which the costs of protection are greater
than anticipated losses, the auditor may recommend against installing the speciﬁc controls.
Sometimes companies assess their information systems risks by employing ethical
hackers to conduct penetration testing. We discussed hacking in Chapter 10 as a
computer crime. However, when an IT auditor employs ‘‘white hat’’ hacking techniques,
the purpose is to evaluate risk and design controls to protect against unauthorized access.
We call this type of ethical hacking penetration testing because the auditor is trying to
penetrate the system to gain access to resources or sensitive information.
Guidance in Designing and Evaluating IT Controls.
Two guides are available
to IT auditors for designing and evaluating internal controls related to IT. The Institute
of Internal Auditors ﬁrst issued the Systems Auditability and Control (SAC) report
in 1977. Advances in IT led to revisions in 1991 and 1994, and the 2001 issuance
of a new model, Electronic Systems Assurance and Control (eSAC), that provides
a framework for evaluating e-business controls. The SAC report identiﬁes important
information technologies and the speciﬁc risks related to these technologies. It also
recommends controls to mitigate risks and suggests audit procedures to validate the
existence and effectiveness of these controls. The SAC report consists of a set of reference
volumes that identify risk, controls, and audit techniques for a variety of areas, such as
telecommunications, end-user systems, and emerging technologies. The 1994 SAC report
added object technology, document management, and multimedia technologies sections.

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
457
Both internal and external auditors rely on the SAC report for guidance on controls over IT
and in auditing computer-based applications.
Chapter 11 pointed out that the Information Systems Audit and Control Foundation
developed the Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT)
framework. This framework provides auditors and businesses with guidance in managing
and controlling for business risk associated with IT environments. COBIT, version 4.1,
includes control objectives and control outcomes tests for evaluating the effectiveness
of controls. Using the framework, management and auditors can design a cost-effective
control system for IT resources and processes. COBIT beneﬁts business and IT managers,
as well as auditors. For auditors, the model helps in advising management on internal
controls and can provide substantive support for audit opinions. The next case describes
one company’s use of COBIT.
Case-in-Point 14.3
Sun Microsystems is a world-wide provider of hardware and software
solutions. In order to improve the strategic value of IT and to comply with Sarbanes-Oxley,
Sun’s IT department decided to use the COBIT framework to evaluate and measure the
relationship of IT to corporate strategy. The framework enabled Sun to successfully evaluate
six data centers and more than 600 IT applications, and enabled senior IT executives to create
a Sun IT/COBIT Activities Listing that mapped Sun’s IT processes and activities to COBIT.2
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUDITOR’S TOOLKIT
Auditors can use computer-assisted audit techniques (CAATs) to help them in various
auditing tasks. In an automated AIS, auditing with the computer (i.e., using the computer
itself as an audit tool) is virtually mandatory because data are stored on computer media
and manual access is impossible. However, there are many reasons for auditing with the
computer beyond the need to access computerized accounting data. One of the most
important is that computer-based AISs are rapidly increasing in sophistication. Another is
that CAATs save time. Imagine footing and cross-footing large spreadsheets or schedules
without using a computer.
Auditing Software
Auditors can use a variety of software when auditing with the computer. Examples
include general-use software such as word processing programs, spreadsheet software,
and database management systems. Other software that we discuss here such as generalized
audit software (GAS) and automated workpaper software is more speciﬁcally oriented
toward auditor tasks
General-Use Software.
Auditors employ general-use software as productivity tools
that can improve their work. For instance, word processing programs improve effectiveness
when writing reports because built-in spell checks can signiﬁcantly reduce spelling errors.
Similarly, an auditor can write a customer conﬁrmation letter with a word processing
program and mail-merge it with an address ﬁle so that each letter appears to have been
individually prepared.
2Source: www.isaca.org (COBIT and IT Governance Case Study: Sun Microsystems) Accessed: September 6, 2008.

458
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Spreadsheet software allows both accountants and auditors to make complex calcula-
tions automatically. It also allows the user to change one number and update all related
numbers at the click of a mouse. One of the most common uses of electronic spreadsheets
by accountants and auditors is for making mathematical calculations, such as interest and
depreciation. Spreadsheet software can also be used to perform analytical procedures,
such as computing ratios. Different presentation formats for data contained in spreadsheets
contribute to the usefulness of these data for management decision-making and other
managerial functions.
Accountants and auditors can use a database management system (DBMS) to perform
some of the same functions as spreadsheet software. For instance, DBMSs can sort data
and make certain mathematical computations. However, they are distinguished from
spreadsheet software by their ability to manipulate large sets of data in fairly simple ways.
As a general rule, accountants and auditors use spreadsheet software to make complex
calculations with relatively small sets of data, whereas they will use DBMSs for simpler
calculations or manipulations, such as sorting, on large data sets.
A DBMS controls almost all organizational accounting systems. The auditor can select
subsets of a client company’s data for manipulation purposes. This can be done either on
the client’s computer system, or, after the data are downloaded, on the auditor’s computer.
A valuable tool for retrieving and manipulating data is Structured Query Language
(SQL), a popular data manipulation language. Auditors can use SQL to retrieve a client’s
data and display these data in a variety of formats for audit purposes. As an example, an
auditor may use the SELECT command to retrieve inventory items meeting certain criteria,
such as minimum dollar amount. Other data manipulation capabilities of SQL include: (1)
selecting records matching speciﬁed criteria, (2) deleting records from a ﬁle based on
established criteria, (3) generating customized reports based on all or a subset of data, and
(4) rearranging ﬁle records in sequential order.
Generalized Audit Software.
Generalized audit software (GAS) packages (or pro-
grams) enable auditors to review computer ﬁles without continually rewriting processing
programs. Large CPA ﬁrms have developed some of these packages in-house; many other
programs are available from various software suppliers. GAS packages are available to
run on microcomputers, minicomputers, or mainframes. GAS programs are capable of
the basic data manipulation tasks that spreadsheet or DBMS software might also perform.
These include mathematical computations, cross footing, categorizing, summarizing, merg-
ing ﬁles, sorting records, statistical sampling, and printing reports. The advantage GAS
packages have over other software is that these programs are speciﬁcally tailored to auditor
tasks. Auditors can use GAS programs in a variety of ways in speciﬁc application areas,
such as accounts receivable, inventory, and accounts payable. Figure 14-4 shows some of
the ways auditors might use GAS to audit inventory applications.
Case-in-Point 14.4
Benford’s Law is based on the observation that the lead digit in a set
of naturally-ocurring numbers is not uniform, but actually varies in frequency. For example,
Frank Benford noticed in 1938 that the digit ‘‘1’’ was likely to occur about 30% of the
time—much greater than the 10% you might expect. The other digits decline in probability of
occurrence, with the digit ‘‘2’’ occurring about 17% of the time and the digit ‘‘9’’ occurring
less than 5% of the time. GAS software can examine huge sets of such number sequences as
vendor payments to determine if they conform to this law.
Two popular GAS packages used by auditors are Audit Command Language (ACL)
and Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA). These programs allow auditors
to examine a company’s data in a variety of formats. They include commands such as

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
459
• Merge last year’s inventory ﬁle with this year’s and list those items with unit costs greater than a certain
dollar amount and that have increased by more than a speciﬁed percentage.
• List inventory quantities on hand in excess of units sold during a speciﬁed period and list those inventory
items with a last sales date prior to a speciﬁed date to identify possible obsolete inventory items.
• Select a sample of inventory tag numbers and print the sample selection.
• Scan the sequence of inventory tag numbers and print any missing or duplicate numbers.
• Select a random sample of inventory items for price testing on a dollar-value basis, and list all items with
an extended value in excess of a speciﬁed amount.
• Perform a net-realizable-value test on year-end inventory quantities, and list any items where inventory
cost exceeds net-realizable value.
FIGURE 14-4
Various ways to use generalized audit software packages to audit inventory.
STRATIFY, EXTRACT, and JOIN. Each of these commands provides an auditor with a
different view of the data. For example, the stratify command lets an auditor group data
into categories. This is useful, for example, in sorting inventories into various classes based
on their cost. Stratiﬁcation lets an auditor concentrate on high-dollar-value inventory items.
Another example of data stratiﬁcation is in auditing accounts receivable. Auditors will
want to verify balances of customers owing large dollar amounts in greater proportion
than small accounts receivable balances owed by customers. Most GAS packages allow
auditors to extract data according to some speciﬁcation. This capability is an invaluable
audit tool. Auditors can extract data to detect a variety of exception conditions, such as
duplicate invoice numbers, inventory items that have not been sold in more than one year,
and customers with negative accounts receivable balances. By joining ﬁles, auditors can
compare data. For example, combining the employee ﬁle with the vendor ﬁle may show
that an employee has perpetrated a fraud by creating a ﬁctitious vendor. The following
case describes how an accounting ﬁrm used ACL to uncover a signiﬁcant fraud.
Case-in-Point 14.5
Summerford Accountancy employs fraud examiners who help organi-
zations discover and deter fraudulent activities. The Los Angeles Uniﬁed School District hired
them to examine a construction project for a high school, the Belmont Learning Complex. The
fraud experts used ACL software to discover duplicate payments to vendors, fake vendors, and
fraudulent transactions. One speciﬁc example of the software’s use is that it found 48 budget
transfers an employee authorized that were for $49,999. This allowed the employee to avoid
the school district policy that required Board of Education approval for any spending greater
than $50,000.3
Automated Workpaper Software.
Automated workpaper software is similar to
general ledger software. The difference is that automated workpaper software handles
accounts for many organizations in a ﬂexible manner. The functions of automated workpa-
per software vary with speciﬁc programs. Some of the features of this software are its ability
to: (1) generate trial balances, (2) make adjusting entries, (3) perform consolidations, and
(4) conduct analytical procedures. The advantage of using automated workpaper software
is that it automates footing, cross footing, and reconciliation to schedules. Auditors can use
this software to prepare consolidated trial balances and ﬁnancial statements (that combine
accounts of multiple companies). Automated workpaper software can also help auditors
3Source: www.acl.com–Success Stories–Summerford Accountancy PC (accessed June 8, 2006).

460
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
create common-size income statements and balance sheets that show account balances
as percentages. In addition, automated workpaper software can easily calculate ﬁnancial
statement ratios and measurements, such as the current ratio, the working capital, the
inventory turnover rate, and the price-earnings ratio.
The Internet can also be a valuable resource for IT auditors. There are many websites
that offer useful advice and guidance. These include software vendor sites with patches
for software security holes, sites with alerts about security threats, and websites that have
special tools that may be used free of charge or purchased.
Case-in-Point 14.6
AuditNet (wwww.auditnet.org) describes itself as a ‘‘global resource
for auditors.’’ Registered users can subscribe to download audit programs for a variety
of application areas, such as accounts payable. These programs include detailed audit
procedures. There is a Sarbanes-Oxley resource center, a discussion forum, a virtual library,
and a list of audit terminology and deﬁnitions.
People Skills
Arguably the most important skills that auditors need are people skills. After all, they must
work as a team as well as be able to interact with clients. For example, to understand the
organizational structure of the IT function, the IT auditor will need to interview the CIO.
Interviews are a mainstay of IT auditing. Similarly, they are also likely to ﬁnd that many
of the audit steps in their evaluation of internal controls have more to do with human
behavior than technology. For example, one of the best protections against programmed
threats such as viruses and worms is regularly updated anti-virus software. Although it may
be important to understand the capabilities of the software, it is even more important to
see if the security administrator is checking for virus updates and patches on a regular basis.
Case-in-Point 14.7
The MyDoom worm, unleashed in early 2004, posed a particularly
serious threat to systems, as it had the potential to launch denial-of-service attacks from
infected computer systems. Shortly after the virus was launched, several anti-virus software
vendors updated their software to protect against it. However, many IT security personnel
do not monitor security sites or take the time to update anti-virus software regularly. An IT
auditor should check to see that the IT function is scanning alerts, applying patches, and
updating security software regularly.
AUDITING COMPUTERIZED ACCOUNTING
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
When computers were ﬁrst used for accounting data processing functions, the typical
auditor knew very little about automated data processing. The basic auditing approach,
therefore, was to follow the audit trail up to the point at which accounting data entered
the computer and to pick these data up again when they reappeared in processed form
as computer output. This is called auditing around the computer. It assumes that the
presence of accurate output veriﬁes proper processing operations. This type of auditing
pays little or no attention to the control procedures within the IT environment. Auditing
around the computer is not generally an effective approach to auditing a computerized
environment, in part because it tests normal transactions but ignores the exceptions. It is
the exceptions that are of primary interest to the auditor.

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
461
When auditing the computerized AIS, an auditor usually follows the audit trail
through the internal computer operations phase of automated data processing. This
approach, auditing through the computer, attempts to verify that the processing
controls involved in the AIS programs are functioning properly. It also attempts to verify
that the accounting data processed are accurate. Because this type of auditing tests the
existence and functioning of control procedures, it normally occurs during the compliance
phase of the ﬂowchart in Figure 14-2.
Auditing through the computer usually assumes that the CPU and other hardware are
functioning properly. This leaves the auditor the principal task of verifying processing and
control logic as opposed to computer accuracy. Five techniques that auditors use to audit a
computerized AIS are: (1) use of test data, integrated test facility, and parallel simulation to
test programs, (2) use of audit techniques to validate computer programs, (3) use of logs
and specialized control software to review systems software, (4) use of documentation
and CAATs to validate user accounts and access privileges, and (5) use of embedded audit
modules to achieve continuous auditing.
Testing Computer Programs
In testing computer programs, the objective is to ensure that the programs accomplish
their goals and that the data are input and processed accurately. Three techniques that
auditors may employ to test computer programs are: (1) test data, (2) integrated test facility,
and (3) parallel simulation.
Test Data.
It is the auditor’s responsibility to develop a set of transactions that tests, as
completely as possible, the range of exception situations that might occur under normal
processing conditions. Conventionally, these transactions are called test data. Possible
exception situations for a payroll application, for example, include out-of-sequence payroll
checks, duplicate time cards, negative hours worked, invalid employee numbers, invalid
dates, invalid pay rates, invalid deduction codes, and use of alphabetic data in numeric
codes.
Once an auditor has assembled appropriate sample data (usually transactions of some
type), these data are arranged into test sequence in preparation for computerized data
processing. To complete the audit test, an auditor will compare the results obtained from
processing test data with a predetermined set of answers on an audit work sheet. If
processing results and worksheet results do not agree, further investigation is necessary. A
sample set of program edit tests and test data appears in Figure 14-5.
Program Edit Test
Required by Program
Test Data
Completeness
6 characters required
12345
Numeric Field
Numeric characters only
123C45
Sign
Positive numbers only
−123456
Reasonableness
Hours worked should not exceed 80 per week
110
Valid Code
Accept only I (invoice), P (payment), M (memo)
C
Range
Accept only dates between 01/01/01 and 12/31/02
09/07/99
FIGURE 14-5
Program edit tests and test data.

462
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Integrated Test Facility.
Although test data work well in validating an application’s
input controls, they are not so effective in evaluating integrated online systems or complex
programming logic. In these situations, it may be better to use a more comprehensive test
technique such as an integrated test facility (ITF). The purpose of an ITF is to audit
an AIS in an operational setting. This involves: (1) establishing a ﬁctitious entity such as a
department, branch, customer, or employee, (2) entering transactions for that entity, and
(3) observing how these transactions are processed. For example, an auditor might create
a number of ﬁctitious credit customers and place appropriate accounts receivable master
records on the company’s accounts receivable computer ﬁles. From the standpoint of the
auditor, of course, the information contained on these records is for test purposes only.
To most of the employees of the company, however, these records represent bona ﬁde
customers entitled to purchase company merchandise inventory or services on credit.
To use the ITF, an auditor will introduce artiﬁcial transactions into the data processing
stream of the AIS and have the company routinely handle the business involved. In a truly
integrated test facility, this may mean actually shipping merchandise (not ordered by
anyone) to designated addresses or billing customers for services not rendered. Because
of the amount of work involved, however, it may be necessary to intercept the ordered
merchandise at the shipping department and reverse the billing transactions at the
managerial level.
Parallel Simulation.
With parallel simulation, the auditor uses live input data, rather
than test data, in a program actually written or controlled by the auditor. The auditor’s
program simulates all or some of the operations of the real program that is actually in
use. In order for this method to be effective, an auditor must thoroughly understand the
audited organization’s computer system and know-how to predict the results. The latter is
necessary to intelligently compare the results of processing data using the test programs
with those results from using the real programs.
As you might imagine, it can be very time-consuming and thus cost-prohibitive for
an auditor to write computer programs entirely replicating those of the client. For this
reason, parallel simulation usually involves replicating only certain critical functions of a
program. For example, a program that replicates payroll processing might just calculate
net pay for employees rather than making all the payroll distributions that exist in the
entire payroll program.
Validating Computer Programs
A clever programmer can thwart the use of test data by substituting a legitimate, but
unused, program for a dishonest one when an auditor asks for the processing routine(s)
required for the audit. Therefore, an auditor must validate any program with which he
or she is presented. Although there is no 100% foolproof way of validating a computer
program, several procedures may be used to assist in this task, including tests of program
change control and program comparison.
Tests of Program Change Control.
The process by which a newly developed
program or program modiﬁcation is put into actual use should be subject to program
change control. It is a set of internal control procedures developed to protect against
unauthorized program changes. Sound program change control requires documentation of
every request for application program changes. It also requires computer programmers to

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
463
develop and implement changes in a separate test environment rather than a live processing
environment.
Depending on the size of an organization, the change control process might be one of
many duties performed by one individual. Alternatively, responsibility might be assigned
to more than one individual. The basic procedures in program change control include
testing program changes and obtaining proper authorizations as programs move from a
testing stage to actual production (live) use. The auditor’s responsibility is to ensure that
a company’s management establishes and executes proper authorization procedures and
that the company’s employees observe these procedures.
A test of program change control begins with an inspection of the documentation
maintained by the information processing subsystem. It is not unusual for an organization
to have on hand a ﬂowchart of its change control process. The organization should also
have special forms that authorize a change to an existing program or development of
new programs. Included on these program authorization forms should be the name of
the individual responsible for the work and the signature of the supervisor responsible
for approving the ﬁnal programs. Similarly, there should be forms that show the work
has been completed and a signature authorizing the use of the program(s) for present
data processing. These authorizing signatures afﬁx responsibility for the data processing
routines and ensure accountability when problems arise. We call this a responsibility
system of computer program development and maintenance. Figure 14-6 describes
the processes in this system that an auditor should validate.
The chief purpose of a responsibility system at the computer center is not to
afﬁx blame in the event of program failures but to ensure accountability and adequate
supervisory controls in the critical area of data processing. Tighter control over both the
development of new programs and changes to existing programs is likely to result in better
computer software, because individuals tend to do better when they are responsible for
a given piece of work.
Program Comparison.
To guard against unauthorized program tampering, such as the
insertion of a Trojan Horse (see Chapter 10), it is possible to perform certain control total
tests of program authenticity. One is a test of length. To perform this test, an auditor obtains
the latest version of an accounting computer program to be veriﬁed and compares the
number of bytes of computer memory it requires with an entry in a security table of length
counts of all valid accounting programs. If the accounting program’s length count fails to
• Programmers document all program changes on the proper change-request forms.
• Users and accountants properly cost all program change requests and the planning committee reviews
high-cost projects.
• Both computer development committee personnel and users sign the outline speciﬁcation form, thereby
establishing authorization for the programming work.
• Program changes match those in the programs in the production load library (where currently used
programs are stored).
• Documentation matches the production version of a computer program.
• Information systems personnel property carry out librarian functions, especially a review of the paperwork
involved with the documentation of program change requests.
FIGURE 14-6
Each of the above processes is checked by an auditor in reviewing a responsibil-
ity system of computer program development and maintenance.

464
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
match its control total, the program is then further scrutinized. (This process is similar to
comparing the word count in two similar documents produced by Microsoft Word.)
Another way to ensure consistency between the authorized version of an accounting
computer program and the program version currently in use is to compare the code
directly on a line-by-line basis using a comparison program. A comparison program will
detect any changes that a programmer might have made, even if the programmer has been
clever enough to ensure that the program length for the two versions is the same. Auditors
must evaluate the tradeoff between efﬁciency and effectiveness in choosing whether to
use control totals, perform detailed program comparison, or rely on general controls over
program changes to prevent unauthorized tampering with computer programs.
Review of Systems Software
Systems software controls include: (1) operating system software, (2) utility programs
that do basic ‘‘housekeeping’’ chores such as sorting and copying, (3) program library
software that controls and monitors storage of programs, and (4) access control software
that controls logical access to programs and data ﬁles.
When auditing through the computer, auditors will want to review the systems
software documentation. In addition, auditors will request management to provide certain
output or runs from the software. For instance, the auditor, in reviewing how passwords
within the system are set, will ask the information systems manager for a listing of all
parameters or password characteristics designated in the system. Figure 14-7 lists some of
the characteristics of passwords that the auditor will examine.
Parameter
Deﬁnition
Sample Setting
Risk
Minimum password length
Minimum number of
characters required
6 digits
Short passwords are more
easily guessed
Required password
change
Require users to change
passwords at speciﬁc
intervals
60 days
Compromised passwords
can be used forever
Minimum interval before
password change
Minimum number of days
before user can change
password
1 day
If a user believes someone
has learned the
password, how much
time must pass before it
can be changed?
Maximum number of
repeating characters
allowed
Speciﬁes how many
characters may be
repeated within the
password
2 characters
Passwords such as
‘‘AAAAAA’’ are easily
guessed
Alphabetic characters
Passwords may not
consist of only numbers
Alpha
Protects against use of
birthdates or other
easily guessed numbers
Dictionary entries
Passwords cannot be
dictionary words
ROOTTOOT
Hackers use standard
dictionaries to ﬁnd
passwords
Assignment
Only bona ﬁde users are
given passwords
Employee
Passwords ensure
accountability in
addition to providing
access
FIGURE 14-7
Examples of parameters that might be set to control passwords.

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
465
Auditors may choose to use software tools to review systems software. A number of
tools are available, ranging from user-written programs to commercial packages such as
CA-Examine. There are also general analysis types of software tools, such as SAS, SPSS,
and FOCUS. These software tools can query operating system ﬁles to analyze the system
parameters.
Systems software usually generates automatic outputs that are important for monitoring
a company’s computer system. In auditing the company’s system, an auditor will want to
inspect these outputs, which include logs and incident reports. The company’s management
uses logs for accounting purposes and for scheduling the use of computer resources
efﬁciently. Auditors will make use of these logs to evaluate system security. Unusual
occurrences, such as programs run at odd times or programs run with greater frequency
than usual, are noted and subsequently investigated. Management may manually maintain
incident reports, or systems software may automatically generate these reports. The reports
list events encountered by the system that are unusual or interrupt operations. Incidents
typically recorded are security violations (such as unauthorized access attempts), hardware
failures, and software failures.
Validating Users and Access Privileges
An IT auditor needs to make sure that all computer-system users are valid and that each has
access privileges appropriate to his or her job responsibilities. Systems software generally
includes access control software that determines how the system administrator sets up
and controls User IDs, user proﬁles, and passwords. The IT auditor should verify not
only that the software parameters are set appropriately, but that IT staff are using them
appropriately. For example, one audit task is to make sure that employee accounts are
closed immediately after someone leaves the organization. To accomplish this, the IT auditor
might request a list of current personnel from Human Resources. Another approach would
be to obtain a current phone directory and compare names with those in the listing of user
accounts.
IT Auditors should also look at user listings to see if there are any Group IDs assigned.
For example, there may be an ID named AP_Clerk. Sometimes managers decide to issue
these IDs to cut down on paperwork when making personnel changes. However, this type
of ID prevents assigning responsibility to an individual. If one AP clerk were to make a
mistake or commit fraud, the use of a Group ID would make it difﬁcult to identify which
of the accounts payable clerks was responsible.
An IT auditor can visually inspect printouts from databases and software documentation
to verify users, appropriateness of passwords, and spot Group IDs. However, a variety of
auditor software tools are available to make the work more efﬁcient. As an example, such
software might examine login times. If a user has not logged in for several months, it may
be that the account should have been deleted. Users logging on at odd hours may also
provide information that something is not quite right. As we noted earlier in the chapter,
it is the exception conditions or irregularities that the IT auditor wants to identify.
Continuous Auditing
Some audit tools can be installed within an information system itself to achieve continuous
auditing or real-time assurance. Continuous auditing is increasingly important as we move
toward real-time ﬁnancial reporting. There is also increasing pressure to reduce the time
span between the production of ﬁnancial information and the audit of the information,
known as the audit cycle. Stakeholders want audited information quickly as decision time

466
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
frames are becoming shorter. Many businesses report their ﬁnancial information over the
Internet and many more are likely to do so as XBRL enhances this form of reporting.
Five speciﬁc approaches for continuous auditing are: (1) embedded audit modules
or audit hooks, (2) exception reporting, (3) transaction tagging, (4) snapshot technique,
and (5) continuous and intermittent simulation. These tools allow auditing to occur even
when an auditor is not present. With embedded audit modules, application subroutines
capture data for audit purposes. These data usually are related to a high-risk area. For
example, an application program for payroll would include a code that causes transactions
meeting pre-speciﬁed criteria to be written to a special log. Possible transactions that might
be recorded in a log include those affecting inactive accounts, deviating from company
policy, or involving write-downs of asset values. For payroll applications, these transactions
could reﬂect situations where, for instance, employees worked more than a predetermined
number of hours. Another example might be recording related transactions occurring in a
particular sequence.
The practice of exception reporting is also a form of continuous auditing. If the
information system includes mechanisms to reject certain transactions that fall outside
predeﬁned speciﬁcations (such as an unusually large vendor check), then the ongoing
reporting of exception transactions allows the system to continually monitor itself.
Using transaction tagging, auditors can tag certain transactions with a special identiﬁer
so that they can be recorded as they pass through the information system. For example, a
speciﬁc number of employees can have tags attached to their transaction records so that an
auditor can verify the processing logic in the payroll system. Tagging in this instance could
also check to see that controls within the system are operating. Suppose that a control
procedure requires rejection of payroll transactions if the number of hours worked during
a pay period is too high. Auditors can review tagged transactions to make sure that this
control procedure is functioning properly.
The snapshot technique examines the way transactions are processed. Selected
transactions are marked with a special code that triggers the snapshot process. Audit mod-
ules in the computer program record these transactions and their master ﬁle records
before and after processing activities. Snapshot data are recorded in a special ﬁle
and reviewed by the auditor to verify that all processing steps have been properly
performed.
Continuous and intermittent simulation (CIS) embeds an audit module in a database
management system (DBMS). The CIS module examines all transactions that update the
DBMS. If a transaction has special audit signiﬁcance, the audit module independently
processes the data (in a manner similar to parallel simulation), records the results, and
compares them with those results obtained by the DBMS. If any discrepancies exist, the
details of these discrepancies are written onto an audit log for subsequent investigation.
If serious discrepancies are discovered, the CIS may prevent the DBMS from executing
the update process. A challenge for continuous auditing is that the data in complex
organizations may be located in multiple DBMS. To effectively conduct real-time assurance,
auditors may need to create a data mart or subset of the data warehouse, speciﬁcally for
audit purposes.
An example of continuous auditing on a smaller scale is embedding audit modules
in spreadsheets. For example, the Excel payroll spreadsheet in Figure 14-8 computes the
regular and overtime earnings for the employees of a construction company. Most such
spreadsheets would only include the ﬁrst few lines shown in the ﬁgure, plus perhaps
the ‘‘Total’’ line in row 11. But this spreadsheet includes several additional rows, an
auditing module that can help an accountant audit the application and check its validity
and accuracy. The ﬁgure in the ‘‘Counts’’ row uses Excel’s COUNTIF function to count
the number of positive values in columns B, C, and D of the spreadsheet. An auditor can

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
467
Microsoft Excel - Excel Example.xls 
File Edit 
View 
Insert 
Tools Data 
Help 
Window 
Format 
TimesNew Roman 
10 
B U
a 
$ 
= 
14 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
1 
2 
3 
5 
6 
7 
4 
Choi Construction Company
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
Adams 
Payrate 
Regular 
Hours 
Payroll for Week Ending: 3/15/XX 
Overtime 
Hours 
Regular 
Pay 
Overtime 
Pay 
 
Total 
Baker 
Carlton 
Daniels 
Englert 
Franklin 
Griffin 
Hartford 
Totals: 
8.90 
12.55 
9.60 
10.20 
9.60 
11.55 
10.80 
9.90 
40 
35 
40 
35 
40 
40 
35 
40 
3 
0 
2 
0 
5 
0 
0 
10 
8 
8 
4 
12.55 
40.00 
10.00 
356.00 
502.00 
384.00 
408.00 
384.00 
462.00 
432.00 
396.00 
$4,016.00 
40.05 
0.00 
38.80 
0.00 
72.00 
0.00 
0.00 
148.50 
$  753.00 
396.05 
502.00 
422.80 
408.00 
456.00 
462.00 
432.00 
544.50 
305 
20 $3,324.00 $  299.35 $3,623.35 
$3,623.35 
13 
14 
15 
Totals: 
Counts: 
Maximums: 
Sum: Reg + O'time 
Max Regular Pay: 
Max Overtime Pay: 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22
FIGURE 14-8
This simple spreadsheet to compute regular and overtime payments contains sev-
eral errors.
compare the largest of these numbers to the total number of employees known to work
for the company. If we assume that this company has upper limits for the pay rate ($13),
regular hours (40), and overtime hours (10), an auditor can also compare the values in the
‘‘Maximums’’ row against these upper limits to determine if any entries are too large.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AUDITING TODAY
IT auditing is actually a component of information technology (IT) governance. In this
section, we discuss the issue of IT governance and other important recent developments
that impact IT auditing. These include the use of technology to deter fraud, the impact of
the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley legislation on IT auditing, and third party and systems reliability
assurance.
Information Technology Governance
IT governance is the process of using IT resources effectively to meet organizational
objectives. It includes using IT efﬁciently, responsibly, and strategically. The IT Governance
Institute, an afﬁliation of the Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA),
was created in 1998 in recognition that IT was more than a tool an organization could use
to meet objectives. Rather, strategic use of IT can drive a business and make the difference
between success or failure.

468
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
The objectives of IT governance are really twofold. The ﬁrst set of objectives focus
on using IT strategically to fulﬁll the organizational mission and to compete effectively.
Top management and the Board of Directors are responsible for ensuring these IT
governance objectives. The second set of IT governance objectives involves making sure
that the organization’s IT resources are managed effectively and that management controls
IT-related risks. Meeting these objectives is the concern of the Chief Information Ofﬁcer
(CIO), the auditors, and often top management.
Case-in-Point 14.8
The City of Mesa, Arizona provides government services to almost
400,000 people. The city has an IT steering committee that prioritizes IT projects for
all departmental units. The committee uses techniques such as portfolio management to
create the priorities. The IT governance program helps to facilitate communication between
the IT function and the departmental users of IT. The governance structure also creates
interdisciplinary teams that make sure IT projects fulﬁll the city’s strategic objectives.4
Auditing for Fraud: Statement on Auditing Standards No. 99
The ﬁnancial statement audits mandated by the Securities and Exchange Commission
require auditors to attest to the fairness of a company’s ﬁnancial statements. They do not
require auditors to detect fraudulent activities. This has long been seen as a problem by
many investors and other business stakeholders who believe that an auditor report meant
that a company was ‘‘clean,’’ or that there was no fraud taking place by management or
other employees. As a result, the AICPA’s Auditing Standards Board issued Statement on
Auditing Standards (SAS) No. 99 Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit.
SAS No. 99 superseded SAS No. 82. Although the earlier rule had the same name,
the 2002 fraud standard provides more guidance for auditors to proactively prevent and
deter fraud. The standard is part of a corporate responsibility and anti-fraud initiative of the
AICPA. It encourages auditors to adopt a professional skepticism that will make them alert
for signs of fraud, such as those in the fraud triangle depicted in Figure 14-9. This triangle
Rationalization 
(Ethics, values, 
character 
deficiencies) 
Incentive/ 
Pressure 
(Motivation for 
fraud) 
Opportunity 
(Circumstances enabling 
fraud) 
FIGURE 14-9
The fraud triangle. Three conditions required for fraud.
4Source: www.itgi.org–Case Studies. (March 19, 2004)

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
469
includes three elements that create a fraud. These are the motive for committing the fraud,
the opportunity that allows the fraud to occur, and the rationalization by the individual
perpetrating the fraud that the behavior is appropriate or justiﬁed.
One of the ways in which IT impacts on fraud is that fraudulent activity tends to be
more costly than it would in a manual environment. An employee with a criminal bent
and a high level of IT skills may have access to liquid assets and also the ability to cover
his or her tracks electronically. An IT auditor might assist a fraud investigator or forensic
accountant in many ways. One situation is where an IT auditor helps reconstruct an audit
trail. Another case where IT audit skills are useful is in retrieving computerized records.
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
In 2002, Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (sometimes called SOX or Sarbox
for short), the most sweeping piece of legislation to impact ﬁnancial reporting and the
accounting profession since the SEC Acts of 1933 and 1934. As noted in Chapter 1, the
bill was a response to the wave of corporate accounting scandals that took down many
long-time business icons, including Enron and Arthur Andersen. Figure 14-10 describes
several of the major provisions of the act. For example, Section 201: Services Outside the
Scope of Practice of Auditors; Prohibited Activities prohibits public accounting ﬁrms from
offering non-audit services to a client at the same time they are conducting an audit. This
means that, for example, one Big Four ﬁrm might be the external auditors of Company A
and a different Big Four ﬁrm could be the outsourced internal auditors for Company A.
(They may, however, provide these services to non-audit clients.)
Section 201: Services Outside the Scope of Practice of Auditors: Prohibited Activities
• Bookkeeping or other services related to accounting records of ﬁnancial statements
• Financial information systems design and implementation
• Appraisal or valuation services, fairness opinions, or contribution-in-kind reports
• Actuarial services
• Internal audit outsourcing services
• Management functions or human resources
• Broker or dealer, investment adviser, or investment banking services
• Legal services and expert services unrelated to the audit
• Any other service determined by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board as unallowable
Section 302: Corporate Responsibility for Financial Reports
The CEO and CFO of each public company issuing ﬁnancial reports must prepare a statement that
accompanies the audit report to certify the ‘‘appropriateness of the ﬁnancial statements and disclosures
contained in the periodic report, and that those ﬁnancial statements and disclosures fairly present, in all
material respects, the operations and ﬁnancial condition of the issuer.’’ The CEO and CFO must knowingly
and intentionally violate this requirement in order to be liable.
Section 404: Management Assessment of Internal Controls
Public company annual reports must contain an internal control report, which should state the responsibility
of management for establishing and maintaining an adequate internal control structure and procedures for
ﬁnancial reporting; and contain an assessment, as of the end of the issuer’s ﬁscal year, of the effectiveness
of the internal control structure and procedures of the issuer for ﬁnancial reporting. Each issuer’s auditor
must attest to, and report on, management’s assessment.
FIGURE 14-10
A summary of key provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.

470
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
SOX has four basic groups of compliance requirements: (1) audit committee/corporate
governance requirements, (2) issues regarding certiﬁcation, disclosure, and internal con-
trols, (3) rules about ﬁnancial statement reporting, and (4) regulations governing executive
reporting and conduct. However, Section 302 and Section 404 of the Act are sometimes
called full-employment acts for IT auditors! The cost of complying with the legislation,
particularly the requirement to document and attest to internal controls, runs into millions
of dollars for the largest public companies.
When Jeffrey Skilling, Enron’s onetime Chief Executive Ofﬁcer (CEO), testiﬁed before
the Senate Banking and Commerce Committee in 2002, he claimed ignorance with respect
to Enron’s accounting. Later, Bernie Ebbers, CEO of WorldCom, claimed a similar lack of
knowledge about his company’s ﬁnancial records. Shocked that corporate heads might not
understand the ﬁnancial activities of their own companies, lawmakers included Section
302. This SOX provision requires both Chief Financial Ofﬁcers (CFOs) and CEOs to certify
personally that their company’s ﬁnancial statements are accurate and complete, and also
that internal controls and disclosures are adequate. So SOX requires top management in
public companies to understand their internal controls, and makes them legally liable if
they knowingly misrepresent the condition of these controls.
Section 404 of SOX requires both the CEO and CFO to assess their organization’s
internal controls over ﬁnancial reporting and attest to them. They do so in an internal
control report that is ﬁled with the annual report. This section also requires that the external
auditors report on management’s internal control assessment. This is the work that is really
keeping management and a company’s internal and external auditors the busiest.
To assess internal ﬁnancial controls requires documenting business processes and
internal controls. Large public companies are likely to make heavy use of IT in their
processes and ﬁnancial reporting, which means that they’ll need an IT auditor to document
the processes and controls. This can be a daunting task, but a good one for companies to
undertake. Consider that you may have a large ﬁnancial services ﬁrm, for example, with
literally hundreds of software applications and very complex business processes. Who has
the big picture? Probably no one, unless the internal audit staff takes the time to ﬁt the
pieces together and create a ‘‘map’’ of the entire company’s processes and applications.
The auditors can use this map to examine the internal controls in general and for
each application. For example, one general type of internal control is separation of duties
(see Chapter 8). Who does what should be clearer from the documentation of processes.
Various applications will each have internal controls unique to them as well, such as a
control over a procurement application concerning who may enter invoices. The AIS at
Work feature at the end of this chapter describes how the internal auditors at a Big Four
ﬁrm might approach a ‘‘404’’ review for an internal audit client.
An interesting by-product of SOX is the emergence of software to facilitate compliance
with the new rules. The main uses of software for SOX are for managing communication,
workﬂow, and documentation. Many accounting software packages, such as ACCPAC
or PeopleSoft include features to document internal controls. However, there are also
specialized programs designed speciﬁcally to adhere to the requirements of Sarbanes-Oxley.
Case-in-Point 14.9
S-O Comply®, a product of DoubleCheck LLC and one of the earliest
software tools created to assist with Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, includes document manage-
ment and audit tools. One of the primary requirements of the act is for companies to disclose
all material information that might affect the company’s ﬁnancial performance over time. The
software includes a Compliance Manager that manages controls, issues, and tasks, discloses
documents and work ﬂow, and maintains an audit trail.5
5Source: www.onproject.com/soa

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
471
SOX regulations do not require companies to automate their controls or processes
in order to be compliant. So a company may have many manual processes and manual
controls over those processes in addition to the computerized processes and controls that
are of primary interest to the IT auditor. IT auditors must work closely with ﬁnancial
auditors to complete the thorough internal control review mandated by Section 404.
Third-Party and Information Systems Reliability Assurances
Auditing electronic commerce is a specialized ﬁeld—in part because of the skill level
involved, and in part because many of the safeguards found in non e-commerce systems are
absent. One problem is the lack of hard-copy documents with which to verify the existence
of accounts, purchases, or payments—a characteristic of electronic communications.
Similarly, the arrival of an electronic transaction on a server does not guarantee its
validity or authenticity—only that something was transmitted. As an increasing number of
companies publish their ﬁnancial statements online, auditors need to attest to this type
of format. An audit report or digital signature can provide those viewing online ﬁnancial
information with the same assurances as found in a traditional audit report.
The importance of the Internet and electronic commerce impacts auditors’ work in
other ways. In recent years auditors have shifted away from audits of transactions to
examinations of business risks. Because Internet systems and websites are sources of such
risks, specialized audits of these systems, particularly in terms of security and privacy, are
becoming commonplace. In fact, the risks introduced by a business’ Internet presence
have created a market for third-party assurance services.
Independent third parties may provide business users and individual consumers with
some level of comfort over their Internet transactions. The comfort level varies with the
type of assurance services offered. In some cases, third-party assurance is limited to data
privacy. The TRUSTe assurance seal is an example of privacy assurance. TRUSTe is a
nonproﬁt organization that issues a privacy seal.
Case-in-Point 14.10
Monster® offers online career connection services. It matches
employers with prospective employees, and also offers career advice. Because job seekers
post personal information at the site, privacy is particularly important. Monster displays the
TRUSTe privacy seal at its website, along with a privacy statement that includes information
about how the company uses the data it collects. The seal is a symbol of assurance to the site
users that Monster complies with TRUSTe’s privacy practice requirement.6
Other assurance services offer different kinds of protection. Consumers and business
partners are not just concerned about privacy and security of data transmissions. They also
worry about the business policies of an Internet company, its ability to deliver goods and
services in a timely fashion, its billing procedures, and its integrity in using a customer’s
email address. The Better Business Bureau’s BBBOnline seeks to verify the business policies
of Internet businesses. CPA WebTrust, offered by the AICPA, is a third party assurance
seal that promises data privacy and security, in addition to reliable business practices and
integrity in processing transactions. BetterWeb, offered by PricewaterhouseCoopers, pro-
vides customers engaged in online transactions with assurance regarding a business’ sales
terms, privacy, security, and handling of complaints. Concerns about email spamming and
phishing (discussed in Chapter 9), have led to development of email assurance or accredita-
tion. In addition to privacy protection, TRUSTe now offers a specialized seal to businesses
that assures customers that a company will not spam them or misuse their email address.
6Source: www.truste.org–TRUSTe Case Study (Accessed September 6, 2008)

472
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Auditors must take risks associated with information systems into account with
respect to their possible impact on ﬁnancial statements. In addition, many businesses
seek assurance as to the reliability of their information systems. AICPA members may
offer Trust Services that include both WebTrust and SysTrust, an assurance service that
evaluates the reliability of information systems with respect to their availability, security,
integrity, and maintainability. CPAs offering SysTrust services to their clients may evaluate
all or some of these reliability characteristics. For instance, a company may have concerns
about the security of its information systems. A CPA would evaluate that client’s system in
terms of its controls over unauthorized access. As increasing numbers of parties rely on
organizations’ information systems, assurance over the reliability of those systems is likely
to grow in importance.
The principles of the AICPA’s Trust Services are: (1) security (protection against unau-
thorized access), (2) availability (the information system is available for use), (3) processing
integrity (processing is complete, timely, authorized, and accurate), (4) online privacy
(protection of personal information), and (5) conﬁdentiality (protection of information des-
ignated as secret or conﬁdential). Trust Services consists of these principles, together with
speciﬁc criteria and illustrative controls. The structure provides guidance to practitioners
who are evaluating organizations in terms of their reliability, privacy, and security.
AIS AT WORK
An Internal Audit ‘‘404’’ Review
One Big Four public accounting ﬁrm developed a methodology for its internal auditors
to use to help comply with Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 requirements. As a ﬁrst step,
the auditor must identify the business processes associated with ﬁnancial statement line
items. These include typical processes such as revenue and expenditures, and sometimes
nonstandard cycles, depending on the nature of the client’s business or particular footnote
disclosures. In addition to documenting the business process controls, management must
document the IT controls for auditors to access. These include general, application, and
database controls.
Identifying applications in the scope of 404 can be a difﬁcult task, especially when
a company has a ‘‘best of breed’’ approach that involves multiple, highly customized
application interfaces. SOX states that ﬁnancial data must be controlled from their point of
origin, so mapping the path of a transaction from instigation to the ﬁnancial statement can
be difﬁcult with complex integrated systems.
At one large company, auditors applied both a top-down and a bottom-up approach to
mapping transaction and data ﬂows. The auditors determined that an application processed
an average of more than one thousand journal entries each month into the general ledger.
For each of those journal entries the auditor identiﬁed the system of origin where the
transaction cycle began. The bottom-up approach involved identifying the system that
originated a transaction and working in the opposite direction toward the general ledger
system. These two approaches, working concurrently, expedited the process of scoping
applications or determining which applications affect the ﬁnancial statements. Auditors
could then start the rigorous process of documenting the controls around these ﬁnancial
applications, leading to management’s assertion of a proper control environment.
After identifying all business cycles and applications and documenting the controls
surrounding them, the auditor compares these documented controls against a set of standard

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
473
controls and identiﬁes any gaps and remedies or compensates for them. Management then
tests these controls to verify that they are performing as documented. If this is the case,
management can attest to the control environment and the process is complete.
SUMMARY
• Although both the internal and external auditors are concerned with computerized systems, there
are important differences in the goals of each type of auditor.
• IT auditing may complement the ﬁnancial audit, by providing a basis for determining the appropriate
scope of the ﬁnancial audit.
• Knowledge of both accounting and information systems makes for the best IT auditors because
these two areas are so closely related.
• Auditors today have some special tools available to them in designing and evaluating internal
controls in IT environments, including general-use software and generalized audit software (GAS).
• People skills, including team-building and interpersonal skills, are important for an IT auditor.
• IT auditors use a risk assessment approach in designing their audit programs to ensure that the
costs of control procedures do not outweigh their value.
• Auditing through the computer involves both testing and validating computer programs, as well
as review of systems software and validating user accounts and access privileges.
• Embedded audit modules are an example of one tool available to perform a continuous audit.
• Proper IT governance mandates that managers not only control risks associated with IT, but that
they also use IT strategically.
• An increase in attention to fraud and internal controls, as mandated by SAS No. 99 and the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 will increase the need for the type of work done by IT auditors.
• IT auditors may also offer assurance services unrelated to ﬁnancial audits, such as third party and
systems reliability assurance.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
auditing around the computer
auditing through the computer
auditing with the computer
automated workpaper software
Certiﬁed Information Systems Auditor (CISA)
computer-assisted audit techniques (CAATs)
continuous auditing
Control Objectives for Information and Related
Technology (COBIT)
CPA WebTrust
Electronic Systems Assurance and Control
(eSAC)
fraud triangle
generalized audit software (GAS)
general-use software
information technology (IT) auditing
information systems risk assessment
integrated test facility (ITF)
IT governance
parallel simulation
penetration testing
program change control
responsibility system of computer program
development and maintenance
risk-based audit approach
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Structured Query Language (SQL)
Systems Auditability and Control (SAC) report
test data
third-party assurance services
Trust Services

474
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
TEST YOURSELF
Q14-1. An IT Auditor:
a. Must be an external auditor
b. Must be an internal auditor
c. Can be either an internal or external auditor
d. Must be a Certiﬁed Public Accountant
Q14-2. Which of the following is NOT true with respect to forensic accountants?
a. They specialize in fraud investigation
b. They are always external auditors
c. They may work for the FBI
d. Forensic accounting is an example of an assurance service
Q14-3. In determining the scope of an IT audit, the auditor should pay most attention to:
a. Threats and risks
b. The cost of the audit
c. What the IT manager asks to be evaluated
d. Listings of standard control procedures
Q14-4. Auditing around the computer:
a. Is the approach to auditing that is recommended in most cases to reduce IT audit costs
b. Focuses on computerized control procedures
c. Assumes that accurate output is sufﬁcient evidence that processing operations are
appropriate
d. Follows the audit trail through internal computer operations
Q14-5. COBIT is:
a. A control framework developed by the Institute of Internal Auditors
b. A control framework developed speciﬁcally for organizations involved in e-business
c. An internal control model that covers both automated and manual systems
d. An internal control framework and model that encompasses an organization’s IT gover-
nance and information technologies
Q14-6. Which of the following is NOT true with respect to generalized audit software (GAS)?
a. They require auditors to rewrite processing programs frequently while reviewing
computer ﬁles
b. They are speciﬁcally tailored to auditor tasks
c. They may be used for speciﬁc application areas, such as accounts receivable and
inventory
d. They allow auditors to manipulate ﬁles to extract and compare data
Q14-7. Which of the following is NOT an audit technique for auditing computerized AIS?
a. Parallel simulation
b. Use of specialized control software
c. Continuous auditing
d. All of the above are techniques used to audit computerized AIS
Q14-8. In auditing program change control, the IT auditor will:
a. Make sure that only computer programmers have tested the changes they made to
programs

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
475
b. Ensure an organization is following the process described in their documentation for
program change control
c. Not need to inspect program authorization forms for signatures
d. Make sure that only computer programmers move their own changes into a production
environment
Q14-9. Continuous auditing:
a. Has been talked about for years but will never catch on
b. Will likely become popular if organizations adopt XBRL in their ﬁnancial reporting
c. Does not include techniques such as embedded audit modules
d. Will never allow IT auditors to provide some types of assurance on a real-time basis
Q14-10. With respect to changes in IT auditing today, which of the following is NOT true?
a. IT governance, which ties IT to organizational strategy, is increasingly important
b. Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 created an increase in demand for both
IT auditors and internal auditors
c. IT auditors are concerned only with supporting ﬁnancial auditors and should not
investigate fraud cases
d. Third-party assurance seals may provide some comfort to e-business customers regarding
the security of online transactions
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
14-1. Distinguish between the roles of an internal and an external auditor. Cite at least two
examples of auditing procedures that might reasonably be expected of an internal auditor
but not an external auditor. Which type of auditor would you rather be? Why?
14-2. How does information technology auditing differ from ﬁnancial auditing? Make a list of the
skills you think are important for ﬁnancial auditors and for IT auditors. Do you think all
auditors should have all the skills on both lists? Why or why not?
14-3. Describe the differences between general-use software and generalized audit software. How
might you use spreadsheet software, database software, and word processing software in
conducting an audit of ﬁxed assets?
14-4. IT auditors need people skills as well as technical skills. One such skill is the ability to
interview effectively. Discuss some techniques or tools that might help an interviewer get
the best information from an interviewee, including sensitive information.
14-5. The Pan Paciﬁc Computer Company purchases independent computer components, which it
then uses to manufacture custom-made computer hardware. Because it deals with a number
of vendors, it has computerized the accounting procedures for its accounts payables. Describe
how an auditor might use through-the-computer techniques such as test data, integrated
test facility, parallel simulation, or validation of computer programs to accomplish audit
objectives relative to accounts payable.
14-6. How does an auditor evaluate the control procedures of an automated AIS? How is the
element of uncertainty handled in the audit examination?
14-7. Jose Rodriguez was the only internal auditor of a medium-sized communications ﬁrm. The
company used a computer for most of its accounting applications, and recently, several new
software packages had been implemented to handle the increased volume of the company’s
business. To evaluate the packages’ control capabilities, Jose performed a cost-beneﬁt
analysis and found that many of the control procedures were potentially useful but not
clearly cost-effective. The problem, therefore, was what to say in his report to management.

476
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
After pondering this question for some time, he decided to recommend almost all the
controls based on the idea that a company was ‘‘better to be safe than sorry.’’ Comment.
14-8. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 may impact auditing more than any legislation enacted since
the Securities and Exchange Acts in the 1930’s. It will also likely signiﬁcantly increase the
cost of an audit. Discuss what speciﬁc elements of the new law will add to auditing costs.
14-9. This chapter described several third party assurance seals, including CPA WebTrust, BBB
Online, and TRUSTe. Explain the differences among them. Identify at least one other third
party assurance seal available for companies that allows them to demonstrate to their
customers that they may be trusted in business transactions.
PROBLEMS
14-10. The Espy Company recently had an outside consulting ﬁrm perform an audit of its infor-
mation systems department. One of the consultants identiﬁed some business risks and their
probability of occurrence. Estimates of the potential losses and estimated control costs are
given in Figure 14-11.
a. Using the Figure 14-11 information, develop a risk assessment for the Espy Company.
b. If you were the manager responsible for the Espy Company’s information processing
system, which controls would you implement and why?
14-11. Visit www.isaca.org, the website for the Information Systems Audit and Control Association,
and examine two case studies of organizations that use COBIT. Explain how these entities
obtain value by using COBIT as a control framework.
14-12. Information systems auditors sometimes use tools or information they can download from
the Internet. These tools or information may include software, audit guides, or computer
security advisories. Locate some examples from the Internet of audit tools, audit guides, or
computer security advisories that you would ﬁnd useful in conducting an audit of a client’s
computer system.
14-13. Continuous auditing has the potential to reduce labor costs associated with auditing. It also
can provide audit assurance closer to the occurrence of a transaction, which improves the
reliability of frequent or real-time ﬁnancial reports. Using an Internet search engine, ﬁnd an
example of an organization’s usage of continuous auditing.
Losses
Probability That
Low
High
Estimated
Hazard
Loss Will Occur
Estimate
Estimate
Control Costs
Equipment failure
.08
$50,000
$150,000
$2,000
Software failure
.10
4,000
18,000
1,400
Vandalism
.65
1,000
15,000
8,000
Embezzlement
.05
3,000
9,000
1,000
Brownout
.40
850
2,000
250
Power surge
.40
850
2,000
300
Flood
.15
250,000
500,000
2,500
Fire
.10
150,000
300,000
4,000
FIGURE 14-11
A risk analysis for the Espy Company.

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
477
CASE ANALYSES
14-14. IT Auditing at Merriman, Davenport, and Walker, P.C. (IT Audit
Function)
Merriman, Davenport, and Walker, P.C. is a regional public accounting ﬁrm located in
Norfolk, Virginia. The ﬁrm specializes in audits of small to mid-size businesses and serves
clients throughout Virginia, the District of Columbia, and North Carolina. Connie Merriman,
the founding partner, started the ﬁrm in 1985, and now employs forty audit staff and four
tax accountants.
During the past twenty years, Merriman, Davenport, and Walker’s clients have become
increasingly sophisticated in their computerized accounting applications. Most of the
auditing staff members have developed IT auditing skills and employ them as deemed
appropriate when conducting ﬁnancial audits. However, Connie Merriman has felt for
some time that hiring one or two specialized IT auditors would be a good idea and might
reduce audit costs, and could also increase ﬁrm revenues.
Requirements:
1. Explain how the IT auditors might be able to reduce the cost of an annual audit for a
mid-sized client?
2. How would the IT auditors most likely interface with the ﬁnancial audit team on a
speciﬁc client engagement?
3. What are some new services the ﬁrm might be able to offer that would help them to
increase revenues?
4. What limitations on services that the IT auditors might perform are imposed by the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act?
14-15. Basic Requirements (Systems Reliability Assurance)
Kara and Scott Baker own a small retail company, Basic Requirements, with one store
located in a small college town and a website through which customers can make
purchases. The store sells traditional but up-to-date clothing for young women such as
tee-shirts, jeans, chinos, and skirts. The store has been open for ten years and the owners
added the online shopping capability just last year. Online business has been slow, but
Kara and Scott believe that as student customers graduate from the university they will use
the online site to continue to have access to their favorite store from their college days.
The store’s website has many features. It classiﬁes clothing by type and customers can
view items in various colors. To purchase an item, the user clicks on the icon depicting
the desired product and adds it to an individual online shopping basket. The customer
can view the basket and make a purchase at any time while browsing the site. When
checking out at the site, a new customer must ﬁrst register, providing billing and shipping
information, as well as credit card data. Returning customers log in with the identiﬁcation
code and password they created when they registered. They also use that method to check
on an order status. If a customer forgets their login information, they can simply click on
a link to have it emailed to them. Once a user registers, Basic Requirements’ system will

478
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
automatically add their email address to a ﬁle that they use to regularly send out emails
about sales and other promotions.
Kara and Scott are concerned about internal controls in their business. They especially
worry because they know that their web access creates some special risks. They have
asked one of their customers who is an accounting student at the university to evaluate the
reliability of their information system, with respect to security, availability, and privacy.
Requirements:
1. Identify two security, availability, and privacy risks that Basic Requirements faces.
2. For each risk identiﬁed above, describe two internal controls Basic Requirements should
use to protect against these risks.
3. The accounting student who is evaluating the reliability of Basic Requirements’ infor-
mation system is interested in becoming an IT auditor. Describe some of the speciﬁc
actions an IT auditor would take to verify that Kara and Scott have adequate controls in
place concerning privacy.
14-16. Tiffany Martin, CPA (Information Technology Audit Skills)
Tiffany Martin is an audit manager in a medium-sized public accounting ﬁrm. Tiffany
graduated from college seven years ago with a degree in accounting. She obtained her CPA
certiﬁcation soon after she joined the ﬁrm where she currently works. Tiffany is a ﬁnancial
auditor; she has had little training in auditing computerized information systems.
The current engagement Tiffany is working on includes a complex information process-
ing system with multiple applications. The ﬁnancial accounting transactions are processed
on server. The IT department employs 25 personnel, including programmers, systems
analysts, a database administrator, computer operators, technical support personnel, and a
director. Tiffany has not spoken with anyone in the department because she is fearful that
her lack of technical knowledge relative to IT will cause some concern with the client.
Because Tiffany does not understand the complexities of the computer processing
environment, she is unable to determine what risks might result from the computerized
system’s operations. She is particularly worried about unauthorized changes to programs
and data that would affect the reliability of the ﬁnancial statements.
Tiffany has spoken to Dick Stanton, the partner who has responsibility for this audit client,
about her concerns. Dick has suggested that Tiffany conduct more substantive testing than
she would undertake in a less complex processing environment. This additional testing will
hopefully ensure that there are no errors or fraud associated with the computer processing
of the ﬁnancial statements.
Requirements:
1. Do you think that Dick Stanton’s suggested approach is the most efﬁcient way to control
risks associated with complex computer environments?
2. How should Tiffany respond to Dick’s suggestion?

CHAPTER 14 / Information Technology Auditing
479
3. What can a public accounting ﬁrm, such as the one in which Tiffany works, do to ensure
that audits of computerized accounting information systems are conducted efﬁciently
and effectively?
4. Should Tiffany be allowed to conduct this audit given her limited level of skills? How
might she acquire new skills?
14-17. The Linz Company (Audit Program for User Accounts)
Jack Herron is an IT auditor with McGee LLP, a large national public accounting ﬁrm. His
manager, Amanda McDermott, has assigned him to the Linz Company audit. The McGee
ﬁnancial auditors have requested that the IT auditors complete several auditing steps so
that they may make a decision about the scope of their audit work. The IT auditors also
need to evaluate IT controls to provide the ﬁnancial auditors with information in order to
garner an opinion on internal controls as part of Sarbanes-Oxley compliance.
The Linz Company manufactures automotive parts and supplies them to the largest
auto-makers. The company has approximately 600 employees and has manufacturing
operations and ofﬁces in three locations. Linz uses a mid-sized ERP software program for
manufacturers that they acquired and implemented two years ago.
Amanda has asked Jack to develop an audit program to examine logical access to the ERP
system. According to the Security Administrator at Linz, each employee is assigned a unique
User ID and password when they join the company. The company is very concerned about
security, so there is no remote access to the ERP system. The ERP system requires that
users change their passwords every six months. System and group settings assigned to each
User ID determine what parts of the ERP systems are available to each user.
Requirements:
1. Explain how a deﬁciency in controls over User IDs and passwords might impact Linz’s
ﬁnancial statements.
2. Explain why auditing User IDs and passwords should be part of the overall IT audit
program for Linz.
3. Describe at least four control procedures that Linz could have in place to ensure that
only authorized users access the system and that user access is limited according to
their responsibilities.
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Aerts, Luc., ‘‘A Framework for Managing Operational Risk,’’ Internal Auditor (August 2001), pp.
53–59.
Alles, Michael G., Alexander Kogan, & Miklow A. Vasarhelyi. ‘‘Putting Continuous Auditing Theory
into Practice: Lessons from Two Pilot Implementations,’’ Journal of Information Systems. Vol.
22, Iss. 2 (Fall 2008), pp. 195–215.
Attaway, Morris C., ‘‘What Every Auditor Needs to Know About E-Commerce,’’ Internal Auditor
(March 2000), pp. 56–60.

480
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Campbell, Diane Sears. ‘‘Focus on Cyber-Fraud,’’ Internal Auditor (February 2002), pp. 28–33.
Coe, Martin J. ‘‘Trust Services: A Better Way to Evaluate I.T. Controls,’’ Journal of Accountancy
(March 2005), pp. 69–73.
Davis, Riccardo A. ‘‘Technology: Risky Business,’’ Accounting Technology, Vol. 22, Iss. 2 (March
2006), pp. 32–35.
Frieswick, Kris. ‘‘How Audits Must Change,’’ CFO (July 2003), pp. 42–50.
Gallegos, Frederick. ‘‘Red Teams: An Audit Tool, Technique and Methodology for Information
Assurance,’’ Information Systems Audit and Control Journal, Vol. 2 (2006), pp. 51–56.
Hinson, Gary. ‘‘The State of IT Auditing in 2007,’’ EDPACS (July 2007), Vol. 36, Iss. 1, pp. 13–32.
Hunton, James E., Stephanie M. Bryant, & Nancy A. Bagranoff, Core Concepts of Information
Technology Auditing. New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 2004.
Melber, Derek. ‘‘Auditing User Accounts,’’ Internal Auditor (November/December 2005), pp.
41–45.
Nyberg, Alix. ‘‘Sticker Shock—The True Cost of Sarbanes-Oxley Compliance,’’ CFO (September
2003), pp. 51–62.
Osheroff, Mike. ‘‘SOX As Opportunity,’’ Strategic Finance, Vol. 87, Iss. 10 (April 2006), pp. 19–20.
Panko, R. R. ‘‘Applying Code Inspection To Spreadsheet Testing’’ Journal of Management Informa-
tion Systems Vol. 16, No. 2 (Fall 1999), pp. 159–176.
Raff, Lawrence. ‘‘Seeking SOX Software?’’ Strategic Finance Vol. 87, Iss 11. (May 2006), pp. 52–55.
Ramaswamy, Vinita & John Leavins. ‘‘Continuous Auditing, Digital Analysis, and Benford’s Law,’’
Internal Auditing (July/August 2007), Vol. 22, Iss. 4, pp. 25–32.
Ramos, Michael. ‘‘Auditors’ Responsibility for Fraud Detection.’’ Journal of Accountancy (January
2003), pp. 28–35.
Richards, Dave. ‘‘Consultant Auditing: Charting a Course,’’ Internal Auditor (December 2001), pp.
30–35.
Searcy DeWayne, L., & Jon B. Woodroof. ‘‘Continuous Auditing: Leveraging Technology,’’ The CPA
Journal (May 2003), pp. 46–48.
Sarva, Srinivas. ‘‘Continuous Auditing Through Leveraging Technology,’’ Information Systems Con-
trol Journal, Vol. 2 (2006), pp. 47–50.
Warren, J. Donald, Jr., & L. Murphy Smith. ‘‘Continuous Auditing: An Effective Tool for Internal
Auditors,’’ Internal Auditing (March/April 2006), pp. 27–35.
Winters, Bruce I. ‘‘Choose the Right Tools for Internal Control Reporting,’’ Journal of Accountancy.
(February 2004), pp. 34–40.
Worthen, Ben. ‘‘A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Compliance (It Got Easier),’’ CIO (December
2003), pp. 1–7.
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. c
2. b
3. a
4. c
5. d
6. d
7. d
8. b
9. b
10. c

Chapter 15
Accounting on the Internet
INTRODUCTION
THE INTERNET AND WORLD WIDE WEB
Internet Addresses and Software
Intranets and Extranets
The World Wide Web and HTML
Groupware, Electronic Conferencing, and Blogs
XBRL: FINANCIAL REPORTING ON THE
INTERNET
XBRL Instance Documents and Taxonomies
The Beneﬁts of XBRL
The Current Status of XBRL
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
Retail Sales
E-Payments and E-Wallets
Business-to-Business E-Commerce
Electronic Data Interchange and Virtual PBXs
PRIVACY AND SECURITY ON THE INTERNET
Privacy and Identity Theft
Security
Spam and Phishing
Firewalls, Intrusion Detection Systems, Value-Added
Networks, and Proxy Servers
Data Encryption
Digital Signatures and Digital Time Stamping
AIS AT WORK—THE BENEFITS OF ONLINE
ACCOUNTING OUTSOURCING
SUMMARY
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
TEST YOURSELF
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
PROBLEMS
CASE ANALYSES
Hammaker Manufacturing IV
DeGraaf Ofﬁce Supplies
Barra Concrete
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED
READINGS
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
After reading this chapter, you will:
1. Understand some of the basic concepts of the
Internet, such as TCP/IP, URLs, and web page
addresses.
2. Appreciate why electronic communication is
useful to accountants.
3. Know why XBRL is important to ﬁnancial report-
ing.
4. Understand electronic data interchange (EDI),
and why it is important to AISs.
5. Know the differences between business-to-
consumer and B2B e-commerce.
6. Appreciate the privacy and security issues asso-
ciated with e-commerce.
7. Know why businesses use ﬁrewalls, proxy
servers, and encryption techniques.
8. Understand
digital
signatures
and
digital
time-stamping techniques.
481

482
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
‘‘It is important to understand that e-commerce is simply a tool to conduct business
efﬁciently, so you still need a sound business model. It doesn’t really change what you
do, but rather the way you do it.’’
Heather Douglas, ‘‘E-Commerce and the Home Business’’
NZ Business (June 2006), p. 63.
INTRODUCTION
Most accountants use the Internet for research, education, and email on a daily basis.
Auditors regularly evaluate their client’s internal controls to ensure complete, accurate,
and authentic transmissions of transactions over the Internet. In fact, it’s nearly impossible
to imagine how accountants would accomplish their various job responsibilities without
the many technologies that support today’s businesses.
This chapter describes the Internet and some of its accounting uses in detail. The
ﬁrst section describes Internet components such as Internet addresses and software. This
section also discusses some Internet concepts of special importance to accountants (i.e.,
intranets and extranets). We also discuss XBRL, a ﬁnancial reporting language, in this
section.
One of the most important uses of the Internet is for electronic commerce
(e-commerce)—the topic of the next section of this chapter. Although the terms e-
commerce and e-business are often used interchangeably, there is a difference. E-commerce
involves buying and selling electronically, and can be between two businesses, between
a for-proﬁt company and a governmental entity, between a business and a customer,
and other similar combinations. We use the term e-business to describe the electronic
infrastructure that supports e-commerce. Here, we discuss such vital concepts as retail
sales, e-payments, electronic data interchange (EDI), and virtual PBXs.
As more organizations conduct at least some business on the Internet, it is only natural
that managers increasingly recognize the importance of Internet privacy and security. This
includes protecting consumers’ personal privacy, protecting proprietary data from hackers,
and safeguarding information that businesses send to one another over the Internet. The
ﬁnal section of this chapter discusses these topics in detail.
THE INTERNET AND WORLD WIDE WEB
The Internet is a collection of local and wide-area networks that are now connected
together via the Internet backbone—i.e., the main electronic connections of the system.
Describing the Internet as an ‘‘information superhighway’’ makes sense because over
1 billion people from around the world now use it, just as a set of state, interstate, and
international highways connect people physically. Almost all universities are connected
to the Internet, as are most commercial information services, businesses, government
agencies, and not-for-proﬁt organizations. This section of the chapter discusses Internet
basics, including Internet addresses and software, intranets and extranets, the World Wide
Web, IDEA, groupware, electronic conferencing, and weblogs.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
483
Internet Addresses and Software
To transmit data over the Internet, a computer uses an Internet address and a forwarding
system that works much the same way as the post ofﬁce system. On the Internet, the initial
computer transmits a message to other computers along the Internet’s backbone, which in
turn relay the message from site to site until it reaches its ﬁnal destination. If the message
is large, Internet computers can divide it into smaller pieces called data packets and route
each of them along different routes. The receiving computer then reassembles the packets
into a complete message at the ﬁnal destination.
An Internet address begins as a domain address, which is also called a uniform
resource locator (URL). This is a text address such as ‘‘www.Name.com.uk.’’ As
suggested by this generic example, the lead item indicates the World Wide Web. The
second entry designates the site name, and the third entry (‘‘com’’ for commercial user)
is the organization code. Other organization codes are ‘‘edu’’ (education), ‘‘gov’’ (gov-
ernment), ‘‘mil’’ (military), ‘‘net’’ (network service organization), ‘‘org’’ (miscellaneous
organization), and ‘‘int’’ (international treaty organization). Finally, a domain address
can include a country code as well—for example, ‘‘ca’’ for Canada, ‘‘uk’’ for the United
Kingdom, or ‘‘nz’’ for New Zealand.
For transmission purposes, Internet computers use tables of domain names that enable
them to translate a text-based domain address such as www.Wikepedia.org into a numeric
Internet protocol (IP) address such as 207.142.131.248. The elements in this address
contain a geographic region (‘‘207’’), an organization number (‘‘142’’), a computer group
(‘‘131’’), and a speciﬁc computer (‘‘248’’). The IP address enables Internet computers to
deliver a speciﬁc message to a speciﬁc computer at a speciﬁc computer site—for example,
send an email message to a friend at another university using the standard Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP)/Internet protocol. IP addresses are useful to auditors because
they help identify the sender, which is an important control in e-commerce applications.
Intranets and Extranets
Because Internet software is so convenient to use, many companies also create their own
intranets for internal communications purposes. These computer networks use the same
software as the Internet but are internal to the organization that created them. Thus,
outsiders cannot access the information on intranet networks—a convenient security
feature.
Companies, governmental entities, military organizations, and educational institutions
are all ﬁnding many uses for intranets. These systems allow users to access and interact
with a range of internal databases. Advanced search engine technology coupled with an
intranet can deliver user-deﬁned information when needed. For example, a purchasing
agent can access a centralized listing of approved vendors using his or her web browser
and a local area network.
Another valuable use of an intranet is for gathering and disseminating information
to internal users. For example, employees can collaborate with each other by posting
messages and data on the internal network, updating records, checking out job postings,
completing forms to request ofﬁce supplies, and entering travel expenses through their
organization’s intranet. Universities offer many of the same services to their employees, as
well as a similar variety of services and educational opportunities to students.
Case-in-Point 15.1
Students at Baylor University’s Hankamer School of Business have
direct access to The Wall Street Journal Online through the university’s intranet. Baylor

484
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
was one of the ﬁrst academic institutions to implement intranet-based access to the journal
through a recently launched Journal-in-Education service. Although students do not need to
register, they still have access to all of the online journal’s regular personalization features,
including company and industry tracking, email alerts, portfolio and interactive tools, and
special reports with interactive graphics.1
Extranets enable selected outside users to access corporate intranets. Users connect
through the Internet itself via passwords or private data communications channels. The
following is an example.
Case-in-Point 15.2
Chamberlain Group, Inc., distributes door operators, gate operators,
and telephone entry systems. The ﬁrm’s extranet helps the independent dealers who sell its
products place orders, view invoices, obtain return authorizations, track warranty claims,
and download manuals in PDF format. The company is particularly proud of its ‘‘resource
center’’—a separate portion of its website—which allows dealers to obtain advertising
assistance, download high-resolution logos and pictures of products, and even TV and radio
commercials.2
The World Wide Web and HTML
The multimedia portion of the Internet is commonly called the World Wide Web or just ‘‘the
web.’’ As you probably already know, you view these graphics using a web browser such
as Microsoft’s Internet Explorer. A typical entity on the web is a web page—i.e., a collec-
tion of text, graphics, and links to other web pages stored on Internet-connected computers.
HTML.
Developers typically create web pages in an editing language such as hypertext
markup language (HTML— see Figure 15-1a). Web designers store these instructions in
one or more ﬁles and use the Internet to transfer these pages from a source computer
to a recipient computer using a communications protocol such as hypertext transfer
protocol (HTTP). Your web browser then deciphers the editing language and displays
the text, graphics, and other items of the web page on your screen (Figure 15-1b).
Because HTML is an editing language, many of its instructions are simply pairs of tags
that instruct a web browser how to display the information bracketed by these tags. Thus,
in Figure 15-1a, note that the entire ﬁle begins with an <html> tag and ends with a closing
</html> tag. Similarly, the <b> and </b> tags bold and unbold text, and the <i> and
</i> tags begin and end italicized text. Using Figure 15-1b, you can probably guess the
purpose of anchor tags (beginning with <a>), ordered-list tags (beginning with <ol>), and
list-item tags (beginning with <li>). Problem 15–18 is an exercise to help you understand
HTML tags.
Groupware, Electronic Conferencing, and Blogs
Groupware allows users to send and receive email, collaborate on work tasks, make
revisions to the same document, schedule appointments on each other’s calendars,
share ﬁles and databases, conduct electronic meetings, and develop custom applications.
1Source: P. Li. ‘‘Baylor University offers business students intranet access to the Wall Street Journal Online,’’
College Planning & Management (January 2004), p. 8.
2Source: no author. ‘‘The Chamberlain Group Updates its Extranet’’, Security Distributing and Marketing
Vol. 37, No 10 (October 2007), pp. 26–27.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
485
<html>
<title>Some examples of HTML tags</title>
<body lang=EN-US style=’tab-interval:.5in’>
<h1>Some Examples of HTML Tags</h1>
<p><b>This sentence is bold.</b></p>
<p><i>This sentence is in italics.</i></p>
<p><span style=font-size:14.0pt>
This sentence uses 14-point type
</span>
</p>
<p><a href=“http://www.wiley.com”>John
   Wiley web site</a></p>
<p>This is an ordered list.</p>
<ol><li>This is item #1.</li>
<li>This is item #2.</li>
</body>
</html>
(a) HTML code
(b) What the code in part (a) displays
FIGURE 15-1
An example of HTML code and what that code displays in a web browser. Note the anchor
tag <a>, which allows you to create a link to another web page—in this case, the Wiley website.
Examples of such software include Exchange (Microsoft), Groupwise (Novell), Lotus Notes
(Lotus Development Corporation) and Outlook (Microsoft).
Instant messaging software enables remote users to communicate with each other
in real time via the Internet. You are probably already familiar with such software if you
use MSN Messenger, Yahoo Messenger, or Internet Relay Chat (IRC) to chat with distant
friends. Many of these packages also support audio, video, and electronic conferencing
(enabling several users to join a discussion instead of just two). Accounting applications
include the ability to interview job applicants remotely, consult with clients about tax or
audit problems, discuss projects from several remote sites, or plan corporate budgets.
Large consulting and accounting ﬁrms have access to a wealth of information within
their organizations. Groupware is one of the technologies behind knowledge manage-
ment that many professional service ﬁrms (such as accounting and consulting ﬁrms) use to
distribute expertise within the organization (frequently on its intranet). This information
includes descriptions of clients’ best practices, research ﬁndings, links to business web-
sites, and customized news. For example, an employee with a client issue can access the
knowledge database to learn how others handled similar issues.
Weblogs or blogs are collaboration tools that allow users with web browsers and
easy-to-use software to publish a personalized diary online. Blogging introduces a new way
to create, share, and leverage knowledge in an organization, and therefore can be valuable
to accountants. Enterprise blogs provide companies with easy-to-use tools to manage
internal and external information, which in turn affects relationships with customers,
partners, and investors, as well as internal decision-makers.
Case-in-Point 15.3
The U.S. Department of Defense’s Naval Undersea Warfare Center
(NUWC) in Newport, R.I., uses TeamPage enterprise blogging software to create a secure
communications hub for a project to evaluate night-vision technology. The blog is part of a
pilot project to speed up communications within the DOD’s test and evaluation programs.
NUWC will blog information about its tests of the night-vision technology so the information is
available in real time to its partners (Ford Motor Co. and the U.S. Army’s night-vision lab).3
3Source: Linda Rosencrance, ‘‘Blogs Bubble into Business,’’ Computerworld (January 26, 2004), p. 23–4.

486
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
XBRL: FINANCIAL REPORTING ON THE INTERNET
Although the Internet supports general ﬁnancial reporting, exchanging ﬁnancial infor-
mation between trading partners often requires more detailed speciﬁcations. XML or
eXtensible Markup Language is similar to HTML in that it also uses tags such as <b>
and </b> to format data. But there are two important differences between HTML and
XML. One is that XML tags are ‘‘extensible,’’ allowing users to deﬁne their own tags
such as <SalesRevenue>. The other difference is that the XML tags actually describe the
data rather than simply indicate how to display it. For example, if a business wants to
report sales revenue of $1 million, it could use the XML tags: <SalesRevenue> $1,000,000
</SalesRevenue>. Now, this data item has meaning.
A problem with XML tags is a potential lack of consistency among users. For example,
your company might use the XML tag <SalesRevenue> but another company might
choose <Revenues>. Without standardized markers (tags), users cannot exchange ﬁnancial
information or extract data from XML ﬁles for comparison purposes. XBRL or eXtensible
Business Reporting Language solves this problem by standardizing the tags that describe
ﬁnancial information in documents for both proﬁt and not-for-proﬁt organizations. In short,
XBRL is a specialized subset of XML for reporting ﬁnancial information. Figure 15-2 provides
an example of XBRL code and what that code creates.
The XBRL International Consortium (discussed below) creates XBRL standards that
anyone can use, license-free. In addition, many accounting software packages are now
XBRL-enabled, meaning that they can insert appropriate XBRL tags automatically in user
ﬁnancial ﬁles.
XBRL Instance Documents and Taxonomies
XBRL documents are called XBRL instance documents because they are examples
(‘‘instances’’) of a class of documents deﬁned by a standard or speciﬁcation. Figure 15-2
shows an example—a portion of an income statement in XBRL. In this example, note that
XBRL code:
<ifrs-gp:CashCashEquivalents contextRef=‘‘Current_AsOf’’ unitRef=‘‘U-Euros’’
decimals=‘‘0’’>1000000</ifrs-gp: CashCashEquivalents>
<ifrs-gp:OtherAssetsCurrent contextRef=‘‘Current_AsOf’’ unitRef=‘‘U-Euros’’
decimals=‘‘0’’>200000</ifrs-gp: OtherAssetsCurrent>
<ifrs-gp:AssetsCurrentTotal contextRef=‘‘Current_AsOf’’ unitRef=‘‘U-Euros’’
decimals=‘‘0’’>1200000</ifrs-gp:AssetsCurrentTotal>
What the XBRL code displays in a web browser:
Current Assets:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
1,000,000
Other Assets, Current
200,000
Current Assets, Total:
1,200,000
FIGURE 15-2
An example of XBRL code and what that code creates.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
487
XBRL tags follow conventional HTML and XML coding rules that use a beginning tag such as
<ifrsgp:OtherAssetsCurrent> and an ending tag such as </ifrsgp:OtherAssetsCurrent> to
deﬁne a value. The number itself sits between these two tags. XBRL tags identify ﬁnancial
values uniquely. For example, the term ‘‘CashCashEquivalents’’ within a tag unambiguously
deﬁnes ‘‘cash and cash equivalents.’’ Finally, you can use optional entries in each tag to
identify currency units (e.g., ‘‘Euros’’) and the number of decimal places (e.g., ‘‘0’’).
To create an XBRL instance document, you need to know: (1) the standard tags that
deﬁne such familiar items as net revenues and operating expenses, and (2) the rules that
govern how to use these tags. XBRL Speciﬁcation 2.1 currently deﬁnes the rules and syntax
for XBRL taxonomies and XBRL documents. XBRL taxonomies deﬁne the tags that represent
accounting and ﬁnancial terms used in XBRL instance documents. With standard tags for
each piece of common ﬁnancial data, accounting software can create instance documents
for income statements, balance sheets, and similar ﬁnancial statements in a straightforward
manner. Figure 15-3 lists a number of ways that XBRL affects accountants.
The Beneﬁts of XBRL
The business potential of XBRL seems great. One obvious beneﬁt is the ability to transmit
ﬁnancial information in a standard format. This facilitates communications between sup-
pliers and their buyers, companies and their shippers, and retailers and their customers.
The same standardization applies to ﬁnancial ﬁlings. For example, the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) now requires XBRL-formatted ﬁnancial statement reports,
which businesses can also use to help complete loan applications.
Another important advantage of XBRL is that it deﬁnes data items uniquely. Consider,
for example, how a spreadsheet stores ﬁnancial information. The only way we know that
a particular number in a spreadsheet is, say, ‘‘net revenue’’ is because we also see a label
that identiﬁes it as such. Move the number somewhere else in the spreadsheet and you
also lose its meaning. In contrast, a ‘‘net revenue’’ ﬁgure remains ‘‘net revenue’’ no matter
where it appears in XBRL instance documents as long as it remains within its tags.
XBRL’s standardized tags also make searching for items in XBRL ﬁnancial documents
relatively easy. If you know the standard tag for an item of interest, you can unambiguously
• Due to corporate scandals, shareholders, analysts, and reporters are demanding more transparent
reporting. XBRL allows readers to quickly access the information they need.
• XBRL permits the automatic and reliable exchange of ﬁnancial information across all software formats and
technologies, including the Internet.
• XBRL does not require a change to existing accounting standards of corporate disclosure policies.
• XBRL improves access to ﬁnancial information because data is in a digital, reusable form.
• XBRL eliminates the need to reenter ﬁnancial data for different users, which reduces risks associated with
data entry and lowers the cost to prepare and distribute ﬁnancial statements.
• XBRL improves investor and analyst access to information.
• XBRL allows accountants to more quickly and easily consolidate and scrutinize internal data for use in
ﬁnancial reports.
• XBRL allows CEOs and CFOs to deliver more transparent information to investors and analysts, and allows
a vehicle for control within the ﬁrm.
Source: Charles Hoffman and Carolyn Strand, XBRL Essentials (New York: AICPA), 2001; and www.xbrl.org
FIGURE 15-3
How does XBRL affect accountants?

488
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
ﬁnd and extract the number in question from those documents. One repository of such
ﬁnancial information is the Security and Exchange Commission’s new interactive data
and electronic applications (IDEA), which the agency unveiled in August of 2008 and
now contains XBRL data for over 10,000 companies—a particularly important source of
ﬁnancial information and a particularly important reason why standardized reporting is
useful.
In business environments, the term semantic meaning refers to the fact that the
ﬁnancial data are related to one another through such formulas as ‘‘Assets = Liabilities +
Equity.’’ An additional advantage of XBRL is its ability to express such relationships in
formulas, thereby making the data self-checking. This is important because organizations
often need to transmit ﬁnancial data to others, and XBRL provides a means of internal
control.
Case-in-Point 15.4
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) insures banks
and similar ﬁnancial institutions throughout the United States. The FDIC exchanges ﬁnancial
information with member institutions all the time, and uses a set of 1,800 rules to validate
such data. The FDIC was an early adopter of XBRL in part because this language has the
ability to perform data-validation tasks automatically.4
Companies using XBRL-enabled software can save their ﬁnancial information in stan-
dard XBRL format, thus avoiding the errors that may come from reentering data multiple
times from multiple sources. Companies can then directly upload their business information
in this format onto their websites. This is important because a recent study by Forrester
Research estimated the cost of re-keying information at $402 billion per year.5
Another advantage is that XBRL permits the automatic and reliable exchange of ﬁnancial
information across all software platforms and technologies, including the Internet. Thus,
anyone interested in comparing the cash and cash equivalents of several companies can
search for the data and export it to a spreadsheet for analysis purposes.
Finally, it is important to note that XBRL does not constrain companies to a particular
format for their ﬁnancial reports. To the contrary, the language is ﬂexible, and therefore
intentionally constructed to support ﬁnancial reporting by companies in different industries
or from different countries. The hope is that both the extensible capabilities of the language
as well as this ﬂexibility are great enough to meet business and governmental needs at all
levels. Problem 15–20 invites you to explore the beneﬁts of XBRL in further detail.
XBRL also has several disadvantages. Perhaps the most important is the fact that a
common reporting language requires its users to learn, and conform to, the standards of
that language. Another problem is that evolving XBRL standards require users to learn new
rules for changing speciﬁcations.
The Current Status of XBRL
The XBRL International Consortium has about 450 members and is in charge of
developing XBRL standards. Many U.S. accounting ﬁrms are members of this consortium,
as is the American Institute of Certiﬁed Public Accountants and parallel accounting
organizations around the world. The speciﬁcations for version 2.1 of XBRL were issued in
July of 2008. The website at www.xbrl.org provides additional information on both current
and proposed standards.
4Source: http://www.ubmatrix.com/Documents/XBRLComparedToXML-2005-07-06%20(4).pdf.
5Source: http://accounting.smartpros.com/x37643.xml; ‘‘How XBRL Is Transforming Financial Reporting’’.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
489
As you might imagine, developing Internet standards for ﬁnancial reporting is a
massive undertaking. The language speciﬁcations require classiﬁcation systems for different
countries, different reporting segments (e.g., different industries), and even different
organizational standards such as U.S. generally accepted accounting standards (GAAP).
For example, oil and gas companies require specialized tags to identify reserve balances,
casinos require specialized tags to identify allowances for unclaimed gambling chips, and
so forth. Then too, the language requires standard tags for formulas (e.g., a Price/Earnings
ratio) and different functions. For this reason, XBRL is best viewed as a dynamic language
still in development.
Most accounting software vendors now support XBRL in one or more of their software
packages, and the world-wide adoption of XBRL is moving along quickly. For example,
in Germany, it’s universal—XBRL is already built into a software package used by 80% of
the accountants in that country. The XBRL International consortium publishes a progress
report three times a year, available on its website, to offer the most current information
about XBRL.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
The term electronic commerce refers to conducting business with computers and data
communications. Often, e-commerce is done over the Internet, but businesses can also
conduct e-commerce over proprietary data transmission lines. Recent surveys estimate the
total annual revenues for e-commerce in the United States exceeds $1 trillion, and the
FBI estimates that the banking industry transfers over $1 trillion each week by electronic
means. Some general categories of electronic commerce are (1) retail sales, (2) e-payments
and e-wallets, and (3) electronic data interchange, each of which we examine brieﬂy in the
paragraphs that follow.
Retail Sales
The World Wide Web offers businesses the opportunity to create virtual stores (‘‘shopping
cart applications’’) for selling merchandise directly to customers. At the retail level, it is
clear that such websites are really automated AISs that allow customers to create their own
order forms, shipping forms, and payment documents. Testimony to the success of such
retail e-commerce abounds. The number of online shoppers has increased steadily over the
past decade. More than 90% of the U.S. population is now connected to the Internet, many
of whom now purchase items over the Internet on a regular basis. For example, consumers
now reserve most of their domestic airline tickets, rental cars, and hotel rooms over the
Internet. Figure 15-4 lists some of the advantages of virtual stores. Note how many of these
advantages relate directly to AISs.
Internet retail sales also introduce special issues. One problem is that customers usually
cannot determine whether a retail website is legitimate. Similarly, consumers must usually
rely on emails to voice their complaints (rather than speaking to someone in person) and
returns are sometimes problematic. A third problem is that online stores frequently rely
on suppliers rather than their own shelves for merchandise to satisfy orders, creating the
potential for stock-out and backorder problems. Finally, a growing e-commerce problem is
click fraud, in which dishonest managers inﬂate the number of clicks viewers make on
an advertisement on a web page, and therefore bill the linked company for more referrals
than actually occurred.

490
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
1. Web pages are much cheaper to create than creating and mailing catalogs.
2. Distribution is global.
3. Sales can occur around the clock.
4. Customers can search for speciﬁc products or services electronically, either within a particular website
or as a ‘‘hit’’ from another site.
5. A business can easily outsource its web business to others, enabling it to focus on core processes.
6. The websites themselves can use automated tools to verify customer credit cards.
7. Businesses can send emails to conﬁrm orders or advise customers about shipping dates.
8. Businesses can update product descriptions, sales prices, and information on merchandise availability
immediately.
9. Customers create their own sales orders online.
10. Customers can track their own orders, freeing business personnel for other tasks.
11. The sales and customer-relations personnel required for virtual stores is minimal, thus reducing labor
costs per dollar of sales.
FIGURE 15-4
Some advantages of virtual stores on the Internet.
Internet retail sales also provide retailers with a wealth of data about their customers,
raising issues about privacy. For example, you might be concerned about the fact that your
web purchase also means that a retailer now has (1) your email address, which it can use to
send additional, annoying emails or sell to others, (2) your credit card information, which
it may or may not protect as well as you would like, and (3) sensitive information about
your purchase patterns—for example, prescription drugs. A later section of this chapter
addresses these privacy and security issues in greater detail.
E-Payments and E-Wallets
Most customers pay for the merchandise they order over the Internet with a credit card,
requiring vendors to use third-party afﬁliates to authenticate user credit-card numbers.
This is a problem because such credit card veriﬁcation systems only indicate that a card
is valid, not that the online customer is authorized to use it. A related problem with
online payments is that although online customers might not mind giving their credit card
numbers to trusted merchants, they may not wish to share the number with unfamiliar
businesses or unknown sellers on mass auction sites.
Some merchants and auction sites solve these problems with electronic payments
(e-payments), which proponents claim is a faster, easier, and safer way for both cus-
tomers and sellers to handle online transactions. The e-payment service acts as a trusted
intermediary because it collects a payment from a buyer and pays that amount to the seller.
Case-in-Point 15.5
Consumers who buy products on E-bay or other online auction sites
may be familiar with Paypal (www.paypal.com), an e-payment system that operates via the
Internet. Customers who want to bid for items in online auctions, but who don’t wish to
share their credit card number with unknown sellers, may open an account with Paypal.
Account-holders can deposit cash in their Paypal account using credit cards, debit cards,
or bank checks. When consumers purchase items, Paypal acts as an intermediary bank,
withdrawing money from the purchaser’s account and depositing similar funds into the seller’s
account (or sending a check).6
6To learn more about PayPal, log onto its website at www.paypal.com and click on ‘‘How PayPal works.’’

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
491
Businesses are not the only entities that can enjoy the convenience of e-payments. The
U.S. government has its own system to conduct ﬁnancial transactions online:
Case-in-Point 15.6
Pay.gov (Figure 15-5) enables businesses and individuals to make
payments to the U.S. government electronically. Developed by the U.S. Treasury Department’s
Financial Management Services (FMS), Pay.gov is a central location through which businesses
and individuals can make payments, submit forms, and send bills to federal agencies. This
portal provides authentication services for secure transactions. FMS expects Pay.gov to handle
approximately 80 million transactions worth over $125 billion a year, reduce paperwork, and
save agencies over 5% in processing costs.7
Another Internet payment option is an e-wallet. E-wallets are software applications that
store a consumer’s personal information, including credit card numbers, email addresses,
and shipping addresses. Shoppers pay for online purchases by providing their e-wallet
account numbers to online vendors that also subscribe to the system.
An advantage of an e-wallet is that you can use it whenever you visit subscriber
websites. These systems spare you the trouble of entering your personal information each
time you make an online purchase. Also, because your e-wallet information is usually stored
on your own hard drive, you control it. This maintains your email privacy as well. E-wallets
may be as important for retailers as they are for consumers because many consumers
cancel e-commerce transactions before they complete them, often because of frustration
with online forms.
Case-in-Point 15.7
AOL Wallet is America Online’s e-wallet application. The system
enables users to store up to ten credit card numbers and 50 shipping addresses in a single
account. AOL partners with a number of online retail merchants such as Macy’s and Eddie
Bauer, and shoppers can use AOL Wallet at any of them. When you visit an afﬁliated retailer,
FIGURE 15-5
The home page for Pay.gov—an e-payment system supported by the U.S. govern-
ment.
7Source: Nicholas Morehead. ‘‘Treasury Antes up E-Payments,’’ (April 3, 2004) at www.fcw.com/articles.

492
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
the software enters your name, address, phone, credit card number, and other relevant
information automatically in the payment form.8
Business-to-Business E-Commerce
Although there has been tremendous growth in retail e-commerce, it is dwarfed by
business-to-business (or B2B) e-commerce—i.e., businesses buying and selling goods
and services to each other over the Internet. Buying goods online shortens the time
from purchase to delivery and also allows businesses to shop from vendors all over the
world. Like retail consumers, corporate purchasing agents using B2B e-commerce tools
can select items from online catalogs, conﬁrm purchases, track shipments, and pay bills
electronically. E-commerce software can also expedite internal paperwork by ﬁrst sending
purchase orders to the appropriate managers for approvals and then forwarding them to
the vendor, thus reducing the costs of processing purchase requisitions.
Case-in-Point 15.8
BASF is one of the world’s largest chemical, plastics, and energy
companies, with sales of $81.8 billion in 2008 and 94,000 employees on ﬁve continents.
Company managers credit much of its recent 75% growth in revenues to its new e-commerce
initiatives. Says Herbert Fisch, head of global e-commerce, ‘‘In addition to order management,
e-commerce provides our customers with information and service tools. Customers beneﬁt
from greater transparency and we gain valuable time to better serve them.’’9
Further back the supply chain, the Internet affects accounting activities just as strongly.
Another feature of B2B e-commerce is the wider availability of real-time data that allows
managers to view up-to-the-minute information. Take, for instance, a distributor whose
business customers in turn sell products to end users. With current data about its
customers’ retail sales, the supplier could quickly increase or decrease its operations as
required. Similar online information can determine the location of speciﬁc trucks (using
GPS systems), check the estimated arrival date of incoming cargo ships, or determine
the current status of ﬁnished products, parts inventories, or even working assembly
lines.
Even vendors of inexpensive accounting software now include an e-commerce interface
with their products. An example is Peachtree software’s Peachlink feature, which provides
users with tools to create and use a shopping-cart website and accept Internet orders.
Although the Internet has streamlined procurement and inventory tracking operations,
it has been slow to impact accounts payable or accounts receivable. In part, this is
because companies like to hold their money as long as possible. However, delayed bill
payment works against these same businesses who want to collect on their own accounts
receivable. Software from such companies as Time Capital allows vendors and customers
to view purchase and shipping documents so that they can resolve discrepancies quickly
and cut checks or make electronic payments as needed.
Electronic Data Interchange and Virtual PBXs
Two further uses of Internet technology are electronic data interchange and virtual PBXs.
We examine each of them in the following paragraphs.
8Source: www.AOL.com.
9Source: Elaine Burridge. ‘‘E-commerce Revenues Boost Achieved by BASF’’ European Chemical News Vol. 83,
No. 2174 (December 5, 2005), p. 14.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
493
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI).
Literally thousands of companies use Elec-
tronic Data Interchange (EDI) to electronically exchange billions of dollars every year
as well as many business documents. EDI means transmitting information over high-speed
data communications channels. Examples of EDI business documents include requests for
quotes (RFQs), purchase orders, bills of lading, freight bills, sales invoices, customs docu-
ments, payment remittance forms, and credit memos. Thus, EDI automates the exchange
of business information and permits organizations to conduct many forms of commerce
electronically.
Case-in-Point 15.9
Pressured by budget cuts, British libraries are turning to RFID and
EDI technologies to reduce costs instead of closing libraries. Staffordshire library is an
example, which uses EDI for vendor quotes, catalogue services, acknowledgements, and
invoicing to help it streamline its acquisition processes. As a result, the stock manager reports
that vendor replies to requests have improved, new stock arrives more quickly, and stafﬁng
costs have been reduced by 42%. She estimates that EDI saves the library over $155,000 per
year.10
Government agencies also depend heavily on EDI. One example is the U.S. Customs
Service:
Case-in-Point 15.10
Before EDI, imported goods could wait on docks for weeks while
ofﬁcials processed the paperwork. But information about some imports can be sent weeks
before the merchandise itself arrives. The U.S. Customs Service now uses EDI to process
almost 95% of all customs declarations. This usage has lowered error rates from 17% before
EDI, to about 1.7% now. This improvement translates into annual savings of $500 million in
processing costs, and about 10% in productivity gains.11
One potential advantage of EDI compared to Internet e-commerce is that many business
documents are simply faxed over telephone lines, avoiding computers completely. Another
advantage is that many EDI documents include hand-written signatures, providing assurance
of their authenticity. A third advantage is that EDI includes the exchange of graphic and
photographic documents—media that can be scanned and captured electronically, but at
additional time or cost.
Virtual PBXs.
The acronym PBX stands for ‘‘private branch exchange’’—the phone
system that most businesses use in their ofﬁces. The primary motivator is cost—these
systems enable a business to lease a smaller number of external lines from telephone
service providers than if each ofﬁce had its own outside line. Because modern PBXs are
computer-based, additional beneﬁts include the use of passwords for system access, the
ability to classify long-distance phone charges by handset or by password account, and the
availability of answering-machine services, call-forwarding, call recording, caller ID, and
internal call conferencing.
Virtual PBXs are Internet-based PBX systems that enable organizations to outsource
their PBX services. Most of these systems use VoIP (voice over Internet protocol) to
transmit digitized versions of voice-grade messages over the Internet. In addition to such
common advantages of outsourcing as lower costs, greater reliability, and perhaps enhanced
capabilities, virtual PBXs become invaluable in emergencies or disasters. At such times, for
10Source: Hannah Davies, ‘‘The Electronic Chain to Cost Cutting’’ Bookseller (February 2009), pp. 6–7.
11Source: Theodore Prince. ‘‘EDI Outlook: Good Technology, Problematic Results’’ Journal of Transportation
Law, Logistics, and Policy Vol. 71, No. 4 (Summer 2004), pp. 440–446.

494
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
example, a virtual PBX can reroute toll-free calls to alternate landlines or cell phones, as
well as redirect ‘‘internal calls’’ from one employee to another. Thus, managers can work
at home but still use their ‘‘ofﬁce phone’’ as conveniently as ever.
PRIVACY AND SECURITY ON THE INTERNET
The most important advantage of the Internet and World Wide Web—accessibility—is also
its greatest weakness—vulnerability. This means that someone who poses as an authorized
user may be able to access any email, web page, or computer ﬁle that an authorized user
can access through the Internet. This section of the chapter discusses Internet privacy and
security in detail.
Privacy and Identity Theft
Do organizational managers have the right to view the emails of their employees? Do
businesses have the right to use the personal information collected from their online retail
customers? These are some of the privacy issues ﬁrst discussed in Chapter 10. Both state
governments and such groups as the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Online Privacy
Alliance continue to work on legislation to protect the privacy of data transmitted over the
Internet.
Of particular concern is identity theft, in which someone uses another person’s
personal data in some way that involves fraud or deception (usually for economic beneﬁt).12
The most current statistics released by the FBI indicate that almost 10 million Americans
were identity-theft victims and experienced losses totaling $52.6 billion.13 The most
common complaint related to identity theft is credit card fraud. The Department of Justice
prosecutes ID theft violations under the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence
Act (ITADA) of 1998. The punishment can be a prison term of 15 years, a ﬁne, and
forfeiture of any personal property used to commit the crime.
Although companies need strong preventive controls to help protect customer informa-
tion, individuals should also exercise reasonable caution in protecting personal information.
Unscrupulous individuals, posing as a company or bank employee, might call or send email
messages to solicit personal information. Use your professional skepticism. If you are uncer-
tain about the authenticity of the request, ask the person to send the request in writing
on company letterhead. If you question the authenticity of a particular website, do more
research on the company before purchasing goods or services through it—especially if you
must give your credit card number. Figure 15-6 outlines some additional steps that you can
take to better protect your personal information—almost all of them accounting-related.
Security
Security policies and procedures safeguard an organization’s electronic resources and limit
their access to authorized users. As noted in Chapter 1, information security has been
the number one technology in each of the last ﬁve years in the AICPA’s survey of the ‘‘Top
10 Technologies’’ expected to have a powerful inﬂuence over business.
12Source: www.usdoj.gov/criminal/fraud/idtheft.html.
13Source: http://www.identitytheftsecurity.com/stats.shtml.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
495
1. Only give personal information such as Social Security numbers and dates of birth to those absolutely
needing it.
2. Mail checks, credit applications, and similar materials directly in locked outgoing mail boxes, not in
front-yard mail boxes with red, ‘‘steal me’’ ﬂags on their sides.
3. Do not leave purses, wallets, or similar carrying cases unattended—for example, in unlocked gym
lockers.
4. When asked by a legitimate business person such as a bank teller for your personal information, write it
down for them—do not recite it verbally.
5. Be wary of unsolicited calls from individuals claiming to be bank representatives, credit-card issuers,
or others, especially if they ask for personal information. A similar rule applies to emails from unknown
agents.
6. Do not ‘‘lend’’ personal information to others—for example, a password.
7. Do not simply toss sensitive information in trash cans where others can retrieve it. Shred or burn it ﬁrst.
8. Be wary of relatives in ﬁnancial difﬁculties. Sadly, family members who are well known by the victims
account for a high percentage of identity theft.
9. Phishing describes a website that appears to be from a well-known company, but that gathers personal
data for illegal purposes. Don’t fall for them.
10. Key-logging software is software that captures your keystrokes—usually for illicit purposes. Use security
software to guard against it.
FIGURE 15-6
Steps that you can take to safeguard your personal data from identity theft.
Case-in-Point 15.11
Richard Farina of AirTight Networks was traveling on an American
Airlines ﬂight in October of 2008 that supported Internet access for its passengers. As an
experiment, he used some of his company’s intrusion protection software and found that he
could view all his fellow passenger’s Internet activities due to the airline’s poor security.14
Of special importance to AISs is access security—e.g., restricting access to bona ﬁde
users. Access authentication requires individuals to prove they are who they say they are.
The three types of authentication are based on: (1) what you have, (2) what you know, and
(3) who you are. What you have may be a plastic card that provides you physical access to
information or a restricted area. Examples are your ATM card, debit card, or employee card
that gives you access to certain premises. What you know refers to unique information you
possess, such as a password or your mother’s maiden name. You can authenticate who
you are with a unique physical characteristic such as your ﬁngerprint or the pattern of the
retina in your eye. As you might guess, using security that forces a user to prove who they
are is the highest level of authentication. Some security systems require a combination of
authentication techniques—for example, using both your debit card and your password to
withdraw cash from an ATM.
Spam and Phishing
A current Internet problem is the increasing amount of spam—those annoying, unsolicited
email messages that clog your email inbox. However, spam is more than a simple bother—it
is distracting, often illegal, and increasingly costly to organizations. AOL and Microsoft, two
of the biggest Internet service providers, estimate that they each block over 2 billion spam
emails per day.
14Source: Taylor Buley. ‘‘Phishing at Gate B22’’ Forbes Vol. 182, No. 12 (December 8, 2008), pp. 52–52.

496
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Although about 35% of spam messages are harmless advertising, a greater percentage
contains pornographic solicitations, attempts to steal identities, or ﬁctitious stories asking
recipients for money. Clicking on the ‘‘unsubscribe button’’ in such messages usually
accomplishes the exact opposite effect because it tells the sender that you are a legitimate
user who actually reads such emails. Spammers sell lists of such prized, active email
accounts to one another, furthering the problem.
Case-in-Point 15.12
The Radicati Group has 21 Exchange email servers, of which ﬁve
handle nothing but junk mail. The company estimates that it spends almost half a million
dollars annually on such server capacity to process spam transmissions.15
Although some spam email contains legitimate sales offers, many more are bogus.
In such cases, the spammers advertise products at ‘‘too-good-to-believe prices,’’ take
credit-card orders, collect the money, and then quickly fold up shop before consumers
realize they’ve been victimized.
Case-in-Point 15.13
At the time this book was written, New Zealand brothers Shane
and Lance Atkinson were in federal court as a result of a suit ﬁled by the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) for ‘‘deceptive and fraudulent practices.’’ The FTC claim is that, in less than
nine months in 2007, the team used a botnet-driven spam network to defraud victims of more
than $7 million.16
As we described in Chapter 10, phishing websites trick users into providing such
personal information as Social Security numbers, debit-card PIN numbers, or similar
personal information—for example, for ‘‘routine security purposes’’ or even ‘‘because we
believe your account has been compromised.’’ Phishing activity is growing. For 2007, the
Gartner research group estimated that 3.6 million Americans were victims of phishing—a
40% increase over the previous year—and that total losses were more than $3.2 billion.
According to a banking group in the United Kingdom, the comparable growth ﬁgure is
180%. These statistics are especially relevant to accounting information systems because
most phishers want personal information that in turn provides access to ﬁnancial resources.
In 2007, for example, the Anti-Phishing Working Group found that over 90% of the targeted
companies were ﬁnancial service companies.
Firewalls, Intrusion Detection Systems, Value-Added Networks,
and Proxy Servers
To gain access to a company’s ﬁles, a computer hacker must ﬁrst obtain access to
that company’s computers. The ﬁrewalls, intrusion detection systems, and proxy servers
discussed here protect against unwarranted intrusions from external parties.
Firewalls.
A ﬁrewall (Figure 15-7a) guards against unauthorized access to sensitive
ﬁle information from external Internet users. On networked systems, ﬁrewalls are often
stand-alone devices with built-in, protective software (Figure 15-7b). On mainframe or host
systems, ﬁrewalls are usually software.
The two primary methods of ﬁrewall protection are by inclusion or by exclusion.
When ﬁrewalls protect internal systems by inclusion, the software examines packets of
15Source: no author, ‘‘Spam Wars Cost’’ Controller’s Report Vol. 2004, No. 9 (September 2004), p. 15.
16Source: http://www.scmagazineus.com/SC-World-Congress-Anatomy-of-a-spam-business/article/122708/.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
497
Authorized
external user
(message is
accepted)
Unauthorized
external user
(message is
rejected)
Organization computers
Firewall
(a) Firewalls accept messages from bona fide users but reject messages from unauthorized users.
(b) This hardware-based firewall from Sonicwall can support an unlimited number of users and 8
gigabytes of traffic per second.
FIGURE 15-7
A ﬁrewall acts as a barrier between unauthorized external users and organiza-
tional (internal) computers and ﬁles.
incoming messages and limits entry to authorized (‘‘included’’) users. To do this, the
software maintains an access control list (ACL) of bona ﬁde IP addresses that network
administrators create for this purpose. If the software does not recognize the IP address of
an external user, it refuses that user access to the ﬁles he or she requested. When ﬁrewalls
protect internal systems by exclusion, the software compares the incoming packet IP
address to a list of known threat addresses, rejecting messages from these sources but
accepting all others.
Firewalls are useful Internet security controls but (like most security features) are not
foolproof. One problem is that they cannot protect against denial-of-service attacks,
which overwhelm system resources with a volume of service requests. Another problem
is spooﬁng (i.e., masquerading as an authorized user with a recognizable IP address). A
similar, but less obvious, problem is the ability of a determined hacker to alter the contents
of the access control list itself—a security breach that is especially difﬁcult to overcome. A
ﬁnal problem is that most ﬁrewalls can only protect against external attacks, not internal
(authorized) users bent on mischief.
Intrusion Detection Systems.
Whereas ﬁrewalls simply reject unauthorized users
from access, intrusion detection systems (IDSs) create records of such events. Passive
IDSs create logs of potential intrusions and alert network administrators to them either via
console messages, alarms, or beepers. Reactive IDSs have the ability to detect potential
intrusions dynamically (e.g., by examining trafﬁc ﬂows), log off potentially malicious users,
and even reprogram a ﬁrewall to block further messages from the suspected source.
Perhaps the most important advantage of an IDS is its ability to both prevent unau-
thorized access to sensitive information and to alert system administrators to potential

498
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
violations. This may also increase the perceived risk of discovery, dissuading would-be
hackers. IDSs may also be able to detect preambles to attacks, forestalling their effective-
ness. Finally, an IDS is an important tool for documenting an attack, thereby generating
invaluable information to both network administrators and investigators.
Value-Added Networks.
Message-routing is important to accountants because the
security of a data transmission partially rests on the security of all the intermediate
computers along a given communications pathway. Thus, the greater the distance between
the sending station and the destination computer, the more intermediary routing computers
there are and the more vulnerable a message becomes to interception and abuse. This
is one reason why businesses often prefer to create their own (proprietary) networks to
transmit data electronically.
Value-Added Networks (VANs) are private, point-to-point communication channels
that large organizations create for themselves—usually for security reasons (Figure 15-8).
When it ﬁrst implements a VAN, the business assigns each user a unique account code
that simultaneously identiﬁes the external entity and authenticates the organization’s
subsequent electronic transactions.
There are at least three ways to create VANs. One way is to start with a blank slate
and create everything from scratch—an approach ﬁrst used by the military and later by
Wal-Mart. A second way is to lease secure, dedicated transmission lines from conventional
long-distance carriers such as AT&T—the approach used by IGT’s Megabucks system (see
Chapter 2).
A third alternative is to create a virtual private network (VPN) on the Internet. As
the name suggests, a VPN mimics a VAN in many of its security features, but enjoys the
beneﬁt of transmitting messages cheaply over existing Internet connections. A VPN creates
secure data transmissions by (1) using ‘‘tunneling’’ security protocols embedded in the
message frames sent to, and received by, the organization, (2) encrypting all transmitted
data, and (3) authenticating the remote computer, and perhaps also the individual sender
as well, before permitting further data transmissions. Most AIS VANs use this approach.
Proxy Servers.
Given the large amount of information now available on the web,
some organizations seek to limit the number of sites that employees can access—for
example, to ensure that employees do not use web-access privileges for frivolous or
counterproductive purposes. A proxy server is a network server and related software
that creates a transparent gateway to and from the Internet and controls web access. In a
Value- 
Added 
Network 
(VAN): 
Customer 
• Security 
• Translation 
• Transmission 
   reliability 
 
Vendor A 
Vendor B 
Vendor C 
Vendor. . . 
FIGURE 15-8
A VAN-based EDI system.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
499
typical application, users log onto their familiar ﬁle server as before. But when they attempt
to access a web page, the initial network server contacts the proxy server to perform the
requested task.
One advantage of using a proxy server is the ability to funnel all incoming and
outgoing Internet requests through a single server. This can make web access more
efﬁcient because the proxy server is speciﬁcally designed to handle requests for Internet
information. A second advantage is the proxy server’s ability to examine all incoming
requests for information and test them for authenticity (i.e., the ability to act as a ﬁrewall).
A third advantage is that a proxy server can limit employee Internet access to approved
websites (i.e., to only those IP addresses contained in an access control list). This enables
an organization to deny employees access to gambling, pornographic, or game-playing
websites that are unlikely to have any productive beneﬁts.
A fourth advantage is the ability to limit the information that is stored on the proxy
server to information that the company can afford to lose. If this server fails or is
compromised by hackers, the organization is only marginally inconvenienced because its
main servers remain functional. To recover, the company can simply restart the system and
reinitialize the server with backup data.
Netscape Communications estimates that between 30–60% of Internet requests
are redundant. A ﬁnal advantage of proxy servers is the ability to store (‘‘cache’’)
frequently-accessed web pages on its hard drive—for example, the web pages of pre-
ferred vendors. This enables the server to respond quickly to user requests for information
because the web-page data are available locally. This feature also enables managers to
obtain some idea of what information employees need most and perhaps take steps to
provide it internally (rather than through web sources).
Data Encryption
To safeguard transmitted data, businesses often use data encryption techniques that
transform plaintext messages into unintelligible cyphertext ones. The receiving station
then decodes the encrypted messages back into plaintext for use. There are many
encryption techniques and standards. The simple method shown in Figure 15-9 uses a
cyclic substitution of the alphabet with a displacement value of ‘‘5’’ to transform the letters
of a plaintext message into alternate letters of the alphabet. To decode the message, the
recipient’s computer performs the encryption process in reverse, decrypting the coded
Encryption Scheme:
Letters of the alphabet: A B C D
E
F
G
H
I
J
. . .
Numerical equivalent:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
. . .
Plus displacement key:
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
New values:
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15
Letters to use in code:
F G H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
. . .
Example:
Plaintext message:
HI, ABE!
Cyphertext message:
MN, FGJI
FIGURE 15-9
A simple data encryption method.

500
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
message back into readable text. To make things more secure, the sender can use a different
displacement value for each coded message.
The method that computers use to transform plaintext into cyphertext is called the
encryption key. This is typically a mathematical function that depends on a large prime
number. The data encryption standard (DES) system used by the U.S. government to
encode documents employs such a system. DES uses a number with 56 binary digits to
encode information, a value equal to approximately 72 quadrillion. Thus, to crack the code,
a hacker must guess which of 72 quadrillion values was used to encrypt the message.
The data encryption method illustrated in Figure 15-9 uses a single cryptographic key
that is shared by the two communicating parties and is called secret key cryptography.
This system derives its name from the fact that its users must keep the key secret and
not share the key with other parties. The most common encryption methods today
use public key encryption, a technique that requires each party to use a pair of
public/private encryption keys. Two examples are SSL (Secure Socket Layer) and S-HTTP
(Secure Hypertext Transport Protocol).
To employ public key encryption, the sending party uses a public key to encode the
message and the receiving party uses a second, private key to decode it. A major advantage
of public key encryption is that the same public key cannot both encode and decode a
message. Data transmissions using public key encryption are likely to be secure because
the transmitted message itself is scrambled and because neither party knows the other’s
key. This is the main reason why most web applications use public key encryption systems.
Digital Signatures and Digital Time Stamping
Many businesses want proof that the accounting documents they transmit or receive over
the Internet are authentic. Examples include purchase orders, bids for contracts, and
acceptance letters. To authenticate such documents, a company can transmit a complete
document in plaintext, and then also include a portion of that same message or some other
standard text in an encrypted format—that is, can include a digital signature.
In 1994, the National Institute of Standards and Technology adopted Federal Informa-
tion Processing Standard 186—the digital signature standard (DSS). The presence of the
digital signature authenticates a document. The reasoning is straightforward: if a recipient’s
private key decodes a message, then an authentic sender must have created the message.
Thus, some experts consider digital signatures even more secure than written signatures
(which can be forged). Further, if the sender includes a complete message in both plaintext
and cyphertext, the encrypted message provides assurance that no one has altered the
readable copy. If someone has altered the plaintext, the two copies will not match.
Another authentication technique is a digital certiﬁcate—an authenticating document
issued by an independent third party called a certiﬁcate authority (e.g., Thawte or
VeriSign). The certiﬁcates themselves are signed documents with sender names and public
key information. Certiﬁcates are generally encoded, possibly in a certiﬁcate standard such as
the X.509 certiﬁcate format. Customers can also use digital certiﬁcates to assure themselves
that a website is real.
Case-in-Point 15.14
In the future, each U.S. citizen may have a taxpayer’s digital certiﬁ-
cate within a smart card. Citizens could use the smart card for all their transactions with the
federal government. The government program responsible for developing this card is called
Access Certiﬁcates for Electronics Services project, or ACES. Although ACES is meant to
ensure secure communications, privacy advocates are afraid that maybe the cards are too
smart. This is because they contain all your personal information in one place. ACES does

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
501
include safeguards to ensure that the data on the cards can’t be used in the private sector and
are available only to a federal or authorized agency. But those concerned with privacy worry
that the existence of the card will lead to unintended uses.
Many important business documents are time sensitive. Examples include bidding
documents that must be submitted by a deadline, deposit slips that must be presented to
banks before the close of business, buy orders for stock purchases that depend on the date
and time of issue, and legal documents that must be ﬁled in a timely fashion. Then, too,
most businesses also want to know when customers ordered particular purchases, when
they paid particular bills, or when speciﬁc employees entered or modiﬁed data items in
important databases. Finally, a good way to protect intellectual property such as computer
software is to clearly establish the date and time it was ﬁrst created or distributed.
What these items have in common is the need for a time stamp that unambiguously
indicates the date and time of transmission, ﬁling, or data entry. PGP Digital Time Stamping
Service and Verisign are two of several digital time-stamping services (DTSSs) that
attach digital time stamps to documents either for a small fee or for free. In a typical
application, the user sends the document to the service’s email address along with the
Internet address of the ﬁnal recipient. When the service receives the document, it performs
its time-stamping task and then forwards the document as required.
Digital time stamping performs the same task electronically that ofﬁcial seals and
other time stamps perform manually: authenticate the date, time, and perhaps place of a
business transaction. This can be important over the Internet. Although most documents
are transmitted almost instantaneously, time delays can occur when ﬁle servers temporarily
falter or power failures disrupt wide area networks. DTSSs enable businesses to overcome
these problems.
AIS AT WORK
The Beneﬁts of Online Accounting Outsourcing
The advantages of outsourcing such accounting functions as payroll processing or tax
preparation are well known, but outsourcing additional accounting tasks to online providers
is a different matter. Can an external or offshore provider perform general ledger or
deprecation computations as well? A growing number of businesses say ‘‘yes!’’
The most common reason organizations outsource a given business process is ‘‘reduced
cost,’’ and this applies to accounting outsourcing as well. Additional beneﬁts include
faster turnaround, improved quality, enhanced access to expertise, reduced variability in
accounting costs caused by peak processing volumes, and reduced capital expenditures
(e.g., in computers and software). Experts note that online outsourcing enables the clients
to reduce in-house labor costs, pay only for the services they need, and focus on their core
businesses.
Perhaps the most commonly-cited objection to outsourcing is a loss of control.
In a recent survey of over 800 businesses by Accenture, however, over 85% of the
respondents said that outsourcing actually gave them more control—especially in the
ability to plan. In addition, over 55% thought that accounting outsourcing enabled them
to implement strategic changes faster and at more controlled rates. But the biggest beneﬁt
of outsourcing may be the increased business for those accounting companies providing
these services—yet one more opportunity made possible by the Internet.
Source: ‘‘Why Outsourcing is a Good Idea for You’’ Articlesbase, www.articlesbase.com/
outsourcing-articles/why-outsourcing-accounting-is-a-good-idea-for-you-591876.html.

502
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
SUMMARY
• The Internet is a collection of local, wide-area, and international networks that accountants can
use for communication, research, and business purposes. Most accountants also use the World
Wide Web—the multimedia portion of the Internet—for similar purposes.
• Intranets are private networks that businesses create for such internal purposes as distributing
email. Extranets are similar to intranets, except that they allow external parties to access internal
network ﬁles and databases.
• Groupware is software that supports email on business networks, plus allows users to share
computer ﬁles, schedule appointments, video conference, and develop custom applications.
• To exchange ﬁnancial information on the Internet, businesses can use XBRL—a form of XML that
provides a common format for ﬁnancial data and allows searches of the data and extractions for
comparison purposes. The XBRL International Consortium develops XBRL standards.
• Electronic commerce includes retail sales on the Internet, electronic data interchange (EDI),
and business-to-business (B2B) applications. In addition to credit and debit cards, consumers use
e-payment and e-wallet systems to pay for Internet purchases.
• For security reasons, some businesses prefer to use expensive, but private, value-added networks
(VANs) rather than the Internet to support e-commerce applications.
• Authentication requires users to prove they are who they say they are—for example, with
something they have (a plastic card), something they know (a password), or something they are (a
retina scan). Privacy concerns also include the need to protect users’ private information and the
growing threat of identity theft.
• Internet privacy and security concerns include hacking, identity theft, spam, and phishing, all of
which impact AISs. These concerns prompt many businesses to use ﬁrewalls, intrusion detection
systems, proxy servers, data encryption techniques, digital signatures, and digital time stamping to
achieve control objectives.
KEY TERMS YOU SHOULD KNOW
access control list
access security
certiﬁcate authority
click fraud
data encryption
data encryption standard (DES)
digital certiﬁcate
digital signature
digital signature standard (DSS)
digital time stamping service (DTSS)
domain address
e-commerce
electronic conferencing
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
electronic payments (e-payments)
electronic procurement
encryption key
e-wallet
Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL)
Extensible Markup Language (XML)
extranets
ﬁrewall
groupware
hyperlinks
hypertext markup language (HTML)
hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP)
IDEA
identify theft
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act
(ITADA) of 1998
information security
instant messaging
Internet protocol (IP)
intranets

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
503
intrusion detection system (IDS)
knowledge sharing
phishing
proxy server
public key encryption
secret key cryptography
spam
spooﬁng
TCP/IP
uniform resource locator (URL)
value-added network (VAN)
virtual PBX
virtual private network (VPN)
Voice over Internet protocol (VoIP)
XBRL instance documents
XBRL International consortium
TEST YOURSELF
Q15-1. Which of the following is most likely to contain only numbers?
a. Domain address
b. URL address
c. IP address
d. Postal address
Q15-2. Which of the following enables users to view data with a web browser?
a. Intranet
b. Extranet
c. Internet
d. All of these
Q15-3. All of the following are protocols for transmitting data over the Internet except:
a. IP
b. HTTP
c. XML
d. All of these are protocols
Q15-4. All of the following are markup languages (that use edit tags) except:
a. HTML
b. XOR
c. XML
d. XBRL
Q15-5. Which of these is not an acronym?
a. HTML
b. Blog
c. PBX
d. Firewall
Q15-6. Which of the following is true?
a. XBRL is a subset of XML
b. XML is a subset of TCP
c. PBX is a subset of HTML
d. None of these is true
Q15-7. A document ﬁle containing XBRL tags is a(n):
a. Extranet document
b. Intranet document
c. Instance document
d. URL
Q15-8. Which of these identiﬁes a private, point-to-point network?
a. EDI
b. DES
c. IP
d. VAN
Q15-9. Which of these statements is correct?
a. A VPN is a type of VAN
b. DES stands for ‘‘data entry system’’
c. An IDS is the same as a ﬁrewall
d. All of these statements are correct
Q15-10. Spooﬁng means:
a. Kidding someone about their ﬁrewall
b. Simulating a disaster to test the effectiveness of a disaster recovery system
c. Posing as an authentic user to gain access to a computer system
d. Encrypting data for security purposes

504
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
15-1. What are intranets? What are extranets? Why are intranets and extranets important to
accountants?
15-2. What are blogs? How are they used? Who is using them?
15-3. What is hypertext markup language? How does it differ from XML and XBRL? (Note: for a
more comprehensive description of the differences, you may want to search the Internet.)
15-4. What is the relationship between XBRL and IDEA?
15-5. Describe some important uses of electronic commerce and explain why it is important to
accountants.
15-6. What are electronic payments? How are they different from credit card payments?
15-7. What is electronic data interchange? Why do companies use EDI?
15-8. Most retail-sales websites require customers to use their credit cards to make purchases
online. How comfortable are you in providing your credit card number in such applications?
Why do you feel this way?
15-9. What is click fraud? Who beneﬁts and who loses when click fraud occurs?
15-10. What is spamming? How is spam related to accounting information systems? Should all
spamming be illegal? Why or why not?
15-11. What are Internet ﬁrewalls and proxy servers? How are they created? How do businesses use
them for Internet security?
15-12. What is data encryption? What techniques are used for data encryption?
15-13. Describe and contrast the three types of authentication. Can you think of a business situation
where someone would need to use a combination of all three levels to gain access to
information?
15-14. What are digital signatures? Why do businesses use them? How can businesses use a digital
certiﬁcate for Internet security?
15-15. Analysts claim that businesses can increase sales on the Internet, but not proﬁts. What
evidence does this chapter provide to support or refute this claim? Discuss.
PROBLEMS
15-16. The Internet uses many acronyms. Within the context of the present chapter, what words
were used to form each of the following?
a. EC
b. EDI
c. email
d. HTTP
e. IDS
f. ITADA
g. IP address
h. blog
i. URL
j. VANs
k. VPN
l. WWW
m. XBRL
n. XML
o. IDEA
15-17. In Discussion Question 15-1 above, you discussed intranets and extranets, and identiﬁed the
importance of each to accountants. Now, assume that you are a partner in a medium-sized,
local CPA ﬁrm. Your ﬁrm has 4 partners, 10 staff accountants, 1 research assistant, and an
administrative assistant. Your ﬁrm is considered a technology leader in the local area and you
consider this a competitive advantage for your ﬁrm. At the weekly staff meeting next Friday
you want to discuss the topic of developing an intranet for the ﬁrm. To be sure everyone
is prepared to discuss this topic, you want to develop a ‘‘talking paper,’’ which is a one
page summary of salient points that you want to be sure you cover in your presentation to
everyone. Assume you are the research assistant and the partner asks you to prepare this
one-page discussion aid.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
505
15-18. Create an HTML document of your own, using the example in Figure 15-1 to guide you. Put
the name of this assignment in the <h1> tag for the heading. Put your name in bold. Include
at least one hyperlink to a favorite web page using the anchor <a> tag. Finally, include an
ordered list in your web page with at least three items—for example, a list of your favorite
books, favorite restaurants, or the courses you’re taking this semester. You will ﬁnd it easiest
to work in Notepad for this problem, but you can also use a word processor—as long as you
save your document as ‘‘text.’’ Also, be sure to add the extension ‘‘html’’ to the end of your
ﬁle name. View your completed document in your web browser—for example, by selecting
File/Open in Microsoft Internet Explorer—and screen capture your work.
15-19. At the time this book was written, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
still supported Edgar—a depository of corporate accounting ﬁlings. Log onto Edgar at
www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml, click on ‘‘Search for Company Filings,’’ click on ‘‘Company or
Fund Name,’’ and ﬁnally, select two companies in the same industry (either your instructor’s
choice or your choice) so that you can compare various ﬁnancial data. Note that you
can select either ‘‘text’’ or ‘‘html’’ formats. Compare these formats to Figure 15-1. Are
they similar? Looking at either image, can you download the ﬁnancial information into a
spreadsheet? Can you easily do ﬁnancial comparisons such as ratio analysis? What do you
have to do if you want to make ﬁnancial comparisons?
15-20. Visit the XBRL home page at www.XBRL.org, and read the section entitled ‘‘What is XBRL.’’
Then, do each of the following:
a. Select the option ‘‘Latest News’’ from the home page, which lists several articles that
describe recent developments. Choose one of these and write a one-page summary of
your ﬁndings.
b. Select ‘‘Beneﬁts Across Business’’ at www.xbrl.org/BeneﬁtsAcrossBusiness/. This site
contains a set of articles describing the various beneﬁts of XBRL to different types of
businesses. Select one article from this list and write a one-page summary of it.
15-21. Write a one-page paper on each of the following topics as they relate to XBRL:
a. What is the history of XBRL? What professional accounting organization helped in the
early stages of this concept?
b. What is an XBRL speciﬁcation and what is the latest version? When was it released? By
whom?
c. How could XBRL help a company engage in ‘‘continuous reporting?’’ Find a website or
an e-journal (an article) that discusses XBRL and continuous reporting. What are the main
points of the article?
d. Find at least two other companies (other than Microsoft) that are publishing their ﬁnancial
statements on the Internet using XBRL. What business are they in (what industry)?
15-22. Examine the data encryption technique illustrated in Figure 15-9. Use a displacement value
of ‘‘8’’ to encrypt the following message:
‘‘Those who ignore history are forced to repeat it.’’
15-23. The message below was encrypted using the technique illustrated in Figure 15-9 (using a
displacement key other than 5). Using trial and error, decode it:
OZ OY TUZ CNGZ CK JUTZ QTUC ZNGZ NAXZY AY
OZ OY CNGZ CK JU QTUC ZNGZ PAYZ GOTZ YU
15-24. A number of accounting journals now post back issues, or even publish their entire journals,
online. Access the Journal of Accountancy website at www.aicpa.org (or another website
selected by your instructor). Select an article that pertains to a topic in this chapter and write
a one-page report on it. Be careful to correctly cite any information that you use from this
article!
15-25. The following stated policies pertain to the e-commerce website for Small Computers, Inc.,
a (ﬁctitious) personal and handheld computer manufacturer and seller.

506
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
Privacy Statement
• We will only use information collected on this web for legitimate business purposes. We
do not give away or rent any information to third parties.
• We will only contact you for legitimate business purposes, possibly from time to time,
as needed. Please be 100% assured that we hold all transactions between you and our
company in the strictest conﬁdence.
Disclosure of Business Practices, Shipping, and Billing
• We will ship all items at the earliest possible date.
• We will not require you to accept items that you did not order.
• We will accept any returns from you of damaged or defective merchandise.
• In the event that we should accidentally bill you more than once for the same item, we
will immediately issue you a refund.
Evaluate these stated policies in terms of how well they promote customer trust and
conﬁdence in Small Computers, Inc.’s electronic business operations.
CASE ANALYSES
15-26. Hammaker Manufacturing IV (XBRL-Enabled Software)
Recall, from Chapter 8, the Hammaker Manufacturing Company (HMC) is located in Burke,
Virginia, and manufactures specialty parts for Corvettes. The company implemented a new
AIS with the help of a consulting ﬁrm. At the time, Hammaker was especially interested
in collecting data about inventories. Then, HMC decided to accept the consulting ﬁrm’s
recommendation to reengineer some processes in the production departments, rather
than outsource these processes. Generally speaking, the BPR project is considered a
success, based on the results that have been achieved—increased proﬁts and more satisﬁed
customers. To Denise’s credit, she kept the employees informed throughout the study
phase so that they understood the need for change. As a result of employee involvement,
many useful changes were made and no employees were terminated.
Now, with increased proﬁts and a very optimistic view of future growth, Hammaker
meets with Denise and Lloyd to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a new,
more powerful AIS. Lloyd’s area of expertise is implementing ERPs, and he is eager to
inform HMC about the advantages of selecting an XBRL-enabled software solution for
the ﬁrm.
Requirements:
1. What does it mean when software is ‘‘XBRL-enabled’’?
2. Identify at least ﬁve advantages that Lloyd might discuss with Dick and Denise regarding
an XBRL-enabled software solution. Identify any disadvantages that might also be
relevant for HMC.
3. Assume that you are Lloyd’s research assistant. Draft a memo for Lloyd to give to HMC
that explains how XBRL works. Remember to keep in mind your audience. This should
be an executive-level piece of correspondence.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
507
4. Now, as the research assistant, develop a PowerPoint presentation for Lloyd to give to
Dick and Denise explaining exactly what sorts of beneﬁts they could realize with an
XBRL-enabled software solution. Be creative, and use diagrams and examples where
appropriate.
15-27. DeGraaf Ofﬁce Supplies (Business Websites and Security)
DeGraaf Ofﬁce Supplies is a national retailer of ofﬁce supplies, equipment, and furnishings.
The company opened its ﬁrst store in 1932, in Columbus, Ohio. Currently, DeGraaf has
300 stores nationwide. Owner-managers purchase and run franchised stores. Kim DeGraaf,
the founder’s daughter, currently is President and CEO of the corporation.
Sales revenues grew steadily during the past decade, but 2009 sales were quite disap-
pointing, down 8% from 2008. The company’s stock price has also taken a big hit during
the past few months. Kim resisted developing an Internet presence for the company, and
it appears now that this was a mistake. Online sales of ofﬁce supplies are growing rapidly,
particularly in the business-to-business sector as business organizations are ﬁnding it faster
and more efﬁcient to enter their ofﬁce supply orders electronically. The following is a
conversation between Kim and Peter Brewer, Vice President of Marketing.
Peter: ‘‘Kim, I warned you that we were going to see sales decline if we didn’t hurry up
and get on the Internet. The established brick-and-mortar businesses in many industries are
suffering.’’
Kim: ‘‘You were right, Peter. I think I’ve been overly concerned about security and
privacy issues. I also didn’t really believe that online sales in our industry would take off
the way they have. I hope we’re not too late, because I want to move ahead immediately
in developing a website. I know other companies have a jump start but hopefully our
brand name recognition and reputation for quality will help us. I have contracted with
a consulting ﬁrm to start the website development and am going to give a press release
this afternoon about our plans. Fortunately, our current enterprise software has electronic
commerce features and the consultants tell me that our Internet site should be ready for
business in about six months. I need you to have your staff prepare an analysis of our
competitor websites. I would also like as much information as possible related to providing
retail and business customers with security and privacy over online transactions with us.’’
Peter: ‘‘This is great news! I will get my staff busy at once providing you and the
consulting team with the information they need. There will be a lot of decisions to make.
I’ve studied all the ofﬁce supply websites and they are organized in a variety of ways. For
instance, some sites provide customers with the option to select a type of product such
as ballpoint pens and then show the vendor options in that category, while other sites are
organized around the vendors. This type of site allows customers to select a vendor name,
such as PaperMate, and then lists all the product offerings from that vendor. Hopefully,
the consultants have a lot of experience with business websites and they can help us with
many of these issues.’’
Requirements:
1. Visit the websites of two ofﬁce supply stores on the Internet. Develop a set of four to
ﬁve criteria for evaluating their website.
2. Evaluate DeGraaf’s chances for catching up to competitors in the online marketplace.
3. Discuss the privacy and security concerns for companies doing business electronically.
Make recommendations to DeGraaf Ofﬁce Supplies for addressing these concerns.

508
PART FIVE / Special Topics in Accounting Information Systems
15-28. Barra Concrete (XOR Encryption)
Barra Concrete specializes in creating driveways and curbs for the residential market. Its
accounting software uses exclusive OR (XOR) operations to convert the individual bits of
a plaintext message into cyphertext. The rules are as follows:
Exclusive OR rules
Rule 1
Rule 2
Rule 3
Rule 4
Plaintext bit
0
0
1
1
Bit in key
0
1
0
1
Cypertext result
0
1
1
0
In other words, exactly one of the bits must be a ‘‘1’’ and the other a ‘‘0’’ for the result
of an exclusive OR operation to be a ‘‘1.’’ To illustrate, suppose that the bits representing a
single plaintext character were 1010 0101 and the secret key used just the four bits 1110.
Here are the results of the XOR operation, using this key:
Plaintext bits
1010
0101
Key (repeated)
1110
1110
Cypher text result
0100
1011
The encrypted bits are the cypher text, or 0100 1011 as shown. These (encrypted) bits
are what the software would transmit to the recipient.
Requirements:
1. Decrypting the cipher text created by an XOR operation is easy—just use the same XOR
operation on the encrypted bits! Demonstrate this for the example above.
2. Suppose the secret key were longer—the eight bits 1100 0011. Using this key and an
exclusive OR, what is the cipher text for the plaintext message ‘‘Go, team’’ if the bit
conﬁguration for these letters is as shown below. (Hint: the ﬁnal answer consists of
seven sets of data, each containing eight bits.)
Message
G
O
,
T
E
A
M
Binary
0100 0111
0100 1111
0010 1100
0101 0100
0100 0101
0100 0001
0100 1101
REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Bannan, Karen J. ‘‘Detecting, Defeating Click Fraud,’’ B to B Vol. 92, No. 2 (January 15, 2007),
pp. 15–19.
Brandt, Andrew. ‘‘The 10 Biggest Security Risks You Don’t Know About,’’ PC World Vol. 24, No. 8
(August 2006), pp. 76–88.

CHAPTER 15 / Accounting on the Internet
509
Burnett, Royce D., Mark Friedman, & Murthy Uday. ‘‘Financial Reports: Why you Need XBRL,’’
Journal of Corporate Accounting and Finance Vol. 17, No. 5 (July/August 2006), pp. 33–40.
Cranor, Lorrie Faith. ‘‘Can Phishing be Foiled?’’ Scientiﬁc American Vol. 229, No. 6 (December
2008), pp. 104–110.
Douglas, Heather. ‘‘E-Commerce and the Home Business,’’ NZ Business Vol. 20, No. 5 (June 2006),
p. 63.
Farwell, Stephanie M. ‘‘An Introduction to XBRL through the Use of Research and Technical
Assignments’’ Journal of Information Systems Vol. 20, No. 1 (Spring 2006), pp. 161–185.
Glover, Hannah. ‘‘Next XBRL Frontier: Fund Disclosures,’’ Money Management Executive Vol. 14,
No. 19 (June 2006), pp. 1–34.
Hannon, Neal J. ‘‘XBRL Alliances: Shall We Dance?’’ Strategic Finance Vol. 87, No. 12 (June 2006),
pp. 6–8.
Hucklesby, Mark. ‘‘The Latest on XBRL,’’ Chartered Accountants Journal Vol. 85, No. 4 (May 2006),
pp. 46–47.
IASC Foundation XBRL Team. ‘‘Fundamentals of XBRL,’’ International Committee Standards Founda-
tion website: www.iasb.org/xbrl/about xbrl/fundamentals xbrl.html (2006).
Kersnar, Scott. ‘‘Will 2006 be Record Year for Online Identity Theft?’’ Mortgage Servicing News Vol.
10, No. 7 (August 2006), p. 22
Kirchheimer, Sid. ‘‘Scams Unmasked!’’ AARP Magazine (May/June 2006), pp. 78–82.
Levey, Richard H. ‘‘Security Leads Global IT Priorities,’’ Direct Vol. 18, No. 7 (June 15, 2006), p. 5.
McMillan, Paul. ‘‘E-Commerce Activity Doubles in the Last Year,’’ Money Marketing (no volume or
issue numbers) (July 6, 2006), p. 16.
Rosencrance, Linda. ‘‘Blogs Bubble into Business,’’ Computerworld (January 26, 2004), p. 23–4.
Samwel, Emad. ‘‘E-commerce: Does Anyone Care?’’ Journal of Commerce Vol. 7, No. 28 (July 10,
2006), p. 34.
Walper, George & Catherine McBreen. ‘‘Identity Thieves Target the Afﬂuent,’’ On Wall Street Vol.
18, No. 10 (October 2008), pp. 66–70.
White, Skip. The Accountants Guide to XBRL (Delaware: SkipWhite.Com, 2006).
ANSWERS TO TEST YOURSELF
1. c
2. d
3. c
4. b
5. d
6. a
7. c
8. d
9. a
10. c


Glossary
Access control list a list of bona ﬁde IP
addresses in devices such as ﬁrewalls.
Access security a restriction of AIS
access to bona ﬁde users.
Accounting information system (AIS)
the information subsystem within an
organization that accumulates and
processes information (both ﬁnancial
and non-ﬁnancial) from the entity’s
various subsystems and communi-
cates this information to the organi-
zation’s users.
Action query (Microsoft Access) a
query that manipulates, and typically
alters, one or more tables in an Access
database.
Activity-based costing systems help
managers in describing processes,
identifying cost drivers of each pro-
cess, and then determining the unit
costs of products associated with
drivers.
Advanced electronic tags input tech-
nologies that replace manual data
entry with automated technologies,
such as barcode scanners, radio fre-
quency(RF) technology, and RFIDs.
These input technologies can be used
individually or combined to signiﬁ-
cantly reduce input errors and sup-
port fast, accurate, real-time produc-
tion and data collection.
Advanced planning and scheduling
systems (APS) systems that work
to synchronize the ﬂow of materials
within the supply chain.
Alphanumeric codes codes that use
numbers and letters.
Analysis paralysis the condition where
a problem is studied to the point that
the study overshadows the problem.
Antivirus software computer programs
such as Norton Antivirus or MacAffee
that end users typically install in their
computers to guard against computer
viruses.
Applet a small program that is stored in
a Web page and is designed to run
by Web browser software. Friendly
applets animate Web pages, allow
users to play games, or perform pro-
cessing tasks.
Application controls a major cate-
gory of computer controls that are
designed and implemented to pre-
vent, detect, and correct errors and
irregularities in transactions as they
ﬂow through the input, processing,
and output stages of data processing
work.
Application service provider (ASP) a
source through which companies can
rent rather than buy software.
Application software computer soft-
ware that performs speciﬁc tasks
such as accounting tasks, spread-
sheet
tasks,
marketing
tasks,
or
word-processing tasks.
Applications portfolio a set of software
applications belonging to an organiza-
tion.
Association of Certiﬁed Fraud Exam-
iners (ACFE) an international pro-
fessional organization committed to
detecting, deterring, and preventing
fraud and white-collar crime.
Attributes the characteristics of entities,
or the data ﬁelds describing them.
Audio input computer inputs that use
sound frequencies. An alternate term
is ‘‘speech recognition system.’’
Audit
Control
Language
(ACL)
specialized software for auditing tasks
used in forensic accounting.
Audit trail enables information users
within a company’s system to follow
the ﬂow of data through the system.
Auditing around the computer audit
approach whereby an auditor follows
a company’s audit trail up to the
point where accounting data enter
the computer and then picks these
data up again when they reappear in
processed form as computer output.
Auditing through the computer audit
approach whereby an auditor follows
a company’s audit trail through the
internal computer operations phase
of automated data processing.
Auditing with the computer audit
approach whereby the auditor uses
the computer to aid in performing var-
ious auditing procedures (e.g., select-
ing a sample of accounts receivable
data for conﬁrmation).
Automated
workpaper
software
software that aids an auditor in per-
forming such accounting functions as
generating trial balances, recording
adjusting journal entries, and prepar-
ing income statements and balance
sheets.
Back-ofﬁce a reference to internal func-
tions and processing within an organi-
zation, such as human resources and
accounting.
Backup additional copies of data that
may be used to restore computer
operations (e.g., after a disaster or
in the event that ﬁles are accidentally
deleted or corrupted).
Balanced scorecard an approach to
performance measurement that uses
measures in four categories (ﬁnancial
performance, customer knowledge,
internal business processes, and learn-
ing and growth) to evaluate and pro-
mote certain activities and behaviors.
Bar code reader a device that interprets
the familiar barcode stripes printed
on merchandise packages, shipping
labels, and similar documents, and
inputs the data into a computer.
Batch control total (BCT) typically, a
manual total that is compared to a
computer total to determine whether
data were processed correctly.
Benchmark test an approach for exam-
ining the operating efﬁciency of a par-
ticular system whereby a computer
vendor’s system performs a data pro-
cessing task that a company’s new
system must perform and company
representatives then examine the pro-
cessing outputs for accuracy, consis-
tency, and efﬁciency.
Best-of-breed an approach to systems
development where each application
may be acquired from a separate ven-
dor and represents the best program
in that category of need.
Biometric scanners a method of authen-
ticating system users based on who
they are. Examples include voice and
ﬁngerprint recognition systems.
Block codes sequential codes in which
speciﬁc
blocks
of
numbers
are
reserved for particular uses.
Blogs (or Web logs) collaboration tools
that allow users with Web browsers
and easy-to-use software to publish a
personalized diary online.
Bolt-ons
software
from
a
variety
of
suppliers
when
employing
a
‘‘best-of-breed’’ approach.
Boot-sector virus a virus that hides in
the boot sector of a disk, where the
operating system (OS) accesses the
virus every time the OS accesses the
disk itself.
Bound control (databases) a form con-
trol such as a textbox or label that
displays the underlying data from a
database table.
511

512
Glossary
Business
continuity
plan
(BCP)
management’s policies and proce-
dures to continue the organization.
This includes risk identiﬁcation, sce-
nario planning, and practicing the
plan.
Business event an activity that may or
may not impact ﬁnancial statements,
but is important to the business.
Business intelligence (BI) tools data
analysis software that helps managers
obtain the most information from
their customer relationship manage-
ment systems.
Business process a collection of activi-
ties or ﬂow of work in an organization
that creates value.
Business process management soft-
ware software solutions that help
companies collect corporate knowl-
edge, data, and business rules into a
business system to improve core busi-
ness processes.
Business process outsourcing (BPO)
an approach where an organization
chooses to have some of its basic func-
tions, often related to IT, performed
by an external organization.
Business
process
reengineering
(BPR) techniques used by organiza-
tions to redesign their business pro-
cesses from scratch.
Business-to-business
(or
B2B)
e-commerce businesses buying and
selling goods and services to each
other over the Internet.
Business-without-boundaries a new
business model that arose from the
combination
of
networked
enter-
prises and globalization.
CAATs (computer-assisted audit tech-
niques) used by auditors when audit-
ing through the computer. CAATs can
aid in the performance of compliance
testing to ensure that a company’s
controls are in place and working as
prescribed.
Canned
software software acquired
from independent vendors.
Cardinalities a notation reﬂecting the
nature of relationships among entities
as one-to-one, one-to-many, none-to
one, none-to-many, or many-to-many.
CASE tools computer-assisted software
engineering
tools
that
automate
documentation tasks such as draw-
ing or modifying ﬂowcharts, generat-
ing graphics and screen designs, and
developing report formats.
Cash control physical safeguards for
cash, which is especially susceptible
to theft by employees, and to human
error when employees handle large
amounts of it.
CD-ROM
an
acronym
for
‘‘compact
disk-read only memory.’’ CD-ROM
disks
can
store
approximately
640 megabytes of data.
Central
database
a
comprehensive
database that holds all the data for
multiple applications or processes.
Central processing unit (CPU) the
component of a computer that per-
forms the processing tasks of the sys-
tem. The processor part of the CPU is
typically a single silicon chip that can
manipulate data—e.g., perform math-
ematical functions such as addition,
as well as logic operations such as
comparing text or number values.
Certiﬁcate authority an entity that
issues digital certiﬁcates—for exam-
ple,
to
authenticate
the
legiti-
macy of a bid or ﬁnancial purchase.
Certiﬁed Information Systems Audi-
tor (CISA) a professional information
systems auditor who meets certiﬁca-
tion requirements of the Information
Systems Audit and Control Associa-
tion.
Certiﬁed
Information
Technology
Professional a designation given by
the AICPA for CPAs who meet spec-
iﬁed additional requirements related
to information technologies.
Change
management
a
systematic
approach
to
introducing
dynamic
change or disruption in an organiza-
tion.
Chart of accounts what provides the
organizational structure for the gen-
eral ledger. The chart of accounts
makes use of a block coding struc-
ture.
Checkpoint a control that is performed
at periodic intervals during process-
ing. A company’s computer network
system temporarily does not accept
new transactions. Instead, it com-
pletes updating procedures for all par-
tially processed transactions and then
generates an exact copy of all data
values and other information needed
to restart the system. The checkpoint
is recorded on a separate tape or disk
ﬁle. This process is executed several
times per hour. Should a hardware
failure occur, the system is restarted
by reading in the last checkpoint and
then reprocessing only those trans-
actions that have occurred since the
checkpoint.
Child record the lower-level record of
two adjacent records in a hierarchical
data structure.
Client/server computing an alternate
to mainframe computing in which
processing tasks are shared between
a centralized host computer called
the ‘‘server’’ and a smaller microcom-
puter called the ‘‘client.’’
COBIT Control Objectives for Informa-
tion and Related Technology (COBIT)
is a project undertaken by the Infor-
mation Systems Audit and Control
Foundation to develop a deﬁnition of
internal control.
Cold backup a backup that is performed
while the database is off-line and
unavailable to its users.
Cold site a location where power and
environmentally controlled space are
available to install processing equip-
ment on short notice. If a disaster
recovery plan designates a cold site,
then separate arrangements are also
necessary to obtain computer equip-
ment matching the conﬁguration of
equipment lost in the disaster.
Collaborative business partnerships
situations
in
which
organizations
work with other businesses, even
their competitors, to increase their
power to meet customer demands.
Computer abuse the unauthorized use
of, or access to, a computer for pur-
poses contrary to the wishes of the
owner of the computer.
Computer crime the manipulation of a
computer or computer data, by what-
ever method, to dishonestly obtain
money,
property,
or
some
other
advantage of value, or to cause loss.
Computer facility controls policies and
procedures that prevent both unin-
tentional and intentional harm to the
ﬁrm’s computer assets.
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of
1986 the act that deﬁnes computer
fraud as any illegal act for which
knowledge of computer technology
is essential for its perpetration, inves-
tigation, or prosecution.
Computer record a set of data ﬁelds
about one ﬁle entity—for example,
one employee, one inventory item, or
one sales transaction.
Computer Security Institute (CSI) the
organization that conducts an annual
survey to help determine the scope of
computer crime in the United States.
Computer virus a computer program
that rogue programmers embed in
other programs, emails, or computer
ﬁles, and that (when executed) typ-
ically perform such destructive acts
as erasing ﬁles, disrupting emails,

Glossary
513
or interfering with operating system
functions.
Computer
worms
reproducing
pro-
grams that do not actually destroy
data, but replicate themselves repeat-
edly until the user runs out of internal
memory or disk space.
Computer-assisted audit techniques
(CAATs) used by auditors when audit-
ing through the computer; CAAT’s
can aid in the performance of compli-
ance tests to ensure that a company’s
controls are in place and working as
prescribed.
Concurrency controls controls that
prevent two or more users of a data-
base from accessing the same record
from the same ﬁle at the same time.
Consensus-based protocols a fault tol-
erant system that contains an odd
number of processors. If one proces-
sor disagrees with the others, it is
thereafter ignored.
Context diagram high-level data ﬂow
diagram that provides an overall pic-
ture of an application or system.
Contingency planning the process of
planning for events that could impede
a company’s data processing function.
Continuous auditing the use of tools
(such as embedded audit modules)
thatallowauditingtooccurevenwhen
an auditor is not present; it is particu-
larly effective when most of an appli-
cation’s data are in electronic form.
Control Activities the policies and pro-
cedures that the management of a
company develops to help protect all
of the different assets of the ﬁrm.
Control break (databases) a change of
value in an important data ﬁeld (e.g.,
department number) of the records
of a database table that requires
additional computations in an output
listing—for example, a subtotal.
Control environment a component of
internal control that establishes the
tone of a company, which inﬂuences
the control awareness of the com-
pany’s employees.
Control Objectives for Information
and Related Technology (COBIT)
a project undertaken by the IT Gov-
ernance Institute to develop a frame-
work for internal control relative to
information technology.
Cookie a small text ﬁle that stores infor-
mation about your browsing habits
and interests, as well as other informa-
tion that you may supply by logging
onto a website.
Corporate governance managing an
organization in a fair, transparent,
and accountable manner to protect
the interests of all the stakeholder
groups.
Corrective controls control procedures
within a company’s internal control
system that are designed to remedy
problems discovered through detec-
tive controls.
COSO Report: 1992 a committee estab-
lishedby theTreadway Commissionto
develop a common deﬁnition for inter-
nal control and to provide guidance
forjudgingtheeffectivenessofinternal
control as well as improving it.
COSO Report–2004 ‘‘Enterprise Risk
Management—Integrated
Frame-
work’’ focuses on enterprise risk
management (ERM). The ERM Frame-
work includes the ﬁve components of
internal control (control environment,
risk assessment,
control activities,
information and communication, and
monitoring) and adds three additional
components: objective setting, event
identiﬁcation, and risk response.
Cost accounting subsystem generally
associated with manufacturing ﬁrms,
this subsystem provides important
control information (such as variance
reports) and is usually either job cost-
ing or process costing.
CPA WebTrust a set of services offered
through the AICPA where auditors
provide third-party assurance over a
client’s Web site and Internet services.
Critical path the longest path to project
completion within a PERT diagram,
which is also the shortest completion
time of the entire project.
Customer relationship management
(CRM) employed to gather, main-
tain, and use data about a com-
pany’s customers with the objective
of improving customer satisfaction
and company proﬁtability.
Dashboards a graphic technique that
shows an organization’s performance
metrics and compares actual data with
planned.
Data communications protocol the
settings that create a communications
standard for a speciﬁc data commu-
nications application. Examples of
such settings include the transmis-
sion speed, parity bit, duplex setting,
or synchronous-versus-asynchronous
transmission type.
Data deﬁnition language (DDL) part of
a DBMS that enables its users to deﬁne
the record structure of any particular
database table.
Data dictionary a description of the data
ﬁelds in each database record of a
database system.
Data diddling changing data before, dur-
ing, or after they are entered into a
computer system.
Data encryption scrambling the data
in a message in a systematic way in
order to prevent competitors from
electronically monitoring conﬁdential
data transmissions.
Data
encryption
standard
(DES)
an encryption methodology initially
adopted
in
1976
and
enjoying
widespread usage. It is now con-
sidered insecure because of a small
(56-bit) key size.
Data ﬂow diagram primarily used in
the systems development process to
document the ﬂow of data through an
AIS.
Data hierarchy storing data electroni-
cally in the following ascending order:
bit, character, data ﬁeld, record, table,
database.
Data integrity controls edit tests con-
tained in the software used to create
databases that guard databases from
erroneous data entries.
Data manipulation controls methods
of controlling data processing, such
as examining software documenta-
tion,
system
ﬂowcharts,
program
ﬂowcharts, data ﬂow diagrams, and
decision tables because they help sys-
tems analysts do a thorough job in
planning data processing functions.
Data manipulation language (DML—-
databases) commands that allow an
end-user to perform queries and simi-
lar tasks on the records in a database.
Data mart a form of data warehouse that
allows users to perform predeﬁned
analytical tasks on the data.
Data mining a set of data analysis and sta-
tistical tools that enables companies
to detect relationships, patterns, or
trends among stored data within a
database.
Data modeling a term used to describe
the process of designing databases.
Data raw facts about events that have no
organization or meaning.
Data transcription the task of convert-
ing manually-prepared source docu-
ments such as credit-card applica-
tion forms to computer-readable ﬁle
records. Where possible, AIS devel-
opers try to avoid data transcription
because it is costly, labor intensive,
time-consuming, and likely to intro-
duce errors into the data.
Data type similar to data format, this term
speciﬁes whether data is, for example,
numerical, text, or currency

514
Glossary
Data validation rule a custom edit test
that enables a spreadsheet or database
to reject entries—e.g., regular hours
worked that exceed 40.
Data warehouses large collections of
historical data that organizations use
to
integrate
their
functions,
thus
allowing
managers
(and
to
some
extent external parties) to obtain
the information needed for planning,
decision making, and control.
Data-access controls processing con-
trols that are used at the time of
data access, such as batch control
totals, hash totals, and ﬁnancial con-
trol totals.
Database a large collection of related
data that are typically stored in com-
puterized, linked ﬁles and manipu-
lated by specialized software packages
called database management systems.
Database
administrator
the
per-
son responsible for supervising the
design, development, and installation
of a large database system; this person
is also responsible for maintaining,
securing, and revising the data within
the database system.
Database
management
system
(DBMS) a separate software system
that enables users to create database
records, delete records, access spe-
ciﬁc information, query records for
viewing or analysis, alter database
information, and reorganize records
as needed.
Database
structure
the
particular
method used to organize the records
in a database.
Decision table a matrix of conditions
and processing tasks for a computer
program that indicates the appropri-
ate action to take for each possibi-
lity.
Decomposition (documentation) the
creation of ﬁner levels of detail in
ﬂowcharts and data ﬂow diagrams.
Default value specifying a value, such as
the number ‘‘40’’ for an hours-worked
data ﬁeld, as an input control on the
data ﬁelds of new records.
Denial of service attack an attack on an
online company (such as eBay) when
hackers ‘‘ﬂood’’ the company’s Web
site with bogus trafﬁc.
Detailed systems design the systems
design work that involves specifying
the outputs, processing procedures,
and inputs for a new system.
Detective controls control procedures
within a company’s internal control
system that provide feedback to man-
agement regarding whether or not
operational efﬁciency and adherence
to prescribed managerial policies have
been achieved.
Dialback systems a password safeguard
that initially disconnects all login users
but reconnects users after checking
their passwords against lists of bona
ﬁde user codes.
Digital certiﬁcate an authenticating doc-
ument issued by an independent third
party called a certiﬁcate authority
used, for example, to authenticate
documents (such as purchase orders)
by including a portion of a docu-
ment’s message in an encrypted for-
mat (which reﬂects the digital signa-
ture).
Digital
signature
standard
(DSS)
Federal Information Processing Stan-
dard 186 by which the presence of a
digital signature authenticates a docu-
ment.
Digital subscriber line (DSL) a set of
technologies that enable users to send
and receive digital messages over tele-
phone lines. Transmission rates range
between 128 and 24,000 kbits per sec-
ond.
Digital time stamping the process of
attaching time stamps to business
transactions to authenticate the time
and possibly the place of individual
transactions.
Digital video disk (DVD) an optically
read disk similar in size and shape to
a CD but that is capable of storing as
much as 17 gigabytes of data.
Direct conversion method of systems
implementation in which a company’s
old system is immediately dropped
and the new system takes over the
complete processing of the com-
pany’s transactions.
Disaster recovery plan part of contin-
gency planning that describes the pro-
cedures to be followed if a company’s
data processing center becomes dis-
abled.
Discrepancy report a way to note
any differences between quantities or
amounts on the purchase order, the
receiving report, and the purchase
invoice.
Disk mirroring also known as disk shad-
owing. This process involves writing
all data in parallel to two disks. Should
one disk fail, the application program
can automatically continue using the
good disk.
Disk shadowing also known as disk mir-
roring. This process involves writing
all data in parallel to two disks. Should
one disk fail, the application program
can automatically continue using the
good disk.
Distributed denial-of-service attacks a
single virus or worm program which
manages to enlist the aid of innocent
‘‘zombie computers’’ that then send
email messages to, or request services
from, the target system.
Document Control when certain orga-
nizational documents are valuable and
must be protected by such means as
ﬁreproof safes or storage in rented
vaults offsite.
Document ﬂowchart a means of trac-
ing the physical ﬂow of documents
through an organization.
Documentation all the ﬂowcharts, nar-
ratives, and other written communi-
cations that describe the inputs, pro-
cessing, and outputs of an AIS.
Domain address an Internet address,
also referred to as a universal resource
locator (URL).
Dot-matrix printer an impact printer
that uses a print head of tiny wires,
arranged in a grid (e.g., 5 wires in
each of 7 rows) to create our familiar
letters and other printing characters.
Many cash registers still use dot-matrix
printers today.
Dumpster
diving
stealing
personal
information from garbage cans.
Dynaset a subset of database information
typically selected dynamically with
a query. A dynaset can be a set of
selected records from a single, large
table, a limited number of data ﬁelds
selected from each record in a table,
a set of related data ﬁelds from the
records in several tables, or a combi-
nation of these items.
E-business conducting business over the
Internet or dedicated proprietary net-
works.
E-commerce largely buying and selling
transactions within e-business.
E-wallet software applications that store
a consumer’s personal information,
including credit card numbers, allow-
ing them to pay for online purchases
by providing their associated account
numbers to online vendors.
Economic events those events that
impact
an
organization’s
ﬁnancial
statements and AISs therefore record
data about them in accounting trans-
actions.

Glossary
515
Economic event an activity that involves
an increase and/or decrease in dollar
amounts on ﬁnancial statements.
Economic feasibility the process of
analyzing the cost-effectiveness of a
proposed system.
Edit programs also called ‘‘input vali-
dation routines.’’ These are programs
or subroutines that check the validity
and accuracy of input data after the
data have been entered and recorded
on a machine-readable ﬁle.
Edit tests tests that examine selected
ﬁelds of input data and reject those
transactions (or other types of data
input) whose data ﬁelds do not meet
the preestablished standards of data
quality.
Electronic commerce conducting busi-
ness (often over the Internet) with
computers
and
data
communica-
tions.
Electronic conferencing a means of
enabling accountants and others to
use
computers
and
phone
lines
to communicate with clients, etc.,
through the use of high-end group-
ware communications packages.
Electronic
Data
Gathering
and
Retrieval (EDGAR) database the
database that contains the ﬁnancial
report ﬁlings of U.S.publicly held com-
panies.
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
a
communications
technique
that
allows
organizations
to
transmit
standard business documents over
high-speed
data
communications
channels.
Electronic
eavesdropping
unautho-
rized access to a computer system
and its data to observe transmissions
intended for someone else.
Electronic funds transfer (EFT) a cash
management technique whereby the
transfer of funds is electronic or
computer-to-computer.
Electronic mail (email) creating a mes-
sage on your microcomputer and
then sending it electronically to some-
one else using the recipient’s email
address.
Electronic
payments
(e-payments)
the use of a third party to act as an
intermediary in an online transaction,
thereby eliminating credit card use.
Electronic procurement the use of
modern computer technology to pur-
chase goods and raw materials elec-
tronically (e.g., over the Internet).
Electronic Systems Assurance and
Control (eSAC) a framework devel-
oped by the Institute of Internal
Auditors for evaluating controls over
e-business.
Electronic vaulting creating backup
copies of ﬁles that are electronically
transmitted to a remote site rather
than physically delivered to an off-site
storage location.
Encryption key a (typically long) set of
bits that is used to encrypt a mes-
sage for transmission over public data
transmission lines.
End-user
computing
the
ability
of
non-computer employees to create
computer applications of their own.
Enterprise
application
integration
(EAI) a useful interface to businesses
thatallowscompanieswithlegacyapp-
licationsanddatabasestointegrateand
continue to use those systems.
Enterprise asset management (EAM)
systems a means of automating the
management of a broad spectrum of
assets.
Enterprise-wide database a large repos-
itory of organizational data that comes
from, and is available to, a wide range
of a company’s employees.
Enterprise mashups a dashboard that
managers use to quickly view critical
business information that collects data
from a variety of sources—both inside
and outside the ﬁrm.
Enterprise resource planning (ERP)
systems software (e.g., Oracle) that
provides for integration among all
of an organization’s major business
processes through the use of a central
database; ERP II systems are extended
with e-business and other front-ofﬁce
capabilities.
Enterprise risk management (ERM)
also called the 2004 COSO Frame-
work. ERM helps an organization
determine
if
their
objectives
are
aligned with their strategy and that
goals are consistent with the level
of risk the organization is willing to
take.
Entities data about objects of inter-
est contained in databases including
business and economic events, plus
information about ‘‘who’’ and ‘‘what’’
were involved in those activities.
Entity-relationship (E-R) diagram a
graphical documentation technique
used by database designers to depict
database elements and their direct
relationships.
Event-driven programming language
a computer programming language
such as Visual Basic, that enables
a computer to respond to speciﬁc
events (e.g., clicking on a menu
choice).
E-wallet also known as a ‘‘digital wallet,’’
e-wallets function like conventional
wallets, but enable their users to buy
and sell merchandise over the Inter-
net.
Exception report a report that lists
exceptional condition(s) that typically
draw management’s attention to a
potential problem.
Expected loss an example of a loss mea-
sure, computed as: expected loss =
risk x exposure
Extended application interfaces (EAI)
software application interfaces that
allow different software applications
to share information among them.
Extensible business reporting lan-
guage see XBRL.
Extranets a means of enabling selected
outside users to access organizations’
intranets.
Fault-tolerant systems systems design-
ed to tolerate faults or errors that are
often based on the concept of redun-
dancy.
Feasibility evaluation the ﬁrst major
procedure in systems design work
whereby the design team determines
the practicality of alternative propos-
als.
Fidelity bond organizational coverage
(from
an
insurance
company)
to
reduce the risk of loss caused by
employee theft of assets.
Field properties settings as ‘‘ﬁeld size’’
and ‘‘format’’ in each data ﬁeld speci-
ﬁed in a table.
File server a computer whose principle
task is to store and output the contents
of computer ﬁles. For example, most
Internet applications use ﬁle servers
to store and output Web page ﬁles.
Financial
accounting
information
system the component of an AIS in
which the major objective is to pro-
vide relevant information (primarily
economic) to individuals and groups
outside an organization’s boundaries.
Financial planning models informa-
tion systems that aid ﬁnancial man-
agers in selecting an optimum strategy
for acquiring and investing ﬁnancial
resources.
Financing
process
the
process
by
which a company acquires and uses
ﬁnancial resources such as cash, other
liquid assets, and investments.
Firewall a software program or hardware
device designed to prevent unautho-
rized data communications between

516
Glossary
hackers and the information resources
within an internal, trusted network.
First normal form (1 NF) when all the
record attributes (data ﬁelds) within
a database are well deﬁned and the
information can thus be stored as a
ﬂat ﬁle.
Fixed asset management management
of the purchase, maintenance, valua-
tion, and disposal of an organization’s
ﬁxed assets.
Flat ﬁles ﬁles with no sequence or order
to them, except perhaps a chronolog-
ical sequence.
Flying-start site a disaster recovery loca-
tion that includes everything con-
tained in a hot site plus up-to-date
backup data and software.
Follow-up and maintenance phase
the continued monitoring of a newly
implemented system to ensure that
the system continues to operate prop-
erly and meets the organization’s
information needs.
Foreign keys data ﬁelds within some
accounting records that enable these
records to reference one or more
records in other tables.
Forensic accountants also called fraud
auditors. These individuals concern
themselves with the prevention and
detection of fraud and white-collar
crime.
Form (databases) a user interface that
typically uses text boxes, labels, and
similar form controls to create or dis-
play records in a database table
Fraud
triangle
three
elements
that
create a fraud. These are motive,
opportunity, and the rationalization
by the individual perpetrating the
fraud that the behavior is appropriate
or justiﬁed.
Front-ofﬁce a reference to external func-
tions and processes of an organiza-
tion, such as those that involve cus-
tomers, suppliers, and other business
partners.
Gantt chart a tool for planning and
controlling a systems implementation
project.
Generalized
audit
software
(GAS)
computer packages that enable audi-
tors to review computer ﬁles without
continually rewriting processing pro-
grams.
General-use software the software used
by auditors as productivity tools for
improving their work; e.g., the use
of a word processing program by an
auditor when writing an audit report.
Gigabyte a unit of disk storage approxi-
mately equal to one billion bytes.
Graphical documentation the depic-
tion, through the use of symbols and
logic diagrams, of existing or pro-
posed AISs by accountants, consul-
tants, and system developers.
Graphical user interface (GUI) one or
more visual computer screens that
enable an end-user to communicate
with a computer—typically by select-
ing items from menus or clicking
on choices using a computer mouse.
Computer programs that did not use
GUIs typically were command-driven
systems that required users to mem-
orize and type in system commands
and instructions.
Group code is the combination of two or
more subcodes creating a group code,
which is often used as a product code
in sales catalogs.
Groupware a means of allowing users to
send and receive email, plus perform a
wide range of other document-editing
tasks.
Hacker a person who breaks into the
computer ﬁles of others for fun or
personal gain.
Hash total the manual and perhaps
meaningless sum of the customers’
account numbers in a batch of trans-
actions that is used for comparison
purposes to control for missing or
transposed numerical data.
Hierarchical
structures
the
way
accounting data may be organized,
with successive levels of data in an
inverted, tree-like pattern.
HIPAA
the
privacy
requirements
of
the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act.
Hosted solution an approach to acquisi-
tion of software where the package is
rented over the Internet, rather than
purchased.
Hot backup a backup performed while
the database is online and available for
read/write.
Hot site a disaster recovery location that
includes a computer system conﬁg-
ured similarly to the system currently
in use by a company for its data pro-
cessing activities.
HTML an acronym for hypertext markup
language—the editing language that
tells a Web browser how to display
information from the World Wide
Web.
Human
resource
management
an
activity
of
an
organization
that
includes the personnel function and
the payroll function.
Hyperlink a word, phrase, or graphic
that allows users to display new infor-
mation in a Web browser or computer
screen, typically by clicking on the
hypertext element with a mouse.
Hypertext
a
text
retrieval
system
enabling a user to access speciﬁc doc-
ument locations
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)
a language used to create Web pages.
Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP)
a communications protocol designed
to transfer information on the World
Wide Web.
I/O-bound
computer
a
computer
whose input speeds and/or output
speeds are slower than its computa-
tional speed.
Ideal control a control procedure within
a company’s internal control system
that reduces to practically zero the
risk of an undetected error or irregu-
larity.
Identity theft the intentional misuse of
someone else’s personal information
with the intent to deceive another.
Identity Theft and Assumption Deter-
rence Act (ITADA) of 1998 the law
under which the Department of Jus-
tice prosecutes ID theft violations.
Image processing storing, manipulat-
ing, or outputting the graphical infor-
mation that usually ﬁrst appear on
hard-copy documents such as con-
tracts, architectural plans, machinery
schematics, or real-estate photos.
Information Systems Audit and Con-
trol Association (ISACA) the pro-
fessional association of information
technology auditors.
Information systems risk assessment
method used by an auditor to evaluate
the desirability of IT-related controls
for a particular aspect of business risk.
Information technology (IT) the hard-
ware and software used in computer-
ized information systems.
Information technology (IT) auditing
process that involves evaluating the
computer’s role in achieving audit and
control objectives.
Information technology (IT) auditors
auditors
who
concern
themselves
with analyzing the risks associated
with all aspects of information tech-
nologies.
IT governance the process of using IT
resources effectively to meet organi-
zational objectives.

Glossary
517
Ink-jet printer a printer that uses very
small nozzles to spray ink onto blank
pages to create printed outputs. An
advantage of ink-jet printers over dot
matrix printers is their ability to print
in color. But ink-jet printers are slower
and more costly, per-page, than laser
printers.
Input controls computer application
controls that attempt to ensure the
validity, accuracy, and completeness
of the data entered into a company’s
AIS; e.g., edit tests.
Input mask a set of characters that dic-
tate the required format for input data.
For example, in Microsoft Access,
the mask ‘‘(###) ###-####’’ speciﬁes
the sequence of numeric digits (rep-
resented by # signs) required for a
phone.
Input validation routines programs or
subroutines that check the validity
and accuracy of input data after the
data have been entered and recorded
on a machine-readable ﬁle.
Input-processing-output
cycle
the
three steps that a computer uses
to process computer records—i.e.,
inputting a record, processing the
information
it
contains,
and
out-
putting the results. A classic example
is creating payroll checks from time-
card data.
Instant Messaging (IM) the use of spe-
cial software to communicate with
others over the Internet in real time.
Many IM programs such as MSN IM
and Yahoo IM also support audio and
video conferencing as well as text
messaging.
Integrated accounting software pro-
grams software packages that can
process
all
types
of
accounting
transactions and provide a variety of
reports, including ﬁnancial statements
and budgets.
Integrated Computer-Assisted Survei-
llance
System
(ICASS)
designed
to protect computer systems from
crimes, abuses, and fraud by auto-
matically searching for anomalies and
printing exception conditions on con-
trol reports.
Integrated
security
an
integrated
approach to security involves man-
agers combining a number of key
security technologies to protect the
organization. This might include the
following: ﬁrewalls, intrusion detec-
tion systems, content ﬁltering, vulner-
ability management, virus protection,
and virtual private networks.
Integrated services digital network
(ISDN) lines high-speed data trans-
mission lines, typically using ﬁber
optics, that end users can rent from
phone companies and that support
transmission rates up to 1.5 million
bits per second (Mbps).
Integrated test facility (ITF) used by
auditors to test a company’s computer
programs; particularly useful for audit-
ing in an operational setting and/or for
evaluating integrated online systems
or complex programming logic.
Interactive data and electronic appli-
cations
(IDEA) managed by the
Securities
and
Exchange
Commis-
sion, IDEA is a particularly important
source of ﬁnancial information, con-
taining XBRL data for over 10,000
companies.
Internal control deﬁned by the COSOas
a process, effected by an entity’s
board of directors, management, and
other personnel, designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the
achievement of objectives in the fol-
lowing categories—effectiveness and
efﬁciency of operations, reliability of
ﬁnancial reporting, and compliance
with applicable laws and regulations.
Internet a global collection of tens
of thousands of interconnected busi-
ness, government, military, and educa-
tion networks that communicate with
each other.
Internet connectivity software that per-
mits small businesses to create Web
sites and engage in electronic com-
merce.
Internet
protocol
(IP)
address
the
numeric
address
into
which
a
text-based
domain
address
is
converted for transmission purposes.
Internet service provider (ISP) the
means of enabling users to connect
to the Internet; examples are America
Online, AT&T, and Sprint.
Intranets networks using the same soft-
ware as the Internet, but which are in
ternal (for communications purposes)
to thecompaniesthat createdthem.
Intrusion
detection
system
(IDS)
computer software that enables users
to identify, document, and perhaps
mislead hackers attempting to access
a protected system.
Inventory Control a means of protect-
ing inventory by keeping it in a stor-
age area accessible only to employees
with custodial responsibility.
IT general controls controls over data
processing
to
provide
reasonable
assurance that (1) development of,
and changes to, computer programs
are authorized, tested, and approved
before their usage, and (2) access to
data ﬁles is restricted to authorized
users and programs to increase the
likelihood that processed accounting
data are accurate and complete.
IT governance ensuring that informa-
tion technology risks are controlled
and also that IT in an organization is
deployed strategically to meet objec-
tives.
Job-costing information system a sys-
tem of costing that keeps track of the
speciﬁc costs for raw materials, labor,
and overhead associated with each
product or group of products.
Job stream the ﬂow of electronic data
through a computer system.
Just-in-Time System an inventory sys-
tem whose objective is to minimize
inventories at all levels of production.
K(kilobytes) exactly 1,024 bytes of com-
puter storage.
Key performance indicators (KPIs)
important metrics that convey infor-
mation
about
operational
perfor-
mance against plans or budgets.
Knowledge management distribution
of
expertise
within
an
organiza-
tion via technologies such as group-
ware.
Knowledge
process
outsourcing
(KPO) an approach where an orga-
nization chooses to have some of
its functions and activities related
to
research
and
acquisition
of
knowledge performed by an external
organization.
Laser printer a type of printer that uses
a laser to sensitize portions of a rotat-
ing drum. These sensitized portions
attract small graphite particles called
toner that can then be transferred to a
blank piece of paper and permanently
‘‘ﬁxed’’ to the page with heat.
Lean Accounting performance measure-
ment systems used in lean manufactur-
ing.
Lean production/manufacturing the
concept
that
a
company
makes
the commitment to eliminate waste
throughout the organization (not just
in production).
Legacy system a business’s older, cus-
tomized computer system that typi-
cally runs on a mainframe computer
and is often too large and expensive
to replace.
Legal feasibility determining whether or
not there will be any conﬂict between

518
Glossary
a newly proposed system and a com-
pany’s legal obligations.
Level 0 data ﬂow diagram the least
detailed data ﬂow diagram, showing
only in broad terms what tasks a sys-
tem performs.
Level 1 data ﬂow diagram the decom-
position of a single symbol from
within a level 0 data ﬂow diagram
to more fully document the system.
Local area network (LAN) a collec-
tion of microcomputers, printers, ﬁle
servers, and similar electronic com-
ponents that are physically located
near one another—for example, in
the same building—and connected
together
for
communication
pur-
poses.
Lock-box system a tool used by a com-
pany to reduce the ﬂoat period during
which checks clear the bank.
Lock-out system a password safeguard
that disconnects telephone users after
a set number of unsuccessful login
attempts.
Logic bomb program computer pro-
grams that remain dormant until some
speciﬁed circumstance or date trig-
gers them.
Logical data ﬂow diagram the depic-
tion of the tasks conducted by partic-
ipants within a systems development
process.
Logical security the use of technology to
limit access by authorized individuals
only to the organization’s systems and
information.
Macro program ﬂowchart the highest-
level program ﬂowchart, providing
an overview of the data processing
logic.
Magnetic (hard) disk a secondary stor-
age device that enables a computer
to store billions of bytes of informa-
tion. Unlike primary (RAM) memory,
whose information is lost when its
computer loses power, magnetic disk
memory is permanent.
Magnetic ink character recognition
(MICR) the technology used primar-
ily by banks to encode magnetically
readable symbols at the bottom of
checks or similar ﬁnancial documents.
Because the magnetic ﬂux of the ink
used in these symbols loses strength
over time, MICR is not widely used
elsewhere.
Mag-strip card a credit card, hotel
‘‘key,’’ employee badge, or similarly-
sized plastic card with a magnetic
stripe on one side that has been
encoded with information about the
user and/or account.
Mainframe computer a large, multi-user
computer that enables large compa-
nies to centralize processing power in
a single device.
Make-or-buy
decision
determining
whether it is more cost effective
to purchase an AIS or develop one
in-house.
Man trap a small antechamber room
between a public corridor and the
entrance to a data processing center,
set up for security purposes.
Manufacturing
resource
planning
(MRPII) system a more complex ver-
sion of the material requirements plan-
ning system that not only coordinates
the purchase and use of raw material
inventories in production, but also
integrates with the purchasing and
revenue processes.
Mark-sense media documents such as
academic test forms, surveys, and sim-
ilar papers that users complete with
simple pencils or pens but that can be
read and evaluated by computerized
input devices.
Master ﬁle a ﬁle that stores permanent
information about ﬁle entities (e.g.,
employees, customers, or ﬁnancial
assets). Its opposite is a transaction
ﬁle, which typically stores temporary
information about the transactions for
a limited period of time.
Material
requirements
planning
(MRPI) system a system that mon-
itors the acquisition and use of raw
materials needed by production pro-
cesses.
Megabyte a unit of computer storage
approximately equal to one million
bytes.
Message
acknowledgment
proce-
dures a control for computer net-
work systems that is useful in pre-
venting the loss of part or all of a
company’s transactions or messages
on a computer network system.
Metadata data about data, contained in
data dictionaries.
Microprocessor the portion of a CPU
that performs the arithmetic and logic
tasks of a computer, and that also
interprets and executes computer
instructions.
Minicomputer a multi-user computer
with less processing power than a
mainframe but typically more power
than a personal, or microcomputer.
Mnemonic codes designed to help the
user remember what they represent.
Modem (modulator/demodulator) a
device for converting the digital data
that a computer uses into sound
pitches that can be transmitted over
phone lines.
Modular conversion a method of sys-
tems implementation whereby the
users involved in speciﬁc data pro-
cessing tasks are divided into smaller
units or modules; the data process-
ing system is then installed module by
module.
Multidimensional databases a means
of storing large quantities of data, with
the goal of enabling employees at vari-
ous levels of an organization to deﬁne
their own tables and reports in for-
mats most useful to them.
Multimedia databases object-oriented
databases that include graphics, audio
information, and animation.
Near ﬁeld communication (NFC) a
means of enabling mobile devices
such
as
cell
phones,
PDAs,
and
laptop computers to communicate
with similar devices containing NFC
chips.
Network
structure
used
with
AIS
databases
to
link
related
records
together and adequately capture the
records’ relationships.
Non-value added waste eliminated or
reduced to improve overall customer
value and to increase the proﬁtability
of the products or services that the
organization offers.
Normalization the process of examining
and arranging ﬁle data in a way that
helps avoid problems when these ﬁles
are used or modiﬁed later; data can be
in ﬁrst, second, or third normal form.
Numeric codes codes that use numbers
only.
Object-oriented database (OODB) a
database that contains both the text
data of traditional databases and infor-
mation about the set of actions that
can be taken on these data ﬁelds.
Object-oriented programming (OOP)
languages computer programming
languages
that
have
strict
rules
(particularly
‘‘inheritance’’
and
‘‘encapsulation’’)
that
govern
the
properties, attributes, and operations
of language objects (such as variables
and form controls). OOP also includes
the developer’s ability to create new
objects with these characteristics that
can be used by other procedures and
programs.
Object-oriented
software
programs
that contain modular, reusable code

Glossary
519
helping programmers avoid writing
duplicate programs and facilitating
changes when needed.
Offshoring moving jobs offshore (e.g.,
to countries like India, China, Canada,
Mexico, or Malaysia).
Online analytical processing (OLAP)
a way to allow database users to
extract multidimensional information
from one or more database tables for
the purpose of making complex deci-
sions.
Operating System (OS) a set of soft-
ware programs that helps a com-
puter run itself as well as the appli-
cation programs designed
to run
under it. Examples include Windows
2000,Windows XP, and Unix.
Operational
audits
are
audits
per-
formed by a company’s internal audit
staff that focus on evaluating the efﬁ-
ciency and effectiveness of operations
within a particular department.
Operational feasibility the examination
of a proposed system’s compatibility
with the current operating environ-
ment (e.g., ensuring that the organi-
zational structure would support the
new system).
Optical character recognition (OCR)
an older technique that enables com-
puter
input
devices
to
interpret
machine-printed (and to a limited
extent, hand-written) data using opti-
cal technology.
Organization-level controls manage-
ment’s philosophy, operating style,
integrity, policies, and procedures
that inﬂuence the tone of a company.
These characteristics help to establish
the level of security and control con-
sciousness in the organization, which
is the basis for the control environ-
ment.
Output controls computer application
controls that are designed to assure
the validity, accuracy, and complete-
ness of the output from a company’s
computer systems; e.g., regulating
the distribution and use of printed
output.
Parallel conversion a method of sys-
tems implementation where both the
old and new system of a company
operate simultaneously for a period of
time.
Parallel simulation technique used by
auditors to test a company’s computer
programs; the auditor uses live input
data, rather than test data in a pro-
gram that simulates all or some of the
operations of the working program.
Parent record the higher-level record of
two adjacent records in a hierarchical
data structure.
Partner
relationship
management
(PRM)
software
applications
that
track and coordinate various con-
tacts and partners of an organization,
including customers, suppliers, and
other entities, such as not-for-proﬁt
organizational relationships.
Password codes general computer con-
trolsdesignedtolimitaccesstoacomp-
any’s computers only to those individ-
uals authorized to have this access.
Payroll processing information sys-
tems a means of paying employees
for their work, maintaining employee
earnings records, complying with gov-
ernment tax and reporting require-
ments, reporting on various deduction
categories, and interacting with other
personnel functions.
Penetration
testing
also
sometimes
called ethical hacking, auditors may
use this approach to see if they can
access resources within an informa-
tion system.
Performance measurement the use of
metrics and data to evaluate the efﬁ-
ciency and effectiveness of people,
technologies, or processes.
Peripheral equipment devices such
as keyboards, display monitors, and
printers, that typically physically sur-
round a computer processor.
Personal data assistant (PDA) device
a computerized device that includes
such functions as calculator, address
book, memo storage, daily planner,
and perhaps even provides wireless
Internet access.
Personal
productivity
software
software that typically runs on micro-
computers
(e.g.,
word
processing
and spreadsheet programs) and that
helps individuals perform their jobs
faster, easier, and more accurately.
PERT
(Program
Evaluation
and
Review) a technique for scheduling
and monitoring the activities in large
systems implementation projects.
Phishing an email from someone who
falsely claims to be an established,
legitimate company.
Physical data ﬂow diagram the depic-
tion of the ﬁrst level of detail within
a system, focusing on physical enti-
ties such as employees involved in
the system, and hard-copy inputs and
outputs.
Physical security any measures that
an organization uses to protect its
facilities, resources, or its propri-
etary data that are stored on physical
media.
Pivot
tables
a
feature
that
enables
a
database
user
to
create
two
dimensional statistical summaries of
database information.
Pixels (picture elements) the tiny dots
that a monitor uses to create a com-
plete screen image. For example, a
monitor might have a pixel resolution
of 1024 x768, meaning the ability to
display 1,024 pixels across the screen
by 768 pixels down the screen.
Point-of-sale (POS) device an input
device such as a barcode reader
that enables a user to input data
directly into
a computer from a
checkout stand in a supermarket or
merchandise store and avoid manual
keystrokes.
Point-scoring analysis an approach
used to evaluate accounting software
packages (as well as hardware) of ven-
dors that meet most of a company’s
major IT requirements.
Portals Web sites that allow outsiders
with authorized access to view a com-
pany’s internal information systems.
Predictive analytics a technique using
data stored in data warehouses to
improve performance.
Preliminary investigation the ﬁrst task
performed by a systems study team
whereby the team, for example, inves-
tigates current needs or problems in a
company’s present system and reports
ﬁndings to the steering committee.
Preventive controls control procedures
that are designed and implemented
within a company’s internal control
system to prevent some potential
problem from occurring when an
activity is performed.
Primary memory the internal random
access memory or RAM that a com-
puter uses to temporarily store com-
puter programs and immediate data.
Privacy policy a Web sites’ policy that
states the information it does and does
not collect about you and how they
might use that information.
Process-costing information system
a system that uses averages to cal-
culate
the
costs
associated
with
goods in process and ﬁnished goods
produced.
Process map a special type of ﬂowchart
used
to
better
understand
and
communicate a company’s current
business processes.

520
Glossary
Processing controls computer applica-
tion controls that focus on the manip-
ulation of accounting data after they
are input to a company’s computer
system—for
example,
data-access
controls.
Production process (sometimes called
the conversion process) begins with a
request for raw materials and ending
with the transfer of ﬁnished goods to
warehouses.
Program change control a set of inter-
nal control procedures developed to
ensure against unauthorized program
changes.
Program ﬂowchart graphical documen-
tation that outlines the processing
logic for each part of a computer pro-
gram and also indicates the sequence
of processing steps.
Programming
language
a
language
such as Java or Visual Basic that
enables
a
programmer
to
create
instructions (called ‘‘code’’) that a
computer can understand.
Project
management
software
software that can aid in planning and
controlling the tasks involved in a
systems implementation project.
Prototyping an approach to systems
design work that involves developing
a simpliﬁed model of a proposed infor-
mation system that is experimented
with by the system’s users.
Proxy server a computer and related
software that creates a transparent
gateway to and from the Internet that
can be used to control Web access.
Public key encryption encrypting mes-
sages using a scrambling key assigned
by a public entity.
Purchasing process the process that
begins with a request (or an order)
for goods or services and ends with
payment to the vendor.
Queries the means of allowing database
users to create subschemas of interest
to them.
Radio frequency technology an emerg-
ing technology that uses RFID tags
(attached to products or pallets of
products) for identiﬁcation. These
tags (transponders) can hold much
more information than barcodes.
Rapid
application
development
(RAD) the use of CASE tools to speed
the planning and development of
computer information systems.
REA model an approach to data mod-
eling that focuses on resources (R),
events (E), and agents (A).
Record keys may or may not be unique
identiﬁers of individual or associated
records.
Record structure the speciﬁc data ﬁelds
in each record of a database table; this
structure is ﬁxed in many accounting
applications.
Redundant
array
of
independent
disks (RAID) a set of magnetic disks
that act as a single hard drive.
Reengineering
business
processes
starting from
scratch
to
redesign
major processes in an organization
(e.g., such as sales orders or purchas-
ing).
Referential
integrity
(databases)
a
control that denies a user the abil-
ity to create a child record with no
parent, or to delete a parent record
that has child records.
Relational database structure a means
of enabling database users to iden-
tify relationships either at the time
the data are initially created or at
a future time as new informational
requirements are ascertained.
Relationship
table
an
approach
to
represent relationships between two
database
tables
when
you
have
many-to-many relationships between
database entities.
Request for proposal (RFP) report
sent to computer vendors in systems
design work that outlines the speciﬁc
requirements of a company’s desired
system.
Responsibility system of computer
program development and main-
tenance a series of steps that com-
prise a test of program change control.
It is designed to ensure account-
ability
and
adequate
supervisory
controls.
RFID tags are computer chips and tiny
antennas that are used to manage
inventory.
Right Networks ASP an add-on for
QuickBooks, enabling remote hosting
of desktop applications.
Risk assessment a component of inter-
nal control that considers the risk
factor when designing controls for a
company.
Risk matrix a tool especially useful for
prioritizing large risks that classiﬁes
each potential risk by mitigation cost
and also by likelihood of occurrence.
Risk-based audit approach used by
auditors to evaluate a company’s inter-
nal control procedures.
Rollback processing a fault-tolerant sys-
tem, at the transaction level, in which
transactions are never written to disk
until they are complete.
Routing
veriﬁcation
procedures
a
control for computer network sys-
tems that helps to ensure that no trans-
actions or messages of a company are
routed to the wrong computer net-
work system address.
Salami technique a computer crime
whereby
computer
programmers
steal small amounts of money from
many accounts over a period of time.
Sales process a process that begins with
a customer order for goods or services
and ends with the collection of cash
from the customer.
Sandwich rule (ﬂowcharting) a rule
that states that a processing symbol
should always appear between an
input symbol and an output symbol.
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 sweeping
ﬁnancial legislation that emphasizes
organizational internal controls and
accountability.
SAS No. 94 ‘‘The Effect of Information
Technology on the Auditor’s Consid-
eration of Internal Control in a Finan-
cial Statement Audit.’’ a SAS rule that
cautions external auditors that the
way ﬁrms use IT might impact any of
the ﬁve internal control components.
Scalable the ability for a software user to
migrate easily to packages that handle
increasingly large volumes of data and
transactions.
Scenario planning found under ‘‘Event
Identiﬁcation’’ (of ERM) is a way
for management to identify scenarios
(from minor concern to major disas-
ters) that could occur.
Schedule feasibility an evaluation that
involves estimating the time frame for
a new or revised system to become
operational.
Schema a reﬂection of the totality of the
information in a database and the rela-
tionships of its tables (i.e., records).
Scope creep a situation where the size
of a task or project gradually becomes
larger, and perhaps more complex
and costly.
Second normal form (2 NF) when a
database is in ﬁrst normal form and all
the data items in each record depend
on the record’s primary record key.
Secondary
record
keys
data
ﬁelds
that are typically not unique among
records but that can also be used to
search records for speciﬁc informa-
tion.
Secondary storage computer equip-
ment that stores data permanently

Glossary
521
(e.g., hard disks, CD Roms, and USB
drives).
Secret key cryptography a data encryp-
tion method that uses a single cryp-
tographic key that is shared by the
communicating parties.
Security policy a comprehensive plan
that management must develop to
help protect the enterprise from inter-
nal and external threats.
Select query the creation of a dynaset
of database information based on
two types of user-speciﬁed criteria:
those that determine which records
to include, and those that determine
which data ﬁelds to include from
those records.
Separation of duties an activity of
an
internal
control
system
that
focuses on structuring work assign-
ments among employees so that one
employee’s work activities serve as
a check on those work activities of
another employee.
Sequence
code a sequential
set
of
numbers used to identify customer
accounts, employee payroll checks,
customer sales invoices, and so forth.
Sibling records two records on the same
level in a hierarchical data structure.
Signed checklists an example of estab-
lishing
accountability by
verifying
that an accountant performed certain
tasks, that a reviewer approved them,
and that both individuals are account-
able for their accuracy.
Slack time a description of the amount
of delay time that can occur in each
non-critical activity and still not delay
a project.
Smishing a scam similar to phishing
using text messages on cell phones
in an attempt to get you to provide or
‘‘update’’ your personal information
such as account number, credit card
number, or password.
Social engineering a tactic hackers use
to gain access to passwords, such as
posing as a bona ﬁde employee to
convince a network administrator to
give passwords over the telephone.
Soft copy output computer output on
video screens, billboards, and similar
devices; the opposite of hard copy
(printed) output.
Source code the program commands
that underlie a software application.
Source document a piece of paper
or an electronic form that becomes
the
source
of
subsequent
com-
puter records and processing activi-
ties. Examples of source documents
include time cards in payroll systems,
employee application forms, doctor
medical diagnoses, insurance claim
forms, and personal bank checks.
SOX, Section 404 a statement that
management is responsible for estab-
lishing and maintaining an adequate
internal control structure and at the
end of each ﬁscal year must attest to
the effectiveness and completeness of
that structure.
Spam annoying, unsolicited email mes-
sages that are often illegal and increas-
ingly costly to organizations.
Spend
management
a
systematic
approach to controlling an organiza-
tion’s expenses.
Spooﬁng masquerading as an authorized
Internet user.
Steering committee a group consisting
of a company’s top management per-
sonnel and possibly one or more staff
auditors that works with the systems
study team throughout all phases of
system development activities.
Strong passwords passwords that con-
tain a variety of characters (letters,
numbers, and symbols) and are 14
characters or longer. A 15-character
password composed of random letters
and numbers is about 33,000 times
stronger than an 8-character pass-
word composed of characters from
the entire keyboard.
Structured programming techniques
used to develop large computer pro-
grams in a hierarchical fashion.
Structured query language (SQL) a
popular data manipulation language
for retrieving and manipulating data;
auditors can use SQL to retrieve a
client’s data and display these data
in a variety of formats for audit
purposes.
Structured walkthrough a meeting in
which the attendees review the logic
of a computer program.
Supercomputer a computer that is faster
and more powerful than a mainframe,
and capable of performing trillions of
operations per second.
Supply
chain
management
(SCM)
applications that enable an ERP sys-
tem or other software to interface
with a company’s suppliers and cus-
tomers.
System development life cycle (SDLC)
comprised of the planning, analysis,
design, and implementation phases of
acquiring or developing a new infor-
mation system.
System ﬂowchart graphical documen-
tation that depicts the logical ﬂow of
data and processing steps in an AIS.
System maintenance ensuring the con-
tinuing operations of a system.
Systems analysis the phase of a sys-
tems study in which the study team
thoroughly familiarizes itself with a
company’s current operating system
by focusing on strengths and weak-
nesses within the system.
Systems approach using a broad point
of view in performing a systems study.
Systems
Auditability
and
Control
(SAC) report a guide developed by
the Institute of Internal Auditors that
provides auditors with guidance in
the evaluation of IT-related internal
controls.
Systems implementation the phase of
a systems study in which the rec-
ommended changes from analysis,
design, and development work are
now put into operation.
Systems speciﬁcation report a docu-
ment that summarizes the ﬁndings of
a design team regarding the needs for
a new information system.
Systems study a formal investigation of
a company’s existing information sys-
tems.
Systems survey part of systems analy-
sis in which the study team obtains
a more complete understanding of a
company’s current operation informa-
tion system and its environment.
SysTrust an assurance service intro-
duced by the AICPA that evaluates the
reliability of information systems with
respect to their availability, security,
integrity, and maintainability.
Table
(databases)
a
set
of
related
records that are stored together in
a ﬁle using a database management
system such as Microsoft Access.
Technical feasibility an analysis of the
technical resources required by a par-
ticular information system.
Test data a set of transactions that exam-
ine the range of exception situations
that might occur under normal pro-
cessing conditions.
Third normal form (3 NF) a database
that is in second normal form and that
contains no transitive dependencies.
Third party assurance services audit
and assessment services offered by
independent third parties to provide
business users and individual con-
sumers with some level of comfort
over Internet transactions.

522
Glossary
Time and billing information sys-
tems similar to job order costing
systems, tracking hours and costs asso-
ciated with each job (i.e., each client)
and each employee (i.e., professional
staff).
Transaction controls needed by AISs
to ensure that the database system
performs each transaction accurately
and completely.
Transaction ﬁle a temporary ﬁle of
accounting
records
that
typically
stores the transactions for a speciﬁc
period of time.
Transitive
dependencies when
the
same record does not contain two data
ﬁelds in which data ﬁeld A determines
data ﬁeld B.
Trojan horse program a destructive or
deceptive computer program hidden
inside an accepted program.
Trust services third party assurance
services offered through the AICPA
that
provide
guidance
to
practi-
tioners to evaluate organizations in
terms of their reliability, privacy, and
security.
Turnaround document a hard-copy
document such as a bank check or
conﬁrmation slip that a business cre-
ates, sends to a second party for
completion or approval, and then
receives back for further processing.
For convenience, most turnaround
documents are computer readable.
Turnkey system a computer system
acquired from independent vendors
that includes both software and hard-
ware.
Uninterruptible power system (UPS)
an auxiliary power supply that can
smooth the ﬂow of power to the com-
puter, thereby preventing the loss of
data due to momentary surges or dips
in power.
Universal
resource
locator
(URL)
a
text
Internet
address
such
as
www.Wiley.com.
Utility programs computer programs
that
are
typically
included
with
computer
operating
systems,
but
which
perform
speciﬁc
end-user
tasks. Examples include programs that
format disks, transfer ﬁle data from
one medium to another, or test emails
for viruses.
Val IT a governance framework devel-
oped
by IT Governance
Institute
(ITGI) as a formal statement of prin-
ciples and processes for IT manage-
ment; it is tightly integrated with
COBIT.
Validation rule see data validation rule.
Value cards credit-card size or key-ring
size cards from retailers that have
a barcode on the back side for the
merchant to track purchases. In some
cases, the merchant offers discounts
or points that may be exchanged for
goods or services. In other cases cus-
tomers simply receive advance infor-
mation for upcoming sales before the
general public.
Value-added
networks
(VANs)
proprietary networks that large IT
organizations design and maintain for
their customers in order to implement
EDI or intranet applications.
Value-added resellers (VARs) special
type of systems consultants who are
licensed to sell particular software
packages and provide organizations
with consulting services related to
those packages.
Value stream management a manage-
ment process that controls activities
that generate value in a product
or service rather than by functional
area.
Vertical market markets or industries
that are distinct in terms of the ser-
vices they provide or the goods they
produce.
View controls a security feature within a
database system that limits each user’s
access to information on a need-to
know basis.
Virtual PBXs are Internet-based PBX
systems that enable organizations to
outsource their PBX services.
Virtual private network (VPN) a mimic
of a value-added network in many
of its security features, but enjoys
the beneﬁt of transmitting messages
cheaply over existing Internet con-
nections.
Virtual storage a computer operating
system technique that uses magnetic
disk storage as a virtual extension of
primary storage.
Virus a computer program that rogue
programmers embed in other pro-
grams, emails, or computer ﬁles, and
that (when executed) typically per-
form such destructive acts as erasing
ﬁles, disrupting emails, or interfering
with operating system functions.
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) a
technology that allows you to make
telephone calls using a broadband
Internet connection instead of a regu-
lar telephone line.
Voice recognition system computer
hardware and software that enables a
computer to hear and interpret voice
commands.
Volatile memory computer memory
that becomes inoperative when it
loses power.
VPN
a
security
appliance
that
runs
behind an organization’s ﬁrewall and
allows remote users to access entity
resources by using wireless, hand-held
devices.
Watchdog processor a fault-tolerant sys-
tem that uses two processors. If some-
thing happens to the ﬁrst processor,
the second processor takes over the
processing work.
Web browser a software application that
enables a user to display and interact
with sites on the World Wide Web.
Wide area network (WAN) computer
networks spanning regional, national,
or global geographic areas.
Wi-ﬁtechnology technology that allows
transmission and receipt of voice and
data messages remotely and without
hard-wired connections to a phone
line.
Wireless application protocol (WAP)
a
data
communication
protocol
mostly used by mobile phones and
PDAs to connect to the Internet.
World Wide Web the graphics portion
of the Internet.
Worm program a program that dis-
rupts normal data processing and is
usually able to replicate itself onto
other ﬁles, computer systems, or net-
works. Examples of these viruses are
boot sector viruses, worm programs,
Trojan horse programs, and logic
bomb programs.
XBRL an acronym for ‘‘extensible busi-
ness reporting language’’—a standard-
ized set of markup (editing) tags and
rules created with XML used by the
ﬁnancial reporting industry.
XBRL instance document an XML doc-
ument that was created using XBRL
standards.
XBRL International Consortium an
organization of about 450 members,
including many U.S. accounting ﬁrms;
it is in charge of developing XBRL
standards.
XML an acronym for extensible markup
language—an extension of HTML that
allows users to create their own
markup (editing) tags.

Index
AAA, See American Accounting
Association (AAA)
ABA, See American Banking Association
(ABA)
ABC, See Activity-based costing (ABC)
system
Access authentication, 495
Access Certiﬁcates for Electronics
Services (ACES), 500
Access control list (ACL), 497, 499
Access database program, 133
Accountants, 36
Accounting, 5, 481–501
cycle, 15
expertise, 37
internet, 481–501
systems, 37
transactions, 225
Accounting information systems (AIS),
3–32
accountant, 3
careers in, 21–23
systems consulting, 22
traditional accounting, 21
corporate scandals, 11–13
countering terrorism, 10
deﬁnition, 4
documentation, 73–112
information technology, 35
information vs. data, 5–8
Patriot Act, 13–14
role in organizations, 8
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 13–14
software programs, 282–287
suspicious activity reporting, 9–10
systems, 8
systems studies and, 417–418
ACCPACsoftware, 284, 470
ACFE, See Association of Certiﬁed Fraud
Examiners (ACFE)
ACL, See Audit Command Language (ACL)
ACM, See Association for computer
machinery (ACM)
Action queries, 166–167
Active RFID tags, 58
Activity-based costing (ABC) system, 17,
257
Activity listings, 402
Adelphia, 12
Administrator, database, 120
Advanced electronic tags, 261, 511
Advanced planning and scheduling (APS)
systems, 511
Agent entities, 125
Agents, 124
Aging report, 229
AICPA, See American Institute of Certiﬁed
Public Accountants (AICPA)
Air Products and Chemicals Company, 8–9
AIS, See Accounting information systems
(AIS)
AITP, See Association of informaton
technology professionals (AITP)
Albertsons, 58
Alden, Inc., 264
Alphanumeric codes, 219
ALU, See Arithmetic-logic unit (ALU)
Amazon.com, 235
America Online (AOL), 55, 491
American Accounting Association (AAA),
16
American Airlines Reservations System,
322
American Banking Association (ABA), 42
American Express, 321
American Institute of Certiﬁed Public
Accountants (AICPA), 16, 85, 333
American Institute of Certiﬁed Public
Accountants, 13
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), 42
American University, 6
Analysis paralysis, 511
Annunzio-Wylie Anti-Money Laundering
Act, 9
ANSI, See American National Standards
Institute (ANSI)
Anti-spam technology, 325
Anti-virus software, 61, 325, 327
AOL Wallet, 491
Applet, 325
Application controls, 395–402
Application interfaces, 291
Application-logic components, in
client/server systems, 56
Application software, 61
Applications portfolio, 417
Approved customer listing, 229
Arithmetic-logic unit (ALU), 47
Art.com, 18
Arthur Andersen, 469
Artiﬁcial transactions, 462
Ashley Company, 343–344
Assets, physical protection of, 361–365
Association for computer machinery
(ACM), 333
Association of Certiﬁed Fraud Examiners
(ACFE), 315
Association of informaton technology
professionals (AITP), 333
Assurance services, 451
AT&T, 323, 498
ATMs, See Automated teller machines
(ATMs)
Attributes, 125, 129
Audit Command Language (ACL), 458
Audit trail, 6, 358, 460
computer-based system, 401
Auditing
around the computer, 460
auditor’s toolkit, 457–460
careers in, 454–455
computerized AIS, 460–466
continuous, 465–466 IT
designing and evaluating IT controls,
456
fraud, 468–469
governance, 467
information technology (IT), 22
information technology, 452–455
internal versus external, 450–452
people skills, 460
risk assessment, 455–456
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 469–470
software, 457–460
systems software, review of, 464–465
testing computer programs, 461–462
third party assurance services, 471
through the computer, 461
users, validating, 465
validating computer programs,
462–464
with the computer, 457
Auditing Standards No. 60, 24
Auditing Standards No. 99, 468
AuditNet, 460
Auditor of Public Accounts (APA), 268
Authorized distribution list, 403
Authorizing transactions, 360
Automated teller machines (ATMs), 70
Automated workpaper software, 459–460
Automatic Data Processing, Inc., 254
Auxiliary storage, 48
Avis Rent-A-Car, 56
B2B, See Business-to-business (B2B)
Backend CASE tools, 97
Back-ofﬁce function, 288
Backup, 387
cold, 387
hot, 387
Backwater University, 69
Bad debt report, 229
Balanced scorecard, 18
Bank of Boston, 318
Bank Secrecy Act, 9
Bank statement, 265
Bar code readers, 40
Barra concrete, 508
BASF, 492
Batch control document, 401
Batch control total, 401
Batch processing, 397
Baylor University, 483–484
Beers Enterprise Accounting databases,
147
Behavioral problems, in systems survey
work, 421–422
Benchmark test, 430
Benford’s Law, 458
Bennet National Bank, 70
Berridge company, 108–109
Best-of-breed (BOB) approach, 291
Better Business Bureau, 432, 471
Bill of materials, 261
Billable hours, 267
Billing, 125
Biometric identiﬁcations, 390
Biometric Scanners, 45
523

524
INDEX
Bits per second (bps), 53
Bizrights, 97
Block codes, 220
Blogs, 485
Bluetooth, 261
Boeing Company, 236
Bolt-ons, 291
Bonnie P Manufacturing Company, 181
Boot-sector viruses, 325
Bound controls, 190
BPM, See Business process management
(BPM) software
BPO, See Business processes outsourcing
(BPO)
BPR, See Business process reengineering
(BPR)
Bps, See Bits per second (bps)
BSN Bicycles II, 183
BSN Bicycles, 148, 222
Budgeting, 19
Business application suites, 287
Business continuity management (BCM),
386
Business continuity planning, 385–387
backup, 387
disaster recovery, 385–386
fault tolerant systems, 386–387
Business events, 124, 225
Business intelligence, 289
Business performance measurement,
18, 20
Business Process Management (BPM)
software, 238–239
Business process reengineering (BPR),
271, 293
Business processes
coding systems, 219–221
collecting accounting information,
221–224
current trends in, 237–239
BPM software, 238–239
BPO, 237–238
ﬁnancial accounting cycle, 218–219
ﬁnancing process, 262–265
in special industries, 265–272
health care organizations, 269–271
not-for-proﬁt organizations,
268–269
professional service organizations,
266–268
reengineering, 271–272
production process, 256–262
purchasing process, 230–237
inputs to, 233–234
objectives of, 230–231
outputs of, 234
reporting accounting information,
221–224
designing reports, 221
good reports, 221–222
output reports, documents to,
222–224
resource management process,
250–256
sales process, 225–230
inputs to, 226–229
objectives of, 225–226
outputs of, 229–230
Business processes outsourcing (BPO),
237
Business value, quantifying, 296–297
Business without boundaries, 238
Business-to-business (B2B), 492
CAATs, See Computer-assisted audit
techniques (CAATs)
CAD, See Computer-aided design (CAD)
CA-Examine, 465
Canned software, 430
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, 318
Cardinalities, 125–127
Careers
in accounting information systems
(AIS), 21–23
in IT auditing, 22–23, 454–455
in IT security, 22–23
in systems consulting, 22
Caribbean Club, 245–246
Carl Beers Enterprises, 146
Carolinas HealthCare System (CHS), 76
CASE, See Computer-assisted software
engineering (CASE)
Cash budget, 265
Cash Control, 363
Cash disbursements, 363
Cash receipts forecast, 264
Cash requirements forecast, 234
Cash-disbursement checks, 223, 364
Catholic Healthcare West (CHW), 288
CD-ROM, 50
Central database, 291
Central processing unit (CPU), 40, 46
Certiﬁcate authority, 500
Certiﬁed fraud examiner (CFE), 332
Certiﬁed Information Security Manager
(CISM), 454
Certiﬁed Information System Auditor
(CISA), 23, 454
Certiﬁed Information Technology
Professional (CITP), 22
Certus Governance Suite, 77, 97
CFAA, See Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
of 1986 (CFAA)
CFE, See Certiﬁed fraud examiner (CFE)
Change management consultants, 272
Change management, 435, 512
Chart of accounts, 219, 512
Check registers, 44, 253
Check-digit control procedure, 399
Checkpoint, 393
Chicago Mercantile Exchange, 97
Child record, 129
Chiropractic software, 271
CHS, See Carolinas HealthCare System
(CHS)
CIS, See Continuous and intermittent
simulation (CIS)
CISA, See Certiﬁed Information System
Auditor (CISA)
CISM, See Certiﬁed Information Security
Manager (CISM)
CITP, See Certiﬁed Information Technology
Professional (CITP)
Claims, 125
Click fraud, 489
Client/server computing, 55
Client/server systems, 56
application-logic, 56
components of, 56
data-management, 56
presentation, 56
Clifford Cohen University, 182
Cloud computing, 59
CNA, 238
COBIT, See Control Objectives for
Information and Related Technology
(COBIT)
COBIT, 2007, 355
Coding systems, 219–221
block, 220
design considerations, 221
group, 220
mnemonic, 220
sequence, 220
Cognizant Technology Solutions (CTS), 439
Cold backup, 387
Cold site, 386
Collaborative business partnerships, 289
Color-coded identiﬁcation badges, 389
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
(COSO), 425
Report (1992), 350
Report (2004), 350
Communication channels, 53
Communications equipment, 38
Communications software, 62
Comparison program, 301, 464
Compilation, 62
Compiler, 62
Compliance testing, 453
Computer abuse, 314
distinguishing between, 315
importance of, 320
Computer accounts, 383
Computer-assisted audit techniques
(CAATs), 453
Computer Crime and Abuse Act, 329
Computer crime, 315–337
abuse, 314–315
computer hacking, 322–323
criminals identiﬁcation
age, 330
education, 330
gender, 330
non-criminal backgrounds, 330
non-technical backgrounds, 329
denial of service, 324–326
forensic accountants, employment of,
332–333
fraud, 314–315
importance of, 320
legislation, 317–319
federal, 317–319
state, 319
mitigation, 326–328
controls implementation, 328–329
employee awareness and education,
326–327
security measures assessment,
327–328
top-management support, enlisting
of, 326
passwords protection, 327–328
physical security, 331

INDEX
525
statistics, 319–320
symptoms of employee fraud, 331–332
accounting irregularities, 332
behavioral changes, 332
internal control weaknesses, 332
lifestyle changes, 332
unreasonable anomalies, 332
TRW credit data case, 321–322
wire fraud, 322–323
Computer facility controls
Computer facility controls, 388–389
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986
(CFAA), 317
Computer hacking, 322
Computer mice, 43
Computer pens, 44
Computer record, 49
Computer Security Act of 1987, 318
Computer security association, 324
Computer Security Institute (CSI), 314
Computer software
antivirus, 325
application, 61–62
auditing, 460–467
business process management (BPM),
238–239, 141
canned, 430
communications, 62
computer-aided design (CAD), 61
documentation, 120–121
enterprise resource management (ERP),
62
generalized audit, 458
general-use, 457–458
instant messaging, 485
integrated accounting programs,
282–287
Internet, 483
key logging, 337, 495
object-oriented, 76
operating systems (OS), 60–61
partner relationship management
(PRM), 289
presentation graphics, 61
programming languages, 62
project management, 61, 436
selecting accounting and enterprise,
299–300
testing of, 461–462
turnkey, 430
validating, 462–464
Computer software, 60
application software, 61–62
languages, 62
operating systems, 60–61
Computer viruses, 39, 61, 385
bootsector, 325
Computer worms, 325
Computer-aided design (CAD), 61
Computer-aided design software, 61
Computer-assisted audit techniques
(CAATs), 453, 457
Computer-assisted software engineering
(CASE), 96–97
backend, 97
front-end, 97
integrated CASE packages, 97
rapid application development, 97
Computers, disposal of outdated, 331
Concurrency controls, 122
Concurrency, 122
Conﬁdentiality, 472
Connectivity, 57
Consensus-based protocols, 387
Context diagrams, 89
Contingency planning, 513
Continuous and intermittent simulation
(CIS), 466
Continuous auditing, 465–467
Contributors table, 130
Control break, 202
Control environment, 349, 381
Control Objectives for Information and
Related Technology (COBIT), 457
Control source property, 192
Control totals, 400–401
Control total tests, 463
Control unit, 47
Conversion
direct, 434
modular, 435
parallel, 435
Cookies, computer, 335
Corporate governance, 348
Corporate performance measurement
(CPM), 18
Corrective controls, 357
COSO Report, 1992, 349–352
COSO Report, 2004, 352–355
Cost accounting subsystem, 256
Cost accounting, 17
Cost-beneﬁt analyses, 366
Cost-effectiveness, 222
Cougar Mountain Fund Suite, 286
CPA Crossings, 36
CPA Trust services, 20
CPA WebTrust, 471
CPM, See Corporate performance
measurement (CPM)
CPU, See Central processing unit (CPU)
Critical path, 435
CRM, See Customer relationship
management (CRM)
Crosstab queries, 166
CSI, See Computer Security Institute (CSI)
Custody of assets, 360
Customer billing statement, 229
Customer Insights, 297
Customer relationship management
(CRM), 229, 289
Cuts-n-Curves Athletic Club, 375
Cyber Security Enhancement Act of 2002,
318
DASDs, See Direct access storage devices
(DASDs)
Dashboards, 18, 295
Data-access controls, 514
Data communications protocol, 53
Data communications, 52
Data deﬁnition language (DDL), 158
Data dictionary, 120
Data diddling, 321
Data encryption standard (DES), 500
Data encryption, 392
Data extraction, 162–171
creating action queries, 166–167
creating select queries, 163
data mining, 169
database programming, 169
guidelines, 167–168
hypertext, 168
indexing, 169
multi-table, 165–166
OLAP, 169
one-table, 163–165
sorting, 169
SQL, 168
Data ﬁeld, 118
Data ﬂow diagrams (DFDs), 86,
88–93
context, 89
drawing guidelines, 89–93
logical, 90
physical, 89
symbols, 88
Data ﬂow lines, 88
Data hierarchy, 118
Data integrity controls, 122
Data manipulation controls, 401–402
Data manipulation languages (DMLs),
162
Data mart, 173
Data mining, 170–171
Data modeling, 115–150
Data packets, 483
Data processing centers
employee access to, 389
insurance, purchasing for, 389
location of, 389
Data redundancy, 155
Data transcription, 40
Data type, 135
Data validation, 157–161
default values, 160
drop-down lists, 160
inputmasks, 159
proper data types for ﬁelds, 159
referential integrity, 161
rules, 160
Data Warehouses, 172
Database, 116–150
additional concerns of, 119–123
administration, 120
backup, 122–123
completeness, 122
concurrency, 122
creating using REA, 123–132
data extraction, 162–171
data integrity, 121
data validation, 157–161
documentation, 120–121
importance, 116–118
multidimensional, 172
multimedia, 171–172
object-oriented, 171–172
processing accuracy, 122
records creation, 132–139
security, 122–123
storing data in, 118
tables creation, 132–139
Database administrator, 120
Database forms, 187–196

526
INDEX
Database management system (DBMS),
116, 157–161, 458
Database reports, 196–204
Database software, 61
Database structure, 129
hierarchical, 129
network, 129
relational, 129
Database tables
creating, 134–136
getting started, 133–134
guidelines, 139
identifying a primary key, 136
record format, 134–136
saving, 136
creating database relationships,
137–138
Data-management component, in
client/server systems, 56
Datasheet screen, 189
Data-storage systems, 56
Daunting task, 37
DBMS, See Database management system
(DBMS)
DDL, See Data deﬁnition language (DDL)
DDoS, See Distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) attacks
DDP, See Distributed data processing
(DDP) system
Debit/credit memoranda, 228
Decision tables, 94–95
advantage, 95
drawback, 95
Decomposing, 89
Decomposition, 91
Deduction reports, 253
Default value, 160
DeGraaf Ofﬁce Supplies, 507
Deletion anomaly, 155
Dell computer company, 258
Demand draft, 363
Demand report, 426
Denial of service (DOS) attacks, 324,
497
Department of Defense (DOD), 237
Department of Taxation, 344–345
Deposit slips, 265
Depreciation register, 256
DES, See Data encryption standard (DES)
Design mode, 190
Detail section, 188
Detailed systems design, See also Systems
design
inputs, 426
outputs, 426
process design, 426–427
prototyping, 427–429
speciﬁcations report, 429
Detective controls, 357
DFDs, See Data ﬂow diagrams (DFDs)
Dialback systems, 328
Digital cameras, 44
Digital certiﬁcate, 500
Digital dashboards, 295–297
anatomy, 297
Digital signature standard (DSS), 500
Digital subscriber line (DSL), 53
Digital time-stamping services (DTSSs),
501
Diner’s Club, 321
Dinteman company, 110
Direct access storage devices (DASDs), 50
Direct conversion, 434
Disaster recovery, 38, 385
Disbursement voucher, 364
Discrepancy reports, 234
Disk mirroring, 387
Disk shadowing, 387
Distributed data processing (DDP) system,
392
Distributed denial-of-service (DDoS)
attacks, 325
Distributed presentation systems, 56
DMLs, See Data manipulation languages
(DMLs)
Document control, 362–363
Document ﬂowcharts, 78
drawing guidelines, 81
Documentation, 73–112
data ﬂow diagrams, 88
database, 120–121
decision tables, 94–95
end user computing and, 98–99
ﬂowcharts, 78–85
graphical, 95–97
importance of, 74–77
process maps, 85–87
program ﬂowcharts, 93–94
software, 95
system ﬂowcharts and, 77–78
Documents
source, 38–40
turnaround, 43
DOD, See Department of Defense (DOD)
Domain address, 483
DOS, See Denial of service (DOS) attacks
Dot-matrix printers, 47
DoubleCheck LLC, 470
DriveSavers Data Recovery, 394
DSL, See Digital subscriber line (DSL)
DSS, See Digital signature standard (DSS)
DTSSs, See Digital time-stamping services
(DTSSs)
Dual observation, 396
Dumpster diving, 336
Dun and Bradstreet, 315
DVDs, 51
Dynaset, 163
EAI, See Enterprise application integration
(EAI)
EAM, See Enterprise asset management
(EAM) systems
Eastman Kodak Company, 287
E-bay, 490
e-business, 9
e-commerce, 9
Economic event, 124–125, 225
Economic feasibility, 424–425
e-copy, 221
EDI, See Electronic data interchange (EDI)
Edit programs, 397
Edit tests, 397
EDRMs, See Electronic document and
record management systems
(EDRMs)
EFT, See Electronic funds transfer (EFT)
Eldercare plus, 20
Electronic commerce, 489
business-to-business, 492
EDI, 492–493
e-payments, 490
e-wallets, 490
retail sales, 489
virtual PBXs, 492–493
Electronic conferencing, 485
Electronic Data Gathering and Retrieval
(EDGAR), 515
Electronic data interchange (EDI), 482,
493
Electronic document and record
management systems (EDRMs), 52
Electronic eavesdropping, 392
Electronic Frontier Foundation, 494
Electronic funds transfer (EFT), 263
Electronic payments, 490
Electronic Systems Assurance and Control
(eSAC), 456
Electronic vaulting, 387
Electronics services project, 500
Elgin Corporation, 331–332
Embedded audit modules, 466
Embezzlement, 327, 383
Emerging Internet Technologies, 296
Emerson Department Store, 375–376
Employee fraud, 326
Employees
access to facility controls, 387–388
awareness, computer crime and,
326–327
informal knowledge of, 384
listings, 253
EnCase, 333
Encryption key, 500
End user documentation, 98–99
importance, 98
policies, 98–99
Enron Corporation, 11–12, 470
Enterprise application integration (EAI),
291
Enterprise asset management (EAM)
systems, 254
Enterprise mashups, 296
Enterprise network, 55
Enterprise resource management (ERP),
62
internal control systems, 352–355
software, 62
Enterprise resource planning (ERP)
systems, 7, 287–298
architecture of, 290–292
application interfaces, 291
centralized database, 291
internet portals, 291
systems conﬁguration, 290
basic functions, 287
beneﬁts, 294–295
business processes, 292
reengineering, 292
costs, 294

INDEX
527
extended systems, 288
quantifying the business value, 296
risks, 294
Enterprise risk management (ERM) cube,
353
event identiﬁcation and risk response,
352–353
framework, 352
objective setting, 352
Enterprise software
enterprise resource planning (ERP)
systems, 287–298
architecture of, 290–292
basic functions, 287
beneﬁts, 294–295
business processes, 292
costs, 294
extended systems, 288
quantifying the business value, 296
risks, 294
integrated accounting software
programs, 282–287
software package
New AIS, Need for, 298
selection, 298
Enterprise-wide database, 173
Enterprise-wide information systems, 287
Entities, 124–129
attributes, 129
entity-relationship (E-R) diagram,
127–129
identifying, 124–125
relationships among, 125–127
direct, 125
indirect, 125
Entity-relationship (E-R) diagram, 127
symbols, 128
Environment, control, 381
eProject, 437
E-R, See Entity-relationship (E-R)
ERM, See Enterprise resource
management (ERM)
Ernst & Young LLP, 455
ERP, See Enterprise resource planning
(ERP)
ERP, See Enterprise resource planning
(ERP) systems
eSAC, See Electronic Systems Assurance
and Control (eSAC)
Ethical issues, 333–335
challenges, 334
identity theft, 336
privacy, 335–336
professional associations, 333
Evaluation, feasibility, 423–425
Event identiﬁcation, 352–355
Event-driven programming languages, 62
e-wallet, 491
Excel, 95
advantages, 95
Excelerator™, 96
Exception report, 221, 466
Expected loss, 367
Exposure, 367
Extended application interfaces (EAI),
515
Extended ERP systems, 288–289
eXtensible Business Reporting Language
(XBRL), 16
beneﬁts of, 487
current status of, 488
instance documents, 486
International Consortium, 488
taxonomies, 486
eXtensible Markup Language (XML), 486
External audit, 450–451
External entity, 88
Extranets, 484
Fair credit reporting act, 322
Fair Employment Practices Guidelines,
335
FAM, See Fixed asset management (FAM)
FASB, See Financial Accounting Standards
Board (FASB)
Fault-tolerant systems, 386
FDIC, See Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC)
Feasibility evaluation, 423–425, See also
Systems design
economic, 424–425
legal, 424
operational, 424
schedule, 424
technical, 424
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 315
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC), 16
Federal Privacy Act of 1974, 318
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 496
FedEx, 229
Feedback mechanism, 416
Fidelity bond, 363
Field names, 135
File security controls, 385
File servers, 55
Filter query, 163–164
Final systems analysis report, 423
Financial accounting cycle, 15, 218–219
Financial accounting information systems,
15
Financial Accounting Standards Board
(FASB), 16
Financial-auditing tasks, 20
Financial control total, 401
Financial data, 9
Financial functions, 57
Financial Management Services (FMS),
491
Financial planning models, 264
Financial statements, 219
Financial transactions, 9
Financing process, 262–265
inputs to, 265
objectives, 263–264
outputs of, 265
Fingerprint scanner, 45
Firewall, 325, 496
First normal form (1 NF), 155
FirstEnergy Corporation, 77
Fixed asset change form, 255
Fixed asset management (FAM), 254–255
inputs to, 254–255
outputs of, 255
Fixed asset requests, 254
Flash memory, 51
Flexible systems, 439
Flowcharts, 75
document, 78–85
high-level system, 83
payroll processing, 83
programming symbols of, 82
symbols, 78
Flying-start site, 386
FMS, See Financial Management Services
(FMS)
Follow-up and maintenance phase,
437–438
Ford Motor Company, 117
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, 350
Foreign keys, 119
Forensic accountants, 332
Form controls, 190
bound, 190
unbound, 190
Forms, 188–196
creation, 189–193
advantages, 189
design mode, 190
run mode, 190
section, 188
detail, 188
heading, 188
navigation bar, 188
subform, 194–96
usage, 193–194
information display, 193
input task, 193
output task, 193
printing, 193
to create new records, 194
Forms control, 402
Form wizard, 189–90
Forrester Research, 488
Fraud tree, 316
Fraud triangle, 468
Fraud, 468–469
Fraudulent ﬁnancial reporting, 316
Freedom of Information Act of 1970, 318
Freezetime, inc., 109
Front-end CASE tools, 97
Front-ofﬁce functions, 288
FTC, See Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
Furry Friends Foundation I, 145
requirements, 146
Furry Friends Foundation II, 183–184
GAAP, See Generally accepted accounting
standards (GAAP)
Gantt charts, 435–436
GAS, See Generalized audit software (GAS)
Gayton Menswear, 374
General controls, 378–390
General ledger, 219
Generalized audit software (GAS), 458
Generally accepted accounting standards
(GAAP), 489
General-use software, 457–458
Geographic information systems (GIS), 159
Gigabytes, 48
Global Crossing, 12

528
INDEX
Goods requisition form (GRF), 79
Grandfather-parent-child procedure, 388
Graphical documentation, 95–97
case tools, 96–97
microsoft word, excel, and powerpoint,
95–96
SOX compliance, 97
Graphical user interfaces (GUIs), 61
GRF, See Goods requisition form (GRF)
Group code, 220
Groupware, 484–485
Grupo Financiero Bital, 421
GUIs, See Graphical user interfaces
(GUIs)
Hacker, 323
Hammaker manufacturing company
(HMC), 506
Hammaker Manufacturing I, 276–277
Hammaker Manufacturing II, 277–278
Hammaker Manufacturing III, 278–279
Hamming distance, 45
Hard-copy, 221
output, 47
Hash total, 401
Header label, 393
Heading section, 188
Health Care Organizations, 269–271
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act, 20
HealthSouth, 12
Hershey, 309
Hierarchical process maps, 86
Hierarchical structure, 129
High-level system ﬂowcharts, 83
HMC, See Hammaker manufacturing
company (HMC)
Hoffer and Straub, 329
Holos, 169
Home page, 336
Hosted solution, 286
Hot backup, 387
Hot site, 386
HTML, See Hypertext Markup Language
(HTML)
HTTP, See Hypertext transfer protocol
(HTTP)
Human resource (HR) management,
250–253
inputs to, 251–253
outputs of, 253
Human-readable, 42
Hyperlinks, 168
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), 168,
484
Hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), 484
I/O bound, 47
IATA, See International airline transport
association (IATA)
IBM, 171
ICASS, See Integrated computer-assisted
surveillance system (ICASS)
IDC Company, 158
IDEA, See Interactive data and electronic
applications (IDEA)
Ideal control procedure, 366
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence
Act (ITADA), 494
Identity theft, 336–337
Identity Theft, 494
IDSs, See Intrusion detection systems
(IDSs)
IFCC, See Internet Fraud Complaint Center
(IFCC)
IGT’s Megabucks system, 498
IIA, See Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)
iLearning.com, 120
IMA, See Institute of Management
Accountants (IMA)
Image processing systems, 51
ImClone, 12
Implementation, See Systems
implementation
Incident reports, 465
Information overload, 7
Information security, 38, 494
Information Systems Audit and Control
Association (ISACA), 23, 333, 467
Information technology, 35–71
accounting and, 14–21
application software, 61–62
auditing, 22
security, 22
auditing, 452–455
auditor’s toolkit, 457–460
central processing units, 46–47
computers, 47
microprocessors, 47
primary memory, 47
processor speeds, 47
computer software, 60
data communications and networks,
52–59
client/server computing, 55–56
cloud computing, 59
communication channels, 53
local area networks, 53–54
protocols, 53
wide area networks, 54–55
wireless data communications, 57
general controls, 390–395
networks, 392–393
personal computers, 393–395
wireless technology, security for,
391–392
governance, 467
importance to accountants, 36–38
input devices, 38–45
biometric scanners, 45
data transcription, 38
digital cameras, 44
magnetic ink character recognition,
42
magnetic strips, plastic cards with,
43
microcomputer input devices, 43
optical character recognition, 42
POS devices, 40–42
source documents, 38
operating systems, 60
output devices, 47–48
multimedia, 48
printers, 47
video output, 48
programming languages, 62
secondary storage devices, 48
CD-ROMs, 50
DVDs, 51
ﬂash memory, 51
image processing systems, 51
Mac, 51
magnetic (hard) disks, 49
top ten technologies, 38
Information Systems (IS) auditor, 450
Information Systems risk assessment, 456
Information technology (IT) auditing, 452
Information technology (IT) auditor, 450
Ink-jet printers, 48
Input controls, 396–398
check-digit control procedure, 399
edit tests, 397–398
Modulus 11 technique, 399
observation, 396–397
recording, 396–397
transcription, 396–397
unfound-record test, 398
Input devices, 38–45
biometric scanners, 45
data transcription, 38
digital cameras, 44
magnetic ink character recognition, 42
magnetic strips, plastic cards with, 43
microcomputer input devices, 43
optical character recognition, 42
POS devices, 40–42
source documents, 38
Input equipment, 38
Input mask, 139
Input validation routines, 397
Inputmasks, 158
Input-processing-output cycle, 38
Insertion anomaly, 155
Instant messaging software, 485
Institute of internal auditors (IIA), 333
Institute of Internal Auditors, 451
Institute of Management Accountants
(IMA), 85, 333
Insurance, for computer damages, 389
Integrated accounting software programs,
282–287
large system, 284
mid-range, 284
small business, 283–284
specialized, 286
Integrated CASE (I-CASE) packages, 97
Integrated computer-assisted surveillance
system (ICASS), 326
Integrated security system, 379–380
Integrated services digital network (ISDN),
53
Integrated test facility, 462
Integration Server, 169
2003 Internet crash, 324
Interacting components, 36
Interactive data and electronic
applications (IDEA), 488
Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis
(IDEA), 458
Interactive data, 16
Internal Airline Transport Association
(IATA), 43
Internal audit, 450–451

INDEX
529
Internal control systems, 347–376
activities, 358–365
good audit trail, 358
internal reviews, 365
personnel policies and practices,
358–360
physical protection of assets,
361–365
separation of duties, 360–361
COBIT, 355–356
components, 349–352
communication, 351–352
control activities, 351
control environment, 349–351
information, 351
monitoring, 352
risk assessment, 351
1992 COSO report, 349
2004 COSO report, 352
deﬁnition, 348–349
ERM, 352–355
event identiﬁcation, 352
objective setting, 352
risk response, 352–355
evaluation, 365–369
cost-beneﬁt analyses, 366–368
risk matrix, 368–369
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 366
types, 356–358
corrective controls, 357
detective controls, 357
preventive controls, 356–357
Internal Control-Integrated Framework
(ICIF), 350
Internal revenue service, 117
International airline transport association
(IATA), 43
Internet, 481–501
addresses, 483
based central data, 16
blogs, 484–485
data encryption, 499–500
digital signatures, 500
digital time stamping, 500–501
electronic commerce, 489–494
electronic conferencing, 484–485
extranets, 483
ﬁnancial reporting, 486–489
ﬁrewalls, 496
groupware, 484–485
HTML, 484
IDEA, 484
intranets, 483
intrusion detection systems, 497
phishing, 495
privacy, 494
proxy servers, 498–499
security on, 494–495
software, 483
spam, 495
value-added networks, 498
world wide web, 482
XBRL, 486–489
Internet bulletin boards, 326
Internet crime complaint center, 320
Internet Fraud Complaint Center (IFCC),
320
Internet Portals, 291
Internet privacy, 494
Internet protocol (IP), 483
Internet relay chat (IRC), 485
Internet service providers (ISPs), 55
Interwoven, 14
Intranets, 483
Intrusion detection system, 380
Intrusion detection systems (IDSs), 497
Intuit, 57, 205
Inventory control, 361
objectives of, 231
Inventory reconciliation report, 262
Inventory status report, 262
Invoices, 109
IP, See Internet Protocol (IP)
IRC, See Internet relay chat (IRC)
Iris scanner, 45
ISACA, See Information Systems Audit and
Control Association (ISACA)
ISDN, See Integrated services digital
network (ISDN)
ISO 17799, 378
ISPs, See Internet service providers (ISPs)
Issuance report, 362
IT auditor, 4
IT general controls
networks, 392–393
personal computers, 393–395
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX),
394–395
wireless technology, security for,
391–392
IT, See Information technology (IT)
ITADA, See Identity Theft and Assumption
Deterrence Act (ITADA)
James H. Rhodes Company, 410
JetBlue, 390–391
JIT, See Just-in-Time (JIT) inventory
systems
Job costing information system, 257
Job stream, 85
Journals, 218–219
Just-in-Time (JIT) inventory systems, 257
Kenbart Company, 445–446
Kerr Cosmetics, 446–447
Key logging software, 337, 495
Key performance indicators (KPIs), 18
KeyBank, 173
Kilobytes, 48
Kimball Electronics, 287
Kimball Group, 174
Knowledge management, 485
Knowledge process outsourcing, 517
Knowledge workers, 8
KPIs, See Key performance indicators
(KPIs)
KPMG, 23, 315, 327
Labels
header, 385
trailer, 385
Lancaster, 392
Lands’ End, 336
Languages
event-driven, 62
object-oriented, 62
LANs, See Local area networks (LANs)
Laptop computers, 46
Large system accounting software, 284
Larkin State University, 246–247
payment process, 246–247
purchase process, 246
requirements, 247
Laser printers, 48
Laser technology, 42
Lawson Software, 426
LCD, See Liquid crystal display (LCD)
Lean accounting, 259
Lean production/manufacturing, 259
Ledger account balances, 15
Ledgers, 219
Legacy systems, 46
Legal feasibility, 424
Legislation, computer crime, 313
Level 0 data ﬂow diagram, 91
Level 1 data ﬂow diagram, 91
Light-sensing mechanisms, 42
Linz Company, 449
Liquid crystal display (LCD), 48
List of authorized vendors, 230
Lloyd’s of London, 52
Local area networks (LANs), 53
advantages of, 53
Lockbox systems, 263
Lock-out systems, 328
Logic bomb, 315
programs, 325
Logical data ﬂow diagrams, 90
Logical security, 379
Lois Hale and associates, 111
Lu Company, 223
Mac’s Convenience Stores, 41
Machine-readable, 42
Macro program ﬂowchart, 93
Madoff, Bernard, 13
Mag strip, 43
Magnetic (Hard) disks, 49
Magnetic ﬂux, 42
Magnetic ink character recognition
(MICR), 42
MailMed Inc. (MMI), 409
MailMed Inc., 409
Mainframe computers, 46
Maintenance, See System maintenance,
415
Make-or-buy decision, 429
Man trap, 389
Management support, computer crime and,
271
Managerial accounting, 17
Managerial control mechanism, 19
Manufacturing resource planning (MRP II)
systems, 518
Manufacturing status reports, 262
Marcia Felix Corporation, 179
Mark Goodwin Resort, 344
Mark-sense media, 42
Martin and Associates, 267
Martin Shoes, Inc., 146–147

530
INDEX
Mass storage, 48
Master ﬁle maintenance processing report,
83
Master ﬁles, 118
Master production schedule, 257
MasterCard, 228
Material requirements planning (MRP I)
systems, 518
Materials price list, 262
McGee LLP, 479
Megabucks system, 498
Megabytes, 48
Merix, 251
Merrill Lynch (ML), 12
Message acknowledgment procedures,
393
Metadata, 121
MICR symbols, 42
MICR, See Magnetic ink character
recognition (MICR)
Microcomputer input devices, 43
Microcomputer, 38
Microprocessor unit, 46
Microprocessors, 47
Microsoft, 295
Microsoft Access, 132–133
Microsoft Dynamics GP Enterprise, 287
Microsoft Excel, 467
Microsoft Great Plains Business Solutions,
224
Microsoft PowerPoint, 95
Microsoft Project, 437
Microsoft Small Business Accounting, 283
Microsoft Word, 464
Microsoft’s windows operating system, 325
Mid-range accounting software, 284
Mini-based hospital system, 270
Minicomputers, 458
Minicomputers, 46
Mnemonic codes, 220
Mobility, 57
Models
ﬁnancial planning, 264
REA, 8
Modem, 53
Modular conversion, 435
Modulus 11 technique, 399
Monitoring, internal control and, 371
MSN Messenger, 485
Multidimensional database, 172
Multimedia databases
Multimedia, 48
Multiprocessing, 61
Multi-user operating systems, 60
Mutual Beneﬁt Life, 271
MyDoom worm, 460
National Bureau of Standards, 83
National Center for Computer Crime Data
(NCCCD), 319
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), 391
National White Collar Crime Center, 320
National white collar crime center, 320
Naval Undersea Warfare Center (NUWC),
485
Navigation bar, 188
NCCCD, See National Center for Computer
Crime Data (NCCCD)
Near ﬁeld communication (NFC), 58
Netbook computers, 46
Network structures, 129–130
Networks, 52
Networks, controls for, 392–393
Networks, data communications and, 11
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), 12
NFC, See Near ﬁeld communication (NFC)
NIST, See National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST)
Nonﬁnancial control totals, 401
Nonﬁnancial data, 401
Non-value-added waste, 259
Nonvoucher system, 363
Normalization, 154–157
ﬁrst normal form, 155
second normal form, 156
third normal form, 157
Not-for-proﬁt organizations, 268–269
Numeric codes, 461
NUWC, See Naval Undersea Warfare
Center (NUWC)
Objective setting, 350
Object-oriented database (OODB), 171
Object-oriented software, 76
Objects, 62
Occupational fraud, 316
OCR, See Optical character recognition
(OCR)
Off-page connectors, 81
Offshoring, 238, 439
Oklahoma state university, 336
OLAP, See Online Analytical Processing
(OLAP)
Online accounting outsourcing, 501
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP), 169
features, 169
Online Privacy Alliance, 494
On-page connectors, 81
OODB, See Object-oriented database
(OODB)
Openpages FCM, 97
Operating management, systems goals of,
420
Operating system, 60
Operation Safe Commerce (OSC), 10
Operational audits, 365
Operational feasibility, 424
Optical character recognition (OCR), 42
Optical character recognition, 42
Oracle, 188
Oracle On Demand, 290
Organization-level controls, 377
Organizations, computer controls for
business continuity planning, 385–387
computer access controls, 389–390
computer facility controls, 388–389
ﬁle security controls, 385
general, 378–390
integrated security, 379–381
organization-level controls, 381
personnel policies, 381–384
OSC, See Operation Safe Commerce (OSC)
Output controls, 378
Output devices, 38
Output equipment, 38
Outsourcing, 432–433, 439
advantages, 433
disadvantages, 433
Owens-Corning Fiberglass Corporation,
287
Packing slip, 226
Paperless ofﬁce, 47
Parallel conversion, 435
Parallel simulation, 462
Parent record, 129
Parent record, 129
Parmalat, 12
Partner relationship management (PRM),
289
Passive IDSs, 497
Passive RFID tags, 58
Passwords, 390
Patriot acts, 13
Pay.Gov, 491
Payables, 125
Paypal, 490
Payroll activities, 49
Payroll deduction authorizations, 253
Payroll ﬁle, 49
Payroll master ﬁle table, 135–137
Dataview sheet, 137
Payroll processing ﬂowcharts, 83
Payroll processing information systems,
251
PCAOB, See Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (PCAOB)
PDA, See Personal data assistant (PDA)
devices
Peachlink, 492
Peachtree Accounting, 283
Penetration testing, 23, 456
PentaSafe, 403
People skills, in auditing, 349
PeopleSoft, 426
Performance measurement business, 18
Performance reports, 421
Periodic usage reports, 262
Peripheral equipment, 38
Personal computers, controls for,
393–395
Personal data assistant (PDA) devices, 44
Personal ﬁnance software, 61
Personal productivity software, 61
Personnel action forms, 252
Personnel policies, 381–384
computer accounts, 383–384
informal knowledge of employees, 384
separation of duties, 382–383
PERT, See Program Evaluation and Review
Technique (PERT)
Petty cash custodian, 363
Petty cash fund, 363
PHF, See Position hiring form (PHF)
Phishing, 336, 496
Physical data ﬂow diagrams, 89
Physical security, 379
Picture elements, 48
Pivot tables, 169
PlanBee, 337

INDEX
531
Planning, See Systems planning
Plastic cards with magnetic strips, 43
Plato, 169
Point-of-sale (POS) devices, 40
Point-scoring analysis, 431
Policies and procedures manual, 351
Ponzi scheme, 13
Portals, 290
POS, See Point-of-sale (POS) devices
Position hiring form (PHF), 79
PowerDimensions, 169
Prado Roberts Manufacturing, 71
Predictive analytics, 8
Preliminary investigation, 416
Preprinted recording forms, 397
Presentation graphics software, 61
Preventive controls, 356
Primary corporate departments, 69
accounting, 69
operations, 69
sales, 69
Primary key, 119
identifying, 136
Primary memory, 47
Primary record keys, 119
Printers, 47
Privacy, 471
Privacy notice, 336
Privacy policy, 336
Privacy, 335–336
company policies with respect, 335
identity theft, 494
internet, 494
PRM, See Partner relationship
management (PRM)
Process costing information system, 257
Process design, 426
Process maps, 85–87
drawing guidelines, 87
Processing accuracy, 122
Processing controls, 400
Processing devices, 38
Procter & Gamble, 231
Production cost reports, 262
Production process, 256–262
inputs to, 260–262
objectives of, 256–260
cost accounting subsystem, 256–257
JIT Inventory systems, 257–258
lean accounting, 259–260
lean production/manufacturing, 259
outputs of, 262
Professional service organizations,
266–268
Program authorization forms, 463
Program change control, 462
Program Evaluation and Review Technique
(PERT), 435–436
Program ﬂowcharts, 93
sales application, 94
Programming function, 383
Programming languages, 62
event-driven, 62
Project management software, 61, 436
Properties window, 193
Protocols, 53
Prototyping, 427–428
Provident Central Credit Union, 173
Proxy Servers, 498
Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board (PCAOB), 381
Public key encryption, 500
Purchase invoice, 233
Purchase order, 108
Purchase order, 222
Purchase requisition, 108, 233
Purchasing process, 230–237
data ﬂow diagram of, 233
high-level systems ﬂowchart, 232
information technology used, 234–235
inputs to, 233–234
objectives of, 230–231
events, 231
outputs of, 234
Queries, 163
Query Wizard, 166
Query, 200–203
Questionnaires, 422
Quickbooks, 283–284
Quickbooks, 205
Radio frequency (RF) technology, 261
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID), 58
RAIDs, See Redundant arrays of
inexpensive disks (RAIDs)
RAM, See Random access memory (RAM)
Random access memory (RAM), 47
Rapid application development (RAD), 97
Ratio analyses, 265
REA accounting, 15
REA model, 123–132
database creation, 123–132
business events identiﬁcation, 124
economic events identiﬁcation, 124
entities, 124–129
organizing database records,
129–132
Reactive IDSs, 497
Real-time, 425
Receivables, 125
Receiving report, 108, 363–364
Record count, 401
Record format, 134
Record keys, 119
primary, 119
secondary, 119
Record management systems, 51
Record structure, 118
Recording transactions, 360
Records, database, 129
Red ﬂags, 384
Red-light camera, 44
Redundant arrays of inexpensive disks
(RAIDs), 49
Redundant data check, 397
Reengineering business processes, 292
Reference data, 387
Referential integrity, 161
Registers, 443
Relational database structure, 131
Relational database, 126
Relational structures, 130
Relationship table, 131
customer order, 131
inventory tables, 131
Remittance advice, 265
Repair and maintenance form, 255
Report design, 445
Report wizard, 197
Reports, 196–204, 283
components of, 197
components, 196
creation, 197–204
with calculated ﬁelds, 200–202
with grouped data, 202
wizard, 197–199
Request for proposal (RFP), 430
Requests for quotes, 493
Resource management process, 250–256
ﬁxed asset management, 254–256
HR management, 250–254
Resources, 124
Responsibility accounting system, 18
Responsibility system of computer program
development and maintenance, 463
Retail store requisition, 108
Retention Performance Marketing
software, 289
Reuters Analytics, 318
Revenue transactions, 225
RFID, See Radio frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID)
RFQs, See Requests for quotes (RFQs)
Riley University, 72
Risk assessment, 455
Risk-based audit approach, 455
Risk matrix, 368
Risk response, 352
RiskPAC, 353
Rollback processing, 387
Ross, Sells, and Young LLP, 3
Routing veriﬁcation procedures, 393
Run mode, 190
SAC, See Systems Auditability and Control
(SAC)
Safer personal computers, 328
Salami technique, 316
Sales analysis reports, 225
Sales invoice, 223, 226
Sales order, 124, 226
Sales process, 225–230
data ﬂow diagram of, 228
high-level systems ﬂowchart, 227
information technology used, 234–235
inputs to, 226–229
objectives of, 225–226
events, 226
outputs of, 229–230
Sales staff, 224
Sandwich rule, 85
SAR, See Suspicious activity reporting
(SAR)
Sarah Stanton Company, 83
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX), 13, 74,
77, 329, 349, 394
requirements, 366
key provisions, 469
Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404, 472–473

532
INDEX
SAS No. 94, 349
Satyam Computer Services, 439
Savage Motors, 68
Scalable products, 283
Scenario planning, 357
Schedule feasibility, 424
Schema, 162
SCM, See Supply chain management (SCM)
Scope creep, 426
Scorecards, 295
Scrub, 173
Sears, 266
SEC, See Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC)
Second normal form (2 NF), 156
Secondary key, 119
Secondary storage devices, 38
Secondary storage, 48
Secret key cryptography, 500
Secure hypertext transport protocol
(S-HTTP), 500
Secure socket layer (SSL), 500
Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), 16, 487
Security, 494
Security and controls, 249
Security policy, 378–379
issues, 379
Security-clearance code, 43
Select query, 163
Semantic meaning, 488
Separation of duties, 360–361
September 11, 2001 attacks, 10
Sequence code, 220
Server, proxy, 481
Shipping notices, 228
Shoulder surﬁng, 337
S-HTTP, See Secure hypertext transport
protocol (S-HTTP)
Sibling records, 129
Signed checklist, 77
Simmons Corporation, 408–409
Single-user operating systems, 60
Sizing handles, 191
Slack time, 436
Sleeter Group, 239
Small business accounting software,
283–284
Small Business Computer Security and
Education Act of 1984, 318
Small Computers, Inc., 505
Smart cash, 40
Smishing, 336
Snapshot technique, 466
S-O Comply® , 470
Social engineering, 328
Soft copy, 221
output, 47
Software package
New AIS, Need for, 298
selection, 298
Software, See Computer software
Souder, Oles, and Franek, 4115
Source document, 38
SOX, See Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
(SOX)
Spam, 495
Specialized accounting information
systems, 286
Spend management, 295
Spooﬁng, 497
Spreadsheet software, 61, 458
Springsteen, Inc., 308–309
SQL, See Structured Query Language
(SQL)
SSL, See Secure socket layer (SSL)
St. Luke’s Episcopal Health System, 18
Standish Group, 418
State University, 307–308
Statement on Auditing Standards (SAS) No.
99 consideration of Fraudina
Financial Statement Audit, 451, 468
Steering committee, 419
Stephen Kerr Cosmetics, 446–447
Stock brokerage systems, 52
Strong passwords, 326
Structured programming, 93
Structured Query Language (SQL), 168,
458
Structured, top-down design, 319
Structured walkthrough, 93
Subform
advantages, 194
creation, 195–96
from multiple tables, showing data, 194
Subschema, 162
Substantive testing, 453
Summerford Accountancy, 459
Sun Microsystems, 457
Supercomputers, 46
Supply chain management (SCM), 288
Supply chain, 231
Suspicious activity reporting (SAR), 9
Sutton, Willie, 337
Swami Consulting, 196–200
Swan Supplies, 180–181
System ﬂowchart, 84
System inputs, 427
System maintenance, 438–439
System outputs, 426
System speciﬁcation report, 429–430
Systems analysis, 37, 420–421
organizational goals, 420–421
general systems goals, 420
operating management systems
goals, 421
top management systems goals,
420–421
procedures, 420
Systems Auditability and Control (SAC),
456
Systems design, 425–433
choosing an AIS, 430–433
making ﬁnal decision, 431
point-scoring analysis, 431–432
selecting ﬁnalist, 432
selection criteria, 430–431
inputs, 426
outputs, 426
outsourcing, 432–433
processes, 426
prototyping, 427–428
speciﬁcations report, 429–430
make or buy decision, 429
Systems development life cycle, 416–447
analysis, 420–421
of a business information system, 417
design, 425–433
follow-up, 437–438
implementation, 433–437
maintenance, 438–439
planning, 418–419
stages in, 416–417
Systems implementation, 433–437
activities, 434–435
Gantt charts, 435–437
managing IT projects, 435
PERT, 435–436
project management software, 436–437
Systems planning, 418–419
current systems, investigating, 419
for success, 418
broad viewpoint, 419
steering committee, 419
study team, 419
Systems review, 455
Systems survey, 421–425
human element, 421–423
data analysis, 422
data gathering, 422
potential behavioral problems, 421
questionnaire, 422
system feasibility, 423–425
economic, 424–425
legal, 424
operational, 424
schedule, 424
technical, 424
SysTrust, 472
Tables, See Database tables
Talbots, 170–171
Tangible property, 318
Target, 37
Tat Consulting Services (TCS), 439
Tax reports, 253
Taxation, 21
TCP, See Transmission control protocol
(TCP)
TCS, See Tat Consulting Services (TCS)
Technical feasibility, 424
Terabytes, 48
Terrorism, 10, See also September 11,
2001 attacks
Test data, 461
Test of length, 463
The RETAIL Cooperative, 305
Thermos, Inc., 290
Thin-client systems, 56
Third normal form (3NF), 157
Third party assurance services, 471
Third-party billing, 269
Time and billing information systems, 266
Time and billing services, 266
Time Capital, 492
Time Line, 437
Time sheets, 252
Toolbox, 96, 191
Top management, systems goals of,
420–421
Touch screens, 43

INDEX
533
Toyota Production System (TPS), 259
TPS, See Toyota Production System (TPS)
Traditional accounting, 21
Trailer label, 393
Transaction controls, 122
Transaction ﬁles, 118
Transaction processing, 122, 395–402
application controls for, 395–402
input controls, 396–400
additional, 398–400
edit tests, 397
observation, 396
recording, 396
transcription, 396
output controls, 402
printed, 402
results validation, 402
processing controls, 400–402
control totals, 400–401
data manipulation controls, 401–402
Transaction tagging, 466
Transmission control protocol (TCP), 53,
483
Transportation worker identiﬁcation
credential (TWIC), 45
Treadway Commission Report, 350
Tree structures, 129
Trial balance, 15, 219
Trial balances, 219
Trojan horse programs, 325
Trust services, 472
TRW credit data case, 321
Turbotax, 21
Turnaround documents, 42
Turnkey software, 430
Turnkey system, 430, 434
TWIC, See Transportation worker
identiﬁcation credential (TWIC)
Tyco, 12–13
U.S. Army, 117
U.S. Customs Service, 493
U.S. Patriot Act, 14
U.S. sentencing commission (USSC), 329
U.S. Treasury Department, 9
UCP, See Universal Concrete Products
(UCP)
Unbound controls, 190
Unfound-record test, 398
Uniform resource locator (URL), 483
Uninterruptible power system (UPS), 388
United Bankers’ Bank (UBB), 403
United Nations Standard Products and
Services Code (UNSPSC), 295
United Parcel Service (UPS), 261
Universal Concrete Products (UCP), 31
Universal concrete products, 31
Universal product code (UPC), 40
University of Arizona, 359
University of Michigan, 392
University of Wisconsin-Superior, 292
UPC, See Universal product code (UPC)
UPS, See Uninterruptible power system
(UPS)
Uptown Bucks, 247–248
URL, See Uniform resource locator
(URL)
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, 318, 323
USSC, See U.S. sentencing commission
(USSC)
Utility programs, 61
Val IT, 355
Validation, 160–161
Value cards, 335
Value stream management, 260, 271
Value-added networks (VANs), 498
Value-added resellers (VARs), 22, 300
VANs, See Value-added networks (VANs)
VARs, See Value-added resellers (VARs)
Vaulting, electronic, See Electronic
vaulting
Vendor support, 431
Vendors, list of, 230
Vertical market, 265–266
Vertical market, 265
Video output, 48
View controls, 123
Virginia Commonwealth University, 291
Virtual PBXs, 493
Virtual private network (VPN), 392, 498
Virtual storage, 61
Visa, 59, 123, 247
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP),
322
VoIP, See Voice over Internet Protocol
(VoIP)
Volatile memory, 48
Voucher system, 364
VPN, See Virtual private network
(VPN)
Wal-Mart, 231
WANs, See Wide area networks (WANs)
Waste Management, 294
Watchdog processor, 387
Web cams, 43
Weblogs, 485
WebTrust, 472
Western Illinois University, 337
What-if analyses, 437
WhiteLight, 169
Wide area networks (WANs), 53–54
Wilmer Ruiz Company, 178
WindSprings Corporation, 121
Wire fraud, 322
Wireless application protocol (WAP),
57
Wireless data communications, 57
Wireless ﬁdelity (Wi-Fi) technology, 391
Wireless markup language, 57
Wireless technology, security for, 391
Woerner Turf, 224
Word processing software, 61
Word Trade Center, 10, 123
Work order, 110
World Wide Web, 482
WorldCom, Inc., 13
Worm media, 50
Wright Company, 444–445
XBRL, See eXtensible Business Reporting
Language (XBRL)
XML, See eXtensible Markup Language
(XML)
Yahoo Messenger, 485
Zombie computers, 325


