Putting up coving  
preparing for putting up coving - cutting cornice moulding  
There's no real 'correct' place in a room to start putting up a coving, if possible, start with a 
simple corner where the wall is longer than one length of coving. Leave the fiddley areas 
around chimney breast until you've got into the swing of it.  
If using powder adhesive, mix some in accordance with the instructions - don't mix too much 
as it will only be usable for 20 to 30 minutes.  
Cut the first mitre joint(s), when one end of the coving is to be a straight joint, always check it 
for damage and trim straight if necessary. On plaster coving dampen the edges which will be 
fit to the wall and ceiling. Dampen the area of the wall and ceiling (this will help ensure good 
adhesion).  
Evenly spread some adhesive along the top and bottom edges of the coving where it will be in 
contact with the wall and ceiling.  
Position the length of coving along the marked line and with the mitre in the corner. Press the 
coving into place, gently pressing along the length of the coving to ensure that the adhesive is 
spread evenly. If the ceiling or wall is not straight, do not push hard where there is a large 
gap, the moulding will relax reducing adhesion.  
When putting up long pieces of coving, it may begin to sag before the adhesive has set. If this 
happens, insert one or two nails into the wall under the bottom edge of the moulding to 
temporarily support it - after the adhesive has set, the nails can be removed and the holes 
filled. It's sometimes necessary to put a couple of nails in the ceiling to stop the moulding 
'rolling' forward, again, remove these after the adhesive has set and fill the holes.  
Heavy plaster coving may need to be fixed with screws anyway. With the coving held in 
position without adhesive, carefully drill through the coving at about 1 metre spacing and into 
the wall. Countersink the holes in the coving, and fit wall plugs. Spread on the adhesive, 
reposition the coving and secure using brass screws. After the adhesive has set, the brass 
screw heads can be covered using filler.  
Surplus adhesive pushed out of the joint should be scraped off with a pallet knife, use the 
surplus to fill in any gap visible. Clean off the residue with a damp sponge or cloth.  
Continue to cut lengths of coving and put up working around the room carefully lining up each 
new piece with the adjacent piece.  
After the first length goes up, each piece will have at least one joint, be it straight or mitre, put 
a blob of adhesive on the end so that the lengths are bonded end to end.  
 
 
Preparation for putting up coving  
cutting cornice moulding - putting up coving  
Coving is fairly easy to put up given a planned approach, patterned cornice is harder to put up 
because of the need to match the pattern at corners.  

Always read any manufacturers instructions supplied with the coving, while the following may 
be more comprehensive than most manufacturers instructions, there may be specific 
considerations particular to the coving you have purchased.  
When putting up coving, it's worth while working from a stable platform, you'll have enough to 
concentrate on putting up the coving, without worrying about where you are going to put your 
feet.  
As coving needs to be stuck to firm, sound surfaces, all wallpaper, emulsion paint, distemper 
and loose plaster need to be removed from both the wall and ceiling - so try to fit coving 
before you redecorate the room.  
Read the instructions (if any) supplied with the coving, this should give you the distance on 
the wall and ceiling for the edge from the corner. If there are no instructions, cut off a small 
length of the coving (about 100 mm (4 inches)) and use this against a corner to determine the 
distances.  
Having removed all wallpaper and unsound surface from the ceiling and wall along the line of 
the coving, use the distances from the corner to mark the wall and ceiling with a pencil to 
indicate the edges - mark on both sides of each corner.  
Put up a string line between corner marks and use rule to check the distance along the line 
between line and corner to check for variation. With most coving, variations upto about 3 mm 
can be accommodated by the adhesive, but if the distance between line and corner is less 
than the coving distance, you'll either have to trim the coving edge or adjust the line down on 
both sides of the corner.  
Don't worry too much about getting the line level, it's more important to get the line parallel to 
the ceiling and wall.  
Having gone completely around the room, marking both ceiling and wall corners, replace the 
string on each edge, mark the wall/ceiling at regular points along the line, remove the string 
and join up the marked points using a straight edge.  
Within the marked area, use a sharp knife to roughen the surfaces of the wall and ceiling with 
criss-cross scratches to provide a key for the adhesive. Use a clean brush to remove any 
dust.  
 
 
Cornices and Coving - general  
What is the difference between Coving and a Cornice ? Cornice is the generic term, coving 
has uniform profile, cornice includes corner mouldings with patterned faces.  
 

Cornices are simple ways to finish off the look of a room and do not require any 
special skills to erect. Their use is especially useful when a new stud wall has been 
erected or a ceiling has been replaced, fitting cornice will remove the need to 
undertake detailed finishing of the corner where the wall and ceiling meet.  
Cornice comes in a range of materials:  
 Plaster  
      heavy, 
easy 
to 
damage 
expensive  
often left unpainted, this needs precautions to avoid messy 
hand 
marks 
when 
being 
erected 
can be painted with water or oil based paint  
    
  
  
 Paper Covered Gypsum 
or Plaster  
  
medium 
weight, 
fairly 
robust
can be painted with water or oil based paint 
    
  
  
 Polyurethane  
  
light, 
robust 
available ready coloured and patterned (such as wood 
effect)  
can be painted with water or oil based paint  
    
  
  
 Expanded Polystyrene  
  
light, 
easy 
to 
damage, 
cheap 
has 
the 
normal 
polystyrene 
bubble 
surface 
finish 
can be painted with water based paint (emulsion)  
    
  
  
 Timber 
  
light, 
flexible 
and 
easy 
to 
use 
tends 
to 
be 
small 
finishing 
strip 
easy 
to 
cut 
to 
shape 
can be varnished or painted - best not to leave untreated as 
it can discolour unevenly  
Cornice also comes in a variety of sizes, it is often 'equal/equal', i.e. the edges are the same 
distance from the corner on both the wall and ceiling. The size quoted on most packages is 
the actual width of the cornice - a 120 mm, equal/equal cornice will come down the wall 
approx. 82 mm.  
Choose the size to suit the room, as a general rule, larger rooms look much better with a 
larger cornice.  
Coving is available in various uniform profiles and cornice come with various patterned faces.  
Coving, with their uniform profile along the length, are easier to fit and tend to look better in 
modern properties (unless the general theme of the architecture or decoration is 'old fashion').  
Some patterned cornices will add a 'period' feel to a room, but this can easily be spoilt by 
miss matching of the pattern at corners. The art of putting up patterned cornices involves 
getting the pattern at all corners to appear as natural points for turning. If possible, all internal 
corners should turn at the same part of the pattern, you cannot just put up a length hoping 
that the next length will reach the corn at a convenient point in the pattern. Erecting patterned 
cornices can be undertaken by the diy'er but care and time are necessary to give a 
professional looking finish.  
Cornice adhesives  
The choice of adhesive depends upon the material of the cornice, the options are:  

Plaster powder adhesive 
    
Needs to be mixed with water before use. Any left unused 
needs 
to 
be 
disposed 
of.
Suitable for plaster and paper covered gypsum/plaster.  
  
    
Ready 
mixed 
plaster 
adhesive  
  
Supplied in tubs ready for use. At the end of erecting cornice, 
just fit the lid to keep the adhesive for future use. 
Suitable for plaster and paper covered gypsum/plaster.  
  
    
Polystyrene adhesive  
  
Supplied in tubs ready for use. At the end of erecting cornice, 
just fit the lid to keep the adhesive for future use. 
Suitable for Polystyrene cornice.  
  
    
General 
gap 
filling 
adhesive 
(NoNails 
and 
similar)  
  
Supplied 
in 
cartridges 
for 
gun 
application. 
Suitable for Polyurethane cornices, those without solvents 
might be suitable for Polystyrene cornice - but check on a 
small 
piece. 
Ideal for timber cornice as it avoids the need for nails  
The choice between plaster powder and ready mixed plaster adhesives is ready a personal 
one, although using ready mixed should reduce wastage (although it is generally more 
expensive) and ensure a consistent consistency.  
Cornice and coving corners 
preparing for putting up coving - putting up coving  
Ready made corners  
Most ranges of cornice and coving include preformed corners. With coving these are usually 
simply preformed internal and external corners. Corners for patterned cornices are often 
features in there own right so that the lengths of cornice simply butt squarely upto the corner 
piece - this has the advantage that there's no need to match up the pattern at the corner.  
With simple coving, it's fairly easy to cut your own mitres as detailed below.  
Cutting coving moulding  
Cutting in a mitre box 
 

Use a mitre box to accurately cut the corner 
mitres, make sure that the mitre box is large 
enough so that the two edges of the coving 
can fit flat against the bottom and side of the 
box (see right).  
  
When using the mite box, always place the 
ceiling edge of each piece of coving at the 
bottom of the box, with the wall edge 
against the side towards you - on lengths 
requiring mitres at both ends, it helps to 
pencil a mark on the ceiling edge of the 
coving to ease identifying it when each end 
is cut.  
  
Transfer wall measurements to the wall 
edge of the coving and carefully line this up 
in the mitre box.  
  
Support lengths of plaster and gypsum 
cornice/coving while they are being sawn - 
they have some degree of flexibility but can 
easily break under their own weight.  
  
Take care that you are cutting the angle in 
the right direction, it's very easy to get 
confused.  
  
The five basic cuts are shown to the right.  
  
Use a fine toothed saw to cut the 
cornice/coving .  
  
Smooth off the cut ends using fine glass 
paper.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

